International Journal of Computer Vision
with different resolutions. The scale transfer module can be
directly embedded into DenseNet with little additional cost.
More recent work, such as PANet (Liu et al. 2018c ), FPR
(Kong et al. 2018 ), DetNet (Li et al. 2018b ), and M2Det
(Zhao et al. 2019 ), as shown in Fig. 17g–j, propose to further
improve on the pyramid architectures like FPN in differentways. Based on FPN, Liu et al. designed PANet (Liu et al.
2018c ) (Fig. 17g1) by adding another bottom-up path with
clean lateral connections from low to top levels, in orderto shorten the information path and to enhance the feature
pyramid. Then, an adaptive feature pooling was proposed to
aggregate features from all feature levels for each proposal.In addition, in the proposal sub-network, a complementary
branch capturing different views for each proposal is cre-
ated to further improve mask prediction. These additionalsteps bring only slightly extra computational overhead, butare effective and allowed PANet to reach 1st place in the
COCO 2017 Challenge Instance Segmentation task and 2nd
place in the Object Detection task. Kong et al. proposed FPR(Kong et al. 2018 ) by explicitly reformulating the feature
pyramid construction process [e.g. FPN (Lin et al. 2017a )]
as feature reconﬁguration functions in a highly nonlinear butefﬁcient way. As shown in Fig. 17h1, instead of using a top-
down path to propagate strong semantic features from the
topmost layer down as in FPN, FPR ﬁrst extracts featuresfrom multiple layers in the backbone network by adaptiveconcatenation, and then designs a more complex FFB module
(Fig. 17h2) to spread strong semantics to all scales. Li et al.
(2018b ) proposed DetNet (Fig. 17i1) by introducing dilated
convolutions to the later layers of the backbone network in
order to maintain high spatial resolution in deeper layers.
Zhao et al. ( 2019 ) proposed a MultiLevel Feature Pyramid
Network (MLFPN) to build more effective feature pyramids
for detecting objects of different scales. As can be seen from
Fig. 17j1, features from two different layers of the backbone
are ﬁrst fused as the base feature, after which a top-downpath with lateral connections from the base feature is created
to build the feature pyramid. As shown in Fig. 17j2, j5, the
FFB module is much more complex than those like FPN, inthat FFB involves a Thinned U-shaped Module (TUM) to
generate a second pyramid structure, after which the feature
maps with equivalent sizes from multiple TUMs are com-bined for object detection. The authors proposed M2Det by
integrating MLFPN into SSD, and achieved better detection
performance than other one-stage detectors.
6.3 Handling of Other Intraclass Variations
Powerful object representations should combine distinctive-ness and robustness. A large amount of recent work has been
devoted to handling changes in object scale, as reviewed in
Sect. 6.2.1 . As discussed in Sect. 2.2and summarized in
Fig. 5, object detection still requires robustness to real-worldvariations other than just scale, which we group into three
categories:
•Geometric transformations,
•Occlusions, and
•Image degradations.
To handle these intra-class variations, the most straightfor-
ward approach is to augment the training datasets with asufﬁcient amount of variations; for example, robustness to
rotation could be achieved by adding rotated objects at many
orientations to the training data. Robustness can frequentlybe learned this way, but usually at the cost of expensive train-ing and complex model parameters. Therefore, researchers
have proposed alternative solutions to these problems.
Handling of geometric transformations DCNNs are inher-
ently limited by the lack of ability to be spatially invariant
to geometric transformations of the input data (Lenc and
Vedaldi 2018 ; Liu et al. 2017 ; Chellappa 2016 ). The intro-
duction of local max pooling layers has allowed DCNNs to
enjoy some translation invariance, however the intermediate
feature maps are not actually invariant to large geometrictransformations of the input data (Lenc and Vedaldi 2018 ).
Therefore, many approaches have been presented to enhance
robustness, aiming at learning invariant CNN representations
with respect to different types of transformations such asscale (Kim et al. 2014 ; Bruna and Mallat 2013 ), rotation
(Bruna and Mallat 2013 ; Cheng et al. 2016 ; Worrall et al.
2017 ; Zhou et al. 2017b ), or both (Jaderberg et al. 2015 ). One
representative work is Spatial Transformer Network (STN)
(Jaderberg et al. 2015 ), which introduces a new learnable
module to handle scaling, cropping, rotations, as well as non-rigid deformations via a global parametric transformation.STN has now been used in rotated text detection (Jaderberg
et al. 2015 ), rotated face detection and generic object detec-
tion (Wang et al. 2017 ).
Although rotation invariance may be attractive in certain
applications, such as scene text detection (He et al. 2018 ;
Ma et al. 2018 ), face detection (Shi et al. 2018 ), and aerial
imagery (Ding et al. 2018 ; Xia et al. 2018 ), there is limited
generic object detection work focusing on rotation invariance
because popular benchmark detection datasets (e.g. PAS-CAL VOC, ImageNet, COCO) do not actually present rotatedimages.
Before deep learning, Deformable Part based Models
(DPMs) (Felzenszwalb et al. 2010b ) were successful for
generic object detection, representing objects by compo-
nent parts arranged in a deformable conﬁguration. Although
DPMs have been signiﬁcantly outperformed by more recentobject detectors, their spirit still deeply inﬂuences many
recent detectors. DPM modeling is less sensitive to transfor-
mations in object pose, viewpoint and nonrigid deformations,motivating researchers (Dai et al. 2017 ; Girshick et al. 2015 ;
123