International Journal of Computer Vision
SPPNet (He et al. 2014 ) During testing, CNN feature
extraction is the main bottleneck of the RCNN detectionpipeline, which requires the extraction of CNN features
from thousands of warped region proposals per image. As a
result, He et al. ( 2014 ) introduced traditional spatial pyramid
pooling (SPP) (Grauman and Darrell 2005 ; Lazebnik et al.
2006 ) into CNN architectures. Since convolutional layers
accept inputs of arbitrary sizes, the requirement of ﬁxed-
sized images in CNNs is due only to the Fully Connected(FC) layers, therefore He et al. added an SPP layer on top
of the last convolutional (CONV) layer to obtain features
of ﬁxed length for the FC layers. With this SPPNet, RCNNobtains a signiﬁcant speedup without sacriﬁcing any detec-
tion quality, because it only needs to run the convolutional
layers once on the entire test image to generate ﬁxed-length
features for region proposals of arbitrary size. While SPPNetaccelerates RCNN evaluation by orders of magnitude, it does
not result in a comparable speedup of the detector training.
Moreover, ﬁne-tuning in SPPNet (He et al. 2014 ) is unable to
update the convolutional layers before the SPP layer, which
limits the accuracy of very deep networks.
Fast RCNN (Girshick 2015 ) Girshick proposed Fast
RCNN (Girshick 2015 ) that addresses some of the dis-
advantages of RCNN and SPPNet, while improving on
their detection speed and quality. As illustrated in Fig. 13,
Fast RCNN enables end-to-end detector training by devel-oping a streamlined training process that simultaneously
learns a softmax classiﬁer and class-speciﬁc bounding box
regression, rather than separately training a softmax clas-siﬁer, SVMs, and Bounding Box Regressors (BBRs) as in
RCNN/SPPNet. Fast RCNN employs the idea of sharing
the computation of convolution across region proposals,and adds a Region of Interest (RoI) pooling layer between
the last CONV layer and the ﬁrst FC layer to extract a
ﬁxed-length feature for each region proposal. Essentially,RoI pooling uses warping at the feature level to approx-imate warping at the image level. The features after the
RoI pooling layer are fed into a sequence of FC layers that
ﬁnally branch into two sibling output layers: softmax prob-abilities for object category prediction, and class-speciﬁc
bounding box regression offsets for proposal reﬁnement.
Compared to RCNN/SPPNet, Fast RCNN improves the efﬁ-ciency considerably—typically 3 times faster in training and
10 times faster in testing. Thus there is higher detection qual-
ity, a single training process that updates all network layers,and no storage required for feature caching.
Faster RCNN (Ren et al. 2015 ,2017 ) Although Fast
RCNN signiﬁcantly sped up the detection process, it still
relies on external region proposals, whose computation isexposed as the new speed bottleneck in Fast RCNN. Recent
work has shown that CNNs have a remarkable ability to local-
ize objects in CONV layers (Zhou et al. 2015 ,2016a ; Cinbis
et al. 2017 ; Oquab et al. 2015 ; Hariharan et al. 2016 ), an
Fig. 13 High level diagrams of the leading frameworks for generic
object detection. The properties of these methods are summarized inTable 11
123