International Journal of Computer Vision
became the speed bottleneck of the detection pipeline (Ren
et al. 2015 ). An emerging class of object proposal algorithms
(Erhan et al. 2014 ; Ren et al. 2015 ; Kuo et al. 2015 ; Ghodrati
et al. 2015 ; Pinheiro et al. 2015 ; Yang et al. 2016a )u s i n g
DCNNs has attracted broad attention.
Recent DCNN based object proposal methods generally
fall into two categories: bounding box based and object
segment based, with representative methods summarized in
Table 9.
Bounding Box Proposal Methods are best exempliﬁed by
the RPC method of Ren et al. ( 2015 ), illustrated in Fig. 19.
RPN predicts object proposals by sliding a small networkover the feature map of the last shared CONV layer. At each
sliding window location, kproposals are predicted by using
kanchor boxes, where each anchor box
14is centered at some
location in the image, and is associated with a particular scaleand aspect ratio. Ren et al. ( 2015 ) proposed integrating RPN
and Fast RCNN into a single network by sharing their convo-
lutional layers, leading to Faster RCNN, the ﬁrst end-to-enddetection pipeline. RPN has been broadly selected as the
proposal method by many state-of-the-art object detectors,
as can be observed from Tables 7and8.
Instead of ﬁxing ap r i o r i a set of anchors as MultiBox
(Erhan et al. 2014 ; Szegedy et al. 2014 ) and RPN (Ren et al.
2015 ), Lu et al. ( 2016 ) proposed generating anchor locations
by using a recursive search strategy which can adaptivelyguide computational resources to focus on sub-regions likely
to contain objects. Starting with the whole image, all regions
visited during the search process serve as anchors. For anyanchor region encountered during the search procedure, a
scalar zoom indicator is used to decide whether to further par-
tition the region, and a set of bounding boxes with objectnessscores are computed by an Adjacency and Zoom Network
(AZNet), which extends RPN by adding a branch to com-
pute the scalar zoom indicator in parallel with the existingbranch.
Further work attempts to generate object proposals by
exploiting multilayer convolutional features. Concurrent
with RPN (Ren et al. 2015 ), Ghodrati et al. ( 2015 )p r o -
posed DeepProposal, which generates object proposals by
using a cascade of multiple convolutional features, building
an inverse cascade to select the most promising object loca-tions and to reﬁne their boxes in a coarse-to-ﬁne manner.
An improved variant of RPN, HyperNet (Kong et al. 2016 )
designs Hyper Features which aggregate multilayer convolu-tional features and shares them both in generating proposalsand detecting objects via an end-to-end joint training strat-
egy. Yang et al. ( 2016a ) proposed CRAFT which also used
a cascade strategy, ﬁrst training an RPN network to generateobject proposals and then using them to train another binary
Fast RCNN network to further distinguish objects from back-
14The concept of “anchor” ﬁrst appeared in Ren et al. ( 2015 ).ground. Li et al. ( 2018a ) proposed ZIP to improve RPN by
predicting object proposals with multiple convolutional fea-ture maps at different network depths to integrate both low
level details and high level semantics. The backbone used in
ZIP is a “zoom out and in” network inspired by the conv anddeconv structure (Long et al. 2015 ).
Finally, recent work which deserves mention includes
Deepbox (Kuo et al. 2015 ), which proposed a lightweight
CNN to learn to rerank proposals generated by EdgeBox, andDeNet (TychsenSmith and Petersson 2017 ) which introduces
bounding box corner estimation to predict object proposals
efﬁciently to replace RPN in a Faster RCNN style detector.
Object Segment Proposal Methods Pinheiro et al. ( 2015 ),
Pinheiro et al. ( 2016 ) aim to generate segment proposals that
are likely to correspond to objects. Segment proposals aremore informative than bounding box proposals, and take astep further towards object instance segmentation (Hariha-
ran et al. 2014 ; Dai et al. 2016b ;L ie ta l . 2017e ). In addition,
using instance segmentation supervision can improve the per-formance of bounding box object detection. The pioneering
work of DeepMask, proposed by Pinheiro et al. ( 2015 ), seg-
ments proposals learnt directly from raw image data with adeep network. Similarly to RPN, after a number of shared
convolutional layers DeepMask splits the network into two
branches in order to predict a class agnostic mask and anassociated objectness score. Also similar to the efﬁcient slid-ing window strategy in OverFeat (Sermanet et al. 2014 ),
the trained DeepMask network is applied in a sliding win-
dow manner to an image (and its rescaled versions) duringinference. More recently, Pinheiro et al. ( 2016 ) proposed
SharpMask by augmenting the DeepMask architecture with
a reﬁnement module, similar to the architectures shown inFig. 17(b1) and (b2), augmenting the feed-forward net-
work with a top-down reﬁnement process. SharpMask can
efﬁciently integrate spatially rich information from early fea-tures with strong semantic information encoded in later layersto generate high ﬁdelity object masks.
Motivated by Fully Convolutional Networks (FCN) for
semantic segmentation (Long et al. 2015 ) and DeepMask
(Pinheiro et al. 2015 ; Dai et al. 2016a ) proposed Instance-
FCN to generate instance segment proposals. Similar to
DeepMask, the InstanceFCN network is split into two fullyconvolutional branches, one to generate instance sensitive
score maps, the other to predict the objectness score. Hu et al.
(2017 ) proposed FastMask to efﬁciently generate instance
segment proposals in a one-shot manner, similar to SSD (Liuet al. 2016 ), in order to make use of multiscale convolutional
features. Sliding windows extracted densely from multiscale
convolutional feature maps were input to a scale-tolerantattentional head module in order to predict segmentation
masks and objectness scores. FastMask is claimed to run
at 13 FPS on 800 ×600 images.
123