International Journal of Computer Vision
which ﬁnds the maximum response to a part ﬁlter with spa-
tial constraints taken into consideration (Ouyang et al. 2015 ;
Girshick et al. 2015 ; Wan et al. 2015 ).
Rotation invariance may be attractive in certain applica-
tions, but there are limited generic object detection workfocusing on rotation invariance, because popular benchmarkdetection datasets (PASCAL VOC, ImageNet, COCO) do not
have large variations in rotation. Occlusion handling is inten-
sively studied in face detection and pedestrian detection, butvery little work has been devoted to occlusion handling for
generic object detection. In general, despite recent advances,
deep networks are still limited by the lack of robustness toa number of variations, which signiﬁcantly constrains their
real-world applications.
(4) Context reasoning
As introduced in Sect. 7, objects in the wild typically coexist
with other objects and environments. It has been recog-
nized that contextual information (object relations, globalscene statistics) helps object detection and recognition (Oliva
and Torralba 2007 ), especially for small objects, occluded
objects, and with poor image quality. There was extensivework preceding deep learning (Malisiewicz and Efros 2009 ;
Murphy et al. 2003 ; Rabinovich et al. 2007 ; Divvala et al.
2009 ; Galleguillos and Belongie 2010 ), and also quite a few
works in the era of deep learning (Gidaris and Komodakis2015 ; Zeng et al. 2016 ,2017 ; Chen and Gupta 2017 ;H ue ta l .
2018a ). How to efﬁciently and effectively incorporate con-
textual information remains to be explored, possibly guidedby how human vision uses context, based on scene graphs
(Li et al. 2017d ), or via the full segmentation of objects and
scenes using panoptic segmentation (Kirillov et al. 2018 ).
(5) Detection proposals
Detection proposals signiﬁcantly reduce search spaces. As
recommended in Hosang et al. ( 2016 ), future detection pro-
posals will surely have to improve in repeatability, recall,
localization accuracy, and speed. Since the success of RPN
(Ren et al. 2015 ), which integrated proposal generation and
detection into a common framework, CNN based detectionproposal generation methods have dominated region pro-
posal. It is recommended that new detection proposals should
be assessed for object detection, instead of evaluating detec-tion proposals alone.
(6) Other factors
As discussed in Sect. 9, there are many other factors affecting
object detection quality: data augmentation, novel train-
ing strategies, combinations of backbone models, multipledetection frameworks, incorporating information from otherrelated tasks, methods for reducing localization error, han-
dling the huge imbalance between positive and negativesamples, mining of hard negative samples, and improving
loss functions.
10.3 Research Directions
Despite the recent tremendous progress in the ﬁeld of object
detection, the technology remains signiﬁcantly more primi-
tive than human vision and cannot yet satisfactorily address
real-world challenges like those of Sect. 2.2. We see a number
of long-standing challenges:
•Working in an open world: being robust to any number
of environmental changes, being able to evolve or adapt.
•Object detection under constrained conditions: learning
from weakly labeled data or few bounding box annota-
tions, wearable devices, unseen object categories etc.
•Object detection in other modalities: video, RGBD
images, 3D point clouds, lidar, remotely sensed imageryetc.
Based on these challenges, we see the following directions
of future research:
(1)Open World Learning The ultimate goal is to develop
object detection capable of accurately and efﬁciently recog-
nizing and localizing instances in thousands or more object
categories in open-world scenes, at a level competitive withthe human visual system. Object detection algorithms are
unable, in general, to recognize object categories outside of
their training dataset, although ideally there should be theability to recognize novel object categories (Lake et al. 2015 ;
Hariharan and Girshick 2017 ). Current detection datasets
(Everingham et al. 2010 ; Russakovsky et al. 2015 ; Lin et al.
2014 ) contain only a few dozen to hundreds of categories,
signiﬁcantly fewer than those which can be recognized by
humans. New larger-scale datasets (Hoffman et al. 2014 ;
Singh et al. 2018a ; Redmon and Farhadi 2017 ) with signiﬁ-
cantly more categories will need to be developed.
(2)Better and More Efﬁcient Detection Frameworks One
of the reasons for the success in generic object detection hasbeen the development of superior detection frameworks, bothregion-based [RCNN (Girshick et al. 2014 ), Fast RCNN (Gir-
shick 2015 ), Faster RCNN (Ren et al. 2015 ), Mask RCNN
(He et al. 2017 )] and one-stage detectors [YOLO (Redmon
et al. 2016 ), SSD (Liu et al. 2016 )]. Region-based detectors
have higher accuracy, one-stage detectors are generally faster
and simpler. Object detectors depend heavily on the under-lying backbone networks, which have been optimized for
image classiﬁcation, possibly causing a learning bias; learn-
ing object detectors from scratch could be helpful for newdetection frameworks.
123