International Journal of Computer Vision
(a) (b)
(d) (c)
Fig. 4 Recognition problems related to generic object detection: a
image level object classiﬁcation, bbounding box level generic object
detection, cpixel-wise semantic segmentation, dinstance level semantic
segmentation
ulated objects (e.g., humans, cows and horses) rather than
unstructured scenes (such as sky, grass and cloud).
The spatial location and extent of an object can be deﬁned
coarsely using a bounding box (an axis-aligned rectangle
tightly bounding the object) (Everingham et al. 2010 ;R u s -
sakovsky et al. 2015 ), a precise pixelwise segmentation mask
(Zhang et al. 2013 ), or a closed boundary (Lin et al. 2014 ;
Russell et al. 2008 ), as illustrated in Fig. 4. To the best of
our knowledge, for the evaluation of generic object detec-
tion algorithms, it is bounding boxes which are most widely
used in the current literature (Everingham et al. 2010 ;R u s -
sakovsky et al. 2015 ), and therefore this is also the approach
we adopt in this survey. However, as the research community
moves towards deeper scene understanding (from image level
object classiﬁcation to single object localization, to genericobject detection, and to pixelwise object segmentation), it is
anticipated that future challenges will be at the pixel level
(Lin et al. 2014 ).
There are many problems closely related to that of generic
object detection
1. The goal of object classiﬁcation orobject
categorization (Fig. 4a) is to assess the presence of objects
from a given set of object classes in an image; i.e., assigningone or more object class labels to a given image, determin-
ing the presence without the need of location. The additional
requirement to locate the instances in an image makes detec-tion a more challenging task than classiﬁcation. The object
recognition problem denotes the more general problem of
identifying/localizing all the objects present in an image,subsuming the problems of object detection and classiﬁca-
tion (Everingham et al. 2010 ; Russakovsky et al. 2015 ; Opelt
1To the best of our knowledge, there is no universal agreement in the
literature on the deﬁnitions of various vision subtasks. Terms such asdetection, localization, recognition, classiﬁcation, categorization, veri-ﬁcation, identiﬁcation, annotation, labeling, and understanding are oftendifferently deﬁned (Andreopoulos and Tsotsos 2013 ).
Fig. 5 Taxonomy of challenges in generic object detection
et al. 2006 ; Andreopoulos and Tsotsos 2013 ). Generic object
detection is closely related to semantic image segmentation
(Fig. 4c), which aims to assign each pixel in an image to a
semantic class label. Object instance segmentation (Fig. 4d)
aims to distinguish different instances of the same objectclass, as opposed to semantic segmentation which does not.
2.2 Main Challenges
The ideal of generic object detection is to develop a general-purpose algorithm that achieves two competing goals of high
quality/accuracy and high efﬁciency (Fig. 5). As illustrated
in Fig. 6, high quality detection must accurately local-
ize and recognize objects in images or video frames, suchthat the large variety of object categories in the real world
can be distinguished (i.e., high distinctiveness), and that
object instances from the same category, subject to intra-class appearance variations, can be localized and recognized
(i.e., high robustness). High efﬁciency requires that the entire
detection task runs in real time with acceptable memory andstorage demands.
2.2.1 Accuracy Related Challenges
Challenges in detection accuracy stem from (1) the vast range
of intra-class variations and (2) the huge number of objectcategories.
Intra-class variations can be divided into two types: intrin-
sic factors and imaging conditions. In terms of intrinsicfactors, each object category can have many different object
instances, possibly varying in one or more of color, tex-
ture, material, shape, and size, such as the “chair” categoryshown in Fig. 6i. Even in a more narrowly deﬁned class, such
as human or horse, object instances can appear in different
poses, subject to nonrigid deformations or with the additionof clothing.
123