gL−1−n ½/C138 ¼ −1ðÞn/C2hn½/C138
where L is the length of the filter. The QMF relationship will ensure that the original input can
be perfectly reconstructed from the decomposed signal.
DWT is very robust to noise as it works with localized time and frequency information.
Hence, if one of the frequency bands of the input signal is altered by the noise, it will not affect
all of the coefficients produced by this algorithm. Due to this reason, many of the researches
related to ASRs used DWT as their feature extraction method [ 43,64,100,151,167].
14.2.3 Wavelet packet transform
WPT is very similar to DWT. The only difference is that the detail and approximation
coefficients are more decomposed in WPT as compared to DWT [ 78]. The research done in
[105] compared the performance of DFT based algorithms with algorithms based on DWPT
for the task of speech recognition. One of the DFT based algorithm under consideration was
MFCC. This research showed that DWPT based methods performed better as compared to
DFT based algorithms. When compared against MFCC, a reduction of 20% in word error rate
was achieved with a DWPT based method. Another research [ 105], compared the perfor-
mances of WPT against DWT. The system being used was an ASR that could identify the
Malayalam language. Here DWT outperformed WPT, as DWT achieved an accuracy of 89%,
as compared to, WPT which could only achieve 61%.
14.3 Summary
From the above discussion, it was easy to conclude th at in the past, feature extraction techniques
that focused on spectral analysi s preferred over techniques that use d temporal analysis. However,
over the past few years, it became obvious that sp ectral analysis alone was not enough to gather
maximum information from the input speech signa l. Hence, the wavelet te chniques, which used
temporal analysis, were used in some resea rches instead of MFCC and LPC. DWT achieved
better results for the task of phoneme recognition than the more commonly used MFCC.
Storage space is a factor that should be taken into consideration when discussing feature
extraction techniques. DWT is preferred if there is limited space available, as its feature vector is
much smaller in size. There are other feature extraction techniques, such as Principal Compo-
nent Analysis (PCA), Vector Quantization (VQ) and Linear Descriptive Analysis (LDA), that
can also be used in combination with other methods, such as MFCC, to reduce the dimensions
of their feature vectors. Different researches used VQ with MFCC [ 153] and DWT [ 127]t o
utilize its clustering property to improve the performance of their ASR. Whereas the PCA and
LDA were used to reduce the dimensionality of the feature vector, all the while making the
system more robust [ 38,60,163]. Another point to be considered when selecting a feature
extraction technique is the type of environment the ASR will be deployed in. In clean
environments, MFCC, PLP, and LPC achieved good accuracies; whereas, for noisy environ-
ments, DWT, LPCC, and WPT showed better results. One way to make an ASR more robust is
to combine the MFCC, PLP, and LPC with either DWT or WPT. Another way is to use
RASTA-PLP, which performs best in a noisy environment but not in clean environments.
Table 4summarizes the advantages and disadvantages of all of the above-mentioned
techniques.9432 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2021) 80:9411 –9457