16.2 Decoding techniques
A decoding technique uses an acoustic model, a language model, and the spoken utterance to
find the most likely word sequence. One of the most obvious methods would be to enumerate
over all possible outputs to find the most likely. As the number of outputs will grow
exponentially with the length of the word, hence this technique can only be employed in tasks
with a very small dataset. Various pruning algorithms [ 41,80] can be used to remove the low
scoring hypothesis, to make searching more efficient.
Viterbi search and n-best search are two of the most commonly used decoding techniques.
16.2.1 Viterbi search
In this approach, all of the hypotheses that are associated with a particular speech utterance are
considered and are directly compared with each other. Viterbi search is impractical for even
medium-sized projects due to its huge computational cost; hence, Viterbi beam search [ 7,65]
is mostly used as it considerably reduces the size of the search space. In the Viterbi beam
search, only those hypotheses whose likelihood falls under a particular radius are considered.
The research performed in [ 92] presents an HMM-based speaker-independent ASR. The
proposed system used the TIMIT dictionary to generate its word transcription dictionary. The
Viterbi algorithm was used to perform sentence decoding on the generated dictionary. Besides
the Viterbi algorithm, the word pair technique was also utilized to get a smooth transition
between two words. The performance of the system was increased to 92.2% from 60.1% with
the usage of both dictionary and word pair techniques.
16.2.2 N-best search
The N-best search [ 23] is very similar to the Viterbi Search; the main difference between the
two algorithms is that where Viterbi Search provides the best hypothesis, the n-best search
provides the n-best hypothesis. One major drawback of this algorithm is that the short
hypotheses have more chances of being chosen as the long hypotheses are more prone to
errors. To overcome this problem, two of the most commonly used methods are the search
method [ 41] and the pruning method [ 80].
16.3 Summary
From the above discussion, it can be concluded that a language model is required for systems
that capture large vocabulary. Nowadays, a lot of research is being performed to optimize
language models. And currently, n-gram and n-best search models are the most commonly
used methods.
17 Toolkits and online resources
A lot of work has been done on perfecting the task of speech recognition. Some of the work
performed over the years is available to us in the form of personal assistant tools such as
Cortana and Siri. Even though a lot of research has been performed in this field, but most of
the work has not been made available publicly. Table 6discusses some of the toolkits and9446 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2021) 80:9411 –9457