bjkðÞ ¼ Pv kat tð jTt¼St/C17
πis the set of initial state probabilities, and it contains the probabilities of every state S ias a
start state, and V = {v 1,v2,…., vm}is the set of all possible output symbols. For an input set of
observations O = o 1,o2,….., o Tand an HMM model λ=( A ,B , π), we can use the following
formula to calculate the probability of a single observation [ 13,123]:
PrOðjπ;A;B/C17
¼∑
qπqt∏T
t¼1aqt−1bqtOtðÞ
A combination of wavelet transform and HMM was introduced in [ 68]. HMM, and wavelet
transforms were used together to boost the performance of wavelet-based algorithms. This hybrid
model was called the Hidden Markov Tree (HMT) model. Even though the wavelet transformation
algorithms produced great results for speech reco gnition, their performance could improve if
dependencies between their coefficients could also be calculated, as each wavelet was treated
independently. With the HMT model, Markov st ructures were created between the wavelet
coefficients to model the depend encies. These structures were no t applied directly to the wavelets
but were applied in between the wavelet coefficien t states. The resultant binary tree had wavelets
connected vertically across th e scale. The performance comp arison between HMT and some
wavelet transformations was done by applying t hem both to a simple classification problem. As
predicted, the HMT showed better results than wa velet-based algorithms. As mentioned in Table 4,
wavelet based algorithms are very robust. De-noising of different noisy speech signals was also
performed to compare the performance of HMT. Ag ain, HMT showed better results than wavelet-
based algorithms. [ 1] presented an enhanced version of HMT that can be used for feature extraction.
CDHMM [ 29,98,99] is the most recently developed approach using HMM. This technique
uses a maximum likelihood (ML) algorithm for training and recognition of HMM. Using this
technique, variations occurring within and between phonemes can be calculated [ 98].
CDHMM can be further improved by using the large margin classifiers in the training process.
When compared with conventional Machine Language techniques, this technique had reduced
error rates [ 19,29,70].
15.2 Artificial neural networks
ANN are great classifiers, and they produce the best results for pattern recognition problems.
They are used for their capability to learn and organize according to the dataset provided at the
training stage. They work exceptionally well with unknown data and can classify unknown
data effectively. The drawback of using an ANN is that they tend to over train and face the
local minima problem. They also ignore the time variability present in the speech signal; this
problem can be solved by using Hybrid HMM-ANN models. The hybrid model is used to get
the advantages of both the models [ 137].
Some of the widely used ANN are discussed below.
15.2.1 Multilayer Perceptrons
Multilayer perceptrons (MLP) have proven to be the most efficient, successful, and commonly
used type of ANN [ 137,156]. An MLP is a simple feed-forward neural network containing at
least three layers: input, output, and hidden. Fig. 10shows the basic structure of an MLP.Multimedia Tools and Applications (2021) 80:9411 –9457 9435