15.2.2 Self-Organising maps
Self-organizing maps (SOM) were introduced in 1982 by Teuvo Kalevi Kohonen [ 6]. The
main idea behind SOM is that input signals are placed in such a way that they can produce a
contour map from a higher dimension input space to a lower-dimensional feature space. So,
the input signal is first placed randomly in the input feature space, which is then organized into
different clusters. Each of the formed clusters represents a unique feature of the input signals.
Because of this, SOM can easily differentiate between different features present in the input
signal [ 16,21,147].
The SOM can differentiate between the signals without supervision and therefore have no
example of potential output. Hence, for the SOM network to be trained satisfactorily, we need
a significant number of training samples. This algorithm can be performed by applying the
following three steps. The first step is to calculate the level of similarity between the pattern
present in the input signal and the neurons present in the output layer. The required similarity
can be calculated with the help of the predefined formula of Euclidean distance. After that, the
synaptic weights are determined, using the formula given below:
wjnþ1 ðÞ ¼ wjnðÞ þ αnðÞhj;ixðÞnðÞxnðÞ−wjnðÞ/C0/C1
Where x is the input function, w j(n) is the weights of neuron j at the time n, α(n) is the learning
rate and hj,i(x) is the neighbourhood function.
The research performed in [ 75] used SOM in combination with DWT to perform the task of
vowel recognition. This system was named the wavelet self-organizing maps (WSOM), which
used SOM to model the input speech signals, and the resultant SOM mapping was used to
adapt the wavelets. The WSOM obtained an accuracy of 55%. Another research [ 31]u s e d
SOM to convert variable length feature vectors into fixed-length feature vectors. This tech-
nique ensured that the MLP classification model used in the system will always have fixed-
length feature vectors even though the length of the input signal can be variable.
The research performed in [ 21] used SOM to identify twelve different Hindi words spoken
by five speakers. The SOM used in the research consisted of an input layer, a competitive
layer, and an output layer; it is a modified version of a basic SOM called supervised SOM. In
this research, four different types of features were extracted from the input signal, and these
features included the intensity, and the pitch of the signal, MFCC, and LPC. The accuracy of
every speaker was analyzed independent of the other speakers. The highest accuracy was
achieved by the intensity features, whose mean-SOM and median-SOM, accuracy was 98.17%
and 98.54%, respectively. The other feature extraction techniques achieved approximately
89% accuracy.
15.2.3 Radial basis functions
Radial basis functions (RBF) have the basic ANN structure, i.e., an input layer, an output layer,
and a hidden layer. The main difference between RBF and other ANN structures is that
Gaussian function is used in the hidden layer. The main task of the RBF model is to generate
clusters on the basis of patterns present in the input speech signal. The Gaussian function is
then used to form a relationship between all of the created clusters. This relationship is formed
by applying the Gaussian function in the centers of these clusters. Hence, the output of this
model can be calculated using the formula given below:Multimedia Tools and Applications (2021) 80:9411 –9457 9437