b Connected Words
Connected words, on the other hand, consists of a system that works with connected utterances
and will take a nominal or no pause between two or more words. Such systems can take an
input of multiple words at a time and process them as a whole rather than individually.
13 Utterance style
Since most people have their speaking style, utterances can also be divided into two types on
this basis. These two types are continuous and spontaneous speech [ 82].
a Continuous Speech
In continuous speech utterances, the users of the system are allowed to speak almost naturally.
These types of utterances do not require a pause between words. The input given to the system
is considered as a whole and is not divided into individual words based on pauses.
b Spontaneous Speech
Spontaneous speech utterances are completely natural. Such utterances may include bogus
starts, coughing, laughter, and words like “um”and“ah”, etc. These systems are very difficult
to develop as the system will require a very large vocabulary. It will also need to be able to
differentiate between valid words and other sounds.
&Channel Variability
Another way of classifying ASRs is based on the quality of the input channel. Some ASRs
require input signals that are recorded in a clean environment i.e. without any background
noise. Noise is unnecessary or unwanted information in the input speech signal. It can be
anything from the chirping of birds in the background to distortion from the sound not being
recorded correctly. Sometimes the input sound wave also gets distorted when we change its
channel by using different software.
Besides noise, the difference in ages, gender, accent, environment, and speaking speed are
also considered as variations in the input signal. An ASR should be able to cope with all of the
different types of background noises or variations in the input speech signal [ 40,71].
14 Feature extraction
The process of feature extraction is applied to remove irrelevant information from the signal. A
good feature extraction algorithm should be able to extract the features in real-time and should
contain maximum information. Feature extraction algorithms can also be classified based on
speech features: temporal and spectral features. The temporal analysis techniques analyze the
audio signal in its original form, the time domain. In spectral analysis, as the name implies, the
spectral representation of the speech signal is used, the frequency domain. Some of the9424 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2021) 80:9411 –9457