information present in the input audio signal by re-scaling, shifting, and then analyzing the
mother wavelet to obtain the temporal information present in the input signal. Because of this,
the input signal is not only analyzed on different frequency levels but with different resolutions
as well [ 5,121].
So, DWT is based on multi-resolution analysis, according to which lower frequency
components appear for a much longer duration than the higher frequency components in a
speech signal. Because of this reason, instead of using the same size window, different sizes of
windows are used for lower and higher frequency components. For a higher frequency
component, a narrow window is used, and a wider one is used for lower frequency components
[121]. DWT was created to replicate the working of a human auditory system, where decreasing
frequency resolution is used to analyze the increasing frequencies present in a signal [ 135].
The DWT analysis divides the input speech signal into two types of coefficients: detail and
approximation coefficients. The detail coefficients represent the low-scale high-frequency
components of the input signal, and approximation coefficients represent the highscale low-
frequency components [ 78,127]. DWT can be performed using a formula proposed by
Stephane G. Mallat [ 96] this is a fast pyramidal algorithm that uses multi-rate filter-banks,
called Mallattree decomposition. The algorithm decomposes the signal into detail and approx-
imation coefficients, as shown in Fig. 8.
The input speech signal is passed through a high-pass and a low-pass filter to get the detail
and approximation coefficients, and then the results obtained from filters are down-sampled by
two, the results obtained after down-sampling are the required coefficients. The process of
applying the filters and down-sampling can be mathematically expressed in the form of the
formulas given below [ 5]:
ylowk½/C138 ¼∑
nxn½/C138 /C2 h2k−n½/C138
yhighk½/C138 ¼∑
nxn½/C138 /C2 g2k−n½/C138
Where x[n] is the input signal, h[n] is the low-pass filter, and g[n] is the high-pass filter. The
approximation coefficients can be further divided by using the same steps repeatedly.
Speech signal often lies in the lower frequency components of a signal, even if the higher
frequency components are removed from a signal, the speech present in the signal will still be
understandable even though the overall sound of the signal will be different. The research done
in [43] shows that instead of using the detail coefficients, using approximation coefficients to
generate octave achieves better accuracy.
DWT coefficients are obtained by concatenating the approximation and detail coefficients
starting from the last decomposition level. The total number of decomposition levels is chosen
based on the frame size. The frame sizes between 3 and 6 octaves are commonly used. The
filters used for computing DWT should be a quadrature mirror filter (QMF), which can be
calculated using the formula given below:
Input Speech SignalLPF
HPF2
2Approximation Coefficients
Detail Coefficients
Fig. 8 Decomposition of speech signal into high frequency and low-frequency componentsMultimedia Tools and Applications (2021) 80:9411 –9457 9431