14.2 Temporal feature analysis
14.2.1 Relative spectra –perceptual linear prediction
RASTA-PLP analysis specializes in noisy environments by merging RASTA and PLP
analysis. It can easily be observed that often training and testing data ’s conditions differ,
testing data usually contains more real-life factors such as noise, inter-speaker variations, intra-
speaker variations, and a difference in the transmission channel. The basis of RASTA [ 139]
analysis is that the temporal properties of the environment, in which the input signal was
recorded, varies from the temporal properties of the speech. So, by using a band-pass filter on
all frequencies in each sub-band, the short-term noise is smoothed, and the difference in
training and testing environments is reduced significantly. The block diagram shown in Fig. 7
explains the steps performed to calculate RAST-PLP features.
Another research [ 56], compared LPC, MFCC, and RASTA-PLP as feature extraction
techniques for a system that recognized digits of Kannada language. The input signals were
pre-processed using wavelet transforms; DWT was used for clean signals, whereas, the
wavelet packet transform (WPT), was used for noisy signals. For clean speech signals, MFCC
had the highest accuracy of 94%, followed by LPC, which had an accuracy of 82%, and
RASTA-PLP had an accuracy of 54%. For the noisy signals without pre-processing, RASTA-
PLP had the highest accuracy of 73%, followed by MFCC, with an accuracy of 60%, and LPC
had the lowest accuracy of 53%. After applying the WPT, the accuracies of all three feature
extraction methods were increased, with RASTA-PLP having the highest accuracy of 83%.
Hence we can easily say that, for noisy datasets, RASTA-PLP performs much better than
any other feature extraction method, whereas it may not perform as well for clean speech
signals. It was also observed in [ 56] that RASTA-PLP can have an even better performance
when combined with WPT.
14.2.2 Discrete wavelet transform
We know that speech signals are not stationary and contain both temporal and frequency
information. Even though most algorithms focus only on frequency information, temporal
information is equally important [ 5,121,137]. DWT takes into consideration the temporal
Input Sound Wave
Windowing
FFT
Critical Band Analysis LogRASTA-FilteringEqual Loudness CurveIntensity Loudness Power Law LPC
Cepstral Analysis
RASTA-PLP Features
Fig. 7 Block diagram of the process of RASTA-PLP9430 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2021) 80:9411 –9457