of extracting features from speech signals. Features are usually the predefined number
of coefficients or values that are obtained by applying various methods on the input
speech signal. The feature extraction module s hould be robust to different factors, such
as noise and echo effect. Most commonly used feature extraction methods are Mel-
frequency cepstral coefficients (MFCCs), linear predictive coding (LPC), and discrete
wavelet transform (DWT) [ 40,78,112,127].
The third and final module is the classification model; this model is used to predict
the text corresponding to the input speech signal. The classification models take input
of the features extracted from the previous stage to predict the text. Like the feature
extraction module, there are different types of approaches that can be applied to
perform the task of speech recognition. The fir st type of approach uses joint probability
distribution formed using the training datas et, and that joint probability distribution is
used to predict the future output. This approach is called a generative approach; HMM
and Gaussian mixture models (GMM) are the most commonly used models based on
this approach. The second approach calculates a parametric model using a training set
of input vectors and their corresponding output vectors. This approach is called the
discriminative approach; Support Vect or Machines (SVM) and ANN are its most
common examples [ 11,87]. Hybrid approaches can also be used for classification
purposes; one example of such a hybrid model is that of a HMM and ANN [ 151].
The language model is the last module of the ASR; it consists of various types of
rules and semantics of a language. Language models are necessary for recognizing the
phoneme predicted by the classifier; and is also used to form trigrams, words or
sentences using all of the predicted phonemes of a given input. Most modern ASRs
are designed to work without Language Mod els as well. Such ASRs can predict words
and sentences spoken in the given input, bu t their efficiency can be increased signif-
icantly by using a language model [ 18].
3.4.1 Types of ASR
As shown in Fig. 3, an ASR can be classified on the basis of speaker models, vocabulary being
used, channel variability, and speaking style, which can be further classified into two types,
utterance speed, and utterance approach.
&Speaker Mode
The purpose of creating an ASR is that it can transliterate any language for any speaker.
Languages differ in terms of phonetics, character set, and grammar rules; speakers vary in
terms of voice pitch, accent, and personality. Every speaker has a unique voice and speaking
style; on this basis, an ASR can be classified into the following three types:
4 Speaker-independent models
Speaker-independent ASRs are developed to recognize multiple speakers. Such systems are
not trained for a particular user and are one of the most complex types of systems to design.
These systems might offer less accuracy than other methods but are more flexible and can have
wide usage in the real world.Multimedia Tools and Applications (2021) 80:9411 –9457 9421