problem can be explained in the following way: for a given sequence input sequence X, where
X=X 1,X2,…., X n, where n is the length of the input sequence, the function of an ASR is to
find a corresponding output sequence Y, where Y = Y 1,Y2,…., Y m, where m is the length of
the output sequence. And the output sequence Y has the highest posterior probability P(Y|X),
where P(Y|X) can be calculated using the given formula:
W¼argmax P W =XðÞ
¼argmaxPWðÞPX =WðÞ
PXðÞ
where P(W) is the probability of the occurrence of the word, P(X) is the probability that X is
present in the signal, and P(X|W) is the probability of the acoustic signal W occurring in
correspondence to the word X.
An ASR can generally be divided into 4 modules: a pre-processing module, a feature
extraction module, a classification model, and a language model, as shown in Fig. 2.U s u a l l y
the input given to an ASR is captured using a microphone. This implies that noise may also be
carried alongside the audio. The goal of preprocessing the audio is to reduce the signal-to-noise
ratio [ 176]. There are different filters and methods that can be applied to a sound signal to
reduce the associated noise. Framing, normalization, end-point detection and pre-emphasis are
some of the frequently used methods to reduce noise in a signal [ 105,114,135]. Pre-
processing methods also vary based on the algorithm being used for feature extraction. Certain
feature extraction algorithms require a specific type of pre-processing method to be applied to
its input signal.
After pre-processing, the clean speech si gnal is then passed through the feature
extraction module. The performance and efficiency of the classification module are
highly dependent upon the extracted features [ 3,78,178]. There are different methods
Input Sound WavePre-Processing
Module
Feature
Extraction
Module
Classification
Model
Language ModelClean Sound Wave
Extracted Features
Predicted Text
Fig. 2 Basic structure of an ASR9420 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2021) 80:9411 –9457