bvn½/C138 ¼ lnpðÞ;for n ¼0
bvn½/C138 ¼ an½/C138 þ ∑n−1
k¼1k
n/C18/C19
bvk½/C138an−k½/C138 ;for1≤n≤p
Where p is the total number of sample points, bvn½/C138are cepestral coefficients, and n is the
number of samples present in the anaysis frame.
Recent research [ 21] examined the performance of LPCC as compared to MFCC. The
system that was used to study these feature extraction algorithms could identify twelve Hindi
words spoken by five different speakers. This system showed that LPCC and MFCC had
similar results. Another research [ 165] showed that LPCC was 10% more efficient and 5.5%
faster than MFCC. Fig. 5sums up the process of LPCC in the form of a block diagram.
14.1.4 Perceptual linear prediction
PLP uses transformations that are based on a human auditory system. This algorithm
has three main characteristics; the spectral resolution of the critical band, application
of intensity-loudness power law, and equa l loudness curve reduction. By remapping
the frequency axis to the Bark scale, PLP inco rporates critical band spectral resolu-
tion into its spectrum estimate and produces a critical band spectrum approximation.
This approximation integrates the ener gy in critical bands. As we know, human
hearing is more sensitive to the middle-frequency range of audible spectrum at
conversational speech levels. PLP incor porates this phenomenon in the algorithm
by multiplying the loudness curve with the critical spectrum band. By doing this,
the high and low-frequency regions ar e suppressed between the range of 400 kHz
and 1200 kHz, which is the mid-range. A non linear relationship exists between the
perceived loudness and the intensity of s ound. Cube root amplitude compression of
the loudness equalized critical band spectr um estimate is used to approximate the
power law of hearing [ 88].
To calculate the coefficients of PLP, windowing is performed on the input signal, and then
an FFT is applied on the windowed input signal. The resultant signal is then converted into
Bark Scale using the formula given below:
θBiðÞ ¼ ∑2:5
B¼−1:3XB−Bi ðÞjj2ψBðÞ
Input Sound Wave
Framming Windowing
Auto-correlation LPC AnalysisFrames
Cepstral Analysis
LPCC
Fig. 5 Block diagram of LPCC9428 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2021) 80:9411 –9457