Whereℋis the activation function, W ihdenotes the weight matrix used between the input and
the hidden states units, W horepresents the weight matrix used between the hidden and output
units, and h t-1represents the previous state ’s values.
Since most RNNs use LSTM cells, the following formulas can be used to mathematically
describe it.
it¼σWxixtþWhiht−1þWcict−1þbi ðÞ
ft¼σWxfxtþWhfht−1þWcfct−1þbf/C0/C1
ct¼ftct−1þittanh WxcxtþWhcht−1þbc ðÞ
ot¼σWxoxtþWhoht−1þWcoctþbo ðÞ
ht¼ottanh ctðÞ
where i trepresents the value of the input gate for the current iteration, f represents the forget
gate, o represents the output gate, c represents the cell activation function, and σrepresents
logistic sigmoid.
One major shortcoming of using a simple RNN is that it would only consider the
previous context. However, in speech recogn ition, the future context is equally important
as the previous context. So, instead of using a simple RNN, bidirectional RNN can be
used to address this shortcoming. As the name describes, a bidirectional RNN processes
the input vector in both directions and keep separate hidden state vector for each
direction, and the following formulas can be used to describe the processing of a
bidirectional RNN:
h!
t¼H W
xh!xtþW
h!
h!h!
t−1þb
h!/C18/C19
h←
t¼H ð W
xh←xtþW
h←h←h←
tþ1þb
h←Þ
yt¼W
h!
yh!
tþW
h←
yh←
tþbo
Neural networks, both feed-forward and recurrent, can be only used for frame-wise classifi-
cation of the input audio. This problem can be addressed by using HMMs to get the alignment
between the input audio and its transcribed output. Another method would be to use CTC [ 58],
as the objective function, as it trains the model without knowing the initial alignment between
the given input and the transcribed output. To decode the output of a CTC network, there are
two methods. One method is to pick the output with the highest probability at the end of every
time step. Another way is to use the beam search. If the beam search is used, then a dictionary
and a language model can also be integrated with the model to increase its efficiency. Fig. 11
shows an example of a simple RNN.
[134] presents an Attention-based Transducer, where the encoder is composed of a pyramid
LSTM layer, a simple LSTM layer, and a multi-head self-attention layer. The input signal is
fed to the pyramid LSTM layer; the output of this layer is then concatenated with the two
previous outputs. The concatenated output is then passed to the LSTM layer and then finally to
the multi-head attention layer. The decoder used in the model is also composed of two simple
LSTM layers. The data used consisted of 10 K hours of in-house English speech data gathered
by the authors using the LAIX learning application. The proposed model achieved a WER of
10.3% and a RTF of 0.19.
The model proposed in [ 46] used RNN to recognize Bengali speech. The network consisted of
three fully-connected layers, followed by a bidirect ional RNN layer and then another fully connectedMultimedia Tools and Applications (2021) 80:9411 –9457 9439