discussed different types of speech rec ognition techniques. In another endeavor, [ 86]a l s o
discussed different types of ASRs, and n eural networks based speech recognition
approaches.
Table 1presents the different highlights of the survey papers, which were discussed in the
previous paragraph, in a compact and easily comprehensible form. The columns represent the
different points that were covered or were missing in the discussed papers.
Most of the previously conducted studies failed to review the different feature extraction
techniques and language models that play a vital part in the construction of an ASR. Similarly,
the latest deep learning techniques were also not explained in the above-mentioned survey
papers. Whereas, different online toolkits and databases that can help train an ASR were also
missing from most of the studies. Hence, this study aims to evaluate the different feature
extraction techniques and deep learning classification techniques. In addition to that, different
online toolkits, databases, and language models were also assessed.
This study captures all the aspects of an ASR from the feature extraction phase to language
models with the following objectives in mind:
&To understand and explain the basic structure of an ASR (shown in Fig. 2) in detail, as well
as discuss how using different techniques at different stages can affect the overall
performance of the system.
&Discuss in detail the different feature extraction and classification techniques being used
for the development of an ASR.
&Evaluate different toolkits and advancements made in language models and how they
affect the performance of an ASR.
&Encapsulate all of the information available regarding the different modules of an ASR,
including different state-of-the-art deep learning classification techniques.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2discusses different tools, resources and
techniques that were used to perform this literature review. Section 3presents a brief history of
ASR, different techniques and datasets that can be employed to calculate the accuracy of the
ASR, as well as the basic structure of an ASR. Section 4explains the state-of-the-art
techniques being used to extract features from an audio signal, whereas, Section 5discusses
techniques that can be used for classifying the extracted features. Section 6explains language
models, why they are needed, and their types. Section 7presents the toolkits that can be used
to perform different ASR related tasks, and finally, the survey is concluded in Section 8.
2R e s e a r c hm e t h o d o l o g y
Before researching this topic, a literature review is performed to determine the cutting edge
technologies in this field. In this regard, IEEE, arxiv.org , Microsoft Academic, and Google
Scholar were used to search and obtain the papers relevant to the research domain. Most of the
relevant scientific seed words were first identified using the generic words and their synonyms
related to the domain. Later on, specific seed words, which were identified from different
publications, were used.
This method of searching ensured that all of the keywords were present in the titles of
the research articles and publications. The AND operation was used to make sure all of
the selected words were present in the titles. Double quotations were also used to ensureMultimedia Tools and Applications (2021) 80:9411 –9457 9413