All of the binary class SVM create decision planes between the class corresponding to them
and all of the other classes. Different voting techniques are then used for choosing the output
for a given input [ 149,172]. The one-against-all technique creates a relatively small amount of
binary SVM, whereas, it requires a large dataset for the training of each binary SVM. A
common problem faced by dividing the multi-class SVM into binary class SVM is the
unclassifiable region problem. For this technique, the unclassifiable region problem can be
solved by either using continuous decision functions or by implementing fuzzy SVM. A fuzzy
SVM uses a membership function in such a way that different input points will contribute
differently to the learning process of SVM [ 36,59,90]. Both techniques can be used to
evaluate the performance of a system and are comparable to each other. However,
implementing continuous decision functions are easier and simpler to implement than fuzzy
SVM.
The work presented in [ 169] shows a comparison between SVM and ANN. The SVM
method employed followed the one-against-all technique in combination with the RBF kernel.
Whereas the ANN method employed was the MLP network. Both networks were trained to
recognize 12 isolated vowels of the Thai language. The SVM network not only took less
processing time in the training phase but also achieved a higher accuracy. The accuracy of the
SVM network was 87.08%, while the accuracy of the MLP network was 82.72%.
15.3.2 The one-against-one technique
Unlike the one-against-all technique, which creates binary SVMs based on the number of
classes, the one-against-one technique creates binary SVMs for all possible pairs. By creating
all possible pairs of classes, this technique distinguishes each class from all the other classes.
Like the one-against-all technique, there exist many voting techniques for the one-against-one
technique as well, which can be employed to choose the output class for a given input [ 149]
[172].
The one-against-one method may create a relatively higher number of binary SVMs, but it
requires less training data. This technique also has a lower computational cost, as a classifier,
can be ignored if its two corresponding classes are rarely required to be distinguished [ 79,
133]. The system presented in [ 9] was used for phoneme classification. MFCC was used to
extract fixed-length feature vectors from the input audio. The classifier used in this system was
a one-against-one classifier in combination with a majority voting technique. This system was
tested on the TIMIT dataset and was compared against HMM. The designed SVM system got
an accuracy of 77.6%, which was 4% better than the HMM. The accuracy of HMM was
73.7%.
15.4 Summary
One of the most commonly used methods of classification for speech is HMM. The reason
behind its ubiquitous usage is its ability to successfully model the temporal information present
in the speech signals. Even though improvements were made in the field of speech recognition
using HMM, but the results obtained were not optimal. So, modifications were done to the
HMM in the form of ANN and SVM. The techniques of ANN and SVM can be employed
independently or as a hybrid model with HMM.
In the past, MLP was the most commonly used type of ANN. Though nowadays, RNN and
RBF are applied more frequently. As discussed above, SVM has shown better or at leastMultimedia Tools and Applications (2021) 80:9411 –9457 9443