comparable results to HMM. Though SVM are inherently binary classifiers, different modi-
fications techniques such as the one-against-all and one-against-one can allow them to classify
multiple classes successfully.
Table 5presents the advantages and disadvantages of using different classification
techniques.
16 Language model
Advancements in the field of speech recognition have increased the need for language models
as speech doesn ’t necessarily follow rigid grammatical rules. Speaking style of person and
their regional and social dialects also affects the input instance. So, a good language model is
required to deal with these problems in real-time [ 40,41]. A language model consists of a
vocabulary set, the search space, and the searching technique. Language models use structural
constraints of a language to predict the probabilities of the occurrence of a word, for a specific
word sequence. These structural constraints can vary from language to language.
The difference between a classifier and a language model is that a classifier maps speech
signals to its closest possible word sequence, whereas, a language model checks the occurrence
probability of the word sequence produced by the classifier. A very common example of this
is, in American English, the phrases ‘recognize speech ’and‘wreck a nice beach ’sound almost
the same, but their meanings are entirely different. These ambiguities are easier to eliminate if
a language model is used in combination with a classification model.
16.1 Types of language models
The language models can be divided into two types: static and dynamic.
16.1.1 Static language models
One of the most commonly used techniques of the static language models is the n-gram model.
Generally, bigram or trigram language models are used where a trigram model holds more
information [ 41]. The research presented in [ 98] shows by using a bigram language model in
combination with their system. By adding a language model, they achieved an accuracy that
was approximately 3% higher than the original accuracy. Another research [ 2] shows a
reduction in the occurrence of out-of-vocabulary (OOV) words by using the n-Gram model.
A major drawback of using such language models is that they cannot adapt if a different
speech of a different domain is given as input.
16.1.2 Dynamic language models
Dynamic language models calculate probabilities based on previously analyzed data. Thus,
they can easily adapt to different speech domains. This technique is highly useful when
transfer learning is being applied; i.e., a pre-trained model of a specific language or speech
domain is being used as a basis to train a model for a different language. Some commonly used
language models techniques are long-distance n-grams [ 2], triggers [ 34,61], cache models
[130], and tree-based models [ 129].9444 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2021) 80:9411 –9457