online resources that have been made publicly available, as well as a few other commonly used
tools.
17.1 Kaldi
Kaldi [ 179] is an open-source speech recognition tool. This tool was developed in C++ and
can easily be deployed on multiple operating systems. Currently, this toolkit only supports the
English language. Kaldi can be used to extract features; it can perform classification tasks as
well. The features can be extracted using multiple methods, which include the most commonly
used MFCC, and cepstral mean and variance normalization (CMVN) and i-vectors. Deep
neural networks (DNN) are used to perform the task of classification.
17.2 CMU Sphinx
CMU Sphinx [ 24] is another open-source speech recognition tool. This tool was developed in
Java and can provide pre-trained models for several languages, including English, French,
Mandarin, Russian, and German. CMU Sphinx uses MFCC to extract features and uses an
HMM-based model to perform the classification task. It also provides an online tool that can
be used to create language models for Sphinx.
17.3 Julius
Julius [ 122] is an open-source speech recognition tool that was originally designed to
recognize the Japanese language. Over the years, with the help of different researches, a
usable model for the English language was also developed. Julius itself is a language
independent decoding program which can be used to create a recognizer for any language as
long as an acoustic model and language model is available for that language.
17.4 Hidden Markov model toolkit
Hidden Markov Model Toolkit (HTK) [ 81] is a portable toolkit that can be used to manipulate
and build hidden Markov models. The original purpose behind creating this toolkit was to
perform the task of speech recognition, but it can be used for other pattern recognition
problems as well.
Table 6 Toolkits and online resources available for speech recognition
Tool Name Programming Language Open-Source Languages Supported
Kaldi C++ Yes English
CMU Sphinx Java Yes English, French, Mandarin
Julius C Yes English, Japanese
HTK C No English
RWTH ASR C++ No EnglishMultimedia Tools and Applications (2021) 80:9411 –9457 9447