1 Introduction
Speech is the most natural, efficient and preferred mode of communication between humans.
Therefore it can be assumed that people are more comfortable using speech as a mode of input
for various machines rather than such other primitive modes of communication as keypads and
keyboards. Automatic speech recognition (ASR) system helps us achieve this goal. Such a
system allows a computer to take the audio file or direct speech from the microphone as an
input and convert it into the text; preferably in the script of the spoken language. An ideal ASR
should be able to “perceive ”the given input, “recognize ”the spoken words and then
subsequently use the recognized words as an input to another machine so that some “action ”
can be performed on it [ 42,126,160]. Retrospectively, we consider ASRs to be the future
means of communication between humans and machines.
Human speech and accents have huge variations, and this variation in speech patterns is one
of the biggest obstacles in creating an autonomous speech recognition system. Bilingual or
multilingual people tend to show more of these variations in their speech patterns than people
who speak only one language. The same problem also arises when we add different factors
such as gender, social style/dialect, speaking style and speed into the equation [ 40,112].
Another obstacle to creating an ASR is finding enough resources to train the ASR model.
Currently, such training models are available only for a handful of languages out of a total of
approximately 6500 world languages.
Over the past few years, many survey papers have been published to review and
examine various aspects of ASR models pr esented over time. A recently published
survey paper [ 160] discussed the challenges an ASR will have to overcome; and also
discussed and analyzed the well-known models of ASR. It analyzes various challenges
which include utterance approach and style, different speaker models, vocabulary size,
and channel variability. The pa per also highlighted three d ifferent classification ap-
proaches; acoustic-phonetic approach, pattern recognition approach, and artificial intel-
ligence approach. In another work [ 144], authors reviewed the efficiency of different
feature extraction techniques including perceptual linear prediction (PLP), revised per-
ceptual linear prediction (RPLP), and Bark frequency cepstral coefficients (BFCC). The
paper compared the results of all these feature extraction techniques on different classi-
fication models. [ 97] also presented some challenges to the real-world implementation of
an optimal ASR system. The authors also classified ASR on the basis of speaker mode,
speaking mode, and vocabulary size. The paper elaborates the front-end and back-end of
an ASR system. The front-end of ASR consists of different feature extraction techniques
in detail; whereas the back-end of ASR discussed various classification techniques
extensively. Another survey paper [ 42], also reviewed different feature extraction tech-
niques and classification models. In addition t o that, the paper briefly defined different
types of speech, speech analysis techniques and their impact on the performance of the
system; and word error rate (WER), a metric us ed to calculate the accuracy of the results
produced by an ASR. Similarly, [ 12] focused solely on ASR for under-resourced
languages. This paper discussed the definition of under-resourced languages as well as
why their preservation is important. The data collection methods of under-resourced
languages and the basic structure of an ASR of under-resourced language were also
discussed. Correspondingly, [ 157] comprehensively explained different hybrid HMM-
ANN based ASRs, whereas, [ 32] gave an overview of different ASRs, as well as
different approaches that can be used to re cognize speech. This paper also briefly9412 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2021) 80:9411 –9457