y¼∑H−1
h¼1whФhxðÞ
where H is the total number of hidden layers, w hare the linear weights, x is the input signal,
andФhis the Gaussian function, which can be calculated using the following formula:
Фh¼ex−chkk =2σ2
h ðÞ
Where c his the centre of the Gaussian function and σhis the width of the Gaussian function.
The research done in [ 17] compared the performance of MLP and RBF. The features were
extracted using LPCC, and the system that was used to compare the two classifiers could
identify six words of the English language, which are spoken by six speakers. MLP achieved
96% accuracy while RBF achieved an accuracy of 98.69%. The training and testing speed of
RBF was also faster than MLP. The research performed in [ 117] combined RBF and HMM.
The main task of this system was to recognize words spoken in a continuous speech
environment. Cepstrum analysis was performed on the input speech signal to extract features
from it. The RBF-HMM hybrid approach created a new HMM for every word in the training
data and associated a target value to each of these HMM. The target value was then used to
calculate the best possible number of neurons for the hidden layer of the network. This system
achieved an accuracy of 80% for recognizing ten words and with a total number of eight
neurons in the hidden layer.
[166] researched the combination of wavelet transformation and RBF to create a robust
ASR. The wavelet transform and RBF were combined in such a way that the activation
function of RBF was replaced with a wavelet transformation. The accuracy of the system was
tested over sixteen speakers speaking different numbers of words, in different environments.
The wavelet-RBF hybrid model achieved better results as compared to a simple RBF network.
But it was observed that as the number of words in the vocabulary increased, the accuracy of
the hybrid model decreased to the point where it was equivalent to the simple RBF network.
Hence, it was assumed that for large vocabularies simple RBF network is better than a
wavelet-RBF model.
[159] proposed a model using temporal RBF features to recognize Arabic letters. The
model is divided into three modules: preprocessing, feature extraction, and classification. The
preprocessing module removes salience from the input signal and then performs normaliza-
tion, pre-emphasis, framing, and windowing on the signal. Once the signal is pre-processed, its
different statistical features were calculated. The calculated features are then used as input for
the RBF-based classification model. The research achieved a recognition rate of 98.175%.
15.2.4 Recurrent neural network
RNN [ 58] model doesn ’t require any phonetic dictionaries or extra human effort to transcribe
the input audio if it ’s trained properly. For a given input sequence x = (x 1,…..,xT), a RNN will
calculate two things, the output vector y = (y 1,…,yT) and the vector used to store the values of
its hidden states h = (h 1,…..,hT). An RNN uses the formula given below to find the values of
the output and hidden vector:
ht¼H WihxtþWhhht−1þbh ðÞ
yt¼Whohtþbo9438 Multimedia Tools and Applications (2021) 80:9411 –9457