itself with the corresponding elements of the receptive field [ 94]. The following mathematical
representation can be used to express the convolutional function:
gx ;yðÞ ¼ ix;yðÞ *h x ;yðÞ
Where i(x, y) represents the input signal, h(x, y) represents the applied filter, and g(x, y) is the
resultant convolved filter. The same filter, with the same set of weights, is used on all of the
receptive fields. This particular feature allows CNN to capture most of the features present in a
signal without using a large number of weights.
The focus of a convolution layer is to extract as many features as possible from a signal. But
once those features are identified, the exact locations of a particular feature don ’t matter as long
as its approximate location relative to the other features is maintained [ 94]. The pooling layer
performs the job of down-sampling, by retaining only the dominant value in each of the
receptive fields, hence, further reducing the size of the input signal. By reducing the signal
size, not only the network becomes less complex, but it also reduces the chances of over-fitting
and increases generalization.
The research presented in [ 143] used the combination of CNN and Bidirectional LSTM
(BLSTM) to recognize Mandarin speech. The proposed model consisted of four CNN blocks,
each with four layers, followed by a layer of BLSTM, and then a fully connected layer. The
input signal was batch normalized before being processed by the network. Each of the four
CNN blocks consisted of a convolutional layer, followed by a batch normalization layer, then a
Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU) activation layer and in the end a max pooling layer. The
AISHELL-1 [ 15] dataset was used for training and testing. The proposed model achieved a
WER% of 19.2. [ 156] used three different types of input, which included MFCC, power
spectrum, and raw wave format, were tried with their model. The model proposed in the paper
than 12 convolutional layers. The stride of the convolutional model varied with the type of
input. Increasing the stride did not affect MFCC whereas it was observed that with the power
spectrum and raw waveform the overall stride of the network played a vital role. LibriSpeech
[116] was the dataset that was used for training, testing and validating purposes. When used
with MFCC the model produced 7.2% WER, with power spectrum as its input the model had
9.4% WER, and lastly with raw waveform it had 10.1% WER.
15.2.6 Fuzzy neural network
Fuzzy neural networks (FNN) is a hybrid technique that incorporates concepts of a fuzzy
system in neural networks. Because of the usage of fuzzy systems, a membership function is
used to make sure every element is mapped to a proper degree of membership. This
membership function proves to be very useful to map speech signals, as they have no clear
boundaries [ 99]. Another advantage of using FNN is that an ANN requires a large amount of
data to be effectively trained. But FNN shows better results with even small datasets as they
converge during the learning phase [ 73].
The work proposed in [ 99] used wavelet transforms, CDHMM, and FNN to recognize fifty
words. When compared with a simple CDHMM, the hybrid model was proven to be more
successful in a noisy environment; by achieving 15.2% more accuracy. Though, in a clean
environment, CDHMM performed better, having a difference of 7.6% in their accuracies.
Adaptive Neuro-Fuzzy Inference System (ANFIS) [ 73,170] is a widely used FNN-based
speech recognition system, which employs different fuzzy inference techniques to performMultimedia Tools and Applications (2021) 80:9411 –9457 9441