Unsupervised Pre-Training
Task-Specific RL
   
    online
   encoder
    target
   encoderexponential
moving avg.conv. transition
       model        Cosine 
Similarity Loss
     target
  projection   prediction     online
  projection   
Inverse Model
       Loss
     target
  projection   prediction     online
  projection   sampled goal
compute distance
       to goal
compute distance
       to goal
Q-Learning Loss q-learning
    headShared Feature Extractor1. Self-Predictive Representations 
2. Inverse Modelling 3. Goal-conditioned RL
Q-Learning Loss 
SPR Loss+ aug.
+ aug.Figure 1: A schematic diagram showing our two stage pretrain-then-ﬁnetune method. All unsuper-
vised training losses and task-speciﬁc RL use the shared torso on the left.
To this end, we propose to use a combination of self-supervised objectives for representation learning
on ofﬂine data, requiring orders of magnitude less pretraining data than existing methods, while
approaching human-level data-efﬁciency when ﬁnetuned on downstream tasks. We summarize our
work below:
RL-aligned representation learning objectives: We propose to pretrain representations using a
combination of latent dynamics modeling, unsupervised goal-conditioned reinforcement learning,
and inverse dynamics modeling – with the intuition that a collection of such objectives can capture
more information about the dynamical and temporal aspects of the environment of interest than any
single objective. We refer to our method as SGI (SPR,Goal-conditioned RL and Inverse modeling).
Signiﬁcant advances for data-efﬁciency on Atari: SGI’s combination of objectives performs
better than any in isolation and signiﬁcantly improves performance over previous representation
pretraining baselines such as ATC (Stooke et al., 2021). Our results are competitive with exploration-
based approaches such as APT or VISR (Liu & Abbeel, 2021; Hansen et al., 2020), which require two
to three orders of magnitude more pretraining data and the ability to interact with the environment
during training, while SGI can learn with a small ofﬂine dataset of exploration data.
Scaling with data quality and model size: SGI’s performance also scales with data quality and
quantity, increasing as data comes from better-performing or more-exploratory policies. Additionally,
we ﬁnd that SGI’s performance scales robustly with model size; while larger models are unstable
or bring limited beneﬁts in standard RL, SGI pretraining allows their ﬁnetuning performance to
signiﬁcantly exceed that of smaller networks.
We assume familiarity with RL in the following sections (with a brief overview in Appendix A).
2 Representation Learning Objectives
A wide range of SSL objectives have been proposed for RL which leverage various aspects of the
structure available in agent interactions. For example, the temporal dynamics of an environment can
be exploited to create a forward prediction task (e.g., Gelada et al., 2019; Guo et al., 2018; Stooke
et al., 2021; Schwarzer et al., 2021) in which an agent is trained to predict its immediate future
observations, perhaps conditioned on a sequence of actions to perform.
Structure in RL goes far beyond forward dynamics, however. We propose to combine multiple
representation learning objectives, covering different agent-centric and temporal aspects of the MDP.
Based on the intuition that knowledge of an environment is best represented in multiple ways (Hessel
et al., 2021; Degris & Modayil, 2012), we expect this to outperform monolithic representation
learning methods such as temporal contrastive learning (e.g., Stooke et al., 2021). In deciding which
2