Pretraining Representations for Data-Efﬁcient
Reinforcement Learning
Max Schwarzer 1;2, Nitarshan Rajkumar1;2, Michael Noukhovitch1;2, Ankesh Anand1;2
Laurent Charlin1;3;5, Devon Hjelm1;4, Philip Bachman4, Aaron Courville1;2;5
1Mila,2Université de Montréal,3HEC Montréal,4Microsoft Research,5CIFAR
Abstract
Data efﬁciency is a key challenge for deep reinforcement learning. We address this
problem by using unlabeled data to pretrain an encoder which is then ﬁnetuned on
a small amount of task-speciﬁc data. To encourage learning representations which
capture diverse aspects of the underlying MDP, we employ a combination of latent
dynamics modelling and unsupervised goal-conditioned RL. When limited to 100k
steps of interaction on Atari games (equivalent to two hours of human experience),
our approach signiﬁcantly surpasses prior work combining ofﬂine representation
pretraining with task-speciﬁc ﬁnetuning, and compares favourably with other
pretraining methods that require orders of magnitude more data. Our approach
shows particular promise when combined with larger models as well as more
diverse, task-aligned observational data – approaching human-level performance
and data-efﬁciency on Atari in our best setting. We provide code associated with
this work at https://github.com/mila-iqia/SGI .
1 Introduction
Deep reinforcement learning (RL) methods often focus on training networks tabula rasa from random
initializations without using any prior knowledge about the environment. In contrast, humans rely
a great deal on visual and dynamics priors about the world to perform decision making efﬁciently
(Dubey et al., 2018; Lake et al., 2017). Thus, it is not surprising that RL algorithms which learn
tabula rasa suffer from severe overﬁtting (Zhang et al., 2018) and poor sample efﬁciency compared
to humans (Tsividis et al., 2017).
Self-supervised learning (SSL) provides a promising approach to learning useful priors from past
data or experiences. SSL methods leverage unlabelled data to learn strong representations, which
can be used to bootstrap learning on downstream tasks. Pretraining with self-supervised learning has
been shown to be quite successful in vision (Hénaff et al., 2019; Grill et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2020a)
and language (Devlin et al., 2019; Brown et al., 2020) settings.
Pretraining can also be used in an RL context to learn priors over representations or dynamics. One
approach to pretraining for RL is to train agents to explore their environment in an unsupervised
fashion, forcing them to learn useful skills and representations (Hansen et al., 2020; Liu & Abbeel,
2021; Campos et al., 2021). Unfortunately, current unsupervised exploration methods require months
or years of real-time experience, which may be impractical for real-world systems with limits and
costs to interaction — agents cannot be run faster than real-time, may require signiﬁcant human
oversight for safety, and can be expensive to run in parallel. It is thus important to develop pretraining
methods that work with practical quantities of data, and ideally that can be applied ofﬂine to ﬁxed
datasets collected from prior experiments or expert demonstrations (as in Stooke et al., 2021).
{max.schwarzer, nitarshan}@mila.quebec
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).