Figure 1: A diagram of transformation from acoustic features
to character-level transcriptions. The red connections repre-
sent the residual connections, which are rescaled according to
Equation 5 for stochastic Transformers.
2. Model Description
2.1. Encoder-Decoder with Attention
The main components of the model include an encoder, which
consumes the source sequence and then generates a high-level
representation, and a decoder generating the target sequence.
The decoder models the data as a conditional language model -
the probability of the sequence of discrete tokens is decomposed
into an ordered product of distributions conditioned on both the
previously generated tokens and the encoder representation.
Both encoder and decoder are neural networks and require
neural components that are able to learn the relationship be-
tween the time steps in the input and output sequence. The de-
coder also requires a mechanism to condition on speciﬁc com-
ponents of the encoder representation. For the Transformer, at-
tention or its common variation multi-head attention, is the core
of the model in place of recurrence.
2.2. Multi-Head Attention
Fundamentally, attention refers to the method of using a
content-based information extractor from a set of queries Q,
keysKand valuesK. The retrieval function is based on simi-
larities [11] between the queries and the keys, and in turn returns
the the weighted sum of the values as following:
Attention (Q;K;V ) =softmax (QKT)V (1)
Recently, [7] improves dot-product attention by scaling the
queries before hand and introducing sub-space projection for
keys, queries and values into nparallel heads, in which natten-
tion operations are performed with corresponding heads. The
result is the concatenation of attention outputs from each head.
Notably, unlike recurrent connections which use single states
with gating mechanism to transfer data or convolution connec-
tions linearly combining local states limited in a kernel size,
self-attention aggregates the information in alltime-steps with-
out any intermediate transformation.2.3. Layer Architecture
The overall architecture is demonstrated in Figure 1. The en-
coder and decoder of the Transformers are constructed by lay-
ers, each of which contains self-attentional sub-layers coupled
with feed-forward neural networks.
To adapt the encoder to long speech utterances, we follow
the reshaping practice from [6] by grouping consecutive frames
into one step. Subsequently we combine the input features
with sinusoidal positional encoding [7]. While directly adding
acoustic features to the positional encoding is harmful, poten-
tially leading to divergence during training [6], we resolved that
problem by simply projecting the concatenated features to a
higher dimension before adding ( 512, as other hidden layers
in the model). In the case of speech recognition speciﬁcally,
the positional encoding offers a clear advantage compared to
learnable positional embeddings [12], because the speech sig-
nals can be arbitrarily long with a higher variance compared to
text sequences.
The Transformer encoder passes the input features to a self-
attention layer followed by a feed-forward neural network with
1 hidden layer with the ReLU activation function. Before these
sub-modules, we follow the original work to include residual
connections which establishes short-cuts between the lower-
level representation and the higher layers. The presence of the
residual layer massively increases the magnitude of the neuron
values which is then alleviated by the layer-normalization [13]
layers placed after each residual connection.
The decoder is the standard Transformer decoder in the re-
cent translation systems [7]. The notable difference between the
decoder and the encoder is that to maintain the auto-regressive
nature of the model, the self-attention layer of the decoder must
be masked so that each state has only access to the past states.
Moreover, an additional attention layer using the target hidden
layer layers as queries and the encoder outputs as keys and val-
ues is placed between the self-attention and the feed-forward
layers. Residual and layer-normalization are setup identically
to the encoder.
This particular design of the Transformer has various ad-
vantages compared to previously proposed RNNs and CNNs
networks. First, computation of each layer and sub-module can
be efﬁciently parallelized over both mini-batch and time dimen-
sions of the input. Second, the combination of residual and layer
normalization is the key to enable greater depth conﬁgurations
to be trainable, which is the main reason for the performance
breakthrough in recent works in both MT and natural language
processing [8, 14].
2.4. Stochastic Layers
The high density of residual connections is the reason why
Transformer is favourably trained with many layers. How-
ever, deep models in general suffer from either overﬁtting due
to more complex architectures and optimization difﬁculty [15].
Studies about residual networks have shown that during training
the network consists of multiple sub-networks taking different
paths through shortcut connections [16], and thus there are re-
dundant layers. Motivated by the previous work of [10], we
propose to apply stochastic residual layers into our Transform-
ers. The method resembles Dropout [17], in which the key idea
is the layers are randomly dropped during training. The original
residual connection of an input xand its corresponding neural
layerFhas the following form:
R(x) =LayerNorm (F(x) +x) (2)