Very Deep Self-Attention Networks for End-to-End Speech Recognition
Ngoc-Quan Pham1, Thai-Son Nguyen1, Jan Niehues1, Markus M ¨uller1, Sebastian St ¨uker1, Alex
Waibel1;2
1Interactive Systems Lab, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Karlsruhe, Germany
2Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh PA, USA
ngoc.pham@kit.edu, thai.nguyen@kit.edu
Abstract
Recently, end-to-end sequence-to-sequence models for
speech recognition have gained signiﬁcant interest in the re-
search community. While previous architecture choices revolve
around time-delay neural networks (TDNN) and long short-
term memory (LSTM) recurrent neural networks, we propose to
use self-attention via the Transformer architecture as an alterna-
tive. Our analysis shows that deep Transformer networks with
high learning capacity are able to exceed performance from pre-
vious end-to-end approaches and even match the conventional
hybrid systems. Moreover, we trained very deep models with
up to 48 Transformer layers for both encoder and decoders
combined with stochastic residual connections, which greatly
improve generalizability and training efﬁciency. The result-
ing models outperform all previous end-to-end ASR approaches
on the Switchboard benchmark. An ensemble of these models
achieve 9:9%and17:7%WER on Switchboard and CallHome
test sets respectively. This ﬁnding brings our end-to-end mod-
els to competitive levels with previous hybrid systems. Further,
with model ensembling the Transformers can outperform cer-
tain hybrid systems, which are more complicated in terms of
both structure and training procedure.
Index Terms : speech recognition, sequence-to-sequence mod-
els, stochastic transformer
1. Introduction
Recently, the sequence-to-sequence (S2S) approach in auto-
matic speech recognition (ASR) has received a considerable
amount of interest, due to the ability to jointly train all com-
ponents towards a common goal which reduces complexity and
error propagation compared to traditional hybrid systems. Tra-
ditional systems divide representation into different levels in the
acoustic model, in particular separating global features (such as
channel and speaker characteristics) and local features (on the
phoneme level). The language model and acoustic model are
trained with different loss functions and then combined during
decoding. In contrast, neural S2S models perform a direct map-
ping from audio signals to text sequences based on dynamic
interactions between two main model components, an encoder
and a decoder, which are jointly trained towards maximizing
the likelihood of the generated output sequence. The neural en-
coder reads the audio features into high-level representations,
which are then fed into an auto-regressive decoder which atten-
tively generates the output sequences [1, 2].
In this context, we aim at reconsidering acoustic model-
ing within end-to-end models. Previous approaches in general
had long short-term memory neural networks (LSTM) [3] or
time-delay neural networks [4] operating on top of frame-level
features to learn sequence-level representation. These neural
networks are able to capture long range and local dependenciesbetween different timesteps.
Recently, self-attention has been shown to efﬁciently repre-
sent different structures including text [1], images [5], and even
acoustic signals [6] with impressive results. The Transformer
model using self-attention achieved the state-of-the-art in main-
stream NLP tasks [7]. The attractiveness of self-attention net-
works originates from the ability to establish a direct connec-
tion between any element in the sequence. Self-attention is
able to scale with the length of the input sequence without any
limiting factor such as, e.g., the kernel size of CNNs, or the
vanishing gradient problem of LSTMs. Moreover, the self-
attention network is also computationally advantageous com-
pared to recurrent structures because intermediate states are no
longer connected recurrently, leading to more efﬁcient batched
operations. As a result, self-attention networks can be reason-
ably trained with many layers leading to state-of-the-art per-
formance in various tasks [8]. Self-attention and the Trans-
former have been exploratorily applied to ASR, but so far with
unsatisfactory results. [6] found that self-attention in the en-
coder (acoustic model) was not effective, but combined with an
LSTM brought marginal improvement and greater interpretabil-
ity, while [9] did not ﬁnd any notable improvement using the
Transformer in which the encoder combines self-attention with
convolution/LSTM compared to other model architectures.
In this work, we show that the Transformer requires little modi-
ﬁcation to adapt on the speech recognition task. Speciﬁcally, we
exploit the advantages of self-attention networks for ASR such
that both our acoustic encoder and character-generating decoder
are constructed without any recurrence or convolution. This is
the ﬁrst attempt to propose this system architecture to the best
of our knowledge, and we show that a competitive end-to-end
ASR model can be achieved solely using standard training tech-
niques from general S2S systems.
Our contributions are as follows. First, we show that depth
is an important factor to acquire competitive end-to-end ASR
models with the Transformer. Second, in order to facilitate
training of very deep conﬁgurations, we propose a variation of
stochastic depth for the Transformer inspired by the Stochastic
Residual Network for image classiﬁcation [10].
We discovered that its ability to regularize is the key con-
tribution to obtain the state-of-the-art result among end-to-end
ASR models for the standard 300h Switchboard (SWB) bench-
mark. This result is achieved using a total of 48 Transformer
layers across the encoder and decoder.1
1Our source code and ﬁnal model are available at
https://github.com/quanpn90/NMTGMinor/tree/audio-encoder/arXiv:1904.13377v2  [cs.CL]  3 May 2019