condition. Action2Motion [20] and ACTOR [45] are the
works most similar to ours. Action2Motion proposes a tem-
poral V AE to generate motions frame by frame, based on
GRU architecture. ACTOR also adopts a V AE framework
while leveraging the Transformer architecture and learning
a sequence-level latent distribution, which differs from Ac-
tion2Motion. Our ActFormer also receives a sequence-level
latent prior as input. Unlike ACTOR, our input is a latent
vector sequence sampled from a GP prior, inherently en-
forcing temporal correlations and thus reducing the diffi-
culty of generating realistic motions.
Another stream of works lies in simulation-based char-
acter control. For example, [36] learns an autoregressive
conditional V AE and then applies task-specific control poli-
cies based on this model. [48] guides characters to achieve
specific character-scene interaction goals with their mo-
tions. Recently, [52] and [51] seek general approaches for
physics-based character control.
2.3. MoCap Dataset
Large-scale MoCap data is critical for driving a gen-
eral motion generator. There have been many MoCap
datasets [25, 40, 44, 7], and AMASS [39] contributes a
large collection by unifying MoCap data from different
sources into a common representation based on the SMPL
body model [38]. Despite a large amount of high-quality
and diverse human motion data, semantic action labels are
missing in AMASS. Fortunately, the newly-released BA-
BEL [47] provides fine-grained action labels on frame-level
for AMASS, resulting in a challenging and practically valu-
able benchmark for our task.
Some other datasets provide action labels, while their
motion data is represented by skeleton joint coordinates.
Among them, NTU RGB+D 120 [37] is a large-scale and
representative one. Owing to the scalability of our method,
we can learn from MoCap data with various motion repre-
sentations. The NTU RGB+D data is used for both single-
person and multi-person motion generation. As a comple-
ment to the daily interactive actions in NTU RGB+D, we
contribute another GTA Combat dataset with more complex
multi-person motions and interactions.
2.4. Transformer in GANs
The success of Transformers [50] in visual recognition
tasks inspires its application in generation tasks. Trans-
GAN [27] is the first pure Transformer-based GAN archi-
tecture. Later ViTGAN [32] proposes novel regulariza-
tion methods to improve the stability of Transformer-based
GAN training. [14] combines a Transformer-based genera-
tor and a CNN-based discriminator to form a robust model
without cumbersome design choices. We follow [14] to ex-
empt from the tricky designs in the discriminator and pay
more attention to the generator.3. Approach
The problem to be tackled is action-conditioned motion
generation. Formally speaking, given a semantic action
label aand a seed zsampled from the latent prior, Our
Action-Conditioned Motion TransFormer (ActFormer) will
generate a sequence of human motions M={Mt|t∈
{1, ..., T}}corresponding to the action label. Each frame
Mtcontains the motions of Ppersons, i.e.,Mt={Mp
t|p∈
{1, ..., P}}. The motion of one person in a frame Mp
tis
composed of a root translation lp
tin a global coordinate
frame, and local body poses θp
t. The latter can be either
SMPL-based parameters or other formats like skeleton joint
coordinates. In this section, we first introduce our approach
to solve the single-person motion generation and then show
how it can be extended to the multi-person setting.
3.1. Single-person Motion Generation
The generation starts with sampling a random seed from
the latent prior. Since temporal correlation is critical to a
realistic motion sequence, we select the Gaussian Process as
our latent prior and sample a (T, C 0)latent vector sequence
zfor each generation. The time length Tis the same as that
of the motion sequence to be generated, and the latent vector
at each time step has C0channels. A 1-d vector sequence
withTtime steps is sampled independently from a GP on
each of C0channels, with the characteristic length-scales
on different channels spanning a spectrum of values. As
suggested by [53], this models a composition of correlations
at various time scales into the latent vector sequence.
The ActFormer employs a Transformer-based generator
to transform the latent vector sequence and the given action
label, to a human motion sequence. As shown in Fig. 2,
at the input stage, the (T, C 0)latent vector sequence zis
regarded as a list of Ttokens and passed through an MLP
layer for input embedding. To incorporate the semantic con-
dition, we append a class token embedding the action cate-
gorya, resulting in totally T+ 1tokens. Since the Trans-
former encoder is data-dependent, we add learnable posi-
tional encoding (PE) to the input tokens to maintain location
information. After that, Llayers of Temporal-transFormer
(T-Former) model the temporal correlations among various
time steps represented by tokens. Finally, the class token is
discarded while each of the rest Ttokens is projected by an
output layer into a C-d vector. The vector is regarded as a
concatenation of a person’s root translation and local body
poses at a specific time step.
3.2. Multi-person Motion Generation
Transferring from the single-person to multi-person set-
ting induces an additional person-wise dimension P. Fortu-
nately, our approach introduced above can fit such an addi-
tional dimension Pby slight adjustment, thus be scaled to
the multi-person case.
2230