This paper explores a solution towards general action-
conditioned human motion generation, as shown in Fig. 1.
The very first challenge lies in generating long motion se-
quences with realism and diversity. Many prior works as-
sume a Markovian dependency in temporal motions and
adopt an auto-regressive model [58, 20, 5, 6, 31]. How-
ever, these methods are subject to the “mean-pose” prob-
lem, in which the model starts to generate the mean pose
continuously after a few frames. In contrast, CSGN [53]
and ACTOR [45] sample from a sequence-level latent prior
and produce the whole sequence altogether. Specifically,
CSGN samples from a Gaussian Process (GP) latent prior
and stacks convolutions in the generator to enforce tempo-
ral correlations. On the other hand, ACTOR samples a sin-
gle vector as the sequence-level embedding and produces
multiple frames by querying through different positional en-
codings. We argue that both are sub-optimal solutions, and
we seek a better trade-off between inductive bias and repre-
sentation capacity. Our proposed Action-Conditioned Mo-
tion Trans Former (ActFormer ) leverages the GP prior for
the inherent temporal correlations. Meanwhile, we adopt a
Transformer architecture for its simple structure and strong
power in encoding non-local correlations proved in many
other tasks. The Transformer model naturally regards a la-
tent vector sequence from the GP prior as a sequence of
tokens, leading to a seamless conjunction. We incorporate
the Transformer-based motion generator into GAN, known
for high-quality generative modeling. These designs jointly
contribute to significant advantages of our framework in the
single-person motion generation task.
Another challenge lies in handling human interactions
when multi-person interactive actions are included. Human
interactions have been explored by some motion prediction
algorithms, in which pooling or self-attention modules are
adopted to encode the interactions [21, 3, 4, 56]. However,
it has not been considered in the motion generation task.
To our knowledge, our approach is the first to tackle multi-
person motion generation. We share the same latent vector
sequence from GP among multiple persons in a group to
enforce their synchronization over time. Meanwhile, differ-
ent persons are distinguished through positional encodings.
Our ActFormer can be easily extended to the multi-person
scenario by alternately modeling temporal correlations and
human interactions. The generation results show impressive
realism in both motions and multi-person interactions.
The strong demand for motion capture (MoCap) data
with action labels also poses a challenge. Prior methods
rely on datasets with ∼10 categories, which can hardly
drive a general motion generator. MoCap datasets with
multi-person interactive actions are even rarer. We lever-
age NTU RGB+D 120 [37] and the newly-released BA-
BEL dataset [47], both including more than 100 action
categories. To facilitate the research on multi-person mo-tion generation, we further construct a GTA Combat dataset
through the Grand Theft Auto V’s (GTA-V) [1] gaming en-
gine. We collect ∼7K motion sequences of combat behav-
ior, which is one of the most complex types of human inter-
actions. Experiments on these datasets verify the effective-
ness of our approach.
Our three-fold contributions are summarized as follows:
(i) We propose ActFormer, a GAN-based Transformer
framework, which adapts to various human motion repre-
sentations and achieves leading results in the single-person
motion generation task; (ii) Our ActFormer takes a faith-
fully early step to solve the multi-person motion generation
problem; (iii) We contribute a GTA Combat dataset with
plentiful and complex multi-person interactive motions.
2. Related Work
We review the literature on human motion prediction
and generation tasks and MoCap datasets. We also review
Transformers in GANs which are relevant to our approach.
2.1. Motion Prediction
Motion prediction aims to predict motions of future
frames, given one or several frames of past motions. Re-
current Neural Networks have been predominantly adopted
to model sequence learning [16, 26, 41, 22, 11, 55, 8]. Es-
pecially, generative models like V AEs and GANs are incor-
porated in [22, 11, 55]. Recently, the powerful Transformer
architecture is utilized by [34] to predict dance motions con-
ditioned on music.
Multi-person interactions have also been considered in
motion prediction. [21] and [3] adopts the pooling module
to aggregate information across multiple persons. [4] pro-
poses a graph-based message passing mechanism to model
both human-human and human-object interactions. Re-
cently, [56] uses the self-attention module to entangle multi-
person motions. Unlike the works above, we aim to tackle
the motion generation task without relying on past motions.
2.2. Motion Generation
Compared to future motion prediction, motion gen-
eration from scratch is a new and less explored field.
CSGN [53] generates unconstrained motions with a graph-
convolution-based GAN framework. [58] further explores
generating ever-changing motions for unbounded durations.
More works tend to generate motions from various con-
ditions. [31, 33, 24] generates dance motions corresponding
to the given music. [35, 17, 5, 6, 13, 19, 10, 46, 29] synthe-
size motions from language descriptions. More recently,
diffusion model is also proposed for text-driven human mo-
tion generation in [57, 49].
Our work is dedicated to the task of action-conditioned
motion generation, which uses semantic action labels as the
2229