GP
 aInput  projection
... ...T+1 tokenssingle-person
multi-person× P
share... ...
P∙(T+1) tokensT-FormerGCN
Discriminator
L × L × 
T-Former
I-Former
 ... ...
... ...Mt
Mt2Mt1
Output  projection
PE1
2...
2-1
2-2...
1-1
1-2...
z
(T , C 0)Figure 2. Overview of the proposed ActFormer framework. Given a latent vector sequence zsampled from Gaussian Process (GP) prior
and an action label a, the model can synthesize either a single-person (top stream) or a multi-person (bottom stream) motion sequence. The
model is trained under a GAN scheme.
In the single-person setting, a T-frame motion sequence
is encoded from a list of Ttokens. Therefore, another T-
frame motion sequence with Ppersons requires Plists of
Ttokens. Considering that motions of these Ppersons are
highly correlated and synchronized at each time step, we
regard them as an entity and sample only one latent vector
sequence to share among them. Specifically, the Tinput
embedding tokens along with the class token are shared P
times to produce the input. This strategy enforces the syn-
chronization among multiple persons in a group from the
input stage. Meanwhile, different persons need to be distin-
guished from each other. We turn to learnable positional en-
coding (PE) again to achieve this goal. Here T+1temporal
positional encodings (TPE) and Pperson-wise positional
encodings (PPE) are separately learned. Then they are tiled
to generate P·(T+ 1) positional encodings to match in-
put tokens. Specifically, the PE for a (t, p)-indexed token
PE(t, p) =concat (TPE (t), PPE (p)). Completely inde-
pendent PE for each token is also feasible, while such a 2D
combination provides better results.
The ActFormer generator can be extended to a multi-
person setting with slight adjustments, owing to the flex-
ibility of Transformer encoders to adapt to modeling cor-
relations along various dimensions. As Fig. 2 shows, an
Interaction-transFormer (I-Former) firstly models the inter-
actions among different persons at each time step indepen-
dently. Then a Temporal-transFormer (T-Former) follows
to model the temporal correlations for each person indepen-
dently. Such a module, which alternately encodes human
interactions and temporal correlations, is stacked Llayers.
Similar to the single-person case, all class tokens are dis-
carded finally. The remaining P·Ttokens are projected
into the final (P, T, C )output, in which the C-d vector from
each token represents the motion of a specific person at a
particular time step.
3.3. Generative Adversarial Training
Our ActFormer is learned under the conditional genera-
tive adversarial training framework [18, 42]. During train-ing, the ActFormer generator synthesizes human motion se-
quences conditioned on given action labels. Besides, a dis-
criminator receives human motion sequences and action la-
bels as inputs, trying to discriminate the generated human
motions from real ones of specified actions. The generator
learns from the discriminator’s feedback to improve its gen-
eration results to be close to real ones. Conditional Wasser-
stein GAN loss functions [42, 9] are adopted for training,
formatted as,
LD=E[D(G(z, a), a)−D(˜M, a)],
LG=E[−D(G(z, a), a)],(1)
where ˜Mrepresents the sequence sampled from real mo-
tion data belonging to the action category a.Ddenotes the
discriminator and Gdenotes the ActFormer generator.
An ST-GCN [54] is adopted as the discriminator. The
C-d vector of a person’s motion at each time step is decom-
posed into a (K, D )part-wise representation. The K-node
Graph is constructed according to the skeleton topology be-
hind the local body poses θp
t, with the root translation lp
t
also connected. Therefore, a (T, C)motion sequence is
re-organized into a (T, K, D )spatial-temporal graph. In
the multi-person setting, the part-wise motions of multiple
persons are directly concatenated on the Ddimension. In
other words, the (P, T, C )multi-person motion sequence
becomes a (T, K, P ·D)graph. Finally, the graph-based
motion sequence is input to the GCN discriminator to com-
pute a score, with the semantic condition integrated by pro-
jection [43].
By concatenating the part-wise motions of multiple per-
sons, the GCN can model their interactions at various spa-
tial and temporal scales. However, the concatenation oper-
ator is not permutation-invariant. In other words, it cannot
ensure to output the same score for the same motion se-
quence with various person-wise permutations. We adopt a
simple data augmentation strategy to compensate for this.
For each sample from the MoCap dataset, the persons in-
side are randomly permuted in every training iteration. In
2231