ActFormer: A GAN-based Transformer towards General Action-Conditioned
3D Human Motion Generation
Liang Xu2,3*Ziyang Song5*Dongliang Wang1,6Jing Su1Zhicheng Fang1Chenjing Ding1
Weihao Gan7Yichao Yan2Xin Jin3,4Xiaokang Yang2Wenjun Zeng3,4Wei Wu1,6
1SenseTime Research2Shanghai Jiao Tong University3Eastern Institute of Technology, Ningbo
4Ningbo Institute of Digital Twin5The Hong Kong Polytechnic University6Shanghai AI Laboratory
7Mashang Consumer Finance Co., Ltd.
Abstract
We present a GAN-based Transformer for general
action-conditioned 3D human motion generation, includ-
ing not only single-person actions but also multi-person
interactive actions. Our approach consists of a powerful
Action-conditioned motion TransFormer (ActFormer) under
a GAN training scheme, equipped with a Gaussian Pro-
cess latent prior. Such a design combines the strong spatio-
temporal representation capacity of Transformer, superior-
ity in generative modeling of GAN, and inherent temporal
correlations from the latent prior. Furthermore, ActFormer
can be naturally extended to multi-person motions by alter-
nately modeling temporal correlations and human interac-
tions with Transformer encoders. To further facilitate re-
search on multi-person motion generation, we introduce a
new synthetic dataset of complex multi-person combat be-
haviors. Extensive experiments on NTU-13, NTU RGB+D
120, BABEL and the proposed combat dataset show that
our method can adapt to various human motion represen-
tations and achieve superior performance over the state-
of-the-art methods on both single-person and multi-person
motion generation tasks, demonstrating a promising step to-
wards a general human motion generator. The project web-
site can be found at https://liangxuy.github.io/actformer/.
1. Introduction
This work aims to tackle the action-conditioned motion
generation task. Specifically, given a semantic action label
as input and generate corresponding 3D human motions.
The technique is key to applications like character anima-
*Denotes equal contribution. Work done when Liang and Ziyang
were at SenseTime. Corresponding authors: Dongliang Wang (wang-
dongliang@senseauto.com), Yichao Yan (yanyichao@sjtu.edu.cn) and
Xin Jin (jinxin@eias.ac.cn).
Jog
...ActFormer
CombatShake hands
......Crouch
Side kick
SaluteTake off shoe
Exchange sth.
Pat on back
High-five
Touch pocket
HugSquat down...
Figure 1. Towards general action-conditioned 3D human mo-
tion generation. Our framework adapts to more action categories,
various human motion representations ( e.g., SMPL body models,
skeleton joint coordinates), and multi-person interactive actions.
tion creation, humanoid robots interaction and data synthe-
sis for computer vision tasks related to human actions.
Human motion synthesis has been a long-standing re-
search topic. However, most of the prior works are closer
to a prediction task, in which future motions are generated
from previous motions [16, 26, 41, 8, 22, 11, 55, 34]. In
recent years, some works started to focus on motion gen-
eration from action labels [20, 45, 49]. Despite some im-
pressive generation results, these works are still limited in
the following two aspects. Firstly, most of these works bias
towards motion data of SMPL pose parameters while per-
forming poorly on data of skeleton joint coordinates, which
limits the generalization. A solution adaptable to various
human motion representations is thus expected. Secondly,
prior works only focus on single-person motion generation
while neglecting multi-person interactive actions, which are
integral parts of daily human motions. In general, prior
works fail to cover a complete domain of human motions
and stand far from a general human motion generator.
This ICCV paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.
2228