Figure 3. Sample RGB images and human pose annotations in the
GTA Combat dataset.
this way, we encourage the ActFormer to regard the same
sample with various permutations as different samples and
model all of them into the learned distribution. We find such
a simple data augmentation more robust than importing
symmetric functions into the discriminator network, since
the latter often destabilizes the GAN training.
4. Experiments
In this section, we evaluate the proposed ActFormer
on both single-person and multi-person motion generation
tasks. We firstly introduce the datasets and quantitative met-
rics used for evaluation. Next, the ActFormer is compared
with baseline methods from prior works. Then we conduct
an ablation study to investigate various components in Act-
Former. Finally, qualitative results are shown.
4.1. Datasets and Evaluation Metrics
NTU-13 [37, 20] is a subset of NTU RGB+D 120 with only
13 action categories and we choose it to be able to compare
to previous works [20, 45]. The SMPL-based motion data
are obtained through VIBE [30], as adopted in [20, 45].
NTU RGB+D 120 [37] contains 114,480 motion clips be-
longing to 120 action categories. Among them, 94 cate-
gories are single-person actions, and the rest 26 categories
are two-person interactive actions. The dataset provides
MoCap data in the format of skeleton joint coordinates,
which are captured by Kinect [59] and severely noisy. We
fill missing detections and perform temporal smoothing to
improve its quality. Different parts of the dataset are used
for both single-person and multi-person motion generation
(referred to as NTU-1P and NTU-2P respectively in the fol-
lowing context). Moreover, to evaluate the methods’ adapt-
ability to different motion representations, we apply a mo-
tion reconstruction pipeline similar to [34] onto multi-view
images from NTU-1P. This results in a new version of NTU-
1P data with SMPL parameters, named NTURecon-1P.
BABEL [47] is another large-scale motion dataset with se-
mantic action labels. The SMPL-based motion data is de-rived from AMASS with higher quality. The whole dataset
contains more than 250 action categories but is remarkably
long-tailed. Therefore, we follow the BABEL-120 bench-
mark in [47] and select motion data belonging to the most
frequent 120 action categories. The data is used for single-
person motion generation.
GTA Combat is a synthetic multi-person MoCap dataset
collected by us. As there are few full-body MoCap datasets
qualified for multi-person interactive action generation, we
tackle the game GTA-V [1] for synthetic data collection. We
find combat behavior with 2 or more persons is a partial pro-
cedure generation process in GTA-V . The combat actions
are randomly triggered by combing more than 10 atomic ac-
tions in real-time with more variations when equipped with
different combating arms. And the attacked one can react
randomly, triggered by the ragdoll physics [2] of the game
engine. Our policy of combating behavior is that each char-
acter pick a random opponent to attack without order. This
setting is more like the chaos fighting scene in some fighting
games. So it simulates parts of real-world human social in-
teractions but the complexity and diversity are beyond real-
world fightings, which is suitable to serve as a benchmark
to confirm that our framework can work well on more com-
plex interactive actions (more than 2 persons). We sample
2 to 5 actors in each run and make each actor fight with
one of the others randomly picked. We extend JTA [15]
which helps to extract 3D human skeletons with this ran-
dom combat logic for the data collection. Thereby, we get a
high-quality multi-person interaction MoCap dataset rang-
ing from 2 to even 5 persons. Fig. 3 shows some samples
of GTA Combat dataset. More samples are provided in the
supplementary. According to the number of persons in each
sequence, the dataset is divided into 4 splits. Each split con-
tains∼2.3/1.9/1.5/1.2K sequences with motions of 2/3/4/5
persons.
Evaluation Metrics. We use action recognition accuracy
and FID [23] score as quantitative metrics. Note that these
metrics require a pre-trained action recognition model. We
adopt ST-GCN [54], sharing a similar configuration to the
discriminator in the ActFormer’s training. Different from
previous works [20, 45], the root translation is considered
as an extra node when training the action recognition model
since the root translation results are significant to measure
the quality of the generated motions especially for the multi-
person scenarios.
Previous works [20, 45, 53] consider statistics of the
whole real/generated sample set when computing FID, re-
gardless of action categories. We denote this as whole FID
(FID w), while we find this not reasonable for the action-
conditional generation case. As a supplement, we adopt
another mean FID (FID m), in which FID is independently
measured on samples of each action category and then av-
eraged. FID massumes the conditional distributions of per-
2232