FAccT ’21, March 3–10, 2021, Virtual Event, Canada Dhamala and Sun, et al.
Figure 1: The beginnings of Wikipedia articles are used as prompts
to study the biases in open-ended language generation.
unfair outcomes and negative experiences to the end users of the
downstream applications [11, 18, 20, 33, 34].
In this work we propose to examine bias in open-ended language
generation by triggering or prompting language models (LMs) with
seed words matching the distribution of human-written text. Our
intuition is that while carefully handpicked LM triggers and choices
of LM generations can show some interesting results, they could
misrepresent the level of bias that an LM produces when presented
with more natural prompts. Furthermore, LM generations in such
a contrived setting could reinforce the type of biases that it was
triggered to generate while failing to uncover other critical biases
that need to be exposed.
With this central goal, we propose following key contributions.
(1) First, we present the largest fairness benchmark dataset to-date
for evaluating bias in open-ended English language generation,
containing 23,679 unique prompts to study biases in five domains
spanning 43 different sub-groups1. Our LM prompts are extracted
from English Wikipedia articles that represent naturally occurring
texts from diverse writers. (2) Second, to measure biases from multi-
ple angles we augment various existing bias metrics like sentiment
and regard with novel bias metrics: psycholinguistic norms, toxic-
ity, and gender polarity. These metrics are validated to agree with
humans by gathering crowd-worker ratings along each bias metric
using the Amazon Mechanical Turk (AMT) platform.
In experiments, we evaluate biases in open-ended English lan-
guage generation with three common LMs: GPT-2 [ 27], BERT [ 10],
and CTRL with the Wikipedia (CTRL-WIKI), thoughts (CTRL-THT),
and opinion (CTRL-OPN) control codes [ 15]. Results show that, in
general, most of these models exhibit larger social biases than the
baseline of Wikipedia text, especially towards the historically dis-
advantaged population groups. Also, CTRL-THT, CTRL-OPN and
GPT-2 more frequently generate texts that are polar along the bias
metrics compared to BERT and CTRL-WIKI. These results highlight
the importance of studying the behaviour of language generation
models before being deployed with various downstream tasks.
2 RELATED WORK
Much recent work focuses on exposing and quantifying NLP model
biases that reflect known harmful aspects of human culture, nega-
tive stereotyping, and inadvertent group segregation [1, 8, 23].
1https://github.com/jwaladhamala/BOLD-Bias-in-open-ended-language-generationThe seminal work in [ 2] exposed gender bias in pre-trained word
embeddings and provided a bias metric capturing gender bias as a
magnitude of the projection of gender-neutral words onto the gen-
der subspace. Another work [ 7] inspired by the Implicit Association
Test defines bias as harmful negative stereotypes in human culture
and provides a metric based on a permutation test between words
from target study group and stereotype attribute groups. Many re-
cent works propose new datasets to expose the difference in model
behavior for counterfactual examples from different groups. For
example, Rudinger et al . [29] , Zhao et al . [45] designed the Wino-
gender schema to study the behaviour of co-reference resolution
models in associating gender-neutral occupations with a specific
gender. Webster et al . [40] proposed the GAP dataset that contains
sentences mined from Wikipedia to expose the performance gap
between populations belonging to different gender groups. The
Equity Evaluation Corpus (EEC) [ 16] presents a dataset to measure
the difference in the intensity of sentiments predicted by sentiment
analyzers across various gender and racial groups.
Closely related to our work is a study in [ 31] that showed that
GPT-2 is biased towards generating text with lower sentiment and
regard scores when prompted with contexts associated with certain
groups. This study consists of a manually curated dataset with 60
unique text generation prompts. Sheng et al . [32] further showed
that adversarial triggers [ 37] can be used to control biases in lan-
guage generation. Concurrent with our work, Nadeem et al . [25]
presented a dataset, StereoSet, with 17,000 sentences that measure
an LM’s preference for texts expressing stereotypes. StereoSet was
collected by first curating a set of identifier tokens; for example, him,
wife, etc for the gender domain. Crowd workers are then asked to
provide a stereotypical, an anti-stereotypical, and a neutral sentence
containing the target token. The paper evaluates the probability
that an LM ranks a stereotypical sentence higher than the unbiased
sentence. Nangia et al . [26] presented a dataset, similar in spirit
to the StereoSet, with 1,508 sentence pairs in which one sentence
is more stereotypical than other. The paper measures the degree
to which a masked LM prefers the stereotypical sentence over the
unbiased sentence. Both the dataset and evaluation metrics in [ 25]
and [ 26] are fundamentally different from the work presented here.
BOLD consists of language generation prompts extracted from
Wikipedia sentences. Instead of measuring the probability that an
LM chooses a stereotypical text over an unbiased text, our metrics
directly measure social biases in the generated texts.
3 BOLD: BIAS IN OPEN-ENDED LANGUAGE
GENERATION DATASET
Existing approaches typically collect prompts from experts or crowd-
workers [ 25,31]. This may pose a challenge in collecting prompts
that accurately reflect the diversity and structure of text beginnings
that text generation models are subjected to. Wikipedia is an online
free-content encyclopedia continuously written and reviewed col-
laboratively by a large number of volunteers. Because it provides
articles from many domains and demographics, represents authors
from diverse background, and contains a quality control procedure,
we take English Wikipedia as a source for gathering prompts [ 41].
This section describes the generation process and statistics of BOLD.