FAccT ’21, March 3–10, 2021, Virtual Event, Canada Dhamala and Sun, et al.
domain. We use the Valence Aware Dictionary and Sentiment Rea-
soner (VADER) which computes the sentiment score of a text by
first taking word-level valence-based lexicons and then combining
the lexicon polarity with rules for text context awareness [ 13]. For
each text, VADER produces a score in a range of [−1,1]where−1
represents a negative sentiment and 1represents a positive senti-
ment. Using some texts with known sentiment label, we determine
a threshold of≥0.5and≤ −0.5to classify texts as conveying
positive and negative sentiments respectively.
4.2 Toxicity
A text is considered toxic if the language it conveys is disrespectful,
abusive, unpleasant, and/or harmful. We take a BERT model that
was fine-tuned on a toxic comment classification dataset5to classify
a text into multiple labels: toxic, severe toxic, threat, obscene, insult,
and identity threat. In the final metric, we label a text to be toxic if it
is classified into either of the six labels. Additional implementation
details are provided in the Appendix.
4.3 Regard
Sheng et al . [31] noted that sentiment and language polarity may
not always directly correlate with bias, and defined regard, a metric
that directly measures human-annotated bias by measuring polarity
towards a demographic, rather than overall language polarity. They
train a BERT model on human-annotated samples across gender
(female, male), sexual orientation (gay, straight), and race (White,
Black). These samples were curated by using GPT-2 to complete
sentences that start with a certain set of bias templates for each
demographic. We use this classifier6to evaluate regard on the
generated text. Since the regard classifier was only trained on a few
groups, we limit calculation of this metrics to gender (female, male)
and race (European American, African American) groups .
4.4 Psycholinguistic norms
Some texts may invoke positive emotions like happiness, love, joy
and, success, whereas others may invoke negative emotions like
sadness, anger, disappointment, and fear. To explain the underlying
basic text emotions that accumulated to an overall positive / nega-
tive / neutral sentiment or toxicity for a given text we propose using
text-level psycholinguistic norms. At the word-level, psycholinguis-
tic norms are numeric ratings assigned by expert psychologists to
words to measure the affective meaning conveyed by each words
along various dimensions. Commonly eight dimensions are con-
sidered as the foundation of emotion states: Valence, Arousal, and
Dominance (collectively known as VAD [ 3]); and Joy, Anger, Sad-
ness, Fear, and Disgust (collectively known as BE5 [ 4]). Variables
in VAD use a scale of 1to9with 5representing neutral, and vari-
ables in BE5 use a scale from 1to5with 1representing neutral.
Given a set of seed words with scores along VAD and BE5 variables
labeled by psychologists there are two components to extending
these scores to text-level. First, lexicons should be extended to cover
a larger vocabulary of words. Second, word-level lexicons should
be aggregated to obtain a text-level lexicon. To extend lexicons to a
larger vocabulary we use the method in [ 6] that trains a multi-task
5https://www.kaggle.com/c/jigsaw-toxic-comment-classification-challenge
6https://github.com/ewsheng/nlg-biaslearning feed-forward network with FASTTEXT word embedding
vectors to predict lexicons of unknown words [ 5]. To aggregate
lexicons of each word and compute text level norms we compute
the weighted average as follows:
Í𝑛
𝑖=1sgn(𝑤𝑖)𝑤2
𝑖Í𝑛
𝑖=1|𝑤𝑖|,
where𝑤𝑖represents the word-level lexicon value and 𝑛is the num-
ber of words used during this aggregation. During text-level psy-
cholinguistic norm calculation, we do not include lexicons from
words that belong to certain parts of speech like pronoun, prepo-
sition, and conjunction that do not convey any emotion. For ease
of interpretation, we scale variable in VAD to [−1,1]with 0repre-
senting neutral and BE5 to [0,1]with 0representing neutral.
4.5 Gender polarity
We propose two types of gender polarity metrics. Our first gender
polarity metric (termed unigram matching ) counts the total number
of male and female specific tokens in the text. Following current
literature that studies gender bias in models [ 2,35], we obtain a
list for male and female identifying tokens as: male tokens he,him,
his,himself ,man,men,he’s,boy,boys and female tokens she,her,
hers,herself ,woman ,women ,she’s,girlandgirls. A text is identified
as expressing male gender if the count of male words in the text
is larger than the count of female words. If both counts are zero,
the text is labelled as neutral. While this metric can account for the
direct presence of gendered words in the text it does not account
for words that may be indirectly related to a gender.
We propose a second gender polarity metric to take into account
the presence of words in the text that are indirectly related to a
gender. It is based on Bolukbasi et al . [2] which identifies that the
normalized projection of a word vector into the gender direction
defined by®𝑠ℎ𝑒-®ℎ𝑒is closer to 1if the word is closer to ®𝑠ℎ𝑒and
closer to−1if the word is closer to ®ℎ𝑒in the word embedding space
and shows that a word-level gender classifier based on this metric
has a good approximation with human annotations of word-level
gender. With this finding, we define our second text-level gender
polarity metric as follows. To avoid inheriting the gender biases in
professions existing in a word embedding we use the hard debiased
Word2Vec embedding7. On this word embedding space, we first
compute the gender polarity of each word ®𝑤𝑖in the text as follows:
𝑏𝑖=®𝑤𝑖.®𝑔
||®𝑤𝑖|||®𝑔||,
where®𝑔=®𝑠ℎ𝑒−®ℎ𝑒. If®𝑤𝑖is female-aligned then 𝑏𝑖is close 1, if
®𝑤𝑖is male-aligned then 𝑏𝑖is close to−1, and if®𝑤𝑖is neutral then
𝑏𝑖=0. Next, we aggregate the word-level gender polarity scores
𝑏𝑖and obtain a continuous score indicating the gender polarity of
the entire text. A simple approach to aggregate word-level scores
is averaging. However, since a text in general has a larger number
of neutral words than gender polar words it tends to skew the
gender polarity of the text towards neutral. Hence, we propose two
alternative ways to aggregate word level gender polarity scores
that apply a larger weight to the scores from gender polar words.
First, we propose to weight all word-level gender polarity scores
7https://github.com/tolga-b/debiaswe