BOLD: Dataset and Metrics for Measuring Biases in
Open-Ended Language Generation FAccT ’21, March 3–10, 2021, Virtual Event, Canada
𝑏𝑖by their magnitude and take a weighted average (termed as
Gender-Wavg).
Gender-Wavg =Í𝑛
𝑖=1sgn(𝑏𝑖)𝑏2
𝑖Í𝑛
𝑖=1|𝑏𝑖|.
Second, we propose to take the score from the most gender polar
word in the text (termed as Gender-Max for the rest of the paper).
𝑖∗=arg max
𝑖(|𝑏𝑖|),
Gender-Max =sgn(𝑏𝑖∗)|𝑏𝑖∗|.
Once a global score is computed we take a threshold of ≤−0.25
to classify a text as expressing the male gender and a threshold
of≥0.25to classify a text as expressing the female gender. These
thresholds are determined empirically by computing gender polar-
ity scores on a few texts with known gender labels.
5 GENERATING WITH LANGUAGE MODELS
We trigger an LM to generate texts with prompts from BOLD as
a sequence of seed words. In this study, we include multiple LMs
that differ in their training strategy and training corpora. Below
are the LMs used in this paper.
5.1 BERT
Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers (BERT)
trains deep bidirectional representations from unlabeled text by
jointly conditioning on both left and right context [ 10]. BERT is
pre-trained using English Wikipedia and BooksCorpus [ 46]. In our
task, we use a pre-trained BERT model for filling in the next set
of words given a prompt consisting of a set of seed words from
Wikipedia [38].
5.2 GPT-2
Unlike BERT, GPT-2 is a transformer-based LM that is trained with a
causal language modeling objective: predicting the next word given
a sequence of previous words in an auto-regressive manner [ 28].
GPT-2 was pre-trained on the WebText dataset that was collected
by scraping and filtering web pages from sources such as Reddit.
5.3 CTRL
CTRL is a conditional transformer-based LM that is trained to condi-
tion on control codes to govern the style, content, and task-specific
behaviour [ 15]. Control codes are derived from naturally occurring
structure in raw text and provide control over text generation by
helping to predict which part of the training data is more likely
given a sequence. In this study, we use CTRL LM with three different
control codes:
(1)CTRL-WIKI uses the Wikipedia control code
(2)CTRL-THT uses the Thought control code
(3)CTRL-OPN uses the Opinion control code
Each control code can be traced back to a particular subset of
training data. The Wikipedia control code traces back to English
Wikipedia. The Opinion and Thought control codes trace back to
sub-reddits r/changemyviews and r/showerthoughts respectively.6 EXPERIMENTS
For language generation experiments, we use the HuggingFace
library [ 42]. We provide model implementation details in the Ap-
pendix. In this section, we first evaluate various LMs with regards to
the different types of biases present in the texts that they generated
and compare with a baseline of bias present in the texts extracted
from Wikipedia. These evaluations are done with automated met-
rics described in Section 4.
Next, by collecting crowd workers’ annotations on a subset of
data we validate that the presented automated metrics align well
with human annotations.
6.1 Bias across groups in each domain
BOLD contains prompts that trigger text generation from various
demographic groups that compose profession, gender, race, reli-
gious belief and political ideology domains (see Table 2). In each
domain, some groups may be more frequently associated with neg-
ative emotions than others when an LM generates text. In this
section, we examine biases in generated texts towards different
demographic groups in each domain.
6.1.1 Profession. Table 3 shows the proportion of texts that were
classified as male or as female with Gender-Max, Gender-Wavg,
and unigram matching metrics across various professions and data
sources. This categorization of profession was obtained by merg-
ing a set of granular professions as follows: arts & entertainment
includes dance, film and television, entertainer, writing, artistic,
and theater; science & technology includes engineering, computer,
and scientific; industrial & manufacturing includes metal work-
ing, industrial, and railway industry; and healthcare & medicine
includes healthcare, nursing, and mental health. Only 6.57%of total
texts across all professions are classified as either male or female.
This is because the prompts were extracted from Wikipedia articles
without any constraint that will force an LM to generate gender
polar texts. The proportion of texts classified as female is higher in
healthcare & medicine group across all metrics and data sources
(Table 3 bold), whereas the proportion of texts classified as male is
higher in the majority of the remaining profession groups. Fig. 2
shows the proportion of texts classified as male minus the propor-
tion of texts classified as female with the Gender-Max metric in a
granular profession level across all text sources. It again shows that
most of the professions such as writing, science, art, and engineer-
ing are skewed towards the male gender (male - female proportion
>0). Only the nursing is skewed towards the female gender (male -
female proportion <0). The rest of the professions show a mixture
of male and female majority across data sources.
6.1.2 Gender. Fig. 3a shows the proportion of texts classified as
having positive, neutral, and negative sentiments across male and
female genders. Overall, 76.72% of total texts were classified as
having neutral sentiments. The proportion of texts with positive
sentiment was larger for female (male: 0.17041, female: 0.17763,
p-value in binomial proportion test: 0.204) and the proportion of
texts with negative sentiment was smaller for female (male: 0.069,
female: 0.047, p-value<0.01) showing a (negative) bias in sentiment
scores towards the male population. Table 4 presents the differences
in the proportions of male and female texts that are classified to