Page 3 of 5
 Murdoch  BMC Med Ethics          (2021) 22:122 
 
enough to offset this behaviour. Because of these and 
other concerns, there have been calls for greater systemic 
oversight of big data health research and technology [30].
Given we have already seen such examples of corpo -
rate abuse of patient health information, it is unsurpris -
ing that issues of public trust can arise. For example, a 
2018 survey of four thousand American adults found that 
only 11% were willing to share health data with tech com -
panies, versus 72% with physicians [31]. Moreover, only 
31% were “somewhat confident” or “confident” in tech 
companies’ data security [28]. In some jurisdictions like 
the United States, this has not stopped hospitals from 
sharing patient data that is not fully anonymized with 
companies like Microsoft and IBM [32]. A public lack of 
trust might heighten public scrutiny of or even litigation 
against commercial implementations of healthcare AI.
The problem of reidentification
Another concern with big data use of commercial AI 
relates to the external risk of privacy breaches from 
highly sophisticated algorithmic systems themselves. 
Healthcare data breaches haven risen in many jurisdic -
tions around the world, including the United States [33, 
34], Canada [35–37], and Europe [38]. And while they 
may not be widely used by criminal hackers at this time, 
AI and other algorithms are contributing to a growing 
inability to protect health information [39, 40]. A number 
of recent studies have highlighted how emerging com -
putational strategies can be used to identify individuals 
in health data repositories managed by public or private 
institutions [41]. And this is true even if the information 
has been anonymized and scrubbed of all identifiers [42]. 
A study by Na et al., for example, found that an algorithm 
could be used to re-identify 85.6% of adults and 69.8% of 
children in a physical activity cohort study, “despite data 
aggregation and removal of protected health informa -
tion [43]. ” A 2018 study concluded that data collected by 
ancestry companies could be used to identify approxi -
mately 60% of Americans of European ancestry and that, 
in the near future, the percentage is likely to increase 
substantially [44]. Furthermore, a 2019 study successfully 
used a “linkage attack framework”—that is, an algorithm 
aimed at re-identifying anonymous health informa -
tion—that can link online health data to real world peo -
ple, demonstrating “the vulnerability of existing online 
health data [45]. ” And these are just a few examples of the 
developing approaches that have raised questions about 
the security of health information framed as being confi -
dential. Indeed, it has been suggested that today’s “tech -
niques of re-identification effectively nullify scrubbing 
and compromise privacy [46] .”
This reality potentially increases the privacy risks of 
allowing private AI companies to control patient health information, even in circumstances where “anonymiza -
tion” occurs. It also raises questions of liability, insurabil -
ity and other practical issues that differ from instances 
where state institutions directly control patient data. 
Considering the variable and complex nature of the legal 
risk private AI developers and maintainers could take on 
when dealing with high quantities of patient data, care -
fully constructed contracts will need to be made delineat -
ing the rights and obligations of the parties involved, and 
liability for the various potential negative outcomes.
One way that developers of AI systems can potentially 
obviate continuing privacy concerns is through the use 
of generative data. Generative models develop the abil -
ity to generate realistic but synthetic patient data with 
no connection to real individuals [47, 48]. This can ena -
ble machine learning without the long term use of real 
patient data, though it may initially be needed to create 
the generative model.
Conclusions
It is an exciting period in the development and imple -
mentation of healthcare AI, and patients whose data 
are used by these AI should benefit significantly, if not 
greatly, from the health improvements these technologies 
generate. Nonetheless, the implementation of commer -
cial healthcare AI faces serious privacy challenges. Given 
personal medical information is among the most private 
and legally protected forms of data, there are significant 
concerns about how access, control and use by for-profit 
parties might change over time with a self-improving 
AI. An emphasis on patient agency and consent in the 
development of regulation in this space would reflect 
the key legal and ethical values of liberal democracies. 
For example, requirements for technologically-facilitated 
recurrent informed consent for new uses of data, where 
possible, would help to respect the privacy and agency 
of patients. Also, the right to withdraw data could be 
clearly communicated and especially made easy to exer -
cise; where feasible, generative data could be used to fill 
the data gaps created by these agency-driven withdrawals 
and to avoid de-operationalizing AI systems. Regarding 
the reidentification issue, there will be a need for new and 
improved forms of data protection and anonymization. 
This will require innovation, and there will also be a regu -
latory component to ensuring that private custodians of 
data are using cutting edge and safe methods of protect -
ing patient privacy.
We are currently in a situation in which regulation 
and oversight risk falling behind the technologies they 
govern. Given we are now dealing with technologies 
that can improve themselves at a rapid pace, we risk 
falling very behind, very quickly.