Page 2 of 5 Murdoch  BMC Med Ethics          (2021) 22:122 
In addition, some AI technologies are developed within 
biotechnology startups or established private companies 
[14]. For example, the noted AI for identifying diabetic 
retinopathy is developed and maintained by startup IDx 
[12, 13]. Because AI itself can be opaque for purposes of 
oversight, a high level of engagement with the companies 
developing and maintaining the technology will often be 
necessary. The United States Food and Drug Administra -
tion, are now certifying the institutions who develop and 
maintain AI, rather than focusing on the AI which will 
constantly be changing [15]. The European Commission 
has proposed legislation containing harmonized rules on 
artificial intelligence [16], which delineate a privacy and 
data principle of organizational accountability very simi -
lar to that found in the European General Data Protec -
tion Regulation [17, 18]. Other jurisdictions like Canada 
have not completed tailoring regulation specific to AI 
[19]. AI remains a fairly novel frontier in global health -
care, and one currently without a comprehensive global 
legal and regulatory framework.
The commercial implementation arrangements noted 
will necessitate placing patient health information under 
the control of for-profit corporations. While this is not 
novel in itself, the structure of the public–private inter -
face used in the implementation of healthcare AI could 
mean such corporations, as well as owner-operated clin -
ics and certain publicly funded institutions, will have 
an increased role in obtaining, utilizing and protecting 
patient health information. Here, I outline and consider 
privacy concerns with commercial healthcare AI, focus -
ing on both implementation and ongoing data security.
Main text
Concerns with access, use and control
AI have several unique characteristics compared with tra -
ditional health technologies. Notably, they can be prone 
to certain types of errors and biases [20–23], and some -
times cannot easily or even feasibly be supervised by 
human medical professionals. The latter is because of the 
“black box” problem, whereby learning algorithms’ meth -
ods and “reasoning” used for reaching their conclusions 
can be partially or entirely opaque to human observers 
[10, 18]. This opacity may also apply to how health and 
personal information is used and manipulated if appro -
priate safeguards are not in place. Notably, in response 
to this problem, many researchers have been developing 
interpretable forms of AI that will be easier to integrate 
into medical care [24]. Because of the unique features of 
AI, the regulatory systems used for approval and ongoing 
oversight will also need to be unique.
A significant portion of existing technology relating 
to machine learning and neural networks rests in the 
hands of large tech corporations. Google, Microsoft, IBM, Apple and other companies are all “preparing, 
in their own ways, bids on the future of health and on 
various aspects of the global healthcare industry [25]. ” 
Information sharing agreements can be used to grant 
these private institutions access to patient health infor -
mation. Also, we know that some recent public–private 
partnerships for implementing machine learning have 
resulted in poor protection of privacy. For example, 
DeepMind, owned by Alphabet Inc. (hereinafter referred 
to as Google), partnered with the Royal Free London 
NHS Foundation Trust in 2016 to use machine learning 
to assist in the management of acute kidney injury [22]. 
Critics noted that patients were not afforded agency over 
the use of their information, nor were privacy impacts 
adequately discussed [22]. A senior advisor with Eng -
land’s Department of Health said the patient info was 
obtained on an “inappropriate legal basis” [26]. Further 
controversy arose after Google subsequently took direct 
control over DeepMind’s app, effectively transferring 
control over stored patient data from the United King -
dom to the United States [27]. The ability to essentially 
“annex” mass quantities of private patient data to another 
jurisdiction is a new reality of big data and one at more 
risk of occurring when implementing commercial health -
care AI. The concentration of technological innovation 
and knowledge in big tech companies creates a power 
imbalance where public institutions can become more 
dependent and less an equal and willing partner in health 
tech implementation.
While some of these violations of patient privacy may 
have occurred in spite of existing privacy laws, regula -
tions, and policies, it is clear from the DeepMind exam -
ple that appropriate safeguards must be in place to 
maintain privacy and patient agency in the context of 
these public–private partnerships. Beyond the possi -
bility for general abuses of power, AI pose a novel chal -
lenge because the algorithms often require access to large 
quantities of patient data, and may use the data in dif -
ferent ways over time [28]. The location and ownership 
of servers and computers that store and access patient 
health information for healthcare AI to use are important 
in these scenarios. Regulation should require that patient 
data remain in the jurisdiction from which it is obtained, 
with few exceptions.
Strong privacy protection is realizable when institu -
tions are structurally encouraged to cooperate to ensure 
data protection by their very designs [29]. Commercial 
implementations of healthcare AI can be manageable 
for the purposes of protecting privacy, but it introduces 
competing goals. As we have seen, corporations may not 
be sufficiently encouraged to always maintain privacy 
protection if they can monetize the data or otherwise 
gain from them, and if the legal penalties are not high