Figure 1: Architecture of the MT-DNN model for representation learning. The lower layers are shared across
all tasks while the top layers are task-speciﬁc. The input X(either a sentence or a pair of sentences) is ﬁrst
represented as a sequence of embedding vectors, one for each word, in l1. Then the Transformer encoder captures
the contextual information for each word and generates the shared contextual embedding vectors in l2. Finally, for
each task, additional task-speciﬁc layers generate task-speciﬁc representations, followed by operations necessary
for classiﬁcation, similarity scoring, or relevance ranking.
erates a sequence of contextual embeddings in l2.
This is the shared semantic representation that is
trained by our multi-task objectives. In what fol-
lows, we elaborate on the model in detail.
Lexicon Encoder ( l1):The input X =
fx1;:::;x mgis a sequence of tokens of length m.
Following Devlin et al. (2018), the ﬁrst token x1is
always the [CLS] token. IfXis packed by a sen-
tence pair (X1;X2), we separate the two sentences
with a special token [SEP] . The lexicon encoder
mapsXinto a sequence of input embedding vec-
tors, one for each token, constructed by summing
the corresponding word, segment, and positional
embeddings.
Transformer Encoder ( l2):We use a multi-
layer bidirectional Transformer encoder (Vaswani
et al., 2017) to map the input representation vec-
tors (l1) into a sequence of contextual embedding
vectors C2Rdm. This is the shared represen-
tation across different tasks. Unlike the BERT
model (Devlin et al., 2018) that learns the rep-
resentation via pre-training, MT-DNN learns the
representation using multi-task objectives, in ad-
dition to pre-training.
Below, we will describe the task speciﬁc lay-ers using the NLU tasks in GLUE as examples,
although in practice we can incorporate arbitrary
natural language tasks such as text generation
where the output layers are implemented as a neu-
ral decoder.
Single-Sentence Classiﬁcation Output: Sup-
pose that xis the contextual embedding ( l2) of the
token [CLS] , which can be viewed as the seman-
tic representation of input sentence X. Take the
SST-2 task as an example. The probability that
Xis labeled as class c(i.e., the sentiment) is pre-
dicted by a logistic regression with softmax:
Pr(cjX) =softmax (W>
SSTx); (1)
where WSST is the task-speciﬁc parameter ma-
trix.
Text Similarity Output: Take the STS-B task
as an example. Suppose that xis the contextual
embedding ( l2) of[CLS] which can be viewed
as the semantic representation of the input sen-
tence pair (X1;X2). We introduce a task-speciﬁc
parameter vector wSTS to compute the similarity
score as:
Sim(X1;X2) =w>
STSx; (2)