Multi-Task Deep Neural Networks for Natural Language Understanding
Xiaodong Liu1, Pengcheng He2, Weizhu Chen2, Jianfeng Gao1
1Microsoft Research2Microsoft Dynamics 365 AI
fxiaodl,penhe,wzchen,jfgao g@microsoft.com
Abstract
In this paper, we present a Multi-Task Deep
Neural Network (MT-DNN) for learning rep-
resentations across multiple natural language
understanding (NLU) tasks. MT-DNN not
only leverages large amounts of cross-task
data, but also beneﬁts from a regularization ef-
fect that leads to more general representations
to help adapt to new tasks and domains. MT-
DNN extends the model proposed in Liu et al.
(2015) by incorporating a pre-trained bidirec-
tional transformer language model, known as
BERT (Devlin et al., 2018). MT-DNN ob-
tains new state-of-the-art results on ten NLU
tasks, including SNLI, SciTail, and eight out of
nine GLUE tasks, pushing the GLUE bench-
mark to 82.7% (2.2% absolute improvement)
1. We also demonstrate using the SNLI and Sc-
iTail datasets that the representations learned
by MT-DNN allow domain adaptation with
substantially fewer in-domain labels than the
pre-trained BERT representations. The code
and pre-trained models are publicly available
at https://github.com/namisan/mt-dnn.
1 Introduction
Learning vector-space representations of text, e.g.,
words and sentences, is fundamental to many nat-
ural language understanding (NLU) tasks. Two
popular approaches are multi-task learning and
language model pre-training . In this paper we
combine the strengths of both approaches by
proposing a new Multi-Task Deep Neural Network
(MT-DNN).
Multi-Task Learning (MTL) is inspired by hu-
man learning activities where people often apply
the knowledge learned from previous tasks to help
learn a new task (Caruana, 1997; Zhang and Yang,
2017). For example, it is easier for a person who
knows how to ski to learn skating than the one who
Equal Contribution.
1As of February 25, 2019 on the latest GLUE test set.does not. Similarly, it is useful for multiple (re-
lated) tasks to be learned jointly so that the knowl-
edge learned in one task can beneﬁt other tasks.
Recently, there is a growing interest in applying
MTL to representation learning using deep neu-
ral networks (DNNs) (Collobert et al., 2011; Liu
et al., 2015; Luong et al., 2015; Xu et al., 2018;
Guo et al., 2018; Ruder12 et al., 2019) for two
reasons. First, supervised learning of DNNs re-
quires large amounts of task-speciﬁc labeled data,
which is not always available. MTL provides an
effective way of leveraging supervised data from
many related tasks. Second, the use of multi-task
learning proﬁts from a regularization effect via al-
leviating overﬁtting to a speciﬁc task, thus making
the learned representations universal across tasks.
In contrast to MTL, language model pre-
training has shown to be effective for learning
universal language representations by leveraging
large amounts of unlabeled data. A recent sur-
vey is included in Gao et al. (2018). Some of
the most prominent examples are ELMo (Peters
et al., 2018), GPT (Radford et al., 2018) and BERT
(Devlin et al., 2018). These are neural network
language models trained on text data using unsu-
pervised objectives. For example, BERT is based
on a multi-layer bidirectional Transformer, and is
trained on plain text for masked word prediction
and next sentence prediction tasks. To apply a
pre-trained model to speciﬁc NLU tasks, we often
need to ﬁne-tune, for each task, the model with
additional task-speciﬁc layers using task-speciﬁc
training data. For example, Devlin et al. (2018)
shows that BERT can be ﬁne-tuned this way to
create state-of-the-art models for a range of NLU
tasks, such as question answering and natural lan-
guage inference.
We argue that MTL and language model pre-
training are complementary technologies, and can
be combined to improve the learning of text rep-arXiv:1901.11504v2  [cs.CL]  30 May 2019