resentations to boost the performance of various
NLU tasks. To this end, we extend the MT-DNN
model originally proposed in Liu et al. (2015)
by incorporating BERT as its shared text encod-
ing layers. As shown in Figure 1, the lower lay-
ers (i.e., text encoding layers) are shared across
all tasks, while the top layers are task-speciﬁc,
combining different types of NLU tasks such as
single-sentence classiﬁcation, pairwise text clas-
siﬁcation, text similarity, and relevance ranking.
Similar to the BERT model, MT-DNN can be
adapted to a speciﬁc task via ﬁne-tuning. Unlike
BERT, MT-DNN uses MTL, in addition to lan-
guage model pre-training, for learning text repre-
sentations.
MT-DNN obtains new state-of-the-art results on
eight out of nine NLU tasks2used in the Gen-
eral Language Understanding Evaluation (GLUE)
benchmark (Wang et al., 2018), pushing the GLUE
benchmark score to 82.7%, amounting to 2.2% ab-
solute improvement over BERT. We further extend
the superiority of MT-DNN to the SNLI (Bow-
man et al., 2015a) and SciTail (Khot et al., 2018)
tasks. The representations learned by MT-DNN
allow domain adaptation with substantially fewer
in-domain labels than the pre-trained BERT rep-
resentations. For example, our adapted models
achieve the accuracy of 91.6% on SNLI and 95.0%
on SciTail, outperforming the previous state-of-
the-art performance by 1.5% and 6.7%, respec-
tively. Even with only 0.1% or 1.0% of the origi-
nal training data, the performance of MT-DNN on
both SNLI and SciTail datasets is better than many
existing models. All of these clearly demonstrate
MT-DNN’s exceptional generalization capability
via multi-task learning.
2 Tasks
The MT-DNN model combines four types of NLU
tasks: single-sentence classiﬁcation, pairwise text
classiﬁcation, text similarity scoring, and rele-
vance ranking. For concreteness, we describe
them using the NLU tasks deﬁned in the GLUE
benchmark as examples.
2The only GLUE task where MT-DNN does not create
a new state of the art result is WNLI. But as noted in the
GLUE webpage (https://gluebenchmark.com/faq), there are
issues in the dataset, and none of the submitted systems has
ever outperformed the majority voting baseline whose accu-
racy is 65.1.Single-Sentence Classiﬁcation: Given a sen-
tence3, the model labels it using one of the pre-
deﬁned class labels. For example, the CoLA task
is to predict whether an English sentence is gram-
matically plausible. The SST-2 task is to de-
termine whether the sentiment of a sentence ex-
tracted from movie reviews is positive or negative.
Text Similarity: This is a regression task. Given
a pair of sentences, the model predicts a real-value
score indicating the semantic similarity of the two
sentences. STS-B is the only example of the task
in GLUE.
Pairwise Text Classiﬁcation: Given a pair of
sentences, the model determines the relationship
of the two sentences based on a set of pre-deﬁned
labels. For example, both RTE andMNLI are
language inference tasks, where the goal is to pre-
dict whether a sentence is an entailment ,contra-
diction , orneutral with respect to the other. QQP
andMRPC are paraphrase datasets that consist of
sentence pairs. The task is to predict whether the
sentences in the pair are semantically equivalent.
Relevance Ranking: Given a query and a list of
candidate answers, the model ranks all the can-
didates in the order of relevance to the query.
QNLI is a version of Stanford Question Answer-
ing Dataset (Rajpurkar et al., 2016). The task in-
volves assessing whether a sentence contains the
correct answer to a given query. Although QNLI
is deﬁned as a binary classiﬁcation task in GLUE,
in this study we formulate it as a pairwise ranking
task, where the model is expected to rank the can-
didate that contains the correct answer higher than
the candidate that does not. We will show that this
formulation leads to a signiﬁcant improvement in
accuracy over binary classiﬁcation.
3 The Proposed MT-DNN Model
The architecture of the MT-DNN model is shown
in Figure 1. The lower layers are shared across all
tasks, while the top layers represent task-speciﬁc
outputs. The input X, which is a word sequence
(either a sentence or a pair of sentences packed
together) is ﬁrst represented as a sequence of em-
bedding vectors, one for each word, in l1. Then the
transformer encoder captures the contextual infor-
mation for each word via self-attention, and gen-
3In this study, a sentence can be an arbitrary span of con-
tiguous text or word sequence, rather than a linguistically
plausible sentence.