to initialize its shared layers, reﬁned the model via
MTL on all GLUE tasks, and ﬁne-tuned the model
for each GLUE task using task-speciﬁc data. The
test results in Table 2 show that MT-DNN out-
performs all existing systems on all tasks, ex-
cept WNLI, creating new state-of-the-art results
on eight GLUE tasks and pushing the benchmark
to 82.7%, which amounts to 2.2% absolution im-
provement over BERT LARGE . Since MT-DNN
uses BERT LARGE to initialize its shared layers, the
gain is mainly attributed to the use of MTL in
reﬁning the shared layers. MTL is particularly
useful for the tasks with little in-domain training
data. As we observe in the table, on the same type
of tasks, the improvements over BERT are much
more substantial for the tasks with less in-domain
training data than those with more in-domain la-
bels, even though they belong to the same task
type, e.g., the two NLI tasks: RTE vs. MNLI, and
the two paraphrase tasks: MRPC vs. QQP.
MT-DNN no-ﬁne-tune Since the MTL of MT-DNN
uses all GLUE tasks, it is possible to directly ap-
ply MT-DNN to each GLUE task without ﬁne-
tuning. The results in Table 2 show that MT-
DNN no-ﬁne-tune still outperforms BERT LARGE con-
sistently among all tasks but CoLA. Our analysis
shows that CoLA is a challenge task with much
smaller in-domain data than other tasks, and its
task deﬁnition and dataset are unique among all
GLUE tasks, making it difﬁcult to beneﬁt from
the knowledge learned from other tasks. As a
result, MTL tends to underﬁt the CoLA dataset.
In such a case, ﬁne-tuning is necessary to boost
the performance. As shown in Table 2, the ac-
curacy improves from 58.9% to 62.5% after ﬁne-
tuning, even though only a very small amount
of in-domain data is available for adaptation.
This, together with the fact that the ﬁne-tuned
MT-DNN signiﬁcantly outperforms the ﬁne-tuned
BERT LARGE on CoLA (62.5% vs. 60.5%), reveals
that the learned MT-DNN representation allows
much more effective domain adaptation than the
pre-trained BERT representation. We will revisit
this topic with more experiments in Section 4.4.
The gain of MT-DNN is also attributed to its
ﬂexible modeling framework which allows us to
incorporate the task-speciﬁc model structures and
training methods which have been developed in
the single-task setting, effectively leveraging the
existing body of research. Two such examples are
the use of the SAN answer module for the pairwisetext classiﬁcation output module and the pairwise
ranking loss for the QNLI task which by design
is a binary classiﬁcation problem in GLUE. To in-
vestigate the relative contributions of these mod-
eling design choices, we implement a variant of
MT-DNN as described below.
ST-DNN ST-DNN stands for Single-Task DNN.
It uses the same model architecture as MT-DNN.
But its shared layers are the pre-trained BERT
model without being reﬁned via MTL. We then
ﬁne-tuned ST-DNN for each GLUE task using
task-speciﬁc data. Thus, for pairwise text classi-
ﬁcation tasks, the only difference between their
ST-DNNs and BERT models is the design of the
task-speciﬁc output module. The results in Ta-
ble 3 show that on all four tasks (MNLI, QQP, RTE
and MRPC) ST-DNN outperforms BERT, justi-
fying the effectiveness of the SAN answer mod-
ule. We also compare the results of ST-DNN and
BERT on QNLI. While ST-DNN is ﬁne-tuned us-
ing the pairwise ranking loss, BERT views QNLI
as binary classiﬁcation and is ﬁne-tuned using the
cross entropy loss. ST-DNN signiﬁcantly outper-
forms BERT demonstrates clearly the importance
of problem formulation.
4.4 Domain Adaptation Results on SNLI and
SciTail
Figure 2: Domain adaption results on SNLI and Sci-
Tail development datasets using the shared embeddings
generated by MT-DNN and BERT, respectively. Both
MT-DNN and BERT are ﬁne-tuned based on the pre-
trained BERT BASE. The X-axis indicates the amount of
domain-speciﬁc labeled samples used for adaptation.