Sensors 2021 ,21, 5082 28 of 31
6. Conclusions
Wearable edge AI is a perspective that enables the creation of several applications
using various devices. Thus, this paper discussed the main aspects of creating wearable
edge AI applications, especially for ﬁeld research. Initially, we reviewed the HW/SW
co-design pattern to enforce the parallel architectural design and validation. Finally,
we performed an extensive case study to validate this process towards designing novel
applications for ecological environment research.
6.1. A Novel Co-Design Approach
Traditionally, the hardware/software co-design principles consider the parallel devel-
opment of hardware and software, with the integration after validating both traits. Here,
we proposed a novel approach, considering that architectural decisions affect the hardware
and software effects. Thus, we understand that it is necessary to validate the architecture
integration among the software and hardware in our approach.
The proposal of a novel co-design approach starts similarly, with the requirements
deﬁnition and general architecture proposal. Then, it splits into three branches. The ar-
chitectural branch must identify how the devices communicate within the network, de-
velop and integrate into parallel with HW/SW elements, and have its validation routines.
The software and hardware branches are the same as the traditional co-design approach.
As the integration is parallel to the development of hardware and software modules,
the last stage is to deploy the model in a validation case study. Thus, we proposed an
appliance based on methods developed by ecologists to study forest canopies.
6.2. Developing a Wearable Edge AI Appliance
Our case study targets the usage of wearable edge AI in the forest environment. This
kind of environment has an important edge requirement, as it has a complex connection
and resource restraints. Thus, the appliance must be cloud-independent and provide a
machine learning inference process for several devices in an IoT environment. Furthermore,
we targeted this study to identify leaf diseases, as it has consequences and provides insight
into ecosystem health.
We started from multipurpose wearable solutions, where the proposed hardware
was previously validated. We then provided validation tests for the edge AI server node
hardware. Furthermore, we validated an ML-based leaf classiﬁcation as our edge AI
software. We trained a software tool starting from an existing dataset and validated it
according to the usual metrics from the area. We tested the quality of the provided edge
AI service for the architecture validation, considering it a soft real-time application. We
veriﬁed the quality loss for each added client.
Our results indicate the feasibility of this system. Usual COTS computer-on-modules
were able to provide the required services in a prototype environment. Our result indicates
that the modern computer-on-modules provide more resources to decrease the latency,
even for CPU-constrained tasks. With this feature, these tools were able to perform better
than older hardware with similar CPU chips. The software is a machine-learning- and
computer-vision-based classiﬁer. It was able to classify diseased leaves with 90% accuracy.
The application was able to bear a few clients with a less signiﬁcant quality-of-service loss.
The perspective of using deep learning to perform this task was also tested in this
context. Although this process improves the accuracy to 96%, it was not suitable for time-
sensitive insights in this conﬁguration. Nonetheless, this process is indicated to review and
improve the results of data obtained in ﬁeld when reviewing this process results after the
study. Further future works should also investigate how to enhance the CNN performance
using specialized embedded hardware.
We then validated the proposed architecture within the case study. We randomly sam-
pled leaves according to an arbitrary probability density function in three distributed space
locations. We then used the model to classify the given leaves and used an evolutionary
algorithm to perform regression for our PDF parameters. With the model, we were able to