Sensors 2021 ,21, 5082 20 of 31
Nano performed better than the Raspberry Pi 3B and 3B+. The Raspberry Pi Zero W has
the lowest hardware power, and thus the worst performance. Even though the hardware
speciﬁcations are very similar, the Raspberry Pi 3B performed better than the Raspberry Pi
3B+ and had a closer performance to the Jetson Nano operating in the 5 W mode. Figure 21
displays the average expected prediction per second rate for each platform.
Figure 21. Average expected predictions per second ratio on each platform. The number in blue
displays the expected ratio.
As expected, Zero W had a very low performance. This justiﬁes the initial architectural
proposal involving another hardware element to bear the heavier processing tasks. Another
expected result was that the highest performance was reached with Jetson 20W . An initial
surprising result is that 3Bhad a very superior result when compared to 3B+, even though
it has a better processor theoretically. Another important result is that even with two of
the four cores disabled, Jetson 5W had a superior performance when compared to 3Band
3B+ operating with four cores and more than two times the input power. This result makes
Jetson 5W a great candidate for ﬁeld processing, as it can operate at a high performance
with such a power constraint. From these results, we consider that 3Band Jetson 5W are
the main candidates for bearing this application, as they have the best tradeoff between
performance and power draw.
Finally, we tested the average predictions per second ratio running the CNN and the
MLP pipelines. The only difference in the CNN pipeline from Figure 17 is that the CNN
does not require a feature extraction process. Thus, this stage represents only the input
manipulation to feed the model. We performed these tests in the main hardware candidates
(Jetson 5W ,Jetson 20W , and 3B). The obtained results for the predictions per second in the
proposed conﬁgurations were:
• The average predictions per second ratio in 3Bwas 541for the MLP pipeline and
50 for the CNN pipeline;
• The average predictions per second ratio in Jetson 5W was 715for the MLP pipeline
and 100 for the CNN pipeline.
• The average predictions per second ratio in Jetson 20W was 917for the MLP pipeline
and 150 for the CNN pipeline;
Figure 22 also displays these results in the respective cited order. This data indicates
that even in case of improvements on the software results, the CNN model is not adequate
for time-restrictive tasks in the proposed conﬁgurations. This model is suitable to perform
a later review of in-ﬁeld captured results, but not to be integrated into a distributed
constrained environment within the context of these tests.