Sensors 2021 ,21, 5082 8 of 31
Figure 4. Proposed general architecture. The smart helmets use the wearable edge AI server to
provide machine learning inferences.
The following aspect is the construction of IoT-based sensor nodes. Each node is a
computer-on-chip capable of reading single or multiple sensor data, pre-processing this
data, and casting it over WBAN or WLAN. The chosen sensors to augment perception to
the environment are a laser radar (LIDAR), a 9-degree-of-freedom inertial measurement
unit (9DoF IMU), and a regular camera.
The computer-on-chip must be able to read the required I/O interfaces from each
sensor. It must also be able to establish a wireless connection in the local body area.
As wearable systems have strong energy constraints, the computer-on-chip must carry a
low-power processor. Thus, ARM-based computer-on-chips are adequate solutions for
this purpose.
In general, the candidate devices to perform as core applications for this system
are ARM-based computer-on-chips, with multiple different I/O interfaces to attach the
required sensors, and a network card capable of streaming the data through a local wire-
less connection.
We chose the Wi-Fi network standard (http://www.ieee802.org/11/, accessed on 22
July 2021) (IEEE 802.11) as WLAN/WBAN-interface. This choice was based on the ease of
creating web server solutions, data throughput, and range for WBAN/WLAN. It was also
based on the broader band capability to guarantee the connection quality, especially when
dealing with camera streaming.
Within this network, each sensor node operates like a local webserver. Any appli-
cation built should request the sensor data from each node over the WBAN/WLAN.
The application performs a data fusion algorithm and augments reality.
4.4. Hardware Speciﬁcation
From the proposal, there are two main hardware element decisions: The smart helmet
hardware and the edge AI node hardware. For the smart helmet, we needed a modular
and validated solution with an integrated camera. On the other hand, the edge AI node
hardware selection stage must combine performance and portability.
4.4.1. Smart Helmet Hardware
This project is a continuum evolution of a wearable device built for ecology envi-
ronment use. Other papers were published by members of the research group, which
had results previously discussed. The papers [ 17,45] describe the hardware speciﬁcation
and its evaluation. It is no focus of this paper to reproduce the evaluation previously
discussed. Instead, we aim to integrate the proposed hardware on the edge-AI architecture
in this scope.
This section provides a brief description of the wearable device built and provides the
essential information and concepts to the proposed integration. The developed hardware