Sensors 2021 ,21, 5082 3 of 31
human monitoring application is considered relevant for ﬁeld application, in this paper,
we claim for alternatives that wearable devices should be a service provider to ﬁeld
researchers and practitioners. To this end, few works found in the literature give this focus
on their investigations.
The proposed device in [ 15,16] can be used for simultaneous image processing as a
sensor station to provide information about the environment. An Intel Edison development
board was integrated into the architecture. In another approach, a smart helmet is proposed
as an alternative to climb trees for researchers to perform their tasks [17].
In [18], the authors propose an interactive wearable device based on a sound system
to create the sense of users and remote soundscape, enabling them to feel in nature despite
them being in the city. In the agriculture ﬁeld, wearable devices have been used to collect
information from the user or environment [19].
We attributed the low number of works focused on wearable application to the
ﬁeld research due to the most traditional IoT paradigms. As a result, system designers
tend to propose solutions integrated to the cloud platform, independent of the chosen
paradigm (cloud-based, edge-based, and fog-based). Indeed, these approaches restrict
the application because the ﬁeld research environment has several connection restrictions.
The following sections describe information toward the maturation of edge AI wearable
devices application in forests.
2.2. Edge and Wearable Computing
The IoT context brings on several devices with networking capabilities, producing
data, and receiving data-based decisions and insights. The scalability, availability, commu-
nication throughput, and latency in integrating these applications to a processing service
brings the need to process data closer to the edge [ 20]. Thus, the concept of edge computing
emerges from this condition [ 21]. This trend is enforced when considering mobile [ 22] and
wearable [23] computing.
Wearable computing speciﬁcally brings applications to improve the users’ cognition.
The increasing number of applications towards this goal is bringing user-centered applica-
tions in healthcare [ 24] and activity recognition [ 25], and many other appliances. In this
context, the usage of edge computing decreases the latency of this assistive technology
when compared to traditional cloud appliances [ 23]. Furthermore, as wearable computers
are usually resource-restrained, edge computing provides a way to bring more processing
to integrate with multipurpose wearable devices [26].
2.3. Wearable Edge AI
Usually, ﬁeld research environments do not have the necessary infrastructure to
integrate edge wearable devices and computer systems. Wearable edge AI is an alternative
concept for providing services required to ecological researchers and practitioners. Its
concept aims to provide local services based on artiﬁcial intelligence applications. This
means embedded devices can perform machine learning models to assist a human in the
decision-making process in real-time.
The increasing interest in machine learning, deep learning, and other computational
intelligence applications raised a relevant topic of discussion regarding how to bring these
algorithms to the edge. According to Chen and Ran [ 27], the main challenges regarding the
usage of machine and deep learning when considering this aspect are latency, scalability,
and privacy. Chen and Ran, and also Wang et al. [ 28] state that typical uses for these
technologies are computer vision (CV) and natural language processing (NLP). Wang et al.
also enforce that some relevant features in these applications are cost, reliability, latency,
and privacy.
An increasing number of wearable computing applications are using edge computing
to provide insights based on machine learning. For instance, there are appliances in health
monitoring [ 29–31], ergonomics [ 32], activity tracking [ 33], and so on. An important aspect
is that most of these applications are user-centered. They focus on monitoring the users’