Sensors 2021 ,21, 5082 10 of 31
Figure 6. Edge AI service pipeline. In the proposed architecture, clients perform part of the processing,
while the AI pipeline is provided by the edge AI server node.
4.5. Edge AI Software
As presented in the introductory section, the conditions of leaves are essential indica-
tors of the ecosystem’s health. Thus, we decided to evaluate the constraints of an edge AI
element performing classiﬁcations of leaves within two classes: Normal and diseased . In this
section, we cover the edge AI software applied in the case study.
The ﬁrst step is to ﬁnd a dataset with similar information to the one desired. After some
search, we decided to apply the dataset from Chouhan, Kaul, and Singh [ 46]. They present a
dataset with 4503 images of leaves with and without a disease. Within this set, 2278 images
are from healthy leaves, and 2225 images are from diseased leaves. The leaves are from
12 different species. Figure 7 displays images of healthy and diseased images from the
original dataset. In this database, the separation between diseased and healthy leaves is
guaranteed by the creators. In all cases, any eventual difference in color and texture is
caused only by disease. The images had a resolution of 6000 4000 pixels. To increase
the speed of the test and use a resolution closer to most available cameras for embedded
systems, we lowered the resolution to 900 600 pixels. The new resolution corresponds to
15% of the original size.
Figure 7. Sample of healthy and diseased leaf images obtained from the dataset.
The process of extracting and classifying the data follows a classical pipeline. At ﬁrst,
we acquire the image and extract a feature vector. Then, we classify the image according to
the features using an ML model, obtaining the binary classiﬁcation result. Figure 8 displays
the pipeline, with the substages associated with each main stage.
In this context, we approach this problem by creating a pseudospectral analysis
system [ 47]. In this pipeline, the feature vector is a pseudospectrum, corresponding to the
extraction of the histogram from the Hue channel in the HSV color space. Finally, we divide
the histogram by its sum, creating a probability density function (PDF) corresponding
to the color distribution, henceforth named pseudospectrum. Figure 9 displays some
examples of the pseudospectrum extraction.