Sensors 2021 ,21, 5082 9 of 31
is a helmet composed of sensors and a unit for data processing. It was built for researchers
and professionals who use the climb tree technique to collect ecological environments.
Section 3 describes more detail about their tasks and expectations.
Figure 5 shows the wearable prototype. Figure 5a is a perspective of the front and
side view of the device, and Figure 5b shows a user wearing the device from the back
perspective. The hardware bears a LIDAR sensor connected to a unit processing for distance
and 3D shape estimation of the sensing objects. A Raspberry Pi Zero W was adopted as
unit data processing powered by a 5 V battery. We considered the wearable requirements
and application requirements during the development process.
(a) Assembled wearable device.
(b) User wearing the device.
Figure 5. Prototype assembled.
We used this prototype to perform individual tasks in this scope. As we have pre-
viously validated this solution’s sensing aspects, we mainly performed tests involving
its computing capability in this work. As displayed in further tests, this prototype can
perform some of the desired tasks but has limited capabilities when dealing with higher
demand processing. Thus, this perspective justiﬁes the proposed edge-based architecture.
In the following section, we discuss the process of choosing edge computing hardware.
4.4.2. Edge AI Server Node-Hardware Selection and Integration
Besides the smart helmet, another critical aspect of the general architecture is the
edge AI server node. Thus, this hardware selection must consider embedded systems that
are portable and may provide this stage with machine-to-machine communication. Our
case study provides machine learning within the WBAN/WLAN context for creating a
wearable edge AI perspective. In this text, we compare the performance of four hardware
elements capable of providing this utility.
At ﬁrst, we created a pipeline, separating the elements processed locally and within
the edge AI server node. Initially, the local systems acquire and encode the image, sending
the encoded data to the edge server. In this server, the application loads a trained ML
model and constantly receives encoded frames, decodes them, pre-processes and extracts
the pseudospectrum, and evaluates it. The evaluation result is then stored by the edge AI
server and sent back to the device for redundancy. Figure 6 displays the proposed pipeline
for the edge AI server supporting a single client.
We considered various devices for creating the solution. We considered the Raspberry
Pi Zero W, Raspberry Pi 3B, Raspberry Pi 3B+, and Jetson Nano platforms as suitable
candidates for providing edge AI as a utility in the context of this wearable edge AI solution.
All these solutions are commercial-off-the-shelf ARM-based computer-on-modules.