Sensors 2021 ,21, 5082 15 of 31
Deﬁnition 2. Let E =eibe the ﬁnite set of events that each node performs, where i 2N;
Deﬁnition 3. LetL=lg,ebe the length of time interval that the node gtakes to perform an event
e during the execution, where g 2G and e2E;
Deﬁnition 4. LetP=pibe the set of patterns of events to be observed in the devices, where
pi=Ei,EiE, and i2N. In this case, all client devices will perform the same events in the
same pattern.
Deﬁnition 5. LetO=oibe the ﬁnite set of observations of a certain pattern pi2Pon each device;
The equation that represents the elapsed time lto observe a particular pattern
pi2Pis:
loi=ålg,ekj8ek2oi,oi=Opi. (5)
All client devices in the network composition will have the same fsoft real-time
deadline. Given this equation, let ˆObe a subset of O, where loif,8oi2ˆO. Finally, given
the sets Oand ˆO:
Deﬁnition 6. Let N be the number of elements on the set O;
Deﬁnition 7. Let N hbe the number of elements on the subset ˆO.
The quality factor Qfwill be represented by the following equation:
Qf=Nh
N(100% ). (6)
This result represents how often the nodes execute a pattern of events without violating
the soft real-time constraints. The clients represent the smart-helmets and will send data to
the edge AI server node in parallel on each test.
4.7. Case Study Validation for Deployment
To validate the system within the case study, we used a test based on the probability
distribution function presented in Equation (1). This equation describes the probability
of ﬁnding diseased leaves in a sampling process around the tree, based on the spatial
coordinates. The maximum value of this function is described by the P0value, while
the spacial disease “epicenter” is located on the (x0,y0,z0)coordinate. This condition is
illustrated in Figure 2, presented in Section 3.
In this validation test, we consider a team of three climbers sampling leaves in individ-
ual heights within transects of the canopy. The location of the three climbers is arbitrary but
known. The stops of the transect are also known, making it possible to map their location
along the process as a three-dimensional point. The researchers should be located within
an arbitrary diameter from a tree trunk center in the canopy for better spatial distribution.
Figure 14 displays this organization for a 5-meter radius and 9 stops.
We considered a process with an arbitrary number of stops on the climb, according
to the demand of the transect method. At each stop, the researcher would sample leaf
images. The system automatically classiﬁes the sampled leaves as healthy or diseased
according to the obtained method. Thus, for each (x,y,z)coordinate where a researcher
samples the leaves using the helmet and a background template, the system can calculate
the percentage of diseased unities. As a climber can transport small objects to the canopy,
we propose the usage of a background template, which is a solid object with identiﬁcation
tags on its borders. This proposal allows the algorithm to avoid background interference in
the sampling process. We developed a prototype test to demonstrate this issue using the
wearable camera. The prototype acquires the image, identiﬁes some tags in the background