Sensors 2021 ,21, 5082 2 of 31
Manfreda et al. [ 4] enforce that most monitoring systems are either ground-based, airborne,
satellite-based, or a combination of them. For ground-based measurements, researchers
should consider the possibility of using multi-sensor- and IoT-based wearable systems [ 5–7].
The combined data can be used to perform three-dimensional inferences from the acquired
information [8].
Leaf aspects are indicators of ecosystem health. Therefore, visual aspects that indicate
herbivory, aging, and disease must be observed throughout ecological canopy studies. Biel-
czynski et al. [ 9] state that plant and leaf aging affects its performance on photosynthesis
and photoprotective capability. In addition, disease detection is a relevant issue in both
agricultural and ecological contexts [ 10–12]. Tree diseases are inﬂuenced by the whole
ecosystem’s health, working as individual indicators of biotic, biophysical, and environ-
mental stresses [ 13]. Hence, detecting and understanding these diseases help to assess
environmental health.
1.1. Main Objectives and Contributions
In this work, we evaluate the aspects of creating wearable edge AI applications for
studying ecological environments. For this matter, we performed two tasks, as the two main
objectives of this text. At ﬁrst, we propose a novel project pipeline approach, reviewing the
hardware/software co-design pattern for creating robust IoT- and edge computing-based
appliances. This novel approach considers that the architecture must be integrated and
validated in parallel with developing the hardware and software traits. Then, we propose
a case study based on validated research methods to apply machine learning (ML) tools
in a wearable edge AI collaborative environment. We evaluate the constraints for this
application considering hardware, software, and architectural analyses. Some speciﬁc
contributions are:
• A novel co-design pattern considering architectural constraints;
• A new architecture for performing studies and analysis in ﬁeld research;
• A method for integrating existing and validated solutions in adjustable IoT- and edge
computing-based environments.
• An evaluation of a ML tool for detecting diseases in leaves.
1.2. Text Organization
Up to this point, we introduced the subject of this study and some theoretical back-
ground that supports the developed research. The remainder of this paper is organized
as follows: In Section 2, we review the literature for related work considering the main
aspects of this solution. Section 3 presents the case study for evaluating the usage of this
architecture in a collaborative environment. In Section 4, we deﬁne the materials and
methods we use to validate this approach. We deﬁne hardware, software, and architectural
traits that must be evaluated. Section 5 displays the results we obtained from the proposed
tests. Finally, we discuss our results and conclusions in Section 6.
2. Related Work
In the last section, we presented part of the theoretical background for this work,
reviewing some aspects relevant to this context. Nonetheless, it is required to understand
the importance of this and other proposed contributions within the area. Thus, in this
section, we present the search results in the literature for related work. We chose to search
for aspects within three main branches: Wearable computing in ﬁeld and forest research,
edge and wearable Computing, and wearable edge AI. As we display in the following
subsection, these areas are new and promising, and this research works some gaps in the
research ﬁeld.
2.1. Wearable Computing in Field and Forest Research
Wearable computing devices are generally used for entertainment in sports [ 14],
and in the medical ﬁeld, ref. [ 14] for monitoring the health of its users. Although health