Sensors 2021 ,21, 5082 7 of 31
and software contexts. After that, the development of hardware and software aspects of
the solution happens in parallel. Finally, the solution is only integrated after validating
both aspects. This architecture is sound in high or low abstraction levels in developing
single solutions considering both wearable and embedded systems. Nevertheless, this
architecture is fragile when dealing with multiple and variable architectures. This weakness
happens if the validation after the integration fails due to architectural traits. When thinking
about a wearable edge AI, these factors must not be ignored.
Therefore, we propose that the architecture validation represents a new branch after
context splitting. In the design process, the proposition of new devices must also identify
the essential aspects of architectural design. They must also validate these designs while in
the proposal process. Finally, as the integration happens in parallel, the last stage is the
deployment and validation of all systems together. In the architecture branch, represented
in green blocks in Figure 3b, there are three new stages:
• Architecture/Dataﬂow Design : In this stage, the proposal must identify how the devices
communicate within the network. In the context of IoT and edge computing, devices
communicate with each other providing services, insights, and information. Inte-
grating devices in the same WBAN/WPAN, or even multiple devices with multiple
WLAN users, requires a dataﬂow design.
• Architectural Development and Integration : After deﬁning the roles of each device within
the network, as well as the integration protocols, the architecture must be developed in
parallel with the integration of hardware components and individual software traits.
• Architecture Validation : Like the other branches, the architecture must also be validated
using formally-deﬁned tests. This aspect enforces the design process and identiﬁes
ﬂaws in the development process that must be assessed.
4.2. System Requirements
Wearable Systems are Embedded Systems. Therefore, the core requirements for every
wearable system are the same as the general embedded systems requirements: Energy,
robustness, timing, and communication [ 41]. They also have some further requirements
due to their nature. They need to be comfortable and easy to use [ 42] and must augment
reality through context-awareness [43].
In order to understand how these restraints apply to our desired context, we performed
several interviews with the target users from the technology. From their knowledge, we
estimated the energetic autonomy and robustness requirements in a qualitative or semi-
quantitative form. Communication and synchronization requirements come from the
proposed architecture features.
As this system needs to be taken into the ﬁeld, it needs to work for hours without a
battery recharge or replacement. It needs to be robust enough to take hits from branches and
falling seeds or nuts. As we propose a distributed system in a WBAN-Environment, both
systems need to communicate with an application, working as web server nodes. Finally,
the communication needs to be efﬁcient to stream the data through this local network.
4.3. General Architecture Proposal
The proposed solution works upon a wearable distributed system working in wireless
body-area network (WBAN) and wireless local area networks (WLAN). This system is pro-
jected to allow information extraction through data fusion, image processing, and computer
vision. Figure 4 presents the proposed architecture for this system.
The ﬁrst aspect of this system is the physical core. As we propose a wearable system,
it needs to be an unobtrusive system [ 44]. Therefore, we built the system over equipment
that allows the user hands-free. The physical core which presents the best option for
the wearable and research requirements is a helmet. In Silva et al. [ 45], we discussed
some of the appliance constraints. Primarily, we estimated the energetic requirements and
consumption for such a solution.