610 Techniques in Coloproctology (2023) 27:609–614
1 3
AI for system training [14]. OpenAI’s original ChatGPT 
(2018) [15] and ChatGPT-2 (2019) [16, 17] were LLMs 
developed a few years prior to GPT-3 and 4, but did not 
possess the power of the current iterations.
LLM architecture is based on being able to probabilis-
tically predict the next word in a sentence: For example, 
the colors of the US flag are red, white, and _____. Math-
ematically, this can be expressed as  P/parenleft.s1Xn/uni007C.x/uni007C.xXn−1 ), whereby 
the probability P of the next word Xn is based on the word 
appearing immediately before it in the sentence, Xn−1 . But 
the probability of the next word can also be based on more 
than the immediately prior word, thus more generally:
While transformer neural networks are highly complex, 
a critical part of their operation includes assigning weights  
to the words in the sentence because, generally speaking, 
certain words in a sentence are  more important than oth-
ers. A model can assign parameters, /u1D711 , to maximize the 
probability that Xn will be accurate and that it will make 
grammatical sense. Thus transformer LLMs generally use 
this formula:
This is a simplified mathematical representation of how 
transformer LLMs are able to determine the next word 
(responses) to text queries, and how they are able to perform 
generative AI functions. LLMs do not actually “think”, but 
rather the model generates textual outputs based on next 
word probability and by “ paying attention” to key words in 
text [12]. In computer science, this is termed, autoregres-
sion, where a weighted sample of past data (text) is used to 
predict future results or textual outputs.
The architecture of prior iterations of ChatGPT and cur -
rent iterations (GPT-3/GPT-4) remained fundamentally the 
same; however, the build of the initial  pre-training process 
was much smaller for GPT-1 and GPT-2, with approximately 
20,000 times more computation used for the current model’s 
training [18]. In computing, what is known as scaling law  
allows LLMs to become exponentially more intelligent by 
feeding them more data [19, 20]. Importantly, GPT-3/4 are 
capable of so-called few shot or even zero shot learning, 
whereby learning is achieved from just a few or no examples. 
In addition, GPT-3/4 have the ability to perform chain-of-
thought prompting to demonstrate reasoning, e.g., showing 
the steps for solving a complicated problem in calculus or 
physics [8 , 21]. According to S. Bowman, experts are not yet 
able to interpret the inner workings of LLMs, because the 
LLMs generate outputs based on the vast textual data they 
are fed, and we have no satisfactory method to know “what 
kinds of knowledge, reasoning, or goals a model is using 
when it produces some output” [8 ].P(Xn/uni007C.varXn−1,Xn−2,Xn−3,Xn−4,…)
P/u1D711(Xn/uni007C.varXn−1,Xn−2,Xn−3,Xn−4,…)LLMs in healthcare
One of the most intriguing ideas behind GPT-3, and 
higher versions, is that it can not only analyze voluminous 
amounts of textual data but that it can also compose it, 
making it a functioning generative AI model [2 , 8, 22]. A 
potential use of GPT-3/4 by healthcare providers is imple -
mentation as an informatics support system with the objec-
tive of reducing staff workload and patient wait times. It 
can rapidly synthesize high volume, complex patient data 
and generate summative reports effortlessly. Theoretically, 
healthcare IT can integrate LLMs into the electronic medi-
cal record (EMR) so as to use the generative AI capability 
to write discharge summaries [23], assist with data entry, 
and optimize patient check-in for visits (e.g., by assimi-
lating necessary patient data prior to consultation and 
treatment). Through EMR–LLM integration and, in the 
future, App-embedding, physicians and medical staff can 
conserve time, reallocating it to more patient-centric tasks 
which mandate interpersonal interactions—including face-
to-face consultation and personalized treatment. In this 
manner, LLMs could have a transformative impact on pro-
ductivity and well-being, ultimately decreasing provider 
burnout rates in the medical field [24, 25] while enrich-
ing patient experience. The advantages and limitations of 
LLMs in healthcare are summarized in Table  1.
Real‑world example
In the USA, it is not infrequent that medical insurers deny 
payment for procedures and services rendered to patients, 
such as the “off-label” use of medications [26]. LLMs can 
be tooled to sift through patient data from EMRs and thus 
generate articulate medical insurance appeal letters written 
with proper prose; this is one example of how GPT-3/4 can 
be used to offset a growing clerical and logistical burden 
that ultimately results in delayed delivery of healthcare. 
This reallocated time could, in turn, be used for direct 
patient care. In surgery and research, it appears GPT-3 has 
a role in autogenous tasks [27], including creating grant 
proposals [28], and generating procedure-specific consent 
forms [29, 30].
In the following example GPT-3 was used to generate 
a response to a hypothetical insurance denial letter. This 
response was generated within 10 s after online query; the 
query and response are shown verbatim in Fig.  1.
One can see from this practical example that GPT-3’s tex-
tual output is in fluent, native-speaker English with appropri-
ate syntax.  This is just one example of how ChatGPT can 
be utilized to improve healthcare delivery in the real world.