Vol.:(0123456789)1 3Techniques in Coloproctology (2023) 27:609–614 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10151-023-02837-8
EDITORIAL
How large language models including generative pre‑trained 
transformer (GPT) 3 and 4 will impact medicine and surgery
S. B. Atallah1 · N. R. Banda2 · A. Banda2 · N. A. Roeck3
Received: 12 June 2023 / Accepted: 12 June 2023 / Published online: 15 July 2023 
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2023
Introduction
Recently, a promising autoregressive large language model 
(LLM), Generative Pre-trained Transformer (GPT)-3 trained 
with 175 billion parameters via cloud computing [1 ] has 
been made available to the public online (released by Ope-
nAI on November 30, 2022; https:// chat. openai. com/). Its 
size makes it one of the largest deep learning models ever 
created [2 –5]. ChatGPT’s global uptake has been expo-
nential: 40 days post launch, GPT-3, had 10 million daily 
users, surpassing social media giant Instagram in daily 
users [6 ] and becoming an overnight “cultural sensation” 
[7]. GPT-4 was released on March 14, 2023, and it is capable 
of performing better than humans on high-level professional 
school exams, and it is perceived as a general purpose artifi-
cial intelligence (AI) that is suitable for multiple economic 
sectors, including healthcare.
ChatGPT (GPT-3/4) is able to generate de novo textual 
outputs that are grammatically and semantically fluent. Inter -
estingly, human performance for a task does not define the 
upper bound of LLMs [8 –10]. GPT-3 and higher iterations 
are able to write computer code, compose poetry, generate 
unique musical composition, and even create cooking reci-
pes. Importantly, ChatGPT can be used for a multitude of 
healthcare-relevant scenarios. Uses in medicine pertaining to clinical care and edu-
cation should be considered as target applications for this 
disruptive technology. Herein, we explore how LLMs can 
be applied to health literacy, decision-making, and written 
task formation. Potential pitfalls of LLMs are also discussed.
Understanding large language models 
(LLMs)
LLMs are a specific application of Natural Language Pro-
cessing (NLP), which is a subfield of AI that focuses on 
the interaction between computers and human language. 
It involves processing and analyzing natural language data 
(text or speech) to enable machines to understand, generate, 
and respond to human language [11].
In the field of AI, LLMs are a subset of deep learning 
that overlaps with generative AI. Generative AI is capable 
of producing text, images, audio, and synthetic data. Current 
LLMs are most useful for four types of outputs: (a) text clas-
sification; (b) question answering; (c) document summariza-
tion (including sentiment analysis); and (d) text generation.
While GPT-4 is the most advanced iteration at the time of 
this writing (2023), there are other LLMs including PaLM 
(Pathways Language Model), LaMDA, Microsoft Bing, 
Google Bard, BERT, and T5. To be capable of advanced 
textual outputs, all of these models are based on transformer  
neural networks [12], as opposed to convolutional neural 
networks. The latter defines the architecture underlying 
modern computer vision [13].
One important aspect of transformers is that they are 
highly parallelizable [ 1]. By using thousands of graphics 
processing units (GPUs) in parallel, GPT-3 was able to 
be trained in just 1 month. Without being parallelizable, 
this would have required 355 years using a single GPU. 
GPUs were initially developed for video gaming because 
graphic outputs requires parallelized computation. Trans-
formers allow for rapid scale-up compared to previous  * S. B. Atallah 
 atallah@post.harvard.edu
 N. R. Banda 
 nickbanda12@gmail.com
 A. Banda 
 Archanab@me.com
 N. A. Roeck 
 nar18d@fsu.edu
1 HCA Healthcare Oviedo, Adventheath Orlando, University 
of Central Florida, College of Medicine, Orlando, FL, USA
2 University of Central Florida, Orlando, FL, USA
3 Florida State University, Tallahassee, FL, USA