613 Techniques in Coloproctology (2023) 27:609–614 
1 3
Individuals who reside in remote locales often face a 
significant barrier: lack of easy access to medical profes-
sionals and health resources. This health disparity has a 
substantial impact on an individual’s health awareness, and 
GPT-3/4 will benefit persons residing in such underserved 
communities.
It does not take much to imagine an amalgam of technol-
ogy that includes speech recognition, recent developments 
of human-expressive robotics [34], and generative AI via 
LLMs. Combining those elements appears to be a natural 
next step and a future in which a patient can be evaluated 
and triaged by a speaking intelligent humanoid robot in not 
inconceivable. Once the stuff of science fiction, such a con-
struct could become a reality in the near future.
Ethics and safety governing LLMs remain challenging, 
especially because ChatGPT is growing at an exponential 
rate and also because it is definitely prone to misuse [2 , 8]. 
Through proper human oversight, future iterations aim to 
minimize bias and potential harm to humans. Current rendi-
tions have proven to be suboptimal in certain settings and 
along certain chat streams. It has been shown in simulation, 
for example, that GPT-3 was capable of encouraging sui-
cidal ideation in a mock patient [35], raising serious concern 
for public health rendered via GPT’s unregulated and free 
access.
GPT-3 delivered a functional AI to the masses, which 
is in itself an historic achievement. We must be prepared 
to shepherd its use to prevent malicious application and/or 
harmful outputs. Isaac Asimov famously set forth the cor -
nerstone principles fundamental to all artificially intelligent 
systems. While intended for robots specifically, the Three 
Laws of Asimov [ 36] can be broadened to be inclusive of 
all AI—including GPT and other LLMs. Expanding this, 
Asimov’s Laws are as follows:
1st law   A robot/AI may not injure a human being or, 
through inaction, allow a human being to come 
to harm.
2nd law   A robot/AI must obey the orders given it by 
human beings except where such orders would 
conflict with the 1st law.
3rd law   A robot/AI must protect its own existence as long 
as such protection does not conflict with the 1st or 
2nd law.
Recall that computers have been making critical deci-
sions in healthcare for decades. Perhaps the best example 
of this is the computerized human-independent algorithms 
that control the automated external defibrillator (AED), first 
developed by Paul Zoll at Harvard Medical School in the 1950s [37]; AED implementation has been crucial not just 
because of the access of the device in public areas, but the 
ability for it to be operated without the need for medical 
expertise and intentionally without human input [38].
While humans have been accustomed to specific comput-
erized applications in medicine such as AEDs, generative 
AI models are far more complex and may not be as easily 
adapted. Modern LLMs do not always get it right and on 
occasion produce fluent and grammatically correct textual 
outputs that are categorically false, and in some instances 
fictitious—a phenomenon known as “hallucination” [39].
Experts, including OpenAI CEO Sam Altman and oth-
ers, have voiced concern about the potential misuse of 
LLMs to write computer code for the purpose of carrying 
out cyberattacks, as well as GPT’s potential to propagate 
biased information and misinformation. Computer scien-
tists have suggested that LLMs can manipulate humans to 
acquire power. The majority of 700 plus computer science 
researchers believe there is more than a 10% probability that 
humans will not be able to control further advancements in 
AI leading to “human extinction” [8 , 40]. The gravity of 
these statements suggests that while LLMs are likely here 
to stay, human oversight and governance will be absolutely 
crucial.
Data availability All data, analytic methods, and study materials used 
to conduct the research will be made available to any researcher from 
the corresponding author upon request.
Declarations  
Conflict of interest There are no conflicts of interest to declare.
Ethical approval This is an editorial and ethical approval is not appli-
cable.
Informed consent  This publication does not involve patient care, there-
fore informed consent is not applicable.
References
 1. Atallah AB, Atallah S (2021) Cloud computing for robot-
ics and surgery. Digital Surg. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/  
978-3- 030- 49100-0_4
 2. Korngiebel DM, Mooney SD (2021) Considering the possibilities 
and pitfalls of Generative Pre-trained Transformer 3 (GPT-3) in 
healthcare delivery. NPJ Digital Med 4(1):93
 3. Sallam M (2023) ChatGPT utility in healthcare education, 
research, and practice: Systematic review on the promising per -
spectives and valid concerns. InHealthcare 11(6):887
 4. Li J, Dada A, Kleesiek J, Egger J (2023) ChatGPT in Healthcare: 
a taxonomy and systematic review. medRxiv. https:// doi. org/ 10.  
1101/ 2023. 03. 30. 23287 899
 5. George AS, George AH (2023) A review of ChatGPT AI’s impact 
on several business sectors. Partners Univers Int Innov J 1(1):9–23