Deep Neuroevolution of Recurrent and Discrete World Models
Sebastian Risi and Kenneth O. Stanley
Uber AI
San Francisco, CA 94103
sebastian.risi@gmail.com, kstanley@uber.com
ABSTRACT
Neural architectures inspired by our own human cognitive system,
such as the recently introduced world models, have been shown to
outperform traditional deep reinforcement learning (RL) methods
in a variety of different domains. Instead of the relatively simple ar-
chitectures employed in most RL experiments, world models rely on
multiple different neural components that are responsible for visual
information processing, memory, and decision-making. However,
so far the components of these models have to be trained separately
and through a variety of specialized training methods. This paper
demonstrates the surprising finding that models with the same
precise parts can be instead efficiently trained end-to-end through
a genetic algorithm (GA), reaching a comparable performance to
the original world model by solving a challenging car racing task.
An analysis of the evolved visual and memory system indicates
that they include a similar effective representation to the system
trained through gradient descent. Additionally, in contrast to gradi-
ent descent methods that struggle with discrete variables, GAs also
work directly with such representations, opening up opportunities
for classical planning in latent space. This paper adds additional
evidence on the effectiveness of deep neuroevolution for tasks that
require the intricate orchestration of multiple components in com-
plex heterogeneous architectures.
ACM Reference Format:
Sebastian Risi and Kenneth O. Stanley. 2019. Deep Neuroevolution of Recur-
rent and Discrete World Models. In Genetic and Evolutionary Computation
Conference (GECCO ’19), July 13–17, 2019, Prague, Czech Republic. ACM,
New York, NY, USA, 7 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3321707.3321817
1 INTRODUCTION
Neuroevolution, i.e. evolving neural networks through evolutionary
algorithms, has long been applied to complex control problems [ 7,
32,39] and has recently been shown to be a competitive alternative
for reinforcement learning problems [ 34,40]. Surprisingly, Such et
al. [40] demonstrated that even a simple genetic algorithm (GA) is
able to optimize a large-scale deep network to play various Atari
games from raw pixels.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
GECCO ’19, July 13–17, 2019, Prague, Czech Republic
©2019 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to Associa-
tion for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-6111-8/19/07. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3321707.3321817However, while the aforementioned deep networks have large
numbers of parameters, their architectures are often relatively sim-
ple feed-forward, directly mapping high-dimensional inputs to the
network’s outputs [ 40]. It is therefore an open question how ge-
netic algorithms would scale to problems that require more complex
architectures with multiple different and interacting components.
One such neural network-based architecture, which is inspired
by the human cognitive system, is the world model recently intro-
duced by Ha and Schmidhuber [ 13]. This agent model contains three
different components: a visual module that maps high-dimensional
inputs to a lower-dimensional representative code, a memory com-
ponent that tries to predict the future based on past experience, and
a decision-making module that determines the action of the agent
based on inputs from the visual and memory module.
The world model is motivated by the insight that our brains learn
abstract representations of both spatial and temporal data, allowing
us to generalize to different situations and to predict potential future
sensory experiences. Because of its predictive abilities, the world
model approach is able to find a solution for a challenging 2-D
car racing task (defined as reaching a minimum average reward
of 900 over 100 consecutive trials), a domain that other deep RL
methods such as Q-Learning and A3C [ 16,19] struggle with so far.
However, the approach requires each of its three components to be
trained separately and through specialized training methods. While
the controller part is trained through an evolution strategy, both
the visual and memory components are trained through stochastic
gradient descent based on random rollouts. Given the surprising
and competitive results of GAs on RL problems [ 40], the question
in this paper is whether a simple GA might also be competitive
with complex heterogeneous systems like world models, and if so,
what type of representation would evolve.
As the results in this paper on a 2-D car racing domain demon-
strate, it is in fact possible to train a complex multi-component
system end-to-end with a simple genetic algorithm. Indeed, the
GA performs comparably to the world model approach and finds a
solution to the task, outperforming all of the other traditional deep
RL methods. Surprisingly, even though the sensory component was
not directly trained to compress similar sensory states to similar
latent codes (as is the case in the training of the autoencoder in
Ha and Schmidhuber [ 13]), the GA discovers such a representation
by itself because it is beneficial for solving the task. Similarly, the
emergent representation of the memory system is able to predict
situations in which the agent needs to react quickly to changes in
the environment, such as when taking sharp turns.
Additionally, this paper introduces a discrete world model ap-
proach, in which the VAE is restricted to binary outputs. While
traditional machine learning techniques have focused on continu-
ous representations because backpropagating through discrete vari-
ables is challenging [3, 30, 33, 45], evolutionary-based approachesarXiv:1906.08857v1  [cs.NE]  28 Apr 2019