GECCO ’19, July 13–17, 2019, Prague, Czech Republic
Figure 5: Evolved Visual Representation. t-SNE mapping of the 32-dimensional latent vectors onto two dimensions. The three action
outputs of the agent are mapped to the RGB color values of each plot point (R=steer, G=gas, B=break). The GA successfully discovered a
visual encoder that maps similar pixel inputs to similar latent codes. Similar latent codes in turn determine similar agent actions, such as
turning right (1), driving straight (2), or turning left (3).
Drivingdirection
01
Figure 6: Dynamics of Evolved Forward Model. The size and color of each marker reflects the variance in activation levels of the
MDN-RNN’s hidden state while the agent is driving around the track (brighter colors and larger marker sizes indicate higher magnitudes).
Variance levels are typically higher when the agent is near corners, while they are lower on straight road segments. These results suggest
that the evolved agent model is most reliant on the memory component in situations that benefit from predicting future sensory states.
One advantage and indeed motivation of the original world
model approach was the fact that agents can train and improve
in the environments generated by the world model itself, without
using the actual environment. Testing the evolved world model
presented in this paper for the same purpose is an important next
step. As noted by Ha and Schmidhuber [ 13], the discrete modes in
the mixture density model can be beneficial in environments with
random discrete events (e.g. firing of a weapon in an FPS game).
They observed that if the temperature parameter that controls the
model’s uncertainty is set to a very low value, the enemies in the
world model of their FPS environment never fire their weapons; the
MDN-RNN is not able to reach a mode in the mixture of Gaussianmodels in which this event happens. In this context, we hypothesise
that the ability of the GA to evolve discrete VAE representations
(which are fed into the MDN-RNN) could make it even easier for
the model to switch between different modes than the current
continuous VAE version.
Another exciting prospect is not only to evolve the weights
of such large-scale deep networks but also the neural architec-
tures themselves. While evolutionary algorithms have allowed the
architectures of relatively simple networks to be evolved for re-
inforcement learning problems, so far larger-scale architectures
have mostly been evolved in combination with supervised learn-
ing [ 25] and not extended to very complex RL problems. Other