Deep Neuroevolution of Recurrent and Discrete World Models GECCO ’19, July 13–17, 2019, Prague, Czech Republic
Figure 3: Training performance on CarRacing-v0 .The
score of the best individual is shown in each generation evalu-
ated on 20 randomly created tracks. All approaches, except MUT-C,
are able to evolve agent models that can drive around the track at
high speed while making very few mistakes.
(a) Random Weights
 (b) Evolved Weights
Figure 4: VAE Reconstructions. While a network with random
encoder weights does not allow the VAE to learn to reconstruct
the given images (a), the evolved weights of a champion network
encoder enabled different road images to be reconstructed (b). These
results suggest that evolution discovered how to compress useful
information in the latent code produced by the VAE’s encoder.
does not directly explain how the evolved network is utilizing this
compressed representation to drive efficiently around the track.
To analyze this question further, we employ the t-SNE dimension-
ality reduction technique [ 24] to map the sequence of 32-dimensional
latent vectors collected during one car racing rollout to two dimen-
sions. t-SNE has already been proven valuable for gaining insight
into the workings of deep neural networks [26, 41].
The mapping (Figure 5) suggests that the agent learned to rep-
resent situations that require a similar action (e.g. turning sharp
left or right) with a similar latent vector. For example, situations
in which the agent needs to turn right are represented by similar
latent codes, which are clustered together, while latent codes for
situations in which the agent needs to drive straight or turn left
are part of a different cluster. By learning an abstract, compressedrepresentation of the higher-dimensional pixel inputs, it becomes
easier for the controller module to learn the required behaviors.
5.2 Learned Forward Model Dynamics
In addition to the visual encoder representation, it is interesting
to investigate the emergent dynamics of the evolved predictive
memory component.
Figure 6 visualizes the activation levels of the MDN-RNN while
the agent is driving around two tracks. To get a better sense of the
dynamics of the system, we are interested in how much the average
activation xtof all 256 hidden nodes at time step tdiffers from the
overall average across all time steps ¯X=1
NÍN
1¯xt. The variance of
¯xtis thus calculated as σt=(¯X−¯xt)2, and normalized to the range
[0,1]before plotting. Activation levels far from the mean should
have a higher impact on the agent’s controller component and
can indicate situations in which the agent needs to pay particular
attention to the predictions of the MDN-RNN.
The results show that the dynamics of the recurrent network
are changing more drastically when the agent is near a corner and
change less when the agent is driving on straight track segments.
This effect confirms the hypothesis that predicting future sensory
states is particularly important during situations in which the agent
needs to react quickly to changes in the environment.
6 DISCUSSION AND FUTURE WORK
This paper demonstrated that genetic algorithms can not only train
the weights of relatively simple network architectures but also com-
plicated systems with over a million weights that include different
components for sensory processing, memory, and decision mak-
ing in an end-to-end fashion. The approach outperforms standard
deep RL approaches and reaches a comparable performance to the
recently-introduced world model approach that relies on a much
more complex training regimen. Another surprising result is that
the GA found a solution with a population size of only 200, com-
pared to the much larger population sizes of 1,000 in the work by
Such et al. [40] on Atari video game playing.
The difference between the two mutation treatments MUT-MOD
and MUT-ALL also suggests a potentially useful hybrid approach, in
which mutations sometimes affect all network layers and sometimes
only one layer at a time. Such an approach could combine the better
initial exploration of MUT-ALL with the ability of MUT-MOD to
better fine-tune different parts of the network in later generations.
While the final average generalization score is slightly lower
than the score in the original world model paper [ 13], the presented
system does indeed solve the task while not relying on first learning
from a large number of random rollouts; instead the system can
learn directly in interaction with the environment. The slightly
lower average score (903 compared to 906) with a higher standard
deviation (72 compared to 21) could be explained by the fact that
if random rollout data is available, training each component sep-
arately might produce slightly more robust solutions. However,
especially in more complicated tasks for which data collected dur-
ing random rollouts is insufficient (because a random rollout might
not reach all relevant parts of the environment), the end-to-end
learning approach could become more important.