GECCO ’19, July 13–17, 2019, Prague, Czech Republic
do not struggle with discrete representations. In the future, such rep-
resentations could directly support classical planning approaches
in latent space [2].
Overall, the performance of the GA for evolving the weights of
more complex architectures suggests that it can be a competitive
alternative in many tasks that were thought too high-dimensional
for artificial evolution. In the future, it will be interesting to extend
this approach to not only evolving the network’s weights but also
the architectures of the world models themselves.
2 RELATED WORK
A variety of different RL algorithms have recently been shown to
work well on a diverse set of problems when combined with the
representative power of deep neural networks [ 26,36,37]. While
most approaches are based on variations of Q-learning [ 26] or policy
gradient methods [ 36,37], recently evolutionary-based methods
have emerged as a competitive alternative [34, 40].
Salimans et al. [ 34] showed that a type of evolution strategy
(ES) can reach competitive performance in the Atari benchmark
and at controlling robots in MuJoCo. Additionally, Such et al. [ 40]
demonstrated that a simple genetic algorithm is in fact able to
reach similar performance to deep RL methods such as DQN or
A3C. Earlier approaches that evolved neural networks for RL tasks
worked well in complex RL tasks with lower-dimensional input
spaces [ 7,32,39] and also showed promise in directly learning from
high-dimensional input [21].
However, when trained end-to-end these networks are often still
orders of magnitude simpler than networks employed for super-
vised learning problems [ 17] or depend on additional losses that
are responsible for training certain parts of the network [48].
More complex agent models often require training different net-
work components separately [ 13,46]. For example, in the world
model approach [ 13], the authors first train a variational autoen-
coder (VAE) on 10,000 rollouts from a random policy to compress
the high-dimensional sensory data and then train a recurrent net-
work to predict the next latent code. Only after this process is a
smaller controller network trained to perform the actual task, tak-
ing information from both the VAE and recurrent network as input
to determine the action the agent should perform.
In another earlier related approach the authors first train an
autoencoder in an unsupervised way [ 1] or train an object recog-
nizer in a supervised way [ 28] and then in a separate step evolve
a controller module. The idea in the present paper is to explore
whether a GA can optimize a multi-component system end-to-end
without the need to separate training into different phases, which
is explained in the next section.
Approaches to learning dynamical models have mainly focused
on gradient descent-based methods, with early work on RNNs
in the 1990s [ 35]. More recent work includes PILCO [ 6], which
is a probabilistic model-based policy search method and Black-
DROPS [ 4], which employs CMA-ES for data-efficient optimization
of complex control problems. Additionally, interest has increased
in learning dynamical models directly from high-dimensional pixel
images for robotic tasks [ 47] and also video games [ 11]. Work on
evolving forward models has mainly focused on neural networksthat contain orders of magnitude fewer connections and lower-
dimensional feature vectors [27] than the models in this paper.
3 END-TO-END TRAINING OF
MULTI-COMPONENT NETWORKS
The agent model in this paper is based on the world model ap-
proach introduced by Ha and Schmidhuber [ 13]. The network in-
cludes a sensory component, implemented as a variational autoen-
coder (VAE) that compresses the high-dimensional sensory infor-
mation into a smaller 32-dimensional representative code (Figure 1).
This code is fed into a memory component based on a recurrent
LSTM [ 15], which should predict future representative codes based
on previous information. Both the output from the sensory com-
ponent and the memory component are then fed into a controller
that decides on the action the agent should take at each time step.
Following Such et al. [ 40], the deep neural networks are evolved
with a simple genetic algorithm, in which mutations add Gaussian
noise to the parameter vectors of the networks. Three different
mutation operators are investigated:
•In the first approach ( MUT-ALL ), we apply additive Gauss-
ian noise to the parameter vectors of all three modules (vi-
sion, memory, and controller) at the same time: θ′=θ+σϵ,
where ϵ∼N(0,I)and σwas determined empirically and set
to0.01for the experiments in this paper.
•In the second module mutation setup ( MUT-MOD ), a mu-
tation has an equal probability to either mutate the visual,
memory, or controller component of the network. The hy-
pothesis is that this treatment should allow evolution to
better fine-tune each component in the system than an ap-
proach that always adds Gaussian noise to all components.
•To elucidate the advantages of evolving both the VAE and
memory component, their weights are randomly chosen in
the third setup ( MUT-C ) and only the controller component
is modified through evolution.
In the original world model approach the visual and memory
component were trained separately and through unsupervised
learning based on data from random rollouts. Here they are opti-
mized through a simple genetic algorithm and the components are
not evaluated individually. In other words, the VAE is not directly
optimized to reconstruct the original input data and neither is the
memory component optimized to predict the next time step; the
whole network is trained in an end-to-end fashion and has to learn
a representation by itself that allows it to solve the given task.
Another potential benefit of GAs, beyond being able to train the
whole system end-to-end, is that training discrete VAEs, in which
the latent code takes on only binary values, are seamlessly sup-
ported. While learning representations with continuous features
have been the focus in machine learning, discrete VAEs can have
benefits for domains that are composed of discrete elements (such
as language) or can naturally support classical planning approach
in latent space [ 2]. However, discrete VAEs have proven difficult to
train through gradient descent-based methods [ 3,30] or require a
more complicated training procedure [ 33,45], because backpropa-
gating through discrete variables is not directly possible. This paper
tests the idea of evolving discrete VAEs for the car racing domain.
TheDISCRETE-MOD approach feeds the original output of the