OCEM  Journal  of 
Management,  Technology  & Social  Sciences  120  engaged in online gaming for more than two hours most days. The majority of online problem users 
displayed negative addictive symptoms, especially ‘loss of control’ and ‘conflict’ (Lopez -Fernandez, 
Honrubia -Serrano, Gibson &  Griffiths, 2014). In distinct to my research a cross -sectional survey with a 
sample  size of 3560  students  was conducted  among  high schools  in Connecticut,  USA.  Demographic  data, 
characteristics of internet use, health measures and risk behaviors were asse ssed. the overall prevalence 
was about 4% with no significant difference between genders. (Desaaiet,al.. 201l) In distinct to my 
research a cross sectional study was conducted among adolescents of ages 13 to 18 years, registered on 
the secondary school reg istry in Guangzhou city using a stratified random sampling technique. IA was 
assessed using the Internet Addiction Test (IAT). The majority of respondents were classified as normal 
users of the internet (n = 1,392, 89.2%), with 158 (10.2%) moderately and 1 0 (0.6%) severely addicted 
to the Internet. (Lam et, al, 2009).  
 
3. Research  design  
The Strategic plan structure of data were taken from OCEM student of class 11 and 12. The study was 
examined  to IA with youth.  It was descriptive,  analytical  and cross  tab in nature.  The sample  survey  data 
were collected from youth. The study was based on those students coming from rural and urban areas 
from the different places. A Cross -sectiona1 analytical study design among 169 students was used to 
assess IA among adolescent s of 11th and 12th grade, whose age ranges between 15 to 19 years of OCEM 
College.  
 
3.1 Inclusion criteria and Exclusion  criteria  
The study  included  adolescents  of 11th and 12th grade  with age ranging  from  15 to 19 years,  were  available 
and willing to participate in the study. Those students whose age ranged below 15 years and above 19 
years and absent were excluded from the sample  population.  
 
3.2 Data Collection  Procedure  
Permission was obtained from the concerned authorities. Pre -testing w as done among 10% of samples. 
The objectives of the study were informed to the respondents and written consent was taken. Parental 
consent form was distributed to those whose age is < 18 years and signature of parents were taken as 
the permission to involv e their child in the research. All the respondents who met the inclusion criteria 
were given a structured self -administered questionnaire. Respondents were assured for confidentiality 
of information as it was only used for study purpose. Similarly, a cross  sectional survey was conducted 
between May and June 2010, using a self -administered questionnaire distributed to randomly selected 
770 secondary  schools  students,  using  20-item Young’s  IA test. and the Center  for epidemiological  studies 
depression scale w ith questions related to demographic, social, academic and internet use factors. 716 
Students  answered  the questionnaire  391 are males  and 325 are females.  Prevalence  was 5.3%,  with male 
predominance. IA was associated with a lower degree of school perform ance, more hours using internet 
everyday (Cohen, Manion, Morrison & Bell,  2011).