OCEM Journal of  
Management,  Technology  & Social  Sciences  35  answer the questions mentioned above because these questions are embedded in our perception, belief 
and social thought. The second most important issue is about the pedagogy. The biggest question that 
come up with the p edagogy is what type of pedagogy is perfect to solve the contemporary problem. 
Likewise, instruction also plays a vital role for leadership development. But the questions aroused? 
Does  the methods  like, case study,  presentation,  group  discussion,  reading  article,  doing  assignments  and 
lecturers  are sufficient  for the leadership  development  ? If not, what  could  be the best way of instruction 
for developing business leaders and what about the practical skills for  them?  
The previous study of Brett and Atwater  (2001) argue that the selection of instrument and tools should 
create  the ownership  by students.  It could  be done  by supportive  organizational  structure  and engagement 
of faculty, importance of protégé beliefs and performance as a leader, mentoring, self -reflection, absorb 
negative  feedback,  truly  capable  of leadership,  emotional  and frequently  involvements  in practices.  Further, 
Klimoski and Amos (2012) highlighted that it should focus on clear program goals, responsibility for 
direction  an articulated  pedagogical  framework,  MBA  programs,  student  ownership,  and greater  reliance 
on experience  and the use of assessments  in order  to provide  evidence  of impact.  The other  challenge  that 
needs to face by the development program is the number of available facul ty members, their nature and 
duration and sequencing of learning activities with functional subjects and specializations. (Lawrence 
Dunn  & Weisfeld -Spolter,  2018).  Similarly,  most  business  school’s  faculties  were  not properly  trained  in 
pedagogy and curriculum design, and they may not be able to face the challenge of teaching leadership 
with the most appropriate research findings in mind (Klimoski & Amos, 2012). Some of the business 
schools  are facing  the financial  crisis  and they are adopting  the cost minimization  strategy  like increasing 
the size of sections, increasing the average class size and reduce the number of smaller classes or at a 
minimum to hold class sizes constant. But the question arises here. Does this strategy help us to achieve 
our aim? Or Are the business schools really doing a business? Another challenge faced by business 
schools  is status -based  system,  it is scarcely  in the interests  of those  schools  winning  the competitive  war 
for status  to change  the rules  of the game  that have  put them  on top. “As with any status -based  system,  it 
is scarcely in the interests of those schools winning the competitive war for status to change the rules of 
the game that have put them on top”. And finally, the status quo is maintained by the taken -for-granted 
aspect of so much of business education, the fact that what we do and how we do it has become truly 
institutionalized (Blackburn,  2011).  
Developing  female  business  leader  is another  challenge  for most  of the business  schools.  The number  of 
female  students  is not only low in the classroom,  they are also low in the business  and employment  sector 
specially  managers  and executive  directors  (Marlow  & Carter,  2004;  Reed,  1992).  In some  societies  there 
is clear  separation  of profession  by gender  for example  in Nepal  ‘Male  students  are not allowed  to enroll 
in Nursing and air hostage course, whereas Scandinavian countries give women greater opportunities to 
fill top executive positions. However, in the arena of w orld business, the number of female graduates is 
around  thirty  percent  (30%),  which  seems  as a hitting  the ‘glass  ceiling’  (DeRue  & Ashford,  2010;  Datar, 
Garvin & Cullen, 2014) in today’s scenario, many business schools are trying to increase the number of  
female students to fulfill the demand of companies for the female talent, build their pipeline of female 
leaders, and compensate the gender imbalance that exists in top levels of management (Dragoni,  Tesluk, 
Russell &  Oh, 2009). Some of the top business schools have introduced the fellowships and scholarship 
to attract  and encourage  female  leaders  and to create  awareness  of career  potential  in business.  Moreover, 
partnership  between  business  schools  and external  organi zations  also provide  a platform  like focused