OCEM Journal of  
Management,  Technology  & Social  Sciences  85  One phrase given by one executive “Quality of information means integrity, robustness, able to stand 
up for scrutiny, but very important is also a guarantee of completeness, wholeness”. Or another phrased 
explored  by the next executive:  “We rely on well checked,  reliable,  robust  and relevance  rated  information”. 
Generally, information that arrived ‘bottom up’ was trusted more than information provided by external 
sources. If information become available from uncertain in sources or is not reliable at first sight, it      
is thoroughly scrutinized for its credibility and robustness before being accepted by the departments 
responsible for supplying information to the board. But even so, executives sometimes double -check 
information themselves, one reason being that these departments are not always aware of the strategic 
plans of the board (Citroen, 2010  ). 
 
3. Research  Methodolo gy 
Researcher asked a selected group of executives in colleges whether they would be willing to complete 
the survey questionnaire with recently administered entitled the content, form, technological and time 
factors of the information to make rational strateg ic decisions in their colleges. Twenty -four executive 
level respondents were asked to complete the survey questionnaires to observe in which way they use 
information during the decision making process. Thirty executive level college administrators were 
sending the survey questionnaires but twenty -four of them returned which is 80% response rate. Data 
analysis  was based  on descriptive  statistics  along  with the Principal  Component  Analysis.  Student’s  t-Test 
is used to find out the average differences in decision process in public & private colleges. The Logistic 
Regression Enter Model was used to find the association between the impact of the information factors 
and rational decision making in both private an d public colleges.  
 
3.1. Fieldwork  
The sixteen executives that current researcher sent questionnaires were selected from members of the 
college board or directors (n=16) who also belonged to the Management, Engineering, Education and 
Information Technology Depa rtments of the selected colleges, three from Nawalparasi District and 
thirteen  from  Chitwan  District.  The type of college  executives  that agreed  to take part in the research  and 
the functions of the survey questionnaires were either chairman or member of t he board/management 
team or were directly involved in strategic school  management.  
 
3.2 Sample Population  
The target population was one hundred and ten college executives (N=110) and sample population was 
twenty -four (n=24)  so that the proportion  of sample  population  is (24/110*100),  i.e. 21.81%.  The gender 
proportions  of the sample  were  (19/24)  79.20%  male  executives  and five (5/19)  female  school  executives 
(20.8 %). The proportion of private college was (n/N) 58.33% and public college was 41.66  %. 
 
4. Results  
The analysis has focused on the roles of different factors of information to make rational decision in   
an academic institution. The analysis highlights that the ages of respondent were categorized as (35 - 
35) years  (25 %), (35-40) years  (12.5  %), (40-45) years  (37.5  %) and more  than 45 years  (25 %). The