OCEM  Journal  of 
Management,  Technology  & Social  Sciences  38  success of developing leadership skills primarily depends on determination of all stakeholders, clear 
vision  of the program  director  and the devotion  to prepare  a dynamic  MBA  graduate  leader.  Additionally, 
the review  results  confirmed  that most  of the business schools  were  struggling  to cope  with the challenges 
to develop  the professional  business  leader.  The most  common  challenges  of MBA  programs  were  found 
as the assumption, pedagogy, instruction, instrument, manpower, cost, status -based system and status  
quo. Finally, the results importantly indicate that the business schools were criticized not to teach  the 
right contents and global leadership  skills.  
 
4.2 Future Recommendations and  Limitations  
This study recommends that the future research has to focus on several limitations of MBA program   
on practical skills to develop a qualified leader. This study also  recommends that future research has   
to focus on how to enhance the skills for development of dynamic leaders to compete with this tough 
and competitive business environment. It is also recommended that future research has to emphasise on 
how the graduat e MBA students can ahieve necessary leadership skills and to able to show integrative 
thinking as compared to undergraduates from other domains. Future research has also to address on the 
necessary leadership skills via business courses to make money for t he universities and to focus on the 
relevance of the outputs on career development and managerial practices. Future research is also sought 
for the balancing of practical and theoretical skills of MBA programs. This review is embedded in the 
selection of t wenty articles which may create conflict conclusion because of missing some important 
contemporary  data.  There  is no specific  approach  or guideline  used for selection  of the published  articles. 
This review has provided the limited research gap between the MBA programs and current demand of 
global companies to fulfill the expectation of students and companies, universities or school of business 
need to do the further research in pedagogical development. Again future research is required for the 
new policy re form. Future research need to address the periodical examination on reforming the MBA 
program to find the specific expectation of the companyies (Hooijberg & Lane, 2009). This review has 
covered limited articles so that results cannot guarantee the reliabi lity and validity of the findings. On 
the other hand, the review is based on the secondary data so that the current researcher cannot take the 
guarantee of the review data and  findings.  
 
References  
Anderson, L. (2006). Building Confidence in Creativity: MB A Students. Marketing  Education  
Review , 16(1), 91-96. 
Bazerman, M.H., & Moore, D. A. (2009). Improving decision making. In Judgment in managerial  
decision making (7th ed.): 179 -199. USA, Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons.  
Benjamin, B. and O’Reilly, C. (2011). Becoming a Leader: Early Career Challenges Faced by MBA 
Graduates. Academy of Management Learning & Education , 10(3), 452 -472. 
Blackburn,  G. (2011).  Which  Master  of Business  Administration  (MBA)?  Factors  influencing  prospective 
students’  choice  of MBA  programme  – an empirical  study.  Journal  of Higher  Education  Policy  and 
Management , 33(5), 473 -483. 
Brett,  J. and Atwater,  L. (2001).  360°  feedback:  Accuracy,  reactions,  and perceptions  of usefulness.  Journal 
of Applied Psychology , 86(5),  930-942.