OCEM Journal of  
Management,  Technology  & Social  Sciences  9  the presence of brothers, but not in the presence of sisters; boys’ housework time increases more in the 
presence of brothers and less in the presence of sisters in 16 developing countries. The role of first -born 
girl of mother migrant households is compul sorily responsible to take care for her younger siblings in 
the Nepalese societies because they are regarded as the second mothers to take care for their younger 
siblings and to support for their health educational and psychosocial development (Mechoulan &  Wolff, 
2015). On the other hand, there are some serious issues of sibling’s conflicts for the purpose of holding 
the leadership role in the mother migrant households and individual disagreement among siblings. The 
consequences of age difference between si blings often makes the issues of power and control, sources 
of contention  for children,  rivalry  and jealousy  which  can affect  psychosocial  development  of the LBGs. 
Additionally, the conflict of siblings frequent, poorly resolved and sometimes highly aggressive, violent 
or even  abusive  which  breaks  the peaceful  house  environment  and eventually  girls are negatively  affected 
for their psychosocial development because of their patient  nature and high tolerance capacity (Kolak 
& Volling, 2011). The number of siblings, age and the birth order of siblings are also directly embedded 
to girl’s health and psychosocial development in the Asian context because children are socialized into 
appropriate gender roles according to their age where parents expect older siblings to undertake more 
responsibility and become role models for their younger siblings in multi -child families which only 
applies for the girls not for boys (Adhikari, 2018; Edmond s, 2006). It is consistently found an inverse 
relationship between sibship size and educational outcomes (Booth & Kee 2008; Lu & Treiman 2008). 
The primary objective of the study was to examine the consequences of MIM to the LBGs under the 
age of 16 on edu cation, health and psychosocial development between the mother migrant and non - 
migrant households. The secondary objective was to compare the education, health and psychosocial 
development of the LBGs between migrant and non -migrant households.  
2. Literature  Review of the  Study  
The word migration signifies both male and female migrants, but it does not specify directly for male or 
female migrants. When the motivations, outcomes, and obstacles to international migration are studied, 
there  is a growing  awarenes s in social  science  research  that consideration  of gender  is critical  phenomenon 
(Rossi, 2009; Nguyen Yeoh, & Toyota, 2006). A little effort has been done to model explicitly for the 
differences between male and female migrants with respect to determinants  of international migration 
and their changes overtime. This misunderstanding is a serious shortcoming in the international female 
migration history because there is not any clear definition of male and female migrants (Bank, 2007). It 
is argued that theor etical model and empirical findings focusing on male migration cannot adequately 
describe female migration. More importantly, the studies that do not differentiate between males and 
female migrants can state wrongly the effects of independent variables on migration for both genders 
(Morrison, Schiff & Sjöblom, 2007; Moore, 2016; Rossi, 2009). MIM is defined as a form of family 
transition which breaks the inherent relationship between both mothers and children (Mberu & Pongou, 
2012; Wimalaratana,  2017).  
 
2.1. Theoretical Framework of the  Study  
MIM  and overall  development  of the LBGs  are interconnected  to education,  health  and psychosocial  
development  of  the  LBGs  because  mothers  had  undoubtedly  played  the  primary  role  for  overall