OCEM  Journal  of 
Management,  Technology  & Social  Sciences  122  support the previous study of Heo, Oh, Subramanian, Kim & Kawachi (2014) because both studies the 
similar  findings  that there  was significant  associations  between  addictive  Internet  use and ages of students, 
school grade and marital status. It was further found that female students in girls’ schools were more 
likely  to use Internet  addictively  than those  in coeducational  schools.  Our results  also revealed  significant 
gender differences of addictive I nternet use in its associated individual - and school -level  factors.  
 
4.1                            The                             Internet                             Use                             Factors 
The use of the Internet  has allowed  us the conv enience  of accessing  anything  at our fingertips.  In adolescents 
especially,  the Internet  has become  a readily  accessible  means  for entertainment,  communication,  education 
and information retrieval. Nonetheless, the negative impact of addiction has pervasively affected day to 
day function; school performance and relationships with their parents; Worst of all, extensive Internet 
use may generate adverse effects on t he psychosocial development of adolescents, which may result in 
many of them experiencing mental health problems including depression, loneliness, low self -esteem, 
and anxiety. An increasing number of studies have revealed that addictive online behaviors a re very 
similar to alcoholism, substance addiction and pathological gambling. With the increased popularity of 
the Internet, Internet addiction has emerged as a social and mental health issue among youths. Although 
official diagnostic criteria do not curre ntly exist, Young defined Internet addiction as the excessive, 
obsessive –compulsive,  uncontrollable,  tolerance -causing  use of the Internet,  which  also causes  significant 
distress and impairments in daily functioning. Internet addiction has the following ty pes: cyber -sexual 
addiction, cyber -relational addiction, game addiction, information overload, and net compulsions. In 
recent  years,  Internet  addiction  has been  reported  in both Western  and Eastern  societies  among  adult  and 
adolescent  groups.  Several  studi es have  also examined  the prevalence  of Internet  addiction  during  the past 
few years. Although data from those studies reported inconsistent occurrence rate of Internet addiction, 
there is no doubt that Internet addiction has emerged as a rapidly growing p roblem in young people that 
has attracted world -wide attention. Adolescence is a critical period for addiction vulnerability, when 
compared to adults, adolescents are more likely to adopt patterns of excessive Internet use. Generally 
speaking,  Internet  addiction  is common  among  adolescents,  and related  factors  are found  at both home  and 
school. Close attention should be paid by both parents and teachers to these factors. Effective measures 
are needed to prevent the spread of this  problem.  
 
Table 2. Association between IA and Internet use factors  
Factors   N Z score  p-value  
Internet access at home  Yes 168 0 1 No 1 
Own gadget  Yes 163 2.188  0.29 No 6 
Type of gadget owned Computer  Yes 39 1.461  0.144  No 124 
Smart Phone  Yes 123 0.654  0.513  No 39 
Ipad/Tablet  Yes 38 1.029  0.304  No 125