OCEM Journal of  
Management,  Technology  & Social  Sciences  83  of individual decision makers take centre stage. Strategic decision making is more than computation 
carried  out to make  judgements  and choices.  Various branches  of mathematics  can inform  us about  risk, 
options, game theory and choice”.  
The meaning of strategic decision making is embedded to judge and choose the tricks to make key 
rational decisions to sustain the educational organizations. The strategic decision making is a plan, play, 
pattern,  position  and perspective  to sustain  the organizations  in this competitive  business  era. In the past, 
sometime,  it was defined  as a plan,  sometimes  play,  position,  and perspective  focusing  on organizational 
sustainability for the future sustainability (Nutt & Wilson,  2010).  
 
2.2 A rational approach to d ecision  making  
An important  theme  in research  into strategic  decision -making  concerns  the approach  that is followed  in 
making a rational decision and the structure of decision making process. In a rational decision -making 
process, executives have to reach strategic decisions without a prejudiced opinion about the eventual 
decision and only after a structured process of careful consideration of circumstances, alternative lines 
of thought and consequences of the decision made. Information on matters are embedded in time, 
contents, form and technological factors affecting the organization are needed to judge the implication s 
of the feasible alternatives for the decision to be made (Szymaniec -Mlicka, 2017). “First, organizations 
search for and evaluate information in order to make important decisions. In theory, this choice is to be 
made rationally, based upon complete inform ation about the organization’s goals, feasible alternatives, 
probable  outcomes  of these  alternatives,  and the values  of these  outcomes  to the organization.  In practice, 
rational choice -making is muddled by the pushing of interests among organizational stak eholders, 
bargaining and negotiation between powerful groups and individuals, the limitations and idiosyncracies 
of personal choice making, the lack of information, and so on. Despite the complications addressed in 
earlier paragraph , an organization must keep up at least an impression of rational, reasoned behaviour, 
both to sustain internal trust, and to preserve external legitimacy” (Lunenburg, 2010, p.8). “The second 
area of strategic information use is when the organization makes sense of changes and d evelopments   
in its external environment. Organizations thrive in a dynamic, uncertain world. A dependable supply 
of materials, resources, and energy must be secured to make rational strategic decision making. Market 
forces  and dynamics  modulate  the organ ization’s  success  or failure.  The third  area of strategic  information 
use is embedded in organizations’ creating, organizing and processing information in order to generate 
new knowledge  through  organizational  learning.  New  knowledge  is then applied  to design  new products 
and services, enhance existing offerings, and improve organizational processes” (Citroen, 2010,  p.493).  
 
2.3. Information as a factor in strategic decision -making  
In management  research  publications,  the role of information  in the proce ss of decision -making  is seldom 
recognized, discussed or analyzed as such, probably because management information is considered a 
production factor that is readily available, and its accessibility is “taken for granted” in many studies on 
company performa nce. Although input of information is often mentioned in order to be able to consider 
parameters  such as the business  environment,  internal  and external  issues  and changing  conditions  during 
the decision -making  process,  information  is seldom  seen as a determining  factor  of rational  decision