OCEM  Journal  of 
Management,  Technology  & Social  Sciences  116  Discussion  
From our survey we concluded that Home Automation could be a well -suited technology in near future. 
Reasons monitored that people are not likely to purchase Digital security system and Home Automation 
System includes -they are expensive, hard to maintain, high false alarm rate etc. Major sector where 
future of product can be seen includes home, industries, schools etc. Only 6 % of people disagreed to 
use products  made  in Nepal  which  put light on the interest  of Nepalese  people  to use Nepalese  products. 
During our survey respondent’s we found that price of the product played a vital role for 47.6 % of our 
respondent.  53.2 % people  thought  that the expense  of automation  product  will be the main  aspect  of not 
using automation product, but unexpectedly only 13.7 % thought that this kind of product will be hard 
to manage at the first place. We also tried to find that what would change the mind of respondent for 
adopting automation products, impressively 41.9 % agreed in transparency of the investment and cost 
rather than affordable price which was just 29.8  %. 
Our plan is to generate awareness and find out the market potential for the need of home automation 
system. The home automation revenue is expected to r ise as people become aware of its capabilities. 
Some  recommendations  that this research  provides  that will ensure  good  customer  relations  are as regular 
maintenance, relevant percentage of discount, a year warranty and scheme for custom installments,  easy 
graphical  user interface  and application  control  system,  security  and EMI scheme  and remote  info sharing.  
 
References  
Asadullah, M., & Raza, A. (2016). An overview of home automation systems. 2nd International  
Conference on Robotics and Artificial Intelligence (ICRAI), . Rawalpindi, Pakistan.  
Statistics, C. B. (2017). National Population and Housing Census 2011. Kathmandu: Government of 
Nepal.  
Transparency Market, R. (2017). Home Automation Market . Retrieved Jul y 18, 2018, from https://  
www.transparencymarketresearch.com/home -automation -market.html  
UNFCO, U. F. (2009). An Overview of the Central Development Region (CR). UN Ho use, Pulchowk,  
Kathmandu, Nepal: United Nations Resident and Humanitarian Coordinator’s Office.  
YANG, J. (2005). DISCOVER INTEGRATED APPROACHES TO SMART AND SUSTAINABLE  
HOUSING DEVELOPMENT. 2005 World Sustainable Building Conference. Tokyo.  
 
Appendix 1  
One question had relations with other, so that there will be uniformity of response.  
On the session 1:  
Answers to the questions below were our key concerns.  
1. Are you interested in technology  products?  
Reason: It shows will of the respondent in buying home a utomation products.  
2. Family Monthly Income (in thousands, Nepalese  rupees)  
Reason: Family income determines the capacity of the respondent to buy our product.  
3. Gender  
Reason: Which gender is more likely to buy our products?