OCEM  Journal  of 
Management,  Technology  & Social  Sciences  78  college students to recommend their kith and kin in their existing college to study. The findings of the 
current study has supported the previous findings of Gajic (2011) because Gajic has found that students 
were found satisfied with the rich infrastructure facility. The Chi -square Test was applied to measure 
the association between exist ing students’ locations and their intention to recommend their kith and kin 
to enrol at OCEM. The results show that there is significant relationship between the different locations 
of students and their intention to recommend for the enrolment at OCEM. Th e findings of this study is 
significant for the Department Head, administrative staff and the principal of OCEM to formulate new 
policies and strategies. It will be also important to other colleges of the same characteristics to know the 
students’ percepti on to the private colleges in Nawalpur and Chitwan  District.  
 
Recommendation  
This study recommends that academicians of OCEM need to deliver lifelong academic skills, student - 
cantered activities and updated lecturer during their classroom teaching. Simila rly, the faculty heads 
need to improve their management activities, quick faculty support to students and supportive college 
environment and facilities and should apply new educational technology in their classroom teaching. 
Again,  top level  management  needs to revise  the current  students’  security  system  for the strong  security 
environment, improve lab and library facilities, to improve college infrastructure facilities and other 
physical facilities. The future research has to cover the large sample popula tion both private and the 
public colleges in order to generalize findings for the larger population which makes the future research 
more valid and transferable in other aspects of factors influencing to student satisfaction in Chitwan 
District.  
 
Acknowledg ement  
The author  thanks  all the Department  Heads,  lecturers  and students  of grade  11 and 12 at OCEM  Gaidakot -2 
Nawalpur of Nepal who made substantial contributions to this work. This work was fully funded by the 
OCEM Gaindakot -2 Nawalpur Nepal. The supporting roles and contributions encouragement from our 
Principal,  Professor  Er. Hari Bhandari  and draft  correction  from  Vice Principal  Mr. Tilak  Ram  Panthi  are 
very much admirable and appreciative to complete this great  work.  
 
References  
Attreya, B. (2018). Consumer Buying Behaviour. Journal of Advances and Scholarly Researches in  
Allied Education, 15(9), 1 -4. 
Butt, B. & Rehman, K. (2010). A study examining the students’ satisfaction in higher education. Procedia  
- Social and Behavioral Sciences, 2(2), 5446 -5450.  
Calder, N. (2013). Mathematics in student -centred inquiry learning: Student engagement. Teachers And 
Curriculum, 13. doi: 10.15663/tandc.v13i0.15  
Cohen, L., Manion, L. and Morrison, K. (2011). Research methods in education. London: Routledge.  
Gajic, J. (20 11). Measurement of student satisfaction in higher education. Marketing, 42(1), 71 -80. 
Gruber, T., Fuß, S., Voss, R. and Gläser‐Zikuda, M. (2010). Examining student satisfaction with higher 
education services. International Journal of Public Sector Managem ent, 23(2), 105 -123.