OCEM  Journal  of 
Management,  Technology  & Social  Sciences  96  towards customer’s satisfaction at Buddha Air. Again, the Chi -square Test was computed to examine the 
association  between  customer  satisfaction  and categorical  variables  (gender,  average  family  income  level, 
profession  of the customers,  main  reasons  of choosing  Buddha  Air, different  religions  of the customers). 
A stepwise  strategy  was followed  (Easterby -Smith,  Thorpe  & Jackson,  2012).  Secondly,  a Binary  Logistic 
Regression Model was used to assess the impact of the predictor and control variables on all motives of 
customer’s  satisfaction.  Both  significant  levels  and effective  sizes  were  considered  using  Cohen’s  d cut-off 
points (Cohen, Manion, & Morrison, 2011). Finally, the Wholesome Binary Logistic Regression Model 
was applied  to find the association  between  all the significant  indicators  and customer  satisfaction.  
 
3.2. Quality  Factor  
The first research instrument wa s examined by the first survey instrument where respondents were 
asked to share their experiences and perceptions on environmental cleanness, noise pollution,  customers 
waiting  place,  easy and comfortable  seats,  quality  of drinking  water,  facility  of using  Visa/Master/Debit/ 
Credit Card to purchase tickets, feeling of customers’ facilities, money exchange facility, punctuality of 
flights,  adequate  overhead  facilities  and safety  of airline  flights.  
Table  1. Varimax  rotated  principal  components  matrix  on the quality  of services  for the customers 
satisfaction  before  and after  service  of Buddha  Airs (N = 185).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Principal Component Model extracted three PCs where the first PC has five variables, the second 
PC has three variables and the third PC has four variables. The variances of the first, second, and third 
account were 26.05 %, 13.43 %, and 10.80 % respect ively [KMO = 0.0678]. The first, second, and  third 
PCs were named as the proper shopping environment, quality of services and strict flight schedule and 
security respectively in Buddha  Air. Variables  Loadings  
1 2 3 
PROPER  SHOPPING  ENVIRONMENT  AND  CUSTOMER  MANAGEMENT     
There is no sound pollution in the location of Buddha Airs.  .700   
The seats are comfortable and easy.  .689   
The is sufficient waiting place for customers in Buddha Air’s Office  .655   
The environment is neat and clean in Buddha Airs.  .614   
There is no sound pollution while taking off Buddha Air.  .424   
QUALITY SERVICES     
Buddha Air Service accepts Visa and other online payment cards.   .807  
The food and beverage are quality and satisfactory.   .748  
I feel comfortable service of Buddha Airs.   .645  
STRICT FLIGHT SCHEDULE AND SECURITY     
Buddha Air is punctual in its schedule.    .826 
The Airlines is safety than other Airlines.    .762 
The is the facility of money exchange around the counter.    .623 
The Airlines has overhead luggage facility.    .591