OCEM  Journal  of 
Management,  Technology  & Social  Sciences  72  The research of this study mentioned in Figure 1 signifies that quantitative method is embedded the 
survey research method, research instrument, data analysis method, statistical tools and r eliability scale 
factor. The five point Likert Scales survey questionnaire was used as research instrument to know the 
experiences and opinions of grade 11 & 12 students. Two hundred and fifteen (N=215) questionnaires 
were  distributed  but the respondents  returned  two hundred  and four (N=204)  questionnaire  at the Research 
Department of OCEM. The response rate was 94.22 % where the reliability of the data was examined 
by computing Cronbach’s Alpha value (0.70). The descriptive statistics and Binary Logistic R egression 
Model  was applied  to find the association  between  the independent  and dependent  variables.  The structure 
of Binary Logistic Regression Equation is mentioned as prob(event) is equal to  b0+b1x1+b2x2+………..  
bnxn (Cohen, Manion &  Morrison, 2011 ; Vogt, 2011).  
 
4. Data  Analysis  
The first, second,  third  and the fourth  sub-problems  have  examined  the students’  experiences  and opinions 
on academic facilities, managerial facilities, service facilities and the infrastructure facilities for their 
intention to recommend their friends/relatives/family members at Oxford College of Engineering and 
Management in Gaindakot -2, Nawalpur of  Nepal. The first, second, third and the fourth instruments 
were entitled the “the academic factor; the managerial factor, physical and infrastructure factors. The 
instrument  was based  on the five point  Likert  scales,  for example,  1 = I strongly  disagree,  2 = I disagree, 
3 = I do not know, 4 = I agree  and 5 = I strongly  agree.  Factor  Reduction  Model  of Principal  Component 
Analysis  has been  applied  to reduce  the number  of variables  and to extract  the new principal  components. 
The descriptive statistics analysis was applied to compute mean and Standard Deviation of each 
subscales. Later on, the Binary Logistic Regression Model (BLRM) was applied to find the association 
between dependent and independent variables. Chi -Square Test and Student T-test were applied to find 
the association between the gender and student’s recommendation for the enrolment at  OCEM.  
4.1 Results  
There  were  four sub problems  under  the one main  problem  in this study.  The first sub problem  has examine d 
the student’s  opinions  and experiences  of students  for the current  quality  of academic  program.  Similarly, 
the second sub problem has examined the available managerial support on the student’s intention to 
recommend  their kith and kin to enrol.  Again,  the third  sub problem  has examined  the available  physical 
facilities on student’s intention to recommend for the  enrolment.  
4.1 Academic  factor  
Academic factors are embedded in delivering the practical skills, student centered activities, innovative 
teaching p edagogy, interactive teaching environment, better internal evaluation system, cooperative 
teaching environment and using modern educational technology in classroom teaching (Hanssen and 
Solvoll, 2015; Kreber, 2009).  
4.2 Managerial factor  
The managerial factors  are embedded in the role of faculty members to solve students’’ problems, the 
role of principal to motivate students, the concentration of overall coordinator to address student issues 
and helpful role of principal. Management of time schedule, teaching r esources, availability of faculty