OCEM Journal of  
Management,  Technology  & Social  Sciences  23  important for teaching and learning act ivities because it integrates computer and teaching activities.     
It also enhances teachers’ teaching skills and makes them easy to manage their classroom (Onifade, 
2011). The use of technology in classroom teaching can support teachers for effective and  efficient use 
of curriculum contents which can increase student achievements. The use of technology also enhances 
teachers’ beliefs for external commands and opportunities and permits them to access for resources 
(Christensen  et al., 2018).  “Technology  in education  is an integral  part of effective  teaching  and learning. 
It is crucial to prepare learning leaders who can guide and support innovative and effective technology 
enhanced learning in the classroom” (Christensen et al., 2018, p.458). Educational te chnology also 
supports students and teachers to be more innovatives to improve their performance, & how to get good 
results effectively and efficiently (Alexander,  2018).  
Gupta (2015) states that; “The field of education has been affected by the penetrating influence of 
information  and communication  technology.  Undoubtedly,  ICT has impacted  on the quality  and quantity 
of teaching, learning, and research in traditional and d istance education institutions” (p.316). It is noted 
that current educational systems and teaching and learning practices have been positively influenced  
for delivering actual chances for individualized instruction in classroom teaching by the educational  
technology through its dynamic, interactive, and engaging contents (Cuny, 2011). It also enhances the 
capability of accelerating, inspiring, and deepening skills; motivating and engaging students in teaching 
and learning  activities.  Technology  is also useful tool to teachers  for helping  to relate  school  experiences 
to work practices; creating economic viability for tomorrow’s workforces; underwriting to fundamental 
changes  in school;  strengthening  teaching  and providing  opportunities  for connection  between  the school 
and the society (Onifade,  2011).  
 
1.2 Research Problems and  Questions  
The current chapter has focused on the main research questions of the current study where one main 
research question and 3 sub -questions were designed to facilitate the analysis section. The primary 
research questions are rooted in the differences of citat ion counts; published years of journal and the 
differences of the contents. The firstly, forty -one highly cited articles were selected & secondly, only 
seven articles were selected. The next issue of the research question is deeply rooted in the variations  of 
per five selection journals and the published papers based on their characteristics. The primary research 
question is related to identifying and analyzing the most cited of the five selected journals in the field of 
educational technology during the ye ar 2013 to 2017. The primary research question has been divided 
into three sub -questions.  
 
1. What are the characteristics/differences between the most cited published articles per five  selected  
journals?  
2. What are the characteristics differences between the m ost cited published articles per year among 
the five selected journals between 2013 to  2017?  
3. What  are the differences  between  the most  cited  published  articles  per five selected  journals  and per 
year among the seven selected journals between 2013 to 2017?  
At first, the most cited five journal articles were derived from Publish and Perish Tool. The first journal 
BJET was the main source of academic journal articles for researchers and academicians in the arena of 
digital  educational  and training  technology  throughout  the universe.  The publications  of BJET  are deeply