OCEM  Journal  of 
Management,  Technology  & Social  Sciences  44  private and public colleges in Nepal. A large number of students exist from Nepal to foreign countries. 
There  is always  fluctuation  in student  enrollment  in colleges  due to student’s  dissatisfaction  on academic; 
managerial; organizational; infrastructure factors, location and reputation of colleges. Students have 
been treated as customers since a long time ago but their satisfaction level is very poor and debatable. 
Due to th e lack of student satisfaction in different colleges, student turnover has been regarded as a big 
threat for educational practitioners in Nepal. It is also true that student dissatisfaction directly impacts 
for both quality of education and college financi al situation by which students’ enrollment trends have 
gone  down  in most  of the colleges  (Douglas,  Douglas  & Barnes,  2006).  The declining  trends  of students 
along with the biggest number of higher education institutions changed the intensity of competition 
among  colleges  in Nepal  and attracted  much  more  attention  to marketing  efforts,  which  was so far highly 
neglected particularly by Nepalese public i nstitutions (Sojkin, Bartkowiak & Skuza, 2011). Students  are 
seeking for the student centered learning pedagogy, lifelong skills and international standard education 
in our colleges but the current outcomes are just embedded in securing high marks without focusing on 
delivering lifelong skills to our students (Uprety & Chhetri, 2014).  . 
 
1. Satisfaction:  
The financial anxiety, low quality of lecturers and weak teaching practices, traditional organizational 
managerial  practices,  a lack of student  involvement  in college  decision  making  practices,  limited  learning 
resources, poor service facilities, and high priority in theoretical education and less priority in lifelong 
skills have undermined the student preference to recommend their kith and kin and to continue their 
higher level education in the same colleges in Nepal (Uprety & Chhetri, 2014). Student satisfaction 
level has become a major focus of academic practitioners and researchers in the competitive learning 
environment owing to its strong impact on the suc cess of educational institutes and prospective student 
registration since the past few decades (Langstrand, Cronemyr & Poksinska, 2014; Weerasinghe & 
Fernando, 2018). More specifically, colleges should accomplish high standards of quality in teaching, 
research,  administrative  services  and available  facilities  to pursue  their mission  to meet  the contemporary 
demands of students (Bini & Masserini,  2015).  
 
1.1 Customer  Satisfaction:  
The word  “satisfaction”  is defined  by Uprety  and Chhetri  (2014)  as a state of feeling of a person  who has 
experienced  performance  or an outcome  that fulfils  his/her  expectation.  In terms  of students,  expectation 
may go as far as before the students even enter the higher education, suggesting that it is important to 
the educational practitioners to determine first what the students expect before entering the colleges. It 
is believed that satisfaction ac tually covers the issues of students‟ perception and experiences during the 
college years. It is considered that student satisfaction is a match between what students expect while 
entering colleges, and perception and experiences they develop during the co llege years (Carey, 
Cambiano, & De Vore, 2002). While most studies on satisfaction focus on the perspective of customers 
and researchers who are facing a problem of creating a standard definition for student satisfaction. Thus 
providing a need of customer satisfaction theory to be selected and modified so that it can explain the 
exact  meaning  of student  satisfaction  (Hom,  2002).  Similarly,  William  (2002)  mentioned  that even