OCEM Journal of  
Management,  Technology  & Social  Sciences  117  4. Whether they own  that house or not?  
5. Education status of the  respondent.  
6. Do they have Wi -Fi connection in the  house?  
Reason: Our product as a full package is internet based hence Wi -Fi is the essential part of the 
survey  
 
On the session 2:  
Following questionnaire had important role:  
1. Do you trust in home automation  products?  
2. How would you like to link with  us? 
3. If you were to install home automation products, how would you prefer to  do? 
4. Which of these places you prefer to have automation  systems?  
5. Do you recommend automation products to your  friends/relatives?  
6. Do you see demand of home automation products in  FUTURE?  
7. If this product is available in the market from today, how likely would you be to buy the product?  
8. What would change your mind  about adopting  automation?  
9. Are Automatic water pumps the most essential product in today’s  scenario?  
10. Will Home automation would make your home secure?  
 
Code Book for questionnaires  
We used code book for coding and to serve as documentation of the layout a nd code definition of the 
data file. It will ease us on data analysis and decoding of the survey research. Code book is given below . 
Concerns  
We discussed on the behavior categories for the data analysis because it is not easy to determine the 
respondent response in demographic classification. Demographic classification is also included so that 
more accurate analysis of data is obtained.  
To obtain the effective output of the data of HA we revised the questionnaires many times consulting 
with senior  and our team  members.  The main  purpose  of analyzing  data is to obtained  useable  and useful 
information.  Questionnaires  was made  to analyze  the each of the response  of the individual  so data were 
analyzed  by using  frequency  distribution  and visual  technique  based  upon  the behavior  classification  and 
draw inference. We used statistical analysis (regression) to relate dependent and independent  variable.