OCEM  Journal  of 
Management,  Technology  & Social  Sciences  68  Original Article  
Student Satisfaction at Secondary Level in Oxford  
College of Engineering & Management  
 
Dr. Basanta Prasad Adhikari  
(Research Head and International Relationship Officer)  
Email: adhikari_bp@ymail.com  
 
Abstract  
The objective of this study was to examine the student satisfaction level at grade 11 and grade 12 in 
Oxford College of Engineering and Management (OCEM).  Quantitative  methodology  approach  
along with the survey study was applied in this study. The survey questionnaire was used as research 
instrument to collect data in this study. The target population was four hundred and fourty and the 
sampled population was two hundred and four. There were two hundred and four (N= 204) respondents 
where the boy’s population was 55.88 % and girl’s population was 41.11 %. The response rate was 
94.22%. The Cronbach’s Alpha was calculated to find the reliability of the data. Independent sample t -
test was used to find the differences  between  the male  and female  students’  intention  to recommand  for 
the enrollment of their kith and kin at OCEM. The previ ous studies reveal that students’ satisfaction at 
the secondary level schools were embedded in the factor of quality of education, school administrative 
factor, managerial factor, psysical factor and school location. The results show that lifelong academic  
skills, standard and qualified lecturers, student centered activities, strong faculty management,  proactice 
faculty support, better college environment and facilities, punctuality of the transfort facilities, strong 
security  environment,  better  lab facili ties and advanced  library  facilities,  advanced  physical  facilities  and 
college infrastructure facilities were extracted as the key subscales of the analysis section. The results 
show that there was significant relationship between existing students’ recomm endation to enrol and 
student centered activities, advanced lab and library facilities and college facilities at Oxford College of 
Engineering  and Management  (OCEM)  at Nawalpur  of Nepal  (p < 0.05,  B = -.342,  B = -.309.  B = -.398). 
The implications of findings will be beneficial for college principals, school leaders, academicians, 
Head of Department, college promoters to formulate student centered strategies. It will be also useful to 
college  policy  makers  to formulate  new student -centered  strategy  to motivate  students  for the enrolment. 
In generalizing  the results  of the present  study,  there  is some  cause  for concern  due to a sampling  method 
and representativeness of the boys and girls  
 
Keyword: student satisfaction, quality  of education, school administrative factor, managerial factor, 
physical factor and school location.  
 
1. Introduction  
Student satisfaction is a debatable issue in the global context because the higher education market is 
strongly affected by internal and exte rnal environment of the colleges. This has produced a competitive 
market for educational services and increased competition to attract students (Nogueira, 2018). As