OCEM Journal of  
Management,  Technology  & Social  Sciences  99  the present model shows a decrease in deviance in prediction from the base model because the value of 
Chi-Square  is positive.  So this model  is better  fit compared  to the base model.  The model  summary  table 
shows the values of -2Log Likeh ood, Cox and Snell R2 and Nagelkerke R2  [4.90 % (Cox and Snell)  and 
10.70 % (Nagelkerke)] variance of the model was explained by the independent variables. Hosmer and 
Lemeshow Test shows that p = 0.268 > 0.05 is insignificant which is good to support for the regression 
model fit. Out of 185 customers who chose the first option [satisfied with the price of Buddha Air],  
this model predicts 168 customers showed their satisfaction for the ticket price of Buddha Airs and 17 
customers showed their dissatisfacti on for the price of Airline services. Thus, it predicts that customers 
who showed  their satisfaction  for the price  of tickets  with 100.00  percent  accuracy.  The results  show  that 
the overall percentage of correct prediction is 90.8 percent. The results show  that there was significant 
association between fluctuations in tickets’ price and customers’ satisfaction (p < 0.05 with odds ratio  = 
.474 <1, B = -747 < 0) indicating a negative impact of ticket price on customers’ satisfaction in Buddha 
Air Service. Whe n the independent variable fluctuation in tickets’ price increases one unit, customer 
satisfaction  can be predicated  to decrease  around  0.474  times  if other  variables  are controlled.  This study 
has supported  the previous  study  of Aligholi  (2014)  because  this study  has also highlighted  that fluctuation 
in tickets’  price  made  customers  dissatisfied  which  is also highlighted  by this study.  
 
3.3. Service  quality  of the employees  of Buddha  Airs 
The third research instrument intended to examine the association between employees behaviour and 
customers  satisfaction  in Buddha  Air. The third  survey  instrument  was embedded  in the polite  behaviour 
of Air hostess,  employees’  politeness  to customers,  motivation  of employees  to deliver  service  to customers, 
services  for entertainment,  use of new technological  tools,  cooperative  behaviour  of employees,  satisfaction 
of the services delivered by Buddha Airs, realization of mistakes by employees, service of ATM around 
Airline counters, fulfillment of employees’ responsibilities on time, customer centered employees and 
polite behaviour of  pilots.  
Table  7. Varimax  rotated  principal  components  matrix  on the employees’ 
behaviour  on the customers  satisfaction  (N = 185).  
Variables  Loadings  
1 2 3 4 
SERVICE QUALITY AND EMPLOYEE’S BEHAVIOUR      
Employees are polite in the area of Buddha Air’ counter  .841    
Employees are highly interested to provide services to customers.  .667    
The service quality of Buddha Airs is satisfactory.  .620    
EMPLOYEE MISTAKES AND ENTERTAINMENT      
There are entertainment services in Buddha Airs.   .721   
Employees of Buddha Airs realize their mistakes while dealing.   .630   
Employees are customer centred in Buddha Airs.   .594   
PILOT BEHAVIOUR AND EMPLOYEE COOPERATION      
Buddha Air has used new technological tools in its services.    .831  
The employees of Buddha Airs are cooperative and helpful.    .603  
The pilots are polite while dealing with customers.    .501