OCEM  Journal  of 
Management,  Technology  & Social  Sciences  46  3. Methods  
To answer the research questions mentioned in the section 2, a large -scale survey study was conducted 
in OCEM Gaindakot -2, Nawalpur. OCEM  instead of the whole colleges of Nawalpur was chosen as  
the collage of investigation as the authority for students’ preference to recommend their kith and kin 
with the regional college not with the national colleges. Given the fact, reginal facilities on  academic, 
managerial, psychical and infrastructure condition differ and that these differences might influence 
students’ preferences to recommend their kith and kin, I opted to include only Signal College  (OCEM).  
 
3.1 Sample  
Given the differences in enrolment, duration of the study and orientation of the aforementioned  students 
satisfaction for academic, managerial, psychical and infrastructure facilities, I opted to investigate 
students  experiences,  satisfaction  and preferenc e for the recommendation  to their kith and kin in a signal 
program (BBA). As the majority of the students enrolled in four years (BBA program affiliated with 
Pokhara University), I conducted my study in this  program.  
For the purpose of the current study, it was necessary to reach both students who have just commenced 
their BBA  and those  students  who already  completed  their BBA  at OCEM.  All the students  from  different 
semesters were invited to participate in the study by providing contact information on students who had 
successfully completed their BBA from OCEM. In total students of eight different semesters agreed to 
participate  in the study.  Enrollment  in these semesters  was 35 to 40 students  in each semester.  Participants 
per semester  (first,  second,  third,  fourth,  fifth,  sixth,  seventh  and eighth)  ranged  30 to 45 students.  Out of 
two hundred  and thirteen  respondents,  fifty seven  (n=57)  respondent  was male  and one hundred  and eighty 
(n=180)  respondents  was female.  The response  rate of the survey  instrument  was 94.8 % [237/250 x100]. 
The Cronbach’s Alpha was computed to check the reliability of the data (see in the Table  2). 
 
3.2 Instruments  
Information on the per sonal variables gender, location of the college, family monthly incomes of the 
students and religions was obtained through the student administration of the participating collage 
(OCEM). To gain insight into students’ satisfaction and preference for existi ng students and graduated 
students, the seven questionnaires were developed. Existing literature was reviewed for students;’ 
satisfaction and preference to recommend their kith and kin. To design the instrument as broadly as 
possible,  no single  model  or theoretical  framework  (students  satisfaction,  expectations,  perceive  quality, 
student loyalty) was used as reference. Instead all possible motives were inventoried. The resulting 
instrument was piloted with tem graduated BBA students who did not study anym ore to check our face - 
validity  and possible  missing  motives  of students.  For each motive,  respondents  had to indicate  on a five- 
point scale whether the reason had ranged from completely disagreed to completely  agree.  
 
3.3. Analysis  
Previous study has som etimes relied heavily on single -item indicators of students’ satisfaction and 
preference  or raw frequency  counts  of motives.  This approach  maximizes  the possibility  of measurement 
error  (e.g. Watt &Richardson,  2007).  To construct  this caveat,  I choose  to work  with more  encompassing