OCEM  Journal  of 
Management,  Technology  & Social  Sciences  10  Left Behind Girls  Consequences  development of the LBGs all over the world. The LBGs who lived in incomplete family environment 
were  easily  neglected,  received  inadequate  care and suffered  from  the worse  school  performance;  physical 
health/physical  well-being;  higher  risk of injury,  higher  proportion  of poor behaviour  and lower  nutrition 
(Adhikari,  2018;  Cohen,  1996).  The LBGs  who were  cared  by younger  caretakers  had been  suffered  from 
behaviour of excessive alcohol drinking; smoking; internet addiction and the problem of mental healt h 
in the mother -migrant households (Pescaru, 2015). They were also found of lower socioeconomic  status 
and had more psychological problems in mother -migrant households than father -migrant households 
(Lam & Yeoh, 2016). More psychosocial problem was found i n adolescence LBGs older than the age of 
14 (Adhikari, 2018).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Theoretical Framework of the Proposed Study (c.f. Cortes, 2015)  
2.2 Empirical literature on mother roles for LB Gs 
Cortes (2015) found that there was larger negative consequence to LBGs in mother -migrant households 
than the father -migration households. The same study further summarized that school enrolment of    
the younger girls had been less likely affected by ho usehold economic resources, but they had been 
negatively  affected  by their MIM  in Philippines.  Again,  Moran -Taylor  (2008)  noted  that the larger  negative 
consequence of MIM was found in girls than in boys for their educational, health and psychosocial 
devel opment in Guatemala. The same study further disclosed that immediate parents of LBGs were 
unable to maintain a watchful eye and strong parental control over them which resulted lower level of 
child  development.  Many  LBGs  were  found  promiscuous  in mother -migration  households  which  had led 
to an increase  in single  motherhood  between  the age of 12 and 13 (c.f., Gajos  & Beaver,  2015).  Similarly, 
Grimes (1998) noted that the increase in the number of single mother was one of the most negative 
consequenc es of MIM  in Putla  for the overall  development  of the LBGs.  Cortes  (2015)  disclosed  that the 
LBGs  were  found  more  likely  to involve  in unprotected  sex and excessive  alcoholic  habit  and sometimes 
involved in prostitution for the pocket money and foods in mother -migrant households which had 
resulted  unwanted  social  practice  and directly  affected  for their educational  outcomes  (Pfeiffer  Tailor,  Mother International Migration  
Roles of 
Mothers to LBGS  Psychosocial 
Development 
of the LBGS  Development of 
Health and Well 
Beings of the LBGS  Development of 
Education of 
the LBGS