OCEM Journal of  
Management,  Technology  & Social  Sciences  81  The Impact of Information Technology to Make 
Rational Strategic Decision Making in 
Educational Institutions in Nepal  
Professor, Er. Hari Bhandari  
Principal, Oxford College of Engineering and Management, Nawalpur, Nepal 
hari_ocem@hotmail.com  
Abstract  
The primary objective of this study was to examine the impact of information factors for the rational 
strategic decision making (RSDM) when information is accessed using technology. In educational 
institutions. The previous studies reveal that time content, form of information and technology were 
found influential factors for the appropriate rational strate gic decision making. The quantitative method 
was applied along with the survey study was used as a research method to collect data where the 
administered  survey   structured questionnaire was used as a research instrument to collect data. In   
the first s tage, fourteen private and 10 public colleges were selected purposively and then twenty four 
respondents were selected randomly from the twenty -four colleges. The results show that the  proportion 
of male and female respondent was 79.20 % and 20.8 % respect ively and the proportion of private    
and public college was 58.33 % and 41.66 % respectively. The results indicate that the values of the 
subscales were found lower than the average mean value signifying the less importance of information 
factors to make  the RSDM. Additionally, the results also highlighted that there was an insignificant 
association  between  the value  of information,  the purity  of information,  the efficiency  of information,  the 
details  of information,  the quality  of information,  the advanced  technology  adopted  human  resources,  the 
performance of information, the formats of information, the perfectness of the information and the role 
of information in RSDM (p > 0.05). The results further show that the mean score of the private college 
of the subscale ‘purity of the information’ was statistically significantly higher from that of the public 
college. Similarly, the mean score of the private college for the subscale quality of information was 
statistically  significantly  lower  from  that of the public  college  signifying  that private  college  did not give 
more  importance  to quality  of information  for the impact  of RSDM.  The implication  of this study  will be 
beneficial  for the college  executives  and principals  to understand  the role of information  to make  RSDM 
in educational institutions. The limitation of this research is very limited number of survey respondents 
which has affected the results of the Binary Logistic Regression  Analysis.  
 
Keywords: Information, rational strategic decision making, subscales, principal components, technology.  
 
Introduction  
An organization behaves as an open system that takes in information, material and energy from the 
external environment, transforms these resources i nto knowledge, processes and structures that  
produce services which are then consumed somewhere in the world. An educational organization uses 
information strategically to make sense of changes in its setting to create new knowledge for  innovation