OCEM  Journal  of 
Management,  Technology  & Social  Sciences  132  significant as p -value (0 .00) is less than level of significance level (α = 5 % ).  
4. Discussion  
The results show that using correlation and regression via SPSS is useful for the novice researchers. The 
results also highlighted that the using correlation and regression is embedded on ly in quantitative data. In 
practical  life researcher  can find many  quantitative  variables  which  are related  to each other,  their degree  of 
relationship  can be measured  by correlation  and how two or more  variables  are related  can be described  by 
an equation, e.g. an equation is regression equation. Manually, the calculation of regression equation and 
correlation is very complex for big data ,so it requires software via SPSS which is very easy and faster. 
The results also highlighted that correlation and regression are two key data analysis tools in quantitative 
approach  because  Logistic  Regression  Model  helps  in predicting  probability  of occurrences  of y dependent 
variable to x independent variables, when the dependent variable is dichotomous. Researchers can use 
dichotomous variables, e.g. health status(sick or not), employment status( employed or unemployed), 
labour force participation (part or not part of the labour force) and family planning method (which type). 
The results  also summarized  that Logistic  Regression  Analysis  is more  flexible  method  because  it makes  no 
assumptions  about  the nature  of relationship  between  independent  and dependent  variables.  The limitations 
of this study are the secondary data analysis, limited research materials, limited knowledge on statistical 
tools, limited literature review, limited areas of research knowledge, limited knowledge on correlation and 
regression  analysis.  Due to these  limitations  of this research , the current  research  cannot  give the guarantee 
for the radiality and validity of data and findings. It is recommended that future research has to focus on 
rich literature  review  and primary  research  on how correlation  and regression  can be effectively  use in data 
analysis  processes  of quantitative  methods.  It is also recommended  that a details  steps  of correlation  and 
regression analysis has to focus in future research study to make helpful for the novice researchers.  
 
Reference  
Arkkelin, D. (2014). Using Spss to Understand Research and Data Analysis. Valparaiso: Valparaiso  
University.  
Dendukuri, N., & Reinhold, C. (2005). Correlation and Regression. American journal of Roentgenology , 
3-18. 
Draper, N. R., & Smith, H. (2011). Applied Regression Analysis. Noida: Wiley India Pvt. Ltd.  
Gujarati, D. N., C, P. D., & Gunasekar, S. (2015). Basic Econometrics. New Delhi: McGraw Hill 
Education (india) Pvt. Ltd.  
Gupta, S. C., & Kapoor, V. K. (2014). Fundamentals of Mathematical Statistic s. Mumbai: Sultan Chand 
and Sons.  
Magnello, M. (2009). Karl Pearson and the Establishment of Mathematical Statistics. MInternational  
Statistical Review / Revue Internationale De Statistique , 3-29. 
Mehta, B. C., & Kapoor, K. (2005). Fundamentals of Economet rics. Mumbai: Himalaya Publishing 
House.  
Montgomery, D. (1982). Introduction to linear Regression Analysis. New Delhi: Willy.  
Shrestha, M. P., Khanal, P. R., & Kafle, S. C. (2014). Business Statistics. Kathmandu: Sabdartha 
Publication.  
Sthapit,  A. B., Yadav,  R. P., Khanal,  S. P., & Dangol,  P. M. (2017).  Fundamentals  of Statistics.  Kathmandu: 
Asmita  Publication.  
Zaid Mohamed Ahmed, (2015). Correlation and Regression Analysis; Statistical Economic and Research  
and Training Centre for islamic countries.