OCEM Journal of  
Management,  Technology  & Social  Sciences  25  
 7  
 6  1 
  259, [PERCENTAGE]   
 
  54, [PERCENTAGE]   2 
 1  
 5  
  801, [PERCENTAGE]   
  352, [PERCENTAGE]   3 
 4 4 
  410, [PERCENTAGE]   
 2  
 3 606, [PERCENTAGE]  5 
  506, [PERCENTAGE]   
 
6 Gamifying learning experiences: 
Practical  implications  and outcomes  
 
Current status, opportunities and 
challenges  of augmented  reality  in 
education  
Flipping the classroom and 
instructional technology integration in 
a college -level information  
Technological pedagogical content 
knowledge  – a review  of the literature  
 
Assessing the effects of gamification 
in the classroom  
 
Putting  twitter  to the test: Assessing 
outcomes  for student  collaboration, 
engagement and  success  based on per five selected journals and per year among the five selected journals. The results section 
further explores the details analysis of 7 highly cited articles base d on the publication years, citation 
counts and the percentage covered by each article in each Pie -chart. The fourth part of the current 
dissertation  introduces  the summary  and conclusion  of the whole  part of this study  which  also compares, 
contrasts and s ynthesizes the key findings of the results section. The purpose of the current research 
design was to analyze the most cited seven articles per five selected journals and per year among the 
five selected journals between 2013 to 2017. The contents for the analysis are years of publication and 
citation counts of the most cited seven published articles among forty one published papers. First of  all, 
five journals entitled the CE, CAL, BJET, IEEE TLT and JETRD were selected. The number of citation 
counts might  be more in the forthcoming day, but the current researcher does not consider the citation 
counts after 20th May 2018. In the current study, the research topics of each published article have been 
embedded  in different  subjects  and different  areas  of the educational  and technology  research  (see in the 
Appendix  1 and 2). Twenty -five most  cited  published  papers  were  derived  from  per five selected  journals. 
Similarly,  another  twenty -five most  cited  published  papers  per year among  five selected  journals  between 
2013  to 2017  were  selected.  The selected  articles  mentioned  in the Table  1 and 2 are embedded  in the total 
citation counts of each published article, published years and the name of five selected journals. There 
are five rows and five columns in th e Table 1 and 2 where forty -one published articles are mentioned as 
well. Only the fortyone published articles are mentioned in the Table 1 and  2. 
 
3. Results  
3.1 Analysis of Seven the Most Cited Articles among Horty one highly Cited  articles  
The seven the most c ited articles among the forty -one the most cited published articles according to per 
five selected journals and per year five selected journals were selected for the further analysis but other 
most cited articles were excluded in the analysis The analysis has mainly focused on the citation  counts, 
published years and the five selected journals among fourty one most cited published  articles.  
Detailed analysis of the seven most cited published articles per journal and per year  
Figure 1. Seven most cited published articles among five selected journ als