OCEM  Journal  of 
Management,  Technology  & Social  Sciences  32  A Review of Literature on 
MBA -Expectations and Reality  
Mr. Narayan  Sapkota1 Dr. Basanta Prasad  Adhikari2 
Research Head and International Relationship Officer  
Abstract  
The objective of this this review was to understand the existing knowledge on the current program of Master  
of Business Administration (MBA) in the global context. The next objective was to find out the knowledge gap 
between the existing knowledge and skills delived by the MBA program and the required skills demanding by 
the global industries and companies. The research method of this study was based on reviewing method. The 
reviewed journ al articles were entitled “the Journal of Higher Education  Policy and Management, Academy  
of Management Learning & Education, Journal of Applied Psychology, Journal of Leadership Education, 
Academy  of Management  Review,  Journal  of Business  Ethics,  Journal  of Management  Development,  Consulting 
Psychology Journal: Practice and Research, Innovative Marketing, Women in Management Review, Journal of 
Public Policy & Marketing, Nursing Management (Springhouse) and Human Resource Development Review” 
The results highlighted that more than ten (n=20) articles were reviewed to understand the knowledge gap 
between  the delivered  skills  by the current  MBA  and require  managerial  skills  demanding  by the global  industries 
and companies. The reviewed results highlighted that MBA programs need to set of pedagogical practices to 
teach  leadership  in a global  context  that value  awareness,  reflection  and development  of the leadership  skills.  The 
results  also indicate  that many  graduate  students  from reputed  business  schools  were unable  to shows  integrative 
thinking  as compare  to undergraduates  from other  domains.  The results  also confirmed  that most of the business 
courses and schools were being criticized to make money for the University and their professors  and there was 
a little relevance of the output on career development and managerial practices. The results  also highlighted 
that students were not aware of what they needed to do after complication of the MBA Degree and they lack  
of technical and human skills which made them confused toward their conceptual skills to use at appropriate 
time during their professional work. In addition, the results also show that the scholars were not happy with the 
pedagogy of delivering the MBA degree skills. The implication of this study will be useful to academicians and 
MBA course designers to reform the existing courses to meet the current global demand of leader’s skills to 
employ  at global  companies  and industries  in future.  The limitation  of this study  was the reviewed  of the imitated 
number of journal articles which does not guarantee for the generalization of the findings in the similar context 
in future. It is recommended that the future research needs to focus to review the most cited published journal 
articles  to deepen  the knowledge  gap between  the existing  managerial  skills  delivered  by the MBA  program  and 
the required skills demanding by the global companies and industries.  
Keywords: Master of business Administration, review, knowledge gap, MBA cours e, global required 
leadership skills.  
1. Introduction  
Master of Business Administration (MBA) is one of the most popular subjects in the field of business and 
management. Moreover, students of other disciplines, e.g., Engineering, Medical Science, Technology are 
also showing  their interest  to get the fusion  degree.  Additionally,  many  universities  are introducing  the dual 
degree combing MBA and other disciplines. In addition, (Dubas, 2017) found that MBA program plays a 
vital role to minimize the gap between the companies’ expectations and managerial skills delivered to the