OCEM Journal of  
Management,  Technology  & Social  Sciences  59  1.2 Management of customers  
While  the literature  on customer  perceptions  of service  and its impact  on food store  shopping  experiences  
is sparse, empirical work drawing comparisons between specialty and department store customers 
provides guidance on the strength and direction of these characteristics to store support. Specialty store 
shoppers  view  service  to be one of the most  important  determinants  of store  support.  Sales  associates  play 
a pivotal  role in a customer  service  situation,  with the most  important  attributes  being  store  clerk  attitude 
and treatment of customers (Kotler &  Armstrong, 2012). In a study of customer service in specialty and 
conventional grocery stores, customer perceptions of service were found to vary greatly. It was also 
found that customers who shop small grocery chains placed greater importance on service quality than 
patrons of large grocery store chains (Kirkup et al.,  2004).  
 
1.3 Time  Management  
Time management to check out the products is another influencing factor of customer satisfaction. Study 
in recent  years  have pointed  to the checkout  stand  as a massive  headache  for retail  customers.  As shopping 
has migrated online, where a few clicks are all it takes to complete a transaction, consumers have grown 
less and less patient with a process that has remained much the same for years. Limitations in techn ology 
and the supermarket format have long prevented grocers from speeding up their checkouts. Customers are 
very busy today  and do not want  to spend  more  time in shopping  goods  and services  (Cheriyah  et al., 2013). 
The research study of Cheriyah, Sulistyowati, Cornelia & Viverita (2013) found that customer satisfaction 
is significantly positively associated with waiting time in the checkout process Super Market  Stores.  
BBSM  is the leading  brand  for retail  superstore  in Nepal.  It has all together  16 branches  all over the Nepal 
and it is on process of expansion to other big cities too. There are many customers who go shopping    
in BhatBhateni Super Market (BBSM). Customer can get varieties of products from FMCG goods to 
luxurious goods below a single roof. Almost 120000 varieties of goods are available there. The BBSM 
branch of Chitwan was opened on Baisakh 11, 2073. The flow of customer to BBSM, Chitwan are  high 
but the sales of the store is not as expected as the flow of  customers.  
 
1.4 Purpose of the  study  
The primary purpose of the study was to examine the customers' satisfaction with BBSM located at 
Narayanagarh Chitwan. The specific purposes of this study w ere to examine the opinions and thoughts 
of regular customers for the cost of products, quality of goods; customer management approach and 
time management to customers. The secondary objective of this research is to measure the consumer 
satisfaction level towards BBSM at Chitwan District.  
 
1.5 Statement of the  problem  
The customers are attracted to visit the store, but sales figure is not high as compared to the volume of 
customer flow (Kotler & Amstrong, 2012). Many people visit there for sightseeing and for fun. It is a big 
question for BBSM to have loyal customers. If the BBSM want loyal customers, the customers must be 
satisfied,  and it should  understand  customers’  need.  Keeping  in view  of the above,  the main  problem  of the 
study  is: Are customers  satisfied  by the services  provided  by the BBSM  in the selected  districts  of Nepal.