OCEM  Journal  of 
Management,  Technology  & Social  Sciences  24  rooted in theoretical outlooks, methodological developments and high quality observed studies that 
signify  whether  and how applications  of educational  systems,  tools,  and resources  guide  to developments 
in both formal and informal education at all sectors (Dalby & Swan, 2018). The second journal was 
JCE that is helpful to increase knowledge and understanding of different ways by using computer 
technologies in teaching and l earning activities. More importantly, the journal of JCE was also the main 
source of educational technology research. Additionally, it primarily focuses on digital technology in 
order to enhance educational practices through the publication of high quality  research materials which 
eventually  increases  the level  of the theory  and practice  of education.  It is significantly  noted  that JCE has 
highly  demanded  articles  because  it has revolutionary  increased  the importance  of research  on Computer 
and Education all over the world (Robins,  2015).  
The third journal was JCAL which is connected for using of computers to support the education of 
people, to describe the application of computers and also includes the instructions for computer -based 
learning activities. Moreover, the meaning of JCAL is defined as an interactive instructional technique 
where a computer can remarkably present the instructional materials for teaching and learning activities 
(Arteaga Sánchez, Cortijo & Javed, 2014: De W itte, Haelermans & Rogge, 2014).  
The fourth  journal  was IEEE  TLT which  is connected  for using  technology  in teaching  and learning  activities 
to improve the outcomes of education. In more details, learning technologies have been deeply rooted in 
computer -based learning method which is supported by the application of technology for the improvement 
of teaching methods (Buckley & Doyle, 2017). Furthermore,    computer -based learning is directly linked    
in using the multimedia mater ials and also using of different networks and communication systems to assist 
learning  activities  (Innovation  in Technologies  for Educational  Computing,  2016).  The words  equality , future , 
mobile , motivation , social , updates , assessments , global , and convenience have been used for the importance 
of learning  technologies  in educational  sectors.  The fifth journal  was the JETRD.  The meaning  of educational 
technology  research  and development  is understood  by a single  scholarly  journal  focusing  entirely  on research 
and development in educational technology. The next origin of education technology has been anticipated 
among working professionals, for example, technology coordinators, instructional designers, school library 
media specialists, training director s, and technology teachers (Januszewski,  2001).  
 
2. Research  Method  
The purpose of the current study is to compare and contrast the seven most cited published articles 
among the forty -one highly cited articles per five selected journals and per year among the  five selected 
journals (See in Appendix 1). The current research method has mainly focused on the topics of per five 
selected  journals  and per year among  the five selected  journals  of the forty -one published  papers  between 
2013 to 2017 in the current study. The main research method is embedded in the content analysis of the 
seven most cited published papers. The seven most cited articles among 41 articles are presented in pie - 
chart  mentioning  their citation  counts,  published  year of the articles  and the percentage  of each article  in 
the given pie -chart. Furthermore, forty -one articles are also mentioned in the Table 1 to make analysis 
section clear. Chapter two introduces the research design of the current study where the content analysis 
focuses on analy zing the data. It also explores the methods of data analysis and key contents for the 
further analysis.  
The research  design  also focuses  on different  issues  of data analysis.  Chapter  three  introduces  the results 
of the current study and further identifies and analyzes the key characteristics of the highly cited  articles