OCEM Journal of  
Management,  Technology  & Social  Sciences  107  An Elaborative Study in the Market Potential of Home 
Automation and Security Products: A Case Study of 
Chitwan District in Urban Nepal  
Mr. Samir Raj Bhandari  
Oxford College of Engineering and Management 
E-mail: Vertical16horizon@gmail.com  
 
Abstract  
The objective of this study was to make people aware of automation products and its importance in the 
field of human  convenience  and security  and also to focus  on security,  energy  management  and comfort. 
Quantitative research approach was used in this study. The research was conducted in two phases, i.e. 
collective interview with the guardians of the students by distributing the questionnaire to the students 
and providing them necessary guidance t o fill the questionnaire and field visit to different institutes, 
banks, homes, hotels, industries in the year of 2018. The sampling technique was Random, Quota and 
convenience sampling. The results show that around 78.2 % families had Wi -Fi connection in their 
homes where  61.3 % was male and 37.1 %  was female. Out of 124 members participating in  research,  
48.4 % of respondent was graduate student. The results show that approximately 96.8 % respondents 
show  their interest  in technology  product.  Among  them  60.2 % respondents  were  between  the age group 
of 30-50. The results  also show  that   90.3 % of family  had more  than three  family  members  where  
27.3 % respondents had monthly income above Nepalese Currency 90,000. About 51.7 % respondents 
perceived that security was the key feature of automation products whereas only 17.7 % responded that 
energy management and comfort were major issues for automat ion. The results importantly highlighted 
that approximately, 82.3% were familiar with home automation and 89.5 % respondents trusted in home 
automation products. The results also show that 84.7 % people showed interest in keeping home automation 
products. The empirical studies reveal that home automation is the most customized and reliable automation 
services. This study has tried to relate the advancement in the field of automation and the market potential of 
those products in Chitwan, Nepal. The implicati on of this research will be beneficial to city people who have 
the lack of deep knowledge of automation products and uses. The limitation of this study is the concern of 
proportion of the sample population of male and female participants.  
Keywords: Home Automation, Security, Comfort, Smart Home  
 
Introduction  
Background of Study  
Home  automation  is derived  from  two different  words  “Home”  and the “Automation”  where  home  is the 
place  where  we live inside  the four walls  and “Automation”  means  the act of implementing  the controls  of 
equipment  with advance  tech usually  involving  electronic  hardware  (Asadullah  & Raza,  2016).  Therefore 
“Home automation” gives the sense of smart house. All home automation system controls the lighting, 
temperature,  comfort,  entertainment  and other  appliance  inside  house  and with essential  features  about