OCEM Journal of  
Management,  Technology  & Social  Sciences  91  their opinions  on the role of information  is not important  to make  rational  strategic  decision  making.  Thus, 
it predicts school leaders who showed their opinion for the importance of information to make rational 
strategic decision in the educational institutions with 100% perce nt accuracy and predicts 100 percent 
accuracy of school leaders who said the role of information to make rational strategic decision is not 
important in educational institutions. The results further show that the overall percentage of correctness 
of observ ed data was 100 %. The results  show  that there  was a insignificant  association  between  the value 
of information, the purity of information, the efficiency of information, the details of information, the 
quality  of information,  the advanced  technology  adapt ed human  resource,  the performance  of information, 
the formats of information and the perfectness of the information (p > 0.05) and the rational strategic 
decision  making  in the wholesome  analysis.  Due to the insignificant  association  between  the independent 
variables and independent variable, further analysis of the independent variables was  ignored.  
 
5. Discussion and  conclusions  
The primary objective of this study was to examine the association between the impact of information 
factors for rational strategic decision making in educational institutions. To fulfil this objective results 
show  that mean  score  of the private  colleges  of the second  subscale  purity  of the information  is statistically 
significantly higher than that of the public colleges. Similarly,  the mean score of the private colleges   
of the fifth subscale quality of information was statistically significantly lower than that of the public 
college signifying that private college does not give importance to quality of information for the impact 
of RSDM.  The results  of the nine subscales  highlight  that details  of information  have  covered  the greatest 
value of mean and the efficiency of information has the lowest mean value signifying that educational 
executives  do not give more  attention  for the positive  role of information  factors  to make  rational  strategic 
decision in educational institution s. Additionally, the results also show that the low mean value of each 
subscale is lower than the average mean value (3) signifying that there is no impact of information to 
make rational strategic decision is in educational institutions. The results confi rmed that there was an 
insignificant  association  between  the factors  value  of information,  the purity  of information,  the efficiency 
of information, the details of information, the quality of information, the advanced technology adapted 
human resource, the  performance of information, the formats of information and the perfectness of the 
information (p > 0.05) and the rational strategic decision making in the wholesome analysis. This study 
did not support  the studies  of Frishammar  (2003);  Citroen  (2011)  and Szymaniec -Mlicka  (2017)  because 
all three  previous  studies  had concluded  that there  was significant  association  between  the time,  content, 
form and technology factors of information and the rational strategic decision making. The results are 
somehow  surpri sing because  not a single  independent  variable  had significant  association  with the impact 
of information in rational decision making. The results of the study provide new information on the 
specific knowledge of information on how to improve decision -maki ng efficiency and effectiveness at 
each stage of the strategic decision process in educational  institutions.  
The limitations  of this study  are very small  sample  size and limited  number  of the survey  instruments  used 
in this study.  The findings  of this study  cannot  be generalized  in the similar  situations  because  the number 
of sample size was very small which would be the possible reason for insignificant association between 
the independent  variables  and dependent  variable.  The implication  of this study  will be beneficial  for the