OCEM  Journal  of 
Management,  Technology  & Social  Sciences  54  5. Discussion &  Conclusion  
The purpose of the current study was to examine the students’ preference to recommend their kith and 
kin to enrol  and to continue  their higher  degree  at OCEM  for the further  study.  The quantitative  research 
approach along with the survey method was used to  examine the opinions, experiences and ideas of 
students on their preference to recommend and to continue their further education at OCEM. The study 
was conducted  inside  the OCEM  premises  which  had followed  full criteria  of research  ethics.  This study 
had clearly defined purpose and common concepts. The research procedure was described in sufficient 
detail to permit another research to repeat the research for further advancement, keeping the continuity 
of what  has already  been  attained,  reported  with complete  frankness,  clear  flaws  in procedural  design  and 
has estimated the effects of all issues mentioned earlier paragraph upon the findings. The data analysis 
was adequate to reveal its significance and the methods of analysis was appropriate, the valid ity and 
reliability  of the data were  checked  with the minimum  value  of Cronbach’s  Alpha  (0.60)  and the research 
design was carefully planned to yield results that were as objectives as possible. The Factor Reduction 
Model of Principal Component Analysis wa s used to find the relationship among different variables of 
each instrument.  
The data analysis  was based  on descriptive  statistics  model  where  mean,  Standard  Deviation,  Independent 
Sample t-Test of two different groups and Chi -Square Test were computed to  find the association 
between gender and students’ preference to recommend and to continue student’s preference for the 
further education at OCEM. The Binary Logistic Regression of PCA was applied to find the association 
between the dependent and independe nt variables. The results show that there is significant relationship 
between emphasis on quality of extracurricular activities, strict student development schedule, better 
teaching  environment,  nature  of principal,  emphasis  on punctuality,  requirement  of high quality,  physical 
facilities,  teaching  resources  and health  and safety  issues  (p<0.05,  B = -.500.  -.449,  -.429,  -.490,  -.404,  
-.428, -.904, -.410, -.295 and -.931) respectively. This study reveals that there was association between 
students’ preferenc e to recommend to their kith and kin to join at OCEM and strict student career 
development schedule (p< 0.05 with odds ratio 1.625, B = .486) in the Wholesome Analysis of Binary 
Logistic Regression Model indicating the positive impact on the schedule of th e internal examination, 
grooming the student’s career path and availability of interactive learning environment at OCEM. 
Similarly, the results further confirm that there was significant association between the male and female 
for the recommendation to the ir kith and kin to join at OCEM and physical facilities of OCEM (p< 0.05 
with odds ratio 2.822, B = 1.038) in the Wholesome Analysis of Binary Logistic Regression Model 
indicating the positive impact on the availability of books for the study and the comfo rtable transport 
system,  management  of the hygienic  canteen  and management  of the better  lab facilities.  The implication 
of this study  would  be useful  for the college  administration  to formulate  new student  admission  strategies 
and to reform different internal student centered  policies.  
 
Acknowledgement  
The author thanks all the Department Heads, lecturers and students of Oxford College of Engineering 
and Management [OCEM] Gaindakot -2 Nawalpur of Nepal who made substan tial contributions to this 
work. This work was fully funded by the OCEM. The supporting roles and contributions of Professor