OCEM  Journal  of 
Management,  Technology  & Social  Sciences  58  
   CUSTOMER 
SATISFACTION     
Time  Customer 
Management  Quality of 
Goods  Price of Product  and subsequent  company  profits.  Customer’s  satisfaction  is now a prominent  business  performance  metric. 
Again, the customer’s satisfaction is a subjective measurement, which is rarely used in the performance 
measurement of  stakeholders . 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Factors affecting Supermarket customer satisfaction  
 
Price of the products  
Previous studies suggest that price, as a determinant element of satisfaction, is varied by super market 
store format. Price image has implications for store support, and strategic decisions related to selecting 
a target customer base and creating in -store  environments (Hassan, 2018). Grocery pricing strategy, for 
example high -low (HILO) pricing, has a direct consequence on customer purchase habit in  conventional 
grocery stores: large basket customers prefer a store which offers an everyday low -price format , while 
small basket shoppers desire a store that offers a HILO format. People who shop for economical brands 
also tend to select “economical” store formats. It was found that low prices were second most important 
store characteristic for supermarket shopp ers; store location was the first (Baltas & Papastathopoulou, 
2003).  
 
1.1 Quality of  product  
Product quality and product features were considered the most important product choice criteria in a 
study  of Greek  grocery  customers  (Baltas  and Papastathopoulou,  2003). Quality  is seen as “a satisfaction - 
maintaining factor in the supermarket sector” in that improvements in quality have a small positive 
impact on satisfaction while reductions in quality of the same magnitude have a significantly greater 
chance of redu cing satisfaction (Gómez, McLaughlin & Wittink, 2004, p. 273). For specialty store 
customers,  merchandise  quality  is an important  differentiating  factor.  Previous  study  found  the result  that, 
specialty store customers scored product quality higher in comparison to other store formats, the result 
demonstrates the importance of product quality for these customers. A similar study by King and Ring, 
1980, also found product quality to rank co nsiderably higher for specialty customers when compared to 
mass merchandiser and department store  customers.