OCEM  Journal  of 
Management,  Technology  & Social  Sciences  94  The main  office  of this airline  is based  on Jawalakhel,  Lalitpur  in Nepal.  This study  intends  to study  service 
quality, price, customer management and employees’ behaviour related to customer satisfaction (Fripp, 
2018). The primary objective of this study was to examine the customer satisfaction at Buddha Airline. 
The secondary objectives were to examine the level of customers’ satisfaction level in relation to price 
of ticket, the service quality, customer management and in relation to employee behaviour at Buddha 
Air. The previous studies reveal th at customer relationship management (CRM) had become the most 
important  influence  on customer  satisfaction.  CRM  is a strategic  approach  that is concerned  with creating 
improved shareholder value through the development of appropriate relationships with key  customers 
and customer  segments  (Boettger,  2019).  This study  is for providing  a greater  understanding  in customers’ 
needs  through  the service  quality,  price  of the products,  employees’  behaviour  and customer  relationship 
management factors. Customers are the king of every business. Satisfied customers are the important 
property of the business enterprises. Conversely, dissatisfied customers are the main reason of business 
risk (Khashab,  Gulliver  and Ayoubi,  2018).  There  is a tough  competition  among  airline  industries.  Airlines 
should satisfy customers to survive in the competitive airline market. Customer service shouldn’t just be 
a department, it should be the entire company services including the quality, brand image and customer 
loyalty  (Study  on Citilin k Airline  Passengers,  2019) . Hence,  the results  obtained  from  this research  might 
be helpful for management in making plans for the improvement in services quality. The previous study 
shows  that a majority  of the customers  were  not satisfied  with service  provided  by different  Airlines.  So, 
they are diversified  to other  means  of transportation.  Transport  and the financial  status  of the airlines  has 
seemed  in degrading  trends  (Aboulafia  & Michaels,  2018).  Therefore,  Airline  industries  have  to focus  on 
customer center  strategies.  
2. Research  Design  
This study  used quantitative  methods  design.  During  the quantitative  phase,  the survey  method  was used 
to collect data from the respondents because this method can cover the larger number of respondents 
which  ensures  the generalization  of the findings  (Kothari,  2004).  
Ethical consideration  
Ethical approval was obtained from the administration of Buddha Airs and other ethical considerations 
were also fulfilled during this study. Research Department of OCEM has p rovided permission to go to 
Buddha  Air for the data collection  along  with the acceptance  letter  of Buddha  Air to collect  data with the 
customers.  
Quantitative phase  
A questionnaire  was developed  using  the survey  instruments  from  previous  research  studies  in the area of 
customer  satisfaction.  The questionnaire  was piloted  with five pediatric  customers.  The questionnaire  was 
designed to examine the experiences and opinions of respondents and their demographic  information.  
Sampling Design  
The target populatio n of this study was five hundred (n= 500) where the sample population was one 
hundred  and eighty -five (n = 185).  Two hundred  and twenty  questionnaires  were  dispatched  but only the 
one hundred and eighty five questionnaires were returned by the returnees. The response rate was  84.09  
%. Among one hundred and eighty -five respondents, one hundred and five (n = 105) respondent was 
female population and eighty (n = 80) was male popula tion.