OCEM  Journal  of 
Management,  Technology  & Social  Sciences  60  2. Research  Methods  
The survey method was used to collect data for this study where 190 random customers of BBSW were 
selected in different opening days and time. Thus collected primary data was tested for the reliability 
using Cronbach’s Alpha, and various statistical tests were also applied. Chi -Square Test was computed 
to find the differences  of their preference  between  the male  and female  respondents.  The Binary  Logi stic 
Regression Analysis was used to find the association between the dependent variable (customer's 
satisfaction) and independent variables (price of the product, employees' behaviour with customers, 
discount rate, utilization of technology in buying and selling activities). The target population was    
one thousand (n = 1000) customers and sample population was one hundred and ninety (n = 190). The 
proportion of the sample population was [(n/N x100)] 19 %. Two hundred and ten (n=210) respondents 
were  reque sted to fill the structured  questionnaire,  but only one hundred  and ninety  (n=190)  respondents 
filled the dispatched questionnaire. The response rate was [190/210 x100] 90.47 %. Cronbach's Alpha 
was computed for reliability of collected data of this study.  The proportion of the male respondent  
was [76/190 x100] 39.12% (n =76) and the female respondent was [114/190 x100] 60. 88% (n=114) had 
participated in this study. After computing reliability test of the collected data, the data analysis was 
carried out us ing different simple statistical tools ( Cohen, Manion, Morrison, & Bell,  2011).  
 
3. Results  
Each  survey  instrument  was examined  by computing  the factor  analysis  for the classification  of variables 
or detecting structure in relationship between variables. There were methods based on the assumption 
that some variability in data was not explained by all the components. However, this study has limited 
the discussion to use of factor analysis f or the data reduction which has focused only on Principal 
Component  Model.  The analysis  has finalized  the price  of goods  at BBSM,  lower  discount  rate, discount 
rate at BBSM, facilities and quality of products, facility of furniture and waiting room, better BBSM 
employees  behaviour,  use of technology  and clean  environment,  customer -centered  services,  varieties  of 
new goods and sound customer management, f acilities and equipped technology, varieties of goods and 
quality services and customer’s facilities and management (see in the Table 2). After computing, factors 
loading of the survey instrument as the sub -scales of PCs (see in the Table  1). The analysis  is based   
on the empirical literature of customer relationship management (CRM) system for improved business 
profitability, better customer -centered decision making, enhanced customer relations, and good quality 
of services and product offerings. The und erpinning of the customer -oriented managing concept is that 
identification  and satisfaction  of customer  needs  lead to improved  customer  retention,  which  is based  on 
corporate profitability (Mithas, Krishnan & Fornell,  2005).  
 
3.1 Factors loading of variables  
The survey instrument has been divided in to four parts namely Group A, B, C and D. Each group has 
questions measured in Likert scale. Factor Reduction Model was applied to find the close relationship 
among variables within a group and to segregate variable s in respective group of each survey group. 
The groups are later given the name sub -scales. Following Table 1 shows variables of different groups 
of questionnaires with their factors loading, these factors loading were used to group the variable in to 
different subgroups.