OCEM  Journal  of 
Management,  Technology  & Social  Sciences  34  (Leonhardt, 2000:1) “ Not only that, many graduate students from reputed business schools are unable 
to shows  integrative  thinking  as compared  to undergraduates  from other  domains”  (Petriglieri,  Wood,  & 
Petriglieri, 2011, P.17). Many companies introduced the 3 -weeks basic business training programs for 
new hire. The research  study  of Shepherd,  Douglas  & Fitzsimmons  (2008)  believe  that (70 – 90) percent 
of work  place  learning  occurs  through  on-the-job experience,  informal  training,  coaching  and mentoring. 
Now, the biggest questions arise for business school is “Can they fulfill the expectations of the current 
global companies”? Business schools have to prove the answer not only for company but also need to 
assure  the students  to gain the career  success  and professional  achievement,  such as handsome  salary  and 
higher position. However, many business schools had been facing the numbers of obstacles like cost, 
faculty and staff, status -based system and status quo. Leavitt & m Leavitt (2012) argue that “business 
schools  have  been  designed  without  practical  fields”.  Moreover,  the curriculum  of MBA  and E-MBA  have 
not supported  for succeeding  in business  outcomes  because  it is focused  on the functions  of business  not 
in practical  skills  of managing  business  institutions  (Mintzberg  & Gosling,  2002).  Due to the impractical 
culture, there is little evidence to provide learning required skills. Even, the assumptions of learning are 
also incorrect and focused on external incentive such as grading impeded rather than enhance learning 
outcomes and managerial skills (S teiner & Watson, 2006). Another issue faced by the business schools is  
the method of instructions for example case method, combination of the practical knowledge to professional 
skills  but few examples  are established  business  schools  are there  much  clinical training  or learning  by doing - 
experiential learning where “concrete experience is the basis for observation and reflection” (Твердола & 
Tverdola,  2018.  p.22).  Likewise,  the selection  criteria,  GMAT  is also negatively  perceived  by the students  and 
it is believed  that managerial  success  depends  on the mind -set of the students  to be successful  entrepreneurial 
rather  than a qualified  manager  (Mintzberg  and Gosling,  2002).  
Most of the courses of business schools are being criticized to make money for the U niversity and their 
professors and there is little relevance of the output on career development and managerial practices. 
Most of the Universities perceive MBA program as “Cash cow”. The most common perspective and 
approach  to business  school  education  is supposed  to address  the issue  of relevance  most  of the common 
practices of MBA program are shared for experienced students, multidisciplinary program, how people 
think about business issues, application of learning in groups and individual’s current job a nd company. 
Business  schools  need  to think  differently  to get the success  in the competative  business  world  in future. 
It is important to convert the valuable practices into culture that helps to institutionalize it our practices. 
These practices are embed ded in the quality enhancement, attraction of high performer faculty and 
staff, research practices, systematic assessments of the products and evaluation of competitive global 
environment (Waddock & Lozano,  2013).  
 
2.2 Challenges to Develop the Business  Leader  
Developing  business  leaders  is not a simple  task. It is a human  development  process  which  is incomparable 
with the product  development  or other  tasks.  On the other  hand,  the current  market  is more  dynamic  and 
competitive. In this situation most of the business schools are struggling to cope with the challenges to 
develop global leaders. The initial challenge of developing business leader starts with the assumption 
about  learning  practices  and it raise  the few questions  like ‘how  our receptions  are perceiving  the learning 
process?’ ‘Does it fulfill the actual meaning of teaching and learning outcomes?’ ‘Does it really meet 
requirement of the external incentive likes grading and motivation?’ (Blackburn, 2011).  It is not easy  to