OCEM  Journal  of 
Management,  Technology  & Social  Sciences  86  results  show  that respondents  from  province  3 have  81.25%  and rest was from  province  Gandaki.  All the 
nine Principal  Compnents  (PCs)  were  computed  via Factor  Reduction  Model.  The analysis  has secondly 
focused on Binary Logistic Regression Model to find the association between the independent and 
dependent variables.  
 
4.1 The management of information  
During the decision -making process, there are two phases in which information is mostly collected and 
analyzed  by the board,  the preparation  phase  and the analysis  and review  phase.  The titles  of departments 
that supply this information to the board can be  Corporate Development, Strategy Development, 
Business Development, & Innovation or the Market Intelligence Group. Furthermore, most business 
units  collect  information  about  their own branches  and send summaries  of analysed  information  up to the 
executive  management.  “The  technical  possibilities  to define  queries  have  become  much  easier  so that no 
information specialists and fewer external experts are needed any more to formulate database searches” 
and also that “The interpretation of data and ensuring the relevancy of information for the executives is 
now the bottleneck, not the process of  searching”.  
 
4.1.1 Factor Dimension  Method  
Principal Component (PC) Method has extracted three different principal components from the first 
survey  instrument.  According  to the result  obtained  76.26  % total variance  explained  on RSDM,  the first 
PC accounts for 37.32 % total variance explained, the second PC accounts for 23.72 % total variance 
explained,  the third  PC accounts  for 15.16  % total variance  explained.  The PCs were  named  as values  of 
information, purity of information and efficiency of information. Again, the same method extracted two 
different principal components from the second survey instrument. According to 66.34 % total variance 
explained, the fourth PC account s for 42.62 % total variance explained, the fifth PC accounts 23.72 % 
total variance explained. The PCs were named as importance of details of information and quality of 
information. Similarly, PCM has extracted two different principal components from the forth survey 
instrument. According to 77.73 % total variance explained, the sixth PC accounts for 50.68 % total 
variance  explained,  the seventh  PC accounts  for 27.05  % total variance  explained.  The PCs were  named  as 
formats  of information  and perfectness  of information.  Again,  PCM  has extracted  two different  principal 
components from the fifth survey instrument. According to 71.61 %  total variance explained, the eighth 
PC accounts for 51.12 % total variance explained, the ninth PC accounts for 20.49 % total variance 
explained. The PCs were named as advanced technology adapted human resource and availability of 
advanced  technology.  
 
Table 1. Varimax rotated principal components matrix on time, content, form and technological 
factors of the information for the rational strategic decision making (n = 24).  
Independent variables  Loadings  
1 2 3 
VALUE OF INFORMATION     
Currency of the information is crucial for RSDM.  .953   
Relevant of the information is crucial for RSDM.  .855