OCEM Journal of  
Management,  Technology  & Social  Sciences  77  results show that out of 210, 174 students who initi ally showed their intention to recommend their kith 
and kin to enrol at OCEM, this model predicts only 118 students intended to recommend their kith and 
kin to enrol at OCEM but 46 students intended not to recommend their kith and kin to enrol at OCEM. 
The results further show that out of 36 students who did not intent to recommend their kith and kin to 
enrol at OCEM, 11 students intended to recommend their kith and kin to enrol at OCEM (see in the 
Appendix  1). Thus,  it predicts  students  who intended  to recommend  their kith and kin to enrol  at OCEM 
with 91.5 percent accuracy and also predicts that students who did not intend to recommend their kith 
and kin to enrol  at OCEM  with 35.2 percent  accuracy.  The results  also indicate  that the overall  percentage 
of correctness of observed data was 71.5 %. The results show that there is association between students’ 
intention to recommend to their kith and kin to enrol at OCEM and strict student centred activities     
(p< 0.05 with odds ratio .710, B = .352) in the wholesome analysis of Binary Logistic Regression 
Model indicating the negative experiences on their principal motivational roles, the concerned of the 
overall  coordinator  to hear their issues  in their college,  rational  role of their principal  to make  managerial 
decision and his helpful roles to them. The current study has supported the previous findings of Calder 
(2013)  because  the study  of Calder  had found  that students  were  found  dissatisfied  with the strict  student 
centred  activities  in their colleg e and did not want  to recommend  their kith and kin. Similarly,  the results 
further  reveals  that there  was significant  association  between  the recommendation  of students  to their kith 
and kin to enrol  at OCEM  and college  infrastructure  facilities  of OCEM  (p< 0.05 with odds  ratio .672,  B 
= -.398) in the wholesome analysis of Binary Logistic Regression Model indicating the negative impact 
on safety college building in all aspect, sufficient space of their classroom and equipped administrative 
builds at college . The current study has supported the previous study of Weerasinghe and Fernando 
(2018) because the study of Weerasinghe and Fernando had also found that students were dissatisfied 
with the weak  infrastructure  facilities  by which  students  did not want  to recommend  their kith and kin to 
enrol at their existing colleges.  
 
Discussion and Conclusion  
The objective of this study was to examine the students’ intention to recommend their kith and kin to 
enrol at OCEM Gaindakot -2 Nawalpur of Nepal. Quantitative research method was used along with  
the survey study to collect data on students’ intention for  the current facilities of academic, managerial, 
physical  and quality  of college  programs.  The response  rate of the survey  questionnaire  was 94.22%.  The 
results has concluded that lifelong academic skills, standard and qualified lecturers, student centered 
activities,  strong  faculty  management,  proactice  faculty  support,  better  college  environment  and facilities, 
punctual  transfort  facilities,  strong  security  environment,  better  lab and library  facilities,  college  psychical 
facilities and college infrastructure facilities as the subscales of this study. The results of the Chi -square 
show that there is significant association between students’ recommenda tion to their kith and kin and 
different locals of the college. The results further show that there was association between the intention 
of existing students’ to recommend their kith and kin to enrol at OCEM and student centered activities, 
better lab and  library facilities and college buildings facilities (p < 0.05, B = -.342 , .309, -.398). The 
current study has also  supported the  previous study of Mullamaa (2017) because the  previous study  
of Mullamaa  had found  that student’s  centred  activities  and better  lab and library  facilities  motivated