OCEM Journal of  
Management,  Technology  & Social  Sciences  93  Original Article  
Factors Influencing Customer Satisfaction in  
Buddha Air, Bharatpur Chitwan  
Dr. Basanta Prasad Adhikari  
(Research Head and International Relationship Officer)  
Email: adhikari_bp@ymail.com  
 
Abstract  
The primary purpose of this study was to examine the customer satisfaction on quality  and price of the 
products, customer management and employees’ behaviour of Buddha Air at Bharatpur, Chitwan. The 
survey  study  was used as research  method  and the survey  questionnaire  was used as the research  instrument 
to collect  data in this study.  One hundred  and eighty -five respondents  had been  selected  randomly  where 
one hundred  and eight  was male  population  (58.37  %) and seventy -six was female  population  (41.63  
%). The response rate was 92.5%. The Factor Reduction Method via Principal Component Analy sis 
was applied to find the relationship between the dependent variable and the independent variables.   
The results show that there was significant association between customer satisfaction and strict flight 
schedule and long security checking process, fl uctuation in ticket price, employee motivation skills and 
politeness, customer centered strategy and positive behaviour of employees and adequate facilities and 
proper customer management skills (p < 0.05). The results further show that customers were foun d 
dissatisfied  with the current  ticket  prices,  service  quality,  employee’s  behaviour  and customer  relationship 
management practices in Buddha Air, Bharatpur, Chitwan, Nepal. The previous studies reveal that 
customer  satisfaction  is embedded  in effective  and efficient  customer  management,  high quality  product, 
better customer relationship management and politeness of employees’ behaviour. The implication of 
this study will be beneficial for the board members of the company executive level of Buddha Air to 
formulate  new customer -centered  strategies  and also be useful  for the branch  managers  of Buddha  Air all 
over the country to improve their managerial skills and to penerate in new  market.  
Keyword: Customer satisfaction, the survey respondents, Principal Component Analysis, customer  
management.  
 
1. Introduction  
In Nepal,  the airlines  history  has begun  since  1958  as the first airline  named  Royal  Nepal  Airlines  based 
on Tribhuvan International Airport, Kathmandu. It’s been long time since the airlines facilities has been 
competing with prices and service quality to win the heart of customers. It is obvious that, customer 
satisfaction is the key measure of products and services quality to meet the customers’ expectation.  
Buddha Air Pvt. Ltd is a private air travel company founded on 23 April 1996. It is the best domestic 
airline  company  of the nation.  It has over 13 domestic  and more  than two international  destinations.  It has 
facility to operate the famous for the Everes t Experience Flight. It is in the process of further expansion 
in international sectors. After 20 years of dedicated non -stop service, more than 100,000 flight hours 
logged in with over 10 million passengers flown to thirteen destinations with permanent ru nways in the 
country, Buddha Air today is the largest domestic air travel operator in Nepal employing more than 900 
experienced professionals (“Buddha Air”, 2018).