OCEM Journal of  
Management,  Technology  & Social  Sciences  45  though  it is arguable  to view  students  as customers,  but given  the current  atmosphere  of higher  education 
marketplace,  there  is a new moral  privilege  that students  have  become  “customers”  and therefore  can, as 
fee payers,  reasonably  demand  that their views  should  be heard  and acted  upon  so as this study  considers 
students as “customers” (Weerasinghe & Fernando,  2018).  
 
1.2 Student  Satisfaction  
Retention  is a big challenge  for all the higher  education  institutions,  especially  among  the first with more 
than half of students that drop out doing so in their first year. Many students who endeavour to earn a 
college  degree  fail to continue  until graduation.  Therefore,  an effort  should  be made  to keep  this dropping 
trends  to a minimum  extent  (Mukhtar,  Ahmed,  Anwar  & Baloch,  2015).  The level  of student  satisfaction 
in educational  contexts  can be defined  as a short -term attitude  based  on students’  educational  experiences. 
“Satisfaction  in education  is a positive  originator  of student  loyalty  to institutions  and also is an outcome 
of a successful educational system. Thus, student satisfaction levels can be defined as a function of the 
relative  perceived  levels  of the quality  of experiences  and higher  educational  institutions’  performance  in 
providing  educatio nal services  (Sojkin,  Bartkowiak  & Skuza,  2011).  Elliott  and Healy  (2001)  mentioned 
that “A short -term attitude  resulting  from  an evaluation  of a students’  educational  experience  is generally 
accepted as student satisfaction. Student satisfaction results when actual performance meets or exceeds 
the students’ expectations” (p.8). Student satisfaction is defined as multi -dimensional and depended on 
the clarity  of student  goals  as report ed by (Mihanović,  Batinić  & Pavičić,  2016).  They  further  found  that 
satisfaction  was significantly  influenced  by trust.  Educational  practitioners  of higher  education  can build 
trust by treating students in a consistent and equitable manner, meeting and handling their expectations 
and complaints in a caring manner. Bassi (2019) concluded that perceived quality of an educational 
experience is a consequence of student satisfa ction. By analyzing the earlier mentioned definitions of 
student’s satisfaction reveal that understanding the contemporary expectations and demands of students 
almostly signifies the definition of student  satisfaction.  
 
2. The current  study  
The current study explores the complex phenomenon of student preference to recommend their kith and 
kin for the enrollment  at OCEM.  As main  starting  point,  the study  puts forward  the idea that the moment 
at which students prefer not to enroll their kith and kin may have an important impact on their motives 
for quitting from OCEM. In addition, gender and types of enrollment stream, educational level, family 
income, religions and collage location are incorporated as control variables. The following research 
questions are guide d my investigation:  
(1) Does the student satisfaction (preference) vary according to personal variables, such having actual 
experience with academic factors or not, gender, family income, and collage  location?  
(2) What  motives  do existing  students  at OCEM  have for their preference  to recommend  their kith and kin? 
(3) Do the satisfaction and preference differ according to whether or not existing students have in 
academic, managerial, physical and infrastructure factors and does this distinction remain after 
controlling for other personal variables (gender, location, family monthly income and college 
location).