OCEM  Journal  of 
Management,  Technology  & Social  Sciences  82  and to make  decision  about  its course  of action  (Citroen,  2011).  The primary  objective  of this study  is to 
examine the impact of information factors to make rational decision making in educational institutions. 
This study will also address the need for more data about the effects of information technology on the 
strategic decision -making process in education al institutions. The research study of Aharoni, Tihanyi & 
Connelly (2011) found that strategic rational decision -making processes were positively correlated with 
the factual and relevant information delivered by the college IT Department. Similarly, the re search 
study  of Nutt and Wilson  (2010)  found  that strategic  decision  making  was negatively  correlated  with the 
poor technological performance. Moreover, some recent approaches to strategic decision making have 
concentrated upon the more micro aspects of ho w college executives think, act, and interpret strategic 
decisions. The micro approach has been termed the strategy as practice perspective (Szymaniec -Mlicka, 
2017). Many studies in strategic management take the position that executives reach strategic dec isions 
based on a structured process of careful consideration of circumstances, alternatives and consequences 
of the available  information  which  approach  is known  as a ‘rational  process.  Information  on matters  such 
as competition, markets, technologies and  trends in the societal environment affecting the organization 
is used as a basis for the judgement on the implications of feasible alternatives for the decision to be 
made in such a rational process. It is universally obvious that the use of information c ontributes to the 
reduction  of uncertainty.  However,  aspects  of the role of information  in the decision -making  process  have 
got less priority  in management  research  to make  a rational  strategic  decision.  For that reason,  this study 
investigates whether this research can add a new viewpoint to this field, specifically to that of the role 
and value  of modern  information  resources  and access  as a prerequisite  for the structuring  of the strategic 
decision -making  process.  This study  will also observe  in detail  the use of information  during  the process 
of a number of actual recent strategic decisions taken by executives in the educational institutions. The 
emphasis is on the factors of information for the rational decision -making process, not on the substance 
or quality of the resulting decisions  (Nutt & Wilson,  2010).  
 
2. Literature  Review  
2.1 Meaning of the information and decision  making  
Information  is an intrinsic  component  of nearly  every  activity  in the organization  so much  that its function 
has become  transparent  (Choo,  1996,  p.329).  Without  a firm grasp  of how it creates,  transforms  and uses 
information, an organization would lack the coherent vision to manage and integrate its information 
processes, information resources and information technologies (Petersen &  Laustsen, 2019). Current 
thinking in management and organization theory recognizes three distinct areas in which the creation 
and use of information play a strategic role in determining an organization’s capacity to make rational 
strategic  decision.  
Nutt & Wilson (2010, p.3) state the following statements for the meaning of strategic decision making. 
“The term strategic decision making is often used to indicate important or key decisions made in 
organizations of all types. The term organization includes an y collective social, economic or political 
activity  involving  a plurality  of human  effort.  Strategic  decisions  emphasize  the social  practice  of decision 
making as it is carried out among and between individuals in the organization. When studying decision 
making, both the organizing of decision activity as a collective phenomenon and the cognitive  processes