OCEM Journal of  
Management,  Technology  & Social  Sciences  69  competition  among  higher  education  institutions  (HEIs)  has increased,  these  institutions  have  been  forced 
to adopt  market -oriented  strategies  to differentiate  themselves  from  their competitors  and thereby  attract 
as many  students  as possible  (Butt  & Rehman,  2010).  HEIs  have  also realized  that their sector  represents 
a busine ss-like service industry and have begun to focus more on meeting or exceeding the needs of 
their students (Gruber et al., 2010; Mihanović, Batinić & Pavičić, 2016). The primary objective of this 
study is to examine the experiences and opinions of students of grade 11 & 12 on the current available 
academic, managerial, physical and infrastructure facilities for their intention to recommend their kith 
and kin. Students satisfaction level is embedded in the internal and external and external environment 
of the  educational institutions which covers image of college, ideal location of the college, quality of 
college  facilities,  quality  of college  academic  program  experiences  and the quality  of administrative  staff. 
The secondary objective of this study is to identify the student’s intention to continue their higher level 
education at OCEM. Student satisfaction is a short -term attitude resulting from an evaluation of a 
student’s  educational experience (Hossain  & Islam, 2012), and as such, it is important to understand  
for a number of reasons for example, to motivate students, to generate more profit and to penetrate      
in the new market. Satisfied customers tend to have a higher probability of generating pos itive word - 
of-mouth (Kwun, Ellyn & Choi, 2013; Nogueira, 2018). Thus, it is more likely that satisfied students 
engage  in positive  word -of-mouth  communication  than do less satisfied  students.  Feedback  from  students 
can be used to improve those factors whe re satisfaction is lower than the normal standard and because 
student satisfaction has been found to be associated with the perceived quality of the institution. Kwun 
et al., (2013) concluded that improving the level of student satisfaction will eventually  improve public 
perception with respect to the quality of the institution. The level of student dissatisfaction has been 
increased in the Nepalese institutions (Sahayogee, 2019) and student retention has seen a big challenge 
to the educational  practitioner s in higher  education.  If educational  organizations  are failed  to satisfy  their 
students,  the future  of higher  educational  institutions  will be in risk. Student  centered  marketing  strategy 
has emerged  to fulfil  the contemporary  demands  of students  in higher  education  sector  (Upreti  & Chhetri, 
2013). The current study will be beneficial for higher educational academic leaders and practitioners   
to focus their marketing strategy to satisfy the students. Similarly, this study will also helpful for local 
government to know the current demand of students and to regularize the local education system and to 
associate with student  mankind.  
 
2. Theoretical Model of The  Study  
Student recommendation is deeply rooted in their satisfaction level where they are currently studying as 
a student of higher education. Generally, they evaluate the current facilities available by their respective 
college  where  the quality  of administrativ e staff;  college  program;  image  of the college;  ideal  location  of 
the college and external environment of the college are the key indicators to satisfy them (Weerasinghe 
& Fernando, 2018). Factors affecting student’s satisfaction are also concluded as a student’s culture, 
subculture, social class; reference groups, aspirational groups, member groups, family roles and status, 
age and life -cycle stage, occupation, economic circumstances, lifestyle, personality and self -concept, 
perception, learning, beliefs , and attitudes (Attreya, 2018). Again, student’s satisfaction is deeply rooted 
in 7P’s of the service  marketing  which  are mentioned  as product,  price,  placement,  promotion,  people,