OCEM Journal of  
Management,  Technology  & Social  Sciences  27  years as the current study concluded. The current study has also identified that the current trends in 
education  technology  is highly  connected  with the computer  and education  in teaching  activities  because 
most of the published most cit ed published articles were derived from the journal of Computer and 
Education (n=21). The result importantly conclude that the key words used in different articles were 
varied in seven published articles, but the mostly repeated keywords from seven publish ed articles were 
identified as learning, technology, collaboration, game, mobile and education. Furthermore, the current 
study signifies that the trends of current educational technology research has focused on computer    
and education technology research . Finally, the current study also confirmed that most of the repeated 
published articles were also derived from the JCE (Sun & Shen,  2014).  
The current researcher had faced many difficulties during this study, for example, finding the most cited 
articles b ecause there was variation in the citation counts among different online sources. Some online 
sites showed greater number of citation counts and some online resources showed lesser number of 
citation  counts.  The next limitation  of the current  study  is the analysis  of the limited  number  of most  cited 
articles because the current study had reviewed only seven most cited articles. So, the findings cannot 
be generalized for the larger sample size in the similar context. The next limitation of the this study was  
the limited analysis of characteristics of the only seven most cited articles because the current study has 
analyzed articles based on per year among the five selected journals and per five selected journals. The 
current  researcher  has also realized  that the findings  would  be more  valid  and reliable  if the greater  number 
of the most  cited  articles  had been  selected  and added  in the analysis  section.  Again,  it was further  noticed 
that reviewing  most  cited  articles  can give more  depth  knowledge  to select  future  research  topics  and also 
helpful to know the current trends of educational technology research. The most crucial findings for the 
current researcher was embedded in knowing the emerging issues of educational technology to  integrate 
in teaching and l earning activities for improving the quality of education and students’ performance 
(Margaryan,  Bianco  & Littlejohn,  2015).  It is obvious  that the educational  technology  research  of JCE is 
emerging  in educational  institutions  so the researchers  have  to focus on reviewing  the most  cited  articles 
on the journal of  JCE.  
 
Recommendations  
The future research has also to focus on reviewing the most cited articles of longitudinal studies which 
would give more citation counts and reflect more advanced knowledge of educational technology for 
the novice researchers. This study recommends that th e future researchers need to focus on reviewing 
the greater number of the most cited journals of CE separately to foreground the specific knowledge   
of educational technology to enhance educational quality by which an innovative and contemporary 
knowledge  of educational technology and computer education can be generated for future generation. If 
the future research focuses on reviewing the most cited articles of per selected five journals, it would be 
more  beneficial  for practitioners,  school  leaders  and the different  levels  teachers  to gain more  knowledge 
how to intergrade computer technology into classroom teaching. More importantly, the future research 
needs to focus on reviewing the articles of the former years which would give more citation counts   
and deep knowledge for conducting the future primary research. This study also recommends that the 
future  research  also has to select  the most  cited  published  articles  of per five selected  journals  and needs