OCEM Journal of  
Management,  Technology  & Social  Sciences  33  graduate students. The primary propose of this reviewed journal article was to identify the gap between 
the expectation of companies and the teaching learning processes impl emented by the business schools. 
This review is embedded in examining the following questions a) What expectation do companies are  
looking for through MBA graduates? b) What are the thoughts of scholars about the MBA program 
organizers c) What are the best approaches for business school to meet the current global expectations of 
companies and students. This review was based on the theoretical arguments of the previous studies. This 
review articles were organized on major four parts i.e. introduction, re view of literature, methodology and 
theoretical answer of the research questions, discussion and conclusions. The reasons for undertaking this 
study toward an MBA are widely documented in the following section. A recent survey showed that self - 
improvement , career development, enhancing business skills, having a positive impact on society are the 
most important to MBAs immediately after they receive their degrees. Other reasons such as networking 
opportunities,  experiencing  a foreign  culture  (for overseas  students)  and increased  professional  and personal 
effectiveness are also proposed (Blackburn, 2011). Students in the MBA program are usually entered in 
their late twenties with experience across small, medium and large organizations, and come from diverse 
professional backgrounds, e.g. Engineering, Automotive, Law, Marketing, Banking, Defense and Tourism 
Management, Consulting, Entrepreneurship (The Aspen Institute, 2008). Many national and international 
universities have invested a large amount of public funds but the rate of the students moving to other 
international  markets  rather  than the home  countries  has been increased  steadily  and created  a great  problem. 
It is universally identified that the curriculum contents and practical skills required to MBA program have 
to be modified  and improved.  It is expected  that future  managers  and company  leaders  have to able to scan 
both internal and external company’s environment to achieve their pre -determined objectives (Lawrence, 
Dunn & Weisfeld -Spolter,  2018).  
 
2. Literature  Review  
2.1 MBA Expectations and  reality  
In today’s globalized world, most of the business schools are desperate to get the business leader, who 
can be able to achieve the competitive advantage in this competetive global markets. And, the pri mary 
source of it seems to be the business schools. However, companies have a greater dissatisfaction toward 
the graduate students of business and management, programs like MBAs and EMBA. Current  executive 
programs  are also fail fulfill  the demand  of compa nies. Soft skills  are the most  important  for the business 
leaders,  but MBA  Program  also need  to focus  on functional  and technical  skills.  In addition,  the common 
requirements of MBA programs are embedded in thoughtful, awareness, sensitive, flexible and  adaptive 
capability of readiness to be a global executive. But the bigger questions have been raised for business 
school’s capability to develop every dimensions of leadership skills. Because some abilities like 
communication ability, leadership interperso nal skills, and wisdom skill alongwith “the ability to weave 
together and make use of different kinds of knowledge” (Mintzberge & Gosling, 2002:28). But these 
skills are at once less easily transferred to others and these skills are highly valued in the co mpetition 
for leadership positions that occur in organizations. In result of these coherence gaps between the   
skills needed in business and taught program and companies look for alternative source. Here are few 
examples  to support  it, “Boston  Consulting  Group  hired  20% of its consultants  without  MBAs  in 2000”; 
“Hamilton  planned  to hire one third  of its people  without  graduate  business  degrees”  and “more  than half 
of the consultants at McKinsey and Company do not have a Master of Business Administration  degree”