OCEM Journal of  
Management,  Technology  & Social  Sciences  17  6. Discu ssion & Conclusion  
This study was conducted at Chitwan District to examine both positive and negative consequences of 
MIM to the LBGs for their education, health and psychosocial development among the mother migrant 
households. The MIM and its consequences  on the LBGs is a very debatable issue for the women and 
gender study in the Asian context. The empirical research reveals that there was both negative and 
positive consequences of MIM to the LBGs for their education, health and psychosocial development 
in MIM households. A mixed method research approach was applied to collect data. Two hundred and 
thirty -seven  LBGs  were  involved  in the survey  study  and six LGBs  as interviewees  were  involved  in the 
qualitative study. There were twenty -two subscales with the  values of mean, SD and Cronbach’s Alpha 
(see in the Table  1) and also twenty -two independent  variables  in this study.  The results  indicate  that there 
were twelve significant indicators for the consequences of MIM (p <  0. 05) [see in the table 23]. The 
results  show  that there  was significant  association  between  the consequences  of MIM  and the use of social 
media and outdoor activities, positive psychosocial feeling and family support (p< 0.05 with odds ratio 
1.780, 2.45 9, 1.972) in the Wholesome Model of Binary Logistic Regression Analysis. The implication 
of the study is to support local government to formulate the child friendly policy and make aware the 
local government to protect child rights in Chitwan District. The  findings of the current study can be 
generalized  in the same  context  of larger  population  because  of the larger  quantitative  sample  population 
involvement  in this study.  The results  further  conclude  that the linear  regression  model  was the statistical 
significance where, p < 0.038, which is less than 0.05, indicating that, overall, the regression model 
statistically  significantly  predicts  the outcome  variables  which  is a good  fit for the data.  The development 
of the left behind  girls under  the age of 16 on education,  health  and psychosocial  development  is a globally 
debatable  issue  so that researchers,  academicians,  police  officers,  policy  makers  and the government  have 
to focus on their future research for the children rights, security, safety and their overall development. 
The universe is based on variation on mankind, geographical structure, population, resources, political 
system, form and nature of governments so that there are the variations in the condition of the LBGS 
among  each country.  Nepal  is an underdeveloped  country  where  the condition  of the LBGs  is adverse  and 
unfavourable  for their overall  development.  The issue  of the MIM  and its negative  consequences  have  to 
be addressed in the future research of the international researchers and academic institutions. This study 
is the ongoing research phenomenon to collect he larger scale of and analyzing holistically in future. It 
is estimated that two thousand responden ts for the survey study, fifty-one interviews for the qualitative 
study and five Focus Group Discussion have been targeted to complete the study in future. The doctors, 
police officers, immediate parents, the LBGs between the aged of 10 to 16 years, compou nders, doctors 
and social workers will be focused to collect qualitative data and quantitative data to enlarge this  study.  
References  
Adhikari,  B. (2018).  The negative  impacts  of MIM  to the left behind  girls to the left behind  girls under  16 
years old on e ducation, health and psychosocial development in Chitwan District. Retrieved from 
https://www.researchgate.net/search . 
Adhikari, J. (2006). Nepali  women and foreign labour migration (1st Ed.). Kathmandu: UNIFEM. 
Agbola, F., & Acupan, A. (2010). An empirical analysis of international labour migration in the 
Philippines. Economic Systems , 34(4), 386 -396.