OCEM Journal of  
Management,  Technology  & Social  Sciences  71   
 
 
 
 
 
Quantitative  
Approach  
[The Survey 
Research 
Method]   
 
 
 
 
 
Research 
Instrument  
[The Survey 
Questionnaire]   
 
 
 
 
 
Data Analysis  
Method  
[The 
Descriptive 
Stastistics]   
 
 
 
 
 
Stastistical Tool  
[Principal 
Component 
Analysis  and 
Chi-square]   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reliability  
[Relibility Scale 
Factor]  students on academic factor for their intention to recommend their friends/family members/relatives to 
enrol at OCEM. The second sub problem will examine the student’s experiences and opinions of grade 
11 and 12 grade students on managerial factors for their intention to recommend their kith and kin at 
secondary level schools. The third sub problem will examine student’s experiences and opinions on 
college’s physical factor for their intention to recommend their kith and kin to enrol at Secondary Level 
Schools. The fourth sub problem will  examine the experiences and opinions on college infrastructure 
facilities  for their recommendation  to enrol  their kith and kin to enrol  at schools  where  they are currently 
studying  (Cohen,  Manion  & Morrison,  2011;  Tucker,  2013.  Saying  so, the first main  problem  and its sub 
problems have been presented as follows.  
1. What  are the key influencing  factors  affecting  student’s  intention  to recommend  their kith and kin to 
of grade 11 and 12 in the college?  
1.1. What  is the impact  of academic  factor  on student’s  intention  to recommend  their friends/relatives/ 
family members to enrol at the college where they are currently  studying?  
1.2. What is the impact of managerial factor on student’s intention to recommend their friends/ 
relatives/family members to enrol at the co llege where they are currently  studying?  
1.3. What  is the impact  of physical  factor  on student’s  intention  to recommend  their friends/relatives/ 
family members to enrol at the college where they are currently  studying?  
1.4. What is the impact of infrastructure facto r on student’s intention to recommend their friends/ 
relatives/family members to enrol at the college where they are currently  studying?  
 
3. Methods  
The survey  research  design  was applied  to collect  data on student’s  recommendation  to their kith and kin 
to enrol  at the same  college  because  this method  is useful  to cover  a large  sample  population.  The survey 
research design which is used in this study has been presented  below.  
Source: Kothari, 2004  
Figure 2 Research design of quantitative method