OCEM Journal of  
Management,  Technology  & Social  Sciences  109  
Problem Statement  
Problem definition  
We are living in the 21st century but still follow traditional methods for comfort, security, and energy 
management. Presently we have system that can be easily installed, cost efficient, and able to provide 
genuine  home  automation  to consumers.  We are wastin g the energy  (more  specifically  electrical  energy) 
in different fields such as Agriculture, Hospitals, Education, and Apartments etc (Transparency Market, 
2017). which can be due to unwanted operation of different loads or  equipment.  
The market of Home solution is wide and includes variety of consumers of different age group starting 
from  kids to senior  citizens.  The demand  and type of solutions  vary as per the consumer.  The main  problem 
we encountered from the on -field survey was prob lems with an integrated system capable of controlling 
their comfort, security, and energy management issues. This research surveyed for the likeliness of a 
single integrated system incorporating all the components of a home network which solves the issues of 
comfort, security, and energy management to fit the present  scenario.  
 
Market Potential:  
The market potential of is very high as it consists of 579,984 population (Statistics, 2017).  
Target Market: Map of Nepal showing Chitwan  
 
It has an area of 2,23 8.39 km2 and in 2011 had a population of 579,984 (279,087 male and 300,897 
female) (Statistics, 2017). Chitwan has a huge opportunity for home automation product. Bharatpur     
is major commercial and service Centre of Chitwan as well as Nepal and major de stination for higher 
education, health care and transportation in the region (UNFCO, 2009). At present Bharatpur is the 
largest business area of Chitwan. Chitwan district is also known as the medical city of Nepal. There are 
many top -rated medical institut ions in the district are located in Bharatpur. High rank schools, hotels, 
apartments,  hospitals  and industries  are also present  in abundant  amount  (UNFCO,  2009).  Hence  market 
potential of home automation products in Chitwan is very high.