OCEM  Journal  of 
Management,  Technology  & Social  Sciences  130  1.11 Multiple  Regressions:  
Let ‘y’ is the dependent variable and x1, x2, x3 ................................ .....xk be the ‘k’ independent variables. Then  the 
multi ple regression model is defined as  
y   0  1 x1   2 x 2  .............   k xk  e 
Where,  
y = dependent variable and x1, x2, x3 …………… xk are independent variables.  
0 = y-intercept.  
1 = Slope of y with variable x1 holding the remaining variables x2, x3 …,xk constant  or Regression  
coefficient of y on x1 holding the remaining variables x2, x3 …………… xk constant. And so on.  
(Dendukuri & Reinhold, 2005)  
Some pre -requisities to carry linear regression model are  
- There is linear relationship between quantitative dependent and independent variables  
- There is no presence of autocorrelation of residuals.  
- The mean of residuals is zero . 
- There is equal variance of residuall or presence of  homoscedasticity.  
- The independent variables are uncorrelated with  errors.  
- There is absence of multicollinearity. (Zaid,  2015)  
1.12 SPSS  
SPSS  refers  to Statistical  Package  for Social  Science.  It is statistical  software  which  eases  to compile  and 
analyze data. We can compile or entry collected primary data or secondary as same as Microsoft Excel. 
Its menu bar is helpful to analyze the data thus entered easily. Many statistical analysis can be carried 
using SPSS (Arkkelin,  2014).  
Many researchers have applied the correlation and regression analysis in their thesis, articles and their 
documents, however; they are not yet confident for the appropriate use of correlation and regression 
analysis and how to fit these statistical tools in their research works. In some cases, their interpretation 
may mislead  their research  studies.  Many  novice  researchers  are willing  to use correlation  and regression 
analysis but they don’t know how to use these tools during th eir data analysis. The primary objective of 
this study is to share knowledge on regression and correlation analysis and required conditions to use in 
their research paper.  
2. Method & Materials  
This study is based on sampled secondary data of 423 maternity women respondents admitted in 
Chitwan Medical Sciences(CMS), Bharatpur, Chitwan, Nepal during the period 2017 July to August 
2017 for maternity. The data used in this study were accessed via li brary of Chitwan Medical Sciences. 
The sample data of infant’s ages and weight were entered into computer software (SPSS) and analyzed 
using  regression  and correlation.  Different  published  articles  were  googled  through  online  resources,  for 
example,  google,  bookboon.com,  uef.fi,  and http://www.oxfordcollege.edu.np . All the research  materials 
were embedded in correlation and regression analysis. The collected materials were initially observed 
their ab stracts, methods and findings to find the deep knowledge on the research  phenomenon.  
3. Results &  Discussion  
To study the association between quantitative variables, correlation analysis can be carried in SPSS. To 
start this analysis, at first select Analyze then define the variables between which variable researchers 
wants  to determine  correlation  and then choose  Pearson’s  correlation,  Kendal  tau or spearman’s  according 
to the nature  of data.  For test of significance  tail of the test can be defined.  After  completing  these  actions  