OCEM  Journal  of 
Management,  Technology  & Social  Sciences  104  management at Buddha Air], this model predicts 165 customers showed their satisfaction for customer 
management  at Buddha  Air and 11 customers  showed  their dissatisfaction  for the customer  management 
at Buddha Airline. Again, out of 9 customers who chose the second optio n dissatisfaction, this model 
predicts that 3 were still dissatisfied and 6 were found satisfied with the price of the tickets, quality of 
service, employee behaviour and customer management. Thus, it predicts that customers showed their 
satisfaction for t he customer management at Buddha Air with 98.20 percent accuracy and also predicts 
that customers showed their dissatisfaction for the cost price of ticket, quality of services, employee 
behaviour and customer management at Buddha Air with 98.20 percent ac curacy which predicts 35.30 
percent  accuracy.  The results  show  that the overall  percentage  of correct  prediction  is 92.40  percent.  The 
results  also show  that there  was significant  association  between  fluctuation  in ticket  price  and customers’ 
satisfaction  (p < 0.05 with odds  ratio = .599 <1, B = -.582<0)  indicating  a negative  impact  on customers’ 
satisfaction. When the independent variable fluctuation in ticket price increases one unit, customer 
satisfaction  can be predicated  to decrease  around  0.559  times  if other  variables  are controlled.  This study 
has supported  the previous  study  of “The  Effect  of Price  and Service  Quality  on Customer  Satisfaction  in 
Mutiara Hotel Bandung” (2016) because both previous and current studies found that there is negative 
association between the price fluctuation in ticket price and customers’ satisfaction. The previous study 
also disclosed  that customers  were  found  dissatisfied  when  the price  of the ticket  price  goes up and down. 
Similarly, there was significant association between strict flight schedule and security (p < 0.05 with 
odds ratio = .221 <1, B = -.1.512 < 0) indicating a negative impact on customers’ satisfaction. When  the 
independent variable strict flight schedule and security increases one unit, customer satisfaction can be 
predicated to decrease around 0.559 times if other variables are controlled. This study has supported the 
study of Fornell, Mithas, Morgeson & Krishnan ( 2006) because the previous and the current studies  had 
found that there was negative association between strict flight schedule, lengthy security processes and 
customers’  satisfaction.  
3.5. Results  on categorical  variables  of the Linear  Regression  Model  
The categorical  variables  on reasons  of choosing  Buddha  Air and gender  were  entered  the Linear  Regression 
Model  of the SPSS  to find the correlation  between  them.  
Table 14. The correlation between gender and the reasons for choosing Buddha Air  
Model  R R Square  Adjusted R Square  Std. Error of the Estimate  Durbin -Watson  
1 .274a .075 .055 .282 1.892  
The outputs of the first Table 14 show the model summary and overall fit statistics. The results show 
that the R value is .274. Therefore, the customer satisfaction is positively correlated with the reasons of 
choosing Buddha Air and signifying a weak relationship between the customer s atisfaction and reasons 
for choosing Buddha Air. Again, the R² value is 0.075 signifying that the independent variables (price 
of the tickets, customer management, service quality and employees’ behaviour) have explained total 
variances of 7.50 % on depend ent variable customer satisfaction which shows a very weak relationship 
between the customer satisfaction and reasons of choosing Buddha Air. Again, the adjusted R² of the 
model  was 0.055  with the R² = .075 that means  that the linear  regression  explains  5.50 % of the variance 
in the data which is not a large variation so that the regression equation does not appear to be useful for 
making predictions for the reasons of choosing Buddha Air since the value of R² is lower than 1. Again, 
the Durbin -Watson d = 1 .982, which is between the two critical values of 1.5 < d < 2.5 and therefore we 
can assume  that there  was no first order  linear  auto-correlation  in the data.