OCEM Journal of  
Management,  Technology  & Social  Sciences  21  Literature review of the most cited articles in selected 5 
educational technology journals during 2013 to  
2017 – Identifying the champions  
Dr. Basanta Prasad Adhikari  
(Research Head and International Relationship Officer)  
Email: adhikari_bp@ymail.com  
 
Abstract  
The aim of the current  review  study  was to examine  the characteristics  of the most  cited  articles,  derived 
from f ive selected journals in the field of educational technology between 2013 to 2017. The research 
method of this study was the review of the most cited published articles. Total forty one (n=41) articles 
were reviewed first and later only seven most cited ar ticles were selected for the father analysis. The 
results indicate that the most cited published article from the five selected per journal and the years 
between 2013 to 2017 was entitled “The gamifying learning experiences” (Citation count = 801 times). 
The results  further  highlight  that three  articles  were  derived  from  the journal  of Computer  and Education. 
The results  also show  that the five most  cited  articles  were  published  in 2013  and other  two articles  were 
published  in 2014  and 2015.  A mixed  methods  approach,  review  of the empirical  articles  and quantitative 
approach were used as research methods in the most cited five selected journals. The results confirm 
that the journal of Computer and Education was found the most dominating in the field of educa tional 
technology  research  in all years.  The results  also show  that the year 2013  was the most  dominating  years 
for the published  articles  reviewed  in this study.  The primary  implication  of findings  will be beneficial  for 
the novice  researchers,  Master  Degree  students  and academicians  to know  the current  issues  of the educational 
technology  and its future  improvement.  The limitation  of this study  is the issue  of generalization  because  of the 
limited  number  of reviewed  most cited published  articles  in the current  study.  
 
Keyword: Characteristics, educational technology, most cited articles, computer and education.  
 
1. Introduction  
Reviewing published most cited articles is one of the primary tasks for the novice researchers. The 
reviewer  of this research  study  will be named  as the current  researcher  in the following  texts.  The research 
findings of the reviewed articles can be not only recognized in the academic community but also be 
beneficial for applying tenure, promotion, grants and scholar awards by th e publications to advance 
their professional careers. Similarly, education researchers often view the publications of research 
findings in academic journals as a significant work for their professional development (Tsai & Lydia 
Wen, 2005). More importantly , reviewing most cited published educational technology journals help  the 
novice researchers to understand the required field in greater depth. Educators can be supported by the 
systematic  analysis  of the most  cited  published  articles  in academic  journals  to discover  the current  status 
and future trends of educational technology research (Lee, Wu & Tsai, 2009). Various methods have 
been used to review different empirical published most cited articles. Reviewing journal articles is also 
regarded  a key effort  to find the most  debatable  and emergent  issue  of educational  technology  research  in