OCEM Journal of  
Management,  Technology  & Social  Sciences  95  Method of Data Collection  
The questionnaire  was circulated  to all 185 customers  registered  with the Buddha  Air, Bharatpur  Chitwan. 
The customers were all registered in Buddha Air’s Webpage before two years ago. A link to the web - 
based questionnaire was sent via email to all paediatric customers in Buddha Air. A reminder email was 
circulated  2 weeks  later.  The responses  were  anonymous  and could  not be linked  to the email  address.  
 
Processing and Analyzing of Data  
The survey data were analysed using simple descriptive statistics and correlations. Principal compnent 
analysis via Factor Reduction Model was applied to find the new principal components (PCs). Again, 
Linear  Regression  Model  was used to find the correlati on between  the selction  of Buddha  Air and gender 
of the  population.  
 
3. Results  
The data analysis  was based  on descriptive  statistics  analysis.  The analysis  is embedded  in the subscales, 
Chi-square  test, categorical  variables  of the Linear  Regression  Model  and the principal  components.  
 
3.1 Data  Analysis  
Factor analysis was used to reduce the large number of variables to a small number of components. The 
demand for the air services has increased manifold in the past some years. Buddha Air as an air service 
provi der was examined  for factors  influencing  customer  satisfaction  against  its current  ticket  prices,  service 
quality, employees’ behaviour and customer management. This study undertakes a survey of 185  service 
users  of Buddha  Air who fly from  Bharatpur  to Kathmandu  and vice versa.  Respondents  were  contacted 
via telephone and were asked to rate forty -eight statements on their perceptions and experiences about 
the Airline’s service quality, employee’s behaviour, customer management strategy and ticket’s prices on 
a 5-point Likert scale [Completely dissatisfied =1, Dissatisfied =2, I do not know =3, Satisfied =4 and 
completely  satisfied  =5]. The concept  of data reduction  is based  on the fact that few components  explain 
most of the variance in dependent var iable (Factors influencing customer’s satisfaction) (Pandya et al., 
2018). KMO and Bartlett’s Test was used to ensure the sample sufficiency for the further analysis of the 
PCs where the minimum value of KMO was fixed < 0.60. Previous study had sometimes r elied heavily 
on a single -item indicator of customer’s’ satisfaction and preference which maximizes the possibility of 
measurement error (e.g. Watt &Richardson, 2007). To construct this requirement, this study has chosen 
to work with more encompassing cons tructs, measured by multiple items. To identify these underlying 
themes  in the questionnaire,  a Principal  Component  Analysis  (PCA)  was run. Subsequently,  an Exploratory 
Factor Analysis (EFA) with Varimax rotation was carried out to refine and interpret the se components. 
The reliability of the data was checked by computing scale analysis where the minimum value of the 
Cronbach’s  Alpha  was considered  over 0.60 (Cohen  et al. 2011).  
Eigenvalues, the screen plot and theoretical interpretability were also used to make a decision on the 
number of factors. A factor loading of at least [0.40] was taken as cut -off point to incorporate a specific 
item as an indicator  for an understanding  motive. To explore  the relation  between  customers’  satisfaction 
and personal variables, descriptive statistics and cross tabulations were computed (Pandya, Bulsari & 
Sinha,  2018).  Descriptive  statistics  was further  employed  to analyze  customers’  ‘ motives  (satisfaction)  for 
current service facilities, prices of the tickets, customer management strategy and employee’s  behaviour