OCEM  Journal  of 
Management,  Technology  & Social  Sciences  110  Research Methodology  
Research Approach  
Initially exploratory design procedure was used for convenience and to get tentative idea about the 
market. Later conclusive research was conducted to get precise idea of the market. Under conclusive 
research design p rocedure, we conducted causal research procedure by formulating questionnaire that 
was asked to 120 respondents.  
Population and Sampling  
The population  of Chitwan  is 579,984  population  (Statistics,  2017)  which  is relatively  larger  as compared 
to other cities of Nepal. But for our convenience we selected 120 samples for our research. The sample 
included respondent from Bharatpur and its nearby areas. The sampling was carried out through 
convenience, quota and random sampling  procedure.  
Questionnaire and Administration  
Home automation (HA) is one of the new concepts for comfort, security and energy management. After 
the formulation of questionnaires, the research was divided into two parts. In first part different  students 
at Oxford  Colle ge of Engineering  and Management  were  included  by providing  them  questionnaire.  Each 
and every  student  of the class  was provided  with proper  instruction  and was asked  to fill the questionnaire 
through their guardian. The answered questionnaire was collected in the next  day. 
In second  part the research  was conducted  on targeted  area like hotel  and restaurant,  educational  institute, 
home  etc. Both  the approach  gave  positive  and sound  feedback  regarding  the need  of automation  products. 
This research was based on the study of demand of technology so the prepared questionnaires were for 
urban area pertaining to high class and middle -class family.  
The research was conducted relating to te chnology and taking reviews through well -structured and 
chronological questionnaires. The questionnaire was divided into three parts (consent, screening and 
respondent  field questions).  The time of interview  was around  10-15 minutes.  On screening  part, personal 
and demographic  information  of the respondent  as well as their willingness  in the technology  was taken. 
It clarifies which income group, gender and what age group of people was interested in technology 
products.  
Data Analysis  
A separate column is provided for unanswered questions (unanswered questions have no label in the figure)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1 : Interest in keeping the technology Products  120.0  
100.0    96.8  
80.0 
60.0 
40.0 
20.0 
2.4 
0.0 
YES NO Percentage