OCEM Journal of  
Management,  Technology  & Social  Sciences  101  model depicts that 176 customers show their satisfaction for Buddha Airs’ employees behaviour and 17 
customers  showed  their dissatisfaction  for the Airline’s  employees  behaviour.  Again,  out of 4 customers  who 
showed their dissatisfaction for Buddha Air’s employee behaviour, the results show that 4 customers were  
found dissatisfied for the employee behaviour of Buddha Air. Thus, it predicts that customers who showed 
their satisfact ion for the employee behaviour with 97.60 percent accuracy and the customers who showed 
their dissatisfaction for the airline services was 0 percentage accuracy. The results show that the overall  
percentage  of correct  prediction  is 88.60  percent.  The results  also show  that there  was significant  association 
between  service  quality  and employees’  behaviour  and customers’  satisfaction  (p < 0.05 with odds  ratio 
= .568 < 1, B = -.566 < 0) indicating a negative impact on customers’ satisfaction. When the independent  
variable  service  quality  and employee’s  behaviour  increases  one unit, customer  satisfaction  can be predicated 
to decrease around 0.568 times if other variables are controlled. Similarly, there is significant association 
between employee mistakes and entertainment facilities and customer’s satisfaction (p < 0.05 with odds 
ratio = .523 <1, B = -.649 < 0) indicating a negative impact on customers’ satisfaction. Again, when the 
independent variable customers centered strategy and positive att itude of the employee increases one unit, 
customer satisfaction can be predicated to decrease around 0.649 times if other variables are controlled. 
This study  supported  the research  findings  of Kattara,  Weheba  & El-Said (2008)  because  both studies  found 
that there  was positive  correlation  between  service  quality,  employee’s  behaviour  and customers  satisfaction. 
The previous  study  had also found  that customers  were satisfied  when  they received  quality  airline  services 
and employees’ polite behaviour. Importantly, the previous research had also concluded that employees’ 
behaviours  have great  effect  on overall  customer  satisfaction  regardless  of customers’  gender,  nationality,  and 
purpose  of visit,  number  of visits  and length  of stay. 
3.4. Customer Relationship Management  CRM)  
The fourth research instrument intended to examine perceptions and experiences of respondents on the 
customers’ management and their satisfaction level at Buddha Air. The fourth survey instrument was 
embedded in availa bility of air tickets in each ticket counter, ease of ticket availability, time consuming in 
check -in and check -out, distance between ticket counter and airline take off destination, facility of ticket 
cancellation and holding, comparison of Buddha Air with other air services, management of waiting place, 
and the management  of loyalty  card.  The empirical  studies  had prioritized  the importance  of CRM  in company 
business strategy. CRM is an integration of technologies and business processes used to satisfy the needs 
of a customer during any given interactions. More specifically, CRM involves acquisition. CRM life-cycle 
follows eight stages which are planning, research, system analysis, design, construction, implementation, 
maintenance and docu mentation and adaption (Amoah Mensah, Quaye & Mensah,  2018).  
Table  10. Varimax  rotated  principal  components  matrix  on the customer 
management  for the customers  satisfaction  (N = 185).  
Variables  Loadings  
1 2 3 4 
FACILITIES AND CUSTOMER MANAGEMENT  
Buddha Air provides all services on time.  .766    
The facilities of Buddha Airs are satisfactory.  .759    
Employees answer the customers inquiry  .699