OCEM  Journal  of 
Management,  Technology  & Social  Sciences  22  the current  educational  context.  Review  of journal  articles  is also connected  for selecting  a new research 
topic for further investigation.  
In the current study, the aim of the analysis was to identify the most cited articles in educational 
technology  between  2013  to 2017.  The five selected  journals  were  entitled  “British  Journal  of Educational 
Technology (BJET), the Journal of Computer and Ed ucation (JCE), the Journal of Computer Assisted 
Learning (JCAL), the Journal of IEEE Transactions on Learning Technologies (IEEE TLT) and the 
Journal of Educational Technology Research and Development (JETRD). The method of reviewing   
the most cited publi shed articles was content analysis method where selected most cited published 
articles were compared and summarized on the basis of the citation counts, published years, titles of  
the published articles and existing theories. The current era of education is connected with worldwide 
educational systems which demands for the holistic research in the educational technology to support 
the learners and teachers (Pathek & Chaudhay, 2012). Many changes have been globally taken place in 
the political, economic and  demographical sectors which also demand the systematic research on the 
emergence of educational technologies in teaching and learning activities. Furthermore, the research on 
educational  technology  has covered,  for example,  the issues  of social  media,  serious  games,  and adaptive 
software to improve the outcomes of education. Similarly, the emerging practices on openness and user 
modelling have to be focused in future research because global education has demanded the  innovations 
and new practices in dig ital learning contexts which have been facing complexities and unavailable 
technological resources in teaching and learning activities (Pathek & Chaudhay, 2012). The roles of 
educational technology have been increasing day by day in the educational sector for the improvement 
of the students’ achievements and educational quality. So, the review of most cited published articles is 
emerging to focus on the current demands of educational technology and its integration in educational 
institutions (Aksnes, 2003; Tondeur, van Braak, Siddiq & Scherer, 2016). The outcomes of education 
will be fruitful for all nations if computer and Technological tools are integrated in their educational 
system.  More  importantly,  this is the era of Information  and Communication  Techn ology  (ICT)  where  all 
official and none -official works, private and public activities have been made so convenient. So,  current 
educational leaders and practitioners have to at least understand the importance of ICT for effective and 
efficient  teaching  and learning  activities  (Onifade,  2011;  Picatoste,  Pérez -Ortiz  & Ruesga -Benito,  2018).  
 
1.1 Importance of technology in classroom teaching and learning  activities  
The current era of education is more likely emerging to connect with educational technology research 
because teacher educators are still struggling with how to create positive, interactive, open learning 
environment in educational institutions. Creating a powerful learning experiences is one step ahead to 
transform teachers’ efforts into classroom practice (Putnam & Borko, 2000). The roles of technology in 
education has been emerged since two decades ago to now because the use of education technology can 
identify the demands of students, enriches teachers how to apply technology in instructions and  tracking 
the their performance (Onifade, 2011). Additionally, educational technology can enhance students’ 
performance, keep students engage effectively in learni ng activities, improve students’ performance and 
make student response to adapt the new learning environment (Spector, 2017). Van Thiel (2018) States 
that “Technology  integration  in schools  involves  implementation  of computers  for effective  and efficient 
use in meaningful curriculum -driven ways that enhance student learning by allowing for flexibility, 
creativity  and collaboration,  while  making  real-world  connections”  (p.2).  Educational  technology  is