OCEM  Journal  of 
Management,  Technology  & Social  Sciences  108  security such as fire alarm and cctv cameras which are getting popularity now days (Asadullah & Raza, 
2016). The objective of home automation is all  about comfort, efficient operation, reduction in energy 
consumption  and increasing  the life standard.  Certainly,  with elderly  and disabled  people  can get quality 
of life because of the home automation (Asadullah &  Raza, 2016). It is doubtless to say that a home 
automation is connected with the “server” which is also known as hub. User can control home activities 
within one click, even it he is far away from his house. The user needs to connect with any internet 
source from  anywhere  so he/she  can get notification  instantly  gadgets  like cell phone  laptops  etc. Where 
every gadgets and house equipment are connected with IOT so that every object can complete task and 
communicate with user each other. The table below show s more clearly how automation is connected 
with user. The control & automation is limted to the user alone (Asadullah & Raza,  2016).  
 
Block diagram Home Automation  
The automation  industry  is in a re-evaluation  stage  with significant  technological  advancements.  Developments 
in automation industry, introduction of upgraded devices and technology, also kn own as Smart Home and 
Smart Building, has changed the way products and services are being delivered. With focus on enhancing 
consumer experience, these technologies are witnessing continues research and development to equip the 
products as per compatibilit y with Smart & Sustainable Home and Building projects (YANG, 2005). The 
market  for home  automation  is forecast  to grow  steadily  to become  US$ 116.26  Billion  by 2026  from US$ 
64.67 Billion in 2017, at a CAGR of 6.8 % (Transparency Market, 2017)  
Moreover, the market for home automation products and solutions in developing economies across the 
globe such as China, India, and Brazil, are witnessing increasing adoption due to significant rise in 
disposable income of the mid -income group and rising pr eference for luxurious lifestyle (Transparency 
Market,  2017).  Furthermore,  other  Asian  countries,  for instance  Indonesia,  Taiwan,  and South  Korea,  are 
projected to fuel the growth of the home automation market during the forecast period in this  geography 
(Transparency  Market,  2017).  This research  is initially  trying  to understand  the necessary  outlet  showing,  
55.6 % choose online store, showing people interest in using technology with 46 % people thought that 
this kind of product is very preferable to Home. Respondents view on the Products like automatic water 
pumps which are available in the market with the pr ice ranging from NRs. 1500 -2500 Nepalese Rupees 
(NRs) and remote -controlled lights and fans whose price in the market is NRs 15000 -20000 were  about  
10.5 % people  strongly  agreed  in the requirement  of automatic  water  pump  in present  scenario.  Products 
like. Market research showed that about 72.7 % people had income level less than NRs. 90,000. Even 
though people of Chitwan are aware of automation, Home automation is a completely new  market.  SECURITY  ENERGY 
MANAGEMENT  MAIN SYSTEM  COMFORT  USER