OCEM Journal of  
Management,  Technology  & Social  Sciences  7  The Consequences  of Mother  International  Migration 
To The Left Behind  Girls  Under  16 For Their  Education, 
Health  & Psycho -Social  Development  in Chitwan  District  
Dr. Basanta Prasad Adhikari  
(Research Head and International Relationship Officer)  
Email: adhikari_bp@ymail.com  
 
Abstract  
The primary  objective  of this study  was to examine  the consequences  of Mother  International  Migration 
(MIM) to the Left Behind Girls under the age of 16 on their Education, Health and Psychosocial 
Development in Nepal. A mixed methods approach was used where the survey study and qualitative 
interview were used as data collection methods. A five -point Likert scale survey questionnaire and the 
Semi -structured Interview were used as research instruments to collect data. The consent form was sent 
to immediate parents and the left behind girls for their acceptance to take part in this study.  In the fir st 
stage, twenty different schools were selected randomly and later purposive sampling method was used 
to select the interviewees. Two hundred and fifty questionnaires were dispatched but two hundred and 
thirty -seven  survey  questionnaires  were  returned  by the returnees  which  was more  than 94.8 % response 
rate. Approximately, 45% of the sampled girls were under the age of 12 and 55% of them were between 
the age of 12 to 16 in this study. The results show that there was positive relationship between the MIM 
and feeling of loneliness, poor health suggestion, poor health condition, negative neighbour’s attitudes, 
problem of relationship, and unsupportive house environment (p < 0.05). Again, there is significant 
negative association between MIM and social attachm ent, use of social media and outdoor activities, 
better health condition, positive psychosocial feeling, family support and availability of desired food   
(p < 0.05). About 80% interviewees realized that their overall development of education, health and 
psychosociology have been affected after their MIM. Approximately, 60% interviewees argued that the 
development of the education health and psychosocial development were negatively affected by their 
MIM.  The qualitative  results  supported  the quantitative  results to foreground  the phenomenon  and to get 
additional information on something that wasn’t expected on the impact of MIM to the  LBGS  
Recent increases in MIM to European, Arabic and other countries have invited an upwelling of interest  
in how the absence  of mothers  affect  the left-behind  girls in Nepal.  This study  has supported  the previous 
findings  on (MIM)  that the LBGs  had been  negatively  affected  by the MIM  for their education,  health  & 
psychological  development.  The implication  of this study  is to aware  the policy  makers  and governmental 
administrators about the positive and negative consequences MIM on LBGs for their education, health 
and psychosocial development. The main contribution of this study is to add new knowledge on the 
consequences of MI M to the LBGs in the archive of foreign employment in the Nepalese  context.  
 
Keywords: Mother international migration, left behind girls, education, health and psychosocial  
development, respondents, significant relationship.