OCEM Journal of  
Management,  Technology  & Social  Sciences  11  2007). Adhikari (2018) and Tong, Luo & Piotrowski (2015) concluded that MIM had greater negative 
consequences to the LBGs than the father international migration. The same study further argued that 
mothers  were  found  naturally,  culturally  and maternally  able to motivate  their daughte rs better  than their 
fathers  and also found  usually  skilful  in nurturing  and caring  for the children  in the comparison  of father 
migration households.  
Similarly, Hugo and Ukwatta (2010) and Peng and Wong (2015) disclosed that the separation between 
mother and child had created feelings of loneliness, helplessness, regretfulness and guiltiness which 
had created the feeling of vulnerability and insecurity for girls from their male counterparts. The same 
study further found that 60 out of the 400 mother -migrant households reported that LBGs had suffered 
by mental and physical health problems due to the lack of mother’s primary care. It was concluded that 
teenage daughters of mother -migrant households were forc ed to do extra household duties, for  example, 
cooking, washing, cleaning, cattle rearing that had diminished the level of educational performance 
(Bank,  2007;  Cortes,  2015;  Jampaklay,  2006;  Jaupart,  2018).  The same  studies  also reported  that mothers 
had a bigger spiritual role in family formation than fathers to support the LBGs and also concluded   
that the extended family members who helped the fathers did not involve in the spiritual development 
of the children. It was importantly noted that a long -term absence of fathers did not have any serious 
consequences for the child’s educational achievements compared with mother long -term absenteeism.  
It was also concluded that boys culturally were found involved in less household works and spent more 
time for ou tdoor games compared with girls in SAARC countries (Adhikari, 2018). Conversely, the 
LBGs were negatively affected for their educational, health and psychosocial development in mother - 
migrant households because they have to do extra household duties (Hugo  & Ukwatta, 2010). Research 
study  of Cortes  (2015)  and Adhikari  (2018)  found  that the gender  roles  are still very rigid  in many  Asian 
countries for example, Nepal, India, Pakistan, Shri Lanka where the mother’s main role is to support  
for the development of children and the father main role is to be the breadwinner (Sijapati, 2015). The 
same  study  disclosed  that MIM  had been  perce ived as a much  larger  disruption  in a child  life than father 
international migration. The repeated news of Kathmandu Post reported by Mahata (2018) found that 
many LBGs were even raped by their fathers after the MIM and sometimes found sexual relationship 
between father and daughter. Meyerhoefer and Chen (2010) found that MIM was associated with a 
significant  holdup  in the educational  degradation  of the left behind  girls in China.  The same  study  further 
argued that the level of education was negatively affe cted due to shifting the time allocation of LBGs 
toward household duties. Cortes (2015) and Battistella and Conaco (1998) concluded that MIM was 
found  more  detrimental  than father  international  migration  in the Philippines.  The role of mother  seemed 
more attentive; skilful and more professional on how to care their children than the roles of fathers 
(Gunduz, Karbeyaz & Ayranci, 2011). Thus, children without their mothers seemed more problematic 
in mother -migrant households compared with father -migrant households (Fletcher et al., 2007; Gajos & 
Beaver, 2015). Yeoh and Lam (2016) found that fathers were scared to care their matured and teenaged 
daughters  in mother -migrant  households.  The same  research  further  disclosed  that the left behind  teenage d 
and matured girls had expressed their strong preference for mothers’ support for their proper care and 
development  of health,  education  and psychosocial  issues  during  the age of 13-16 in the Asian  countries 
(c.f., Cortes, 2015).