OCEM  Journal  of 
Management,  Technology  & Social  Sciences  126  Correlation and Regression Analysis Using SPSS  
Sarad Chandra Kafle  
Asst. Professor  
Birendra Multiple Campus, Bharatpur  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1. Introduction  
In quantitative  study,  researcher  willing  to use very famous  statistical  tool regression  & correlation,  however 
due to lack of sufficient  knowledge  on regression  & correlation  analysis  their desired  havenot  fulfilled  or even 
they use the tool, the tool haven’t  been properly  used.  To provide  clear cut idea on correlation  regression,  its 
use way of interpretation  of output  of analysis,  this research  article  has been prepared.  Relation  between  two 
or more  variables  can be studied  by using  Correlation  and Regression.  Two variables  are said to be related  if 
change  in the value  of one variable  changes  the value  of other  variable.  Here  the term change  implies  either 
increase or decrease in the value of variable. Relationship between variables can be studied by the method 
of correlation or regression. Such an analysis of relationship can be carried for quantitative or qualitative 
variable  however  this paper  includes  only the analysis  of relationship  betwe en quantitative  variables.  Those 
variables  which  are measurable  and thus have unit are quantitative  variables.  Study  of relationship  between 
two quantitative  variables  at a time is simple  regression  or simple  correlation  and relationship  between  more 
than two quantitative variables may be partial correlation or multiple correlation or multiple regression 
according to the objective/nature of study and variables included in the study (Sthapit, Yadav, Khanal, & 
Dangol,  2017).  
Strength of relationship between two or more variables is studied by using Correlation. Correlation is 
statistical tool that measures how strong relationship exists between variables. Value of correlation lies in 
between -1 and +1. Nearer the value of correlation to zero weak is the relationship between the variables, 
similarly if the value of correlation close to one implies higher (close) relation between variables. Hence 
correlation  is a value  which  tries to explain  degree  of association  between  variables  whereas  regression  tries 
to explain the relationship between variables using a mathematical function. (Gupta & Kapoor,  2014).  Abstract  
The objective of this study is to share knowledge on how to use Correlation and Regression Analysis 
through  Statistical  Package  for Social  Science  (SPSS).  This study  has used secondary  data to demonstrate 
the way of using very popular statistical tool on u sing correlation and regression analysis for novice 
researchers. Among various statistical tools, correlation and regression analysis are mostly used tools in 
many research works., e.g. the field of management, medicine, social science and education. Howev er, 
not all the researchers may know whether the tools are fit to use, how to carry the analysis and how     
to interpret the obtained results. The results shows that novice researchers need to know the proper 
knowledge and skill to analyse the quantitativ e data. The implications of this study is willing to share 
the knowledge on correlation and regression analysis and the way of analyzing through very popular 
software package  SPSS.  
Keyword: Statistical tools, Test of Significance, p -value, Hypothesis, Depe ndent and Independent  
variables