OCEM Journal of  
Management,  Technology  & Social  Sciences  43  diversified  (Mihanović,  Batinić  & Pavičić,  2016).  A certain  percentage  of students  will be always  expected 
to drop out of colleges  but an effort  has to be made  to minimize  it (Meling,  Kupczynski,  Mundy  & Green, 
2012). In today’s global world, economic growth depends on the capacity to produce knowledge, and 
higher education institutions are key role players in developing a knowledge -based economy. Students 
need  to learn  more  in less time,  and quality  has become  increasingly  important  issue  in higher  educational 
institutions  (Sweeney,  2016).  It is obvious  that good  performance  could  make  students  more  satisfied  with 
their study experience, thus improving their acquired knowledge and career development (Bassi, 2019). 
Consequently,  more  effective  degree  courses  at colleges  may attract  more  motivated  students  and receive 
increased funding from the government and oth er institutional lenders, with the result of improving 
their competitive position (Langstrand, Cronemyr & Poksinska, 2014). To satisfy this requirement, it is 
important to modify and make more effective organisation and contents of teaching activities, as well as 
to offer  adequate  services  to students  (Bassi,  2019).  An important  concern  for private  colleges  and public 
colleges is retaining students and understanding the reasons why students of different programs choose 
to leave a programme (Gibson, 2010). Additionally, college education is considered an essential means 
for the social, economic and political development of a country (Hussein & Bahmani 2012). The right 
to access higher education is mentioned in a number of international human rights agreement s; it should 
be the responsibility of governments and educational service providers to ensure broad access and high 
standards of quality of the educational training processes in each and every college (Langstrand et al., 
2014).  
More  specifically,  colleges  should  achieve  high standards  of quality  in teaching,  research,  administrative 
services and available facilities to pursue their mission better in future. In most cases, good quality       
is synonymous with good performance even though the definition of q uality in colleges’ context is 
quite complex and challenging (Pounder 1999). Student satisfaction is deeply rooted in academic, 
managerial, infrastructure and technological factors in educational institutions. Student satisfaction is 
also embedded  in the current  status  of college  surrounding,  lecturers’  educational  qualification,  teaching 
pedagogy, placement practices, students’ support systems, faculty support, roles of faculty head; roles 
of principal and library and lab facilities (Uprety & Chhetri, 2014 ). College education is considered     
as the essential means for the social, economic and political development of a country. The right to 
access higher education is mentioned in a number of international human rights agreements; it should 
be the responsi bility of governments and educational service providers to ensure broad access and high 
standards  of quality  of the training  processes  in college  level  education  (Moller,  2006).  More  specifically, 
colleges should achieve high standards of quality in teaching, research, administrative services and 
available facilities to pursue their mission better. Good performance could make students more satisfied 
with their study experience, thus improving their acquired knowledge and college career. The primary 
objective  of this study  was to examine  the students’  preference  to recommend  their kith and kin to study 
at private  colleges  and the preference  of students  to continue  their higher  education  at private  colleges  in 
Nawalpur  District  of Nepal.  The secondary  objectives  of this study  was to examine  students’  satisfaction 
on managerial factor; support service factor; administrative factor; infrastructure factor on students’ 
preference to recommend for their kith and kin (Chen, 2014). Student satisfaction is a highly debatable 
global  phenomenon  in educational  sector. The rate of high student  turn-over is a serious  problem  at