OCEM  Journal  of 
Management,  Technology  & Social  Sciences  70  
s 
n 
f 
o 
 
l 
l 
i 
Recommendation 
of 
Students’ 
Stafisfaction  f process, physical evidence as mentioned by Gajic (2011). Here product means college program, price 
means,  fee of each course,  placement  means,  internship  and job guarantee,  promotion  means  advertisement 
of college, people means lecturers and administrative  staff, process means different stages of program 
completion and physical evidence means physical facilities of college (Prentice, Brady & McLaughlin, 
2018). Again, improving the college program, reducing the tuition  fee;  improving  the  connection 
with economic environment; the image of college; the academic staff; the management activities, and 
improving  the college  facilities  are key influencing  factors  of student’s  satisfaction  in higher  educational 
institutions (Hanssen & Solvoll,  2015).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Student Satisfaction Model for Higher Education in Nepal  
 
3. Research Task and Problems  
The quantitative research approach was applied in this study because this approach is useful to cover 
larger sample population generates and statistically robust results that can be derived from quantitative 
research are good for estimating the probability  of success. The research method is the survey study  and 
the research instrument is the service questionnaire. The target population was four hundred and fifty 
(n=440) where the sample population was two hundred and four (n=204) There were two hundred and 
four (n= 204) respondents  where  the boy’s  population  was one hundred  and fourteen  (N=114)  [55.88  %] 
and girl’s population was ninety (n = 90) [41.11 % ].  
The target  population  was four hundred  and fifty (n = 440).  The main  research  problem  will examine  the 
student’s intention to recommend to recommend their kith and kin to enrol at higher secondary schools. 
The first sub problem  will examine  the student’s  experiences  and opinions  at grade  11 and 12 grade