OCEM Journal of  
Management,  Technology  & Social  Sciences  57  Factor Influencing Customer Satisfaction at  
BBSM, Bharatpur, Chitwan  
 
 
Dr. Basanta Prasad Adhikari  
Author 
(Research Head, OCEM)  
Email: adhikari_bp@ymail.com  
 
 
 
 
Abstract  
This study aims to examine the customer satisfaction against the price factors, service quality, time 
management to deliver goods to customer and the customer management practice in BhatBhateni Super 
Market (BBSM). The survey method was applied to collect data using structured questionnaire and the 
respondents were customers visiting for shopping at BBSM, Bharatpur, Chitwan. The sampling method 
was the random sampling technique. One hundred and ninety respondents were selected for this study.  
Out of 190 res pondents, 39.12 % (n =76) were male customers and 60. 88 % (n = 114) were female 
customers. The response rate of the survey questionnaire was 87.5 %. Univariate analysis were carried 
out by using different simple descriptive statistical tools The Chi -Squar e test, Factor Reduction Model 
and Logistic  Regression  Analysis  Model  were  multivariate  the statistical  techniques  employed  to get the 
results. Previous studies on customer satisfaction show that it merely depends upon the price factors, 
service quality, time management to deliver goods to customer and customer management factor. The 
results  showed  that there  was statistically  significant  association  between  the better  customer  relationship 
management and customer satisfaction at BBSM (p <  0.05, B= .438). But the results also showed that 
there  is no significant  association  between  customers  centered  service  facilities  and equipped  technology 
used by BBSM (p > 0.05). The implication of this study will be beneficial to the board members of th e 
company executives to formulate new customer -center strategy and also useful to the branch managers 
of BBSM all over the  country.  
Keyword: Strategy, Customer Management, Association, Factor Analysis, Logistic Regression.  
 
1. Introduction  
The degree of fulfi lment of customer’s expectation, needs and demands with the level of service is 
consumer satisfaction. Simon & Gómez (2013) define customer satisfaction as “a person’s feeling of 
pleasure or disappointment from comparing a product’s perceived performance i n relation to his or her 
expectations” (p.15). The definition of the customer’s satisfaction is embedded in reasonable price of 
the product, quality of the product, service after sales, and the behaviour of the staff of the company. 
Additionally, customer satisfaction is simply stated as a customer’s evaluation of their purchase and 
consumption experience with a product, service, brand, or company (Kotler & Armstrong, 2012). More 
significantly,  customer’s  satisfaction  is deeply  rooted  in affecting  customers ’ repeating  purchase  decisions