OCEM  Journal  of 
Management,  Technology  & Social  Sciences  12  3. Research Task, Data Collection &  Analysis  
This research  study  had used a mixed  method  design  that is both hypothesis  testing  and hypothesis  generating. 
Girls aged, 10 -16 years as the secondary schoolers were identified by visiting local government offices in 
Chitwan District of Nepal. The key informants and immediate parents of the LBGs were contacted for the 
collection of data of both quantitative and qualitative approaches Moreover, the sample population was 
selected from  both private and public institutions (for example, Schools, Hospitals, Police Departments, 
Local Child Clubs, Nongovernment Organizations (Cohen et al., 2007). Two hundred and thirty seven left 
behind  girls (LBGs)  were  selectated  randomly.  All the sample  population  were  contacted  by the field visits, 
email,  and personal  contact,  telephone  conversation,  via local  government  and regional  authorities  and other 
means of communication. Data analysis tools of this study were content analysis and descriptive statistics 
analysis (Cohen et al, 2007; Lichtman, 2006; Thomas, 2009). The Factors Reduction Method was applied 
to reduce the number of variables. After that, the Logistic Regression Model via Principal Component  
Analysis Method was used to fin d the relationship between dependent and independent variables. The 
descriptive statistics analysis was also computed to calculate subscales, grand mean values, and standard 
deviation. Again, the values of Cronbach’s Alpha were computed to examine the reliability and internal 
consistency  of the subscales  of this study  (Creswell  & Plano  Clark,  2018;  Cohen  et al, 2011).  This research 
project had followed the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child (UNCRC) which became useful to 
recap  the main  principles  here.  The UNCRC  to children  research  was fully followed  to minimize  the ethical 
dilemmas for the LBGs. Again, all the principles of child ethic were fully followed during the period of 
the data collection and analysis. A consent form was sent in advance, f ollow -up was continued until the 
consent forms returned. Personal data of each participant and interviewee were guaranteed not to publish 
(Gibb,  2007).  A short  interview  with six interviewees  was conducted  with six left behind  girls to deepen  the 
consequences  of MIM  to the LBGs  for their health,  education  & psychosocial  development.  
4. Results  
The results of the 237 survey respondents were involved in this study where approximately, 45% of the 
sampled girls were under the age of 12 and 55% of them  were between the ages of 12 to16. Thirteen 
respondents  did not return  the survey  questionnaires.  The response  rate was approximately  95% which  was 
excellent response rate. The analysis was based on Factor Reduction Model via Principal Component to 
find the new Principal  Components.  The new PCs were  named  based  on the grouped  variable  decided  by 
the Factor  Reduction  Model.  In the second  phase,  subscales  were  identified  based  on descriptive  statistics 
where the values of grand mean and Standard Deviation (SD) were calculated. The analysis further 
applied the Binary Logistic Regression (BLR) Analysis which examined the relationship between the 
independent  and dependent  variables.  The BLR  model  examined  the positive  and negative  consequences 
of MIM to the LBGS for their education, health and psychosocial development. The results have also 
presented the summary of the vales of mean, SD, Cronbach’s Alpha and p values. The Wholesome 
Model for the s ignificant indicators was computed to examine the consequences of MIM to the LBGs. 
(Jampaklay, Richter, Tangchonlatip & Nanthamongkolchai, 2018). The mean values of the subscales 
less than 3.00 signify that the LBGS were not adequately supported by their i mmediate parents for their 
education, health and psychosocial development after their  MIM.