OCEM Journal of  
Management,  Technology  & Social  Sciences  129  1.7 Partial  correlation : 
Correlation  between  two variables  keeping  the effect  of remaining  variable  constant  is partial  correlation. 
If we are inter ested to study the relationship between two variables X1 and X2 while there exists another 
variable X3 then the correlation between X1 and X2 keeping the value of X3 constant is partial correlation 
between X1 and X2 keeping X3 constant, denoted by r12.3. Value of partial correlation lies in between -1 
and +1.  
r12.3 =                 
 
√(       )   (      ) 
 
 
1. 8 Multiple  Correlation : 
Correlation  between  predicted  and the actual  values  of the dependent  variable  in a linear  regression  model 
that includes  an intercept . In other  words  it is the relationship  between  dependent  variable  and joint effect 
of independent variable on dependent variable In statistics , the coefficient of multiple correlation is a 
measure of how well a given variable can be predicted using a linear function of a set of other  variables.  
If X1 be dependent variable which is described by X2 and X3 then the correlation between actual value of 
X1 predicted value of X1 is denoted by R1.23, in other way, it is the correlation between dependent variable 
X1 and joint effect of X2 and X3 on X1 The value of multiple correlation lie s in between 0 and 1.  
                      
 R1.23 = √   
 
 
 
1.9 Regression  analysis : 
Regression  analysis  tries to study  the relationship  between  two or variables  with the help of equation,  the 
equation  is called  regression  line. The line is also called  line of best fit since  it is obtained  by the method 
of least square. Least Square Method is estimation of parameters of regression equation by minimizing 
the error sum of square of  dependent.  
Regression analysis established the nature of relationship between two or more variables and then 
estimates the unknown variable (dependent variable) with the help of known variable (independent 
variables). In other words there are two types of variables i n a regression analysis. The variables, which 
is used to predict the variable of interest is called the independent or explanatory variable or predictor, 
and the variable whose value is to be predicted is called the dependent variable or explained variable  or 
regressed. (Montgomery, 1982)  
 
1.10 Simple  regression:  
If relationship between two (one dependent and other independent) variables is studied at a time then the  
regression is called simple, whereas the study of more than two variables at a time is multiple. 
If Y is a dependent variable and X is an independent variable then regression equation of Y  is- 
Y = a + b  X 
Where,  
a = y intercept = constant = value of Y when  X = 0  
b = regression coefficient = slope coefficient = change in the value of Y per unit change in the value  
of X.