OCEM Journal of  
Management,  Technology  & Social  Sciences  37  convert classroom practice into professional life (Lester, Hannah, Harms, Vogelgesang & Avolio, 2011). 
Similarly, introducing one to one partnership under coaching of trained and certified mentors are valuable 
for leadership development (Hooijberg & Lane, 2009).  
 
3. Methodology  
The research methodology of this paper was review of previous articles based on theoretical review of 
the selected ten (n = 10) published articles which helps to identify new knowledge about an emerging 
topic of MBA p rograms (Torraco, 2005). The review method study has followed the study of  Chermack 
and Passmore (2005) which argue that the review approach is a key research method for summarizing 
the current body of literature pertinent to MBA programs and leadership sk ills. This approach helps this 
researcher  to provide  the framework  of the research  method.  Throughout  the examination  of the different 
articles based on MBA programs and leadership skills in different journal (Academy Of Management 
Learning &  Education, the Journal of Leadership Education, the Journal of Higher Education Policy 
And Management,  the Journal  of Marketing  Education  Review,  Harvard  Business  Review  Press,  Journal 
of Business Ethics), finally 20 articles have been chosen from the fiv e different management journals 
from  2002  to 2018.  The reviewed  journal  articles  have  highlighted  the key knowledge  on MBA  program 
and its delivered skills. The model summary tables include the name of the sample article, the name of 
journal, key finding, published years and key words (Ibeh, Carter, Poff, & Hamill,  2008).  
 
4. Findings &  Discussion  
4.1 Summary and the  Conclusions  
The review results show that MBA programs have to set pedagogical practices to teach leadership       
in a context that value awareness, reflection and development. The results also indicate that many 
graduate students from reputed business schools are una ble to show integrative thinking as compared  
to undergraduates from other domains. It also confirms that most of the business courses and schools 
were being criticized only to make money for the University and their professors and there was little 
relevan ce of the output on career development and managerial practices. The review results also note 
that the selection  of the good  instruments  and tools  are essential  for the development  of a leader  who can 
help themselves  and others.  It is further  summarized  that drives,  experiences,  awareness,  learning  ability, 
leadership traits, capability and derailment risks were the seven scale instruments for the leadership 
development. This reviews also that shows that Business Schools have to work to fulfill the expect ation 
of the global companies and MBA students. The results also highlighted that students were not aware of 
what they needed to do after completion of the MBA Degree. Further, results show that MBA students 
were found of lacking technical and human skills  which make them confused toward their conceptual 
skills  to use at appropriate  time.  In addition,  the results  also indicate  that the scholars  were  not happy  with 
the pedagogy of delivering the MBA Degree skills. The results further noted that students of B usiness 
Schools perceived MBA programs for making money as a cash cow. It was also noted that the MBA 
Degree  was developed  for the development  of leadership  skills  for business  purposes  which  was possible 
through  behavioral  aspects,  e.g. self-awareness,  assessment,  reflection  and coaching.  Similarly,  the results 
indicate  that the pedagogical  development  was essential  for development  of dynamic  leaders  to compete 
with this tough and competitive business environment. The results importantly disclosed that p edagogy, 
material, ability to coach, self -awareness, reflection ability and level of assessment were found to be the 
key indicators  of developing  a qualified  leader.  It was also highlighted  that the institutional  and individual