OCEM  Journal  of 
Management,  Technology  & Social  Sciences  118  The study  of internet  addiction  among  adolescent  of Oxford 
College  of Engineering  and Management  (OCEM)  
 
Ganga Prasad Sapkota  
Lecturer, HOD statistics (BMC)  
E-mail: gangasapkota3067@gmail.com  
 
 
Abstract  
The primary objective of this study was to determine the prevalence of internet addiction (IA) among 
contributory factors and to determine the association between socio -demographic variables and 
influencing factors of using internet among Oxford College of  Engineering and Management (OCEM) 
students. The quantitative approach along with the survey study was used as a research method and the 
survey questionnaire was used as the research instrument. Participants were selected through simple 
random  sampling.  The cross  sectional  analytical  study  was conducted  among  169 adolescents  of OCEM 
students. The results show that prevalence rate of non -addictive internet users were 20.1%  while 
79.9% were addictive users. Among addictive users, 38.5% were found mild addict ion, 40.8% were 
found moderate addiction, only 0.6% were found in severe addiction. The results also shows that the 
prevalence of internet addiction was significantly high among young generation. Internet addiction was 
also statistically significant with v arious demographic variables and internet use factors. The previous 
studies reveal that internet has become an integral part of contemporary life, bringing huge benefits in 
terms of expanding access to knowledge, information, social interaction, and entert ainment and further 
noted that around 40% of the today’s world population has an internet access. The implications of this 
study will be beneficial to parents, educational leaders, school and college principals to understand the 
internet addiction problems  and to formulate new academic policy to minimize the over use of internet 
during teaching and learning activities. It is also recommended that internet addiction can affect the 
physical and mental health of the students so that the problem of internet add iction should be prevented 
through it’s awareness program on the negative effects of over use of internet.  
 
Keywords: Prevalence; Internet addiction; Inter addiction; youth of OCEM  
 
1. Introduction  
Internet was established in the early 1960 by the U.S. Depart ment of Defense primarily for military 
purposes.  Since  then,  the continual  improvement  of the internet  technology  has provided  an extraordinary 
level of public accessibility to wide range forms of communication Intra -organizational and inter - 
organizational email; data storage, management transfer, social websites like Facebook , twitter, and so 
forth. Due to the development and sprea d of cheaper and more user -friendly computer technology and 
software (e.g., portable computers, Microsoft Word), the use of the internet has increased dramatically 
(Wanajak,  2011) . Today around  50 % of the world  population  has an internet  connection.  In 1995, it was