OCEM  Journal  of 
Management,  Technology  & Social  Sciences  36  events and activities, including conferences and recruitment opportunities (Anderson, 2006).  
 
2.3 Contemporary Approach to Fulfill the Expectations & Cope the  Challenges  
The business  environment  is being  more  complex  day by day, which  is demanding  more  talented,  innovative 
and dynamic leaders. Leadership development is a stage of enhancement in the life cycle which helps, 
encourages  and supports  the expansion  of knowledge  and expertise  required  to optimize  one’s  leadership 
competencies  & performance  (Dator,  Gravin,  & Cullen,  2014).  It is complex  and multidimensional  field 
that continues to evolve time and again (Montgomery, 2005). On the other hand, business schools are 
criticized  to not teach  the right contents,  whether  that is ethical  management,  decision  making  or a greater 
emphasis on input of globalization (Bazerman &  Moore, 2009; Collinson, 2014). Furthermore, MBA 
program has not been given enough effort to training for leadership development skills (Mintzberg & 
Gosling, 2002; Pfeffer & Fong, 2002). MBA programs have to set of pedagogical practices to enhance 
leadersh ip skills in a context that value for the awareness, reflection and development (Roseser & Peck, 
2009; Waddock, &Lozano,  2013).  
The contemporary approach of leadership (new pedagogy) development focuses on the opportunities   
to learn about the experience,  motives, values aspiration and their interaction with the people around 
them  that influence  how they are and how they lead the business  organizations  (Pfeffer  & Sutton,  2006).; 
Lawrence  et al., 2018).  Furthermore,  it should  be based  on values  awareness,  reflection  and development 
designed  to foster  personal  and professional  growth  (Lawrence,  Dunn  & Weisfeld -Spolter,  2018;  Roeser 
& Peck, 2009). In addition, the published articles were failed to link between theory and practices because 
book learning and skills building are also essentials to develop the dynamic leaders which is not found in the 
reviewed articles (Benjamin & O Reilly, 2011; Peffer & Sutton, 1999). The learning material (pedagogy) 
should  focus  on pedagogy  which  could  build  ability  to intera ct with other  leaders,  followers  and organizational 
actors, who exist from dynamic environment (Podsakoff, MacKenzie, Lee & Podsakoff, 2003; Collinson, 
2014). It is a transformational experience where they should gain self-insight and self-knowledge, desir e and 
motivation to be a great leader. They must feel confident and being a great leader, self-efficiency in acting 
like a leader, think like a leader, mastering critical task and to cope with stress and emotions (Klimoski & 
Amos,  2012).  The recent  evidence  of business  leadership  development  programs  is located  on self-awareness, 
iterative  learning  and reflection,  and leadership  coaching  for development  utilizing  an assessment  of leadership 
potential  with established  reliable  and valid  measure  (Lawrence  et al., 2018)  but current  MBA  programs  were 
failed to deliver the practical skills for professional leaders.  
It is important to select the good instruments and tools to develop the leader who can help themselves and 
others. Good instruments prese nt the seven scale tools i.e. drives, experiences, awareness, learning ability, 
leadership traits, capability and derailment risks (Gapper, 2005) which will help to be an accountable, 
handle the complexity and be able to create the scope (Hooijberg & Lane,  2009). With the support  of 
these instruments, it was also thought that other tools are also valuable to develop the competent leader 
like, multisource 360 feedback system (Breft & Atwater, 2001; Hooijberg V lane, 2009), Service learning 
(Steiner & Watson , 2006), Personality assessment (Brungardt, 1997 & Carvan, 2015); Clinical counseling 
(Chermack  & Passmore,  2005)  which  are the common  tools  preferred  by the universities.  On the other  hand, 
the question  has raised  to know  the capability  to lead in this complex  environment.  The review  articles  have 
presented  the norms  to compare  the competency  with successful  global  leader  at each level  from  individual 
to CEO  to identify  the strength  and weakness  or knowing  oneself  which  means,  examine  the ability  to