OCEM  Journal  of 
Management,  Technology  & Social  Sciences  42  Original Article  
Factors Influencing Students’ Satisfaction in Oxford  
College of Engineering and  Management, 
Gaindakot -2, Nawalpur  of Nepal.  
 
Dr. Basanta Prasad Adhikari  
Email: adhikari_bp@ymail.com  
 
 
Abstract  
The objective  of this study  was to examine  the students’  recommendation  to their kith and kin to enrol  at 
Oxford College of Engineering and Management (OCEM) for the higher education study. The previous 
studies reveal that students’ satisfaction was embedded in collage physical facilities, administrative 
facilities, program quality, quality of academic staf f, location of college and reputation of colleges. 
Quantitative research approach was used as research methodology and the survey study was use as 
research method applied to collect data from the respondents. The sampling methods was first purpsive 
and the  second was random sampling method. Two hundred and thirty seven respondents (n=237) were 
participated in this study. The response rate of the survey questionnaire was 94.8 %. The reliability 
analysis  was used to find the value  of Cronbach’s  Alpha  in order  to find out the reliability  and consistency 
of the data. Twelve subscales were extracted from the variables of each Principal Component. Similarly, 
Student t-Test was used to find the differences in boys and girls for their recommendation to enrol their 
kith and kin at OCEM, Nawalpur of Nepal. Fifty seven male (24 %) and one hundred and eighty female 
(76 %) students were participated in this study. The results highlighted that female students were more 
satisfied than the male students at  OCEM.  
The results  aslo show  that strict  student  development  schedule  was positively  and statistically  significantly 
associated with the preference of students’ recommendation to enrol their kith and kin at OCEM (p < 
0.05, B = .486). Similarly, the results further show that physical facilities of OCEM was positively and 
statistically significantly associated to students’ preference to recommend their kith and kin to enrol at 
OCEM (p < 0.05. B = 1.038). The results of Multiple Regression Analysis also highlighted  that there  
is significance association between students’ preference and locations of the college. The implications 
of the findings will be beneficial for the private and public colleges to understand the reason behind the 
declining trends of students’ enrolment at Ch itwan and Nawalparasi Districts. It  will be also fruitful  
for the policy makers of higher educational institutions to formulate new student friendly strategies and 
student motivation  policies.  
 
Keywords: Student satisfaction, physical facilities, academi c qualities, administrative facilities, location  
and reputation of the college, extracurricular activities, Principal Component Analysis  
 
Introduction  
All the college  level  organizations  have  been  facing  the challenges  of student’s  retention  globally.  This 
has increased  in recent  years  as the participation  in higher  education  has increased  significantly  and