OCEM  Journal  of 
Management,  Technology  & Social  Sciences  26  The Pie Chart in the Figure 1 has presented the number of citation counts, percentage covered by each 
article and title of each most cited article. The first most cited article was derived from JCE which was 
“Gamifying  learning  experience:  Practical  implications  and outcomes”  published  in 2013  cited  801 times 
(27%).  The second  most  cited  published  article  was derived  from  JCE which  was entitled  “Current  status, 
opportunities and challenges of augmented reality in education” publi shed in 2013 cited by 606 times 
(20%). The third most cited article was derived from JETRD which was “Flipping the classroom and 
instructional  technology  integration  in a college -level  information  system  spreadsheet  course”  published 
in 2013 cited by 506 t imes and has covered 17%. (Davies, Dean & Ball, 2013). The fourth most cited 
article  was derived  from  JCAL  which  was “Technological  pedagogical  content  knowledge  (TPACK)”  and 
published in 2013, published in 2015 cited by 410 times (14%). The fifth most cited article was derived 
from JCE which was “Assessing the effects of gamification in the classroom: A longitudinal study on 
intrinsic motivation, social comparison, satisfa ction, effort, and academic performance” published in 
2014 which was cited 352 times  (12%).  
The sixth most cited article was derived from BJET which was “Putting twitter to the test: Assessing 
outcomes for student collaboration, engagement and success” pub lished in 2013 which was cited 259 
times (8%) (Junco, Elavsky & Heiberger, 2013). The seventh most cited article was entitled “Delving 
into Participants’ Profiles and Use of Social Tools in MOOCs” which was derived from IEEE TLT, 
published in 2013 cited 54  times (2%). The research theme of the seven most cited articles was the 
massive open online courses and educational technology. The article had cover the participants’  profiles 
on MOOCs, social tools on MOOCs and digital education of the future. Here, the  observations of the 
current researcher also conclude that JCE has been seen as demonizing journal according to per  selected 
journals and per year among the five selected journals. It was also noted that different types of research 
methods were used in the  most cited seven articles, for example, a mixed methods design, review 
method, longitudinal survey method, the cross sectional survey method, qualitative interview method, 
and quantitative method. The results further indicate that a reviewed method was us ed in many of the 
reviewed articles and research objects mentioned in the most cited articles had given the same message 
that ICT has to be interconnected in teaching and learning activities in our classroom for the quality 
education.  Meanwhile  reviewed  method was the first and the mixed  method  was seemed  the next second 
dominating research approach among the seven most cited published articles. In all seven most cited 
articles, different research approaches, for example, quantitative method, a mixed method s research, 
review method and the qualitative research method. Similarly, different research instruments were used 
in the seven  most  cited  articles,  for example,  the survey  questionnaire,  the qualitative  interview  question 
and focus group discussion. There  were many similarities and contrasts among the seven most cited 
articles, for example, the research method and research instrument and key words used in the articles 
(Creswell, 2017).  
The review of seven most cited articles according to per five selected journals and per year among the 
five selected journals between 2013 to 2017 has highlighted the key results in the field of educational 
technology research. The current study has suppor ted the empirical studies of Abramovich, Schunn  
and Higashi (2013) because the study of Abramovich et al. (2013) had also concluded that the articles 
published  in the former  years  had greater  number  of citation  counts  than articles  published  in the later