OCEM  Journal  of 
Management,  Technology  & Social  Sciences  8  1. Introduction  
Among various consequences of MIM, family constellation, a number of siblings, birth order of the 
siblings and the educational, health and psychosocial development of the left behind girls (LBGs) under 
the age of 16 have gained increasing attention from th e migration and sociology scholars as well as the 
social  science  researchers  in the Asian  context  (Adhikari,  2018).  The primary  objective  of this study  was to 
examine  the consequences  of MIM  to the LBGs  for their education,  health  and psychosocial  developm ent 
in the Asian  countries  based  on the family  constellation,  birth  order,  gender,  age differences  and a number 
of siblings in mother migrant households (Cortes, 2015; Lahaie, Hayes, Peng & Wong, 2015; Piper, & 
Heymann,  2009;  Thimothy  & Sasikumar,  2012;  Yeoh  & Lam,  2016;  Meyerhoefer  & Chen,  2010;  Bhadra, 
2007).  It is not yet known  that both theoretically  and practically,  as to whether  the LBGs  are particularly 
vulnerable or not. It is also not known that how, when and under what circumstances, the LBGs ar e 
suffering after their MIM (Adhikari, 2018; Dhar, 2012; Torgler & Valev, 2016). The previous studies  
on MIM have largely been focused on macro determinants and economic and demographic changes, 
however;  the special  issues  of educational,  health  and psychosocial  development  of the LBGs  have  been 
marginalized  and less prioritized  (Resurreccion,  2005;  Adhikari,  2018;  Battistella  & Conaco,  1998;  Rossi, 
2009). Many LBGs have already turned on antisocial activities (for example, addiction of alcohol and 
drugs, unprotected sexual attempts, prostitution, criminal activities) which have been increased due to 
the lack of mother’s  physical  attachment  with them  (Abramsky  et al., 2018;  Adhikari,  2018).  As a result, 
the negative consequences have been increased on educational, health and psychosocial development of 
the LBGs  in the Asian  countries,  like Nepal  (Adhikari,  2018;  Bouchoucha,  2013;  Mazhuvanchery,  2015; 
Pescaru,  2015).  
The next issues  of consequences  of MIM  to the LBGs  are embedded  in the number  of siblings  in family,  their 
age, gender,  relationships  with siblings,  relationship  with parents  and their birth  order  which  can inherently 
impact  on the educational,  health  and psychosocial  development  of the LBGs.  Based  on the socialization 
and interaction perspectives, the experiences of the childhood with siblings are possible indicators to 
affect the individual’s gender identity, intellectual development, and personality characteristics which 
can affect the outcomes of educat ional and career development (Recchia & Wainryb, 2014). Four major 
characteristics of sibling relations in early childhood are embedded in the sibling interactions; intimacy; 
large individual differences and the age difference between siblings. Resources a nd opportunities are 
embedded in different extent in the sibling structure in each child in the family which accompanies 
socialization practices among siblings, but the higher birth order is also closely related to large sibship 
size which is also negative ly related to educational outcomes (Hauser & Sewell 1985; Black, Devereux 
& Salvanes,  2016).  The number  of siblings,  age and the birth  order  of siblings  are also directly  embedded 
in girl’s educational development. With additional siblings, each child’s av erage share of parents’ time, 
energy,  and money  which  will be lowered  or leading  to lower  educational  attainment  (Group  of colleagues, 
2012).  Socially,  boys  are provided  with more  educational  opportunities  than girls because  parents  believe 
that they will be able to support financially to their elderly age. Conversely, girls are taught to cook and 
clean so that they will be able to take care of their own families after marriage. Again, the household 
responsibilities, together with pla y activities, are the only socialization areas in which both parents treat 
girls differently from boys (Lytton and Romney 1991; Quadlin, 2018; Alekseeva, Rzhanova, Fominykh 
& Zyryanova,  2016).  The previous  literature  reveals  that girls’  time spent  on domes tic work  increases  in