OCEM  Journal  of 
Management,  Technology  & Social  Sciences  84  making in educational organizations (Citroen, 2010). As consequences, the characterises of information 
in strategic  management  such as the quality,  the sources  and actual  use of available  informatio n during  the 
process of strategic decision making are not recognized as important issues (Mishra, Allen & Pearman, 
2014).  
 
2.4 Information and communication technology  (ICT)  
Today computers have surprisingly supported to find applications for practically every business  process 
in the educational institutions, this development has had a great influence on the way college executives 
need to operate nowadays. If we restrict ourselves t o the more strategic issues, the decision -making 
process has completely changed over the last decade by the way information has become available and 
travels over communication services that are common now (Citroen, 2010). The potential influence     
of ICT  on strategic decision -making can be summarised as better forecasting accuracy and decision - 
making time horizon, more unanimous decision -making processes through better internal and external 
communication and thus being able to conclude an accurate decisi on-making process . The decision can 
be postponed  if organizations  have  not sufficient  information  to make  rational  strategic  making  (Marques, 
Moniz &  de Sousa, 2018). There is little research into the use of the Internet as an information source 
for strategic decision -making. On the use of the Internet as ‘decision support information technology 
for college leaders and executives in both the private an d public sector’, concludes that “The Internet is 
used in all levels of management involving a number of functional areas which is perceived by college 
executives as a decision -support information technology that contributes positively in improving their 
rational decision making practices in (Elbanna, 2006).  
 
2.5 The role of information in the decision  process  
The information is so important in this competitive world to make a rational strategic decision making 
because organizational operations have to cope wit h high costs, small margins and fixed markets, so 
management has to be very alert and perform proper analyses on, e.g. educational market developments 
before  decisions  can be taken.  The educational  institutions  is more  opportunity  driven  now and can react 
faster with sufficient information (Citroen, 2010 ). For each strategic issue decision, the best decision 
structure can only be obtained when it is clear that all information is available in the proper format and 
is reliable and can be understood by all st akeholders. College executives comment that after collecting 
additional  information  an effort  is required  for studying  and analyzing  this additional  information.  Firsthand 
information mostly come from consultations with internal staff from the departments involved. Lacking 
this expertise or in cases where an external opinion is indicated, studies are also often commissioned to 
external organizations or consultancies. Therefore, it is concluded that both internal and external first 
hand information is a back bone of the rational strategic decision making (Aharoni, Tihanyi & Connelly, 
2011).  
 
2.6 Quality of information for strategic  decision -making  
The college executives are always in the stress of the characteristics of the quality of the information 
required  by the board.  Correct  strategic  decisions  can only be taken  on correct  and complete  information.