Page 9 of 13
 Kim et al. BMC Medical Imaging           (2022) 22:69 
 
knowledge if the entire weights and biases are initialized, 
but this is still considered as TL in the literature.
It is also worth noting that only a few studies [53, 54] 
employed native 3D-CNN. Both studies reported that 
3D-CNN outperformed 2D-CNN and 2.5-CNN mod -
els, however, Zhang et  al. [53] set the number of the 
frames to 16 and Xiong et  al. [54] reduced the resolu -
tion up to 21*21*21 voxels due to the limitation of com -
puter resources. The majority of the studies constructed 
2D-CNN or 2.5D-CNN from 3D inputs. In order to 
reduce the processing burden, only a sample of image 
slices from 3D inputs was taken. We expect that the num -
ber of studies employing 3D models will increase in the 
future as high-performance DL is an emerging research 
topic.
We confirmed (Fig.  5c) that only a limited amount of 
data was available in most studies for medical image 
analysis. Many studies took advantage of using pub -
licly accessible medical datasets from grand challenges 
(https:// grand- chall enge. org/ chall enges). This is a par -
ticularly beneficial scientific practice because novel 
solutions are shared online allowing for better repro -
ducibility. We summarized 78 publicly available medical 
datasets in Additional file  3: Suppl. Table 3 (Appendix C), 
which were organized based on the following five attrib -
utes: data modality, anatomical part/region, task type, 
data name, published year and the link.
Although most evaluated papers included only brief 
information about their hardware setup, no details were 
provided about training or test time performance. As 
most medical data sets are small, usually consumer-grade 
GPUs in custom workstations or seldom server-grade 
cards (P100 or V100) were sufficient for TL. Previous 
survey studies have investigated how DL can be opti -
mized and sped up on GPUs [55] or by using specifically 
designed hardware accelerators like field-programmable 
gate arrays (FPGA) for neural network inference [56]. 
We could not investigate these aspects of efficient TL 
because execution time was rarely reported in the sur -
veyed literature.
This study is limited to surveying only TL for medi -
cal image classification. However, many interesting 
task-oriented TL studies were published in the past few 
years, with a particular focus on object detection and 
image segmentation [57], as reflected by the amount of 
public data sets (see also Additional file  3: Appendix C., 
Table 3). We only investigated off-the-shelf CNN mod -
els pretrained on ImageNet and intentionally left out 
custom CNN architectures, although these can poten -
tially outperform TL-based models on certain tasks 
[58, 59]. Also, we did not evaluate aspects of potential 
model improvements leveraged by the differences of 
the source- and the target domain of the training data used for TL [60]. Similarly, we did not evaluate vision 
transformers (ViT) [61], which are emerging for image 
data analysis. For instance, Liu et al. [62] compared 22 
backbone models and four ViT models and concluded 
that one of the ViT models exhibited the highest accu -
racy trained on cropped cytopathology cell images. 
Recently, Chen et al. [63] proposed a novel architecture 
that is a parallel design of MobileNet and ViT, in view 
of achieving not only more efficient computation but 
also better model performance.
Conclusion
We aimed to provide actionable insights to the readers 
and ML practitioners, on how to select backbone CNN 
models and tune them properly with consideration of 
medical data characteristics. While we encourage readers 
to methodically search for the optimal choice of model 
and TL setup, it is a good starting point to employ deep 
CNN models (preferably ResNet or Inception) as feature 
extractors. We recommend updating only the last fully 
connected layers of the chosen model on the medical 
image dataset. In case the model performance needs to 
be refined, the model should be fine-tuned by incremen -
tally unfreezing convolutional layers from top to bottom 
layers with a low learning rate. Following these basic steps 
can save computational costs and time without degrading 
the predictive power. Finally, publicly accessible medi -
cal image datasets were compiled in a structured table 
describing the modality, anatomical region, task type and 
publication year as well as the URL for accession.
Abbreviations
AUC : Area under the receiver operating characteristic curve; CT: Computed 
tomography; CNN: Convolutional neural networks; DL: Deep learning; FC: Fully 
connected; FPGA: Field‑programmable gate arrays; GPU: Graphics process‑
ing unit; HOG: Histograms of oriented gradients; ILSVRC: ImageNet large 
scale visual recognition challenge; LBP: Local binary pattern; MRI: Magnetic 
resonance imaging; OCT: Optical coherence tomography; TL: Transfer learning; 
TPU: Tensor processing unit; ViT: Vision transformer; WSI: Whole slide image.
Supplementary Information
The online version contains supplementary material available at https:// doi. 
org/ 10. 1186/ s12880‑ 022‑ 00793‑7.
Additional file 1.  Search terms.
Additional file 2.  Summary table of studies.
Additional file 3. Summary table of public medical datasets.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Joseph Babcock (Catholic University of 
Paris) and Jonathan Griffiths (Academic Writing Support Center, Heidelberg 
University) for proofreading and Fabian Siegel MD and Frederik Trinkmann 
MD (Medical Faculty Mannheim, Heidelberg University) for comments on 
the manuscript. We would like to thank the reviewer for their constructive 
feedback.