Page 6 of 13 Kim et al. BMC Medical Imaging           (2022) 22:69 
Besides the benchmark studies, the most prevalent 
model was the Inception (n = 26) that consists of the least 
parameters shown in Table  1. AlexNet (n = 14) and VGG 
(n = 10) were the next commonly used models although 
they are shallower than ResNet (n = 5) and Inception-
Resnet (n = 2). Finally, only a few studies (n = 7) used a 
specific model such as LeNet5, DenseNet, CheXNet, 
DarkNet, OverFeat or CaffeNet.
Transfer learning
Similar to the backbone model, the majority of models 
(n = 46) evaluated numerous TL approaches, which are 
illustrated in Fig.  4c. Many researchers aimed to search 
for the optimal choice of TL approach. Typically, grid 
search was applied. Shin and his colleagues [36] exten -
sively evaluated three components by varying three 
CNN models (CifarNet, AlexNet and GoogLeNet) with 
three TL approaches (feature extractor, fine-tuning from 
scratch with and without random initialization), and the 
fine-tuned GoogLeNet from scratch without random ini -
tialization was identified as the best performing model.
The most popular TL approach was feature extractor 
(n = 38) followed by fine-tuning from scratch (n = 27), 
feature extractor hybrid (n = 7) and fine-tuning (n = 3). 
Feature extractor takes the advantage of saving compu -
tational costs by a large degree compared to the others. 
Likewise, the feature extractor hybrid can profit from 
the same advantage by removing the FC layers and add -
ing less expansive machine learning algorithms. This is 
particularly beneficial for CNN models with heavy FC 
layers like AlexNet and VGG. Fine-tuning from scratch 
was the second most popular approach despite it being 
the most resource-expensive type because it updates the 
entire model. Fine-tuning is less expensive compared to 
the fine-tuning from scratch as it partially updates the parameters of the convolutional layers. Additional file  2: 
Table 2 in Appendix B presents an overview of four TL 
approaches which were organized based on three dimen -
sions: data modality, data subject and TL type.
Data characteristics
As the summary of data characteristics is depicted in 
Fig.  5, a variety of human anatomical regions has been 
studied. Most of the studied regions were breast cancer 
exams and skin cancer lesions. Likewise, a wide variety 
of imaging modalities contained a unique attribute of 
medical image analysis. For instance, computed tomog -
raphy (CT) scans and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) 
are capable of generating 3D image data, while digital 
microscopy can generate terabytes of whole slide image 
(WSI) of tissue specimens.
Figure  5b shows that the majority of studies consist of 
binary classes, while Fig.  5c shows that the majority of 
studies have fallen into the first bin which ranges from 0 
to 600. Minor publications are not depicted in Fig.  5 for 
the following reasons: the experiment was conducted 
with multiple subjects (human body parts); multiple 
tasks; multiple databases; or the subject is non-human 
body images (e.g. surgical tools).
Performance visualization
Figure  6 shows scatter plots of model performance, TL 
type and two data characteristics: data size and image 
modality. The Y coordinates adhere to two metrics, 
namely area under the receiver operating characteris -
tic curve (AUC) and accuracy. Eleven studies used both 
metrics, so they are displayed on both scatter plots. The 
X coordinate is the normalized data quantity, otherwise 
it is not fair to compare the classification performance 
with two classes versus ten classes. The data quantities of 
Fig. 4 Studies of transfer learning in medical image classification over time (y‑axis) with respect to a the number of publications, b applied 
backbone model and c transfer learning type