Page 8 of 13 Kim et al. BMC Medical Imaging           (2022) 22:69 
three modalities—CT, MRI and Microscopy—reflect the 
number of patients.
For the fair comparison, studies employed only a single 
model, TL type and image modality are depicted (n = 41). 
Benchmark studies were excluded; otherwise, one study 
would generate several overlapping data points and 
potentially lead to bias. The excluded studies are either 
with multiple models (n = 57), with multiple TL types 
(n = 14) or with minor models like LeNet (n = 9).
According to Spearman’s rank correlation analyses, 
there were no relevant associations observed between 
the size of the data set and performance metrics. Data 
size and AUC (Fig.  6a, c) showed no relevant correlation 
 (rsp = 0.05, p = 0.03). Similarly, only a weak positive trend 
 (rsp = 0.13, p = 0.17) could be detected between the size 
of the dataset and accuracy (Fig.  6b, d). There was also no 
association between other variables such as modality, TL 
type and backbone model. For instance, the data points 
of models, such as feature extractors that were fitted into 
optical coherence tomography (OCT) images (purple 
crosses, Fig.  6a, b) showed that larger data quantities did 
not necessarily guarantee better performance. Notably, 
data points in cross shapes (models as feature extractors) 
showed decent results even though only a few fully con -
nected layers were being retrained.
Discussion
In this survey of selected literature, we have summa -
rized 121 research articles applying TL to medical image 
analysis and found that the most frequently used model 
was Inception. Inception is a deep model, nevertheless, 
it consists of the least parameters (Table  1) owing to the 
1 × 1 filter [37]. This 1 × 1 filter acts as a fully connected 
layer in Inception and ResNet and it lowers the compu -
tational burden to a great degree [38]. To our surprise, 
AlexNet and VGG were the next popular models. At 
first glance, this result seemed counterintuitive because 
ResNet is a more powerful model with fewer parameters 
compared to AlexNet or VGG. For instance, ResNet50 
achieved a top-5 error of 6.7% on ILSVRC, which was 
2.6% lower than VGG16 with 5.2 times fewer param -
eters and 9.7% lower than AlexNet with 2.4 times fewer 
parameters [27]. However, this assumption is valid only 
if the model was fine-tuned from scratch. The number of 
parameters significantly drops when the model is utilized 
as a feature extractor as shown in Table  1. He et al. [39] 
performed an in-depth evaluation of the impact of vari -
ous settings for refining the training of multiple backbone 
models, focusing primarily on the ResNet architecture. 
Another assumption was that AlexNet and VGG are easy 
to understand because the network morphology is linear 
and made up of stacked layers. This stands against more complex concepts such as skip connections, bottlenecks, 
convolutional blocks introduced in Inception or ResNet.
With respect to TL approaches, the majority of stud -
ies empirically tested as many possible combinations of 
CNN models with as many as possible TL approaches. 
Compared to previously suggested best practices [40], 
some studies determined fine-tuning arbitrarily and 
ambiguously. For instance, [41] froze all layers except the 
last 12 layers without justification, while [42, 43] did not 
clearly describe the fine-tuning configuration. Lee et  al. 
[44] partitioned VGG16/19 into 5 blocks, unfroze blocks 
sequentially and identified the model fine-tuned with two 
blocks that achieved the highest performance. Similarly, 
fine-tuned CaffeNet by unfreezing each layer sequentially 
[45]. The best results were obtained by the model with 
one retrained layer for the detection task and with two 
retrained layers for the classification task.
Fine-tuning from scratch (n = 27) was a prevalent TL 
approach in the literature, however, we recommend using 
this approach carefully for two reasons: firstly, it does 
not improve the model performance as shown in Fig.  6 
and secondly, it is the computationally most expensive 
choice because it updates large gradients for entire lay -
ers. Therefore, we encourage one to begin with the fea -
ture extractor approach, then incrementally fine-tune the 
convolutional layers. We recommend updating all layers 
(fine-tuning from scratch), if the feature extractor does 
not reflect the characteristics of the new medical images.
There was no consensus among studies concerning the 
global optimum configuration for fine-tuning. [46] con -
cluded that fine-tuning the last fully connected layers of 
Inception3, ResNet50, and DenseNet121 outperformed 
fine-tuning from scratch in all cases. On the other 
hand, Yu et al. [47] found that retraining from scratch of 
DenseNet201 achieved the highest diagnostic accuracy. 
We speculate that one of the causes is the variety of data 
subjects and imaging modalities addressed in Sect.  4.3. 
Hence, investigating the medical data characteristics (e.g. 
anatomical sites, imaging modalities, data size, label size 
and more) and TL with CNN models would be interest -
ing to investigate, yet it is understudied in the current lit -
erature. Morid et  al. [48] stated that deep CNN models 
may be more effective for the following image modalities: 
X-ray, endoscopic and ultrasound images, while shallow 
CNN models may be optimal for processing these image 
modalities: OCT and photography for skin lesions and 
fundus. Nonetheless, more research is needed to further 
confirm these hypotheses.
TL with random initialization often appeared in the 
literature [49–52]. These studies used the architecture of 
CNN models only and initialized the training with ran -
dom weights. One could argue that there is no transfer of