Page 2 of 13 Kim et al. BMC Medical Imaging           (2022) 22:69 
the field of image analysis, but the recent emergence 
of deep learning (DL) algorithms has inaugurated a 
shift towards non-handcrafted engineering, permitting 
automated image analysis. In particular, convolutional 
neural networks (CNN) have become the workhorse 
DL algorithm for image analysis. In recent data chal -
lenges for medical image analysis, all of the top-ranked 
teams utilized CNN. For instance, the top-ten ranked 
solutions, excepting one team, had utilized CNN in 
the CAMELYON17 challenge for automated detection 
and classification of breast cancer metastases in whole 
slide images [3 ]. It has also been demonstrated that the 
features extracted from DL surpassed that of the hand -
crafted methods by Shi et al. [4 ].
However, DL algorithms including CNN require—
under preferable circumstances—a large amount of data 
for training; hence follows the data scarcity problem. Par -
ticularly, the limited size of medical cohorts and the cost 
of expert-annotated data sets are some well-known chal -
lenges. Many research endeavors have tried to overcome 
this problem with transfer learning (TL) or domain adap -
tation [5] techniques. These aim to achieve high perfor -
mance on target tasks by leveraging knowledge learned 
from source tasks. A pioneering review paper of TL was 
contributed by Pan and Yang [6] in 2010, and they clas -
sified TL techniques from a labeling aspect, while Weiss 
et al. [7] summarized TL studies based on homogeneous 
and heterogeneous approaches. Most recently in 2020, 
Zhuang et al. [8] reviewed more than forty representative 
TL approaches from the perspectives of data and models. 
Unsupervised TL is an emerging subject and has recently 
received increasing attention from researchers. Wilson 
and Cook [9] surveyed a large number of articles of unsu -
pervised deep domain adaptation. Most recently, gen -
erative adversarial networks (GANs)-based frameworks 
[10–12] gained momentum, a particularly promising 
approach is DANN [13]. Furthermore, multiple ker -
nel active learning [14] and collaborative unsupervised 
methods [15] have also been utilized for unsupervised 
TL.
Some studies conducted a comprehensive review 
focused primarily on DL in the medical domain. Litjens 
et  al. [16] reviewed DL for medical image analysis by 
summarizing over 300 articles, while Chowdhury et  al. 
[17] reviewed the state-of-the-art research on self-super -
vised learning in medicine. On the other hand, others 
surveyed articles focusing on TL with a specific case 
study such as microorganism counting [18], cervical 
cytopathology [19], neuroimaging biomarkers of Alzhei -
mer’s disease [20] and magnetic resonance brain imaging 
in general [21].
In this paper, we aimed to conduct a survey on TL 
with pretrained CNN models for medical image analysis across use cases, data subjects and data modalities. Our 
major contributions are as follows:
 (i) An overview of contributions to the various case 
studies is presented;
 (ii) Actionable recommendations on how to leverage 
TL for medical image classification are provided;
 (iii) Publicly available medical datasets are compiled 
with URL as a supplementary material.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section  2 
covers the background knowledge and the most com -
mon notations used in the following sections. In Sect.  3, 
we describe the protocol for the literature selection. In 
Sect.  4, the results obtained are analyzed and compared. 
Critical discussions are presented in Sect.  5. Finally, we 
end with a conclusion and the lessons learned in Sect.  6. 
Figure  1 is the main diagram which presents the whole 
manuscript.
Background
Transfer learning
Transfer learning (TL) stems from cognitive research, 
which uses the idea, that knowledge is transferred across 
related tasks to improve performances on a new task. 
It is well-known that humans are able to solve simi -
lar tasks by leveraging previous knowledge. The formal 
definition of TL is defined by Pan and Yang with notions 
of domains and tasks. “ A domain consists of a feature 
space X and marginal probability distribution P(X) , 
where X={x1, ...,xn}∈X . Given a specific domain 
denoted by D={X ,P(X)} , a task is denoted by T= /braceleftbigY,f(·)/bracerightbig
 where Y is a label space and f(·) is an objec -
tive predictive function. A task is learned from the pair 
{xi,yi} where xi∈X and yi∈Y . Given a source domain 
DS and learning task TS , a target domain DT and learning 
taskTT , transfer learning aims to improve the learning 
of the target predictive function fT(·) in DT by using the 
knowledge in DS andTS ” [6].
Analogously, one can learn how to drive a motorbike TT 
(transferred task) based on one’s cycling skill Ts (source 
task) where driving two-wheel vehicles is regarded as the 
same domain DS = DT . This does not mean that one will 
not learn how to drive a motorbike without riding a bike, 
but it takes less effort to practice driving the motorbike 
by adapting one’s cycling skills. Similarly, learning the 
parameters of a network from scratch will require larger 
annotated datasets and a longer training time to achieve 
an acceptable performance.
Convolutional neural networks using imageNet
Convolutional neural networks (CNN) are a special type 
of deep learning that processes grid-like topology data 
such as image data. Unlike the standard neural network