Page 4 of 13 Kim et al. BMC Medical Imaging           (2022) 22:69 
Transfer learning with convolutional neural networks
TL with CNN is the idea that knowledge can be trans -
ferred at the parametric level. Well-trained CNN models 
utilize the parameters of the convolutional layers for a 
new task in the medical domain. Specifically, in TL with 
CNN for medical image classification, a medical image 
classification (target task) can be learned by leveraging 
the generic features learned from the natural image clas -
sification (source task) where labels are available in both 
domains. For simplicity, the terminology of TL in the 
remainder of the paper refers to homogeneous TL (i.e. 
both domains are image analysis) with pretrained CNN 
models using ImageNet data for medical image classifica -
tion in a supervisory manner.
Roughly, there are two TL approaches to leveraging 
CNN models: either feature extractor or fine-tuning. The 
feature extractor approach freezes the convolutional lay -
ers, whereas the fine-tuning approach updates param -
eters during model fitting. Each can be further divided 
into two subcategories; hence, four TL approaches are 
defined and surveyed in this paper. They are intuitively 
visualized in Fig.  2. Feature extractor hybrid (Fig.  2a) 
discards the FC layers and attaches a machine learning 
algorithm such as SVM or Random Forest classifier into 
the feature extractor, whereas the skeleton of the given 
networks remains the same in the other types (Fig.  2b-
d). Fine-tuning from scratch is the most time-intensive 
approach because it updates the entire ensemble of 
parameters during the training process.
Methods
Publications were retrieved from two peer-reviewed 
databases (PubMed database on January 2, 2021, and 
Web of Science database on January 22, 2021). Papers 
were selected based on the following four conditions: 
(1) convolutional or CNN should appear in the title or 
abstract; (2) image data analysis should be considered; 
(3) “transfer learning” or “pretrained” should appear in 
the title or abstract; finally, (4) only experimental studies were considered. The time constraint is specified only for 
the latest date, which is December 31, 2020. The exact 
search strings used for these two databases are denoted 
in Appendix A. Duplicates were merged before screening 
assessment. The first author screened the title, abstract 
and methods in order to exclude studies proposing a 
novel CNN model. Typically, this type of study stacked 
up multiple CNN models or concatenated CNN models 
and handcrafted features, and then compared its effi -
cacy with other CNN models. Non-classification tasks, 
and those publications which fell outside the aforemen -
tioned date range, were also excluded. For the eligibility 
assessment, full texts were examined by two researchers. 
A third, independent researcher was involved in deci -
sion-making in the case of discrepancy between the two 
researchers.
Methodology analysis
Eight properties of 121 research articles were surveyed, 
investigated, compared and summarized in this paper. 
Five are quantitative properties and three are qualitative 
properties. They are specified as follows: (1) Off-the-shelf 
CNN model type (AlexNet, CaffeNet, Inception1, Incep -
tion2, Inception3, Inception4, Inception-Resnet, LeNet, 
MobileNet, ResNet, VGG16, VGG19, DenseNet, Xcep -
tion, many or else); (2) Model performances (accuracy, 
AUC, sensitivity and specificity); (3) Transfer learning 
type (feature extractor, feature extractor hybrid, fine-tun -
ing, fine-tuning or many); (4) Fine-tuning ratio; (5) Data 
modality (endoscopy, CT/CAT scan, mammographic, 
microscopy, MRI, OCT, PET, photography, sonography, 
SPECT, X-ray/radiography or many); (6) Data subject 
(abdominopelvic cavity, alimentary system, bones, car -
diovascular system, endocrine glands, genital systems, 
joints, lymphoid system, muscles, nervous system, tissue 
specimen, respiratory system, sense organs, the integu -
ment, thoracic cavity, urinary system, many or else); (7) 
Data quantity; and (8) The number of classes. They fall 
Fig. 2 Four types of transfer learning approach. The last classifier block needs to be replaced by a thinner layer or trained from scratch (ML: Machine 
learning; FC: Fully connected layers)