Multi-Task Learning with Deep Neural Networks: A Survey
Figure 14: Example PathNet architecture (Fernando et al., 2017). A large network is shared by many tasks, but each
task only uses a subnetwork which is evolved through a tournament selection genetic algorithm.
More recently, (Vandenhende et al., 2019) proposes a similar method with a different criterion for task grouping. Instead
of concurrent sample difﬁculty, this algorithm uses representation similarity analysis (RSA) (Kriegeskorte, 2008) as
a measure of task afﬁnity. RSA is built on the principle that similar tasks will rely on similar features of the input,
and will therefore learn similar feature representations. The other important difference between these methods is that
(Vandenhende et al., 2019) computes the branching structure globally instead of greedily by layer. However, the search
over all branching structures is computationally expensive, so the authors resort to a beam search strategy for computing
the branching structure from the representation similarities across tasks in different parts of the network. This paper
includes a direct comparison of the two methods, and the RSA-based variant is shown to be superior. RSA is also used
in some methods to learn explicit task relationships, which are discussed in section 4.
2.5.3 Modular Sharing
The earliest work on modular parameter sharing in multi-task learning that we are aware of is PathNet (Fernando et al.,
2017). A PathNet model is one large neural network which is used for multiple tasks, though different tasks have
different computation pathways within the larger model. A diagram is shown in ﬁgure 14. The pathway for each task is
learned through a tournament selection genetic algorithm, in which many different candidate pathways compete and
evolve towards an optimal subnetwork of the larger network. While this idea is mostly general and can be applied to
various settings, such as multi-task learning and meta-learning, the authors deploy this model for continual learning
with two reinforcement learning tasks. The weights learned during training on the ﬁrst task are ﬁxed during training of
the second task, during which new pathways through the network are evolved to complete the task at hand.
Soft Layer Ordering (Meyerson and Miikkulainen, 2017) and Modular Meta-Learning (Alet et al., 2018) are two
concurrent works of modular MTL, similar but with an important difference. Each of these methods learns a shared
set of neural network modules which are combined in different ways for different tasks, with the hope that a network
“building block" will learn generally applicable knowledge if it is used in various contexts within the different task
networks. Soft Layer Ordering parameterizes a task network by computing a convex combination of each module’s
output at each layer of the network, as shown in ﬁgure 15. With this parameterization, each learned module can
contribute to each level of depth in the network. In contrast, Modular Meta-Learning learns a computation graph over
the modules, meaning that each step of the computation is a discrete composition of a small number of modules, instead
of a soft combination of all of them. The difference in the parameterization of the computation graph between these
methods leads to different optimization strategies, namely, the computation graph in Soft Layer Ordering architectures
can be optimized with gradient descent jointly with the network weights, since the composition of the modules is a
differentiable operation. In comparison, the computation graph in Modular Meta-Learning is a discrete structure, so
gradient-based optimization methods cannot be used to learn the graph over modules for each task. Instead, the authors
employ simulated annealing, a black box optimization method, to learn the computation graph. While this two-level
optimization incurs computational cost, the discrete nature of the computation graph affords the ability to produce an
inductive bias in the resulting model, which the soft sharing of layers does not exhibit. These methods represent two
realizations of a broadly generalizable template that many other methods have employed: Learn individual network
pieces, and learn how to combine them.
The method of (Chen et al., 2018) is another strategy in this spirit, and closely resembles NAS (Zoph and Le, 2016).
This paper proposes a method that ﬁts the template described above, but the composition of modules is not directly
15