Multi-Task Learning with Deep Neural Networks: A Survey
Figure 12: OmniNet architecture proposed in (Pramanik et al., 2019). Each modality has a separate network to handle
inputs, and the aggregated outputs are processed by an encoder-decoder called the Central Neural Processor. The output
of the CNP is then passed to several task-speciﬁc output heads.
search over the layers for each task in order to learn the task hierarchy. The architecture of (Akhtar et al., 2019) handles
visual, audio, and text input to classify emotion and sentiment in a video of a human speaker, using bi-directional GRU
layers along with pairwise attention mechanisms for each pair of modes to learn a shared representation incorporating
all modes of input.
Both (Nguyen and Okatani, 2019; Akhtar et al., 2019) are focused on a set of tasks which all share the same ﬁxed set
of modalities. Instead, (Kaiser et al., 2017) and (Pramanik et al., 2019) focus on building a “universal multi-modal
multi-task model", in which a single model can handle multiple tasks with varying input domains. The architecture
introduced in (Kaiser et al., 2017) is comprised of an input encoder, an I/O mixer, and an autoregressive decoder. Each
of these three blocks is made of a mix of convolutions, attention layers, and sparsely-gated mixture-of-experts layers.
The authors also demonstrate that the large degree of sharing between tasks yields signiﬁcantly increased performance
for tasks with limited training data. Instead of aggregating mechanisms from various modes of deep learning, (Pramanik
et al., 2019) introduces an architecture called OmniNet with a spatio-temporal cache mechanism to learn dependencies
across spatial dimensions of data as well as the temporal dimension. A diagram is shown in ﬁgure 12. Each input
modality has a corresponding “peripheral" network, and the outputs of these networks are aggregated and fed into
the Central Neural Processor, whose output is fed to task-speciﬁc output heads. The CNP has an encoder-decoder
architecture with a spatial cache and a temporal cache. OmniNet reached SOTA-competitive performance on POS
tagging, image captioning, visual question answering, and video activity recognition.
Most recently, (Lu et al., 2020) introduces a multi-task model that handles 12 different datasets simultaneously, aptly
named 12-in-1. Their model achieves superior performance over the corresponding single-task models on 11 out of 12
of these tasks, and using multi-task training as a pre-training step leads to SOTA performance on 7 of these tasks. The
architecture is based on the ViLBERT model (Lu et al., 2020), and is trained using a mix of methods such as dynamic
task scheduling, curriculum learning, and hyperparameter heuristics.
2.5 Learned Architectures
As we have already seen in the preceding sections, there have been many developments in the design of shared
architectures to emphasize the strengths of multi-task learning while mitigating the weaknesses. Another approach
to architecture design for multi-task learning is to learn the architecture as well as the weights of the resulting model.
Many of the following methods for learning shared architectures allow for the model to learn how parameters should
be shared between tasks. With a varying parameter sharing scheme, the model can shift the overlap between tasks
in such a way that similar tasks have a higher degree of sharing than unrelated tasks. This is one potential method
for mitigating negative transfer between tasks: if two tasks exhibit negative transfer, the model may learn to keep the
parameters for those tasks separate. Going further, it may be the case that two tasks exhibit positive transfer in some
parts of the network, and negative transfer in others. In this case, designing a parameter sharing scheme by hand to
accommodate various task similarites at different parts of the network becomes infeasible, especially as the number of
tasks and the size of the network grows. Learned parameter sharing offers a way to facilitate adaptive sharing between
tasks to a level of precision that isn’t realistic for hand designed shared architectures.
We roughly categorize the methods for learned architectures into four groups: architecture search, branched sharing,
modular sharing, and ﬁne-grained sharing. The boundaries between these groups aren’t concrete, and they are often
blurred, but we believe this is a useful way to broadly characterize the patterns in the recently developed methods.
13