Multi-Task Learning with Deep Neural Networks: A Survey
Figure 1: Architecture for TCDCN (Zhang et al., 2014). The base feature extractor is made of a series of convolutional
layers which are shared between all tasks, and the extracted features are used as input to task-speciﬁc output heads.
Figure 2: Illustration of Multi-task Network Cascades (Dai et al., 2016). The output of the ﬁrst task is used as an input
for the second task, the second task’s output is used as an input for the third task, and so on.
shared components in a way that allows for generalization through sharing and information ﬂow between tasks, while
minimizing negative transfer.
2.1.1 Shared Trunk
Traditionally, many multi-task architectures in computer vision follow a simple outline: A global feature extractor made
of convolutional layers shared by all tasks followed by an individual output branch for each task, as in ﬁgure 1. We will
refer to this template as a shared trunk .
(Zhang et al., 2014; Dai et al., 2016; Zhao et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2019; Ma et al., 2018) propose architectures which
are variations on the shared trunk idea. (Zhang et al., 2014), the earliest of these works, introduces Tasks-Constrained
Deep Convolutional Network (TCDCN), whose architecture is shown in ﬁgure 1. The authors propose to improve
performance on a facial landmark detection task by jointly learning head pose estimation and facial attribute inference.
(Dai et al., 2016) introduces Multi-task Network Cascades (MNCs). The architecture of MNCs is similar to TCDCN,
with an important difference: the output of each task-speciﬁc branch is appended to the input of the next task-speciﬁc
branch, forming the “cascade" of information ﬂow after which the method is named. This type of architecture is similar
to the cascaded information networks for NLP discussed in section 2.2.3.
(Zhao et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2019) each build on this original template with the introduction of task-speciﬁc modules
which can be placed within existing shared architectures. By doing this, the computation of features relies on both the
shared parameters of the feature extractor and the task-speciﬁc parameters of modules placed through the network,
so that features of different tasks may differ before the task-speciﬁc output branches. (Zhao et al., 2018) introduces
a modulation module in the form of a task-speciﬁc channel-wise linear projection of feature maps, and the authors
design a convolutional architecture with these modules following convolutional layers in the latter half of the network.
Interestingly, it is empirically shown that the inclusion of these task-speciﬁc projection modules decreases the chance
that gradient update directions for different tasks point in opposite directions, implying that this architecture decreases
the occurence of negative transfer. (Liu et al., 2019) proposes task-speciﬁc attention modules. Each attention module
takes as input the features from some intermediate layer of the shared network concatenated with the output of the
previous attention module, if one exists. Each module computes an attention map by passing its input through a
Conv-BN-ReLU layer followed by a Conv-BN-Sigmoid layer. The attention map is then element-wise multiplied with
features from a successive shared layer, and this product is the output of the attention module. This attention module
allows the network to emphasize features in the network which are more important for the corresponding task, and
downplay the effect of unimportant features.
Multi-gate Mixture-of-Experts (Ma et al., 2018) is a recently proposed shared trunk model, with a twist: the network
contains multiple shared trunks, and each task-speciﬁc output head receives as input a linear combination of the outputs
of each shared trunk. The weights of the linear combination are computed by a separate gating function, which performs
a linear transformation on the network input to compute the linear combination weights. The gating function can either
3