Multi-Task Learning with Deep Neural Networks: A Survey
Figure 23: Visualization of Pareto optimal solutions for a two-objective optimization problem (Dréo, 2006). The Pareto
frontier is made of all points along the red curve.
by combining many loss functions into one using a weighted average, though this ﬁx isn’t perfect. The map from a
tuple of loss values (L1(t);L2(t);:::;LN(t))to their weighted averageP
iiLi(t)isn’t an injective mapping, meaning
that some information is lost when we transform a collection of loss functions into a single weighted loss function1.
Constructing this weighted average also necessitates a choice of weights, which is prone to error. Using multi-objective
optimization for MTL is an alternative optimization method which doesn’t suffer from these weaknesses.
Multi-objective optimization is exactly the process of optimizing several objective functions simultaneously. Notice that
in a multi-objective problem, there is not necessarily a solution which is a global minimum for all objective functions,
meaning that typically there are no globally optimal solutions for multi-objective optimization problems. Instead, we
consider solutions which are Pareto optimal. Pareto optimal solutions to a multi-objective problem are those for which
the performance for any of the objectives can only be improved by worsening performance on another objective. In
other words, Pareto optimal solutions represent the best feasible options for solving a multi-objective optimization
problem, up to a trade-off between objectives. The set of Pareto optimal solutions to a multi-objective optimization
problem is called the Pareto frontier, and is visualized in ﬁgure 23.
Despite being a natural ﬁt for MTL and a well-studied problem (Miettinen, 1998), it has only recently been applied
to multi-task problems. (Sener and Koltun, 2018) brought gradient-based multi-objective optimization algorithms to
the ﬁeld of deep multi-task learning by extending the well known Multiple Gradient Descent Algorithm (MGDA)
(Désidéri, 2012) to a form that scales well to the high dimensionality of deep learning problems. This is accomplished
by minimizing an upper bound to the MGDA loss, and doing so incurs only a small amount of computational overhead
compared to traditional MTL. Pareto Multi-Task Learning (Lin et al., 2019) takes this extension one step further
by generalizing the algorithm proposed in (Sener and Koltun, 2018) in order to compute multiple Pareto optimal
solutions. Since no Pareto optimal solution is a priori superior to any other, a set of Pareto optimal solutions which is
representative of the Pareto frontier is more ﬂexible and likely more useful than a single solution. Pareto MTL works
by decomposing the multi-objective optimization problem into multiple subproblems, each with varying preferences
between objectives. Interestingly, the authors show that Pareto MTL and the algorithm presented in (Sener and Koltun,
2018) can actually be formulated as methods to compute adaptive loss weights, similar to those discussed in section 3.1.
This is somewhat counterintuitive, since multi-objective optimization methods are intended to be of a fundamentally
different nature than methods which optimize a weighted average over loss functions. With further exploration, the
surprising connection between these two directions could potentially lead to a better understanding of existing multi-task
optimization methods.
4 Task Relationship Learning
We have now discussed MTL architectures and optimization methods, completing a broader analogue of the popular
dichotomy speciﬁed by hard and soft parameter sharing. However, there is a lesser known third wheel to this pair of
approaches: task relationship learning. Task relationship learning (or TRL) is a separate approach that doesn’t quite ﬁt
1It is a well known fact in mathematical analysis that there is no continuous injective mapping from RdtoRford2, so
unfortunately there is no immediate candidate for a multi-task loss function which is superior to the weighted average in the sense of
injectivity.
28