Multi-Task Learning with Deep Neural Networks: A Survey
The existing methods of MTL have often been partitioned into two groups with a familiar dichotomy: hard parameter
sharing vs.soft parameter sharing . Hard parameter sharing is the practice of sharing model weights between multiple
tasks, so that each weight is trained to jointly minimize multiple loss functions. Under soft parameter sharing, different
tasks have individual task-speciﬁc models with separate weights, but the distance between the model parameters of
different tasks is added to the joint objective function. Though there is no explicit parameter sharing, there is an incentive
for the task-speciﬁc models to have similar parameters. This is a useful dichotomy, but the nature of multi-task methods
has grown extremely diverse in the past few years, and we feel that these two categories alone are not broad enough
to accurately describe the entire ﬁeld. Instead, we widen the scope of the members of this dichotomy to cover more
ground. We generalize the class of hard parameter sharing methods to multi-task architectures, while soft parameter
sharing is broadened into multi-task optimization. When combined, architecture design and optimization techniques
provide a nearly complete image of modern MTL. However, there is still an important direction within the ﬁeld that is
missing even from this generalized dichotomy: task relationship learning. Task relationship laerning (or TRL) methods
focus on learning an explicit representation of the relationships between tasks, such as task embeddings or transfer
learning afﬁnities, and these types of methods don’t quite ﬁt into either architecture design or optimization. Broadly
speaking, these three directions - architecture design, optimization, and task relationship learning - make up the existing
methods of modern deep multi-task learning.
Many different researchers have used the term multi-task learning to refer to different settings, and we feel that it is
important to clarify the scope of this review. As a convention, we interpret MTL to only contain learning settings in
which a ﬁxed set of tasks is learned simultaneously, and each task is treated equally. This means that we don’t consider
training settings that have only a single “main task" with one or more auxiliary tasks, as well as settings in which the set
of tasks to learn changes over time. We may, however, discuss models which were designed for such settings, if the
ideas from the model are easily applicable to MTL.
The rest of the survey is outlined as follows. Section 2 contains a discussion of neural network architectures for
multi-task learning. In section 3, we discuss MTL optimization strategies, and we discuss methods for learning explicit
task relationships in section 4. Section 5 contains an overview of common multi-task benchmark for various domains.
Finally, we conclude with section 6. Within each subsection or subsubsection, the methods are mostly presented in
order of publication, from earliest to most recent. It should be noted that we do not discuss any classical (non-neural)
multi-task learning methods, though a thorough review can be found in (Zhang and Yang, 2017; Ruder, 2017).
2 Multi-Task Architectures
A large portion of the MTL literature is devoted to the design of multi-task neural network architectures. There are many
different factors to consider when creating a shared architecture, such as the portion of the model’s parameters that will
be shared between tasks, and how to parameterize and combine task-speciﬁc and shared modules. More variations arise
when considering architectures for a speciﬁc problem domain, like how to partition convolutional ﬁlters into shared and
task-speciﬁc groups for a set of vision tasks. Many of the proposed architectures for MTL play a balancing game with
the degree of information sharing between tasks: Too much sharing will lead to negative transfer and can cause worse
performance of joint multi-task models than individual models for each task, while too little sharing doesn’t allow the
model to effectively leverage information between tasks. The best performing architectures for MTL are those which
balance sharing well.
We partition the MTL architectures into four groups: architectures for a particular task domain, multi-modal architectures,
learned architectures, and conditional architectures. For single-domain architectures, we consider the domains of
computer vision, natural language processing, and reinforcement learning. Multi-modal architectures handle tasks with
input in more than one mode, such as visual question answering with both a visual and a language component. It should
be noted that we only consider multi-modal architectures which handle multiple tasks. For a more complete discussion
of multi-modal methods, see (Baltrusaitis et al., 2019). Lastly, We make the following distinction between learned
architectures and conditional architectures: Learned architectures are ﬁxed between steps of architecture learning, so
the same computation is performed for each input from the same task. In conditional architectures, the architecture
used for a given piece of data is dependent on the data itself.
2.1 Architectures for Computer Vision
In the single-task setting, many major developments for computer vision architectures have focused on novel network
components and connections to improve optimization and extract more meaningful features, such as batch normalization
(Ioffe and Szegedy, 2015), residual networks (He et al., 2016), and squeeze and excitation blocks (Hu et al., 2018). In
contrast, many multi-task architectures for computer vision focus on partitioning the network into task-speciﬁc and
2