Multi-Task Learning with Deep Neural Networks: A Survey
Figure 13: Learned branching architecture proposed in (Lu et al., 2017). At the beginning of training, each task shares
all layers of the network. As training goes on, less related tasks branch into clusters, so that only highly related tasks
share as many parameters.
Branched sharing methods are a coarse-grained way to share parameters between tasks. Once the computation graphs
for two tasks differ, they never rejoin (see ﬁgure 13). Modular sharing represents a more ﬁne-grained approach, in
which a set of neural network modules is shared between tasks, where the architecture for each task is made by a
task-speciﬁc combination of some or all of the modules, as in ﬁgure 16. Lastly, the most ﬁne-grained approach to
parameter sharing is what we simply call ﬁne-grained sharing , in which sharing decisions occur at the parameter level
instead of the layer level, as shown in ﬁgure 17.
2.5.1 Architecture Search
Each of (Wong and Gesmundo, 2017; Liang et al., 2018; Gao et al., 2020) introduces a method for multi-task architecture
search, but with completely different approaches. (Wong and Gesmundo, 2017) introduces the Multi-task Neural
Model Search (MNMS) controller. This method doesn’t involve a single network which is shared between all tasks.
Instead, the MNMS controller is trained simultaneously on all tasks to generate one individual architecture for each task.
The method is an extension of (Zoph and Le, 2016), where an RNN controller iteratively makes architecture design
choices, and is trained with reinforcement learning to maximize the expected performance of the resulting network. In
the multi-task variant, the RNN also uses task embeddings, which are learned jointly with the MNMS controller, to
condition architectural design choices on the nature of the task.
On the other hand, (Liang et al., 2018) introduces several variations of a multi-task neural architecture search algorithm
that uses evolutionary strategies to learn neural network modules which can be reordered differently for various tasks.
This method is an extension of the Soft Layer Ordering introduced in (Meyerson and Miikkulainen, 2017) (discussed in
section 2.3.2). Just as in (Meyerson and Miikkulainen, 2017), the method of (Liang et al., 2018) involves learning neural
network modules jointly with their ordering for various tasks. In the architecture search extension, the architecture of
the modules is learned along with their routing for individual tasks. The most sophisticated variant of this algorithm is
called Coevolution of Modules and Task Routing (CMTR), in which the CoDeepNEAT algorithm (Miikkulainen et al.,
2019) is used to evolve the architecture of the shared group modules in an outer loop, and the task speciﬁc routings of
these modules are evolved in an inner loop.
Most recently, (Gao et al., 2020) proposes MTL-NAS as a method for gradient-based architecture search in MTL.
All architectures in this search space are made of a set of ﬁxed-architecture single-task backbone networks, one for
each task, and the search process operates over feature fusion operations between different layers of these single-task
networks. The feature fusion operations are parameterized by NDDR (from NDDR-CNN (Gao et al., 2019), see section
2.1.2), which is essentially a 11convolution acting on concatenations of feature maps from different tasks. This
method also introduces a minimum entropy objective on the weights of the fusion operations, so that the search process
converges to a discrete architecture during the architecture search phase, which diminishes the need for a discretization
of a soft combination of architectures as in other NAS works (Liu et al., 2018) and closes the performance gap between
learned soft architectures and the ﬁnal discretized version. The ﬁnal learned architectures were shown to outperform
common multi-task baselines on the NYU-v2 (Silberman et al., 2012) and Taskonomy (Zamir et al., 2018) datasets.
2.5.2 Branched Sharing
(Lu et al., 2017) is one of the earliest methods for learned parameter sharing in multi-task deep learning. The idea is
to start with a network which is shared between all tasks up to task-speciﬁc output heads, then iteratively decouple
parameters between tasks layer by layer, starting with the layer closest to the output heads, and moving to the earlier
layers. A diagram of this process is shown in ﬁgure 13. When a shared layer splits into multiple task speciﬁc layers,
tasks are clustered based on an estimate of pairwise task afﬁnity. These task afﬁnities are computed according to
the following principle: two tasks are likely related if the same input data is equally easy/difﬁcult for the models
corresponding to each task.
14