Multi-Task Learning with Deep Neural Networks: A Survey
Figure 25: Task taxonomies for a collection of computer vision tasks as computed in Taskonomy (Zamir et al., 2018).
An edge from task ito taskjdenotes that task iis an ideal source task to perform transfer learning on task j.
remainder of tasks by transferring from the source tasks, with only a small amount of training data to train the decoder
on top of the transferred feature extractor. The problem of choosing the ideal set of source tasks and which source tasks
to use for each target task (given the task transfer afﬁnities) is encoded as a Boolean Integer Programming problem.
The solution can be represented as a directed graph in which the nodes are tasks, and the presence of an edge from task
ito taskjmeans that task iis included in the set of source tasks for task j. Some resulting taxonomies for varying
supervision budgets and transfer order (maximum number of source tasks for each target task) are shown in ﬁgure
25. Taskonomy is the ﬁrst large scale empirical study to analyze task transfer relationships and compute an explicit
hierarchy of tasks based on their transfer relationships, and by doing so they are able to compute optimal transfer
policies for learning a group of related tasks with limited supervision. However, their method of doing so is extremely
expensive, since it involves training for a huge number of combinations of source/target tasks. The entire process of
constructing task taxonomies took 47,886 GPU hours.
A similarly inspired but much more efﬁcient method for learning task transfer relationships is introduced in (Dwivedi
and Roig, 2019), which uses Representation Similarity Analysis (RSA) (Kriegeskorte, 2008) to compute a measure
of similarity between tasks. RSA is a commonly used tool in computational neuroscience to quantitatively compare
measures of neural activity, and it has been adopted for analyzing neural network activations by the deep learning
community in recent years (Vandenhende et al., 2019). The underlying assumption behind the RSA transfer model in
(Dwivedi and Roig, 2019) is that if two tasks would exhibit positive transfer, then single-task networks trained on each
of them will tend to learn similar representations, and so RSA will be an accurate measure of the transfer afﬁnities of
the task at hand. Because RSA only involves comparing the representations of different networks, there is no need to
actually perform any transfer learning between each pair of tasks, making the RSA transfer model orders of magnitude
faster than Taskonomy. Furthermore, the authors ﬁnd that the computed task afﬁnities from RSA are nearly independent
of the size of the models used to train on the tasks, so that the computation of the task relationships can be done with
very small models in order to cut computation cost even more.
Most recently, (Song et al., 2019) follows a similar approach as the RSA transfer model: compare the similarity of
single-task networks to compute task transfer afﬁnities, instead of actually performing transfer learning. Instead of
comparing the networks’ learned representations, the method presented in (Song et al., 2019) compares their attribution
maps on the same input data. An attribution map is a scoring over the individual units of a network’s input which
represents the relevance of each unit to the network’s output. In computer vision, for example, an attribution map
assigns a relevance score to each pixel in the input. Just as the RSA transfer model assumes that tasks with positive
transfer will learn similar representations, the attribution map transfer model assumes that such tasks will pay attention
to the same parts of an input. This approach shows similar results as the RSA transfer model: orders of magnitude
31