Multi-Task Learning with Deep Neural Networks: A Survey
into either architecture design or optimization, and is more speciﬁc to MTL. The goal of TRL is to learn an explicit
representation of tasks or relationships between tasks, such as clustering tasks into groups by similarity, and leveraging
the learned task relationships to improve learning on the tasks at hand.
In this section we discuss three research directions within TRL. The ﬁrst is grouping tasks, where the goal is to partition
a collection of tasks into groups such that simultaneous training of tasks in a group is beneﬁcial. The second is learning
transfer relationships, which includes methods that attempt to analyze and understand when transferring knowledge
from one task to another is beneﬁcial for learning. Finally, we discuss task embedding methods, which learn an
embedding space for tasks themselves.
4.1 Grouping Tasks
As a solution to negative transfer, many MTL methods are designed to adaptively share information between related
tasks and separate information from tasks which might hurt each other’s learning. The papers discussed here use task
grouping as an alternative solution: if two tasks exhibit negative transfer, simply separate their learning from the start.
However, doing so requires signiﬁcant computation time for trial and error in training networks jointly for various
sets of tasks, and there are currently very few methods which can accurately determine the joint learning dynamics of
groups of tasks without this kind of brute force trial and error.
Two early concurrent works of learning to group tasks are (Alonso and Plank, 2016) and (Bingel and Søgaard, 2017).
Both of these papers are empirical studies analyzing the effectiveness of various task groupings in MTL for natural
language processing, with a focus on choosing one or two auxiliary tasks (such as POS tagging, syntactic chunking, and
word counting) to help learning on a main task (such as named entity recognition and semantic frame detection) by
training a multi-task network on many combinations of tasks. In these studies, a single-task network is trained for each
individual main task, and its performance is compared to the performance of a multi-task network trained on the main
task jointly with one or two auxiliary tasks.
(Alonso and Plank, 2016) trains 1440 task combinations, each with a main task and one or two auxiliary tasks, and ﬁnds
that performance on the main task improves the most with auxiliary tasks whose label distributions have high entropy
and low kurtosis. This is consistent with the ﬁndings of (Bingel and Søgaard, 2017), in which 90 pairs of tasks (one
main, one auxiliary) are trained. Using the results of these training runs as data, this work trains a logistic regression
model to predict whether an auxiliary task will help or hurt main task performance based on features from the datasets
and learning curves of the two tasks. They also ﬁnd that entropy of the auxiliary label distribution is highly correlated
with improvement on the main task, though the features most highly correlated with main task improvement are the
gradients of the main task learning curve when trained on its own. Speciﬁcally, if the learning curve of a task (when
trained in a single-task setup) begins to plateau during the ﬁrst 20% to 30% of training, including an auxiliary task in
training is likely to improve the performance on the main task. The authors speculate that this may be because a main
task whose learning curve has an early plateau is likely to be stuck in a non-optimal local minimum, and the inclusion of
an auxiliary task helps the optimization process to escape this minimum. Somewhat surprising is their ﬁnding that the
difference in sizes of the main and auxiliary task dataset was not found to be indicative of the main task performance
gain when including the auxiliary task. Despite the fact that these studies don’t treat all tasks identically, as is usually
the case with MTL, the conditions they ﬁnd which imply positive transfer between tasks are general enough that they
may be useful in the multi-task setting.
An empirical study on the joint training of computer vision tasks is performed in (Doersch and Zisserman, 2017), with
a focus on self-supervised tasks, namely relative position regression, colorization, motion segmentation, and exemplar
matching. This study is less in-depth, as it is not the sole focus of the paper, but the authors come to the interesting
conclusion that multi-task training always improved performance compared to the single-task baselines. This fact
is very surprising given the inconsistency of improvement that MTL usually affords over single-task training. The
consistent improvement may be due to the relationships between the tasks or the nature of their self-supervised labels,
but none of these answers are certain.
Adjacent to these empirical studies to analyze multi-task task relationships is a principled method for learning these
relationships online during training without trial-and-error task grouping, called Selective Sharing (Strezoski et al.,
2019b). Selective sharing uses a shared trunk architecture to handle multiple tasks, and clusters tasks into groups
based on the similarity of their gradient vectors throughout training. This clustering is motivated by the fact that the
task-speciﬁc branches are all initialized with identical parameters, so that the similarity between task gradients is
indicative of the similarity of tasks. As the clusters of tasks are updated throughout training, the task branches of
the network are merged so that tasks which are clustered together share parameters, and this process continues until
the clusters stop changing. Aside from the obvious beneﬁt of decreased computation cost compared to large scale
empirical studies to determine groups of tasks, this method uses learned task features to understand the relationships
29