Multi-Task Learning with Deep Neural Networks: A Survey
Figure 17: Learned ﬁne-grained sharing architecture from (Sun et al., 2019a). Each task has a sparse subnetwork which
may or may not overlap with that of other tasks. Each subnetwork is extracted using Iterative Magnitude Pruning
(Frankle and Carbin, 2018) on the entire randomly initialized network before training.
binary mask values. This method of optimizing such mask values is justiﬁed in prior work on binarized neural networks
(Courbariaux et al., 2015).
(Newell et al., 2019) and (Bragman et al., 2019) are concurrent works that each propose a parameter sharing scheme for
multi-task CNNs in which sharing occurs at the ﬁlter level. For each convolutional layer of a multi-task network, the
method of (Newell et al., 2019) learns a binary valued NCarrayM, whereNis again the number of tasks and Cis
the number of feature channels in a given layer of the network. The (i;c)-th element of Mdenotes whether the model
of thei-th task should include the c-th feature map in the considered layer. Instead of optimizing this binary valued
array with a Gumbel-Softmax (Jang et al., 2016) distribution, the authors do not learn these values directly. Rather, the
method learns a real-valued matrix Pof sizeNN, with values in the range [0;1], where the (i;j)-th element of P
represents the proportion of feature channels which are shared by both the models for task iand taskj. In this way, the
relationships between tasks are learned directly, and an array Mwhich satisﬁes P=1
CMTMis sampled after each
new value of Pis computed. With this parameterization of M, the network architecture isn’t directly learned, but is
instead sampled so that the learned task afﬁnity matrix dictates the amount of overlap between task parameters. This
task afﬁnity matrix, P, is learned through evoluationary strategies. (Bragman et al., 2019) proposes Stochastic Filter
Groups (SFGs), in which the assignment of a convolutional ﬁlter to task-speciﬁc or shared is learned through variational
inference. More speciﬁcally, SFGs are trained by learning the posterior distribution over the possible assignment of
convolutional ﬁlters to task-speciﬁc or shared roles. As far as we know, SFGs are the only probabilistic approach to
multi-task architecture learning.
(Sun et al., 2019a) introduces an algorithm for learning a ﬁne-grained parameter sharing scheme by extracting sparse
subnetworks of a single fully shared model. From a randomly initialized, overparameterized network, the authors
employ Iterative Magnitude Pruning (IMP) (Frankle and Carbin, 2018) to extract a sparse subnetwork from the larger
network for each individual task. IMP prunes a network by training for a small number of epochs, then removing the
weights which have the smallest magnitude until a desired level of sparsity is reached. Given a reasonable level of
sparsity, the extracted subnetworks for each task will overlap and exhibit ﬁne-grained parameter sharing between tasks.
A diagram is shown in ﬁgure 17. It is important to note that the degree of overlap between the extracted subnetworks of
two tasks is not necessarily correlated with the relatedness of those two tasks, which suggests the need for a ﬁne-grained
parameter sharing scheme which incorporates information of task afﬁnity to construct appropriate sharing mechanisms
between tasks.
2.6 Conditional Architectures
Conditional or adaptive computation (Bengio et al., 2013) is a method in which parts of a neural network architecture are
selected for execution depending on the input to the network. Conditional computation is used in many areas outside of
multi-task learning, such as to decrease model computational cost and in hierarchical reinforcement learning (Kulkarni
et al., 2016). In the multi-task case, a conditional architecture is dynamic between inputs as well as between tasks,
17