Multi-Task Learning with Deep Neural Networks: A Survey
5.4 Multi-Modal Benchmarks
Flickr30K Captions (Young et al., 2014) is a collection of 30,000 photographs obtained from the image hosting
website Flickr, with over 150,000 corresponding captions.
MS-COCO Captions (Chen et al., 2015) contains over 1.5 million captions of more than 300,000 photos from the
MS-COCO (Lin et al., 2014) dataset. These captions were collected using Amazon Mechanical Turk.
Visual Genome (Krishna et al., 2017) is made of over 100,000 densely annotated images with a focus on a grounding
connection between visual and linguistic concepts. Each image contains over 40 regions which each have their own
description, 17 (on average) question-answer pairs per image, an average of 21 object annotations per image, attribute
labels per object, and relationship annotations between objects.
Flickr30K Entities (Plummer et al., 2015) augments the Flickr30K dataset with 276,000 annotated bounding boxes
and 244,000 coreference chains. The coreference chains identify when references to objects in different captions of
the same image are referring to the same object.
GuessWhat?! (De Vries et al., 2017) is not just a dataset, but a dialogue-based guessing game in which a questioner
asks an oracle about an unknown object pictured in a given image. The paper includes a collection of 150,000 games
played by humans, with 800,000 visual question answer pairs on 66,000 images. The intention of GuessWhat?! is to
introduce a task which bridges visual question answering with dialogue.
VQA 2.0 (Goyal et al., 2017) is a visual question answering dataset constructed by balancing the VQA (Antol et al.,
2015) dataset with a focus on the visual aspect of visual question answering. The paper points out that a model can
reach decent performance on many VQA benchmarks based only on scene regularities and the question at hand while
ignoring the visual input. VQA 2.0 is balanced in the sense that every question is accompanied by two images that
lead to different answers, so that a successful model must pay attention to the visual content of a given image.
GQA (Hudson and Manning, 2019) is another visual question answering dataset, constructed by leveraging scene
graphs to create 22 million questions for their corresponding images. The programmatic construction of the dataset
allowed for each question to be accompanied by a functional program which characterizes the question semantics,
and for the distribution of answers to be tuned to minimize bias.
6 Conclusion
We have presented a review of the ﬁeld of multi-task learning, covering the three broad directions of architecture design,
optimization techniques, and task relationship learning. Currently, key techniques for the construction of multi-task
neural networks include shared feature extractors with task-speciﬁc decoders, varying parameter sharing schemes in
existing network architectures, sharing and recombination of neural network modules, learning what to share, and
ﬁne-grained parameter sharing. The most prominent directions within optimization are per-task loss weighting, such as
by uncertainty or learning speed, regularization with L2and trace norms, gradient modulation and replacement to avoid
conﬂicting gradients between tasks, and multi-objective optimization. Finally, several methods have been proposed
to learn relationships between tasks, such as large-scale empirical studies to determine which tasks exhibit positive
learning dynamics when learned simultaneously, comparing representations of networks to determine task similarity,
and learning task embeddings.
Despite the progress the community has made so far to develop multi-task learning for deep networks, there is one
direction of research that has had less development than others, and that we have not discussed at all so far: theory. This
shouldn’t come as a surprise, given that this is also true of deep learning in general. Still, many non-neural multi-task
learning methods are motivated and justiﬁed by strong theory (Baxter, 2000; Ben-David and Borbely, 2008; Zhang,
2015; Lounici et al., 2009), but aside from a small pool of recent work (Shui et al., 2019; Ndirango and Lee, 2019;
D’Eramo et al., 2020; Wu et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2020; Bettgenhäuser et al., 2020), there is a lack of theoretical
understanding of MTL with deep neural networks. This is an important area to promote a deeper understanding of the
ﬁeld as a whole, and we hope to see more development in this direction in the coming years.
We believe that the development of multi-task learning (and the related ﬁelds of meta-learning, transfer learning, and
continuous/lifelong learning) is an important step towards developing artiﬁcial intelligence with more human-like
qualities. In order to build machines that can learn as quickly and robustly as humans, we must create techniques
for learning general underlying concepts which are applicable between tasks and applying these concepts to new and
unfamiliar situations. Building systems that truly exhibit these qualities will require approaches from many different
directions, likely including many that researchers haven’t yet discovered. The ﬁeld has come a long way, but continued
effort from the research community is needed to fully achieve the potential of multi-task methods.
34