Multi-Task Learning with Deep Neural Networks: A Survey
Figure 18: Example Neural Module Network execution (Andreas et al., 2016). The semantic structure of a given
question is used to dynamically instantiate a network made of modules that correspond to the elements of the question.
Figure 19: Example Routing Network execution (Rosenbaum et al., 2017). The router iteratively chooses a layer to
apply to the input to dynamically instantiate a network for each input.
though the components of these dynamically instantiated architectures are shared, which encourages these components
to be generalizable between various inputs and tasks.
Neural Module Networks (Andreas et al., 2016) are an early work of conditional computation which were speciﬁcally
designed for visual question answering. This method leverages the compositional structure of questions in natural
language to train and deploy modules speciﬁcally catered for the individual parts of a question. The structure of a given
question is determined by a non-neural semantic parser, speciﬁcally the Stanford Parser (Klein and Manning, 2003).
The output of the parser is used to determine the compositional pieces of the question and the relationships between
them, and the corresponding neural modules are used to dynamically instantiate a model for the given question. This
process is shown in ﬁgure 18. While this work paved the way for future methods of conditional computation, it is
lakcing in the sense that the composition of modules is not learned. Therefore, the role of each module and combination
of modules is ﬁxed and cannot be improved.
Routing Networks (Rosenbaum et al., 2017) and the Compositional Recursive Learner (CRL) (Chang et al., 2018)
are more recent related works of conditional computation in which the composition of modules is learned in addition
to the weights of the modules themselves. A Routing Network is comprised of a router and a set of neural network
modules. Given a piece of input data, the router iteratively chooses a module from the set of network modules to apply
to the input for a ﬁxed number of iterations; this process is shown in ﬁgure 19. The router can also choose a “pass"
action instead of a module, which simply continues to the next iteration of routing. The module weights can be learned
directly through backpropagation, and the router weights are learned with reinforcement learning to maximize the
performance of the dynamically instantiated networks on their inputs. The Compositional Recursive Learner of (Chang
et al., 2018) is similar, though with some key differences. Given a piece of input data, the CRL also iteratively chooses a
network module from a ﬁxed set of modules through which to route the input. In the case of the CRL, any task speciﬁc
information (such as a task ID) is intentionally hidden from the network modules, to ensure that the modules learn
task-agnostic and therefore generalizable information. CRL is also trained with reinforcement learning on a curriculum,
to encourage the re-use of modules learned on easier problems.
(Ahn et al., 2019) introduces a very similar architecture in which layers of varying conﬁguration and scale are chosen
from a larger backbone network through which to route the input. The router (called the selector network in this variant)
is again trained with reinforcement learning.
The architecture of (Kirsch et al., 2018) is similarly inspired to Routing Networks and the CRL, but takes a local view
of routing rather than a global one. In Routing Networks and the CRL, any of the network modules can be placed into
an instantiated network at any depth. In contrast, (Kirsch et al., 2018) proposes a conditional architecture in which
routing decisions are made only within layers of the network. The architecture is made of a series of modular layers,
each having mnetwork modules. When a layer is to be applied to an input, the input is passed through a controller,
which selects kmodules from the set of mmodules belonging to the layer. The layer input is then individually passed
18