Multi-Task Learning with Deep Neural Networks: A Survey
Figure 7: From top to bottom: Uniform-Layer, Coupled-Layer, and Shared-Layer architectures of (Liu et al., 2016a).
Each architecture presents a novel partition of recurrent architecture components into shared and task-speciﬁc modules.
In addition to these recurrent architectures, (Liu et al., 2016b) augments the LSTM architecture with a memory
mechanism. To form a shared architecture, each task has its own LSTM parameters, but the memory is shared among
all tasks. The memory mechanism is inspired by the memory enhanced LSTM (ME-LSTM) (Sukhbaatar et al., 2015).
The novel contribution of (Liu et al., 2016b) is in a fusion mechanism that allows the memory to be read from and
written to jointly by all tasks. With this addition, the hidden state of each task’s LSTM is computed from a gated sum of
the LSTM’s internal memory and the information held in the shared external memory. The authors also introduce a
variant in which each task has its own private external memory, and the shared global external memory is read/written
by each task-speciﬁc memory module.
2.2.3 Cascaded Information
In all of the NLP architectures we have discussed so far, the sub-architectures corresponding to each task have been
symmetric. In particular, the output branch of each task occurs at the maximum network depth for each task, meaning
that supervision for the task-speciﬁc features of each task occurs at the same depth. Several works (Søgaard and
Goldberg, 2016; Hashimoto et al., 2016; Sanh et al., 2019) propose supervising “lower-level" tasks at earlier layers
so that the features learned for these tasks may be used by higher-level tasks. By doing this we form an explicit task
hierarchy, and provide a direct way for information from one task to aid in the solution of another. We refer to this
template for iterated inference and feature combination as cascaded information , with an example pictured in ﬁgure 8.
(Søgaard and Goldberg, 2016) forms this hierarchy by choosing POS tagging as a low-level task to inform syntactic
chunking and CCG supertagging. Their network architecture is made of a series of bi-directional RNN layers, and
for each task ithere is an associated layer `ifrom which the task-speciﬁc classiﬁer for task istems. In this case, the
associated layer for POS tagging occurs earlier in the network than the associated layers of syntactic chunking and
CCG supertagging, so that the learned POS features can inform the tasks of syntactic chunking and CCG supertagging.
Not long after the publication of (Søgaard and Goldberg, 2016), (Hashimoto et al., 2016) achieved a mix of SOTA and
8