Multi-Task Learning with Deep Neural Networks: A Survey
to learn information which is general across its domains. The authors also show that the learned modules can be
paired in combinations unseen during training, to instantiate a policy with zero-shot generalization capabilities. This
method also gives partial information to the task module; each observation is decomposed into a task-speciﬁc portion
and a robot-speciﬁc portion. The task-speciﬁc module only receives the task-speciﬁc observation as input, and the
robot-speciﬁc module receives the robot-speciﬁc observation as well as the output of the task-speciﬁc module.
Both of these architectures exhibit an interesting strategy for learning general representations across tasks: information
hiding . We have so far discussed parameter sharing, adversarial methods, and orthogonality constraints as regularization
strategies for multi-task methods. But the division of labor brought forth by the modularity in these two architectures
allows for information to be restricted to certain modules in the network, forcing the modules missing this information
to learn representations which are invariant to the omitted information. In this case, we obtain modules which are
invariant to the task at hand.
RL with Policy Sketches (Andreas et al., 2017) is another template for policy modularity which was proposed soon after
(Heess et al., 2016) and (Devin et al., 2017), in which the policy for a task is composed of several subpolicies, and each
subpolicy is a neural network whose parameters are shared between tasks. The composition of subpolicies for each task
is deﬁned by a human-provided “policy sketch", which roughly outlines the steps to complete a task. For example, in
the minecraft-inspired environment used for evaluation in the paper, the tasks “Make Planks" and “Make Sticks" may
have the policy sketches (get wood, use workbench) and (get wood, use toolshed), respectively. In this case, the policies
for these tasks would use the subpolicies wood,bench, andshed, with the compositions planks = (wood;bench)and
sticks= (wood;shed). The weak supervision provided by the policy sketches deﬁnes a sharing structure of subpolicies
between tasks, which was shown to be more beneﬁcial to learning than unsupervised option discovery. This process is
similar to how the syntactical strcture of a question deﬁnes the composition of subpolicies in Neural Module Networks
(Andreas et al., 2016) (discussed in section 2.6), though in that example the composed architecture is dependent on
each individual given question, while the composition of subpolicies remains ﬁxed for each task with Policy Sketches.
It is important to note that module composition takes two different forms with Policy Sketches and the architectures of
(Heess et al., 2016) and (Devin et al., 2017): subpolicies in Policy Sketches behave as in hierarchical reinforcement
learning (Kulkarni et al., 2016), where a subpolicy is chosen to act as the policy until some termination condition is met,
as opposed to composition in the sense of function composition as in (Heess et al., 2016) and (Devin et al., 2017).
2.3.3 Multiple Auxiliary Tasks
(Jaderberg et al., 2016) introduces several unsupervised auxiliary tasks to be learned in conjuction with a main task,
as an additional form of supervision. These auxiliary tasks encourage general representations in the usual sense for
MTL, but they also help to decrease the sparsity of rewards in the original task. The architecture is a CNN-LSTM
actor-critic with a shared trunk, and output branches for each auxiliary task that requires its own output. The auxiliary
tasks themselves are called pixel control, feature control, and reward prediction. Pixel control shares parameters from
the agent CNN and LSTM, and branches off into a task-speciﬁc branch that chooses its own actions. The actions are
rewarded for causing maximal change in the pixel intesity of the pixels observed as a result of the chosen action. Feature
control does not require an output, and instead the agent is rewarded for activating the hidden units of a given hidden
layer of the agent network. Lastly, reward prediction uses the agent’s CNN to map three recent frames to a prediction of
the reward on the next step. These auxiliary tasks do not require any supervision that isn’t provided by the environment
dynamics and are general enough to apply to many different problem settings. Training an agent with these simple
auxiliary tasks led to SOTA performance on the Arcade Learning Environment (Bellemare et al., 2013).
2.4 Multi-Modal Architectures
In sections 2.1, 2.2, and 2.3, we discussed the multi-task architectures which were speciﬁcally designed to handle data
in one ﬁxed domain. Here, we describe architectures to handle multiple tasks using data from multiple domains, which
is usually some combination of visual and linguistic data. Multi-modal learning is an interesting extension of many of
the motivating principles behind multi-task learning: sharing representations across domains decreases overﬁtting and
increases data efﬁciency. In the multi-task single modality case, the representations are shared across tasks but within
in a single modality. However, in the multi-task multi-modal case, representations are shared across tasks and across
modes, providing another layer of abstraction through which the learned representations must generalize. This suggests
that multi-task multi-modal learning may yield an increase in the beneﬁts already exhibited by multi-task learning.
(Nguyen and Okatani, 2019) introduces an architecture for shared vision and language tasks by using dense co-attention
layers (Nguyen and Okatani, 2018), in which tasks are organized into a hierarchy and low-level tasks are supervised at
earlier layers in the network. Dense co-attention layers were developed for visual question answering, speciﬁcally for
the integration of visual and linguistic information. This setup of task supervision is similar to the cascaded information
architectures discussed in section 2.2.3. However, instead of hand-designing a hierarchy of tasks, this method performs a
12