Multi-Task Learning with Deep Neural Networks: A Survey
Figure 8: Various task supervision in various layers from (Hashimoto et al., 2016). Lower level tasks are supervised at
earlier layers.
SOTA-competitive results on several language tasks by constructing a similarly supervised architecture with 5 tasks:
POS tagging, chunking, dependency parsing, semantic relatedness, and textual entailment. The authors also replace
the bi-directional RNN units of (Søgaard and Goldberg, 2016) with bi-directional LSTM units. Figure 8 shows their
architecture.
Besides the increase in the number of tasks, this method also introduces a regularization term to avoid training
interference between the tasks. Each time a task’s dataset is sampled for training, the squared Euclidean distance
between the pre-update parameters and the current model parameters is added to the loss function. This encourages the
network parameters not to stray too far from the parameter conﬁguration which was learned by training on a different
task on the previous epoch.
Following these two works, (Sanh et al., 2019) introduces a similarly inspired model for a different set of tasks,
achieving SOTA results for Named Entity Recognition, Entity Mention Detection and Relation Extraction. In order
from lowest to highest, the task hierarchy in this work is NER, EMD, and coreference resolution/relation extraction
(equally ranked as highest level).
2.2.4 Adversarial Feature Separation
In a novel application of adversarial methods, (Liu et al., 2017) introduces an adversarial learning framework for
multi-task learning in order to distill learned features into task-speciﬁc and task-agnostic subspaces. Their architecture
is comprised of a single shared LSTM layer and one task-speciﬁc LSTM layer per task. Once the input sentence from
a task is passed through the shared LSTM layer and the task-speciﬁc LSTM layer, the two outputs are concatenated
and used as the ﬁnal features to perform inference on. However, the features produced by the shared LSTM layer
are also fed into the task discriminator. The task discriminator is a linear transformation followed by a softmax
layer that is trained to predict which task the original input sentence came from. The shared LSTM layer is then
trained to jointly minimize the task loss along with the discriminator loss, so that the features produced by the shared
LSTM do not contain any task-speciﬁc information. In addition, the shared features and the task speciﬁc features are
encouraged to encode separate information with the use of an orthogonality penalty (similar to (Ruder et al., 2019)) on
the resulting features. More speciﬁcally, the orthogonality loss is deﬁned as the squared Frobenius norm of the product
of the task-speciﬁc features and the shared features. This loss is added to the overall training objective, in order to
encourage the task-speciﬁc and the shared features to be orthogonal. These two auxiliary losses enforce the separation
of task-speciﬁc and task-agnostic information in the shared network.
2.2.5 BERT for MTL
Despite the popularity of the Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers (BERT) (Devlin et al., 2018),
there have been surprisingly little applications of the text encoding method for MTL. (Liu et al., 2019b) extends the
work of (Liu et al., 2015a) by adding shared BERT embedding layers into the architecture. The network architecture
overall is quite similar to (Liu et al., 2019b), the only difference being the addition of BERT contextual embedding
9