Multi-Task Learning with Deep Neural Networks: A Survey
each task to have a similar contribution to the update, so that the relative importance of each task is agnostic to the scale
of the reward functions. Applying PopArt to multi-task deep reinforcement learning signiﬁcantly improves performance
of agents trained with IMPALA (Espeholt et al., 2018) on the DeepMind Lab (Beattie et al., 2016) collection of tasks.
3.1.5 Geometric Mean of Losses
While most MTL methods model the network loss as a weighted average of individual task losses, (Chennupati et al.,
2019) proposes to compute the geometric mean of task losses as an alternative. The authors claim that using a geometric
mean facilitates balanced training of all tasks, and that this loss function handles differences in learning speeds of
various tasks better than the traditional weighted average loss function. However, there is no rigorous evidence to
support these claims. The results presented in their work show that models trained with the geometric outperform
baselines, but there has been little work done on analyzing the speciﬁc properties of optimization using these loss
functions in the MTL setting, which may be an interesting direction for future research.
3.2 Regularization
Regularization has long played in important role in multi-task learning, mostly in the form of soft parameter sharing.
Soft parameter sharing is one of two popular techniques for MTL (the other being hard parameter sharing) in which
parameters aren’t shared between task models, but instead the L2distance between the parameters of task models is
added to the training objective, in order to encourage similar model parameters between different tasks. Soft parameter
sharing is simple to implement and has been employed extensively in MTL methods.
(Duong et al., 2015) is a well-known method which uses soft parameter sharing instead of hard parameter sharing. The
authors employ the architecture of (Chen and Manning, 2014) for dependency parsing in multiple languages, but train
separate copies of the same network, one for each language. Only a small fraction of the parameters in the network are
softly shared between tasks, namely the layers which transform the embedded POS tags and the embedded arc labels.
The use of soft parameter sharing across models for different languages was shown to greatly increase performance in
the small data setting.
An interesting variant of soft parameter sharing is introduced in (Yang and Hospedales, 2016b), in which the L2
distance between parameter vectors is replaced by the tensor trace norm of the tensor formed by stacking corresponding
parameter vectors from different tasks. The trace norm of a matrix is the sum of the singular values of that matrix, and
it can be thought of as a convex relaxation of rank, i.e. the number of non-zero singular values. Therefore, minimizing
the trace norm of a matrix is a good surrogate for minimizing the rank of that matrix. By extending the trace norm
from matrices to tensors and minimizing the tensor trace norm of stacked parameter vectors, this method encourages
the learning of parameter vectors across tasks which are similar, just as in traditional soft parameter sharing. In this
case, however, similarity is measured by the existence of linear dependencies between parameter vectors (i.e. low
tensor rank), instead of L2distance. The authors interpret the resulting trace norms after training as a measure of
sharing strength between corresponding layers in different task models (low trace norm means stronger sharing), and
interestingly, the sharing strength was found to decrease with layer depth. This conincides with the common intuition in
MTL that representations in earlier layers should be less task-dependent than those of deeper layers.
Besides soft parameter sharing, MTL models can also be regularized by placing prior distributions on the network
parameters. Multilinear Relationship Networks (MRNs) (Long et al., 2017) do exactly this by imposing a tensor normal
distribution as a prior over the parameters in task-speciﬁc layers of multi-task models. A tensor normal distribution is
essentially a multivariate normal distribution with the extra assumption that the covariance matrix can be decomposed
into the Kronecker product of Kcovariance matrices, where Kis the order of a tensor following this distribution. Each
of these covariance matrices represents the covariance between rows of various matricizations of a tensor following the
distribution. To impose this distribution on the parameter tensor of a multi-task network, the covariance is constructed
as the Kronecker product of three covariance matrices: a covariance matrix representing the relationships between
features, another indicating the relationships between classiﬁcation classes, and the last modeling the relationships
between tasks. It is this construction that allows the model to learn relationships between tasks, as its name suggests. At
the time of its publication, MRNs reached state of the art performance on three different MTL benchmarks.
Deep Asymmetric Multitask Feature Learning (Deep-AMTFL) (Lee et al., 2018) is a method of regularizing deep
multi-task neural networks by introducing an autoencoder term to the objective function. This auxiliary task involves
reconstructing the features from the second to last layer of a network from the network output, so that each of the task
predictions is used to construct the features for all other tasks, a task which was proposed by Asymmetric Multi-Task
Learning (Lee et al., 2016). The motivation behind these methods is to allow for information to ﬂow from tasks which
the model does well to tasks which the model does poorly, but not the other way around, hence the “asymmetric" in the
names.
22