Multi-Task Learning with Deep Neural Networks: A Survey
speedup compared to Taskonomy without degradation of the results. Unfortunately, this work doesn’t include any direct
comparison with the RSA transfer model, so there is no evidence of superiority of either model.
The existing methods for learning task transfer relationships are all very recent, and there is much more work to be
done in this area. One interesting thing to note is the manner in which the RSA and attribution map transfer models
(Kriegeskorte, 2008; Song et al., 2019) achieve efﬁciency while computing nontrivial information. To summarize
succinctly, these models use the network to train the network. Both methods leverage information learned by the
single-task networks (either intermediate representations or relevance scoring) in order to inform training downstream.
Taskonomy, on the other hand, trains extra networks to do what these two methods did without any extra training. It
goes to show that the rich information learned by deep networks isn’t only useful for the network’s forward pass. In
general, even outside of MTL, this information can and should be leveraged to further inform model training: Use the
network to train the network.
4.3 Task Embeddings
Although they are mostly used for meta-learning, task embeddings are a very general form of learning task relationships,
and are strongly related to the methods we have so far discussed in this section. Even with this strong tie between
models, there is a signiﬁcant lack of methods in MTL which utilize task embeddings. This shouldn’t come as a surprise,
though. Task embeddings ﬁnd their most use in situations where a new task is given after already learning a number of
tasks from the same distribution, and this new task must be localized with respect to tasks already learned. If the set of
tasks for a model to learn is ﬁxed - as is the case with MTL - why should one assign a vector representation to each
task? Still, we feel that the connection to TRL is important, so we provide a brief summary of several task embedding
methods in the meta-learning literature.
(James et al., 2018) uses metric learning to construct a task embedding for imitation learning of various robotic
manipulation tasks. This model, named TecNet, is comprised of an embedding network and a control network. The
embedding network produces a vector representation of a task given many examples from that task, while the control
network takes an observation and a task representation as input to produce an action. Instead of computing a task
embedding from expert demonstrations, (Achille et al., 2019) constructs them from the Fisher Information Matrix
of a pre-trained network. Lastly, (Lan et al., 2019) trains a shared policy for meta-reinforcement learning which is
conditioned on task embeddings. These task embeddings are the outputs of a task encoder which is trained to output
embeddings based on experience from each task.
5 Multi-Task Benchmarks
In this section, we give a short overview of commonly used benchmarks in various domains of multi-task learning,
including benchmarks for computer vision, natural language processing, reinforcement learning, and multi-modal
problems. It should be noted that, while there are a few benchmarks speciﬁcally designed for multi-task learning
(such as Taskonomy (Zamir et al., 2018) and Meta-World (Yu et al., 2019)), these are few and far between. Most
MTL methods are evaluated in multi-task settings which use generic benchmarks that include supervision for multiple
tasks, such as NYU-v2 (Silberman et al., 2012). Lastly, the benchmarks discussed here aren’t an exhaustive list, just a
highlight of some of the most commonly used MTL benchmarks. The benchmarks within each domain are sorted by
release date starting with the earliest.
5.1 Computer Vision Benchmarks
NYU-v2 (Silberman et al., 2012) is a dataset of RGB-depth images from 464 indoor scenes with 1449 densely labeled
images and over 400,000 unlabeled images. The labeled images are labeled for instance segmentation, semantic
segmentation, and scene classiﬁcation, and all images contain depth values for each pixel. All images are frames
extracted from video sequences.
MS-COCO (Lin et al., 2014) contains 328,000 images of natural scenes with a total of 2.5 million object instances
spanning 91 object types. The images contain labels for image classiﬁcation, semantic segmentation, and instance
segmentation.
CelebA (Liu et al., 2015b) has 200,000 images of celebrity faces, with 20 images of 10,000 different people. Each
image is labeled with 40 face attributes and ﬁve keypoints, for a total of 8 million facial attribute labels.
OmniGlot (Lake et al., 2015) contains images of characters, unlike many of the other popular natural image
benchmarks. The dataset contains images of 1623 characters from 50 different alphabets, operating in a low-data
regime. Omniglot was designed with a focus on few-shot learning and meta-learning in image classiﬁcation and
generative modeling.
32