Multi-Task Learning with Deep Neural Networks: A Survey
Figure 9: Shared architecture for robotic grasping, pushing, and poking (Pinto and Gupta, 2017).
layers following the input embedding vectors in ﬁgure 6. This new MTL architecture, named MT-DNN, achieved SOTA
performance on eight out of nine GLUE tasks (Wang et al., 2018) at the time of its publication.
2.3 Architectures for Reinforcement Learning
In recent years, many of the advances in reinforcement learning have focused on optimization and training methods
(Schulman et al., 2017; Haarnoja et al., 2018; Akkaya et al., 2019). Since many RL problems don’t necessarily involve
complex perception, such as working with words or pixels, the architectural demand isn’t as high for many RL problems.
Because of this, many deep networks for RL are simple fully-connected, convolutional, or recurrent architectures.
However, in the multi-task case, there are several instances of interesting works which leverage information between
tasks to create improved architectures for RL.
2.3.1 Joint Task Training
Several works in RL have found that task performance can be improved by simply training for multiple tasks jointly,
with or without parameter sharing. (Pinto and Gupta, 2017) uses a shared trunk architecture (shown in ﬁgure 9 to jointly
learn robotic grasping, pushing, and poking from pixels. The shared feature extractor consists of three convolutional
layers, and these shared features are fed to three task-speciﬁc output branches. The grasping and poking output branches
are made of three fully-connected layers each, and the pushing branch has one convolutional layer, followed by two
fully-connected layers. This shared network is trained with a supervised loss which is an average of cross-entropy
and squared Euclidean losses, one for each task. The network actions are parameterized in such a way to allow for
supervised training. The authors ﬁnd that this shared network trained with 2500 examples of both pushing and grasping
outperforms a task-speciﬁc grasping network trained with 5000 examples. (Zeng et al., 2018) also ﬁnds advantages by
jointly training with robotic pushing and grasping, though their architecture does not employ any parameter sharing.
The network is comprised of two separate fully convolutional Q-networks, one for pushing and one for grasping. The
two networks are, however, given a joint training signal. The reward for a timestep tis deﬁned as follows: if a grasping
action is chosen at timestep tand the grasp is successful, the reward is 1. If a pushing action is chosen at timestep tand
the action causes a sufﬁciently large change in the environment, then the reward is 0.5. From this reward, there is no
explicit encouragement of one task to aid another. But when both networks are jointly trained to maximize the same
reward, the pushing network learns to push in a way that inﬂuences the environment to maximize the grasping reward.
This joint training setup was shown to be much more sample efﬁcient than baselines, making training on a physical
robot feasible with only a few hours of training.
2.3.2 Modular Policies
There have been many similarities between the various parameter sharing schemes that we have discussed so far,
but modular networks are present a novel family of parameter sharing methods which are totally different from the
shared trunk or cross-talk architectures from sections 2.1.1 and 2.1.2. In modular learning setups, each task’s network
10