Multi-Task Learning with Deep Neural Networks: A Survey
CityScapes (Cordts et al., 2016) is comprised of video frames shot in the streets of 50 urban cities. The densely
labeled subset of the dataset contains 5000 images with pixel-level annotations, while 20000 other images are coarsely
labeled. The images are labeled for image classiﬁcation, semantic segmentation, and instance segmentation.
Taskonomy (Zamir et al., 2018) may be the only large scale computer vision dataset speciﬁcally intended for research
with multi-task learning. The dataset consists of 4 million images of indoor scenes from 600 different buildings, and
each image is annotated for 26 different visual tasks, including 2D, 2.5D, and 3D tasks.
5.2 Natural Language Processing Benchmarks
Unless otherwise speciﬁed, it can be assumed that the text within a corpus is English.
Penn Treebank (Marcus et al., 1993) is a corpus of text consisting of 4.5 million words. The text is aggregated
from multiple sources including scientiﬁc abstracts, news stories, book chapters, computer manuals, and more, and
contains Part-of-Speech tags and syntactical structure annotations.
OntoNotes 5.0 (Weischedel et al., 2013) is a multi-lingual corpus of Arabic, English, and Chinese text with 2.9
million words total, labeled for syntax and predicate argument structure, coreference resolution, and word sense
disambiguation. The text sources consist of written news, broadcast news, web data, and more.
WMT 14 (Bojar et al., 2014) is a dataset from the 2014 Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation, with parallel
corpuses of many language pairs, including French-English, German-English, Hindi-English, Russian-English, and
Czech-English. These corpuses vary in size between 90 million total English sentences and 1 million total Hindi
sentences.
Stanford Natural Language Inference (Bowman et al., 2015) contains 570,000 sentence pairs, where each pair
contains a label describing their relationship as either neutral, entailment, or contradiction. The dataset was acquired
through Amazon Turk, with the instructions displaying a captioned image and asking for one alternative caption, one
caption that may be correct, and one caption that is certainly incorrect.
SciTail (Khot et al., 2018) is a textual entailment dataset consisting of scientiﬁc statements. The corpus was
constructed by converting multiple choice questions on science exams (and web data) into entailed and non-entailed
pairs, for a total of 27,000 total examples.
GLUE (Wang et al., 2018) consists of nine NLP tasks accompanied with data from previously existing NLP corpuses.
The benchmark is intended to be used to evaluate general language understanding models that can handle all or
multiple tasks simulataneously. Some tasks are intentionally provided with small amounts of training data to
encourage information sharing between tasks.
decaNLP (McCann et al., 2018) is a collection of ten NLP tasks which are all posed as question answering. This is a
new approach to NLP benchmarking: instead of the task being speciﬁed by explicit constraints on the input/output,
each task is given to the model with a description in natural language. Each example is a 3-tuple of question, context,
and answer.
5.3 Reinforcement Learning Benchmarks
Arcade Learning Environment (Bellemare et al., 2013) (or ALE) is a diverse collection of hundreds of Atari 2600
games, where observations are given to the agent as raw pixels. These games were originally designed to be a
challenge for the human video game player, so they present a challenge for modern RL agents in aspects such as
exploration and learning with sparse rewards.
DeepMind Lab (Beattie et al., 2016) is a 3D ﬁrst person game platform which requires the agent to make actions
from raw pixels. DeepMind Lab offers the ability to customize environments through the observations, termination
conditions, reward functions, and more. The 3D nature of the environment makes for a challenge not just in strategic
decision making but also in perception.
Meta-World (Yu et al., 2019) is a collection of robotic manipulation tasks designed to encourage research in
multi-task learning and meta-learning. The collection consists of 50 tasks for a simulated Sawyer robotic arm, each
task with its own parametric variations, such as goal position. The multi-task benchmarks within Meta-World are
MT10 and MT50, which consist of simultaneously learning 10 and 50 tasks, respectively, while the meta-learning
benchmarks are ML10 and ML45, which consist of learning on 10 and 45 tasks before being asked to quickly adapt
to new unseen tasks.
33