Multi-Task Learning with Deep Neural Networks: A Survey
authors consider an example of adjacent cars: at the local level, when only considering small image patches, the depth
discontinuity between cars suggests that there should be a change in the semantic labels across this discontinuity. At the
global level, however, one can see that the objects surrounding the depth discontinuity have the same semantic label,
which contradicts the supposed task interaction at the local level. This scenario suggests that multi-scale information
should be considered when distilling predictions across tasks, and indeed this model does show a larger improvement
over single-task counterparts than high-performing baselines.
2.1.4 Task Routing
Despite their success, shared trunk and cross-talk architectures are somewhat rigid in their parameter sharing scheme.
(Strezoski et al., 2019a) presents an architecture which is more ﬂexible, allowing for ﬁne-grained parameter sharing
between tasks that occurs at the feature level instead of the layer level. The novel component of this architecture is
the Task Routing Layer which applies a task-speciﬁc binary mask to the output of a convolutional layer to which it
is applied, zeroing out a subset of the computed features and effectively assigning a subnetwork to each task which
overlaps with that of other tasks. The binary masks are not learned, instead they are randomly initialized at the beginning
of training and ﬁxed from that point on. Although this random initialization doesn’t allow for the possibility of a
principled parameter sharing scheme between tasks, the user still has control over the degree of sharing between tasks
through the use of a hyperparameter , known as the sharing ratio. takes values between 0 and 1, specifying the
proportion of units in each layer which are task-speciﬁc, and the random initialization of the binary masks in each layer
are executed in a way to ﬁt this constraint. The proposed architecture only requires a small increase in the number of
parameters as the number of tasks increases, and experiments demonstrate superior performance over MTL baselines
such as the Cross-Stitch network. Impressively, the Task Routing Layer allows for the network to scale up to handle up
to 312 tasks simultaneously while maintaining decent performance. The Task Routing Layer is strongly related to the
learned architectures Piggyback (Mallya et al., 2018) and Sparse Sharing Architectures (Sun et al., 2019a) (discussed in
section 2.5.4), though in these works the binary masks which assign a set of units to each task are learned.
2.1.5 Single Tasking
Nearly every multi-task architecture for computer vision produces output for multiple tasks from the same given input,
and each one we have discussed so far satisﬁes this condition. (Maninis et al., 2019) is, to our knowledge, the only
such method which handles a single task at once, but can be used for multiple tasks with multiple forward passes. The
authors argue that, since the network only performs inference for a single task at a time, the network is better able
to leverage task-speciﬁc information and disregard information useful for other tasks. This focusing is accomplished
through the use of two different attention mechanisms: task-speciﬁc data-dependent modulation (Perez et al., 2018) and
task-speciﬁc Residual Adapter blocks (Rebufﬁ et al., 2018). The network is also trained with an adversarial loss (Liu
et al., 2017) to encourage the gradients from each task to be indistinguishable. The idea of using an adversarial setup to
encourage similar gradient directions between tasks has also been explored outside of the realm of computer vision, and
is discussed further in section 3.4.1.
2.2 Architectures for Natural Language Processing
Natural language processing naturally lends itself well to MTL, due to the abundance of related questions one can ask
about a given piece of text and the task-agnostic representations which are so often used in modern NLP techniques.
The development in neural architectures for NLP has gone through phases in recent years, with traditional feed-forward
architectures evolving into recurrent models, and recurrent models being succeeded by attention based architectures.
These phases are reﬂected in the application of these NLP architectures for MTL.
It should also be noted that many NLP techniques could be considered as multi-task in that they construct general
representations which are task-agnostic (such as word embeddings), and under this interpretation a discussion of
multi-task NLP would include a large number of methods which are better known as general NLP techniques. Here, for
the sake of practicality, we restrict our discussion to mostly include techniques which explicitly learn multiple tasks
simultaneously for the end goal of performing these tasks simultaneously.
2.2.1 Traditional Feed-Forward
(Collobert and Weston, 2008; Collobert et al., 2011; Liu et al., 2015a) all use traditional feed-forward (non-attention
based) architectures for multi-task NLP. Many of these architectures have a structural resemblance to the early shared
architectures of computer vision: a shared, global feature extractor followed by task-speciﬁc output branches. In this
case, however, the features are word representations. (Collobert and Weston, 2008) uses a shared lookup table layer to
learn word representations, where the parameters of each word vector are directly learned through gradient descent.
6