Multi-Task Learning with Deep Neural Networks: A Survey
Figure 3: Cross-Stitch network architecture (Misra et al., 2016). Each task has a separate network, but cross-stitch units
combine information from parallel layers of the different task networks with a linear combination.
be shared between all tasks, so that each task-speciﬁc output head receives the same input, or task-speciﬁc, so that each
output head receives a different mixture of the shared trunk outputs. This model bears resemblance to Cross-Stitch
networks (Misra et al., 2016) (see section 2.1.2), but performs a single linear combination of shared components instead
of multiple feature combinations from task-speciﬁc layers. This method wasn’t empirically evaluated on computer
vision tasks, but is discussed here due to its close relationship with the other CV architectures (Zhang et al., 2014; Misra
et al., 2016).
2.1.2 Cross-Talk
Not all MTL architectures for computer vision consist of a shared, global feature extractor with task-speciﬁc output
branches or modules. (Misra et al., 2016; Ruder et al., 2019; Gao et al., 2019) take a separate approach. Instead of
a single shared extractor, these architectures have a separate network for each task, with information ﬂow between
parallel layers in the task networks, referred to as cross-talk . Figure 3 depicts this idea with the Cross-Stitch network
architecture from (Misra et al., 2016).
A Cross-Stitch network is composed of individual networks for each task, but the input to each layer is a linear
combination of the outputs of the previous layer from every task network. The weights of each linear combination
are learned and task-speciﬁc, so that each layer can choose which tasks to leverage information from. (Ruder et al.,
2019) generalizes this idea with the introduction of the Sluice network. In the Sluice network, each layer is divided into
task-speciﬁc and shared subspaces, and the input to each layer is a linear combination of the task-speciﬁc and shared
outputs of the previous layer from each task network. This way, each layer can choose whether to focus on task speciﬁc
or shared features from previous layers. The task-speciﬁc and shared subspaces of each layer are also encouraged to
be orthogal, by adding an auxiliary term to the loss function to minimize the squared Frobenius norm of the product
of each task-speciﬁc subspace with its corresponding shared subspace. It should be noted that Sluice networks are
presented in a domain-agnostic way, but we discuss them here due to their relation to Cross-Stitch networks. Finally,
(Gao et al., 2019) generalizes the feature fusion operation at parallel layers with Neural Discriminative Dimensionality
Reduction (NDDR-CNN). Instead of using a linear combination to combine features from parallel layers of the task
networks, NDDR-CNN concatenates the outputs from each layer and pass the result through a 1x1 convolution. The
parameters of this convolution are task speciﬁc, as are the linear combination weights in Cross-Stitch networks. A
diagram is shown in ﬁgure 4. Note that this method for feature fusion is a generalization of Cross-Stitch networks.
The 1x1 convolutional parameters can be learned in such a way to mimic a Cross-Stitch network, but most parameter
combinations lead to feature fusion operations which can’t be implemented with a Cross-Stitch network.
(Yang and Hospedales, 2016a) proposes an architecture which is related to the cross-talk template, though perhaps only
tangentially. In the Sluice network, task-speciﬁc and shared parameter tensors from each layer are simply concatenated
to form the layer’s parameters. The architecture of (Yang and Hospedales, 2016a) also creates an explicit separation
between task-speciﬁc and shared parameters, but does so using tensor factorization, a well-known approach in the
classical MTL literature (Evgeniou and Pontil, 2004; Argyriou et al., 2008; Kumar and Daume III, 2012). Tensor
factorization is used in MTL to represent a multi-task model’s parameter tensor as a product of two smaller tensors, one
shared between tasks and one task-speciﬁc, which enforces a different type of division of shared/task-speciﬁc feature
spaces than, for example, Sluice networks. (Yang and Hospedales, 2016a) extends this approach to the deep learning
setting in order to learn the sharing structure at each layer within a deep network. Unfortunately, there is no empirical
comparison of this tensor factorization approach with the other cross-talk architectures, and there hasn’t been much
work extending the tensor factorization approach of (Yang and Hospedales, 2016a) for deep MTL.
4