Multi-Task Learning with Deep Neural Networks: A Survey
Figure 10: Shared modular architecture for locomotion with multiple robots (Heess et al., 2016). Note that the high-level
module updates the modulated input to the low-level module at a different frequency than it itself receives input from
the environment.
Figure 11: Shared modular architecture for multi-task and multi-robot transfer (Devin et al., 2017). Each network is
made of two modules, one robot module and one task module. Each robot module can be combined with a task module
to form a network to perform each (task, robot) pair.
architecture is composed of a combination of smaller sub-networks, and these smaller sub-networks are combined in
different ways for different tasks. Just as MTL is motivated by generality through shared representations, modular
learning offers generality of computation through shared neural building blocks. The goal of these setups is to learn
building blocks which are general enough to be useful as a part of the network architecture for multiple tasks. We
discuss several other learned modular architectures in sections 2.5 and 2.6, but here we only discuss those modular
methods for which the parameters of the building blocks are learned and the conﬁguration of building blocks for each
task remains ﬁxed. Discussion of modular methods with learned building block combinations can be found in the
aforementioned sections.
Within weeks of each other, (Heess et al., 2016) and (Devin et al., 2017) both introduced modular neural network
policies for multi-task learning across various robots. The architectures of each of these works are depicted in ﬁgures
10 and 11, respectively.
The task architecture of (Heess et al., 2016) is made of two modules, a low-level “spinal" network and a high-level
“cortical" network. The spinal network has access to proprioceptive information like muscle tension, and it chooses
motor actions, while the cortical network has access to all observations and modulates inputs to the spinal network. It is
important to note that the proprioceptive information given to the spinal network is always task-independent, so that
the spinal network must learn task-independent representations. In their experiments, the low-level/spinal network is
feed-forward, while the high-level/cortical network is recurrent. The combination of the division of labor between the
two modules and the information hiding from the spinal network allows for a pre-trained spinal network to be deployed
with a new cortical network to quickly solve a new task with the same robot body. The usage of the pre-trained spinal
network allows for effective exploration in the robot body, despite the new task.
The architecture of (Devin et al., 2017) is similarly inspired, but employs parameter sharing for the network controllers
between different robots as well as between tasks. Each task and robot has its own network module. The network
for each task/robot pair is composed of the corresponding task-speciﬁc module, followed by the corresponding robot-
speciﬁc module, as shown in ﬁgure 11 Because each module is shared between tasks and robots, it is constrained
11