Multi-Task Learning with Deep Neural Networks: A Survey
Figure 21: Multi-task GREAT model (Sinha et al., 2018). An auxiliary network takes a gradient vector for a single
task’s loss and tries to classify which task the gradient vector came from. The network gradients are then modulated to
minimize the performance of the auxiliary network, to enforce the condition that gradients from different task functions
have statistically indistinguishable distributions.
3.4 Gradient Modulation
One of the main challenges in MTL is negative transfer , when the joint training of tasks hurts learning instead of
helping it. From an optimization perspective, negative transfer manifests as the presence of conﬂicting task gradients.
When two tasks have gradients which point in opposing directions, following the gradient for one task will decrease
the performance on the other task, and following the average of the two gradients means that neither task sees the
same improvement it would in a single-task training setting. Among many other approaches to alleviate the conﬂict
in learning dynamics between different tasks, explicit gradient modulation has arisen as a potential solution. The
methods presented here work by modifying training gradients, either through the use of adversarial methods or by
simply replacing gradient vectors when conﬂicts arise.
3.4.1 Adversarial Gradient Modulation
If a multi-task model is training on a collection of related tasks, then ideally the gradients from these tasks should point
in similar directions. Gradient Adversarial Training (GREAT) (Sinha et al., 2018) explicitly enforces this condition by
including an adversarial loss term that encourages gradients from different sources to have statistically indistinguishable
distributions. GREAT is a general framework which can be applied for adversarial defense and knowledge distillation
(and likely other settings) besides multi-task learning. In the MTL setup, the model is augmented with an auxiliary
discriminator network which attempts to classify the tasks corresponding to gradients of the task decoders, as pictured
in ﬁgure 21. During the backward pass, the gradients are modiﬁed by Gradient Alignment Layers (GALs) through
element-wise scaling to minimize the performance of the auxiliary network in distinguishing between the task gradients.
A similar adversarial setup to enforce gradient similarity between tasks is used in (Maninis et al., 2019).
While the motivation for the model is intuitively plausible, the premise of adversarial training isn’t rigorously justiﬁed.
Just because two tasks are related, how can we be sure that their gradient distributions should be identical? Furthermore,
it seems likely that the distribution of a task’s gradients will change throughout training, so how likely can it be that
each task’s gradient distributions move together? The existence of negative transfer in the ﬁrst place tells us that similar
tasks do not necessarily have aligning gradients. Can we actually alleviate negative transfer by enforcing gradients to be
similar, even when the original gradients of the loss function are conﬂicting? Without theoretical justiﬁcation, we can’t
be sure of the answers to these questions. Nevertheless, the experiments presented in this work show that GREAT does
increase the performance of multi-task models, and that it outperforms other multi-task optimization baselines such as
GradNorm. The nature of both the premise and the results of this model are still unanswered questions.
3.4.2 Gradient Replacement
An entirely different approach to gradient modulation is explored in (Lopez-Paz and Ranzato, 2017; Chaudhry et al.,
2018; Yu et al., 2020). The main idea behind these three works is to replace a task gradient vector which conﬂicts with
another by a modiﬁed version which has no conﬂicts. This idea is broad, but the implementations of each of these
works are similar at heart and we will present a rigorous deﬁnition of each.
(Lopez-Paz and Ranzato, 2017) introduces Gradient Episodic Memory (GEM) for continual learning, a problem
formulation in which a model learns multiple tasks sequentially, instead of simultaneously as in MTL. GEM keeps an
episodic memory of training examples from past learned tasks, and enforces the following constraint at each update
25