Multi-Task Learning with Deep Neural Networks: A Survey
Figure 4: NDDR-CNN network architecture (Gao et al., 2019). Instead of combining information from different task
networks with a linear combination of parallel features (as in Cross-Stitch networks (Misra et al., 2016)), NDDR-CNN
uses concatenation and a 1x1 convolution to fuse features from separate task networks.
Figure 5: PAD-Net architecture for prediction distillation (Xu et al., 2018a). Preliminary predictions are made for four
tasks, then these predictions are re-combined and used to compute ﬁnal, reﬁned predictions for two output tasks.
2.1.3 Prediction Distillation
A major tenant and popular justiﬁcation of MTL is that learned features from one task may be useful in performing
another related task. Prediction distillation techniques are based on a natural extension of this principle: that the answers
to one task may help learning of another. (Vandenhende et al., 2020) provides a great motivating example of this
phenomenon: In an MTL setup for jointly learning depth prediction and semantic segmentation, discontinuities in the
depth map imply likely discontinuities in semantic segmentation labels, and vice versa. PAD-Net (Xu et al., 2018a),
Pattern-Afﬁnitive Propagation (Zhang et al., 2019), and MTI-Net (Vandenhende et al., 2020) each take advantage of
this phenomenon for the multi-task learning of computer vision tasks by making preliminary predictions for each task,
then combining these predictions to produced ﬁnal, reﬁned outputs.
PAD-Net (Xu et al., 2018a) is the earliest of these works, introducing an architecture to combine preliminary predictions
for depth prediction, scene parsing, surface normal estimation, and contour prediction to produce reﬁned predictions
for depth prediction and scene parsing, as pictured in ﬁgure 5. The preliminary predictions are recombined using
one of three novel variations of a multi-modal distillation module, either using naive feature concatenation, message
passing, or attention-guided message passing. Pattern-Afﬁnitive Propagation (PAP) (Zhang et al., 2019) expands on
this architecture by introducing an afﬁnity learning layer which learns to represent pair-wise relationships of tasks and
combines features from various tasks according to these relationships. PAP also does away with the extra auxiliary
tasks of PAD-Net and instead produces both preliminary and ﬁnal predictions for depth prediction, surface normal
estimation, and semantic segmentation. Both of these methods, at the times of their publication, reached state of the art
performance on at least one task from the NYU-v2 dataset (Silberman et al., 2012).
This style of architecture is further extended by the recently proposed MTI-Net (Vandenhende et al., 2020), which
models task interactions at multiple scales of the receptive ﬁeld. Speciﬁcally, the architecture consists of a backbone
that extracts multi-scale features, and features from each scale are used to make preliminary task predictions. The initial
predictions from the 1/32 scale are combined with 1/16 scale features to form the input for predictions at the 1/16 scale,
then the predictions from the 1/16 scale are used as input to make predictions at the 1/8 scale, etc. After predictions
are made from each scale, the predictions are distilled between tasks and aggregated across scales to make the ﬁnal
reﬁned task predictions. The motivation behind this multi-scale interaction network comes from the fact that one task’s
features or ground-truth outputs may only be informative for learning another task at some (but not all) scales. The
5