Multi-Task Learning with Deep Neural Networks: A Survey
Figure 24: An example partitioning of a group of tasks into clusters with positive transfer (Standley et al., 2019).
between tasks, which is a powerful and inexpensive approach to TRL that is also employed in (Kriegeskorte, 2008;
Song et al., 2019) (see section 4.2 for further discussion). It should be noted, however, that their model is based on an
assumption which breaks down more and more during training. It may be true that gradient vectors are indicative of
task similarity at the beginning of training, when parameters across tasks are still relatively similar. But as training
continues and model parameters get further apart, similarity between task gradients becomes less and less representative
of the similarity between tasks, and this signal will devolve into noise with a sufﬁciently non-convex loss landscape.
Still, the approach is empirically shown to be effective for computing task relationships with proper conﬁguration.
Most recently, (Standley et al., 2019) includes an in-depth empirical study of task grouping with the Taskonomy dataset
(Zamir et al., 2018) and a method to partition a group of tasks into clusters which each exhibit positive transfer between
their respective tasks. Such a partitioning of tasks is pictured in ﬁgure 24. Using four different training settings with
varying amounts of training data and network sizes to train each pair of tasks within groups of ﬁve tasks, the authors
ﬁnd several interesting trends with a more thorough analysis than the previous studies. First, there were mixed results on
whether or not multi-task training improved over the single-task baselines, with many multi-task networks performing
worse than the single-task counterparts. Next, the performance gain from single-task to multi-task training varies wildly
with the training setting, implying that the effectiveness of MTL is not as dependent on the relationship of the tasks
themselves as we might have once thought. Surprisingly, the study also ﬁnds no correlation between the multi-task
afﬁnity and the transfer afﬁnity between tasks, which again shows that there are many more factors behind joint task
learning dynamics (in both multi-task and transfer learning) than just the nature of the tasks in consideration. To ﬁnd a
partition of a group of tasks into clusters with desirable learning dynamics, this work uses both approximations of the
performance of multi-task networks at convergence and a branch-and-bound algorithm that uses these approximations
to select a set of multi-task networks to collectively perform all tasks. Using this method of grouping tasks, the resulting
multi-task networks consistently outperform the single task baselines, which is a vast improvement over the multi-task
setups from the empirical study in which every single pair of tasks is trained jointly. To our knowledge, this is the only
computational framework for deciding which tasks to train together in multi-task learning that allows for more than two
tasks to be trained jointly.
4.2 Transfer Relationships
Learning transfer relationships between tasks in MTL is related to the problem of learning to group tasks for joint
learning, though they don’t always correlate, as noted above. However, unlike learning tasks simultaneously, transfer
learning already plays an important role in the wider deep learning research effort; most natural language processing
and computer vision models start not from scratch, but transferring a pre-trained model to use on a new task. Be that as
it may, research into methods that can explicitly learn transfer relationships between tasks is only somewhat recent.
With the large existing applicability of transfer learning today, these methods have the potential to make a strong impact
on the larger research community.
The ﬁrst (and certainly most well known) work which attempted to learn transfer afﬁnities between tasks is Taskonomy
(Zamir et al., 2018). Aside from the Taskonomy dataset with 4 million images labeled for 26 tasks, this paper introduces
a computational method to automatically construct a taxonomy of visual tasks based on transfer relationships between
tasks. To do this, a single-task network is trained on each individual task, then transfer relationships are computed by
answering the following question for each pair of tasks: How well can we perform task iby training a decoder on top of
a feature extractor which was trained on task j? This is a bit of a simpliﬁcation, as the actual training setup involves
transferring from multiple source tasks to a single target task, but the main idea is the same. Once the transfer afﬁnities
are computed, the problem of constructing a task taxonomy is characterized as choosing the ideal source task or tasks
for each target task in a way that satisﬁes a budget on the number of source tasks. The motivation here is to limit the
number of tasks which have access to the full amount of supervised data (these are the source tasks), and to learn the
30