Multi-Task Learning with Deep Neural Networks: A Survey
Figure 15: Soft Layer Ordering with three learned layers (Meyerson and Miikkulainen, 2017). Each layer of the network
is a linear combination of several network modules, and the weights of these combinations are task-speciﬁc.
Figure 16: A learned parameter sharing scheme with AdaShare (Sun et al., 2019b). Each layer in the network is either
included or ignored by each task, so that each task uses a subnetwork which is (likely) overlapping with other tasks.
parameterized and learned such as in Soft Layer Ordering and Modular Meta-Learning. Instead, this method trains
an RNN controller to choose a layer from a ﬁxed set of layers to iteratively build an architecture as a sequence of
modules, and the module is again trained with reinforcement learning to maximize the expected performance of the
constructed architecture. This method bears a strong resemblance to the previously discussed Multi-task Neural Model
Search controller (Wong and Gesmundo, 2017), with the main difference being that the RNN controller used in (Chen
et al., 2018) simply chooses between a set of network modules, while the MNMS controller makes architectural design
decisions.
Most recently, AdaShare (Sun et al., 2019b) is an algorithm for modular MTL in which each task architecture is
comprised of a sequence of network layers. Each layer in the shared set is either included or omitted from the network
for each task. An example is shown in ﬁgure 16. Along with the weights of each layer, AdaShare learns an NLarray
of binary values, where Nis the number of tasks, Lis the total number of shared layers, and the (i;`)-th element of the
binary array denotes whether layer `is included in the model of the i-th task. Since the output of a task’s network is not
differentiable with respect to these binary values, the method adopts Gumbel-Softmax sampling (Jang et al., 2016) to
optimize these parameters with gradient descent jointly with the network weights. This strategy makes an interesting
medium between Soft Layer Ordering (Meyerson and Miikkulainen, 2017) and Modular Meta-Learning (Alet et al.,
2018), in which each shared module is shared discretely instead of softly, but the computation graph can still be learned
with gradient descent. AdaShare also employs several regularization terms to encourage sharing in the lower-level
modules and sparsity in the resulting task-speciﬁc networks, which are discussed in section 3.2.
2.5.4 Fine-Grained Sharing
Fine-grained parameter sharing schemes are the most recently introduced MTL architecture type, and they allow for
more ﬂexible information ﬂow between tasks than sharing at the layer or multi-layer level. Piggyback (Mallya et al.,
2018) is a method for adapting a pre-trained network on a related task by learning to mask out individual weights of the
original network. This allows for the storage of a newly trained model with a storage cost of only one additional bit
per parameter of the original model while preserving the original network function. Despite the fact that the network
output is not differentiable with respect to these network masks, these network masks are optimized through gradient
descent jointly with the network weights by using a continuous relaxation of the mask values as a noisy estimate of the
16