MULTI -TASK LEARNING WITH DEEPNEURAL NETWORKS : A
SURVEY
Michael Crawshaw
Department of Computer Science
George Mason University
mcrawsha@gmu.edu
ABSTRACT
Multi-task learning (MTL) is a subﬁeld of machine learning in which multiple tasks are simultane-
ously learned by a shared model. Such approaches offer advantages like improved data efﬁciency,
reduced overﬁtting through shared representations, and fast learning by leveraging auxiliary infor-
mation. However, the simultaneous learning of multiple tasks presents new design and optimization
challenges, and choosing which tasks should be learned jointly is in itself a non-trivial problem.
In this survey, we give an overview of multi-task learning methods for deep neural networks, with
the aim of summarizing both the well-established and most recent directions within the ﬁeld. Our
discussion is structured according to a partition of the existing deep MTL techniques into three groups:
architectures, optimization methods, and task relationship learning. We also provide a summary of
common multi-task benchmarks.
1 Introduction
Multi-task learning is a training paradigm in which machine learning models are trained with data from multiple tasks
simultaneously, using shared representations to learn the common ideas between a collection of related tasks. These
shared representations increase data efﬁciency and can potentially yield faster learning speed for related or downstream
tasks, helping to alleviate the well-known weaknesses of deep learning: large-scale data requirements and computational
demand. However, achieving such effects has not proven easy and is an active area of research today.
We believe that MTL reﬂects the learning process of human beings more accurately than single task learning in that
integrating knowledge across domains is a central tenant of human intelligence. When a newborn baby learns to walk
or use its hands, it accumulates general motor skills which rely on abstract notions of balance and intuitive physics.
Once these motor skills and abstract concepts are learned, they can be reused and augmented for more complex tasks
later in life, such as riding a bike or tightrope walking. Any time that a human attempts to learn something new, we
bring a tremendous amount of prior knowledge to the table. It’s no wonder that neural networks require such numerous
training examples and computation time: every task is learned from scratch. Imagine trying to learn to tightrope walk
without ﬁrst learning to walk! The human ability to rapidly learn with few examples is dependent on this process of
learning concepts which are generalizable across multiple settings and leveraging these concepts for fast learning; we
believe that developing systems to perform this process should be the goal of multi-task learning and the related ﬁelds
of meta-learning (Hospedales et al., 2020), transfer learning (Zhuang et al., 2019), and continuous/lifelong learning
(Parisi et al., 2019).
Learning concepts for multiple tasks does bring difﬁculties which aren’t present in single task learning. In particular,
it may be the case that different tasks have conﬂicting needs. In this case, increasing the performance of a model
on one task will hurt performance on a task with different needs, a phenomenon referred to as negative transfer or
destructive interference . Minimizing negative transfer is a key goal for MTL methods. Many architectures are designed
with speciﬁc features to decrease negative transfer, such as task-speciﬁc feature spaces and attention mechanisms, but
division of information between tasks is a ﬁne line to walk: we want to allow information ﬂow between tasks that yields
positive transfer, and discourage sharing when it would create negative transfer. The question of how exactly to design
such a system is being actively investigated in MTL research.arXiv:2009.09796v1  [cs.LG]  10 Sep 2020