17
V. RLS EQ2SEQ: ANOPEN-SOURCE LIBRARY FOR
TRAINING SEQ2SEQ MODELS WITH RL M ETHODS
As part of this comprehensive study, we developed an open-
source library which implements various RL techniques for
the problem of abstractive text summarization. This library is
made available at www.github.com/yaserkl/RLSeq2Seq/ . Since
experimenting each speciﬁc conﬁguration of these models,
even requires few days of training on GPUs, we encourage
researchers, who use this library to build and enhance their
own models, to also share their trained model at this website.
In this section, we explain some of the important features of
our library. As mentioned before, this library provides modules
for abstractive text summarization. The core of our library
is based on a model called pointer-generator39[12] which
itself is based on Google TextSum model40. We also provide
a similar imitation learning used in training REINFORCE
algorithm to train the function approximator. This way, we
propose training our DQN (DDQN, Dueling Net) using a
schedule sampling in which we start training the model in
the beginning based on ground-truth Q-values while as we
move on with the training process, we completely rely on the
function estimator to train the network. This could be seen as
a pre-training step for the function approximator. Therefore,
the model is guaranteed to start by using better ground-truth
data since it is exposed to the true ground-truth values versus
the random estimation it receives from the model itself. In
summary, our library implements the following features:
Adding temporal attention and intra-decoder attention that
was proposed in [13].
Adding scheduled sampling along with its differentiable
relaxation proposed in [31] and E2EBackProb [28] for
solving exposure bias problem.
Adding adaptive training of REINFORCE algorithm by
minimizing the mixed objective loss in Eq. (34).
Providing Self-Critic training by adding the greedy reward
as the baseline.
Providing Actor-Critic training options for training the
model using asynchronous training of Value Network, DQN,
DDQN, and Dueling Net.
Providing options for scheduled sampling for training of the
Q-Function in DQN, DDQN, and Dueling Net.
A. Experiments
To test the power of some of the studied models in this
paper, we have done a range of various experiments using
our open-source library. As mentioned in Section IV, most
of the RL-based models play as a ﬁne-tuning technique in
seq2seq applications. Thus, we ﬁrst pre-train our model for
15 epochs using only cross-entropy loss and then add the RL
training for another 10 epochs. Our experiments follows the
same setup as to the pointer-generator model [12] and we
only show the results after activating the coverage mechanism.
We activate the coverage mechanism only for the last epoch
and select the best model using the evaluation data. We use
39https://github.com/abisee/pointer-generator
40https://github.com/tensorﬂow/models/tree/master/research/textsuma linear scheduling probability as =step=totalsteps and
we use= 1 after activating the coverage so that the model
completely relies on its own output for the rest of training and
for E2EBackPropagation model, Kis set to 4. All experiments
are done using two NVIDIA P100 GPUs one used for training
the model and the other for select the best trained model based
on the evaluation data.
1) Analysis of the results: Table V shows the results of
our experiments based on ROUGE score on this dataset. All
our ROUGE scores have a 95% conﬁdence interval of at
most0:25as reported by the ofﬁcial ROUGE script. In
this table, PG stands for Pointer-Generation and SS stands for
Scheduled Sampling. As shown in this table, both scheduled
sampling model and E2E model are superior to the pointer-
generator. We have also used our framework to train the
Self-Critic Policy Gradient (SCPG) based model proposed by
Paulus et al. [13]. However, as shown in this table, although
the SCPG improves the performance of the pointer-generator
model, this improvement is very marginal. This result is totally
in contrast with the result in the original paper [13] and
shows that SCPG, as claimed by the authors, will not greatly
improve the performance of the pointer-generator model. One
of the main reason for this difference in the result of our
experiment with the Paulus et al. [13] paper is that they
use a completely different set of hyperparameters for training
their model. For instance, the input for their encoder is 800
words while in our default setting, for all our experiments, it
is set to 400. Also, the vocabulary size is set to 150K and
50K for input and output while our default is set to 50K for
both input and output. Moreover, the size of hidden layers for
encoder and decoder in their work is larger that our default
values and they also use a pre-trained GloVe [180] word-
embedding for training their model. Finally, we are comparing
all these policy-gradient based models with an Actor-Critic
model proposed by Chen et al. [55] which holds the state-of-
the-art result in text summarization in CNN/DM dataset. As
shown in Table V, this model is superior to any of the policy-
gradient based models according to the ROUGE scores.
2) Analysis of the training time: In general, the pointer-
generator framework requires more than 3 days of training for
an effective results, while this time will also be expanded after
adding the self-critic policy gradient. On average, each batch
of training during MLE training will take 2-3 seconds while
once we add the SCPG loss this time will be increased to 5-6
seconds which means the whole training time will be double
after activation of the RL loss. On the other hand, the whole
training time for the Actor-Critic model before and after RL
activation is only a few hours which shows that not only it has
superiority in the ROUGE score results but also the training
process converges much faster than the other models.
VI. C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we provided a general overview of a speciﬁc
type of deep learning models called sequence-to-sequence
(seq2seq) models and discussed some of the recent advances
in combining training of these models with Reinforcement
Learning (RL) techniques. Seq2seq models are common in a