4
TABLE I: Notations used in this paper.
Seq2seq Model Parameters
X The sequence of input of length Te,X=fx1;x2;;xTeg:
Y The sequence of ground-truth output of length T,Y=fy1;y2;;yTg:
^Y The sequence of output generated by model of length T,^Y=f^y1;^y2;;^yTg:
Te Length of the input sequence and number of encoders.
T Length of the output sequence and number of decoders.
d Size of the input and output sequence representation.
A Input and output shared vocabulary.
ht Encoder hidden state at time t.
st Decoder hidden state at time t.
 The seq2seq model with parameter .
Reinforcement Learning Parameters
rt=r(st;yt) The reward that the agent receives by taking action ytwhen the state of the environment is st
^YSets of actions that the agent is taking for a period of time T,^Y=f^y1;^y2;;^yTg
This is similar to the output that the seq2seq model is generating.

The policy that the agent uses to take the action.
Seq2seq models use RNNs with parameter for the policy.

 Discount factor to reduce the effect of rewards from future actions.
Q(st;yt)
Q(st;yt)TheQ-value (under policy ) that shows the estimated reward of taking action ytwhen at state st.
Q	(st;yt) A function approximator with parameter 	that estimates the Q-value given the state-action pair at time t.
V(st)
V(st)Value function which calculates the expectation of Q-value (under policy ) over all possible actions.
V	(st) A function approximator with parameter 	that estimates the value function given the state at time t.
A(st;yt)Advantage function (under policy ) which deﬁnes how good a state-action pair is
w.r.t. the expected reward that can be received at this state.
A	(st;yt) A function approximator with parameter 	that estimates the advantage function for the state-action pair at time t.
Problem Statement :Given a series of input data and a
series of ground-truth outputs, train a model that:
Only relies on its own output, rather than the ground-
truth, to generate the results (avoiding exposure bias).
Directly optimize the model using the evaluation measure
(avoiding mismatch between training and test measures).
Although recently there had been a couple of survey articles
on the topic of deep reinforcement learning [47], [48], these
works heavily focused on the reinforcement learning methods
and their applications in robotics and vision, while giving less
emphasis to how these models could be used in a variety of
other tasks. In this paper, we will summarize some of the
most recent frameworks that attempted to ﬁnd a solution for
the above problem statement in a broad range of applications
and explain how RL and seq2seq learning could beneﬁt from
each other in solving complex tasks. To this end, we will
provide insights on some of the challenges and issues with
the current models and how one can improve them with better
RL models. The goal of this paper is to provide information
about how we can broaden the power of seq2seq models
with RL methods and understand challenges that exist in
applying these methods to deep learning contexts. In addition,
currently, there does not exist a good open-source framework
for implementing these ideas. Along with this paper, we
provide a library that combines state-of-the-art methods for
the complex task of abstractive text summarization with recent
techniques used in deep RL. The library provides a variety of
different options and hyperparameters for training the seq2seq
model using different RL models. Moreover, We provide
experimental results on some of the most common techniques
that are explained in this paper and we encourage researchers
to experiment with other hyperparameters and explore how
they can use this framework to gain better performance ondifferent seq2seq tasks. The contributions of this paper are
summarized as follows:
We provide a comprehensive summary of RL methods that
are used in deep learning and speciﬁcally in the context of
training seq2seq models.
We summarize the challenges, advantages, and disadvan-
tages of using different RL methods for seq2seq training.
We provide guidelines on how one could improve a speciﬁc
RL method to obtain a better and smoother training for
seq2seq models.
We provide an open-source library for implementing a
complex seq2seq model using different RL techniques3
along with experiments that aim for identifying an accurate
estimate on the amount of improvement that RL algorithm
provide for current seq2seq models.
This paper is organized as follows: Section III provides
details of some of the common RL techniques used in training
seq2seq models. We provide a brief introduction to different
seq2seq models in Section IV and later explain various RL
models that can be used along with the seq2seq model training
process. We provide a summary of recent real-world applica-
tions that combine RL training with seq2seq training and in
Section V we present the framework that we implemented and
discuss the details about how this framework can applied to
different seq2seq problems and provide experimental results
for some of the well-known RL algorithm. Finally, in Sec-
tion VI, we discuss conclusions of our work.
II. S EQ2SEQ MODELS AND THEIR APPLICATIONS
Sequence to Sequence (seq2seq) models have been an inte-
gral part of many real-world problems. From Google Machine
3www.github.com/yaserkl/RLSeq2Seq/