important eld of Explainable AI [6]. While building interpretable models is
encouraged, many existing state-of-the-art NNs are not designed to be inter-
pretable, thus the development of algorithms that explain black-box models
becomes highly desirable. This is particularly important when AI is used in
domains such as healthcare, nance or self-driving vehicles where establishing
trust in AI-driven systems is critical.
Some of the fundamental approaches that interpret black-box models are
feature, neuron and layer importance algorithms, also known as attribution
algorithms. Existing frameworks such as DeepExplain [3], Alibi [8] and Inter-
pretML [11] have been developed to unify those algorithms in one framework and
make them accessible to all machine learning model developers and practition-
ers. These frameworks, however, have insucient support for PyTorch models.
In Captum, we provide generic implementations of a number of gradient and
perturbation-based attribution algorithms that can be applied to any PyTorch
model of any modality. The library is easily extensible and lets users scale com-
putations across multiple GPUs and handles large-sized input by dividing them
into smaller pieces, thereby preventing out of memory situations.
Another important aspect is that both qualitative and quantitative evalua-
tion of attributions are dicult. Visual explanations can be misleading [1] and
evaluation metrics are subjective or domain specic [18]. To address these issues,
we provide generic implementations of two evaluation metrics called indelity
and max-sensitivity proposed in [19]. These metrics can be used in combination
with any PyTorch model and most attribution algorithms.
Lastly, model understanding research largely focuses on the Computer Vi-
sion (CV) domain whereas there are many unexplored NN applications that
desperately need model understanding tools. Adapting CV-specic implemen-
tations for those applications is not always straightforward, thus the need for a
well-tested and generic library that can be easily applied to multiple domains
across research and production.
2 An Overview of the Algorithms
The attribution algorithms in Captum can be grouped into three main cate-
gories: primary-, neuron- and layer- attributions, as shown in Figure 1. Pri-
mary attribution algorithms are the traditional feature importance algorithms
that allow us to attribute output predictions to model inputs. Layer attribution
variants allow us to attribute output predictions to all neurons in a hidden layer
and neuron attribution methods allow us to attribute an internal, hidden neuron
to the inputs of the model. In most cases, both neuron and layer variants are
slight modications of the primary attribution algorithms.
Most attribution algorithms in Captum can be categorized into gradient and
perturbation-based approaches as also depicted in Figure 2. Some of these al-
gorithms such as GradCam [13], GuidedGradCam [13], GuidedBackProp [16],
Deconvolution [20] and Occlusion [20] are more popular in the CV community,
where they stem from. However, our implementations of those algorithms are
2