indelity and max-sensitivity scores. The perturbations for indelity metric are
sampled uniformly from a normal distribution N(0;0:03) and for max-sensitivity
from aL1ball with a radius of 0.03. The norm jj:jjused in max-sensitivity
computations is the L2norm.
Figure 3: Visualizing salient tokens computed by integrated gradients that con-
tribute to the predicted class using a binary classication model trained on
IMDB dataset. Green means that those tokens pull towards and red that they
pull away from the predicted class. The intensity of the color signies the mag-
nitude of the signal.
Classication models are not the only types of models that Captum supports.
As an example, we built a regression model using Boston house prices dataset [7]
and a simple four layer NN using linear layers and ReLUs. We attributed the
output predictions to the last linear layer using layer conductance algorithm
and plotted them together with the learned weights of that same layer as shown
in Figure 4. Here we can see that the weights and the attribution scores are
aligned with each other. Both scores were normalized using L1norm.
In order to improve model debugging experience, we developed an interactive
visualization tool called Captum Insights. The tool allows to sub-sample input
examples and interactively attribute dierent output classes to the inputs of the
model using dierent types of attribution algorithms depicted in Figure 5.
4.1 Multimodality
The support for multi-modal Neural Networks is one of the core motivations
of Captum library. This allows us to apply Captum to machine-learning mod-
els that are built using features stemming from dierent sources such as audio,
video, image, text, categorical or dense features. Aggregated feature importance
scores for each input modality can reveal which modalities are most impactful.
In the example of attributions computed for a multi-modal Visual Question An-
swering model depicted in Figure 5, we can tell whether the stronger predictive
signal is coming from text or image.
7