Table 1: Runtime performance of Integrated Gradients and Feature ablation for
VGG19 with a single input image of shape: 3 x 224 x 224
Number of GPUs Execution Time in seconds
Int. Grads Feature Abl.
1 41.62 140.4
4 26.41 38.39
8 15.06 22.02
and improves attribution runtime signicantly. We made this available for all
layer and neuron attribution algorithms, including Layer Activation and Noise-
Tunnel.
In one of our experiments, we used Integrated Gradients on a pre-trained
VGG19 model, for a single 3 x 224 x 224 input image in a GPU environment that
has 8 GPUs, each 16GB memory available and gradually increased the number
of GPUs while keeping the number of integral approximation steps constant (in
this case 2990). From the second column of Table 1 we can see how the execution
time decreases substantially as we increase the number of GPUs. In the second
experiment we used the same execution environment, pre-trained model, input
image and performed feature ablation by ablating multiple features in one batch
using model's single forward pass. Based on the experimental results shown in
third column of Table 1 we can tell that by increasing the number of GPUs from
1 to 8 the execution time drops by approximately 85%.
3 Evaluation
As mentioned in the sections above, both qualitative and quantitative evalu-
ation of feature, neuron and layer importances are challenging research areas.
Human annotations based on visual perception are often subjective, and many
quantitative evaluation metrics rely on priors of a dataset domain. We imple-
mented two metrics, indelity and maximum sensitivity proposed in [19], in a
generic manner for use with any PyTorch model and most Captum algorithms.
Similar to other algorithms, we can perform multiple perturbations simultane-
ously which ultimately helps to improve runtime performance. Indelity is the
generalization of sensitivity-n [3] metric that relies on the completeness axiom,
an important property of many attribution algorithms, that states that the sum
of the attributions is equal to the dierences of the NN function at its input and
baseline. Given x2 RNas input,y2 Ras output, a NN model represented by
a continuous function F: RN! R, an attribution function  : F RN! RN
and a meaningful perturbation I2 RNwith a probability measure I, the
indelity of the attribution function  for input sample xand NN predictor
functionFis dened as:
5