130 G. Montavon et al.
Fig. 6. Population statistics of individual features for the 6 clusters. The black cross
in Cluster 2 is Instance 338, the black cross in Cluster 4 is Instance 339. Features are
mapped to the logarithm and standardized.
the membership of Instance 339 to Cluster 4, it is not clear from this simple
analysis what makes Instance 339 a member of Cluster 4 in the ﬁrst place. Forexample, while the feature ‘grocery’ of Instance 339 is within the inter quartile
range (IQR) of Cluster 4 and can therefore be considered typical of that cluster,
other clusters have similar IQRs for that feature. Moreover, Instance 339 fallssigniﬁcantly outside Cluster 4’s IQR for other features. In comparison, our LRP
approach more directly and reliably explains the cluster membership and outlier-
ness of the considered instances. Furthermore, population statistics of individual
features may be misleading on non-linear models (such as kernel clustering) and
does not scale to high-dimensional data, such as image data.
Overall, our analysis allows to identify on a single-instance basis features that
contribute to various properties relating this instance to the rest of the data, such
as inlierness/outlierness and cluster membership. As our analysis has revealed,the insights that are obtained go well beyond a traditional data analysis based
on looking at population statistics for individual features, or a simple inspection
of unsupervised learning outcomes.
5.2 Image Analysis
Our next experiment looks at explanation of inlierness, outlierness, and cluster
membership for image data. Unlike the example above, relevant image statisticsare better expressed at a more abstract level than directly on the pixels. A
popular approach consists of using a pretrained neural model (e.g. the VGG-16
network [ 46]), and use the activations produced at a certain layer as input.
We ﬁrst consider the problem of anomaly detection for industrial inspection
and use for this an image of the MVTecAD dataset [ 6], speciﬁcally, an image
of wood where an anomalous horizontal scratch can be observed. The image is
s h o w ni nF i g . 7(left). We feed that image to a pretrained VGG-16 network and
collect the activations at the output of Block 5 (i.e. at the output of the featureextractor). We consider each spatial location at the output of that block as a
data point and build a KDE model (with γ=0.05) on the resulting dataset.