120 G. Montavon et al.
A last approach, propagation-based , assumes that the prediction has been
produced by a neural network, and leverages the neural network structure bycasting the problem of explanation as performing a backward pass in the net-
work [ 3,42,47]. The propagation approach is embodied by the Layer-wise Rel-
evance Propagation (LRP) method [ 3,31]. The backward pass implemented by
LRP consists of a sequence of conservative propagation steps where each step
is implemented by a propagation rule. Let jandkbe indices for neurons at
layer landl+ 1 respectively, and assume that the function output f(x)h a s
been propagated from the top-layer to layer l+1. We denote the resulting attri-
bution onto these neurons as the vector of ‘relevance scores’ ( R
k)k. LRP then
deﬁnes ‘messages’ Rj←kthat redistribute the relevance Rkto neurons in the layer
below. These messages typically have the structure Rj←k=[zjk//summationtext
jzjk]·Rk,
where zjkmodels the contribution of neuron jto activating neuron k.T h e
overall relevance of neuron jis then obtained by computing Rj=/summationtext
kRj←k.
It is easy to show that application of LRP from one layer to the layer below
is conservative. Consequently, the explanation formed by iterating the LRPpropagation from the top layer to the input layer is therefore also conserva-
tive, i.e./summationtext
iRi=···=/summationtext
jRj=/summationtext
kRk=···=f(x). As a result, explana-
tions satisfying the conservation property can be obtained within a single for-ward/backward pass, instead of multiple function evaluations, as it was the case
for the approaches described above. The runtime advantage of LRP facilitates
explanation of large models and datasets (e.g. GPU implementations of LRPcan achieve hundreds of image classiﬁcation explanations per second [ 1,40]).
2.2 Neuralization-Propagation
Propagation-based explanation techniques such as LRP have a computational
advantage over approaches based on multiple function evaluations. However,
they assume a preexisting neural network structure associated to the prediction
function. Unsupervised learning models such as kernel density estimation or k-
means, are a priori not neural networks. However, the fact that these models are
not given as neural networks does not preclude the existence of a neural networkthat implements the same function. If such a network exists (neural network
equivalents of some unsupervised models will be presented in Sects. 3and4), we
can quickly and robustly compute explanations by applying the following twosteps:
Step 1: The unsupervised model is ‘ neuralized ’, that is, rewritten (without
retraining) as a functionally equivalent neural network.
Step 2: The LRP method is applied to the resulting neural network, in order
to produce an explanation of the prediction of the original model.
These two steps are illustrated in Fig. 1. In practice, for the second step to
work well, some restrictions must be imposed on the type of neurons composing
the network. In particular neurons should have a clear directionality in their
input space to ensure that meaningful propagation to the lower layer can be