Explaining the Predictions
of Unsupervised Learning Models
Gr´egoire Montavon1,2(B), Jacob Kauﬀmann1, Wojciech Samek2,3,
and Klaus-Robert M¨ uller1,2,4,5
1ML Group, Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science,
Technische Universit¨ at Berlin, Berlin, Germany
gregoire.montavon@tu-berlin.de
2BIFOLD – Berlin Institute for Foundations of Learning and Data,
Berlin, Germany
3Department of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Fraunhofer Heinrich Hertz Institute,
Berlin, Germany
4Department of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Korea University, Seoul, Korea
5Max Planck Institut f¨ ur Informatik, Saarbr¨ ucken, Germany
Abstract. Unsupervised learning is a subﬁeld of machine learning that
focuses on learning the structure of data without making use of labels.
This implies a diﬀerent set of learning algorithms than those used for
supervised learning, and consequently, also prevents a direct transposi-tion of Explainable AI (XAI) methods from the supervised to the less
studied unsupervised setting. In this chapter, we review our recently pro-
posed ‘neuralization-propagation’ (NEON) approach for bringing XAIto workhorses of unsupervised learning such as kernel density estima-
tion and k-means clustering. NEON ﬁrst converts (without retraining)
the unsupervised model into a functionally equivalent neural network sothat, in a second step, supervised XAI techniques such as layer-wise rel-
evance propagation (LRP) can be used. The approach is showcased on
two application examples: (1) analysis of spending behavior in wholesalecustomer data and (2) analysis of visual features in industrial and scene
images.
Keywords: Explainable AI
·Unsupervised learning ·Neural networks
1 Introduction
Supervised learning has been in the spotlight of machine learning research and
applications for the last decade, with deep neural networks achieving record-breaking classiﬁcation accuracy and enabling new machine learning applications
[5,15,23]. The success of deep neural networks can be attributed to their ability
to implement with their multiple layers, complex nonlinear functions in a com-pact manner [ 32]. Recently, a signiﬁcant amount of work has been dedicated to
make deep neural network models more transparent [ 13,24,40,41], for example,
c/circlecopyrtThe Author(s) 2022
A. Holzinger et al. (Eds.): xxAI 2020, LNAI 13200, pp. 117–138, 2022.https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-04083-2
_7