Explaining Unsupervised Learning Models 133
6 Conclusion and Outlook
In this paper, we have considered the problem of explaining the predictions of
unsupervised models, in particular, we have reviewed and extended the neu-
ralization/propagation approach of [ 18,19] which consists of rewriting, without
retraining, the unsupervised model as a functionally equivalent neural network,
and applying LRP in a second step. On two models of interest, kernel density
estimation and k-means, we have highlighted a variety of techniques that can beused for neuralization. This includes the identiﬁcation of log-mean-exp pooling
structures, the use of random features, and the transformation of a diﬀerence of
(squared) distances into a linear layer. The capacity of our approach to delivermeaningful explanations was highlighted on two examples covering simple tab-
ular data and images including their mapping on some layer of a convolutional
network.
While our approach delivers good quality explanations at low computational
cost, there are however still a number of open questions that remain to beaddressed to further solidify the neuralization-propagation approach, and the
explanation of unsupervised models in general.
A ﬁrst question concerns the applicability of our method to a broader range
of practical scenarios. We have highlighted how neuralized models can be built
not only in input space but also on some layer of a deep neural network, thereby
bringing explanations to much more complex unsupervised models. However,there is a higher diversity of unsupervised learning algorithms that are encoun-
tered in practice, including energy-based models [ 16], spectral methods [ 33,44],
linkage clustering [ 12], non-Euclidean methods [ 27], or prototype-based anomaly
detection [ 14]. An important future work will therefore be to extend the pro-
posed framework to handle this heterogeneity of unsupervised machine learning
approaches.
Another question is that of validation. There are many possible LRP prop-
agation rules that one can deﬁne in practice, as well as potentially multiple
neural network reformulations of the same unsupervised model. This creates a
need for reliable techniques to evaluate the quality of diﬀerent explanation meth-
ods. While techniques to evaluate explanation quality have been proposed andsuccessfully applied in the context of supervised learning (e.g. based on feature
removal [ 39]), further care needs to be taken in the unsupervised scenario, in
particular, to avoid that the outcome of the evaluation is spuriously aﬀectedby such feature removals. As an example, removing some feature responsible
for some predicted anomaly may unintentionally cause some new artefact to be
created in the data. That would in turn increase the anomaly score instead oflowering it as it was originally intended [ 19].
In addition to further extending and validating the neuralization-propagation
approach, one needs to ask how to develop these explanation techniques beyondtheir usage as a simple visualization or data exploration tool. For example, it
remains to demonstrate whether these explanation techniques, in combination
with user feedback, can be used to systematically verify and improve the unsu-