Explaining Unsupervised Learning Models 119
In the following, we focus on a well-studied problem of XAI, which is how
to attribute the prediction of an individual data point, to the input features[3,4,29,37,45,48,50]. Let us denote by X=I
1×···×I dthe input space formed
by the concatenation of dinput features (e.g. words, pixels, or sensor measure-
ments). We assume a learned model f:X→ R(supervised or unsupervised),
mapping each data point in Xto a real-valued score measuring the evidence
for a class or some other predicted quantity. The problem of attribution can be
abstracted as producing for the given function fa mapping Ef:X→ Rdthat
associates to each input example a vector of scores representing the (positive or
negative) contribution of each feature. Often, one requires attribution techniques
to implement a conservation (or completeness) property, where for all x∈X
we have 1/latticetopEf(x)=f(x) i.e. for every data point the sum of explanation scores
over the input features should match the function value.
2.1 Approaches to Attribution
A ﬁrst approach, occlusion-based , consists of testing the function to explain
against various occlusions of the input features [ 53,54]. An important method of
this family (and which was originally developed in the context of game theory)
is the Shapley value [ 29,43,48]. The Shapley value identiﬁes a unique attribu-
tion that satisﬁes some predeﬁned set of axioms of an explanation, including
the conservation property stated above. While the approach has strong theoret-
ical underpinnings, computing the explanation however requires an exponential
number of function evaluations (an evaluation for every subset of input features).
This makes the Shapley value in its basic form intractable for any problem withmore than a few input dimensions.
Another approach, gradient-based , leverages the gradient of the function, so
that a mapping of the function value onto the multiple input dimensions isreadily obtained [ 45,50]. The method of integrated gradients [ 50], in particular,
attributes the prediction to input features by integrating the gradient along a
path connecting some reference point (e.g. the origin) to the data point. Themethod requires somewhere between ten and a hundred function evaluations,
and satisﬁes the aforementioned conservation property. The main advantage of
gradient-based methods is that, by leveraging the gradient information in addi-tion to the function value, one no longer has to perturb each input feature
individually to produce an explanation.
A further approach, surrogate-based , consists of learning a simple local surro-
gate model of the function which is as accurate as possible, and whose structure
makes explanation fast and unambiguous [ 29,37]. For example, when approx-
imating the function locally with a linear model, e.g. g(x)=/summationtext
d
i=1xiwi,t h e
output of that linear model can be easily decomposed to the input features by
taking the individual summands. While explanation itself is fast to compute,
training the surrogate model incurs a signiﬁcant additional cost, and furthercare must be taken to ensure that the surrogate model implements the same
decision strategy as the original model, in particular, that it uses the same input
features.