Explaining Unsupervised Learning Models 127
the categories ‘fresh’, ‘milk’, ‘grocery’, ‘frozen’, ‘detergents/paper’, ‘delicatessen’
is given. Two additional geographic features are also part of this dataset, howeverwe do not include them in our experiment. We will place our focus on two
particular data points with feature values shown in the table below:
Table 1. Excerpt of the Wholesale Customer Dataset [ 11] where we show feature
values, expressed in monetary units (m.u.), for two instances as well as the averagevalues over the whole dataset.
Index Fresh Milk Grocery Frozen Detergents/
PaperDelicatessen
338 9351 m.u 1347m.u 2611m.u 8170m.u 442 m.u 868 m.u.
339 3m . u 333 m.u 7201m.u 15601m.u 15 m.u 550 m.u.
AVG 12000m.u. 5796m.u. 7951m.u. 3072m.u. 2881 m.u. 1525 m.u.
Instance 338 has rather typical levels of spending across categories, in general
slightly lower than average, but with high spending on frozen products. Instance
339 has more extreme spending with almost no spending on fresh products anddetergents and very high spending on frozen products.
To get further insights into the data, we construct a KDE model on the
whole data and apply our analysis to the selected instances. Each input featureis ﬁrst mapped to the logarithm and standardized (mean 0 and variance 1). We
choose the kernel parameter γ= 1. We use a leave-one-out approach where the
data used to build the KDE model is the whole data except the instance to bepredicted and analyzed. The number of random features is set to H= 2500 such
that the computational complexity of the inlier model stays within one order of
magnitude to the original kernel model. Predictions on the whole dataset andanalysis for the selected instances is shown in Fig. 4.
Instance 338 is predicted to be an inlier, which is consistent with our initial
observation that the levels of spending across categories are on the lower end butremain usual. We can characterize this instance as a typical small customer. We
also note that the feature ‘frozen’ contributes less to inlierness according to our
analysis, probably due to the spending on that category being unusually high
for a typical small customer.
Instance 339 has an inlierness score almost zero, which is consistent with the
observation in Table 1that spending behavior is extremal for multiple product
categories. The decomposition of an inlierness score of almost zero on the dif-
ferent categories is rather uninformative, hence, for this customer, we look atwhat explains outlierness (bottom of Fig. 4). We observe as expected that cat-
egories where spending behavior diverges for this instance are indeed strongly
represented in the explanation of outlierness, with ‘fresh’, ‘milk’, ‘frozen’ and‘detergents/paper’ contributing almost all evidence for outlierness. Surprisingly,
we observe that extremely low spending on ‘fresh’ is underrepresented in the
outlierness score, compared to other categories such as ‘milk’ or ‘frozen’ where