Explaining Unsupervised Learning Models 131
We then apply our analysis to attribute the predicted inlierness/outlierness to
the activations of Block 5. In practice, we need to consider the fact that anyattribution on a deactivated neuron cannot be redistributed further to input
pixels as there is no pattern in pixel space to attach to. Hence, the propagation
procedure must be carefully implemented to address this constraint, possibly byonly redistributing a limited share of the model output. The details are given in
Appendix A. As a last step, we take relevance scores computed at the output of
Block 5 and pursue the relevance propagation procedure in the VGG-16 networkusing standard LRP rules until the pixels are reached. Explanations obtained for
inlierness and outlierness of the wood image of interest are shown in Fig. 7.
Fig. 7. Exemplary image from the MVTec AD dataset along with the explanation
of an inlier/outlier prediction of a KDE model built at the output of the VGG-16
feature extractor. Red color indicates positively contributing pixels, blue color indicatesnegatively contributing pixels, and gray indicates irrelevant pixels. (Color ﬁgure online)
It can be observed that pixels associated to regular wood stripes are the main
contributors to inlierness. Instead, the horizontal scratch on the wood panel is
a contributing factor for outlierness. Hence, with our explanation method, wecan precisely identify, on a pixel-wise basis what are the factors that contribute
for/against predicted inlierness and outlierness.
We now consider some image of the SUN 2010 database [ 52], an indoor scene
containing diﬀerent pieces of furniture and home appliances. We consider the
same VGG-16 network as in the experiment above and build a dataset by col-lecting activations at each spatial location of the output of Block 5. We then
apply the k-means algorithm on this dataset with the number of clusters hard-
coded to 5. Once the clustering model has been built, we rescale each clustercentroid to ﬁxed norm. We then apply our analysis attribute the cluster mem-
bership scores to the activations at the output of Block 5. As for the industrial
inspection example above, we must adjust the LRP rules so that deactivated neu-rons are not attributed relevance. The details of the LRP procedure are given in
Appendix A. Obtained relevance scores are then propagated further to the input
pixels using standard LRP rules. Resulting explanations are shown in Fig. 8.