Explaining Unsupervised Learning Models 121
Fig. 1. Overview of the neuralization-propagation (NEON) approach to explain the
predictions of an unsupervised model. As a ﬁrst step, the unsupervised model is trans-formed without retraining into a functionally equivalent neural network. As a second
step, the LRP procedure is applied to identify, with help of the neural network struc-
ture, by what amount each input feature has contributed to a given prediction.
achieved. (We will see in Sects. 3and4, that this requirement does not always
hold.) Hence, the ‘neuralized model’ must be designed under the double con-
straint of (1) replicating the decision function of the unsupervised model exactly,and (2) being composed of neurons that enable a meaningful redistribution from
the output to the input features.
3 Kernel Density Estimation
Kernel density estimation (KDE) [ 35] is one of the most common methods for
unsupervised learning. The KDE model (or variations of it) has been used, inparticular, for anomaly detection [ 21,26,38]. It assumes an unlabeled dataset
D=(u
1,...,uN), and a kernel, typically the Gaussian kernel K(x,x/prime)=
exp(−γ/bardblx−x/prime/bardbl2). The KDE model predicts a new data point xby computing:
˜p(x)=1
NN/summationdisplay
k=1exp(−γ/bardblx−uk/bardbl2). (1)
The function ˜ p(x) can be interpreted as an (unnormalized) probability density
function. From this score, one can predict inlierness or outlierness of a data point.
For example, one can say that xis more anomalous than x/primeif the inequality
˜p(x)<˜p(x/prime) holds. In the following, we consider the task of neuralizing the KDE
model so that its inlier/outlier predictions can be explained.
3.1 Explaining Outlierness
A ﬁrst question to ask is why a particular example xis predicted by KDE to be an
outlier , more speciﬁcally, what features of this example contribute to outlierness.
As a ﬁrst step, we consider what is a suitable measure of outlierness. The function
˜p(x) produced by KDE decreases with outlierness, and also saturates to zero even