118 G. Montavon et al.
by proposing algorithms that identify which input features are responsible for a
given classiﬁcation outcome. Methods such as layer-wise relevance propagation(LRP) [ 3], guided backprop [ 47], and Grad-CAM [ 42], have been shown capable
of quickly and robustly computing these explanations.
Unsupervised learning is substantially diﬀerent from supervised learning in
that there is no ground-truth supervised signal to match. Consequently, non-
neural network models such as kernel density estimation or k-means clustering,
where the user controls the scale and the level of abstraction through a particularchoice of kernel or feature representation, have remained highly popular. Despite
the predominance of unsupervised machine learning in a variety of applications
(e.g. [9,22]), research on explaining unsupervised models has remained relatively
sparse [ 18,19,25,28,30] compared to their supervised counterparts. Paradoxi-
cally, it might in fact be unsupervised models that most strongly require inter-
pretability. Unsupervised models are indeed notoriously hard to quantitatively
validate [ 51], and the main purpose of applying these models is often to better
understand the data in the ﬁrst place [ 9,17].
In this chapter, we review the ‘neuralization-propagation’ (NEON) approach
we have developed in the papers [ 18–20] to make the predictions of unsupervised
models, e.g. cluster membership or anomaly score, explainable. NEON proceedsin two steps: (1) the decision function of the unsupervised model is reformulated
(without retraining) as a functionally equivalent neural network (i.e. it is ‘neu-
ralized’); (2) the extracted neural network structure is then leveraged by theLRP method to produce an explanation of the model prediction. We review the
application of NEON to kernel density estimation for outlier detection and k-
means clustering, as presented originally in [ 18–20]. We also extend the reviewed
work with a new contribution: explanation of inlier detection, and we use the
framework of random features [ 36] for that purpose.
The NEON approach is showcased on several practical examples, in particu-
lar, the analysis of wholesale customer data, image-based industrial inspection,
and analysis of scene images. The ﬁrst scenario covers the application of the
method directly to the raw input features, whereas the second scenario illus-
trates how the framework can be applied to unsupervised models built on some
intermediate layer of representation of a neural network.
2 A Brief Review of Explainable AI
The ﬁeld of Explainable AI (XAI) has produced a wealth of explanation tech-niques and types of explanation. They address the heterogeneity of ML models
found in applications and the heterogeneity of questions the user may formulate
about the model and its predictions. An explanation may take the form of a sim-ple decision tree (or other intrinsically interpretable model) that approximates
the model’s input-output relation [ 10,29]. Alternatively, an explanation may be
a prototype for the concept represented at the output of the model, speciﬁcally,an input example to which the model reacts most strongly [ 34,45]. Lastly, an
explanation may highlight what input features are the most important for the
model’s predictions [ 3,4,7].