Explaining Unsupervised Learning Models 123
Referring back to Sect. 2.1we want to stress that computing the relevance
of input features with LRP has the same computational complexity as a singleforward pass, and does not require to train an explainable surrogate model.
3.2 Explaining Inlierness: Direct Approach
In Sect. 3.1, we have focused on explaining what makes a given example an out-
lier. An equally important question to ask is why a given example xis predicted
by the KDE model to be an inlier. Inlierness is naturally modeled by the KDE
output ˜ p(x). Hence we can deﬁne the measure of inlierness as i(x)/defines˜p(x). An
inspection of Eq. ( 1) suggests the following two-layer neural network:
hk=e x p ( −γ/bardblx−uk/bardbl2) (layer 1)
i(x)=1
N/summationtextN
k=1hk (layer 2)
The ﬁrst layer performs a mapping on Gaussian functions at diﬀerent locations,
and the second layer performs an average pooling. We now consider the task of
propagation. A natural way of redistributing in the top layer is in proportion to
the activations. This gives us the scores
Rk=hk/summationtext
khki(x).
A decomposition of Rkon the input features is however diﬃcult. Because the
relevance Rkcan be rewritten as a product:
Rk=1
Nd/productdisplay
i=1exp(−γ(xi−uik)2)
and observing that the contribution Rkcan be made nearly zero by perturbing
any of the input features signiﬁcantly, we can conclude that every input feature
contributes equally to Rkand should therefore be attributed an equal share of
it. Application of this strategy for every neuron kwould result in an uniform
redistribution of the score i(x) to the input features. The explanation would
therefore be qualitatively always the same, regardless of the data point xand
the overall shape of the inlier function i(x). While uniform attribution may be
a good baseline, we usually strive for a more informative explanation.
3.3 Explaining Inlierness: Random Features Approach
To overcome the limitations of the approach above, we explore a second app-
roach to explaining inlierness, where the neuralization is based on a feature maprepresentation of the KDE model. For this, we ﬁrst recall that any kernel-based
model also admits a formulation in terms of the feature map Φ(x) associated to