Explaining Unsupervised Learning Models 125
Rj=hj/summationtext
jhj/hatwidei(x)
for the ﬁrst step of redistribution of /hatwidei(x). More importantly, in the ﬁrst layer,
the random features have now a clear directionality (given by the vectors ( ωj)j),
which we can use for attribution on the input features. In particular, we can apply
the propagation rule:
Ri=/summationdisplay
j[ωj]2
i
/bardblωj/bardbl2·Rj.
Compared to the direct approach of Sect. 3.2, the explanation produced here
assigns diﬀerent scores for each input feature. Moreover, while the estimate ofinlierness /hatwidei(x) converges to the true KDE inlierness score i(x) as more random
features are being drawn, we observe similar convergence for the explanation
associated to the inlier prediction.
4 K-Means Clustering
Another important class of unsupervised models is clustering. K-means is a pop-
ular algorithm for identifying clusters in the data. The k-means model represents
each cluster cwith a centroid μc∈Rdcorresponding to the mean of the cluster
members. It assigns data onto clusters by ﬁrst computing the distance between
the data point and each cluster, e.g.
dc(x)=/bardblx−μc/bardbl (4)
and chooses the cluster with the lowest distance dc(x). Once the data has been
clustered, it is often the case that we would like to gain understanding of why a
given data point has been assigned to a particular cluster, either for validating
a given clustering model or for getting novel insights on the cluster structure of
the data.
4.1 Explaining Cluster Assignments
As a starting point for applying our explanation framework, we need to identify
a function fc(x) that represents well the assignment onto a particular cluster c,
e.g. a function that is larger than zero when the data point is assigned to a givencluster, and less than zero otherwise.
The distance function d
c(x) on which the clustering algorithm is based is how-
ever not directly suitable for the purpose of explanation. Indeed, dc(x) tends to
be inversely related to cluster membership, and it also does not take into account
how far the data point is from other clusters. In [ 18], it is proposed to contrast
the assigned cluster with the competing clusters. In particular, k-means clustermembership can be modeled as the diﬀerence of (squared) distances between the
nearest competing cluster and the assigned cluster c:
f
c(x) = min
k/negationslash=c/braceleftbig
d2
k(x)/bracerightbig
−d2
c(x) (5)