simulations at the beginning of each round when private tiles were dealt to
our agent. Actually we can also do simulations after each tile is discarded
by any player. That is, instead of only adapting the policy to the initial
hands, we can continue the adaptation as the game goes on and more and
more information becomes observable. Doing so should be able to further
improve the performance of our policy. Moreover, since we gradually adapt
our policy, we do not need too many samplings and roll-outs at each step.
In other words, we can amortize the computational complexity of policy
adaptation over the entire round. With this, it is even possible to use policy
adaption in the online playing with aﬀordable computational resources.
Suphx is an agent that constantly learns and improves. Today’s achievement
of Suphx on Tenhou.net is just the beginning. Looking forward, we will introduce
more novel technologies to Suphx, and continue to push the frontier of Mahjong
AI and imperfect-information game playing.
Most real world problems such as ﬁnance market predication and logistic
optimization share the same characteristics with Mahjong rather than Go/chess
- complex operation/reward rules, imperfect information, etc. We believe our
techniques designed in Suphx for Mahjong, including global reward prediction,
oracle guiding and parametric Monte-Carlo policy adaptation, have a great
potential to beneﬁt for a wide range of real-world applications.
Acknowledgement
We would like to sincerely thank Tsunoda Shungo and Tenhou.net for providing
the expert game playing logs and online platform for our experiments. We
would like to thank players on Tenhou.net for playing games with Suphx. We
would like to thank MoYuan for helping us to collect the statistics of human
professional players. We would also like to thank our interns Hao Zheng and
Xiaohong Ji, as well as our colleagues Yatao Li, Wei Cao, Weidong Ma, and Di
He for their contributions to developing the learning algorithms and training
system of Suphx.
References
1.Christopher Berner, Greg Brockman, Brooke Chan, Vicki Cheung, Prze-
mysław Dębiak, Christy Dennison, David Farhi, Quirin Fischer, Shariq
Hashme, Chris Hesse, et al. Dota 2 with large scale deep reinforcement
learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.06680 , 2019.
2.Michael Bowling, Neil Burch, Michael Johanson, and Oskari Tammelin.
Heads-up limit Hold’Em poker is solved. Commun. ACM , 60(11):81–88,
October 2017.
23