those 100K trajectories by using the basic policy gradient method.
3.Test of the adapted policy: Our agent plays against the other three players
using the updated policy on another 10K test set where the private tiles of
our agent are still ﬁxed. As the initial private tiles of our agent is ﬁxed,
the performance of the adapted agent on this test set can tell whether such
run-time policy adaptation really makes our agent adapt and work better
for the current private tiles.
Please note that run-time policy adaptation is time consuming due to the
roll-outs and online learning. Therefore, at the current stage, we only tested
this technique on hundreds of initial rounds. The wining rate of the adapted
version of RL-2 against its non-adapted version is 66%, which demonstrates the
advantage of run-time policy adaptation.
Policy adaption makes our agent work better for the current private hand,
especially at the last 1 or 2 rounds of a game. Figure 10 shows an example of the
last round of a game. Through simulations the agent learns to know that while
it is easy to win this round with a nice round score, this is unfortunately not
enough to avoid ending the game with the 4-th place. Thus, after adaptation,
the agent plays more aggressively, takes more risks, and eventually wins the
round with a much larger round score and successfully avoid ending the game
with the 4-th place.
5 Online Evaluation
To evaluate the real performance of our Mahjong AI Suphx8, we let it play on
Tenhou.net, the most popular online platform for Japanese Mahjong. Tenhou
has two major rooms, the expert room and the phoenix room. The expert room
is open to AI and human players of 4 dan and above, while the phoenix room is
only open to human players of 7+ dan. According to this policy, Suphx can only
play in the expert room.
Suphx played 5000+ games in the expert room and achieved 10 dan in terms
of record rank9and 8.74 dan in terms of stable rank.10It is the ﬁrst and only
AI in Tenhou that achieves 10 dan in terms of record rank.
We compare Suphx with several AI/human players in Table 4:
Bakuuchi ( 10): This is a Mahjong AI designed by the University of Tokyo
based on Monte Carlo simulation and opponent modeling. It does not use
reinforcement learning.
8Suphx is equivalent to RL-2 trained with about 2.5 million games. Given that Tenhou.net
has time constraint for each action, run-time policy adaptation was not integrated into Suphx
while testing on Tenhou.net since it is time consuming. We believe the integration of run-time
policy adaptation will further improve Suphx.
9Record rank is the highest rank a player has ever achieved in Tenhou. As shown in
Appendix B, the rank of a player is dynamic and usually changes over time. For example, if
he/she does not play well recently, his/her rank will drop.
10See Appendix C for the deﬁnition of stable rank.
17