11,13,15,16,18 ). Recent studies have gradually evolved from relatively simple
perfect-information or two-player games (e.g., shogi, chess, Go, and heads-up
Texas hold’em) to more complicated imperfect-information multi-player ones
(e.g., contract bridge ( 12), Dota ( 1), StarCraft II ( 21), and multi-player Texas
hold’em ( 4)).
Mahjong, a multi-round tile-based game with imperfect information and
multiple players, is very popular with hundreds of millions of players worldwide.
In each round of a Mahjong game, four players compete with each other towards
the ﬁrst completion of a winning hand. Building a strong Mahjong program
raises great challenges to the current studies on game AI.
First, Mahjong has complicated scoring rules. Each game of Mahjong contains
multiplerounds, andtheﬁnalranking(andsothereward)ofagameisdetermined
by the accumulated round scores of those rounds. The loss of one round does
not always mean that a player plays poorly for that round (e.g., the player may
tactically lose the last round to ensure rank 1 of the game if he/she has a big
advantage in previous rounds), and so we cannot directly use the round score
as a feedback signal for learning. Furthermore, Mahjong has a huge number
of possible winning hands. Those winning hands can be very diﬀerent from
each other, and diﬀerent hands result in diﬀerent winning round scores of the
round. Such scoring rules are much more complex than previously studied games
including chess, Go, etc. A professional player needs to carefully choose what
kind of winning hand to form in order to trade oﬀ the winning probability and
winning score of the round.
Second, in Mahjong each player has up to 13 private tiles in his/her hand
which are not visible to other players, and there are 14 titles in the dead wall,
which are invisible to all the players throughout the game, and 70 tiles in the
live wall, which will become visible once they are drawn and discarded by the
players. As a result, on average, for each information set (a decision point of
a player), there are more than 1048hidden states that are indistinguishable to
him/her. Such a large set of hidden information makes Mahjong a much more
diﬃcult imperfect-information game than previously studied ones such as Texas
hold’em poker. It is hard for a Mahjong player to determine which action is
good only based on his/her own private tiles, since the goodness of an action
highly depends on the private tiles of other players and the wall tiles that are
invisible to everyone. Consequently, it is also diﬃcult for an AI to connect the
reward signal to the observed information.
Third, the playing rule of Mahjong is complex: (1) there are diﬀerent types
of actions including Riichi, Chow, Pong, Kong, discard, and (2) the regular order
of plays can be interrupted when making a meld (Pong or Kong), going Mahjong
(declaring a winning hand), or robbing a Kong. Because each player can have
up to 13 private tiles, it is hard to predict those interruptions, and therefore
we even cannot build a regular game tree; even if we build a game tree, such
a tree will have a huge number of paths between the consecutive actions of a
player. This prevents the direct application of previously successful techniques
for games such as Monte-Carlo tree search ( 14,15) and counterfactual regret
minimization ( 3,4).
2