Lethdenote the private hand tiles of our agent at a round, odenote the
parameters of the policy trained oﬀ-line, and athe parameters of the new policy
adapted to this round. Then we have
a= arg max
X
oT(h)R()p(;)
p(;o); (6)
whereT(h)is the set of trajectories with preﬁx h, andp(;)is the probability
of policygenerating trajectory .
According to our study, the number Kof simulations/trajectories does not
need to be very large and pMCPA does not need to collect statistics for all
the following states for this round. Since pMCPA is a parametric method, the
updated policy (using the Ksimulations) can lead to updated estimation of those
states not visited in the simulations as well. That is, such run-time adaptation
can help to generalize our knowledge obtained from limited simulations to unseen
states.
Please note that the policy adaptation is performed for each round indepen-
dently. That is, after we adapt the policy of our agent in the current round, for
the next round, we will restart from the oﬄine-trained policy once again.
4 Oﬄine Evaluation
In this section, we report the eﬀectiveness of each technical component of Suphx
through oﬄine experiments.
4.1 Supervised Learning
InSuphx, theﬁvemodelswereﬁrsttrainedthroughsupervisedlearningseparately.
Each training sample is a state-action pair collected from human professional
players with state serving as the input and action serving as the label for
supervised learning. For example, for the training of the discard model, the
input of a sample is all the observable information (and the look-head features)
of a state, and the label is the action taken by a human player, i.e., the tile
discarded at this state.
The training data sizes and the test accuracy are reported in Table 3. The
sizes of the validation data and test data are 10K and 50K respectively, for all
the models. Since the discard model addresses a 34-class classiﬁcation problem,
we collected more training samples for it. As can be seen from the table, we
achieve an accuracy of 76:7%for the discard model, 85:7%for the Riichi model,
95:0%for the Chow model, 91:9%for the Pong model, and 94:0%for the Kong
model. We also list the accuracy achieved by previous works ( 6) as a reference.5
5We would like to point out that our numbers are not directly comparable to previous
numbers due to diﬀerent training/test data and model structures.
13