Model Training Data Size Test Accuracy Previous Accuracy ( 6)
Discard model 15M 76.7% 68.8 %
Riichi model 5M 85.7 % -
Chow model 10M 95.0% 90.4%
Pong model 10M 91.9 % 88.2%
Kong model 4M 94.0 % -
Table 3: Results for supervised learning
4.2 Reinforcement Learning
To demonstrate the value of each RL component in Suphx, we trained several
Mahjong agents:
SL: the supervised learning agent. This agent (with all the ﬁve models)
was trained in a supervised way, as illustrated in the previous subsection.
SL-weak: an under-trained version of the SL agent, which serves as oppo-
nent models while evaluating other agents.
RL-basic: the basic version of the reinforcement learning agent. In RL-
basic, the discard model was initialized with the SL discard model and
then boosted through the policy gradient method with round scores as
reward and entropy regularization. The Riichi, Chow, Pong, and Kong
models remain the same as those of the SL agent.6
RL-1: the RL agent that enhances RL-basic with global reward prediction.
The reward predictor was trained through supervised learning with human
game logs from Tenhou.
RL-2: the RL agent that further enhances RL-1 with oracle guiding. Please
note that in both RL-1 and RL-2, we also only trained the discard model
using RL, and left the other four models the same as those of the SL agent.
The initial private tiles have large randomness and will greatly impact the
win/loss of a game. To reduce the variance caused by initial private tiles, during
the oﬄine evaluation, we randomly generated one million games. Each agent
plays against 3 SL-weak agents on these games. In such a setting, the evaluation
of one agent took 20 Tesla K80 GPUs for two days. For the evaluation metric,
we computed the stable rank of an agent following the rules of Tenhou (see
Appendix C). To reduce the variance of stable rank, for each agent, we randomly
sampled 800K games from the one million games, for 1000 times.
Figure 8 shows the interquartile ranges7of stable ranks over the 1000 sam-
plings for those agents. Note that for fair comparison, each RL agent was trained
6These four models can also be improved through reinforcement learning, although not as
signiﬁcant as the discard model. Therefore, to reduce training time, we inherit the SL models.
7According to Wikipedia, "In descriptive statistics, the interquartile range (IQR) is a
measure of statistical dispersion, being equal to the diﬀerence between 75-th and 25-th
14