Due to the above challenges, although there are several attempts ( 7–9,20),
the best Mahjong AI is still far behind top human players.
In this work, we build Suphx(short for Super Phoenix), an AI system
for 4-player Japanese Mahjong (Riichi Mahjong), which has one of the largest
Mahjong communities in the world. Suphx adopts deep convolutional neural
networks as its models. The networks are ﬁrst trained through supervised
learning from the logs of human professional players and then boosted through
self-play reinforcement learning (RL), with the networks as the policy. We use
the popular policy gradient algorithm ( 17) for self-play RL and introduce several
techniques to address the aforementioned challenges.
1.Global reward prediction trains a predictor to predict the ﬁnal reward
(after several future rounds) of a game based on the information of the
current and previous rounds. This predictor provides eﬀective learning
signals so that the training of the policy network can be performed. In
addition, we design look-ahead features to encode the rich possibilities of
diﬀerent winning hands and their winning scores of the round, as a support
to the decision making of our RL agent.
2.Oracle guiding introduces an oracle agent that can see the perfect infor-
mation including the private tiles of other players and the wall tiles. This
oracle agent is a super strong Mahjong AI due to the (unfair) perfect
information access. In our RL training process, we gradually drop the
perfect information from the oracle agent, and ﬁnally convert it to a normal
agent which only takes observable information as input. With the help of
the oracle agent, our normal agent improves much faster than standard
RL training which only leverages observable information.
3.As the complex playing rules of Mahjong lead to an irregular game tree
and prevent the application of Monte-Carlo tree search techniques, we
introduce parametric Monte-Carlo policy adaptation (pMCPA) to improve
the run-time performance of our agent. pMCPA gradually modiﬁes and
adapts the oﬄine-trained policy to a speciﬁc round in the online playing
stage when the round goes on and there is more information observable
(such as public tiles discarded by four players).
We evaluated Suphx on the most popular and competitive Mahjong platform,
Tenhou ( 19), which has more than 350,000 active users. Suphx reached 10 dan
at Tenhou, and its stable rank, which describes the long-term average of the
performance of a player, surpasses most top human players.
2 Overview of Suphx
In this section, we ﬁrst describe the decision ﬂow of Suphx, and then the network
structures and features used in Suphx.
3