Appendix A: Rules of Mahjong
Mahjong is a tile-based game that was developed in China hundreds of years ago
and is now popular worldwide with hundreds of millions of players. The game
of Mahjong itself has numerous variations across the world, and Mahjong in
diﬀerent regions is diﬀerent in both the rules and the tiles used. In this work, we
focus on 4-player Japanese Mahjong (Riichi Mahjong) considering that Japanese
Mahjong is very popular with a professional league17of top players in Japan
and its rules ( 5) are clearly deﬁned and well accepted. Since the playing/scoring
rules of Japanese Mahjong are very complex and the focus of this work is not
to give a comprehensive introduction to them, here we make some selections
and simpliﬁcations and give a brief introduction to those rules. Comprehensive
introductions can be found at Mahjong International League rules ( 5).
There are 136 tiles in Japanese Mahjong, consisting of 34 diﬀerent kinds of
tiles, with four of each kind. The 34 tiles are consists of three suit, Bamboo,
Character and Dot, each from 1 to 9, and 7 diﬀerent Honour tiles. A game
contains multiple rounds and ends when one player loses all points, or some
winning condition is triggered.
Each player in a game will start with 25,000 points, and one of four players is
designated as the dealer. At the beginning of each round, all the tiles are shuﬄed
and arranged into four walls, each with 34 tiles. 52 tiles are dealt to 4 players
(13 for each player as his/her private hand), 14 tiles form the dead wall , which
are never played except when players declare Kongs and draw a replacement
tile, and the remaining 70 tiles form the live wall. The 4 players take turns to
draw and discard tiles.18The player who ﬁrst builds a complete hand with at
least one yaku wins the round and gets certain round score calculated by the
rewarding rules:
A complete hand is a set of 4 meldsplus apair. A meld can be a Pong
(three identical tiles), a Kong(four identical tiles), and a Chow(three
consecutive simple tiles of the same suit). The pair consists of any two
identical tiles, but it cannot be mixed with the four melds. A player
can make a Chow/Pong/Kong from (1) a tile drawn from the wall by
himself/herself, in which case this meld is concealed to others, or (2) a tile
discarded by other players, in which case this meld is exposed to others. If
a Kong is made from a tile drawn from the wall, it is called ClosedKong .
After a player makes a Kong, he/she needs to draw an additional tile from
the dead wall for replacement. A special case called AddKong converts
an exposed Pong into a Kong when a player draws a tile that matches an
exposedPonghe/she has.
A yaku is a certain pattern of players’ tiles or a special condition. Yaku
is the main factor to determine round score, and the value of yaku varies
from diﬀerent patterns. A winning hand could contain several diﬀerent
17https://m-league.jp/
18The turns can be interrupted by a Kong/Kong and declaring a winning hand.
26