To this end, there might be diﬀerent approaches. In Suphx, what we do is to
ﬁrst train the oracle agent through reinforcement learning, using all the features
including the prefect ones. Then we gradually drop out the perfect features so
that the oracle agent will eventually transit to a normal agent:
L() = E
s;a0(aj[xn(s);txo(s)])
0(aj[xn(s);txo(s)])A([xn(s);txo(s)];a)
;(5)
wherexn(s)denote the normal features and xo(s)the additional perfect features
of states, andtis the dropout matrix at the t-th iteration whose elements are
Bernoulli variables with P(t(i;j) = 1) =
t. We gradually decay 
tfrom 1 to 0.
When
t= 0, all the prefect features are dropped out and the model transits
from the oracle agent to a normal agent.
After
tbecomes zero, we continue the training of the normal agent for a
certain number of iterations. We adopt two tricks during the continual training.
First, we decay the learning rate to one tenth. Second, we reject some state-action
pairs if the importance weight is larger than a pre-deﬁned threshold. According
to our experiments, without these tricks, the continual training is not stable and
does not lead to further improvements.
3.4 Parametric Monte-Carlo Policy Adaptation
The strategy of a top human player will be very diﬀerent when his/her initial
hand (private tiles) varies. For example, he/she will play aggressively to win
more given a good initial hand, and conservatively to lose less given a poor initial
hand. This is very diﬀerent from previous games including Go and StarCraft.
Therefore, we believe that we could build a stronger Mahjong agent if we are
able to adapt the oﬄine-trained policy in the run time.
Monte-Carlo tree search (MCTS) is a well established technique in games
like Go ( 14) for run-time performance improvement. Unfortunately, as afore-
mentioned, the playing order of Mahjong is not ﬁxed and it is hard to build a
regular game tree. Therefore, MCTS cannot be directly applied to Mahjong.
In this work, we design a new method, named parametric Monte-Carlo policy
adaptation (pMCPA).
When a round begins and the initial private hand is dealt to our agent, we
adapt the oﬄine-trained policy to this given initial hand as follows:
1.Simulations: Randomly sample private tiles for the three opponents and
wall tiles from the pool of tiles excluding our own private tiles, and then
use the oﬄine-trained policy to roll out and ﬁnish the whole trajectory. In
total,Ktrajectories are generated in this way.
2.Adaptation: Perform gradient updates using the rollout trajectories to
ﬁnetune the oﬄine policy.
3.Inference: Use the ﬁnetuned policy to play against other players in this
round.
12