Figure 5. Left half of images are generated by our decoder network, and the right half of the images are generated by decoder used in [ 19].
When the 28thdimension of the activity vector is changed between [-0.075,0.075], we can clearly observe that all the variations in the left
half of the images are the same, like elongation in vertical direction. In the right half images, the variations are different for each class. For
an example ‘7’ is shrunken in the vertical dimension, ‘1’ is elongated in the vertical direction and ‘9’ is showing some rotation.
0 5 10 15 20 25 30
Instantiation Parameter0.000.010.020.030.04Variance Across Classes
Figure 6. All the 32 instantiation parameters and its variance across
the MNIST dataset. Although, instantiation parameter space is not
orthogonal, high variance instantiation parameters show clear sep-
arable changes in the reconstructed images, while, low variance
instantiation parameters show mixed changes.
Rotation
Vertical elongation(10)
(18)
Thickness
Vertical expansion
Localized skewness(1)
(6)(30)
Figure 7. Perturbations on a single instantiation parameter of the
above digit shows that, high variance instantiation parameters
cause global changes and low variance instantiation parameters re-
sponsible for localized changes.
rameters with higher variance demonstrates clearly separa-
ble variations as illustrated by Fig. 7.
6. Conclusion
In this paper, we proposed a new deep architecture for
Capsule Networks, termed DeepCaps, drawing intuition
from the concepts of skip connections and 3D convolutions.Skip connections within a capsule cell allow good gradient
ﬂow in back propagation. At the bottom of the network,
we use a higher number of routing iterations when the skip
connections jump more than a layer. 3D convolutions are
used to generate votes from the capsule tensors which are
used for dynamic routing. This helps us to route a localized
group of capsules to a certain higher-level capsule. As a
result, we were able to go deeper with capsules using less
computational complexity compared to Sabour et al. [19].
Our model surpasses the state-of-the-art performance on CI-
FAR10, SVHN and Fashion-MNIST, while achieving the
state-of-the art performance on MNIST datasets in the Cap-
sule Network domain.
Further, we introduced a novel class-independent de-
coder network, which acts as a regularization for the Deep-
Caps. Since it learns from the activity vectors which are dis-
tributed in the same space, we observed that across all the
classes, a speciﬁc instantiation parameter captures a speciﬁc
change. This opens up new avenues in practical applications
such as data generation.
Furthermore, we were able to get better performance on
comparatively complex datasets such as CIFAR10, where
the CapsNet in [ 19] did not show signiﬁcant performance.
As future work, we would like to build even deeper and
higher level understanding models and apply on Ima-
geNet dataset. The class-independent decoder network also
showed potential in data generation applications with spe-
ciﬁc requirements such as generate text data with same
styles. Further, we hope to investigate on eliminating the
correlation between the instantiation parameters.
7. Acknowledgement
The authors thank National Research Coun-
cil, Sri Lanka (Grant 12-018), and the Faculty
of Information Technology of the University of
Moratuwa, Sri Lanka for providing computational re-
sources.
810732