+
+
+
+
Figure 2. A four cell DeepCaps model, with ﬁrst three cells using
i= 1and in the last cell 3D convolution based dynamic routing is
applied.
networks, since it is forced to learn the activity vectors
jointly within a constrained Rbspace. In our setting, only
vectorPt∈R1×bis fed into the decoder, where t=
true label in the training stage, and t= argmaxi(/bardblPi/bardbl2
2).Apart from regularization, a key advantage of having a
decoder network is that it can be utilized for tasks such
as data generation [ 19]. However, a signiﬁcant limitation
of these decoders is the lack of controllability over which
physical parameter is captured by which instantiation pa-
rameter. For example, if a certain instantiation parameter
for a given class causes rotation for that particular class,
there is no guarantee that the same instantiation parame-
ter would cause rotation in any other classes. As a result,
generating data with similar requirements, such as the same
thickness or skewness, is a challenge.
As a solution to these issues, we propose the following
procedure. Instead of masking the non-predicted class in-
stantiation parameters, we only send the Pt∈R1×b, as il-
lustrated by Fig. 4. In contrast to the decoder learning pro-
cedure in [ 19], the learning of each instantiation parameter
in the proposed method is drawn from the same joint distri-
bution. Hence, the entity encapsulated by the any given in-
stantiation parameter, which is learned by the decoder, will
be the same irrespective of the image label.
Further, this procedure helps us to understand the types
of variations in the MNIST dataset. For example, rotation
and elongation being a dominant variation in the dataset
while localized changes being less dominant among char-
acters is reﬂected by the variance of the activity vector.
In other words, the instatiation parameters causing rota-
tions have higher variance whereas those causing localized
changes have lower variance.
Figure 3. Decoder network used in [ 19], which takes all the vectorized
masked activity vectors.
Figure 4. Proposed decoder, which takes only the activity vectors of
the predicted class.
610730