DeepCaps: Going Deeper with Capsule Networks
Jathushan Rajasegaran1Vinoj Jayasundara1Sandaru Jayasekara1Hirunima Jayasekara1
Suranga Seneviratne2Ranga Rodrigo1
1Department of Electronic and Telecommunication Engineering, University of Moratuwa
2School of Computer Science, University of Sydney
{brjathu, vinojjayasundara, sandaruamashan, nhirunima }@gmail.com
suranga.seneviratne@sydney.edu.au, ranga@uom.lk
Abstract
Capsule Network is a promising concept in deep learn-
ing, yet its true potential is not fully realized thus far, provid-
ing sub-par performance on several key benchmark datasets
with complex data. Drawing intuition from the success
achieved by Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) by go-
ing deeper, we introduce DeepCaps1, a deep capsule net-
work architecture which uses a novel 3D convolution based
dynamic routing algorithm. With DeepCaps, we surpass
the state-of-the-art results in the capsule network domain
on CIFAR10, SVHN and Fashion MNIST, while achieving
a 68% reduction in the number of parameters. Further,
we propose a class-independent decoder network, which
strengthens the use of reconstruction loss as a regulariza-
tion term. This leads to an interesting property of the de-
coder, which allows us to identify and control the physical
attributes of the images represented by the instantiation pa-
rameters.
1. Introduction
In the last few years, convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) made breakthroughs in many computer vision
tasks, and signiﬁcantly outperformed many conventional
curated feature driven models. Two common themes of in-
creasing the performance of CNNs are to increase the depth
and the width of the network ( e.g., the number of levels
of the network and the number of units at each level) and
to use as much training data as possible. Although CNNs
have been successful, they have few limitations such as the
invariance caused by pooling and the inability to under-
stand spatial relationship between features. To address these
limitations, Sabour et al. proposed Capsule Networks [ 19]
which have shown promising comparable results to CNNs
in several standard datasets. Intuitively, attempting to go
deeper with capsule networks is a step in the right direction
to further enhance their performance.
1https://github.com/brjathu/deepcapsThe capsule network (CapsNet) model proposed by
Sabour et al . [19] comprises only one convolution layer
and one fully-connected capsule layer. The proposed archi-
tecture works well with the MNIST [ 16] dataset, nonethe-
less the performance on datasets with more complex objects
such as CIFAR10 [ 14] is not on par with the CNNs, due to
the nature of complex shapes in CIFAR10 in comparison to
MNIST.
A naive attempt of creating a deep CapsNet by simply
stacking such fully-connected capsule layers will result in
an architecture similar to a MLP model which has several
limitations. First, dynamic routing used in capsule networks
is an extremely computationally expensive procedure, and
having multiple routing layers incur higher costs of training
and inference time. Second, it has been recently shown that
stacking fully connected capsule layers on top of each other
will result in poor learning in the middle layers [ 24]. This
is due to the fact that when there are too many capsules,
the coupling coefﬁcients tend to be too small, consequently
dampening the gradient ﬂow and inhibiting learning. Third,
it has been shown that, especially in the lower layers, cor-
related units tend to concentrate in local regions [ 21]. Al-
though localized routing can conspicuously take advantage
of this observation, such localized routing cannot be imple-
mented in fully connected capsules.
In order to address these limitations caused by stacking
capsule layers, we propose the following solutions. To re-
duce the computational complexity introduced by multiple
layers needing dynamic routing, several avenues are possi-
ble: Reducing the number of routing iterations in the initial
layers that are larger in size reduces the complexity while
not affecting the features as they need not be complex in
nature. In addition, using 3D-convolution-inspired routing
in the middle layers –due to parameter sharing– reduces
the number of parameters. We can address the problem of
poor learning in the middle layers due to naive stacking by
improving the gradient ﬂow, that involve skip connections
coupled with convolutions. Moreover, while reducing the
1
10725