complexity, the deep capsule network must be able to han-
dle richer data sets than MNIST. We propose that localized
routing will be able to capture the higher level information
better than fully connected routing.
Sabour et al . [19] used regularization through the in-
corporation of reconstruction error (which is generated by
the decoder network) to reduce over ﬁtting. Nevertheless,
a stronger regularization than [ 19] is necessary to reduce
overﬁtting when developing deeper networks, due to the in-
herent increase in the model complexity with model depth.
Hence, in an attempt to enhance the regularization, we pro-
pose a class-independent decoder. We observed an interest-
ing property of this decoder, which provides controllability
over the learning and perturbation of instantiation param-
eters. In existing capsule networks and decoders, it is not
possible to guarantee that the physical property represented
by a given instantiation parameter is the same across all the
classes. In the proposed decoder, it is guaranteed that the
represented property will be the same for any given instanti-
ation parameter across all the classes, providing higher con-
trollability, which is immensely advantageous in practical
applications and theoretical studies.
To this end, in this paper, we propose DeepCaps : a deep
capsule network architecture by leveraging two key ideas:
Dynamic routing andGoing deeper in the network . The
novel dynamic routing algorithm that we propose achieves
parameter reduction and localized routing, making the rout-
ing possible in a convolutional framework rather than re-
sorting to fully-connected capsules, while skip connections
allow us to train deeper networks. More speciﬁcally, we
make the following contributions in the paper:
•Proposing a novel deep architecture for capsule net-
works, termed DeepCaps , that aims at improving the
performance of the capsule networks for more com-
plex image datasets. Further, we propose a novel 3D-
convolution-based dynamic routing algorithm to aid
the learning process of DeepCaps.
•Proposing a novel class-independent decoder network,
which acts as a better regularization term. We further
investigate on the observation that this novel decoder
has the ability to provide controllability over the in-
stantiation parameters.
•Evaluating the performance of DeepCaps on several
benchmark datasets: We signiﬁcantly outperform the
existing state-of-the-art capsule network architectures,
while requiring a signiﬁcantly lower number of param-
eters. For example, for the CIFAR10 dataset, Deep-
Caps achieves a 3% improvement in the accuracy in
comparison to [ 19], along with a 68% reduction in the
number of parameters.The rest of the paper is organized as follows: In Sec-
tion 2, we discuss the related work on Capsule Networks,
Section 3describes our DeepCaps architecture and the
novel 3D routing algorithm, Section 4outlines the class-
independent decoder network. Section 5shows our results.
Finally, Section 6concludes the paper.
2. Related Work
One of the major issues which we face with deep net-
works is the vanishing/exploding gradients. When the er-
ror signal is passed through many layers, it can vanish and
wash out by the time it reaches the beginning of the net-
work [ 2], [4], which hinders the convergence. This issue is
being addressed in many models proposed, where ResNets
[5] and Highway Networks [ 20] bypass signals from one
layer to the next via identity connections. Stochastic depth
[10] shortens ResNets by randomly dropping layers dur-
ing training to allow better information and gradient ﬂow.
DenseNets [ 9] ensure the maximum information ﬂow be-
tween layers in the network, by connecting all layers (with
matching feature-map sizes) directly with each other. To
preserve the feed-forward nature, each layer obtains addi-
tional inputs from all preceding layers and passes on its own
feature-maps to all subsequent layers. They create short
paths from early layers to latter layers.
The idea of grouping the neurons is proposed in Hinton
et al. [7]. As an extension to this, Sabour et al. [19] pro-
posed a dynamic routing algorithm between capsules, us-
ing the concept of routing by agreement between capsules.
Dynamic routing helps the network to achieve eqivarience,
where CNNs can only achieve in-variance by the pooling
operation. In addition to dynamic routing, Hinton et al. [8]
used EM routing for matrix capsules representing each en-
tity by a pose matrix. There have been many extensions to
these: HitNet [ 3] uses a hybrid hit and miss layer for data
augmentations. Dilin et al. [23] solves the dynamic rout-
ing as an optimization problem, and achieves better perfor-
mance by introducing KL divergence between the coupling
distribution. CapsGan [ 11] uses a capsule network as the
discriminator in the GAN pipeline, to get visually better re-
sults than convolutional GANs. In contrast to these, our
work focuses on going deeper with the capsule networks
and increase its performance on more complex datasets.
SegCaps [ 15] uses capsules for image segmentation and
they achieve the state-of-the-art results on LUNA16 dataset.
This is the closest work to ours on the basis of routing.
They use 2D convolution for the voting procedure. By us-
ing 2D convolutions, it takes all the capsule along depth as
the inputs for the transformation, thus, mixing the informa-
tion contained in the capsules. In our 3D-convolution-based
routing, we design the strides along the depth to be the cap-
sule dimension, as a result of which, each capsules along
the depth dimension is voted separately.
210726