overall detection architecture is based on FCOS [24], a sim-
ple anchor-free one-stage object detection framework, in
which the feature pyramid network and prediction head are
searched using our proposed NAS method.
Our main contributions are summarized as follows.
•In this work, we propose a fast and memory-efﬁcient
NAS method for searching both FPN and head archi-
tectures, with carefully designed proxy tasks, search
space and evaluation strategies, which is able to ﬁnd
top-performing architectures over 3,000architectures
using28GPU-days only.
Speciﬁcally, this high efﬁciency is enabled with the
following designs.
−Developing a fast proxy task training scheme by
skipping the backbone ﬁnetuning stage;
−Adapting progressive search strategy to reduce time
cost taken by the extended search space;
−Using a more discriminative criterion for evaluation
of searched architectures.
−Employing an efﬁcient anchor-free one-stage detec-
tion framework with simple post processing;
•Using NAS, we explore the workload relationship be-
tween FPN and head, proving the importance of weight
sharing in head.
•We show that the overall structure of NAS-FCOS is
general and ﬂexible in that it can be equipped with var-
ious backbones including MobileNetV 2, ResNet- 50,
ResNet-101 and ResNeXt- 101, and surpasses state-
of-the-art object detection algorithms using compa-
rable computation complexity and memory footprint.
More speciﬁcally, our model can improve the AP by
1.5∼3.5points on all above models comparing to
their FCOS counterparts.
2. Related Work
2.1. Object Detection
The frameworks of deep neural networks for object de-
tection can be roughly categorized into two types: one-stage
detectors [12] and two-stage detectors [6, 20].
Two-stage detection frameworks ﬁrst generate class-
independent region proposals using a region proposal net-
work (RPN), and then classify and reﬁne them using ex-
tra detection heads. In spite of achieving top perfor-
mance, the two-stage methods have noticeable drawbacks:
they are computationally expensive and have many hyper-
parameters that need to be tuned to ﬁt a speciﬁc dataset.
In comparison, the structures of one-stage detectors are
much simpler. They directly predict object categories andbounding boxes at each location of feature maps generated
by a single CNN backbone.
Note that most state-of-the-art object detectors (includ-
ing both one-stage detectors [12, 16, 19] and two-stage de-
tectors [20]) make predictions based on anchor boxes of
different scales and aspect ratios at each convolutional fea-
ture map location. However, the usage of anchor boxes
may lead to high imbalance between object and non-object
examples and introduce extra hyper-parameters. More re-
cently, anchor-free one-stage detectors [9, 10, 24, 29, 30]
have attracted increasing research interests, due to their sim-
ple fully convolutional architectures and reduced consump-
tion of computational resources.
2.2. Neural Architecture Search
NAS is usually time consuming. We have seen great
improvements from 24,000 GPU-days [32] to 0.2GPU-
day [28]. The trick is to ﬁrst construct a supernet contain-
ing the complete search space and train the candidates all
at once with bi-level optimization and efﬁcient weight shar-
ing [13, 15]. But the large memory allocation and difﬁ-
culties in approximated optimization prohibit the search for
more complex structures.
Recently researchers [1, 5, 23] propose to apply single-
path training to reduce the bias introduced by approxima-
tion and model simpliﬁcation of the supernet. DetNAS [2]
follows this idea to search for an efﬁcient object detection
architecture. One limitation of the single-path approach is
that the search space is restricted to a sequential structure.
Single-path sampling and straight through estimate of the
weight gradients introduce large variance to the optimiza-
tion process and prohibit the search for more complex struc-
tures under this framework. Within this very simple search
space, NAS algorithms can only make trivial decisions like
kernel sizes for manually designed modules.
Object detection models are different from single-path
image classiﬁcation networks in their way of merging multi-
level features and distributing the task to parallel prediction
heads. Feature pyramid networks (FPNs) [4, 8, 11, 14, 27],
designed to handle this job, plays an important role in
modern object detection models. NAS-FPN [4] targets on
searching for an FPN alternative based on one-stage frame-
work RetinaNet [12]. Feature pyramid architectures are
sampled with a recurrent neural network (RNN) controller.
The RNN controller is trained with reinforcement learn-
ing (RL). However, the search is very time-consuming even
though a proxy task with ResNet-10 backbone is trained to
evaluate each architecture.
Since all these three kinds of research ( [2, 4] and ours)
focus on object detection framework, we demonstrate the
differences among them that DetNAS [2] aims to search
for the designs of better backbones, while NAS-FPN [4]
searches the FPN structure, and our search space contains
11944