NAS-FCOS: Fast Neural Architecture Search for Object Detection∗
Ning Wang†‡, Yang Gao†‡, Hao Chen⋄, Peng Wang†‡, Zhi Tian⋄, Chunhua Shen⋄, Yanning Zhang†‡
†School of Computer Science, Northwestern Polytechnical University, China
‡National Engineering Lab for Integrated Aero-Space-Ground-Ocean Big Data Application Technology, China
⋄The University of Adelaide, Australia
Abstract
The success of deep neural networks relies on signiﬁ-
cant architecture engineering. Recently neural architecture
search (NAS) has emerged as a promise to greatly reduce
manual effort in network design by automatically search-
ing for optimal architectures, although typically such al-
gorithms need an excessive amount of computational re-
sources, e.g., a few thousand GPU-days. To date, on chal-
lenging vision tasks such as object detection, NAS, espe-
cially fast versions of NAS, is less studied. Here we propose
to search for the decoder structure of object detectors with
search efﬁciency being taken into consideration. To be more
speciﬁc, we aim to efﬁciently search for the feature pyra-
mid network (FPN) as well as the prediction head of a sim-
ple anchor-free object detector, namely FCOS [24], using
a tailored reinforcement learning paradigm. With carefully
designed search space, search algorithms and strategies for
evaluating network quality, we are able to efﬁciently search
a top-performing detection architecture within 4days us-
ing8V100 GPUs. The discovered architecture surpasses
state-of-the-art object detection models (such as Faster R-
CNN, RetinaNet and FCOS) by 1.5to3.5points in AP on
the COCO dataset,with comparable computation complex-
ity and memory footprint, demonstrating the efﬁcacy of the
proposed NAS for object detection.
1. Introduction
Object detection is one of the fundamental tasks in com-
puter vision, and has been researched extensively. In the
past few years, state-of-the-art methods for this task are
based on deep convolutional neural networks (such as Faster
R-CNN [20], RetinaNet [11]), due to their impressive per-
formance. Typically, the designs of object detection net-
works are much more complex than those for image clas-
siﬁcation, because the former need to localize and classify
multiple objects in an image simultaneously while the latter
∗NW, YG, HC contributed to this work equally.only need to output image-level labels. Due to its complex
structure and numerous hyper-parameters, designing effec-
tive object detection networks is more challenging and usu-
ally needs much manual effort.
On the other hand, Neural Architecture Search (NAS)
approaches [4, 17, 32] have been showing impressive results
on automatically discovering top-performing neural net-
work architectures in large-scale search spaces. Compared
to manual designs, NAS methods are data-driven instead of
experience-driven, and hence need much less human inter-
vention. As deﬁned in [3], the workﬂow of NAS can be
divided into the following three processes: 1) sampling ar-
chitecture from a search space following some search strate-
gies;2) evaluating the performance of the sampled archi-
tecture; and 3) updating the parameters based on the perfor-
mance.
One of the main problems prohibiting NAS from being
used in more realistic applications is its search efﬁciency.
The evaluation process is the most time consuming part be-
cause it involves a full training procedure of a neural net-
work. To reduce the evaluation time, in practice a proxy
task is often used as a lower cost substitution. In the proxy
task, the input, network parameters and training iterations
are often scaled down to speedup the evaluation. However,
there is often a performance gap for samples between the
proxy tasks and target tasks, which makes the evaluation
process biased. How to design proxy tasks that are both
accurate and efﬁcient for speciﬁc problems is a challeng-
ing problem. Another solution to improve search efﬁciency
is constructing a supernet that covers the complete search
space and training candidate architectures with shared pa-
rameters [15, 18]. However, this solution leads to signiﬁ-
cantly increased memory consumption and restricts itself to
small-to-moderate sized search spaces.
To our knowledge, studies on efﬁcient and accurate NAS
approaches to object detection networks are rarely touched,
despite its signiﬁcant importance. To this end, we present
a fast and memory saving NAS method for object detection
networks, which is capable of discovering top-performing
architectures within signiﬁcantly reduced search time. Our
11943