quence with three components, FPN conﬁguration, head
conﬁguration and weight sharing stages. We provide de-
tailed descriptions to each of them in the following sections.
The complete diagram of our decoder structure is shown in
Fig. 1.
3.2.1 FPN Search Space
As mentioned above, the FPN fmaps the convolutional
featuresCtoP. First, we initialize the sampling pool as
X0=C. Our FPN is deﬁned by applying the basic block
7times to the sampling pool, f:=bbf
1◦bbf
2◦ ··· ◦bbf
7.
To yield pyramid features P, we collect the last three basic
block outputs {x5,x6,x7}as{p3,p4,p5}.
To allow shared information across all layers, we use
a simple rule to create global features. If there is some
dangling layer xtwhich is not sampled by later blocks
{bbf
i|i > t}nor belongs to the last three layers t <5, we
use element-wise add to merge it to all output features
p∗
i=pi+xt, i∈ {3,4,5}. (1)
Same as the aggregation operations, if the features have dif-
ferent resolution, the smaller one is upsampled with bilinear
interpolation.
To be consistent with FCOS, p6andp7are obtained via
a3×3stride-2convolution on p5andp6respectively.
3.2.2 Prediction Head Search Space
Prediction head hmaps each feature in the pyramid Pto the
output of corresponding y, which in FCOS and RetinaNet,
consists of four 3×3convolutions. To explore the potential
of the head, we therefore extend a sequential search space
for its generation. Speciﬁcally, our head is deﬁned as a se-
quence of six basic operations. Compared with candidate
operations in the FPN structures, the head search space has
two slight differences. First, we add standard convolution
modules (including conv 1x1and conv3x3) to the head sam-
pling pool for better comparison. Second, we follow the
design of FCOS by replacing all the Batch Normalization
(BN) layers to Group Normalization (GN) [25] in the oper-
ations sampling pool of head, considering that head needs
to share weights between different levels, which causes BN
invalid. The ﬁnal output of head is the output of the last
(sixth) layer.
3.2.3 Searching for Head Weight Sharing
To add even more ﬂexibility and understand the effect of
weight sharing in prediction heads, we further add an index
ias the location where the prediction head starts to share
weights. For every layer before stage i, the head hwill
create independent set of weights for each FPN output level,
otherwise, it will use the global weights for sharing purpose.Considering the independent part of the heads being
extended FPN branch and the shared part as head with
adaptive-length, we can further balance the workload for
each individual FPN branch to extract level-speciﬁc features
and the prediction head shared across all levels.
3.3. Search Strategy
RL based strategy is applied to the search process. We
rely on an LSTM-based controller to predict the full con-
ﬁguration. We consider using a progressive search strat-
egy rather than the joint search for both FPN structure and
prediction head part, since the former requires less com-
puting resources and time cost than the latter. The training
dataset is randomly split into a meta-train Dtand meta-val
Dvsubset. To speed up the training, we ﬁx the backbone
network and cache the pre-computed backbone output C.
This makes our single architecture training cost indepen-
dent from the depth of backbone network. Taking this ad-
vantage, we can apply much more complex backbone struc-
tures and utilize high quality multilevel features as our de-
coder’s input. We ﬁnd that the process of backbone ﬁne-
tuning can be skipped if the cached features are powerful
enough. Speedup techniques such as Polyak weight averag-
ing are also applied during the training.
The most widely used detection metric is average preci-
sion (AP). However, due to the difﬁculty of object detection
task, at the early stages, AP is too low to tell the good archi-
tectures from the bad ones, which makes the controller take
much more time to converge. To make the architecture eval-
uation process easier even at the early stages of the training,
we therefore use negative loss sum as the reward instead of
average precision:
R(a) =−/summationdisplay
(x,Y)∈Dv(Lcls(x,Y|a)
+Lreg(x,Y|a)+Lctr(x,Y|a))(2)
whereLcls,Lreg,Lctrare the three loss terms in FCOS.
Gradient of the controller is estimated via proximal policy
optimization (PPO) [22].
4. Experiments
4.1. Implementation Details
4.1.1 Searching Phase
We design a fast proxy task for evaluating the decoder archi-
tectures sampled in the searching phase. PASCAL VOC is
selected as the proxy dataset, which contains 5715 training
images with object bounding box annotations of 20classes.
Transfer capacity of the structures can be illustrated since
the search and full training phase use different datasets.
The VOC training set is randomly split into a meta-train
11946