both FPN and head structure.
To speed up reward evaluation of RL-based NAS, the
work of [17] proposes to use progressive tasks and other
training acceleration methods. By caching the encoder fea-
tures, they are able to train semantic segmentation decoders
with very large batch sizes very efﬁciently. In the sequel of
this paper, we refer to this technique as fast decoder adap-
tation. However, directly applying this technique to object
detection tasks does not enjoy similar speed boost, because
they are either not in using a fully-convolutional model [11]
or require complicated post processing that are not scalable
with the batch size [12].
To reduce the post processing overhead, we resort to
a recently introduced anchor-free one-stage framework,
namely, FCOS [24], which signiﬁcantly improve the search
efﬁciency by cancelling the processing time of anchor-box
matching in RetinaNet.
Compared to its anchor-based counterpart, FCOS signif-
icantly reduces the training memory footprint while being
able to improve the performance.
3. Our Approach
In our work, we search for anchor-free fully convolu-
tional detection models with fast decoder adaptation. Thus,
NAS methods can be easily applied.
3.1. Problem Formulation
We base our search algorithm upon a one-stage frame-
work FCOS due to its simplicity. Our training tuples
{(x,Y)}consist of input image tensors xof size(3×H×
W)and FCOS output targets Yin a pyramid representa-
tion, which is a list of tensors yleach of size ((K+ 4 +
1)×Hl×Wl)whereHl×Wlis feature map size on level
pof the pyramid. (K+ 4 + 1) is the output channels of
FCOS, the three terms are length- Kone-hot classiﬁcation
labels,4bounding box regression targets and 1centerness
factor respectively.
The network g:x→ˆYin original FCOS consists of
three parts, a backbone b, FPNfand multi-level subnets
we call prediction heads hin this paper. First backbone
b:x→Cmaps the input tensor to a set of intermediate-
leveled features C={c3,c4,c5}, with resolution (Hi×
Wi) = (H/2i×W/2i). Then FPN f:C→Pmaps
the features to a feature pyramid P={p3,p4,p5,p6,p7}.
Then the prediction head h:p→yis applied to each level
ofPand the result is collected to create the ﬁnal prediction.
To avoid overﬁtting, same his often applied to all instances
inP.
Since objects of different scales require different effec-
tive receptive ﬁelds, the mechanism to select and merge
intermediate-leveled features Cis particularly important in
object detection network design. Thus, most researches [16,20] are carried out on designing fandhwhile using widely-
adopted backbone structures such as ResNet [7]. Following
this principle, our search goal is to decide when to choose
which features from Cand how to merge them.
To improve the efﬁciency, we reuse the parameters in b
pretrained on target dataset and search for the optimal struc-
tures after that. For the convenience of the following state-
ment, we call the network components to search for, namely
fandh, together the decoder structure for the objection de-
tection network.
fandhtake care of different parts of the detection job. f
extracts features targeting different object scales in the pyra-
mid representations P, whilehis a uniﬁed mapping applied
to each feature in Pto avoid overﬁtting. In practice, people
seldom discuss the possibility of using a more diversiﬁed f
to extract features at different levels or how many layers in
hneed to be shared across the levels. In this work, we use
NAS as an automatic method to test these possibilities.
3.2. Search Space
Considering the different functions of fandh, we ap-
ply two search space respectively. Given the particularity
of FPN structure, a basic block with new overall connection
andf’s output design is built for it. For simplicity, sequen-
tial space is applied for hpart.
We replace the cell structure with atomic operations to
provide even more ﬂexibility. To construct one basic block,
we ﬁrst choose two layers x1,x2from the sampling pool
Xatid1,id2, then two operations op1,op2 are applied
to each of them and an aggregation operation agg merges
the two output into one feature. To build a deep decoder
structure, we apply multiple basic blocks with their outputs
added to the sampling pool. Our basic block bbt:Xt−1→
Xtat time step ttransforms the sampling pool Xt−1to
Xt=Xt−1∪{xt}, wherextis the output of bbt.
The candidate operations are listed in Table 1. We in-
clude only separable/depth-wise convolutions so that the
decoder can be efﬁcient. In order to enable the decoder to
apply convolutional ﬁlters on irregular grids, here we have
also included deformable 3×3convolutions [31]. For the
aggregation operations, we include element-wise sum and
concatenation followed by a 1×1convolution.
The decoder conﬁguration can be represented by a se-
ID Description
0 separable conv 3×3
1 separable conv 3×3with dilation rate 3
2 separable conv 5×5with dilation rate 6
3 skip-connection
4 deformable 3×3convolution
Table 1. Unary operations used in the search process.
11945