This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
HARDJONO et al. : TOW ARD AN INTEROPERABILITY ARCHITECTURE FOR BLOCKCHAIN AUTONOMOUS SYSTEMS 7
or perhaps unobtainable by external entities in the case of
permissioned systems.
4)Degrees of permissionability: Currently, the permission-
less/permissioned distinction refers to the degree to whichusers can participate in the system [23]. Interoperability
across permissioned blockchains poses additional ques-tions with regard to how data recorded on the ledger can
be referenced (referred to or “pointed to”) by transactions
in a foreign domain (i.e., another blockchain system).
5)Degrees of anonymity: There are at least two degrees of
anonymity that is relevant to blockchain systems. Theﬁrst pertains to the anonymity of end users (i.e., identityanonymity [28]–[30]), and the second is the anonymity
of the nodes participating in processing transactions (e.g.,
nodes participating in a given consensus instance). Combi-nations are possible, such as where a permissioned system
may require all consensus nodes to be strongly authenti-
cated and identiﬁed, but allows for end users to remainpermissionless (and even unidentiﬁed/unauthenticated).
6)Cybersecurity and assurance levels of nodes: The robust-
ness of a blockchain system consisting of a P2P network of
nodes is largely affected by the security of the nodes that
make up the network. If nodes are easily compromised di-rectly (e.g., hacks) or via indirect means (e.g., dormant
viruses), the utility of the blockchain system degrades
considerably [26].
IV . G
A TEW A YS FOR INTEROPERABILITY AND MANAGEABILITY
As mentioned previously, similar to the Internet architecture
consisting of a network of ASs, the future blockchain tech-
nology may evolve to becoming a network of interconnected
blockchain systems—each with differing internal consensus
protocols, incentives mechanisms, permissions, and security-
related constraints. Key to this interconnectivity is the notion ofblockchain gateways . In this section, we discuss the potential
use of blockchain gateways to provide interoperability and in-terconnectivity across different blockchain systems and servicetypes.
Interoperability becomes a complex matter when transactions
in permissionless blockchains (publicly readable ledgers) inter-act with permissioned (private) blockchains, where transaction
entries on the ledger may reveal conﬁdential information and,
therefore, considered to be private. The use-case examples typ-ically involve interactions between ledgers that record factual
existential information about a given asset or object and ledgers
that record legal ownership of that asset or object.
A. Intradomain and Interdomain Nodes
Similar to a routing AS being composed of one or more (possi-
bly nested) routing domains, we propose viewing a blockchain
system as consisting of one or more ledger management do-
mains . Thus, just as routers in a routing domain operate one
or more routing protocols to achieve best routes through thatdomain, nodes in a blockchain domain contribute to maintain-
ing a shared ledger by running one or more ledger manage-
ment protocols (e.g., consensus algorithms and membershipFig. 4. Blockchain AS, domains, and gateways.
management) to achieve stability and fast convergence (i.e.,conﬁrmation throughput) of the ledger in that domain.
Nodes could, therefore, be classiﬁed from the perspective of
ledger management as operating either intradomain or interdo-main. Fig. 4 illustrates the concept, showing one blockchain AS,
with three local domain blockchains, each managing a distinct
ledger.
1)Intradomain nodes: These are nodes and other entities
whose main task is maintaining ledger information andconducting transactions within one domain. Examples in-cludes nodes that participate in consensus computations
(e.g., full mining nodes in Bitcoin [17]), nodes that “or-
chestrate” consensus computations (e.g., Orderers and
Endorsers in Hyperledger Fabric [19]), and nodes that per-
form validations only (e.g., V alidators in Ripple [31]).
2)Interdomain nodes: These are nodes and other entities
whose main task is dealing with cross-domain transac-tions involving different blockchain ASs. We refer to thesenodes as interdomain gateways.
Although Fig. 4 shows a small number of nodes G to be des-
ignated as interdomain nodes, ideally, all nodes N in a givenblockchain AS should have the capability (i.e., correct soft-
ware, hardware, and trusted computing base) to become an in-
terdomain gateway. This allows dynamic groups (subsets) of thepopulation of nodes to become gateway groups that act collec-
tively on behalf of the blockchain system as a whole [32]. In theremainder of this paper, we will denote interdomain gatewayssimply as “gateways.”
B. Deﬁning the Perimeter for Blockchain ASs
In the history of routing on the Internet, the emergence and
evolution of the concept of ASs was driven partly by the need
to manage networks. Among others, the owners and operators
of networks needed to deﬁne their network physical perimeter,deploy administrative controls over the networks, and legally
understand the areas of business responsibilities and liabilities.
This arrangement provided the freedom on the part of the opera-tors to design the routing topologies according to their business
needs, applying different protocols, tools, and devices in each