This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
10 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ENGINEERING MANAGEMENT
forward this query to one or more of the gateways in
BC1, which collectively share the mapping table. In turn,
one of these gateways in BC1 can remap the query intoTx2
publicID /BC2 and redirect the query to one or more of
the gateways in BC2. This resolver role is similar to thedomain name system (DNS) systems, and also to the on-line certiﬁcate status protocol (OCSP) Responder model
in public key infrastructure (PKI) [42], which can report
on the status of a public key in an X.509 certiﬁcate issuedby the Certiﬁcate Authority who operates the Responder
service.
E. Interdomain Trust Establishment
A second potential use of gateways in the context of
blockchain interoperability is to support the establishment of
trust (i.e., technical trust) across blockchain ASs. We believe
there is a promising role for trusted hardware to implement many
of the function of the gateways. As mentioned previously, ide-ally, all nodes in a given blockchain AS should possess the rele-
vant trusted hardware and software to allow them to take on the
role of gateways as required.
Examples of trusted hardware include the TPM [34] with its
various roots of trust for measurement, storage, and reporting.The ﬁrst successful version was TPM v1.2 that supported a“one-size-ﬁts-all” approach that primarily targeted the PC mar-
ket. A second-generation TPM v2.0 expanded trusted computing
features to better support vertical markets. TPMv2.0 introduced
platform-speciﬁc proﬁles that deﬁne mandatory, optional, and
excluded functionality for PC Client, Mobile, and Automotive-Thin platform categories. Platform-speciﬁc proﬁles allow TPM
vendors ﬂexibility in implementing TPM features that accom-
modates a speciﬁc market. Additionally, TPMv2.0 supportsthree key hierarchies, for storage, platform, and endorsement.
Each hierarchy can support multiple keys and cryptographic
algorithms. We believe that TPM v2.0 proﬁles for trustedgateways could be developed for the blockchain infrastructure
market.
Another example of trusted hardware is the Software Guard
Extensions (SGX) from Intel Corporation [35]. The SGX offers
another perspective on trusted computing base, where a trusted
environment exists within a user process called an Enclave.T h e
SGX TCB consists of hardware isolated memory pages, CPU in-
structions for creating, extending, initializing, entering, exiting,
and attesting the enclave, and privileged CPU modes for con-
trolling access to enclave memory. A second-generation SGX
(see [43]) added support for dynamic memory management,where enclave runtimes could dynamically increase or decrease
the number of enclave pages.
There are multiple steps to establish measurable technical
trust that can be input into legal frameworks in the context ofpeering. Some of these are as follows.
1)Mutual veriﬁcation of gateway device identities: Prior
to interacting, two gateways belonging to separateblockchain AS must mutually verify their device identities
(e.g., AIK certiﬁcates in TPM).
2)Mutual attestation of gateway device status: As part of
trust establishment, each gateway may be required toattest to its hardware and software stack, as well as the
current state of some of its hardware registers (e.g., Quote
protocol [34], [35]).
3)Mutual session key establishment: For use cases involving
session keys, the gateways have the additional task of ne-gotiating the keying parameters and establish the relevantsession keys.
4)Mutual reporting of transaction settlement: In use cases
involving one (or both) private blockchains, an additionalrequirement could be the signing of assertions using a
gateway’s device keys.
F . Peering Points for Peering Business Agreements
The third potential use of gateways in the context of
blockchain interoperability is to serve as the peering points
identiﬁed within peering agreements or contracts. In the caseof various ISPs that make up the Internet, peering agreements
are contracts that deﬁne various interconnection aspects (e.g.,trafﬁc bandwidth, protocols, etc.) as well as fees (“settlements”)
and possible penalties. For the interoperability of autonomous
blockchain systems, a notion similar to peering agreements mustbe developed that possess features speciﬁcally for blockchain
technology and the governance model used by the systems. Peer-
ing agreements should include, among others, the following.
1)Identiﬁcation of gateways chosen as peering points: A
blockchain peering agreement should require the clearidentiﬁcation of gateways, which are permitted to peer
with other gateways. This agreement may specify the de-
vice certiﬁcates, hardware and software manifest (e.g.,hash of manifest), root certiﬁcates, device status attesta-
tions, and so on.
2)Specify the minimal trust establishment mechanisms and
parameters: A peering agreement should specify the trust
negotiation and establishment protocols, the respectiveknown parameters (e.g., size of key parameters), the keymanagement protocols, standards compliance required,
minimal assurance level required, and others.
3)Specify warranties and liabilities: Similar to peering
agreements for ISPs and Certiﬁcate Practices Statementfor certiﬁcate authorities, blockchain peering agreements
should clearly identify the liabilities of parties (e.g., in
monetary terms) in negative or catastrophic scenarios
(e.g., gateway is compromised).
V. C
ONCLUSION
The fundamental goals underlying the Internet architecture
has played a key role in determining the interoperability of
various networks and service types, which together compose
the Internet as we know it today. Interoperability is key tosurvivability. A number of design principles emerged from the
evolution of internet routing in the 1970s and 1980s, which
ensured the scalable operation of the Internet over the last threedecades.
We believe that a similar design philosophy is needed for inter-
operable blockchain systems. The recognition that a blockchainsystem is an AS is an important starting point that allows
notions such as reachability, referencing of transaction data