This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
4 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ENGINEERING MANAGEMENT
Fig. 1. ASs as a set of networks and gateways (after [4]).
mechanical level and the value level—if blockchain systems and
technologies are to become the fundamental infrastructure of the
future global commerce [21], [22].
This paper focuses primarily on the interoperability across
blockchain systems at the mechanical level, as the basis toachieve a measurable degree of technical trust across these sys-
tems. In turn, technical trust is needed by the upper level func-tions to achieve interoperability at the value level, so that legal
frameworks can be created that are able quantify risks based
on the technological choices used to implement technical trust.Poorly designed blockchain systems should present a higher risk
for commerce, and vice versa. Finally, business trust can be built
upon these legal frameworks to allow business transactions to
occur seamlessly across multiple blockchain systems globally.
In this section, we identify and discuss some of the challenges
to blockchain interoperability, using the Internet architecture as aguide and using the fundamental goals as the basis for developing
a design philosophy for interoperable blockchains.
In order to clarify the meaning on “interoperability” in the
context blockchain systems, we offer the following deﬁnitionof an “interoperable blockchain architecture” using the NIST
deﬁnition of “blockchain” (see [23, p. 50]):
An interoperable blockchain architecture is a composition of distin-
guishable blockchain systems, each representing a unique distributed
data ledger , where atomic transaction execution may span multipleheterogeneous blockchain systems, and where data recorded in oneblockchain are reachable, veriﬁable, and referenceable by anotherpossibly foreign transaction in a semantically compatible manner .
In the following, we recast the aspects of survivability, va-
riety of service types, and variety of systems in the context of
blockchain systems.
A. Survivability
As mentioned previously, interoperability is key to surviv-
ability. In the Internet architecture, survivability as viewed by
the DARPA [3], [4] meant that communications must continuedespite loss of networks and gateways. In practical engineering
terms, this meant the use of the packet-switching model as a
realization of the connectionless routing paradigm.
In the context of blockchain systems generally, survivability
should also mean continued operations in the face of variouskinds of attacks. The possible types of attacks to a blockchainsystem have been discussed elsewhere and consist of a broad
spectrum. These range from classic network-level attacks (e.g.,Fig. 2. Example of the reliability of a simple transaction.
network partitions, denial of services, distributed denial-of-
service (DDOS), etc.) to more sophisticated attacks targetingthe particular constructs (e.g., consensus implementation [24]–
[26]), to targeting speciﬁc implementations of mining nodes
(e.g., code vulnerabilities and viruses). Similar to applicationson the Internet, we can also view survivability more speciﬁcally
from the perspective of the application (and its user) that is trans-
acting on the blockchain. A user’s transaction should proceed asfar as possible despite the blockchain being under attack.
For blockchain systems, we propose to reinterpret the term
“survivability” to mean the completion (conﬁrmation) of anapplication-level transaction independent of blockchain sys-
tems involved in achieving the completion of the transaction.
Furthermore, the transaction may be composed of subtrans-
actions and in the same sense of a message on the Internet
may consist of multiple IP datagrams. Thus, in the blockchaincase, an application-level transaction may consist of multiple
ledger-level transactions (subtransaction), where each could be
intended for (and be conﬁrmed at) different blockchain systems(e.g., subtransaction for asset transfer in blockchain A,s i m u l -
taneously with subtransaction for payments and subtransactionfor taxes in blockchain B).
Here, the notion of packets routing through multiple domains
being opaque to the user’s communications application (e.g.,e-mail applications and browsers) is now recast to the notion ofsubtransactions conﬁrmed on a spread of blockchain systems
generally being opaque to the user application . Thus, the
challenge of reliability and “best effort delivery” becomes the
challenge of ensuring that an application-level transaction is
completed within reasonable time, possibly with the application
itself being oblivious to the actual blockchains, where differentledger-level subtransactions are ﬁnally conﬁrmed.
To illustrate the challenges of survivability as interpreted in
this manner, we start with the simplest case in which an ap-
plication sends a “data” transaction (signed hash value) to a
blockchain for the purpose of recording it on the ledger ofthe blockchain (see Fig. 2). We ignore for the moment the di-
chotomy of permissionless and permissioned blockchains and
ignore the speciﬁc logic syntax of the blockchain. Here, the ap-plication does not care which blockchain records the data as long
as once the transaction is conﬁrmed, later the application (andother entities) can ﬁnd the transaction/block and verify that thedata have been recorded immutably. Fig. 2 illustrates the sce-
nario. The application transmits data bytes (hash) to a blockchain
system No. 1 and waits for conﬁrmation to become available onthe blockchain. After waiting for some predetermined time un-
successfully (i.e., timeout), the application transmits the same