This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ENGINEERING MANAGEMENT 1
Toward an Interoperability Architecture for
Blockchain Autonomous Systems
Thomas Hardjono , Alexander Lipton, and Alex Pentland
Abstract—There is considerable interest today in the use of
blockchain technology to provide better visibility into shared in-
formation among a number of participants and systems arranged
in a decentralized peer-to-peer topology. Several challenges inblockchain technology remain to be addressed, including the inter-operability, survivability, and manageability of blockchain systems.Crucial to answering these challenges is the need to understandaspects of the Internet architecture that has made it scalable,resilient, and a commercial success as a global connectivity infras-tructure. In this paper, we discuss a design philosophy for inter-operable blockchain systems, using the design philosophy of theInternet architecture as the basis to identify key design principles.We recast some of the challenges faced in the design of the Internetarchitecture to that of the design of an interoperable blockchain ar-chitecture. We emphasize interoperability as a crucial requirementfor the survivability and manageability of blockchain systems. Thegoal is to deﬁne an interoperable blockchain architecture, in whichcommon components of the blockchain architecture can begin tobe standardized, leading to lowering of development costs, betterreusability, and higher degree of interoperability.
Index T erms —Computer network management, computer secu-
rity, cryptography, decentralized control, distributed computing.
I. I NTRODUCTION
THERE is considerable interest today in the use of
blockchain technology to provide better visibility into
shared information among a number of participants and sys-tems arranged in a peer-to-peer (P2P) topology. However, more
attention needs to be placed on challenges around the aspects
of the manageability of blockchain systems, the survivability ofblockchain networks, and the cybersecurity of systems and in-
frastructures that participate in blockchain communities. Crucial
to answering these challenges is the need to understand aspectsof the Internet architecture that has made it scalable, resilient,
and a commercial success as a global connectivity infrastructure.
The goal of this paper is to bring to the forefront the notion of
interoperability ,survivability , and manageability for blockchain
systems, using lessons learned from the three decades of the
Manuscript received February 17, 2019; revised April 22, 2019; accepted May
28, 2019. Review of this manuscript was arranged by Department Editor K.-K.
R. Choo. (Corresponding author: Thomas Hardjono.)
T. Hardjono and A. Lipton are with MIT Connection Science and Engineering,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139 USA (e-mail:hardjono@mit.edu; alexlipt@mit.edu).
A. Pentland is with MIT Connection Science and Engineering and the MIT
Media Lab, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139 USA(e-mail: pentland@mit.edu).
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TEM.2019.2920154development of the Internet. Our overall goal is to develop
a design philosophy for an interoperable blockchain archi-
tecture, and to identify some design principles that promote
interoperability.
Currently, there is considerable interest (real and hype) in
blockchain systems as a promising technology for the future in-frastructure of a global value-exchange network—or what somerefer to as the “Internet of value.” The original blockchain idea
of Haber and Stornetta [1], [2] is now a fundamental construct
within most blockchain systems, starting with the Bitcoin sys-tem which ﬁrst adopted the idea and deployed it in a digital
currency context.
Many parallels have been made between blockchain systems
and the Internet. However, many comparisons often fail to un-derstand the fundamental goals of the Internet architecture as
promoted and led by the Defense Advanced Research Projects
Agency (DARPA) and thus fail to fully appreciate how these
goals have shaped the Internet to achieve its success as we seeit today. There was a pressing need in the Cold War period of
the 1960s and 1970s to develop a new communications network
architecture that did not previously exist, one that would allowcommunications to survive in the face of attacks. In Section II,
we review and discuss these goals.
We argue in this paper that if blockchain technology seeks
to be a fundamental component of the future global distributednetwork of commerce and value, then its architecture must also
satisfy the same fundamental goals of the Internet architecture.This is the core of Section II.
In Section III, we attempt to recast some of these fundamen-
tal goals of the Internet to the current context of blockchaintechnology. Among others, we look for some design principles
for blockchain technology that should remain true across any
blockchain system implementation.
Section IV discusses the notion blockchain gateways as a
means to provide interoperability across blockchain systems.We review how routing gateways today allow various Internet
service provider (ISP) networks to interconnect and provide end-
to-end connectivity. The notion of boundary or perimeter is ex-amined, and three potential uses of blockchain gateways are then
presented. This paper is then closed with some observations and
conclusions.
II. D
ESIGN PHILOSOPHY OF THE INTERNET
In considering the future direction for blockchain systems
generally, it is useful to recall and understand goals of the
0018-9391 © 2019 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.