This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
HARDJONO et al. : TOW ARD AN INTEROPERABILITY ARCHITECTURE FOR BLOCKCHAIN AUTONOMOUS SYSTEMS 9
Fig. 5. Example of interdomain transaction across two blockchain systems.
blockchain systems, none of the gateways or nodes in BC1 can
directly read/write to BC2, and vice versa.
The following is a high-level summary of the transaction ﬂows
between BC1 and BC2. In step 1, User A initiates the transfer toUser B by submitting a (candidate) transaction to BC1, with the
recipient address being the public key of User B in BC2 (e.g.,
pubkey
B/BC2). Because the destination blockchain BC2 is a
foreign system, only the gateway nodes in BC1 are permitted or
have the capability to process this transaction. In step 2, gateway
G1 selects the candidate (unprocessed) transaction of User A in
BC1 and proceeds to process the transaction. Seeing that the
pending transaction is destined for pubkeyB/BC2, gateway G1
locates one or more gateways G2 in BC2 and proceeds perform
trust negotiations with G2 (see Section IV-E).
In step 3, because BC1 is a private system, gateway G1 has to
mask the private identiﬁer value Tx1privateID with a new public
value Tx1publicID . G1 has to persistently maintain this table of
mappings ( Tx1privateID andTx1publicID ). In the future, gateway
G1 must provide a means to resolve the public value Tx1publicID
back to the internal private value Tx1privateID should that be
required (see Section IV-D). In steps 4 and 5, (multiround)
gateways G1 and G2 must establish trust by executing a key
establishment protocol that includes the exchange of keying
parameters, hardware root of trust certiﬁcates (e.g., attestationidentity key (AIK) certiﬁcates in TPM [34]), hardware status
reports (e.g., Quote protocol reports [35]), and other relevant
trust establishment parameters.
In step 6, after pairwise technical trust has been established
between gateways G1 and G2, gateway G2 proceeds to submit anew local transaction with identiﬁer Tx2
privateID into the ledger
of BC2 addressed pubkeyB. This local transaction references
the asset (in BC1) identiﬁed by the public value Tx1publicID .
In effect, gateway G2 is “registering” this asset Tx2privateID
as belonging to User B with public key pubkeyB.I ns t e p7 ,
conﬁrmation has been achieved in the ledger of BC2. GatewayG2 needs to indirectly report this conﬁrmed status of Tx2
privateID
to gateway G1. As such, G2 has to mask local transaction iden-tiﬁer Tx2
privateID with a new public identiﬁer Tx2publicID . Gate-
way G2 must henceforth maintain a persistent mapping between
Tx2publicID andTx2privateID .In step 8, gateway G2 issues a signed assertion to G1 stating
that the asset with the transaction identiﬁer Tx2publicID has been
conﬁrmed on ledger BC2 and includes a hash of the private
identiﬁer Tx2privateID in the assertion. In step 9, upon seeing
the signed assertion from G2, gateway G1 proceeds to submit a
new “invalidation” transaction in BC1, essentially marking that
the asset previously known as Tx1privateID has been moved to
BC2. The invalidation transaction also includes a reference to the
new home of the asset, namely Tx2publicID /BC2. It should also
include a hash of the signed assertion from G2. Finally, in step 10,User B is able to see the conﬁrmed transaction Tx2
privateID /BC2,
while User A sees that Tx1privateID /BC1 is also being conﬁrmed.
Note that the above use case is an abstract example only. Many
variations are possible for these ﬂows, including the incorpora-
tion of commitment protocols (e.g., two-phase commit) in steps2–9.
D. Visibility and Referenceability of Transaction Identiﬁers
One key potential use of gateways in the context of blockchain
interoperability is to provide some degree of control over the
visibility (i.e., read access) of transaction identiﬁers residing onthe ledger of the blockchain system.
1)Masking of private identiﬁers: In cases of pri-
vate/permissioned blockchain systems, where all trans-action information on the conﬁrmed blocks on the
ledger is considered conﬁdential information (includ-
ing the transaction-identiﬁers), a gateway may offer the
possibility to support the notion of identiﬁer “masking.”
As discussed in Section IV-C, a substitute transaction iden-tiﬁer is used for external referenceability in a persistent
manner. In a sense, this is akin to the network address
translation found in network address translation (NA T)devices and dual-stack IPv4/IPv6 routers.
2)Resolution of private identiﬁers: If identiﬁer masking or
translation is used, a corresponding resolution functioncan be implemented at gateways. Thus, in the example
of Section IV-C, after the asset has been moved from
BC1 to BC2, whenever one of more nodes in BC1 ob-tains a query regarding Tx1
publicID /BC1, the node can