This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
HARDJONO et al. : TOW ARD AN INTEROPERABILITY ARCHITECTURE FOR BLOCKCHAIN AUTONOMOUS SYSTEMS 5
data bytes to a different blockchain system No. 2. The applica-
tion continues this process until it is able to obtain the desired
conﬁrmation.
Although the example in Fig. 2 may appear overly simplis-
tic and inefﬁcient and has the undesirable side effect of con-ﬁrmations on multiple blockchains, it highlights a number ofquestions similar to those posed in the early days of the Internet
architecture development:
1)Application degree of awareness: To what degree must
an application be aware of the internal constructs of ablockchain system in order to interact with it and make
use of the blockchain? Most (all of) wallet applicationstoday must maintain conﬁguration information regarding
which blockchain system to which a key applies.
As a point of comparison, an e-mail client application to-day is not aware of constructs of packets, media access
control protocol data units (MPDUs), routing, and so on. It
interacts with the mail server according to a high-level pro-tocol (e.g., post ofﬁce protocol 3 (POP3), Internet message
access protocol (IMAP), and simple mail transfer protocol
(SMTP)) and a well-deﬁned API. The e-mail client needs
only to know the destination e-mail address.
2)Distinguishability and addressability of blockchain sys-
tems: For an interoperable blockchain architecture, each
blockchain AS must be distinguishable from a naming per-spective as well as from an addressing/routing perspective.This introduces some new challenges, such as the situa-
tion where a node is permitted to participate in several
blockchain systems simultaneously. From a key manage-ment perspective, there is also the question regarding mul-
tiple uses of the same public key pair across several distinct
blockchain systems.
3)Placement of reliability functions: What is the correct
notion of “reliability” in the context of interoperableblockchain systems and where should the function of reli-ability be placed? That is, should the function of retrans-
mitting the same data bytes (transaction) be part of the
application, part of the blockchain system, or part of a yet
to be deﬁned “middle layer”?
As a comparison, within the TCP/IP stack, the TCP pro-tocol has a number of ﬂow control features that “hides”
reliability issues from the higher level applications.
4)Semantic interoperability: If in the future there will
emerge blockchain ASs with differing applications (e.g.,registry of assets, currency trading, etc.), what mecha-
nisms are needed to convey to an external system thefunctional goal of a blockchain and its application-speciﬁc
semantics?
As a comparison, the HTTP protocol and remote proce-dure call (RPC) interprocess communications both run
on the TCP/IP layer. However, these represent differ-
ent resource access paradigms for different types ofapplications.
5)Objective benchmarks for speed and performance: How
do external entities obtain information about the current
performance/throughput of a blockchain system and what
measure can be used to compare across systems?B. V ariety of Service Types
The second goal of the Internet architecture was the support
for different types of services, distinguished by different speeds,latency, and reliability. The bidirectional reliable data delivery
model was suitable for a variety of “applications” on the Internet,
but each application required different speeds and bandwidth
consumptions (e.g., remote login, ﬁle transfer, etc.). This under-
standing led to the realization early in the design of the Internetthat more than one transport service would be needed, and that
the architecture must support simultaneously transports wish-
ing to tailor reliability, delay, or bandwidth usage. This resultedin the separation of TCP (that provided reliable sequenced data
stream) from the IP that provided “best effort” delivery using
the common building block of the datagram. The User Data-
gram Protocol [27] was created to address the need for certain
applications that wished to trade reliability for direct access to
the datagram construct.
For blockchain systems, we propose to reinterpret the notion
of service types from the perspective of the different needs ofvarious applications. We distinguish three basic types of service.
1)Immediate direct conﬁrmation: This refers to applications
that require the fastest conﬁrmation from a speciﬁc desti-nation blockchain system. The conﬁrmation of the trans-
action must occur at the destination blockchain. As such,
speed and latency are the primary concerns for these typesof applications. This is summarized in Fig. 3(a). This situ-
ation is an analog of the classic TCP-based login service,
in which the user performs login to a speciﬁc computersystem and needs conﬁrmation in as minimal delay as
possible (e.g., milliseconds and seconds).
Digital currency applications (e.g., currency trading sys-tem) are a typical example of cases needing direct and
immediate conﬁrmation with low latency.
2)Delayed mediated conﬁrmation: This refers to applica-
tions that are satisﬁed with a “temporary” conﬁrmationproduced by a mediating blockchain system, which will
then seek to “move” the transaction to its intended destina-
tion blockchain system. This is summarized in Fig. 3(b).
The application will obtain two conﬁrmations: the ﬁrst
would be a temporary conﬁrmation from the mediatingblockchain system, while the ﬁnal conﬁrmation will oc-
cur at the destination blockchain system at a later time.
As such, there are two latency values corresponding to the
two conﬁrmations. The understanding here is that the ap-
plication deems the ﬁrst latency to be acceptable from a
practical perspective, and that the second latency can be
of a longer period of time (e.g., minutes). This is akin to
the store-and-forward method used by classic electronicmail systems.
An example of this type of application are noncritical no-
tarization applications, which seek to record static (un-changing) data (e.g., birth date on a birth certiﬁcate) and
which do not require low-latency conﬁrmations.
3)Multiparty mediated conﬁrmation: This scenario is a mul-
tiparty variation of the single-party mediated case men-tioned above. Here, two (or more) applications are seeking