This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
HARDJONO et al. : TOW ARD AN INTEROPERABILITY ARCHITECTURE FOR BLOCKCHAIN AUTONOMOUS SYSTEMS 3
browsers) is also built on the premise that client–server data
encryption is an end-to-end function performed by the browser
(client) and by the HTTP server.
C. Autonomous System Paradigm
Another key concept in the development of the Internet is that
ofautonomous systems (ASs) (or routing domains) as a connec-
tivity unit that provide scale-up capabilities. More speciﬁcally,
the classic deﬁnition of an AS is a connected group of one ormore networks (distinguishable via IP preﬁxes) run by one or
more network operators, which has a single and clearly deﬁned
routing policy [10]. The notion of ASs provides a way to hier-
archically aggregate routing information, such that the distribu-
tion of routing information itself becomes a manageable task.
This division into domains provides independence for each do-main owner/operator to employ the routing mechanisms of its
choice. IP packet routing inside an AS is, therefore, referred to
asintradomain routing, while routing between (across) ASs is
referred to as interdomain routing. The common goal of many
providers of routing services (consumer ISPs, backbone ISPs,and participating corporations) is that of supporting differenttypes of services (in the sense of speed, latency, and reliability).
In the case of intradomain routing, the aim is to share best-
route information among routers using an intradomain routingprotocol (e.g., distance vector such as routing information pro-
tocol (RIP) [11] or link-state such as open shortest path ﬁrst
protocol (OSPF) [12]). The routing protocol of choice must ad-
dress numerous issues, including possible loops and imbalances
in trafﬁc distribution. Today, routers are typically owned andoperated by the legal owner of the AS (e.g., ISP or corporation).
These owners then enter into peering agreements with each other
in order to achieve end-to-end reachability of destinations across
multiple hops or domains. The primary revenue model in the ISP
industry revolves around different tiers of services appropriate
to different groups of customers.
There are several important points regarding the AS paradigm
and the positive impact this paradigm has had on the develop-ment of the Internet for the past four decades:
1)AS paradigm leads to scale: The AS paradigm, the con-
nectionless routing model, and the distributed networktopology of the Internet allows each unit (the AS) to solveperformance issues locally. This, in turn, promotes service
scale in the sense of throughput (end-to-end) and reach
(the large numbers of connected endpoints). As such, it
is important to see the global Internet today a connected
set of “islands” of AS, stitched together through peeringagreements.
2)Domain-level control with distributed topology: Each AS
typically possesses multiple routers operating the sameintradomain routing protocol. The availability of multi-
ple routers implies availability of multiple routing paths
through the domain. Despite this distributed networktopology, these routers are centrally controlled (e.g., by
the network administrator of the domain). The AS as a
control unit provides manageability, visibility, and peer-ing capabilities centrally administered by the owner of the
domain.3)Each entity is uniquely identiﬁable in its domain: All
routers (and other devices, such as bridges and switches)
in an AS are uniquely identiﬁable and visible to the net-work operator. This is a precondition of routing. The iden-
tiﬁability and visibility of devices in a domain is usually
limited to that domain. Entities outside the domain maynot even be aware of the existence individual routers in
the domain.
4)AS reachability: ASs interact with each other through spe-
cial kinds of routers—called Gateways—that are designed
and conﬁgured for cross-domain packet routing. These
operate speciﬁc kinds of protocols (such as an exteriorBorder Gateway Protocol [13]), which provides transfer
of packets across domains. For various reasons (includ-
ing privacy and security), these exterior-facing gatewayprotocols typically advertise only reachability status in-
formation regarding routers and hosts in the domain, butdo not publish internal routing conditions.
5)ASs are owned and operated by legal entities: All rout-
ing ASs (routing domains) today are owned, operated,and controlled by known entities. ISPs provide their au-
tonomous system numbers and routing preﬁxes to Internet
routing registries (IRRs). IRRs can be used by ISPs to de-
velop routing plans. An example of an IRR is the Amer-
ican Registry for Internet Numbers [14], which is one of
several IRRs around the world.
In the next section, we remap the fundamental goals of the
Internet architecture in the context blockchain systems, withthe goal of identifying some fundamental requirements forblockchain interoperability.
III. I
NTEROPERABLE BLOCKCHAINS :TOWARD A
DESIGN PHILOSOPHY
During the 1970s and 1980s, several local area network
(LAN) systems were in development and were marketed forEnterprises (e.g., IBM SNA [15] and DECnet [16]). However,
these LANs were distinct enough in their technological ap-
proaches (e.g., PHY layer protocols) that they did not inter-operate with each other [5]. Today, we are seeing a very similar
situation, in which multiple blockchain designs are being pro-
posed (e.g., Bitcoin [17], Ethereum [18], Hyperldeger [19],and CORDA [20], each having different technological designs
and approaches. Most share some common terminology (e.g.,
“transaction,” “mining node,” etc.), but there is little or no
interoperability among these systems.
Given the history of the development of the Internet and of
computer networks in general (e.g., LANs and wide area net-works), it is unlikely that the world will settle on one global
blockchain system operating universally. The emerging picturewill most likely consist of “islands” of blockchain systems,
which—like ASs that make up the Internet—must be “stitched”
together in some fashion to make a coherent unity (see Fig. 1).
Following from the ﬁrst fundamental goal of the Internet ar-
chitecture, the lesson learned there was that interoperability is
key to survivability . Thus, interoperability is core to the en-
tire value proposition of blockchain technology. Interoperability
across blockchain systems must be a requirement—both at the