This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
12 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ENGINEERING MANAGEMENT
Thomas Hardjono received the B.S. (Hons.) degree in computer science from
the University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia, in 1987, and the Ph.D. degree in
computer science and engineering from the University of New South Wales,
Sydney, Australia, in 1991.
He is the Chief Technology Ofﬁcer (CTO) of Connection Science and Tech-
nical Director of the MIT Trust-Data Consortium, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA. For several years prior to this, he was
the Executive Director of the MIT Kerberos Consortium. Over the past twodecades, he has held various industry technical leadership roles, including a
Distinguished Engineer with Bay Networks, a Principal Scientist with V eriSign
PKI, and CTO roles at several start-ups. He has been at the forefront of severalindustry initiatives around identity, trust, and cybersecurity. He has authoredseveral dozen technical papers, patents, and books covering cryptography, net-
work security, identity, and blockchain security. His research interests include
Internet of Things security, trusted computing, decentralized identity, personaldata privacy, peer-to-peer networks, and blockchain systems.
Alexander Lipton received the M.S. (summa cum laude) and Ph.D. degrees in
pure mathematics from Lomonosov Moscow State University, Moscow, Russia,
in 1979 and 1982, respectively.
He is the Cofounder and Chief Technology Ofﬁcer (CTO) of SilaMoney,
Partner with Numeraire Financial, a Connection Science Fellow with the Mas-sachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA, and a Visiting Profes-
sor of Financial Engineering with École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne,Lausanne, Switzerland. He is a Board Advisory Board Member for several ﬁn-tech startups. For 20 years, he held senior managerial positions with preeminent
ﬁnancial institutions, including Bank of America Merrill Lynch and Citadel
Investment Group, and, in parallel, prestigious academic appointments withrenowned universities, including Oxford University and New Y ork University.He was a Full Professor of Mathematics with the University of Illinois and a
Consultant with the Los Alamos National Laboratory. He has authored/edited
eight books.
Prof. Lipton is the ﬁrst recipient of the Quant of the Year Award.Alex (Sandy) Pentland received the B.G.S. degree in mathematics and statistics
from the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA, in 1976, and the Ph.D.
degree in artiﬁcial intelligence from The Massachusetts Institute of Technology
(MIT), Cambridge, MA, USA, in 1982.
He has helped create and direct MIT Media Lab, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA, the Media Lab Asia, and the Center for
Future Health. He is the Chair of World Economic Forum’s Data Driven Devel-
opment Council, the Academic Director of the Data-Pop Alliance, and a memberof the Advisory Boards for Google, Nissan, Telefonica, the United Nations Sec-
retary General, Monument Capital, and the Minerva Schools. He is among the
most cited computational scientists in the world, and a pioneer in computationalsocial science, organizational engineering, wearable computing (Google Glass),image understanding, and modern biometrics. His research has been featured in
Nature, Science,a n dHarvard Business Review, as well as being the focus of TV
features on BBC World, Discover, and Science channels. His most recent book
isSocial Physics (London, U.K.: Penguin Press, 2015). Over the years, he has
advised more than 50 Ph.D. students.
Prof. Pentland was the recipient of the McKinsey Award from Harvard Busi-
ness Review in 2013. In 2012, Forbes named him one of the “seven most powerful
data scientists in the world,” along with Google founders and the Chief Tech-nology Ofﬁcer of the United States.