This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
8 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ENGINEERING MANAGEMENT
domain. The result is that the physical perimeter of each network
is clearly demarcated, without any ambiguities with regard to the
legal ownership of each AS.
The situation is somewhat more complex in blockchain sys-
tems, which employ a P2P network of nodes in a geographicallydistributed topology, and where the participation of nodes aredynamic over time. One revolutionary aspect of the Bitcoin sys-
tem [17] is its openness for any person or entity to participate in
the act of mining by independently and anonymously deployingCPU cycles to compute the proof of work (consensus) algorithm.
As such—and in contrast to routing domains—the perimeter of
the Bitcoin network of nodes is not a physical or geographicalone but rather an a computation-participatory one. This inde-
pendence and anonymity meant that it is difﬁcult or even im-
possible to know how many nodes (and which nodes) actuallyspent CPU cycles (successfully or not) in computing a given
instance of the proof of work. Although unauthenticable anony-
mous identities maybe useful in some scenarios, in the contextof the Bitcoin system. it may allow certain entities (e.g., state-
sponsored actors) to amass computing power in a large min-
ing pool and to “weaponize” that hash power at the opportune
moment.
The future of blockchain ASs may evolve into an intercon-
nected set of autonomous and independent blockchain systems,each with its own interior protocols, entities, and systems, and
where each system’s perimeter is deﬁned along one or more ofthe following axis.
1)Degree of identiﬁable and authenticable participation:The “membership” of a node and entity in a blockchainAS may be deﬁned as the potential for that node or entity
to positively (or negatively) impact the community in a
considerable way.In tightly permissioned blockchain systems, the organiza-
tion or community that oversees the operations of the sys-
tem may demand that all member nodes (i.e., legal ownersof nodes) not only register their identities, but also report
their participation in one measure or another (e.g., partici-
pated in a mining instance). For example, in an enterprise
(single organization) privately owned blockchain system,
all nodes are legally owned by the organization, andthus, the degree of participation is fully controlled by the
organization.
In a multiorganization consortium arrangement, the con-sortium may require all nodes belonging to consortium
members to be identiﬁed beforehand (i.e., registered), but
a node’s actual participation in each consensus compu-tation may be at the discretion of the member. Thus,
the consortium as a collective may wish to ensure that
no unknown or rogue node affects the consortium asa whole but allows each member to control their own
resources.
To this end, approaches using anonymous-veriﬁable iden-tity schemes [29], [33] may be used to offer some de-
gree of anonymity to the nodes. Similarly, methods to
prove participation in computation can be devised based
on schemes that use a combination of the consensus al-
gorithm, a periodic reporting of hardware internal state(e.g., Trusted Platform Module (TPM) registers [34] and
Quote protocol [35]), and secure multiparty computation
techniques [36].
2)Degree of trust and assurance: Another factor related to
perimeters and membership is the degree of provable trust
each node can attain and can convey to other nodes and en-tities. The idea here is that the ability of a node to perform
its tasks with high assurance (e.g., perform proof of work,
safeguard its private keys, etc.) becomes input into the de-cision as to whether to accept the computation results of
that node.
This factor is notably important in the multiorganizationconsortium arrangement. The aspect of provable assur-
ance may determine the acceptability internally of the re-
sults of the consensus computations by the member nodes.For example, in networks that deal with high-value trans-
actions, the consortium may require its members to de-
ploy trusted computing technologies that convey technicaltrust.
In this context, it is useful to revisit some key architec-
tural designs of the TPM from the late 1990s, which pro-
vided a basic understanding on trustworthiness [37], [38].
Reusing some of the concepts in trusted computing, a nodecan be considered to exhibit technical trust if it: a) oper-
ates unhindered and shielded from external inﬂuences orinterference; b) operates for a well-deﬁned task; and c)has the ability to report results of its computations and its
internal status truthfully.
3)Business model of the organization or community: The
business purpose of a blockchain AS may determine thedegree of required identiﬁable and authenticable partici-
pation, as well as the minimal required trust and assurance.For example, a blockchain system for supply-chain man-
agement of components for a defense organization [39] has
a different set of constraints compared to a blockchain usedfor supply-chain management of consumer goods [40].
Similarly, a consortium of organizations whose goal is
high-speed trading in digital assets using blockchain tech-
nology has different business purpose than a consortium
of music publishers seeking greater accessibility to rightsdata in a global music ecosystem [41].
C. Use Case: Interdomain Transactions
To illustrate and aid discussion, we use a simple example
shown in Fig. 5, in which an asset recorded in blockchain sys-tem BC1 is to be transferred to blockchain system BC2. Bothblockchains BC1 and BC2 are permissioned/private blockchain
systems.
In Fig. 5, User A with Application X has his or her asset
ownership (e.g., land title deed) recorded on the ledger insideblockchain BC1. The local transaction identiﬁer for this ledger
entry is Tx1
privateID . User A wishes to transfer legal ownership
of the asset (e.g., sell) to a different User B running Application
Y . However, User B requires that the asset be “moved” to the
blockchain BC2 and be authoritatively recorded on the ledgerof BC2. This would allow User B to later sell the asset locally in
blockchain BC2 to other users in BC2. Note that being private