This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
6 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ENGINEERING MANAGEMENT
Fig. 3. (a)–(c) Service types based on different conﬁrmation models.
to complete a common transaction at an agreed destina-
tion blockchain system, with the aid of settlement logic
that executes at the destination blockchain system. Each
of the applications are willing to accept a “temporary”conﬁrmation produced by a mediating blockchain system,
with the understanding that they will obtain a ﬁnal con-
ﬁrmation from the destination blockchain system. This is
summarized in Fig. 3(c).
This situation is akin to TCP-based messaging or chatservers (e.g., extensible messaging and presence protocol
(XMPP)), in which two (or more) parties converge on a
common server even though they each may have their ownlocal servers.
C. V ariety of Blockchain Systems
The third fundamental goal of the Internet architecture was
to support a variety of networks, which included networks em-ploying different transmission technologies at the physical layer
(e.g., X.25, SNA, etc.), local networks and long-haul networks,
and networks operated/owned by different legal entities. Theminimum assumption of the Internet architecture—which is core
to the success of the Internet as an interoperable system ofnetworks—was that each network must be able to transport a
datagram as the lowest unit common denominator. Furthermore,
this was to be performed “best effort”—namely with reasonable
reliability, but not perfect reliability.
For blockchain systems, we propose a reinterpretation of the
minimal assumption as consisting of the following:
1) a common standardized transaction format and syntax that
will be understood by all blockchain systems regardlessof their respective technological implementation;
2) a common standardized minimal operations set that will
be implemented all blockchain systems regardless of theirtechnological choices.The notion of a common transaction format is akin to the def-
inition of the minimal IP datagram, which was ﬁrst published
in the 1974 milestone paper by Cerf and Kahn [4]. The opera-
tion involved in the datagram case is simple and is implicit inthe datagram construct itself, namely that a set of bytes needs
to be transmitted from one IP address to another. The situation
is somewhat more complex in blockchain systems. Aside from
the current common ﬁelds found in transactions in current sys-
tems (e.g., sender/receiver public keys, timestamp, and point-ers), there is the question of semantic meaning of the operations
intended by the op-code symbols. Some mathematical oper-ations are clear (e.g., op codes for addition, multiplication,and hash function), but others may introduce some degree of
ambiguity across systems.
Similar to the variety of technologies implementing LANs and
local routing in the 1980s and 1990s, today, there are severaltechnological aspect that differentiate one blockchain system
from another.
1)Governance model: The term “governance” in the con-
text of blockchain systems is typically used to refer to thecombination of: a) the human-driven policies for the com-munity of participants; b) the rules of operations that are
encoded within the blockchain software and hardware fab-
ric itself; and c) the intended application of the blockchain,which is often expressed as the “smart contracts” (stored
procedures available on nodes) that are application
speciﬁc.
2)Speed of conﬁrmation: The speed (or “throughput”) of a
blockchain system refers to the conﬁrmation speed, basedon the population size of the participating nodes and other
factors.
3)Strength of consensus: An important consideration is the
size of the population of nodes (i.e., entities contributingto the consensus) at any given moment and whether this in-
formation is obtainable. Obtaining this information maybechallenging in systems, where nodes are either anonymous