This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
2 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ENGINEERING MANAGEMENT
Internet architecture as deﬁned in the early 1970s as a project
funded by the DARPA. The deﬁnition of the Internet as view in
the late 1980s is the following: it is “a packet switched commu-nications facility in which a number of distinguishable networks
are connected together using packet switched communica-
tions processors called gateways, which implement a store andforward packet-forwarding algorithm” [3], [4].
A. Fundamental Goals
It is important to remember that the design of the Advanced
Research Projects Agency Network (ARPANET) and the Inter-
net favored military values (e.g., survivability, ﬂexibility, andhigh performance) over commercial goals (e.g., low cost, sim-
plicity, or consumer appeal) [5], which, in turn, has affected
how the Internet has evolved, has been used. This empha-sis was understandable given the Cold War backdrop to the
packet-switching discourse throughout the 1960s and 1970s.
The ARPANET was an early packet-switching network. It wasthe ﬁrst network to implement the transmission control protocol
(TCP)/Internet protocol (IP) suite.
The DARPA view at the time was that there are seven goals of
the Internet architecture, with the ﬁrst three being fundamentalto the design, and the remaining four being second-level goals.
The following are the fundamental goals of the Internet in theorder of importance [3], [4].
1)Survivability: Internet communications must continue de-
spite loss of networks or gateways. This is the most im-
portant goal of the Internet, especially if it was to be the
blueprint for military packet switched communications fa-cilities. This meant that if two entities are communicat-
ing over the Internet, and some failure causes the Internet
to be temporarily disrupted and reconﬁgured to reconsti-tute the service, then the entities communicating should
be able to continue without having to reestablish or re-
set the high-level state of their conversation. Therefore, toachieve this goal, the state information that describes the
on-going conversation must be protected. But more impor-
tantly, in practice, this explicitly meant that it is acceptableto lose the state information associated with an entity if,
at the same time, the entity itself is lost. This notion of
state of conversation is related to the end-to-end principlediscussed below.
2)V ariety of service types: The Internet must support mul-
tiple types of communications service. What was meant
by “multiple types” is that at the transport level, the Inter-
net architecture should support different types of servicesdistinguished by differing requirements for speed, latency,
and reliability. Indeed, it was this goal that resulted in the
separation into two layers of the TCP layer and the IPlayer, and the use of bytes (not packets) at the TCP layer
for ﬂow control and acknowledgment.
3)V ariety of networks: The Internet must accommodate a va-
riety of networks. The Internet architecture must be ableto incorporate and utilize a wide variety of network tech-
nologies, including military and commercial facilities.
The remaining four goals of the Internet architecture are:4) distributed management of resources;
5) cost effectiveness;
6) ease of attaching hosts;7) accountability in resource usage.
Over the ensuing three decades, these second-level goals have
been addressed in different ways. For example, accountability
in resource usage evolved from the use of rudimentary man-
agement information bases into the current sophisticated trafﬁc
management protocols and tools. Cost effectiveness was alwaysan important aspect of the business model for consumer ISPs
and corporate networks.
B. End-to-End Principle
One of the critical debates throughout the development of the
Internet architecture in the 1980s was in regard to the placement
of functions that dealt with reliability of message delivery (e.g.,
duplicate message detection, message sequencing, guaranteed
message delivery, and encryption). In essence, the argumentrevolved around the amount of effort put into reliability mea-
sures within the data communication system and was seen as an
engineering tradeoff based on performance, that is, how muchlow-level function (for reliability) needed to be implemented by
the networks versus implementation by the applications at the
endpoints.
The line of reasoning against low-level function implementa-
tion in the network became known as the end-to-end argument
or principle. The basic argument is as follows: a lower level sub-
system that supports a distributed application may be wasting its
effort in providing a function that must be implemented at theapplication level anyway [6]. Thus, for example, for duplicate
message suppression, the task must be accomplished by the ap-
plication itself seeing that the application is most knowledgeableas to how to detect its own duplicate messages.
Another case in point relates to data encryption. If encryp-
tion/decryption was to be performed by the network, then thenetwork and its data transmission systems must be trusted to
securely manage the required encryption keys. Also, when data
enter the network (to be encrypted there), the data will be inplaintext and, therefore, susceptible to theft and attacks. Finally,
the recipient application of the encrypted messages will still
need to verify the source authenticity of the message. The appli-cation will still need to perform key management. As such, the
best place to perform data encryption/decryption is the applica-
tion endpoints—there is no need for the communication subsys-
tem to provide for automatic encryption of all trafﬁc. That is,
encryption is an end-to-end function.
The end-to-end principle was a fundamental design princi-
ple of the security architecture of the Internet. Among others,it inﬂuenced the direction of the subsequent security featuresof the Internet, including the development of the IP-security
sublayer [7] and its attendant key management function [8]. To-
day, the entire virtual private network (VPN) subsegment of thenetworking industry started based on this end-to-end principle.
(The global VPN market alone is forecasted to reach 70 billion
dollars in the next few years.) The current day-to-day usage ofthe secure sockets layer [9] to protect HTTP web trafﬁc (i.e.,