Self-Attention Generative Adversarial Networks
Figure 3. Training curves for the baseline model and our models with the proposed stabilization techniques, “SN on G/D” and two-
timescale learning rates (TTUR). All models are trained with 1:1 balanced updates for GandD.
illustrates some images randomly generated by the baseline
model at the 10k-th iteration. Although in the the original
paper (Miyato et al., 2018) this unstable training behavior
is greatly mitigated by using 5:1 imbalanced updates for
DandG, the ability to be stably trained with 1:1 balanced
updates is desirable for improving the convergence speed
of the model. Thus, using our proposed techniques means
that the model can produce better results given the same
wall-clock time. Given this, there is no need to search for a
suitable update ratio for the generator and discriminator. As
shown in the middle sub-ﬁgures of Figure 3, adding SN to
both the generator and the discriminator greatly stabilized
our model “SN on G/D”, even when it was trained with
1:1 balanced updates. However, the quality of samples does
not improve monotonically during training. For example,
the image quality as measured by FID and IS is starting to
drop at the 260k-th iteration. Example images randomly
generated by this model at different iterations can be found
in Figure 4. When we also apply the imbalanced learning
rates to train the discriminator and the generator, the quality
of images generated by our model “SN on G/D+TTUR”
improves monotonically during the whole training process.
As shown in Figure 3 and Figure 4, we do not observe any
signiﬁcant decrease in sample quality or in the FID or the
Inception score during one million training iterations. Thus,
both quantitative results and qualitative results demonstrate
the effectiveness of the proposed stabilization techniquesfor GANs’ training. They also demonstrate that the effect
of the two techniques is at least partly additive. In the rest
of experiments, all models use spectral normalization for
both the generator and discriminator and use the imbalanced
learning rates to train the generator and the discriminator
with 1:1 updates.
5.2. Self-attention mechanism.
To explore the effect of the proposed self-attention mecha-
nism, we build several SAGAN models by adding the self-
attention mechanism to different stages of the generator and
the discriminator. As shown in Table 1, the SAGAN mod-
els with the self-attention mechanism at the middle-to-high
level feature maps ( e.g.,feat 32andfeat 64) achieve better
performance than the models with the self-attention mecha-
nism at the low level feature maps ( e.g.,feat 8andfeat 16).
For example, the FID of the model “SAGAN, feat 8” is im-
proved from 22.98 to 18.28 by “SAGAN, feat 32”. The rea-
son is that self-attention receives more evidence and enjoys
more freedom to choose conditions with larger feature maps
(i.e., it is complementary to convolution for large feature
maps), however, it plays a similar role as the local convo-
lution when modeling dependencies for small ( e.g., 88)
feature maps. It demonstrates that the attention mechanism
gives more power to both the generator and the discrimi-
nator to directly model the long-range dependencies in the
feature maps. In addition, the comparison of our SAGAN