Self-Attention Generative Adversarial Networks
Figure 5. Visualization of attention maps. These images were generated by SAGAN. We visualize the attention maps of the last generator
layer that used attention, since this layer is the closest to the output pixels and is the most straightforward to project into pixel space
and interpret. In each cell, the ﬁrst image shows three representative query locations with color coded dots. The other three images are
attention maps for those query locations, with corresponding color coded arrows summarizing the most-attended regions. We observe that
the network learns to allocate attention according to similarity of color and texture, rather than just spatial adjacency (see the top-left cell).
We also ﬁnd that although some query points are quite close in spatial location, their attention maps can be very different, as shown in the
bottom-left cell. As shown in the top-right cell, SAGAN is able to draw dogs with clearly separated legs. The blue query point shows that
attention helps to get the structure of the joint area correct. See the text for more discussion about the properties of learned attention maps.
is complementary to convolutions for image generation in
GANs. As shown in the top-right cell, SAGAN is able to
draw dogs with clearly separated legs. The blue query point
shows that attention helps to get the structure of the joint
area correct.
5.3. Comparison with the state-of-the-art
Our SAGAN is also compared with the state-of-the-art GAN
models (Odena et al., 2017; Miyato & Koyama, 2018) for
class conditional image generation on ImageNet. As shown
in Table 2, our proposed SAGAN achieves the best Incep-
tion score, intra FID and FID. The proposed SAGAN sig-
niﬁcantly improves the best published Inception score from
36.8 to 52.52. The lower FID (18.65) and intra FID (83.7)
achieved by the SAGAN also indicates that the SAGAN
can better approximate the original image distribution by
using the self-attention module to model the long-range
dependencies between image regions.
Figure 6 shows some comparison results and generated-
images for representative classes of ImageNet. We observe
that our SAGAN achieves much better performance ( i.e.,
lower intra FID) than the state-of-the-art GAN model (Miy-ato & Koyama, 2018) for synthesizing image classes with
complex geometric or structural patterns, such as goldﬁsh
and Saint Bernard. For classes with few structural con-
straints ( e.g., valley, stone wall and coral fungus, which
are distinguished more by texture than by geometry), our
SAGAN shows less superiority compared with the baseline
model (Miyato & Koyama, 2018). Again, the reason is
that the self-attention in SAGAN is complementary to the
convolution for capturing long-range, global-level depen-
dencies occurring consistently in geometric or structural
patterns, but plays a similar role as the local convolution
when modeling dependencies for simple texture.
6. Conclusion
In this paper, we proposed Self-Attention Generative Ad-
versarial Networks (SAGANs), which incorporate a self-
attention mechanism into the GAN framework. The self-
attention module is effective in modeling long-range de-
pendencies. In addition, we show that spectral normaliza-
tion applied to the generator stabilizes GAN training and
that TTUR speeds up training of regularized discrimina-
tors. SAGAN achieves the state-of-the-art performance on
class-conditional image generation on ImageNet.