Self-Attention Generative Adversarial Networks
4.1. Spectral normalization for both generator and
discriminator
Miyato et al. (Miyato et al., 2018) originally proposed sta-
bilizing the training of GANs by applying spectral normal-
ization to the discriminator network. Doing so constrains
the Lipschitz constant of the discriminator by restricting
the spectral norm of each layer. Compared to other normal-
ization techniques, spectral normalization does not require
extra hyper-parameter tuning (setting the spectral norm of
all weight layers to 1consistently performs well in practice).
Moreover, the computational cost is also relatively small.
We argue that the generator can also beneﬁt from spectral
normalization, based on recent evidence that the condition-
ing of the generator is an important causal factor in GANs’
performance (Odena et al., 2018). Spectral normalization in
the generator can prevent the escalation of parameter magni-
tudes and avoid unusual gradients. We ﬁnd empirically that
spectral normalization of both generator and discriminator
makes it possible to use fewer discriminator updates per
generator update, thus signiﬁcantly reducing the computa-
tional cost of training. The approach also shows more stable
training behavior.
4.2. Imbalanced learning rate for generator and
discriminator updates
In previous work, regularization of the discriminator (Miy-
ato et al., 2018; Gulrajani et al., 2017) often slows down
the GANs’ learning process. In practice, methods using
regularized discriminators typically require multiple ( e.g.,
5) discriminator update steps per generator update step dur-
ing training. Independently, Heusel et al. (Heusel et al.,
2017) have advocated using separate learning rates (TTUR)
for the generator and the discriminator. We propose using
TTUR speciﬁcally to compensate for the problem of slow
learning in a regularized discriminator, making it possible
to use fewer discriminator steps per generator step. Using
this approach, we are able to produce better results given
the same wall-clock time.
5. Experiments
To evaluate the proposed methods, we conducted extensive
experiments on the LSVRC2012 (ImageNet) dataset (Rus-
sakovsky et al., 2015). First, in Section 5.1, we present
experiments designed to evaluate the effectiveness of the
two proposed techniques for stabilizing GANs’ training.
Next, the proposed self-attention mechanism is investigated
in Section 5.2. Finally, our SAGAN is compared with state-
of-the-art methods (Odena et al., 2017; Miyato & Koyama,
2018) on the image generation task in Section 5.3.
Evaluation metrics. We choose the Inception score
(IS) (Salimans et al., 2016) and the Fr ´echet Inception dis-tance (FID) (Heusel et al., 2017) for quantitative evaluation.
The Inception score (Salimans et al., 2016) computes the KL
divergence between the conditional class distribution and
the marginal class distribution. Higher Inception score indi-
cates better image quality. We include the Inception score
because it is widely used and thus makes it possible to com-
pare our results to previous work. However, it is important
to understand that Inception score has serious limitations—
it is intended primarily to ensure that the model generates
samples that can be conﬁdently recognized as belonging to
a speciﬁc class, and that the model generates samples from
many classes, not necessarily to assess realism of details or
intra-class diversity. FID is a more principled and compre-
hensive metric, and has been shown to be more consistent
with human evaluation in assessing the realism and varia-
tion of the generated samples (Heusel et al., 2017). FID
calculates the Wasserstein-2 distance between the gener-
ated images and the real images in the feature space of an
Inception-v3 network. Besides the FID calculated over the
whole data distribution ( i.e.., all 1000 classes of images in
ImageNet), we also compute FID between the generated
images and dataset images within each class (called intra
FID (Miyato & Koyama, 2018)). Lower FID and intra FID
values mean closer distances between synthetic and real data
distributions. In all our experiments, 50k samples are ran-
domly generated for each model to compute the Inception
score, FID and intra FID.
Network structures and implementation details. All
the SAGAN models we train are designed to generate
128128 images. By default, spectral normalization (Miy-
ato et al., 2018) is used for the layers in both the generator
and the discriminator. Similar to (Miyato & Koyama, 2018),
SAGAN uses conditional batch normalization in the gen-
erator and projection in the discriminator. For all models,
we use the Adam optimizer (Kingma & Ba, 2015) with
1= 0and2= 0:9for training. By default, the learning
rate for the discriminator is 0.0004 and the learning rate for
the generator is 0.0001.
5.1. Evaluating the proposed stabilization techniques
In this section, experiments are conducted to evaluate the
effectiveness of the proposed stabilization techniques, i.e.,
applying spectral normalization (SN) to the generator and
utilizing imbalanced learning rates (TTUR). In Figure 3, our
models “SN on G/D” and “SN on G/D+TTUR” are com-
pared with a baseline model, which is implemented based
on the state-of-the-art image generation method (Miyato
et al., 2018). In this baseline model, SN is only utilized
in the discriminator. When we train it with 1:1 balanced
updates for the discriminator ( D) and the generator ( G), the
training becomes very unstable, as shown in the leftmost
sub-ﬁgures of Figure 3. It exhibits mode collapse very early
in training. For example, the top-left sub-ﬁgure of Figure 4