Self-Attention Generative Adversarial Networks
Han Zhang1 2Ian Goodfellow2Dimitris Metaxas1Augustus Odena2
Abstract
In this paper, we propose the Self-Attention Gen-
erative Adversarial Network (SAGAN) which
allows attention-driven, long-range dependency
modeling for image generation tasks. Traditional
convolutional GANs generate high-resolution de-
tails as a function of only spatially local points
in lower-resolution feature maps. In SAGAN, de-
tails can be generated using cues from all feature
locations. Moreover, the discriminator can check
that highly detailed features in distant portions
of the image are consistent with each other. Fur-
thermore, recent work has shown that generator
conditioning affects GAN performance. Leverag-
ing this insight, we apply spectral normalization
to the GAN generator and ﬁnd that this improves
training dynamics. The proposed SAGAN per-
forms better than prior work1, boosting the best
published Inception score from 36.8 to 52.52 and
reducing Fr ´echet Inception distance from 27.62 to
18.65 on the challenging ImageNet dataset. Visu-
alization of the attention layers shows that the gen-
erator leverages neighborhoods that correspond
to object shapes rather than local regions of ﬁxed
shape.
1. Introduction
Image synthesis is an important problem in computer vi-
sion. There has been remarkable progress in this direc-
tion with the emergence of Generative Adversarial Net-
works (GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2014). GANs based on
deep convolutional networks (Radford et al., 2016; Kar-
ras et al., 2018; Zhang et al.) have been especially suc-
cessful. However, by carefully examining the generated
samples from these models, we can observe that convo-
1Department of Computer Science, Rutgers University2Google
Research, Brain Team. Correspondence to: Han Zhang <zhang-
han@google.com >.
Proceedings of the 36thInternational Conference on Machine
Learning , Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).
1Brock et al. (2018), which builds heavily on this work, has
since improved those results substantially.lutional GANs (Odena et al., 2017; Miyato et al., 2018;
Miyato & Koyama, 2018) have much more difﬁculty in
modeling some image classes than others when trained on
multi-class datasets ( e.g., ImageNet (Russakovsky et al.,
2015)). For example, while the state-of-the-art ImageNet
GAN model (Miyato & Koyama, 2018) excels at synthe-
sizing image classes with few structural constraints ( e.g.,
ocean, sky and landscape classes, which are distinguished
more by texture than by geometry), it fails to capture geo-
metric or structural patterns that occur consistently in some
classes (for example, dogs are often drawn with realistic
fur texture but without clearly deﬁned separate feet). One
possible explanation for this is that previous models rely
heavily on convolution to model the dependencies across
different image regions. Since the convolution operator has
a local receptive ﬁeld, long range dependencies can only be
processed after passing through several convolutional layers.
This could prevent learning about long-term dependencies
for a variety of reasons: a small model may not be able
to represent them, optimization algorithms may have trou-
ble discovering parameter values that carefully coordinate
multiple layers to capture these dependencies, and these
parameterizations may be statistically brittle and prone to
failure when applied to previously unseen inputs. Increasing
the size of the convolution kernels can increase the represen-
tational capacity of the network but doing so also loses the
computational and statistical efﬁciency obtained by using
local convolutional structure. Self-attention (Cheng et al.,
2016; Parikh et al., 2016; Vaswani et al., 2017), on the
other hand, exhibits a better balance between the ability to
model long-range dependencies and the computational and
statistical efﬁciency. The self-attention module calculates
response at a position as a weighted sum of the features at
all positions, where the weights – or attention vectors – are
calculated with only a small computational cost.
In this work, we propose Self-Attention Generative Adver-
sarial Networks (SAGANs), which introduce a self-attention
mechanism into convolutional GANs. The self-attention
module is complementary to convolutions and helps with
modeling long range, multi-level dependencies across image
regions. Armed with self-attention, the generator can draw
images in which ﬁne details at every location are carefully
coordinated with ﬁne details in distant portions of the image.
Moreover, the discriminator can also more accurately en-
force complicated geometric constraints on the global image