the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics , pages 1651–1661, Florence,
Italy. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Appendices
A Useful Blog Posts and Code
Repositories
The following blog posts and code repositories
could be helpful in addition to the information pre-
sented and papers/works mentioned in the body:
•Introduction to popular text augmentation
techniques: https://towardsdatascience.com/
data-augmentation-in-nlp-2801a34dfc28
•Detailed blog post on various text DA
techniques: https://amitness.com/2020/05/
data-augmentation-for-nlp/
•Lightweight library for DA on text and audio:
https://github.com/makcedward/nlpaug
•python framework for adversarial examples:
https://github.com/QData/TextAttack
B DA Methods Table - Description of
Columns and Attributes
Table 1 in the main body compares a non-
exhaustive selection of DAmethods along various
aspects relating to their applicability, dependencies,
and requirements. Below, we provide a more ex-
tensive description of each of this table’s columns
and their attributes.
1.Ext.Know : Short for external knowledge, this
column is 3when the data augmentation pro-
cess requires knowledge resources which go
beyond the immediate input examples and
the task deﬁnition, such as WordNet (Miller,
1995) or PPDB (Pavlick et al., 2015). Note
that we exclude the case where these resources
are pretrained models under a separate point
(next) for clarity, since these are widespread
enough to merit a separate category.
2.Pretrained : Denotes that the data augmenta-
tion process requires a pretrained model, such
as BERT (Devlin et al., 2019) or GPT-2 (Rad-
ford et al., 2019).
3.Preprocess : Denotes the preprocessing steps,
e.g. tokenization ( tok), dependency parsing
(dep), etc. required for the DA process. A
hyphen (-) means either no preprocessing is
required or that it was not explicitly stated.4.Level : Denotes the depth and extent to which
elements of the instance/data are modiﬁed by
theDA. Some primitives modify just the IN-
PUT(e.g. word swapping), some modify both
INPUT andLABEL (e.g. negation), while oth-
ers make changes in the embedding or hidden
space ( EMBED /HIDDEN ) or higher represen-
tation layers enroute to the task model.
5.Task-Agnostic : This is an approximate, par-
tially subjective column denoting the extent
to which a DAmethod can be applied to dif-
ferent tasks. When we say 3here, we don’t
denote a very rigid sense of the term task-
agnostic, but mean that it would possibly eas-
ily extend to most NLP tasks as understood
by the authors. Similarly, an denotes being
restricted to a speciﬁc task (or small group of
related tasks) only. There can be other labels,
denoting applicability to broad task families.
For example, SUBSTRUCTURAL denotes the
family of tasks where sub-parts of the input
are also valid input examples in their own
right, e.g. constituency parsing. SENTENCE
PAIRS denotes tasks which involve pairwise
sentence scoring such as paraphrase identiﬁ-
cation, duplicate question detection, and se-
mantic textual similarity.
C Additional DA Works by Task
See Table 2 for additional DA works for GEC, Ta-
ble 3 for additional DA works for neural machine
translation, Table 4 for additional DA works for
dialogue, and Table 5 for additional DA works for
multimodal tasks. Each work is described brieﬂy.
D Additional Figure
Figure 4: Pedro Domingos’ quip about ofﬂine data aug-
mentation.