between example pairs from a non-novel class
z1!z2to generate augmented examples x!x0
for novel classes. Schwartz et al. (2018) generalize
this to beyond just linear offsets, through their " -
network" autoencoder which learns the distribution
P(z2jz1;C)from ally
z1=y
z2=Cpairs, where
Cis a class and yis the ground-truth labelling
function. Both these methods are applied only on
image tasks, but their theoretical formulations are
generally applicable, and hence we discuss them.
Kumar et al. (2019b) apply these and other
DA methods for few-shot learning of novel intent
classes in task-oriented dialog. Wei et al. (2021a)
show that data augmentation facilitates curriculum
learning for training triplet networks for few-shot
text classiﬁcation. Lee et al. (2021) use T5 to gen-
erate additional examples for data-scarce classes.
4.5 Adversarial Examples (A VEs)
Adversarial examples can be generated using
innocuous label-preserving transformations (e.g.
paraphrasing) that fool state-of-the-art NLP mod-
els, as shown in Jia et al. (2019). Speciﬁcally,
they add sentences with distractor spans to pas-
sages to construct A VEs for span-based QA. Zhang
et al. (2019d) construct A VEs for paraphrase de-
tection using word swapping. Kang et al. (2018)
and Glockner et al. (2018) create A VEs for textual
entailment using WordNet relations.
5 Tasks
In this section, we discuss several DA works
for common NLP tasks.2We focus on non-
classiﬁcation tasks as classiﬁcation is worked on
by default, and well covered in earlier sections (e.g.
§3 and §4). Numerous previously mentioned DA
techniques, e.g. (Wei and Zou, 2019; Chen et al.,
2020b; Anaby-Tavor et al., 2020), have been used
or can be used for text classiﬁcation tasks.
5.1 Summarization
Fabbri et al. (2020) investigate backtranslation as a
DA method for few-shot abstractive summarization
with the use of a consistency loss inspired by UDA.
Parida and Motlicek (2019) propose an iterative DA
approach for abstractive summarization that uses a
mix of synthetic and real data, where the former is
generated from Common Crawl. Zhu et al. (2019)
introduce a query-focused summarization (Dang,
2005) dataset collected using Wikipedia called
WIKIREFwhich can be used for DA. Pasunuru et al.(2021) use DA methods to construct two training
datasets for Query-focused Multi-Document Sum-
marization (QMDS) called QMDS CNNandQMD-
SIRby modifying CNN/DM (Hermann et al., 2015)
and mining search-query logs, respectively.
5.2 Question Answering (QA)
Longpre et al. (2019) investigate various DA and
sampling techniques for domain-agnostic QA in-
cluding paraphrasing by backtranslation . Yang
et al. (2019) propose a DA method using distant
supervision to improve BERT ﬁnetuning for open-
domain QA. Riabi et al. (2020) leverage Question
Generation models to produce augmented exam-
ples for zero-shot cross-lingual QA. Singh et al.
(2019) propose XLDA , or CROSS -LINGUAL DA,
which substitutes a portion of the input text with
its translation in another language, improving per-
formance across multiple languages on NLI tasks
including the SQuAD QA task. Asai and Hajishirzi
(2020) use logical and linguistic knowledge to gen-
erate additional training data to improve the accu-
racy and consistency of QA responses by models.
Yu et al. (2018) introduce a new QA architecture
called QANet that shows improved performance
on SQuAD when combined with augmented data
generated using backtranslation.
5.3 Sequence Tagging Tasks
Ding et al. (2020) propose DAGA , a two-step DA
process. First, a language model over sequences of
tags and words linearized as per a certain scheme is
learned. Second, sequences are sampled from this
language model and de-linearized to generate new
examples. ¸ Sahin and Steedman (2018), discussed
in §3.1, use dependency tree morphing (Figure 2)
to generate additional training examples on the
downstream task of part-of-speech (POS) tagging.
Dai and Adel (2020) modify DA techniques pro-
posed for sentence-level tasks for named entity
recognition (NER), including label-wise token and
synonym replacement, and show improved perfor-
mance using both recurrent and transformer models.
Zhang et al. (2020) propose a DA method based
on M IXUPcalled S EQMIXfor active sequence la-
beling by augmenting queried samples, showing
improvements on NER and Event Detection.
5.4 Parsing Tasks
Jia and Liang (2016) propose DATA RECOMBINA -
TION for injecting task-speciﬁc priors to neural se-
mantic parsers. A synchronous context-free gram-