Figure 3: Contextual Augmentation , Kobayashi (2018)
language. Kumar et al. (2019a) train seq2seq mod-
els with their proposed method DiPS which learns
to generate diverse paraphrases of input text using
a modiﬁed decoder with a submodular objective,
and show its effectiveness as DA for several classi-
ﬁcation tasks. Pretrained language models such as
RNNs (Kobayashi, 2018) and transformers (Yang
et al., 2020) have also been used for augmentation.
Kobayashi (2018) generate augmented examples
by replacing words with others randomly drawn
according to the recurrent language model’s dis-
tribution based on the current context (illustra-
tion in Figure 3). Yang et al. (2020) propose G-
DAUGcwhich generates synthetic examples using
pretrained transformer language models, and se-
lects the most informative and diverse set for aug-
mentation. Gao et al. (2019) advocate retaining the
full distribution through "soft" augmented exam-
ples, showing gains on machine translation.
Nie et al. (2020) augment word representations
with a context-sensitive attention-based mixture of
their semantic neighbors from a pretrained embed-
ding space, and show its effectiveness for NER
on social media text. Inspired by denoising au-
toencoders, Ng et al. (2020) use a corrupt-and-
reconstruct approach, with the corruption function
q(x0jx)masking an arbitrary number of word po-
sitions and the reconstruction function r(xjx0)un-
masking them using BERT (Devlin et al., 2019).
Their approach works well on domain-shifted test
sets across 9 datasets on sentiment, NLI, and NMT.
Feng et al. (2019) propose a task called SEMAN -
TICTEXT EXCHANGE (STE) which involves ad-
justing the overall semantics of a text to ﬁt the
context of a new word/phrase that is inserted called
thereplacement entity (RE) . They do so by using a
system called SMERTI and a masked LM approach.
While not proposed directly for DA, it can be usedas such, as investigated in Feng et al. (2020).
Rather than starting from an existing exam-
ple and modifying it, some model-based DAap-
proaches directly estimate a generative process
from the training set and sample from it. Anaby-
Tavor et al. (2020) learn a label-conditioned gen-
erator by ﬁnetuning GPT-2 (Radford et al., 2019)
on the training data, using this to generate candi-
date examples per class. A classiﬁer trained on the
original training set is then used to select top kcan-
didate examples which conﬁdently belong to the
respective class for augmentation. Quteineh et al.
(2020) use a similar label-conditioned GPT-2 gen-
eration method, and demonstrate its effectiveness
as a DA method in an active learning setup.
Other approaches include syntactic or controlled
paraphrasing (Iyyer et al., 2018; Kumar et al.,
2020), document-level paraphrasing (Gangal et al.,
2021), augmenting misclassiﬁed examples (Dreossi
et al., 2018), BERT cross-encoder labeling of new
inputs (Thakur et al., 2021), guided generation us-
ing large-scale generative language models (Liu
et al., 2020b,c), and automated text augmentation
(Hu et al., 2019; Cai et al., 2020). Models can also
learn to combine together simpler DA primitives
(Cubuk et al., 2018; Ratner et al., 2017) or add
human-in-the-loop (Kaushik et al., 2020, 2021).
4 Applications
In this section, we discuss several DA methods for
some common NLP applications.2
4.1 Low-Resource Languages
Low-resource languages are an important and chal-
lenging application for DA, typically for neural
machine translation (NMT). Techniques using ex-
ternal knowledge such as WordNet (Miller, 1995)
may be difﬁcult to use effectively here.3There
are ways to leverage high-resource languages for
low-resource languages, particularly if they have
similar linguistic properties. Xia et al. (2019) use
this approach to improve low-resource NMT.
Li et al. (2020b) use backtranslation and self-
learning to generate augmented training data. In-
spired by work in CV , Fadaee et al. (2017) gener-
ate additional training examples that contain low-
frequency (rare) words in synthetically created con-
texts. Qin et al. (2020) present a DA framework to
generate multi-lingual code-switching data to ﬁne-
tune multilingual-BERT. It encourages the align-
3Low-resource language challenges discussed more in §6.