oriented dialogue. Louvan and Magnini (2020)
propose LIGHTWEIGHT AUGMENTATION , a set of
word-span and sentence-level DA methods for low-
resource slot ﬁlling and intent classiﬁcation.
Hou et al. (2018) present a seq2seq DA frame-
work to augment dialogue utterances for dialogue
language understanding (Young et al., 2013), in-
cluding a diversity rank to produce diverse utter-
ances. Zhang et al. (2019c) propose MADA to
generate diverse responses using the property that
several valid responses exist for a dialogue context.
There is also DA work for spoken dialogue. Hou
et al. (2018), Kim et al. (2019), Zhao et al. (2019),
and Yoo et al. (2019) investigate DA methods for di-
alogue and spoken language understanding (SLU),
including generative latent variable models.
5.10 Multimodal Tasks
DA techniques have also been proposed for multi-
modal tasks where aligned data for multiple modal-
ities is required. We look at ones that involve lan-
guage or text. Some are discussed below, and more
can be found in Table 5 in Appendix C.
Beginning with speech, Wang et al. (2020) pro-
pose a DA method to improve the robustness of
downstream dialogue models to speech recognition
errors. Wiesner et al. (2018) and Renduchintala
et al. (2018) propose DA methods for end-to-end
automatic speech recognition (ASR).
Looking at images or video, Xu et al. (2020)
learn a cross-modality matching network to pro-
duce synthetic image-text pairs for multimodal clas-
siﬁers. Atliha and Šešok (2020) explore DA meth-
ods such as synonym replacement and contextual-
ized word embeddings augmentation using BERT
forimage captioning . Kaﬂe et al. (2017), Yokota
and Nakayama (2018), and Tang et al. (2020) pro-
pose methods for visual QA including question
generation and adversarial examples.
6 Challenges & Future Directions
Looking forward, data augmentation faces substan-
tial challenges, speciﬁcally for NLP, and with these
challenges, new opportunities for future work arise.
Dissonance between empirical novelties and
theoretical narrative: There appears to be a con-
spicuous lack of research on whyDA works. Most
studies might show empirically that a DA technique
works and provide some intuition, but it is currently
challenging to measure the goodness of a techniquewithout resorting to a full-scale experiment. A re-
cent work in vision (Gontijo-Lopes et al., 2020)
has proposed that afﬁnity (the distributional shift
caused by DA) and diversity (the complexity of the
augmentation) can predict DA performance, but it
is unclear how these results might translate to NLP.
Minimal beneﬁt for pretrained models on in-
domain data: With the popularization of large
pretrained language models, it has come to light
that a couple previously effective DAtechniques
for certain English text classiﬁcation tasks (Wei and
Zou, 2019; Sennrich et al., 2016) provide little ben-
eﬁt for models like BERT and RoBERTa, which
already achieve high performance on in-domain
text classiﬁcation (Longpre et al., 2020). One hy-
pothesis is that using simple DA techniques pro-
vides little beneﬁt when ﬁnetuning large pretrained
transformers on tasks for which examples are well-
represented in the pretraining data, but DA methods
could still be effective when ﬁnetuning on tasks for
which examples are scarce or out-of-domain com-
pared with the training data. Further work could
study under which scenarios data augmentation for
large pretrained models is likely to be effective.
Multimodal challenges: While there has been
increased work in multimodal DA, as discussed in
§5.10, effective DA methods for multiple modal-
ities has been challenging. Many works focus on
augmenting a single modality or multiple ones sep-
arately. For example, there is potential to further
explore simultaneous image and text augmentation
for image captioning, such as a combination of
CUTMIX(Yun et al., 2019) and caption editing.
Span-based tasks offer unique DA challenges
as there are typically many correlated classiﬁcation
decisions. For example, random token replacement
may be a locally acceptable DA method but possi-
bly disrupt coreference chains for latter sentences.
DA techniques here must take into account depen-
dencies between different locations in the text.
Working in specialized domains such as those
with domain-speciﬁc vocabulary and jargon (e.g.
medicine ) can present challenges. Many pretrained
models and external knowledge (e.g. WordNet)
cannot be effectively used. Studies have shown
that DA becomes less beneﬁcial when applied to
out-of-domain data, likely because the distribution
of augmented data can substantially differ from the
original data (Zhang et al., 2019a; Herzig et al.,
2020; Campagna et al., 2020; Zhong et al., 2020).