Figure 1: Weekly Google Trends scores for the search
term "data augmentation" , with a control, uneventful
ML search term ( "minibatch" ) for comparison.
NLP tasks including summarization (5.1), question
answering (5.2), sequence tagging tasks (5.3), pars-
ing tasks (5.4), grammatical error correction (5.5),
neural machine translation (5.6), data-to-text NLG
(5.7), open-ended and conditional text generation
(5.8), dialogue (5.9), and multimodal tasks (5.10).
Finally, Section 6 discusses challenges and future
directions in DA for NLP. Appendix A lists useful
blog posts and code repositories.
Through this work, we hope to emulate past pa-
pers which have surveyed DAmethods for other
types of data, such as images (Shorten and Khosh-
goftaar, 2019), faces (Wang et al., 2019b), and time
series (Iwana and Uchida, 2020). We hope to draw
further attention, elicit broader interest, and moti-
vate additional work in DA, particularly for NLP.
2 Background
What is data augmentation? Data augmentation
(DA) encompasses methods of increasing training
data diversity without directly collecting more data.
Most strategies either add slightly modiﬁed copies
of existing data or create synthetic data, aiming for
the augmented data to act as a regularizer and re-
duce overﬁtting when training ML models (Shorten
and Khoshgoftaar, 2019; Hernández-García and
König, 2020). DA has been commonly used in
CV , where techniques like cropping ,ﬂipping , and
color jittering are a standard component of model
training. In NLP, where the input space is discrete,
how to generate effective augmented examples that
capture the desired invariances is less obvious.
What are the goals and trade-offs? Despite
challenges associated with text, many DA tech-
niques for NLP have been proposed, ranging from
rule-based manipulations (Zhang et al., 2015) to
more complicated generative approaches (Liu et al.,2020b). As DA aims to provide an alternative to
collecting more data, an ideal DA technique should
be both easy-to-implement and improve model per-
formance. Most offer trade-offs between these two.
Rule-based techniques are easy-to-implement
but usually offer incremental performance improve-
ments (Li et al., 2017; Wei and Zou, 2019; Wei
et al., 2021b). Techniques leveraging trained mod-
els may be more costly to implement but introduce
more data variation, leading to better performance
boosts. Model-based techniques customized for
downstream tasks can have strong effects on per-
formance but be difﬁcult to develop and utilize.
Further, the distribution of augmented data
should neither be too similar nor too different from
the original. This may lead to greater overﬁtting
or poor performance through training on examples
not representative of the given domain, respectively.
Effective DA approaches should aim for a balance.
Kasheﬁ and Hwa (2020) devise a KL-
Divergence-based unsupervised procedure to pre-
emptively choose among DAheuristics, rather than
a typical "run-all-heuristics" comparison, which
can be very time and cost intensive.
Interpretation of DA Dao et al. (2019) note that
"data augmentation is typically performed in an ad-
hoc manner with little understanding of the under-
lying theoretical principles" , and claim the typical
explanation of DAasregularization to be insufﬁ-
cient. Overall, there indeed appears to be a lack of
research on whyexactly DA works. Existing work
on this topic is mainly surface-level, and rarely
investigates the theoretical underpinnings and prin-
ciples. We discuss this challenge more in §6, and
highlight some of the existing work below.
Bishop (1995) show training with noised exam-
ples is reducible to Tikhonov regularization (sub-
sumes L2). Rajput et al. (2019) show that DA can
increase the positive margin for classiﬁers, but only
when augmenting exponentially many examples
for common DA methods.
Dao et al. (2019) think of DA transformations
as kernels, and ﬁnd two ways DA helps: averaging
of features and variance regularization. Chen et al.
(2020d) show that DA leads to variance reduction
by averaging over orbits of the group that keep the
data distribution approximately invariant.
3 Techniques & Methods
We now discuss some methodologically represen-
tative DA techniques which are relevant to all tasks