Working with low-resource languages may
present similar difﬁculties as specialized domains.
Further, DA techniques successful in the high-
resource scenario may not be effective for low-
resource languages that are of a different language
family or very distinctive in linguistic and typolog-
ical terms. For example, those which are language
isolates or lack high-resource cognates.
More vision-inspired techniques: Although
many NLP DA methods have been inspired by anal-
ogous approaches in CV , there is potential for draw-
ing further connections. Many CV DA techniques
motivated by real-world invariances (e.g. many
angles of looking at the same object) may have
similar NLP interpretations. For instance, grayscal-
ingcould translate to toning down aspects of the
text (e.g. plural to singular, "awesome" →"good" ).
Morphing a dependency tree could be analogous
to rotating an image, and paraphrasing techniques
may be analogous to changing perspective. For ex-
ample, negative data augmentation (NDA) (Sinha
et al., 2021) involves creating out-of-distribution
samples. It has so far been exclusively explored for
CV , but could be investigated for text.
Self-supervised learning: More recently, DA
has been increasingly used as a key component
of self-supervised learning, particularly in vision
(Chen et al., 2020e). In NLP, BART (Lewis et al.,
2020) showed that predicting deleted tokens as a
pretraining task can achieve similar performance as
the masked LM, and ELECTRA (Clark et al., 2020)
found that pretraining by predicting corrupted to-
kens outperforms BERT given the same model size,
data, and compute. We expect future work will
continue exploring how to effectively manipulate
text for both pretraining and downstream tasks.
Ofﬂine versus online data augmentation: In
CV , standard techniques such as cropping and ro-
tations are typically done stochastically, allowing
for DA to be incorporated elegantly into the train-
ing pipeline. In NLP, however, it is unclear how
to include a lightweight code module to apply DA
stochastically. This is because DA techniques for
NLP often leverage external resources (e.g. a dic-
tionary for token substitution or translation model
for backtranslation) that are not easily transferable
across training pipelines. Thus, a common prac-
tice for DA in NLP is to generate augmented data
ofﬂine and store it as additional data to be loadedduring training.4Future work on a lightweight
module for online DA in NLP could be fruitful,
though another challenge will be determining when
such a module will be helpful, which—compared
with CV , where invariances being imposed are well-
accepted—can vary substantially across NLP tasks.
Lack of uniﬁcation is a challenge for the cur-
rent literature on data augmentation for NLP, and
popular methods are often presented in an aux-
iliary fashion. Whereas there are well-accepted
frameworks for DA for CV (e.g. default augmen-
tation libraries in PyTorch, RandAugment (Cubuk
et al., 2020)), there are no such "generalized" DA
techniques for NLP. Further, we believe that DA
research would beneﬁt from the establishment of
standard and uniﬁed benchmark tasks and datasets
to compare different augmentation methods.
Good data augmentation practices would help
make DA work more accessible and reproducible
to the NLP and ML communities. On top of
uniﬁed benchmark tasks, datasets, and frame-
works/libraries mentioned above, other good prac-
tices include making code and augmented datasets
publicly available, reporting variation among re-
sults (e.g. standard deviation across random seeds),
and more standardized evaluation procedures. Fur-
ther, transparent hyperparameter analysis, explic-
itly stating failure cases of proposed techniques,
and discussion of the intuition and theory behind
them would further improve the transparency and
interpretability of DA techniques.
7 Conclusion
In this paper, we presented a comprehensive and
structured survey of data augmentation for nat-
ural language processing (NLP). We provided a
background about data augmentation and how it
works, discussed major methodologically represen-
tative data augmentation techniques for NLP, and
touched upon data augmentation techniques for
popular NLP applications and tasks. Finally, we
outlined current challenges and directions for fu-
ture research, and showed that there is much room
for further exploration. Overall, we hope our paper
can serve as a guide for NLP researchers to decide
on which data augmentation techniques to use, and
inspire additional interest and work in this area.
Please see the corresponding GitHub repository at
https://github.com/styfeng/DataAug4NLP.
4See Appendix D.