via the extensibility of their formulation.2
3.1 Rule-Based Techniques
Here, we cover DA primitives which use easy-
to-compute, predetermined transforms sans model
components. Feature space DA approaches gen-
erate augmented examples in the model’s feature
space rather than input data. Many few-shot learn-
ing approaches (Hariharan and Girshick, 2017;
Schwartz et al., 2018) leverage estimated feature
space "analogy" transformations between exam-
ples of known classes to augment for novel classes
(see §4.4). Paschali et al. (2019) use iterative
afﬁne transformations and projections to maximally
"stretch" an example along the class-manifold.
Wei and Zou (2019) propose EASY DATAAUG-
MENTATION (EDA) , a set of token-level random
perturbation operations including random insertion,
deletion , and swap . They show improved perfor-
mance on many text classiﬁcation tasks. UDA (Xie
et al., 2020) show how supervised DAmethods can
be exploited for unsupervised data through consis-
tency training on (x;DA (x))pairs.
For paraphrase identiﬁcation, Chen et al. (2020b)
construct a signed graph over the data, with indi-
vidual sentences as nodes and pair labels as signed
edges. They use balance theory and transitivity
to infer augmented sentence pairs from this graph.
Motivated by image cropping and rotation, ¸ Sahin
and Steedman (2018) propose dependency tree mor-
phing . For dependency-annotated sentences, chil-
dren of the same parent are swapped (à la rotation)
or some deleted (à la cropping), as seen in Figure 2.
This is most beneﬁcial for language families with
rich case marking systems (e.g. Baltic andSlavic ).
3.2 Example Interpolation Techniques
Another class of DA techniques, pioneered by
MIXUP(Zhang et al., 2017), interpolates the in-
puts and labels of two or more real examples. This
class of techniques is also sometimes referred to as
Mixed Sample Data Augmentation (MSDA). Ensu-
ing work has explored interpolating inner compo-
nents (Verma et al., 2019; Faramarzi et al., 2020),
more general mixing schemes (Guo, 2020), and
adding adversaries (Beckham et al., 2019).
Another class of extensions of MIXUPwhich has
been growing in the vision community attempts to
fuse raw input image pairs together into a single
2Table 1 compares several DAmethods by various aspects
relating to their applicability, dependencies, and requirements.
Figure 2: Dependency tree morphing DA applied to a
Turkish sentence, ¸ Sahin and Steedman (2018)
input image, rather than improve the continuous in-
terpolation mechanism. Examples of this paradigm
include CUTMIX(Yun et al., 2019), CUTOUT(De-
Vries and Taylor, 2017) and COPY-PASTE (Ghiasi
et al., 2020). For instance, CUTMIXreplaces a
small sub-region of Image A with a patch sampled
from Image B, with the labels mixed in proportion
to sub-region sizes. There is potential to borrow
ideas and inspiration from these works for NLP,
e.g. for multimodal work involving both images
and text (see "Multimodal challenges" in §6).
A bottleneck to using MIXUPfor NLP tasks
was the requirement of continuous inputs. This has
been overcome by mixing embeddings or higher
hidden layers (Chen et al., 2020c). Later variants
propose speech-tailored mixing schemes (Jindal
et al., 2020b) and interpolation with adversarial
examples (Cheng et al., 2020), among others.
SEQ2M IXUP(Guo et al., 2020) generalizes
MIXUPfor sequence transduction tasks in two
ways - the "hard" version samples a binary mask
(from a Bernoulli with a (;)prior) and picks
from one of two sequences at each token position,
while the "soft" version softly interpolates between
sequences based on a coefﬁcient sampled from
(;). The "soft" version is found to outperform
the "hard" version and earlier interpolation-based
techniques like SWITCH OUT(Wang et al., 2018a).
3.3 Model-Based Techniques
Seq2seq and language models have also been used
forDA. The popular BACKTRANSLATION method
(Sennrich et al., 2016) translates a sequence into
another language and then back into the original