A Survey of Data Augmentation Approaches for NLP
Steven Y. Feng,1Varun Gangal,1Jason Weiy,2Sarath Chandar,3
Soroush Vosoughi ,4Teruko Mitamura ,1Eduard Hovy1
1Carnegie Mellon University,2Google Research
3Mila - Quebec AI Institute,4Dartmouth College
{syfeng,vgangal,teruko,hovy}@cs.cmu.edu
jasonwei@google.com sarath.chandar@mila.quebec
soroush@dartmouth.edu
Abstract
Data augmentation has recently seen increased
interest in NLP due to more work in low-
resource domains, new tasks, and the popu-
larity of large-scale neural networks that re-
quire large amounts of training data. De-
spite this recent upsurge, this area is still rel-
atively underexplored, perhaps due to the chal-
lenges posed by the discrete nature of language
data. In this paper, we present a comprehen-
sive and unifying survey of data augmenta-
tion for NLP by summarizing the literature in
a structured manner. We ﬁrst introduce and
motivate data augmentation for NLP, and then
discuss major methodologically representative
approaches. Next, we highlight techniques
that are used for popular NLP applications and
tasks. We conclude by outlining current chal-
lenges and directions for future research. Over-
all, our paper aims to clarify the landscape
of existing literature in data augmentation for
NLP and motivate additional work in this area.
We also present a GitHub repository with a pa-
per list that will be continuously updated at
https://github.com/styfeng/DataAug4NLP.
1 Introduction
Data augmentation ( DA) refers to strategies for in-
creasing the diversity of training examples without
explicitly collecting new data. It has received active
attention in recent machine learning (ML) research
in the form of well-received, general-purpose tech-
niques such as UDA (Xie et al., 2020) (3.1), which
used backtranslation (Sennrich et al., 2016), Au-
toAugment (Cubuk et al., 2018), and RandAugment
(Cubuk et al., 2020), and MIXUP(Zhang et al.,
2017) (3.2). These are often ﬁrst explored in com-
puter vision (CV), and DA’s adaptation for natural
language processing (NLP) seems secondary and
Equal contribution by the two authors.
yAI Resident.comparatively underexplored, perhaps due to chal-
lenges presented by the discrete nature of language,
which rules out continuous noising and makes it
more difﬁcult to maintain invariance.
Despite these challenges, there has been in-
creased interest and demand for DAfor NLP. As
NLP grows due to off-the-shelf availability of large
pretrained models, there are increasingly more
tasks and domains to explore. Many of these are
low-resource, and have a paucity of training exam-
ples, creating many use-cases for which DAcan
play an important role. Particularly, for many non-
classiﬁcation NLP tasks such as span-based tasks
and generation, DAresearch is relatively sparse
despite their ubiquity in real-world settings.
Our paper aims to sensitize the NLP community
towards this growing area of work, which has also
seen increasing interest in ML overall (as seen in
Figure 1). As interest and work on this topic con-
tinue to increase, this is an opportune time for a
paper of our kind to (i) give a bird’s eye view of
DA for NLP, and (ii) identify key challenges to
effectively motivate and orient interest in this area.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst survey
to take a detailed look at DA methods for NLP.1
This paper is structured as follows. Section
2 discusses what DA is, its goals and trade-offs,
and why it works. Section 3 describes popular
methodologically representative DA techniques for
NLP—which we categorize into rule-based (3.1),
example interpolation-based (3.2), or model-based
(3.3). Section 4 discusses useful NLP applications
for DA, including low-resource languages (4.1),
mitigating bias (4.2), ﬁxing class imbalance (4.3),
few-shot learning (4.4), and adversarial examples
(4.5). Section 5 describes DA methods for common
1Liu et al. (2020a) present a smaller-scale text data aug-
mentation survey that is concise and focused. Our work serves
as a more comprehensive survey with larger coverage and is
more up-to-date.arXiv:2105.03075v5  [cs.CL]  1 Dec 2021