mar (SCFG) is induced from training data, and
new "recombinant" examples are sampled. Yu et al.
(2020) introduce GRAPPA , a pretraining approach
for table semantic parsing, and generate synthetic
question-SQL pairs via an SCFG. Andreas (2020)
usecompositionality to construct synthetic exam-
ples for downstream tasks like semantic parsing.
Fragments of original examples are replaced with
fragments from other examples in similar contexts.
Vania et al. (2019) investigate DA for low-
resource dependency parsing including dependency
tree morphing from ¸ Sahin and Steedman (2018)
(Figure 2) and modiﬁed nonce sentence genera-
tion from Gulordava et al. (2018), which replaces
content words with other words of the same POS,
morphological features, and dependency labels.
5.5 Grammatical Error Correction (GEC)
Lack of parallel data is typically a barrier for GEC.
Various works have thus looked at DA methods
for GEC. We discuss some here, and more can be
found in Table 2 in Appendix C.
There is work that makes use of additional re-
sources. Boyd (2018) use German edits from
Wikipedia revision history and use those relating
to GEC as augmented training data. Zhang et al.
(2019b) explore multi-task transfer, or the use of
annotated data from other tasks.
There is also work that adds synthetic errors to
noise the text. Wang et al. (2019a) investigate two
approaches: token-level perturbations and training
error generation models with a ﬁltering strategy
to keep generations with sufﬁcient errors. Grund-
kiewicz et al. (2019) use confusion sets generated
by a spellchecker for noising. Choe et al. (2019)
learn error patterns from small annotated samples
along with POS-speciﬁc noising .
There have also been approaches to improve the
diversity of generated errors. Wan et al. (2020)
investigate noising through editing the latent repre-
sentations of grammatical sentences, and Xie et al.
(2018) use a neural sequence transduction model
and beam search noising procedures.
5.6 Neural Machine Translation (NMT)
There are many works which have investigated DA
for NMT. We highlighted some in §3 and §4.1,
e.g. (Sennrich et al., 2016; Fadaee et al., 2017; Xia
et al., 2019). We discuss some further ones here,
and more can be found in Table 3 in Appendix C.
Wang et al. (2018a) propose SWITCH OUT, a
DA method that randomly replaces words in bothsource and target sentences with other random
words from their corresponding vocabularies. Gao
et al. (2019) introduce SOFT CONTEXTUAL DA
that softly augments randomly chosen words in a
sentence using a contextual mixture of multiple
related words over the vocabulary. Nguyen et al.
(2020) propose DATA DIVERSIFICATION which
merges original training data with the predictions
of several forward and backward models.
5.7 Data-to-Text NLG
Data-to-text NLG refers to tasks which require gen-
erating natural language descriptions of structured
or semi-structured data inputs, e.g. game score
tables (Wiseman et al., 2017). Randomly perturb-
ing game score values without invalidating overall
game outcome is one DAstrategy explored in game
summary generation (Hayashi et al., 2019).
Two popular recent benchmarks are E2E-NLG
(Dušek et al., 2018) and WebNLG (Gardent et al.,
2017). Both involve generation from structured
inputs - meaning representation (MR) sequences
and triple sequences, respectively. Montella et al.
(2020) show performance gains on WebNLG by
DA using Wikipedia sentences as targets and
parsed OpenIE triples as inputs. Tandon et al.
(2018) propose DAfor E2E-NLG based on per-
muting the input MR sequence. Kedzie and McK-
eown (2019) inject Gaussian noise into a trained
decoder’s hidden states and sample diverse aug-
mented examples from it. This sample-augment-
retrain loop helps performance on E2E-NLG.
5.8 Open-Ended & Conditional Generation
There has been limited work on DA for open-ended
and conditional text generation. Feng et al. (2020)
experiment with a suite of DA methods for ﬁnetun-
ing GPT-2 on a low-resource domain in attempts
to improve the quality of generated continuations,
which they call GENAUG. They ﬁnd that WN-
HYPERS (WordNet hypernym replacement of key-
words) and SYNTHETIC NOISE (randomly perturb-
ing non-terminal characters in words) are useful,
and the quality of generated text improves to a peak
at3x the original amount of training data.
5.9 Dialogue
Most DA approaches for dialogue focus on task-
oriented dialogue. We outline some below, and
more can be found in Table 4 in Appendix C.
Quan and Xiong (2019) present sentence and
word-level DA approaches for end-to-end task-