Paper/Work Brief Description
Lichtarge et al. (2019) Generate synthetic noised examples of Wikipedia sentences using backtranslation through
various languages.
White and Rozovskaya (2020) Detailed comparative study of the DA for GEC systems UEdin-MS (Grundkiewicz et al., 2019)
and Kakao&Brain (Choe et al., 2019).
Foster and Andersen (2009) Introduces error generation tool called GenERRate which learns to generate ungrammatical
text with various errors by using an error analysis ﬁle.
Kimn (2020) Use a set of syntactic rules for common Japanese grammatical errors to generate augmented
error-correct sentence pairs for Japanese GEC.
Felice (2016) Thesis that surveys previous work on error generation and investigates some new approaches
using random and probabilistic methods.
Xu et al. (2019) Noises using ﬁve error types: concatenation, misspelling, substitution, deletion, and transposi-
tion. Decent performance on the BEA 2019 Shared Task.
Zhang et al. (2019b) Explore backtranslation and feature discrimination for DA.
Mizumoto et al. (2011) DA by extracting Japanese GEC training data from the revision log of a language learning SNS.
Table 2: Additional DA works for grammatical error correction (GEC), along with a brief description of each.
Paper/Work Brief Description
Vaibhav et al. (2019) Present a synthetic noise induction model which heuristically adds social media noise to text,
andlabeled backtranslation .
Hassan et al. (2017) Present a DA method to project words from closely-related high-resource languages to low-
resource languages using word embedding representations.
Cheng et al. (2020) Propose AdvAug , an adversarial augmentation method for NMT, by sampling adversarial
examples from a new vicinity distribution and using their embeddings to augment training.
Graça et al. (2019) Investigate improvements to sampling-based approaches and the synthetic data generated by
backtranslation.
Bulte and Tezcan (2019) Propose DA approaches for NMT that leverage information retrieved from a Translation
Memory (TM) and using fuzzy TM matches.
Moussallem et al. (2019) Propose an NMT model KG-NMT which is augmented by knowledge graphs to enhance
semantic feature extraction and hence the translation of entities and terminological expressions.
Peng et al. (2020) Propose dictionary-based DA ( DDA ) for cross-domain NMT by synthesizing a domain-speciﬁc
dictionary and automatically generating a pseudo in-domain parallel corpus.
Li et al. (2020a) Present a DA method using sentence boundary segmentation to improve the robustness of NMT
on ASR transcripts.
Nishimura et al. (2018) Introduce DA methods for multi-source NMT that ﬁlls in incomplete portions of multi-source
training data.
Sugiyama and Yoshinaga (2019) Investigate effectiveness of DA by backtranslation for context-aware NMT.
Li and Specia (2019) Present DA methods to improve NMT robustness to noise while keeping models small, and
explore the use of noise from external data (speech transcripts).
Chinea-Ríos et al. (2017) Propose DA method to create synthetic data by leveraging the embedding representation of
sentences.
Alves et al. (2020) Propose two methods for pipeline-based speech translation through the introduction of errors
through 1. utilizing a speech processing workﬂow and 2. a rule-based method.
Kang (2019) Investigate extremely low-resource settings for NMT and a DA approach using a noisy dictio-
nary and language models.
Chen et al. (2020a) Investigate a DA method for lexically constraint-aware NMT to construct constraint-aware
synthetic training data.
Li et al. (2020b) Propose a diversity DA method for low-resource NMT by generating diverse synthetic parallel
data on both source and target sides using a restricted sampling strategy during decoding.
Duan et al. (2020) Propose syntax-aware DA methods with sentence-speciﬁc word selection probabilities using
dependency parsing.
Table 3: Additional DA works for neural machine translation (NMT), along with a brief description of each.