TT-Rec: Tensor Train Compression for Deep Learning Recommendation Models
the embedding operations are more expensive. Both Kaggle
and Terabyte datasets correspond to P = 1.
Figure 11 compares the performance of the non-cached TT-
Rec kernel with PyTorch EmbeddingBag for P =[1, 10, 100]
across various TT-ranks. As seen in Figure 11, the perfor-
mance per training sample is better as P increases. This
is because as the number of embedding lookups increase,
the overhead of EmbeddingBag is amortized, in both the
baseline and TT-Rec cases. Furthermore, the performance
gap between the non-cached TT-Rec kernel and Embedding-
Bag increases as P increases. This is because there exists
higher reuses of embedding vectors when P is larger and
EmbeddingBag beneﬁts from such reuse.
To reduce the execution time of TT-Rec as P increases, Fig-
ure 12 compares the performance of TT-Rec with caching
enabled with EmbeddingBag. To quantify the timing per-
formance per training sample, we synthetically generate
data samples to control the cache hit rate. As expected, as
the cache hit rate increases (the x-axis), the performance of
TT-Rec improves and eventually outperforms the baseline
EmbeddingBag when the cache hit rate reaches 90%.
7 R ELATED WORK
General Model Compression Techniques: Among the
many compression techniques for training, the commonly-
used ones include magnitude pruning (Zhu & Gupta, 2017),
variational dropout (Kingma & Welling, 2013), and l0reg-
ularization (Louizos et al., 2017). Other efforts propose to
impose structured sparsity in model weights upfront (Child
et al., 2019; Gray et al., 2017). Such approaches can sig-
niﬁcantly reduce both training and inference cost, but have
not been proven as effective solutions for deep learning rec-
ommendation models. Furthermore, while these methods
are generally applicable, the prior works are fundamentally
different from our proposed TT-decomposition approach.
Embedding Table Compression Techniques: The semi-
nal work by Weinberger et al. examined feature hashing,
allowing multiple elements to map to the same embedding
vector; thus, it reduces the embedding space (Weinberger
et al., 2009). However, hash collisions can yield signiﬁ-
cant accuracy losses. For example, Zhao et al. observed
an intolerable degree of accuracy loss if hashing were ap-
plied to terabyte-scale recommendation models (Zhao et al.,
2020). Guan et al. proposed a 4-bit quantization scheme
to compress pre-trained models for inference (Guan et al.,
2019). This design is feasible for recommendation inference
although quantization for training is challenging and often
comes with accuracy trade-off. A recent technique proposed
is to generate embedding vectors on the ﬂy using dense
neural networks (Kang et al., 2020). This work achieves
a comparable accuracy against full embedding with 1/4thmodel size. However, it comes with 9xruntime overhead.
Other works also explored the potential of low-rank approx-
imation on the embedding tables (Ghaemmaghami et al.,
2020; Hrinchuk et al., 2020) but experienced critical accu-
racy degradation. None provides a computationally-efﬁcient
interface for industry-scale DLRMs.
Tensorization: Tensor methods have been extensively stud-
ied for compressing DNNs. One of the most common
method is the Tucker factorization (Cohen et al., 2016),
which can generate high-quality DNNs when compressing
fully-connected layers. Tensor Train (TT) and Tensor Ring
(TR) decomposition techniques have been recently studied
in the context of DNNs (Hawkins & Zhang, 2019; Wang
et al., 2018). But previous work has explored the accu-
racy trade-off for fully-connected and convolution layers
only. In particular, TT decomposition offers a structural
way to compress DNNs and thus is capable of preserving
the DNN weights. TR can preserve the weights with moder-
ately lower compression ratios than that of TT (Wang et al.,
2018). Despite interest in TT-based methods, to the best of
our knowledge, ours is the ﬁrst to consider them in the con-
text of DLRMs. In our analysis, we comprehensively study
the design space of how memory size reduction, model qual-
ity, and training time overheads trade-off. Finally, we also
present an efﬁcient implementation for TT-Rec, which we
will release as open source upon the acceptance of this work.
8 C ONCLUSION
The spirit of TT-Rec is to use principled, parameterized al-
gorithmic methods to help control the explosive demands on
computational infrastructure. This strategy complements in-
novations in the infrastructure itself. TT-Rec speciﬁcally at-
tacks the considerable memory requirements of embedding
layers of modern recommendation models, whose memory
requirements in industrial applications at scale can require
hundreds of GBs to TBs of memory. TT-Rec replaces oth-
erwise large embedding tables with a sequence of matrix
products, reducing the total model memory capacity re-
quirement by 112 times with only a small amount of 13.9%
training time overhead while maintaining the same model
accuracy as the baseline. Such signiﬁcant memory capacity
reductions can be achieved with a relatively small increase
in training time through clever caching strategies, making
online recommendation model training more practical.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We would like to thank Richard Vuduc and Mark Tygert for
the rigorous discussions and thoughtful feedback. We also
thank Hsien-Hsin Lee and Kim Hazelwood for supporting
this work.