TT-R EC: TENSOR TRAIN COMPRESSION
FOR DEEP LEARNING RECOMMENDATION MODEL EMBEDDINGS
Chunxing Yin1 2Bilge Acun1Xing Liu1Carole-Jean Wu1
ABSTRACT
The memory capacity of embedding tables in deep learning recommendation models (DLRMs) is increasing
dramatically from tens of GBs to TBs across the industry. Given the fast growth in DLRMs, novel solutions are
urgently needed in order to enable DLRM innovations. At the same time, this must be done in a fast and efﬁcient
way without having to exponentially increase infrastructure capacity demands. In this paper, we demonstrate the
promising potential of Tensor Train decomposition for DLRMs (TT-Rec), an important yet under-investigated
context. We design and implement optimized kernels (TT-EmbeddingBag) to evaluate the proposed TT-Rec
design. TT-EmbeddingBag is 3 faster than the SOTA TT implementation. The performance of TT-Rec is
further optimized with the batched matrix multiplication and caching strategies for embedding vector lookup
operations. In addition, we present mathematically and empirically the effect of weight initialization distribution on
DLRM accuracy and propose to initialize the tensor cores of TT-Rec following the sampled Gaussian distribution.
We evaluate TT-Rec across three important design space dimensions—memory capacity, accuracy, and timing
performance—by training MLPerf-DLRM with Criteo’s Kaggle and Terabyte data sets. TT-Rec compresses the
model size by 4to 221for Kaggle, with 0:03% to0:3%loss of accuracy correspondingly. For Terabyte, our
approach achieves 112 model size reduction which comes with no accuracy loss nor training time overhead as
compared to the uncompressed baseline.
Our code is available on Github at facebookresearch/FBTT-Embedding.
1 I NTRODUCTION
Deep neural networks (DNNs) are witnessing an unprece-
dented growth in all dimensions: data, model complexity,
and the cost of infrastructure required for model training and
deployment. For instance, at Facebook, the amount of data
used in machine learning (ML) tripled in one year (2019–
20), which led to an eight-fold increase in the amount of
computation required for training (Hazelwood, 2020). Simi-
larly, the number of parameters in state-of-the-art language
models have increased exponentially, currently at over 175
billion parameters in OpenAI’s GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020).
In response, there is considerable interest to design domain-
speciﬁc accelerators and at-scale infrastructures (Acun et al.,
2021; Alibaba, 2019; Amazon, 2019; Chung et al., 2018;
Fowers et al., 2018; Hazelwood et al., 2018; Jouppi et al.,
2017; Lee & Rao, 2019; Mattson et al., 2020a; NVIDIA,
2020a; Ovtcharov et al., 2015; Reddi et al., 2020). To sus-
tain the fast cadence of ML innovations, we must achieve
orders-of-magnitude reductions in the infrastructure demand
1Facebook AI, USA2Georgia Institute of Technology, USA. Corre-
spondence to: Bilge Acun <acun@fb.com >.
Proceedings of the 4thMLSys Conference , San Jose, CA, USA,
2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).while maintaining or even improving model accuracy.
In this work, we consider a new algorithmic approach to
cope with the large memory requirement of DNNs, focusing
on the critical use-case of embedding tables in deep learning-
based recommendation models (DLRMs). These models
represent one of the most resource-demanding deep learn-
ing workloads, consuming more than 50% of training and
80% of the total AI inference cycles at Facebook’s data cen-
ters (Gupta et al., 2020; Naumov et al., 2020). Furthermore,
the memory capacity requirement for state-of-the-art recom-
mendation models has grown into the scale of terabytes (Lui
et al., 2021; Yi et al., 2018; Zhao et al., 2019; 2020). From
systems perspective, the large embedding tables that con-
tribute to more than 99% of the total recommendation model
capacity are important targets for efﬁciency optimization.
Our approach uses tensorization to address the large mem-
ory capacity demand of embedding tables in a DLRM.
At a high level, tensorization replaces layers of a neu-
ral network with an approximate and structured low-rank
form (Novikov et al., 2015). The tensorization form is
parametric – its “shape” determines the design trade-off be-
tween storage capacity, execution time, and model accuracy.
Furthermore, tensorized representation can be ﬁne-tuned
with respect to the architecture of a given hardware plat-