TT-Rec: Tensor Train Compression for Deep Learning Recommendation Models
Figure 1. The design space demonstrates the potential of DLRM
accuracy and model size tradeoff with respect to the tunable param-
eters, e.g., ranks of the tensorization method (colors), dimensions
of embedding (shapes), and number of compressed embedding ta-
bles (brightness). The data points that fall onto the Pareto Frontier
(the black curve) represent optimal settings that maximize DLRM
accuracy (the y-axis) given a memory size (the x-axis).
form. Figure 1 illustrates the design space with respective
to the tunable parameters, such as ranks of the tensoriza-
tion method, dimensions of the embedding and number
of tables to compress. Data points on the Pareto frontier
(black curve) represent the optimal settings that maximize
the recommendation model accuracy (y-axis) given a cor-
responding memory size (x-axis). The parameters of these
optimal data points vary, depending on the model’s charac-
teristics (embedding dimensions), the tensorization setting
(i.e., tensor ranks), and the memory capacity of the under-
lying training system. Given the large conﬁguration space,
parameters need to be carefully studied in order to achieve
highest possible model quality given a target model size.
We design a Tensor- Train compression technique for deep
learning Recommendation models, called TT-Rec . The core
idea is to replace large embedding tables in a DLRM with a
sequence of matrix products. This method is analogous to
techniques that use lookup tables to trade-off memory ca-
pacity and bandwidth with computation. TT-Rec suits well
for accelerators like GPUs, which have a relatively higher
compute-to-memory (FLOPs-per-Byte) ratio and limited
memory capacity. Since tensor products skew the initial-
ization distribution, we propose a new way to initialize the
element distribution of the tensor form. Furthermore, to
mitigate increases in training time when the tensor form
must be decompressed, we introduce a cache structure that
exploits the unique sparse feature distribution in DLRMs,
in which we store the most accessed embedding vectors in
the uncompressed format. Since these cached embedding
vectors are learned without compression, using this cache
design can also help recovering model accuracy. Thus, TT-
Rec uses a hybrid approach to learn features and deliver
on-par model accuracy while requiring orders-of-magnitude
less memory capacity.We show signiﬁcant compression ratios and improved train-
ing time performance at the same time with a judicious
design and parameterization of the tensor-train compression
technique. The compute-to-memory ratio of the underlying
hardware can also be taken into account when parameteriz-
ing the proposed technique. While prior works have demon-
strated tensor-train compression techniques for embedding
layers (Hrinchuk et al., 2020), this paper is the ﬁrst to ex-
plore and customize tensor-train compression techniques
for DLRMs, with a particular focus on minimizing the sig-
niﬁcant memory capacity requirement of the embedding
layers (over tens to hundreds of GBs, or over 99% of the
total model size).
The main contributions of this paper are as follows:
•This work applies tensor-train compression for a new
application context—the embedding layers of DLRMs.
•TT-Rec offers a ﬂexible design space between memory
capacity, training time and model accuracy. It is an ef-
fective approach especially for online recommendation
training. The orders-of-magnitude lower memory require-
ment with TT-Rec also unlocks a range of modern AI
training accelerators for DLRM training.
•Our in-depth design space characterization shows the im-
portance of choosing the right number of embedding ta-
bles to compress and the dimension of the compressed
tensors. In particular, we quantify the potential trade-off
between memory requirements and accuracy.
•To recover accuracy loss, we propose to use a sampled
Gaussian distribution for the weight initialization of the
tensor cores. Furthermore, to accelerate the training per-
formance of TT-Rec, we introduce a separate cache struc-
ture to store frequently-accessed embedding vectors in the
uncompressed format, which we show empirically also
improves model accuracy.
•We demonstrate the promise of TT-Rec: on Terabyte, TT-
Rec achieves higher model accuracy (0.19% to 0.42%
over the baseline) while reducing the total memory re-
quirement of the embedding tables by 22 to112with
a small amount of 10% training time increase on average.
2 B ACKGROUND
Deep learning recommendation models. Figure 2 de-
picts the generalized model architecture for DLRMs. The
left box represents the uncompressed baseline, while the
right box depicts the proposed TT-Rec design. There are two
primary components: the Multi Layer Perceptron (MLP)
layer modules and the Embedding Tables (EMBs). The
MLP layers are used to process continuous features, such
as user age, while the EMBs are used to process categorical
features by encoding sparse, high-dimensional inputs into
dense, vector representation. The encoded vectors are pro-
cessed by an interaction operation followed by a top MLP