Visualizing and Understanding the Effectiveness of BERT
Yaru Haoy, Li Dongz, Furu Weiz, Ke Xuy
yBeihang University
zMicrosoft Research
fhaoyaru@,kexu@nlsde. gbuaa.edu.cn
flidong1,fuwei g@microsoft.com
Abstract
Language model pre-training, such as BERT,
has achieved remarkable results in many NLP
tasks. However, it is unclear why the pre-
training-then-ﬁne-tuning paradigm can im-
prove performance and generalization capabil-
ity across different tasks. In this paper, we pro-
pose to visualize loss landscapes and optimiza-
tion trajectories of ﬁne-tuning BERT on spe-
ciﬁc datasets. First, we ﬁnd that pre-training
reaches a good initial point across downstream
tasks, which leads to wider optima and eas-
ier optimization compared with training from
scratch. We also demonstrate that the ﬁne-
tuning procedure is robust to overﬁtting, even
though BERT is highly over-parameterized for
downstream tasks. Second, the visualization
results indicate that ﬁne-tuning BERT tends to
generalize better because of the ﬂat and wide
optima, and the consistency between the train-
ing loss surface and the generalization error
surface. Third, the lower layers of BERT are
more invariant during ﬁne-tuning, which sug-
gests that the layers that are close to input learn
more transferable representations of language.
1 Introduction
Language model pre-training has achieved strong
performance in many NLP tasks (Peters et al.,
2018; Howard and Ruder, 2018a; Radford et al.,
2018; Devlin et al., 2018; Baevski et al., 2019;
Dong et al., 2019). A neural encoder is trained
on a large text corpus by using language model-
ing objectives. Then the pre-trained model either
is used to extract vector representations for input,
or is ﬁne-tuned on the speciﬁc datasets.
Recent work (Tenney et al., 2019b; Liu et al.,
2019a; Goldberg, 2019; Tenney et al., 2019a)
has shown that the pre-trained models can en-
code syntactic and semantic information of lan-
guage. However, it is unclear why pre-training
Contribution during internship at Microsoft Research.is effective on downstream tasks in terms of both
trainability and generalization capability. In this
work, we take BERT (Devlin et al., 2018) as an
example to understand the effectiveness of pre-
training. We visualize the loss landscapes and
the optimization procedure of ﬁne-tuning on spe-
ciﬁc datasets in three ways. First, we compute the
one-dimensional (1D) loss curve, so that we can
inspect the difference between ﬁne-tuning BERT
and training from scratch. Second, we visualize
the two-dimensional (2D) loss surface, which pro-
vides more information about loss landscapes than
1D curves. Third, we project the high-dimensional
optimization trajectory of ﬁne-tuning to the ob-
tained 2D loss surface, which demonstrate the
learning properties in an intuitive way.
The main ﬁndings are summarized as follows.
First, visualization results indicate that BERT pre-
training reaches a good initial point across down-
stream tasks, which leads to wider optima on the
2D loss landscape compared with random initial-
ization. Moreover, the visualization of optimiza-
tion trajectories shows that pre-training results in
easier optimization and faster convergence. We
also demonstrate that the ﬁne-tuning procedure is
robust to overﬁtting. Second, loss landscapes of
ﬁne-tuning partially explain the good generaliza-
tion capability of BERT. Speciﬁcally, pre-training
obtains more ﬂat and wider optima, which indi-
cates the pre-trained model tends to generalize bet-
ter on unseen data (Chaudhari et al., 2017; Li et al.,
2018; Izmailov et al., 2018). Additionally, we
ﬁnd that the training loss surface correlates well
with the generalization error. Third, we demon-
strate that the lower (i.e., close to input) layers
of BERT are more invariant across tasks than the
higher layers, which suggests that the lower layers
learn transferable representations of language. We
verify the point by visualizing the loss landscape
with respect to different groups of layers.arXiv:1908.05620v1  [cs.CL]  15 Aug 2019