It should be mentioned that CPVT [ 52] also alleviates this issue by using a 3 3 Conv to generate
conditional PE at different resolutions and then add it to the feature map. Our work conceptually goes
one step further as we argue that adding PE to feature map is not necessary in semantic segmentation.
Another recent work CvT [ 56] introduced 33 Convs to model the spatial relationship among tokens.
Despite the converging design, our work differs in both motivation and application as we aim to
totally remove PEs to handle the training/testing resolution mismatch issue in semantic segmentation.
Our intuition started from [67] whereas the same intuition was not discussed in CvT.
3.2 Lightweight All-MLP Decoder
SegFormer incorporates a lightweight decoder consisting only of MLP layers and this avoiding the
hand-crafted and computationally demanding components typically used in other methods. The key
to enabling such a simple decoder is that our hierarchical Transformer encoder has a larger effective
receptive ﬁeld (ERF) than traditional CNN encoders.
The proposed All-MLP decoder consists of four main steps. First, multi-level features Fifrom
the MiT encoder go through an MLP layer to unify the channel dimension. Then, in a second
step, features are up-sampled to 1/4th and concatenated together. Third, a MLP layer is adopted to
fuse the concatenated features F. Finally, another MLP layer takes the fused feature to predict the
segmentation mask Mwith aH
4W
4Nclsresolution, where Nclsis the number of categories.
This lets us formulate the decoder as:
^Fi=Linear (Ci; C)(Fi);8i
^Fi=Upsample (W
4W
4)(^Fi);8i
F=Linear (4C; C)(Concat (^Fi));8i
M=Linear (C; N cls)(F);(4)
where Mrefers to the predicted mask, and Linear (Cin; Cout)()refers to a linear layer with Cinand
Coutas input and output vector dimensions respectively.
DeepLabv3+SegFormer
Stage-1Stage-2Stage-3HeadStage-4
Figure 3: Effective Receptive Field (ERF) on Cityscapes (aver-
age over 100 images). Top row: Deeplabv3+. Bottom row: Seg-
Former. ERFs of the four stages and the decoder heads of both
architectures are visualized. Best viewed with zoom in.Effective Receptive Field Analysis.
For semantic segmentation, maintain-
ing large receptive ﬁeld to include con-
text information has been a central is-
sue [ 5,17,18]. Here, we use effec-
tive receptive ﬁeld (ERF) [ 68] as a
toolkit to visualize and interpret why
our MLP decoder design is so effec-
tive on Transformers. In Figure 3, we
visualize ERFs of the four encoder
stages and the decoder heads for both
DeepLabv3+ and SegFormer. We can
make the following observations:
• The ERF of DeepLabv3+ is relatively small even at Stage-4, the deepest stage.
•SegFormer’s encoder naturally produces local attentions which resemble convolutions at lower
stages, while able to output highly non-local attentions that effectively capture contexts at Stage-4.
•As shown with the zoom-in patches in Figure 3, the ERF of the MLP head (blue box) differs from
Stage-4 (red box) with a signiﬁcant stronger local attention besides the non-local attention.
The limited receptive ﬁeld in CNN requires one to resort to context modules such as ASPP [ 16]
that enlarge the receptive ﬁeld but inevitably become heavy. Our decoder design beneﬁts from the
non-local attention in Transformers and leads to a larger receptive ﬁeld without being complex. The
same decoder design, however, does not work well on CNN backbones since the overall receptive
ﬁeld is upper bounded by the limited one at Stage-4, and we will verify this later in Table 1d,
More importantly, our decoder design essentially takes advantage of a Transformer induced feature
that produces both highly local and non-local attention at the same time. By unifying them, our MLP
decoder renders complementary and powerful representations by adding few parameters. This is
5