of the original image. We then pass these multi-level features to the All-MLP decoder to predict
the segmentation mask with aH
4W
4Nclsresolution, where Nclsis the number of categories.
In the remainder of this section, we ﬁrst detail the proposed encoder and decoder designs and then
summarize the main differences of our approach compared to SETR.
3.1 Hierarchical Transformer Encoder
We design a series of Mix Transformer encoders (MiT), MiT-B0 to MiT-B5, with the same architec-
ture but different sizes. On top of the hierarchical architecture and efﬁcient self-attention module
in PVT [ 8], we further propose several novel features including overlapped patch merging and
positional-encoding-free design which will be shown to greatly beneﬁt the segmentation tasks.
Hierarchical Feature Representation. Unlike ViT [ 6], our encoder generates multi-level multi-scale
features given an input image. These features provide both high-resolution coarse features and low-
resolution ﬁne-grained features that boost the performance of semantic segmentation. Speciﬁcally,
given an input image with size HW3, we perform patch merging to obtain a hierarchical feature
mapFiwith a resolution ofH
2i+1W
2i+1Ci, where i2f1;2;3;4g, andCi+1is larger than Ci.
Efﬁcient Self-Attention. A major bottleneck of the above hierarchical feature representation is the
quadratic self-attention complexity with long sequence inputs from higher resolution features. Recall
that in the original multi-head self-attention, each of the heads Q; K; V have the same dimensions
NC, where N=HWis the length of the sequence, the self-attention is estimated as:
Attention( Q; K; V ) = Softmax(QKT
pdhead)V: (1)
We instead adopt the sequence reduction process introduced in [ 8]. This process uses a reduction
ratioRto reduce the length of the sequence of as follows:
^K=Reshape (N
R; CR)(K)
K=Linear (CR; C)(^K);(2)
where Kis the sequence to be reduced, Reshape (N
R; CR)(K)refers to reshape Kto the one with
shape ofN
R(CR), and Linear (Cin; Cout)()refers to a linear layer taking a Cin-dimensional
tensor as input and generating a Cout-dimensional tensor as output. Therefore, the new Khas
dimensionsN
RC. As a result, the complexity of the self-attention mechanism is reduced from
O(N2)toO(N2
R). In our experiments, we set Rto [64, 16, 4, 1] from stage-1 to stage-4.
Overlapped Patch Merging. Given an image patch, the patch merging process used in ViT, uniﬁes
aNN3patch into a 11Cvector. This can easily be extended to unify a 22Ci
feature path into a 11Ci+1vector to obtain hierarchical feature maps. Using this, we can shrink
our hierarchical features from F1(H
4W
4C1) toF2(H
8W
8C2), and then iterate for any
other feature map in the hierarchy. This process was initially designed to combine non-overlapping
image or feature patches. Therefore, it fails to preserve the local continuity around those patches.
Instead, we use an overlapping patch merging process. To this end, we deﬁne K,S, andP, where
Kis the patch size, Sis the stride between two adjacent patches, and Pis the padding size. In our
experiments, we set K= 7,S= 4,P= 3 ,andK= 3,S= 2,P= 1 to perform overlapping
patch merging to produces features with the same size as the non-overlapping process. Similar to the
original patch embedding in ViT [ 6], this operation can be implemented by “nn.Conv2D” in PyTorch.
Positional-Encoding-Free Design. The resolution of the PE in ViT is ﬁxed. One thus needs to
interpolate the PE when the test resolution differs from training. This leads to the drop of accuracy,
which is undesirable since the resolution mismatch is common in semantic segmentation. We instead
introduce Mix-FFN where we consider the effect of zero padding to the leak location information [ 67]
by directly using a 3 3 Conv in the feed-forward network (FFN). Mix-FFN is formulated as:
xout=MLP(GELU (Conv 33(MLP (xin)))) + xin; (3)
where xinis the feature from the self-attention module. Mix-FFN mixes a 3 3 convolution and
an MLP into each FFN. In our experiments, we will show that a 3 3 convolution is sufﬁcient to
provide positional information for Transformers. In particular, we use depth-wise convolutions for
reducing the number of parameters and improving efﬁciency.
4