Page 5 of 7
 Alotaibi et al. BMC Oral Health          (2022) 22:399 
 
Matthews correlation coefficient (MCC)
Due to the imbalance in the number of images in each 
category of the bone level loss dataset, the MCC index 
was used to evaluate both models’ performance. A cor -
relation of 0.51 and 0.65 for the binary and multi-classifi -
cation signifies the that predicted class and the true class 
is moderately correlated.
Cohen Kappa
The assignment of the presence/absence of bone loss 
between the ML and the periodontists showed moder -
ate agreement (k = 0.512). However, the agreement for 
multi-classification was fair (k = 0.41).
Sensitivity and specificity
The detection of healthy versus diseased alveolar bone 
using machine learning as a diagnostic marker had a sen -
sitivity of 73% and a specificity of 79.1%, with the detec -
tion of bone loss by the periodontist as the gold standard.
Discussion
In this study, we evaluated the diagnostic performance of 
a CNN-based model VGG-16 to detect periodontal bone 
loss and classify the alveolar bone levels in teeth affected 
by periodontal disease. The presence of alveolar bone loss 
was detected with high accuracy by the system. Our find -
ings revealed that deep CNN had a diagnostic accuracy 
of 73.04% in detecting an alveolar bone loss in the ante -
rior teeth of both arches. The total diagnostic accuracy 
for the multi-classification was 59.42%, with the highest 
diagnostic accuracy for the presence of normal alveolar 
bone, followed by mild, moderate, and severe alveolar 
bone loss.
Our findings are supported by Lee et  al. [15] who 
developed a deep learning model to classify periodon -
tally compromised posterior teeth from periapical radio -
graphs. They revealed a diagnostic accuracy of 81% for 
periodontally compromised premolar teeth and 76.7% 
for molars, similar to our findings of 73% for the ante -
rior teeth. Another study by Lee Chun demonstrated a 
diagnostic accuracy of 0.85 and no significant difference 
in the RBL percentage measurements determined by the 
DL and examiners and high sensitivity, specificity, and 
accuracy for the different stages, all over 0.8 [14]. Other 
models used DL to detect RBL or calculate the RBL per -
centage from the panoramic radiographs and to assign 
periodontitis staging from the panoramic radiographs 
[7–16]. Although these models on the panoramic radio -
graphs had good accuracy and reliability in assessing the 
bone level on the panoramic radiographs, it is generally 
not recommended to rely on panoramic radiographs due 
to the presence of distorted images, overlapping objects, 
and low resolution [1–18, 21].The proposed model is the first model that assigned a 
severity category based on the traditional classification 
by the International Workshop for Classification of Peri -
odontal Diseases and Conditions (1999) with the severity 
of the bone loss has been characterized as mild with bone 
loss is in the coronal third of the root, moderate with 
bone loss is in the middle third of the root and advanced 
when in the apical third of the root length [17]. Healthy 
indicated no vertical or horizontal alveolar bone loss.
The current study was based on periapical radiographs, 
the standard radiographic images for periodontal diag -
nosis. A major highlight of our study is that we have not 
excluded caries, restorations, and endodontically treated 
teeth to increase the complexity and simulate real-life 
scenarios as much as possible.  The current results con -
firmed the CNN model, designed to detect the presence 
and absence of RBL and categorize the bone loss based 
on the severity, may assist in saving time and produce 
confirmatory decisions for RBL detection and categoriza -
tion of the severity. The implication is that the clinicians 
would not have to assign a bone loss stage by manually 
calculating the RBL percentage for each tooth, a very 
time-consuming process.
The deep CNN algorithm yielded promising results in 
various fields of medicine, including imaging [4–15]. In 
our study, we performed supervised deep learning using 
a CNN-based model called VGG-16 (Visual Geometry 
Group) on a periapical radiographic dental dataset. We 
confirmed that the results had a close predictive accu -
racy compared with the periodontists. The deep CNN 
algorithm had a higher diagnostic accuracy to distinguish 
between no bone loss from bone loss in the upper and 
lower incisor teeth and the deep CNN algorithm was bet -
ter trained and optimized for the detection of a normal 
PCT. However, the accuracy of categorizing the severity 
was lower. The diagnostic accuracy for severe bone loss 
was the lowest overall, and the trained deep CNN algo -
rithm was poorly optimized for the detection of severe 
bone loss. Further studies on the mechanisms underly -
ing deep CNN algorithms are necessary. The sensitivity, 
specificity, and the F-measure demonstrated acceptable 
performance for the binary classification, which supports 
the appropriateness of this method. Other topics for 
future research include additional techniques for improv -
ing the system output, such as applying more advanced 
augmentation techniques, extending the dataset, and 
using more recent CNN architectures.
In summary, this study found that a faster R-CNN 
trained on a limited number of labeled imaging data had 
a good capability of detecting the presence of bone loss 
and a satisfactory detection ability for the severity of 
bone loss in teeth. The application of a faster R-CNN to 
assist in detecting bone loss may reduce diagnostic effort