Page 6 of 7 Alotaibi et al. BMC Oral Health          (2022) 22:399 
by saving assessment time and automating screening 
documentation. A good quality tooth edge is important 
if the periodontal tissue is damaged in order to increase 
the performance accuracy of a PCT model, both diag -
nostically and predicatively. The Deep CNN algorithm 
can automatically extract features from PCT images and 
identify diverse characteristics in the input image, such 
as spots, corners, edges, or progressively complex charac -
teristics, including patterns, structures, and shapes [15]. 
The VGG-16 has a powerful advantage in deciphering 
the detection problem, supporting its use in the present 
study [24].
The strengths of our study include the fact the consid -
eration of imbalanced data, for which accuracy may not 
the best measure of the performance of a classifier. We 
considered other measures such as precision and recall 
(also known as sensitivity) as the most appropriate meas -
ure for the performance of imbalanced data.
Limitations
A limitation of this study is that the machine was only 
tested to detect and categorize alveolar bone loss, not 
to diagnose periodontitis. It is noteworthy that only 
2-dimensional periapical radiographs are insufficient for 
a complete diagnosis or prediction of PD. In order to 
make a more accurate diagnosis and prediction of PD, 
radiographic and clinical data must be reviewed compre -
hensively, including the patient’s history and a compre -
hensive periodontal examination. Deep CNN algorithms 
based on periapical radiographic images alone do not 
provide sufficient evidence to diagnose and predict peri -
odontally compromised teeth, but they may be useful as 
a reference.
We had a heterogeneous distribution of images, based 
on the severity with less severe and moderate images. 
This may have contributed to the reduction of the diag -
nostic accuracy for the multi-classification. To develop 
an advanced deep learning algorithm with the upgraded 
performance it is important to consider the design of the 
algorithm and the use of a balanced training dataset with 
high quality. To overcome this limitation of imbalanced 
image classes required for deep learning, we collected 
only high-quality images that were classified by the perio -
dontist. Learning transfer and preprocessing techniques, 
including image augmentation and enhancement, were 
used to avoid overfitting and to normalize the model [15].
The performance of the machine learning algorithms 
changes with an increasing data size [27]. Additional 
research on a larger dental image dataset with an equal 
distribution of the groups and deep CNN algorithms for 
classification is required.
The images were cropped and resized to 150X150 pix -
els due to practical constraints.  Another limitation of our study was that we performed our results on Google 
Collab with limited memory space, however, memory 
limits are exceeded if the input dimensions of images are 
increased (the memory size of google Collab is 12 GB). To 
process 1800 images with limited resources, Google Col -
lab was used. We downgraded the input dimension to 
150 to utilize the affected resource.  Furthermore, we 
tried 224 dimensions with a reduced number of images 
sample to see if the utilization of memory was affected, 
but the results were not good. The accuracy was lower 
than what we have now, and we recommend investigating 
the impact of the periapical dimension on deep learning 
performance.
Understanding the difference in human dentition is 
crucial in studies. On a superficial level, the teeth of dif -
ferent individuals may appear similar but on closer exam -
ination, they reveal significant variation in both size and 
shape [3]. This variation in the image dataset for upper 
and lower teeth might affect the model result. Maintain -
ing a high quality that covers this variation within each 
class is important and studies are required to reduce the 
impact of this factor on the performance of the deep 
learning prediction and diagnoses.
Clinical trials comparing the identification of periodon -
tally compromised teeth using conventional clinical and 
radiographic findings with and without the support of the 
CNN should be done. Because the differential diagnosis 
between healthy teeth and incipient PCT was made using 
only periapical radiographs, this study did not diagnose 
or distinguish between healthy teeth and incipient PCT.
Conclusion
A deep CNN algorithm (VGG-16) was found to be use -
ful to detect alveolar bone loss in periapical radiographs, 
as well as to detect the severity of bone loss in teeth. The 
results indicate that machines can perform better based 
on the level classification and captured characteristics of 
the image diagnosis. By optimizing the periodontal data -
set, a computer-aided detection system should be able to 
aid in the detection and staging of periodontitis.
Abbreviations
CNN: Convolutional neural network; MCC: Matthews Correlation Coefficient; 
PCT: PCeriodontally compromised teeth; AI: Artificial intelligence; PD: Peri-
odontitis; RBL: Radiographic bone loss.
Acknowledgements
We would like to acknowledge Engr. Amin Alawad, IT Manager at College 
of Dentistry, King Saud bin Abdulaziz University for Health Sciences for his 
support in this research and Dr. Susanna Wright of King AbdullahInternational 
Medical Research Center for her assistance in editing themanuscript.
Author contributions
GA: Formulated the research plan, performed literature search, collected the 
data, and wrote up the studyMAW: performed literature search, collected data, 
and wrote the manuscriptFFF: performed literature search, analyzed data, and