Page 2 of 7 Alotaibi et al. BMC Oral Health          (2022) 22:399 
(20–50%) and is the primary cause of tooth loss in adults 
[19]. Though the microbial plaque biofilm initiates the 
process, progression is largely due to an exaggerated host 
immune-inflammatory response [5]. It is a major public 
health problem with a significant impact on an individu -
al’s quality of life [19].
Despite the latest advances in treatment modalities, 
there has not been a significant improvement in the 
methodology for detecting alveolar bone loss and assess -
ing the severity of the bone loss in the compromised 
teeth. Radiographs, such as panoramic/periapical and 
bitewing radiographs as well as periodontal probing, are 
widely used as objective diagnostic tools for diagnosing 
and predicting periodontally compromised teeth (PCT). 
Clinical diagnostic and prognostic judgment depends 
greatly on empirical evidence [20].
Artificial intelligence (AI) has primarily been used in 
dentistry to improve the accuracy and efficiency of diag -
nosis, which is critical to achieving the best outcomes 
for procedures, and provide superior patient care [8]. 
AI approaches may be beneficial because they provide a 
more effective diagnostic process when combined with 
clinical assessment. Using image recognition, classifica -
tion, and segmentation, AI may enhance dental efficiency. 
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs), the latest core 
model of artificial neural networks, and deep learning in 
computer vision include image recognition and segmen -
tation, which can be used as a supplement to radiographs 
to detect periodontal disease. CNNs can detect edges and 
capture patterns in PCT images. Through their multiple 
convolutional and hidden layers, deep CNN algorithms 
can learn hierarchical feature representations and cap -
ture regional patterns from the PCT images.
To date, there have only been a few studies that inves -
tigated the use of deep learning in the diagnosis of PCT. 
CNN-based methods were proposed for detecting radio -
graphic bone loss (RBL) on dental panoramic radiographs 
[2–11, 16–22, 25]. Studies have also evaluated deep CNN 
for determining peri-implant marginal bone loss on den -
tal periapical radiographs [6]. The CNN was used in the 
detection of periodontally compromised posterior teeth 
on intraoral radiographs [15].
The purpose of the current study was to evaluate the 
potential usefulness and accuracy of deep CNN algo -
rithms for detecting an alveolar bone loss in incisor teeth 
in periapical radiographs and the severity of the bone loss 
in the periodontally compromised incisor teeth.
Methods
The study was conducted in the College of Dentistry, 
King Saud Bin Abdulaziz University for Health Sciences, 
and approved by the Institutional Review Board of King Abdullah International Medical Research Center at 
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia (SP20-234-R).
A data set of 1724 intraoral periapical images of upper 
and lower anterior teeth from randomly selected peri -
odontitis adult patients between 2015 and 2020 was 
retrieved from the ROMEXIS 6.0 software (Planmeca, 
Finland). Periapical images of patients aged 12  years or 
younger, as well as images with severe noise or haziness 
or showing teeth that were partially present or severely 
distorted, had undergone apical surgery with root resec -
tion, with a full restorative crown, or teeth with a shape 
that deviated from normal anatomical structures, were 
excluded.
All periapical images were annotated and examined 
by three independent examiners, including a periodon -
tist who collected, deciphered, and categorized them 
to determine the severity of the bone loss in the peri -
odontally compromised incisor teeth. All examiners 
were calibrated for annotation and categorization of the 
severity of the bone loss. All the periapical radiographs 
for which the diagnosis of the 3 examiners did not agree 
were excluded. We also categorized the severity of bone 
loss based on the traditional classification by the Inter -
national Workshop for Classification of Periodontal Dis -
eases and Conditions (1999) in which the root is divided 
into three parts from the CEJ to the root apex. The first 
part represented the coronal third, the second the middle 
third, and the third the apical third. The severity of the 
bone loss has been defined as mild if the bone loss is in 
the coronal third of the root, moderate when in the mid -
dle third, advanced when in the apical third of the root 
length [17], and healthy when no vertical or horizontal 
alveolar bone loss was present.
Using a combination of transfer learning models with 
CNN architecture, the radiographic images were used to 
determine the optimal CNN algorithm in Python. The 
data set was divided randomly into 70% training data -
set, 20% validation dataset, and 10% testing dataset. The 
image was exported manually in high-quality “PNG” 
format and examined and manually cropped to show 
only the tooth boundaries. The images were classified in 
binary (healthy or disease) and multiclassification (nor -
mal, mild, moderate, severe). Each image was resized to 
equal size of 150 × 150 pixels. The pixel value was nor -
malized to a value between zero and one, Greyscale.
This study was designed to use a CNN-based model 
called VGG-16 (Visual Geometry Group) network archi -
tecture with the TensorFlow and Keras libraries. This 
architecture is the most popular and effective deep learn -
ing model for image classification problems [28]. The use 
of previous knowledge in rebuilding machine learning for 
the collected dataset is better than starting from scratch 
to solve a new image classification proble [24]. Transfer