Appl. Sci. 2020 ,10, 3359 6 of 20
3.2. Transfer Learning
The source dataset is the dataset being used to train the CNN weights to be used for another
target dataset; usually, the source dataset contains millions of images with thousands of classes, like
the ImageNet dataset [ 32]. The following four techniques for transfer learning were introduced in
the literature:
 The ﬁrst technique is to freeze the source CNN’s weights (like ImageNet’s weights) and then
remove the original fully connected layers and add another classiﬁer, either a new fully connected
layer or any machine learning classiﬁer, like support vector machine (SVM), that is, to use the
original weights for feature extraction.
 The second technique is to ﬁne-tune the top layers of the source CNN with a very small learning
rate and freeze the bottom layers, under the assumption that the bottom layers are very generic
and can be used for any kind of image dataset [16].
 The third technique is to ﬁne-tune the entire network’s weights using a very small learning rate to
avoid losing the source weights, then remove the last fully connected layers, and add another
layer to suit the target dataset.
 The fourth technique is to use the CNN’s original architecture without importing any weights,
that is, to initialize the weights from scratch. The point of this technique is using a well-known
architecture that has been experimented with challenging datasets and proven to be good. Di erent
transfer learning techniques are shown in Figure 4.
Appl. Sci. 2020 , 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW 6 of 20 
3.2. Transfer Learning 
The source dataset is the dataset being used to  train the CNN weights to be used for another 
target dataset; usually, the source dataset contains millions of images with thousands of classes, like 
the ImageNet dataset [32]. The following four techniqu es for transfer learning were introduced in the 
literature: 
• The first technique is to freeze the source CNN’ s weights (like ImageNet’s weights) and then 
remove the original fully connected layers an d add another classifier, either a new fully 
connected layer or any machine learning classifi er, like support vector machine (SVM), that is, 
to use the original weights for feature extraction. 
• The second technique is to fine-tune the top layers  of the source CNN with a very small learning 
rate and freeze the bottom layers , under the assumption that the bottom layers are very generic 
and can be used for any kind of image dataset [16]. 
• The third technique is to fine-tune the entire ne twork’s weights using a very small learning rate 
to avoid losing the source weights, then remove  the last fully connected layers, and add another 
layer to suit the target dataset. 
• The fourth technique is to use the CNN’s original architecture without importing any weights, 
that is, to initialize the weights from scratch. The point of this technique is using a well-known 
architecture that has been experimented with challenging datasets and proven to be good. 
Different transfer learning techniques are shown in Figure 4. 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
 
(c) 
Figure 4. Cont.