Appl. Sci. 2020 ,10, 3359 2 of 20
a neural network with more than one hidden layer, it is called deep learning. Deep learning can be
implemented in the image classiﬁcation domain in which a feed-forward convolutional neural network
(CNN) [ 3] can be used to classify images automatically. Making the CNN able to classify images is
called training; in training, the CNN’s weights will be adjusted to suit the image dataset under study.
The main point of CNN is that it is able to map important features of images that can be used to
classify those images without the CNN’s being explicitly programmed to do so. CNN has been proven
to work with great accuracy in the classiﬁcation of many medical domains like diabetic retinopathy
detection and classiﬁcation [ 4,5], Alzheimer’s disease detection [ 6,7], and skin lesion detection [ 8,9],
among others.
Image classiﬁcation, which is deﬁned as grouping images into successive predeﬁned labels, plays
a very important role in many areas, like the medical ﬁeld. Deep learning algorithms can detect
important features of images without any manual feature engineering, which can be thought of as
using autonomous algorithms that can learn by themselves how to di erentiate between distinct image
classes. The earliest attempt to construct an automatic classiﬁer that could learn how to di erentiate
between classes was introduced by LeCun [ 3], who was inspired by the work of Fukushima et al. [ 10]
and Hubel and Wiesel [ 11], and was named convolutional neural networks (CNN), but this attempt
was limited because of the size of datasets and the computational power available then. In 2012,
Krizhevsky et al. [ 12] introduced their CNN architecture that was named AlexNet and won ﬁrst place
in the ILSVRC competition [ 13], with an error rate of 16% compared to the second place winner’s 25%,
and since then, CNN has become a state-of-the-art image classiﬁer. CNN is considered a feed-forward
artiﬁcial neural network that has at least one convolution layer. A diagram of CNN is shown in Figure 1.
Appl. Sci. 2020 , 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW 2 of 20 
A recent breakthrough in the artificial intelligence field is machine learning, in which an 
algorithm can be developed that will be able to  extract image features automatically. When the 
algorithm used is a neural network with more than one hidden layer, it is called deep learning. Deep 
learning can be implemented in the image classification domain in which a feed-forward 
convolutional neural network (CNN) [3] can be used to classify im ages automatically. Making the 
CNN able to classify images is called training; in training, the CNN’s weights will be adjusted to suit 
the image dataset under study. The main point of CNN is that it is able to map important features of 
images that can be used to classify those images  without the CNN’s being explicitly programmed to 
do so. CNN has been proven to work with great accuracy in the classification of many medical 
domains like diabetic retinopathy detection and cl assification [4,5], Alzheimer’s disease detection 
[6,7], and skin lesion dete ction [8,9], among others. 
Image classification, which is defined as grouping images into successive predefined labels, 
plays a very important role in many areas, like the medical field. Deep learning algorithms can detect important features of images without any manual feature engineering, which can be thought of as 
using autonomous algorithms that can learn by th emselves how to differentiate between distinct 
image classes. The earliest attempt to construct an automatic classifier that could learn how to 
differentiate between classes was introduced by LeCun [3], who was inspired by the work of 
Fukushima et al. [10] and Hubel and Wiesel [11] , and was named convolutional neural networks 
(CNN), but this attempt was limited because of th e size of datasets and the computational power 
available then. In 2012, Krizhevsky et al. [12] in troduced their CNN architecture that was named 
AlexNet and won first place in the ILSVRC competitio n [13], with an error rate of 16% compared to 
the second place winner’s 25%, and since then, CNN has become a state-of-the-art image classifier. 
CNN is considered a feed-forward artificial neural network that has at least one convolution layer. A 
diagram of CNN is shown in Figure 1. 
 
Figure 1. Convolutional neural ne twork (CNN) diagram. 
To accurately train CNN and to overcome the ov erfitting issues associated with feed-forward 
neural networks, usually, hundreds of thousands or  even millions of images  are needed [14], which 
can limit the usage of CNN to certain domains, like na ture images, for classification. Transfer learning 
is a novel domain that has been introduced to help overcome the before-mentioned issues in CNN training, where instead of initializing the network weights from scratch, the weights of a previous 
network that was trained on a different large data set can be used. The medical field could benefit a 
lot from the usage of CNN for image classification, but the main drawback is the number of images available for training, and that is where transfer learning can be used. Using transfer learning for 
medical images has been successfully applied in References[4,6,8]. As pointed out by Chollet [15] , 
transfer learning uses two main te chniques: fine-tuning, wherein the original weights will be re-tuned 
to suit the new dataset, or feature extraction, in  which the original weights will be fixed and the 
original layers will serve for featur e extraction only. Both techniques can help a lot based on the size 
of the dataset, as pointed out by Yo sinski et al. [16]. If the dataset is  large enough, the original layers 
can be fine-tuned, while if the dataset is small, the original layers can serve in feature extraction. Also, 
the similarity between the original dataset and the target dataset can play a very important role. For 
this study, we opted for fine-tuning instead of feature extraction because of the following reasons: (1) the large number of images contained in the data set used, and (2) the huge difference (with respect 
Figure 1. Convolutional neural network (CNN) diagram.
To accurately train CNN and to overcome the overﬁtting issues associated with feed-forward
neural networks, usually, hundreds of thousands or even millions of images are needed [ 14], which can
limit the usage of CNN to certain domains, like nature images, for classiﬁcation. Transfer learning is a
novel domain that has been introduced to help overcome the before-mentioned issues in CNN training,
where instead of initializing the network weights from scratch, the weights of a previous network that
was trained on a di erent large dataset can be used. The medical ﬁeld could beneﬁt a lot from the usage
of CNN for image classiﬁcation, but the main drawback is the number of images available for training,
and that is where transfer learning can be used. Using transfer learning for medical images has been
successfully applied in References [ 4,6,8]. As pointed out by Chollet [ 15], transfer learning uses two
main techniques: ﬁne-tuning, wherein the original weights will be re-tuned to suit the new dataset,
or feature extraction, in which the original weights will be ﬁxed and the original layers will serve for
feature extraction only. Both techniques can help a lot based on the size of the dataset, as pointed out
by Yosinski et al. [ 16]. If the dataset is large enough, the original layers can be ﬁne-tuned, while if the
dataset is small, the original layers can serve in feature extraction. Also, the similarity between the
original dataset and the target dataset can play a very important role. For this study, we opted for
ﬁne-tuning instead of feature extraction because of the following reasons: (1) the large number of
images contained in the dataset used, and (2) the huge di erence (with respect to the domain of the
images) between the ImageNet dataset and the histopathology dataset taken into account.