Appl. Sci. 2020 ,10, 3359 8 of 20
given a source domain, DS, and learning task, KS, a target domain, DT,and its learning task, KT.
Transfer learning aims to help improve the learning of the target predictive function T(.)inKTusing
the knowledge in DSand KS, whereDS,DTorKS,KT.DSrepresents the ImageNet dataset in our
research and its learning task, KS, where KS=n
S,S(.)o
, given that Sis the source label space,
andS(.)is the source predictive function that is used to map a new image xito its label yi.DT
represents the histopathology dataset in our research and its learning task, KT, where KT=n
T,T(.)o
.
As stated before, we want to enhance T(.)of the histopathology dataset, DT,using the ImageNet
dataset,DS, and its objective function, S(.)of K S.
3.3. CNN Architectures
Since AlexNet architecture achieved ﬁrst place in the ImageNet challenge in 2012 with an error
rate of 16%, many architectures were introduced using CNN to classify images. In 2014, VGG [ 24]
architectures, which are considerably deeper than AlexNet architecture [12], were introduced, and in
the same year, GoogLeNet architecture [ 28] was introduced as well, which is considered deeper
and wider than AlexNet. Then, in 2015, ResNet architecture [ 29] was introduced and was deeper
and contained the residual connection, and it was followed by DenseNet [ 26] in 2016. All of these
state-of-the-art CNNs were trained on the ImageNet dataset, and their weights are publicly available.
In this study, we decided to take into account three CNNs, namely, VGG16, VGG19, and InceptionV3
architectures. This choice is related to the fact that these three networks are the ones commonly used in
the Kaggle competition associated with this dataset, and, even more important, they produced better
performance with respect to the other competitors. Additionally, the choice of the architectures to
be considered is not fundamental for developing our study that focuses on understanding whether
ﬁne-tuning is a suitable approach for analyzing the histopathology dataset at hand. Below, we brieﬂy
describe the CNNs used in this paper.
3.3.1. VGG Architectures
VGG architectures [ 24] were introduced by Oxford’s Visual Geometry Group in 2014 to participate
in the ILSVRC competition, where it achieved a top-5 error rate of 7.3%. Two networks, namely
VGG16 and VGG19, were introduced, and the only di erence between the two networks is the
number of convolution layers used. VGG16 consists of 13 convolution layers, and VGG19 consists of
16 convolution layers and so is considered deeper than VGG16. Instead of using a convolution layer
with a large ﬁlter size, the authors concatenated two layers with a smaller ﬁlter size, which reduced the
number of parameters by 28%. VGG networks consist of ﬁve convolution blocks, where the ﬁrst two
blocks consist of two convolution layers each with a ﬁlter size of 33, the convolution layers in the
ﬁrst block have 64 ﬁlters each, while the convolution layers in the second block have 128 ﬁlters each.
The third block in VGG16 consists of three convolution layers, and in VGG19, it has four convolution
layers, all of the layers have 256 ﬁlters with size 33. The fourth and ﬁfth convolution blocks consist
of three convolution layers in VGG16 and four convolution layers in VGG19, and all of the layers
have 512 ﬁlters with size 33. The ﬁve blocks are separated by a maximum pooling layer. Two fully
connected layers are used as a classiﬁer for the network with 4096 neurons. VGG16 has 138 million
parameters with 23 layers’ depth, and VGG19 has 143 million parameters with 26 layers’ depth. VGG
architectures are shown in Figure 5.