Appl. Sci. 2020 ,10, 3359 12 of 20
3.6.1. Early Stopping
A technique used to control the number of training epochs is early stopping. The model training
will stop if the accuracy of the validation dataset does not change for a predeﬁned number of epochs,
meaning that the training will stop if the model starts to overﬁt the training dataset. Early stopping
saves computational power and helps the CNN from overﬁtting the training dataset by doing useless
epochs that will take a long time and decrease the network’s accuracy [ 38]. Early stopping can help
optimize the epoch’s size hyperparameter by setting the epoch size too high and then letting early
stopping automatically halt the training if no increase in accuracy occurs [39].
3.6.2. Best Model Saved
The model will be saved only if the accuracy in that epoch is larger than the largest accuracy
achieved so far. The ﬁnal model is the last saved one.
3.6.3. Dropout
Srivastava et al. [ 37] introduced dropout, which is considered a very important regularization
technique that is usually used as an ensemble technique and is similar to a bagging algorithm [ 40,41].
Every single neuron that each layer is applied to has a probability, p,to be dropped temporarily during
training, so it can construct many networks from the same single network. Dropout can make a CNN
very robust against overﬁtting [38].
3.6.4. Image Augmentation
One of the main methods to reduce overfitting is to have a huge training dataset to train the model on
every single possible image, but practically , that is impossible, which is how augmentation was introduced.
To increase the training dataset, image augmentation can be applied. Image augmentation is deﬁned
as an algorithm that can be used to create artiﬁcial images by modifying the original images through a
series of transformations, rotations, and altered brightness, among other possible modiﬁcations.
4. Results
In this study, three CNN architectures were ﬁne-tuned block-wise to determine the e ect of
ﬁne-tuning each block on the generalizability of the network. The CNN architectures used were VGG16,
VGG19, and InceptionV3. The original weights used were the ImageNet dataset weights. The dataset
used was the publicly available PatchCamelyon dataset, and the dataset size was 220,000 labeled
images for training, which consists of 60% of the positive class and 40% of the negative class. A separate
57,458 unlabeled images were provided to assess the classiﬁer’s performance, and the results of
classifying the test dataset were uploaded to the Kaggle website to determine the AUC of the ROC
curve. In all of the experiments, the Keras library was used with Python. A schematic diagram of the
proposed model is shown in Figure 10.