Appl. Sci. 2020 ,10, 3359 18 of 20
Kassani et al. [19] used the PatchCamelyon dataset as well and achieved accuracy of 94.64%, but the
authors did not explain how they used transfer learning or whether they ﬁne-tuned the entire networks
or not, did not state the size of their test dataset, and did not state whether or not they used the
unlabeled dataset. The highest result we achieved was done by ﬁne-tuning the VGG16 top blocks to
the 3rd block, and it was an AUC of 96%. As stated earlier, the results were obtained by predicting the
unlabeled test dataset and submitting that to the Kaggle platform; therefore, all of our results are in
the AUC of the ROC curve because that is the criteria used by Kaggle to assess the performance of
the classiﬁer.
As for other authors who used di erent histopathology datasets, Ahmad et al. [ 31] reported an
accuracy of 85% for the BioImaging dataset using a ﬁne-tuned ResNet architecture, but the authors did
not report the transfer learning technique they used to achieve this result. Sharma et al. [ 17] achieved
an accuracy of 92.6% and an AUC of 95.65% by using the VGG16 network with logistic regression as a
classiﬁer, but the authors did not investigate the role each block plays in the network performance.
Further, the authors split the dataset into two partitions to assess its accuracy using three heuristics:
the ﬁrst split the dataset into 90% and 10%, the second split the dataset into 80% and 20%, and the
last split the dataset into 70% and 30%. The authors did not use any validation algorithms like k-fold
validation. The results of the three heuristics are approximately similar to each other. Deniz et al. [ 30]
compared ﬁne-tuning with feature extraction for the BreakHis dataset, and the authors reported that
the ﬁne-tuned AlexNet outperformed the VGG16 with SVM as a feature extractor. We can conclude
from these studies that ﬁne-tuning a CNN outperformed other techniques and that encouraged us to
investigate the role of each block to further increase the CNN’s performance.
6. Conclusions
This paper concentrated on the impact of CNN architecture depth while ﬁne-tuning the network.
The architectures used, namely VGG16, VGG19, and InceptionV3, were pre-trained on the ImageNet
dataset. All of the networks were ﬁne-tuned on two di erent histopathology datasets to determine the
eect of each block on the generalizability of the network. Three learning rates were used with an
Adam optimizer to determine the e ect of learning on the performance as well. Our results suggest
that for shallow networks like VGG, ﬁne-tuning the top layers can be su cient to obtain decent results,
while for deep networks like InceptionV3, ﬁne-tuning the entire network can yield better results. In all
cases, the low learning rate is highly recommended when ﬁne-tuning the network in order to not mess
up the original weights. Our recommendation in the case of a scarcity of images is that ﬁne-tuning
a pre-trained CNN can be a feasible option. The conclusions drawn from this study, concerning
ﬁne-tuning, refer to the particular application at hand. To further strengthen our ﬁnding and to
draw more general conclusions that could be applied independently from the applicative domain,
it would have been necessary to perform a study that involved dozens and dozens of datasets over
dierent domains.
In future work, we will use di erent optimizers to detect the e ect of the optimizers as well and will
use di erent datasets, including non-medical ones, to detect the block-wise e ect of ﬁne-tuning CNNs.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, I.K. and M.C.; methodology, I.K.; software, I.K.; validation, I.K.,
M.C.; formal analysis, I.K.; investigation, I.K., M.C.; resources, M.C.; data curation, I.K.; writing—original draft
preparation, I.K.; writing—review and editing, M.C.; visualization, I.K.; supervision, M.C.; project administration,
M.C.; funding acquisition, M.C. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This work was supported by national funds through FCT (Fundaç ão para a Ci ência e a Tecnologia) by
the project GADgET (DSAIPA /DS/0022/2018) and AICE (DSAIPA /DS/0113/2019). Mauro Castelli acknowledges
the ﬁnancial support from the Slovenian Research Agency (research core funding No. nP5-0410).
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.