56  ISSUES IN SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGYIn early 1997, before Alexa and Siri were conceived, I 
engaged in several public debates with MIT Media Lab 
professor Pattie Maes about the future of computing and 
artiﬁcial intelligence. /T_he starting place for our disagreement 
was the question of control. Maes was advancing a vision of 
machine autonomy, of the proactive “so/f_tware agent” that 
“can take initiative because it knows what your interests 
are.” I oﬀered a diﬀerent vision: so/f_tware designs that give 
users high levels of understanding and control over their AI-
enabled devices to preserve human agency.
Although both views of AI design have their value, I 
believe that pursuing a vision of AI and technology design 
that starts with machine autonomy is dangerous for the 
future of human beings, our societies, and our environment. 
/T_he consequences of an autonomy-ﬁrst approach have begun 
to make themselves felt, in stock market ﬂash crashes, deadly 
failures of autonomous missile systems in the second Iraq 
War, fatal accidents involving self-driving cars, and the 
two Boeing 737 MAX crashes. Autonomy-ﬁrst elevates the 
dangers of hidden biases in algorithms for making decisions 
about who gets a mortgage, who gets a job, who gets paroled, 
and in the “surveillance capitalism” that turns surreptitiously 
collected private data into targeted advertising.
As AI-enabled devices proliferate in the economy and our 
daily lives, we are at a decisive moment. What will it take to BEN SHNEIDERMAN
put humanity on a path where humans steer AI to advance 
their own values and aspirations, rather than accepting 
control by autonomous decision algorithms that remain 
beyond our view and direct inﬂuence?
We should reject the idea that autonomous machines 
can exceed or replace any meaningful notion of human 
intelligence, creativity, and responsibility. /T_he clichéd 
images of a human hand shaking a robot hand or a 
humanoid robot pretending to think are archaic and 
misguided. People have remarkable abilities, and in 
contrast to future visions of humanoid robots and driverless 
cars that relieve us of our roles and responsibilities in daily 
tasks, I look forward to next-generation technologies that 
bring greater human control of ever-increasing automation.
My agenda is to help change the way we imagine, talk 
about, and design AI systems, starting with a vision of 
people working together, in charge of technology, and 
beneﬁtting from information-abundant displays that enable 
them to ask better questions and make bolder decisions. 
A growing community of AI researchers are calling this 
approach Human-Centered AI (HCAI). Our goal is to 
amplify, rather than erode, human agency.
And more. HCAI is a vision of how machines might 
augment humans, and even encourage our best impulses 
toward each other, rather than how they might replace Human-Centered 
Computer scientists should build devices to 
enhance and empower—not replace—humans.AI