WINTER 2021    61AI
research. For example, the National Science Foundation’s 
program for National AI Research Institutes seeks to 
accelerate “research, transforming society, and growing the 
American workforce.” /T_his program’s request for proposals 
lists “Human-AI Interaction and Collaboration” as the 
ﬁrst of eight research themes. /T_he program description 
supports human-centered design by encouraging 
attention to “ethics, fairness, privacy, lack of deception, 
explainability, protection of vulnerable and protected 
populations, and participatory and inclusive design,” so as 
to produce “trustworthy and safe” AI systems.
But achieving these laudatory goals demands more than 
good intentions; it also requires institutional mechanisms 
that facilitate HCAI. Such mechanisms are compatible with 
the NSF program’s requirement that investigators address 
foundational AI research while conducting “use-inspired 
research” that “drives innovations in related sectors of 
science and engineering, segments of the economy, or 
societal needs” while working with “external stakeholders 
such as industrial partners, public policy-makers, or 
international organizations.” NSF should link these 
mechanisms with the societal goals of its AI program by 
preferentially funding projects that take human-centered 
design seriously.
/T_he encouragement for AI researchers to raise their 
emphasis on use-inspired research is aligned with the 
growing awareness of the beneﬁts of partnering with 
nonacademic organizations and researchers. When AI 
researchers partner with those who are close to real-world 
problems, the quality of foundational research is likely 
to increase, as are the beneﬁts to society. Such persistent 
interactions enhance the mutual understanding—
empathy—that underlies the HCAI approach. It also brings 
researchers closer to users, the other pillar of HCAI’s 
commitment to empiricism.
/T_hese eﬀorts are a good start, but much more needs 
to be done in educating AI researchers and practitioners 
about the philosophy, principles, and methods at the 
core of the HCAI framework. Making sure that students 
interested in AI receive a diverse education that includes humanities and social sciences will also help. When the 
traditions of rationalism and empiricism are reﬁned to 
account for the richness of modern technologies and the 
distinctions between machines and people, then I believe we 
are more likely to see an increased capacity to create reliable, 
safe, and trustworthy technologies.
AI can advance in ways that support, rather than erode, 
fundamental human aspirations. For many people, the 
desire for social connections with trusted friends, family, 
colleagues, and neighbors is strong. People seek to be 
masters of their own lives, strive to express their creative 
potentials, and with some exceptions, take responsibility 
for their actions. People are imperfect and sometimes 
malicious, but I want to support technologies that help 
people to realize their hopes, help others when they can, and 
contribute to causes they believe in. I envision a future that 
emphasizes human self-eﬃcacy, creativity, responsibility, 
and community, while promoting better education, 
business, government, health and well-being, and economic 
development. I envision a future in which technology 
innovations respect human values, rights, and dignity, 
while promoting fairness, equity, and justice. HCAI can 
illuminate the technological pathways toward these goals.
Ben Shneiderman is a distinguished university professor 
of computer science at the University of Maryland and 
a member of the National Academy of Engineering.
RECOMMENDED READING
John Markoﬀ, Machines of Loving Grace: /T_he Quest 
for Common Ground between Humans and Robots  
(New York, NY: HarperCollins, 2016).
Robin R. Murphy, Disaster Robotics  
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2014).
Cathy O’Neil, Weapons of Math Destruction: How Big 
Data Increases Inequality and /T_hreatens Democracy 
(New York, NY: Broadway Books, 2016).
Ben Shneiderman, “Human-Centered Artiﬁcial Intelligence: 
Reliable, Safe & Trustworthy,” International Journal of 
Human-Computer Interaction 36, no. 6 (2020): 495–504. 
———, “Bridging the Gap between Ethics and Practice: 
Guidelines for Reliable, Safe, and Trustworthy 
Human-Centered AI Systems,” ACM Transactions 
on Interactive Intelligent Systems 10, no. 4 (2020).
Brian Cantwell Smith, /T_he Promise of Artiﬁcial 
Intelligence: Reckoning and Judgment 
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2019).
Shannon Vallor, Technology and the Virtues: A 
Philosophical Guide to a Future Worth Wanting 
(New York, NY: Oxford University Press, 2016).
Joseph Weizenbaum, Computer Power and 
Human Reason: From Judgment to Calculation  
(W. H. Freeman & Co., 1976).Linking the development of AI 
systems to guidelines that assure 
transparency and accountability 
will enhance innovation, public 
conﬁdence, societal value, 
and commercial value.