58  ISSUES IN SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGYAI
Trends project, which began in 2008, demonstrates this 
problem. It aimed to predict ﬂu outbreaks by studying 
patterns of internet search queries for items such as 
tissues and ﬂu medications. It worked for a while, but over 
time, as people used search engines in new ways, and the 
underlying search algorithms were revised in response, these 
changes led to prediction failures that were embarrassing 
enough for Google to shut down the website and project.
Human learning
My own professional journey began when, as an 
undergraduate math and physics major, I wrote 
enthusiastically about the possibilities of artiﬁcial 
intelligence from a rationalist perspective. But a/f_ter 
graduating, when I began to teach data processing 
at a community college, my views began to shi/f_t. 
Close contact with students studying programming 
and information systems gave me insight into how 
diverse people faced varied challenges in learning 
something that seemed obvious to me. If I was to help 
them learn, I had to appreciate their struggles.
My PhD research focused on optimization of data 
structures for the emerging topic of database systems. 
I was still building on the rationalist tradition, using 
quantitative methods that appealed to my sense of rigor. 
/T_hen as an assistant professor in computer science at 
Indiana University, and to the surprise of my computer 
science colleagues, I partnered with a young psychologist, 
Richard Mayer, who trained me in experimental methods 
and statistics for research on human subjects. I began to 
study human performance in laboratory-like settings, to 
improve design of programming languages and tools. I 
moved on to complement these controlled experiments 
with qualitative case studies, and a broader focus on 
research on designing technologies to empower people—
just as personal computers were emerging. I was able 
to experience the satisfaction of contributing to the 
development of a new ﬁeld: human-computer interaction.
In adopting this empiricist approach, I had come to 
see that engaging with users of technology could lead me 
to fresh insights. I used (and continue to use) naturalistic 
observations, usability studies, and repeated weeks-long 
case studies with users doing their work to complement 
the rationalist approach of controlled experiments in 
laboratory settings. /T_his work was aligned with the rise of 
the concept of design thinking, an approach to innovation 
that begins with empathy for users and pushes forward 
with humility about the limits of machines and people. 
Empathy enables designers to be sensitive to the confusion 
and frustration that users might have and the dangers to 
people when AI systems fail. Humility leads designers to 
recognize the inevitability of failure and inspires them to 
be always on the lookout for what wrongs are preventable.Humans in the group; computers in the loop
/T_he AI community’s sympathy for rationalism continues 
to lead developers to favor autonomous designs in which 
computers operate reliably without human oversight. /T_his 
approach typically brings with it an imagined future of 
intelligent machines that pretend to have emotions. Many 
developers believe that autonomous machines will seem 
less threatening to us if they act like friends or partners. 
But computers don’t have emotions; people do. Today, 
humanlike social robots remain novelties, mostly conﬁned to 
entertainment, with only voice user interfaces succeeding as a 
consumer product.
HCAI designers recognize that humans are happily and 
productively woven into social networks; for example, at work 
we are embedded in social structures of supervisors, peers, 
and staﬀ who we want to please, inspire, and respect. From 
the HCAI perspective, computers should play a supportive 
role, amplifying people’s ability to work in masterful or 
extraordinary ways.
Although a growing number of people are demanding 
that AI machines include a “human in the loop,” this phrase 
o/f_ten implies a grudging acceptance of human control panels. 
/T_hose who seek a complete and perfect system are resistant to 
the idea that there needs to be human intervention, oversight, 
and control. /T_he HCAI bumper sticker would be Humans in 
the group; computers in the loop .
I believe that progress in technology design will accelerate 
as recognition spreads that humans must have meaningful 
control of technology and are responsible for the outcomes 
of their actions. When humans depend on automation to 
get their work done, they must be able to anticipate what 
happens, because they, not the machines, are responsible. One 
eﬀective way to enable users to anticipate the consequences of 
their actions is with direct manipulation designs—the objects 
and actions are represented on the screen; humans choose 
which actions to carry out; the actions and objects are all 
visible. /T_he ﬁle drops into the trash can, you hear the clinking 
and know what’s going on. Touch screen, swipe le/f_t and right. 
Overview ﬁrst, zoom and ﬁlter, then details on demand. 
Humans are in control; computers are predictable.
Although AI projects are o/f_ten focused on replacing 
humans, HCAI designers favor developing information-rich 
visualizations and explanations built in, rather than added 
on. Today, the vast majority of apps are giving users more 
control, not less—by showing highway navigation routes on 
maps, exercise histories in bar charts, and ﬁnancial portfolios 
in line graphs. /T_hese displays give users a clear understanding 
of what is happening and what they can do. Visual displays 
are now frequently complemented by audio interfaces based 
on speech recognition and generation, opening up new 
possibilities for diverse users to accomplish their tasks. Digital 
cameras have lots of AI embedded, but the users get to take 
the picture they want—and more advanced cameras increase,