60  ISSUES IN SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGYAI
passive targets of automation; HCAI views them as people 
whose lives can be enriched through a strengthened sense 
of agency and social connectedness. 
HCAI for policymakers
Policymakers must now deal with the challenges of 
AI-driven decision processes across a vast range of 
applications, including mortgage and parole decisions, 
self-driving cars, and medical implants. Congressional 
committee and government agency staﬀers are considering 
how to regulate social media platforms to reduce fake news, 
hate speech, criminal activity, and terrorist recruitment. 
Government policymakers are working hard to understand 
and make decisions about how to deal with AI technologies 
that impact public services, such as whether to allow police 
to use facial recognition, how to limit foreign agents from 
interfering with voting, and whether to permit immigration 
agencies to screen refugees with opaque algorithms.
/T_hese policy concerns are usually viewed through an 
ethical lens, and have led to more than 400 reports about 
responsible, fair, transparent, and accountable AI. But 
building the ediﬁce of reliable, safe, and trustworthy AI 
systems requires not just attention to ethics, but actual 
design decisions that embody the HCAI approach. Ethical 
principles and design guidelines from leading companies 
such as Apple, Google, IBM, and Microso/f_t are helpful, but 
insuﬃcient to bridge the gap between ethics and practice. 
General principles such as “mitigate social biases” or “AI 
systems must be transparent and explainable” are ﬁne, but 
speciﬁc guidelines, clear examples, and assessment criteria 
are needed for so/f_tware engineers to know when they have 
done a good job.
I propose that design, development, and implementation 
of AI systems needs to adhere to these three HCAI 
guidelines:
1. Build reliable and transparent systems based on 
sound so/f_tware engineering team practices , such as 
testing so/f_tware to check AI algorithms, using visual tools 
to reveal anomalies, and testing databases to enhance 
fairness in machine learning training datasets. A big 
step forward would be to adapt the model of ﬂight data 
recording, which has contributed so much to make civil 
aviation safe, to record activity that allows retrospective 
forensic analysis a/f_ter failures and near misses. Another 
vital feature will be to support explainable AI, which 
enables users to understand AI-based decisions and seek 
redress for what they see as unfair or incorrect decisions. 
New approaches that involve visual user interfaces are 
proving to be helpful in giving designers, implementers, 
and users a better understanding of AI-based 
decisionmaking. A still better approach is to prevent the 
need for explanations by using visual control panels that 
let users understand their progress through the process.2. Pursue safety culture through eﬀective business 
management strategies , such as clear demonstrations 
by corporate leadership of their commitment to safety. 
Hiring risk-assessment professionals, allocating 
adequate budget for safety and training of staﬀ, and 
reporting all failures and near misses are key pillars 
of safety culture. Another is adherence to voluntary 
industry standards and guidelines promoted by 
professional groups such as the Robotics Industry 
Association, Underwriters Laboratory, the International 
Standards Organization, and IEEE, the largest 
engineering society. HCAI thinking suggests incident 
reporting and suggestion box schemes, such as the Food 
and Drug Administration’s Adverse Event Reporting 
System, the Federal Aviation Administration’s Aviation 
Safety Reporting System, and the Partnership on AI’s 
Incident Database, now with more than a thousand 
entries.
3. Increase trust through certiﬁcation and 
independent oversight within each industry , carried 
out by government agencies, independent accounting 
ﬁrms, insurance companies, professional societies, and 
nongovernmental organizations. An excellent model 
is the National Transportation Safety Board, whose 
investigations of airplane, ship, train, and car accidents 
are widely respected, and whose recommended 
improvements are thus taken seriously by the industries 
the board oversees. /T_hough a National Algorithms 
Safety Board is an appealing notion for independent 
oversight, a more realistic approach is for existing 
government agencies to increase their capacity to 
investigate consequential and life-critical failures in 
each industry.
Above all, HCAI oﬀers fundamental philosophical 
and design principals for addressing the challenges 
created by the diﬀusion of AI systems through society 
and the economy: start with the users. For example, if 
Facebook and other social platforms won’t give their 
users greater control of ﬁlters on what users get to see 
and what ads they are shown, then users could be assured 
such control through regulation or new legislation.
AI advocates might claim that AI regulation by 
government will slow innovation. But the history 
of automobile safety and eﬃciency requirements 
shows that they led to massive innovation and public 
beneﬁts. Regulation of drug safety has similarly 
been essential to the commercial success of the 
pharmaceutical industry. Linking the development 
of AI systems to guidelines that assure transparency 
and accountability will enhance innovation, public 
conﬁdence, societal value, and commercial value.
Government research agencies can also lead the 
way by incentivizing HCAI approaches to cutting-edge