WINTER 2021    57AI
humans with something supposedly better. To understand 
HCAI’s promise not only for our machines but for 
our lives, a good starting place is an appreciation of 
the two competing philosophies that have shaped the 
development of AI, and what those imply for the design 
of new technologies. For policymakers, comprehending 
these competing imperatives can provide a foundation 
for navigating the vast thicket of ethical dilemmas now 
arising in the machine-learning space.
Aristotle vs. da Vinci
/T_he diﬀerence between artiﬁcial intelligence and Human-
Centered AI reﬂects a historical and philosophical clash 
between two approaches to gaining knowledge about the 
world—Aristotle’s rationalism and Leonardo da Vinci’s 
empiricism.
Rationalists believe in logical thinking, which can be 
accomplished in the comfort and familiarity of your lab or 
even your living room. /T_hey believe in the perfectibility of 
rules, the strength of formal methods, and the constancy 
of well-deﬁned boundaries between diﬀerent categories 
of things—such as hot and cold or wet and dry. Aristotle 
recognized important distinctions, such as the diﬀerences 
between vertebrates and invertebrates, and the four 
classes of matter: earth, water, air, and ﬁre.
As useful as strong rules and categories are for 
allowing clarity of thought, they can limit seeing other 
options and middle grounds. Followers of rationalism 
have included Descartes, with his powerful assertion 
of the duality of mind and body, and his mechanistic 
view of nature, and, in the twentieth century, the famed 
statistician Ronald Fisher, whose overly rigid commitment 
to statistics led him to reject early data on the risks 
of smoking. Rationalism, especially as embodied in 
logical mathematical thinking, is the basis for much 
of AI research, in which algorithms are treasured for 
their elegance and measured by their eﬃciency. /T_his 
was true in the days of symbolic AI algorithms written 
by programmers, and remains true in our time of data-
driven deep learning based on neural networks.
By contrast, empiricists believe that researchers are 
enriched by the contradictions and ambiguities that 
come with real-world experiences in all their contextual 
complexity and diversity. /T_hey understand that beliefs 
have to be continuously reﬁned to respond to changing 
realities and new contexts. Da Vinci developed ﬂuid 
dynamics principles by using his keen eyesight to study 
bird ﬂight and watch water ﬂowing around obstacles. 
Galileo was following da Vinci’s method by noticing the 
rhythmic swaying of a chandelier in church, which led 
him to the formula for pendulum swing times. David 
Hume, who recognized that correlations between events 
were fallible predictors of future consequences, was another great empiricist. /T_he statistician John Tukey, 
in contrast to Ronald Fisher, believed in looking at data 
graphically, because analysts could see errors, missing data, 
anomalies, exceptional performances, and unexpected 
distributions of data. /T_his graphical view revealed 
surprising patterns and suggested fresh questions.
Empiricism, pursued through the empathic observation 
of people, is the basis for much of the HCAI community’s 
work, which assesses human performance so as to improve 
it. Empiricists question simple dichotomies and complex 
hierarchies, because these may sometimes limit thinking, 
and undermine the analysts’ capacity to see important 
nuances and nonhierarchical relationships.
/T_he rationalist viewpoint, however, is dominant in 
the AI community. It leads researchers and developers 
to emphasize data-driven solutions based on algorithms. 
Rationalism also favors the belief that statistical methods 
and machine learning algorithms are suﬃcient to achieve 
AI’s promise of matching or exceeding human intelligence 
on well-deﬁned tasks, rather than requiring deep 
engagement with domain experts who understand causal 
relationships among variables. Some AI advocates have 
gone so far as to say that theories about causal relationships 
are no longer needed for AI because the amount of data 
now available for machine learning allows for correlations 
that are strong enough to guide decisions.
Such reasoning also leads to the conclusion that machine 
learning can replace expert knowledge. And though it 
is true that machine learning can reveal patterns in the 
data used to “train” algorithms, it does not deal with 
surprising extreme cases, such as when Tesla’s self-driving 
car could not distinguish a white truck from the sky and 
drove right into it. Learning from these and hundreds of 
other incidents will lead to safer cars sooner. But standard 
approaches to machine learning do not allow adequate 
learning from such apparently exceptional events. Eﬀorts 
to develop commonsense reasoning, explainable AI, and 
causal understanding seem still shallow compared with 
what humans do when they formulate problems, ﬁnd 
innovative solutions, and—as I am doing here—raise 
challenges to existing beliefs.
Human curiosity and desire to understand the world 
mean that humans are devoted to causal explanations, 
even when there is a complex set of distant and proximate 
causes for events. Machines lack such curiosity. Algorithms 
trained via machine learning are still subject to failure in 
novel situations, because they lack the innately human 
attributes of common sense and higher cognition. For 
example, machine learning may not recognize hidden 
biases or the absence of expected patterns.
And though humans experience the passage of time and 
adjust to new realities, computers with machine learning 
repeat the past, including its mistakes. /T_he Google Flu