WINTER 2021    59AI
In sum, the HCAI community’s sympathy for 
empiricism leads its members to design systems with 
users at the center of attention. To get a sense of how 
HCAI can enrich human experience in ways that 
conventional AI cannot, consider its application to the 
daily life of an aging population. Conventional AI might 
lead toward home robots that clear dinner tables to ﬁll 
traditional dishwashers. I see this as eroding human 
agency. AI isn’t the answer to everything: why not have 
small dishwashers built into, under, or beside dinner 
tables so that an older person could simply slide plates, 
cups, and cutlery into the dishwasher, which washes them 
to make them readily available for the next meal. /T_his 
approach enhances self-eﬃcacy rather than waiting for 
a mobile robot to carry oﬀ the dishes to the kitchen and 
bring them back when requested.
In contrast, Human-Centered AI could promote 
community-based solutions for some problems. For 
older adults and people living with disabilities, the 
Meals on Wheels programs that deliver prepared meals 
are much appreciated, not only for the food, but for the 
social contact with the delivery person, who may bring 
the food in, check on the recipient, and maybe clear the 
table. /T_hose who deliver the meals gain satisfaction in 
helping those in need and might be celebrated in their 
communities. AI algorithms could help match interests 
and personalities of deliverers and recipients, while 
scheduling eﬃcient routes.
Social support for professional caregivers, family 
members, and helpful friends could increase the pride 
and satisfaction they get from taking compassionate care 
of homebound individuals. Smartphone applications 
could weave together networks of professional caregivers 
with income-earning strategies that give workers a better 
deal than existing gig-economy schemes. However, the 
special needs of older adults and people with disabilities 
would prioritize long-term commitments that build 
relationships, and opportunities for care recipients to rate 
the caregivers, possibly with public comments of praise 
that would raise status for caregivers. Rationalist AI treats 
caregivers, aging people, and people with disabilities as rather than decrease, the user’s control over the device.
Similarly, educational intelligent tutoring systems with 
chatty humanlike avatars have given way to widely used 
online courses where users chart their own progress, see the 
gaps in their learning, and click to decide how fast they will 
move forward. In my view, future technologies are more 
likely to be what I call supertools and active appliances, 
rather than teammates, partners, and collaborators. Tele-
operated drones, home controls, and surgical devices 
will spread, and the ambitious control rooms for NASA’s 
Mars rovers, transportation management centers, patient-
monitoring displays, and ﬁnancial management so/f_tware, 
such as Bloomberg Terminals, will become the compelling 
prototypes for still more advanced applications.
Accountable AI
/T_his human-centered empiricist-driven strategy should 
apply strongly to military applications where responsibility 
within a chain of command is a core value. Even when 
the case for autonomy in defensive systems is strong, no 
weapons systems should be fully autonomous. But the 
HCAI approach also applies to the popular notion of 
autonomous vehicles or self-driving cars, where attaining 
adequate levels of safety will require an empiricist’s outlook 
and design of eﬀective user interfaces to enable meaningful 
human control, even as the levels of automation increase. 
Self-driving  should become safety-ﬁrst  cars in which proven 
methods such as collision avoidance are improved by better 
user interfaces. /T_hen further improvements will come from 
vehicle-to-vehicle communication, improved highway 
construction, and advanced highway management centers 
that build on the strategies of air traﬃc control centers.
Devotees of autonomous design o/f_ten assume machines 
will do the right thing. But as ﬂaws such as algorithmic 
bias in AI-driven systems emerged to shatter the belief in 
the perfectibility of these systems, HCAI researchers have 
begun to take on fairness, accountability, transparency, 
explainability, and other design features that give 
human developers, managers, users, and lawyers a better 
understanding of what is happening than in the previously 
closed black boxes. Moreover, many types of AI systems 
should include logging activity to support transparent and 
retrospective review of failures and aggregate patterns of 
usage. /T_his strategy, following civil aviation’s commitment 
to continual improvement, would install the equivalent of 
a ﬂight data recorder in every robot. Adding audit trails 
or activity logs would assure appropriate accountability, 
especially in applications that have signiﬁcant consequences 
for people and organizations, in settings ranging from 
the hospital to the battleﬁeld. /T_he design goal is to enable 
retrospective analyses of failures and near misses and 
review of aggregate patterns of performance to allow 
continual design improvement.We should reject the idea that 
autonomous machines can exceed or 
replace any meaningful notion 
of human intelligence, creativity, 
and responsibility.