Sensors 2023 ,23, 3457 20 of 24
Further, in order to ﬁlter off the invalid attributes and simplify the useful information
from the original input dataset, instead of generating low-dimensional images in all sce-
narios, researchers have proposed dividing a particular game map into the combination of
different map elements or components, then replacing these components by some tokens.
This process is known as “tokenization”, as described in [ 68]. Much simpliﬁed new images
that retain all useful attributes could be constructed, then the prescribed machine learning
or VAE model can be used to train these images and produce combined outputs. In the
future, this technique can be incorporated into the existing VAE model for enhancing image
resolution and producing images with better quality, especially for images similar to our
Case Study 1.
5.2. Image Compression, Clarity of Outputs & Model Training
In the VAE model, a scaling factor has to be applied to raw datasets during the
data preprocessing stage. If one excessively compresses the original image, much useful
information will be lost, and ﬁne details cannot be effectively kept during the model
training stage, which could result in outputs of insufﬁcient clarity. On the other hand, if the
compression was not conducted, huge computing resources would be occupied especially
when we are handling large-scale datasets, for example, the database from ImageNet [ 69]
or remotely sensed imageries for object detection or environmental monitoring [70,71]. In
most desktops, the memory is only of 4–48 G [72]; therefore, memory overﬂow will easily
take place, thus limiting the overall efﬁciency and reliability of a model. The time consumed
for model training and image retrieval will be excessively long as well. On top of that, in
terms of model training, it will take many rounds of data analytic experiments in order to
optimize the hyper-parameters of the VAE model, and as a result, increase the overall time
consumed. Therefore, it is of utmost importance to strike a balance between the quality of
outputs and the time consumed for generating the outputs via modeling approaches.
For the purposes of game design and creating new game levels, in order to alleviate
the problem of insufﬁcient clarity caused by the VAE model, and to avoid the occurrence
of “mode collapse” (i.e., only one or several image types will be generated) that often
takes place in traditional GAN models, the combination of VAE and GAN models can be
adopted. The VAE model only consists of one generator, while the GAN model consists
of both a generator and a discriminator. These two “machines” oppose each other, where
the generator is continuously attempting to generate images and frames that can fool the
discriminator; as a result, the probability for a discriminator to make mistakes will increase;
while the discriminator tries its best to distinguish between real and useful data from fake
ones via appropriate neural network mechanisms [ 73]. As a result, better outputs can be
generated after a series of to and fro opposed checking. For enhancing the clarity of images
in Case Studies 1 and 2 of this paper, we propose adopting the VAE model as the generator
and simultaneously develop a discriminator to supervise the VAE model, i.e., a combined
version of VAE and GAN models is to be established. As a result, the generator of the
VAE-GAN model will consist of the statistical or probabilistic distribution of the original
input dataset, and at the same time, it can effectively reduce the training time throughout
the entire process and minimize the chance of the model suffering from “mode collapse”.
6. Conclusions
In this study, we illustrated the possibility and statistical feasibility of using the
combination of a VAE model and machine learning strategies for modern game design,
with the aid of three case studies arising from different natural scenarios and applications.
The mathematical principles and assumptions of the VAE model, as well as its Evidence
Lower Bound (ELBO), loss function during model construction, and loss function in data
clustering, were ﬁrst explored and derived. Then, the VAE model was applied to generate
new game maps based on existing maps obtained from Arknights, create and retrieve anime
avatars, and cluster a group of MNIST datasets that consist of numerals. The output images
and datasets could retain and re-combine information from the inputs to a certain extent,