Sensors 2023 ,23, 3457 16 of 24
the eventual image. In this case study, there are only limited number of game maps, and the
data size of each raw game map is 500500. Therefore, if this model is extended to handle
a large-scale dataset, say those originated from satellite observations [ 58,59], then it would
likely take days or even months for data processing; the same will take place when we
extend the VAE algorithm to handle multi-dimensional datasets. Combining this concept
with the amount of loss as shown in Figure 10b, a factor of 0.2 was adopted, because a
reasonably low average loss was induced by the VAE model, and the computation time
for the entire process was not exceptionally long even when dealing with input datasets
of larger size. Further, from Figure 10b, the R2value of the resulting linear ﬁt is 0.965;
therefore, there is a high possibility that the average loss of the VAE model was linearly
related to the scaling factor imposed.
Despite obtaining all these meaningful conclusions from the correlations between
different statistical quantities, we cannot conclude that when a smaller scaling factor is
adopted, the model output must be better and of higher clarity. This is because the loss
function derived in Section 3.5 only estimates the information loss when comparing the
input and output datasets after both encoding and decoding were conducted, but may
have ignored the information loss during the preprocessing stage. In actual industrial
applications, the information loss of all aspects should be considered, so that an optimal
scaling factor can be selected to balance the quality of outputs and model training efﬁciency.
4.2. Case Study 2: Generating Anime Avatars via the V AE Model
VAE model is not only useful and applicable in generating a mixture of images or
combined game levels from an input dataset, but can also be used to obtain new outputs: If
we consider a set of images as the input, after encoding and decoding processes, a totally
brand-new image can be created as the eventual output. In this case study, a dataset that
consists of 60,000 different anime-girls (an example is shown in Figure 3) was ingested into
the VAE model, and the two possible outputs of the model are as shown in Figure 11.
Sensors 2023 , 23, x FOR PEER REVIEW 16 of 24 
 
 Figure 10. (a) Time consumed for ten image- generation process (in s) ve rsus scaling factor imposed 
in the model; ( b) Average loss of the ten image-generation process versus scaling factor imposed in 
the model. 
As observed, the time consumption was no t linearly related to the scaling factor 
imposed in the VAE model. Instead, the plot shown almost converges to a quadratic or 
exponential relationship. Nevertheless, as the scaling factor increased from 0.2 to 0.3, the 
time consumed would exceed double the original time; while when a scaling factor of 0.4 
was applied to the VAE model, it took 75 s for processing the VAE model and generating the eventual image. In this case study, ther e are only limited number of game maps, and 
the data size of each raw game map is 500 × 500 . Therefore, if this model is extended to 
handle a large-scale dataset, say those originated from satellite observations [58,59], then 
it would likely take days or even months for data processing; the same will take place 
when we extend the VAE algorithm to handle multi-dimensional datasets. Combining this concept with the amount of loss as shown in Figure 10(b), a factor of 0.2 was adopted, 
because a reasonably low average loss was induced by the VAE model, and the 
computation time for the entire process was not exceptionally long even when dealing 
with input datasets of larger size. Further, from Figure 10(b), the R
2 value of the resulting 
linear ﬁt is 0.965; therefore, there is a high po ssibility that the average loss of the VAE 
model was linearly related to the scaling factor imposed.  
Despite obtaining all these meaningful co nclusions from the correlations between 
diﬀerent statistical quantities, we cannot conclude that when a smaller scaling factor is 
adopted, the model output must be be tter and of higher clarity. This is because the loss 
function derived in Section 3.5 only estimates the information loss when comparing the 
input and output datasets after both encodi ng and decoding were conducted, but may 
have ignored the information loss during the preprocessing stage. In actual industrial 
applications, the information loss of all aspects should be considered, so that an optimal scaling factor can be selected to balance the quality of outputs and model training 
eﬃciency. 
4.2. Case Study 2: Generating Anime Avatars via the VAE Model 
VAE model is not only useful and applicable in generating a mixture of images or 
combined game levels from an input dataset, but can also be used to obtain new outputs: 
If we consider a set of images as the input, after encoding and decoding processes, a totally 
brand-new image can be created as the eventual output. In this case study, a dataset that 
consists of 60,000 di ﬀerent anime-girls (an example is sh own in Figure 3) was ingested 
into the VAE model, and the two possible outp uts of the model are as shown in Figure 11. 
  
Figure 11. Two sample output images obtained from the VAE model based on the anime-girl dataset
(Section 2.2.2).
In principle, the creation of new ﬁgures or images is not only limited to grayscale
representation, but can also be feasible when colored images are desired. The VAE model
can generate different new images simply by altering the training dataset, and our purpose
within this case study is merely to illustrate the possibility of using the VAE model for
generating new datasets or frames. In practice, when colored images are of interests, the