Citation: Mak, H.W.L.; Han, R.; Yin,
H.H.F. Application of Variational
AutoEncoder (VAE) Model and
Image Processing Approaches in
Game Design. Sensors 2023 ,23, 3457.
https://doi.org/10.3390/s23073457
Academic Editor: Christoph M.
Friedrich
Received: 28 February 2023
Revised: 15 March 2023
Accepted: 23 March 2023
Published: 25 March 2023
Copyright: © 2023 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
sensors
Article
Application of Variational AutoEncoder (V AE) Model and
Image Processing Approaches in Game Design
Hugo Wai Leung Mak1,2,*
, Runze Han2and Hoover H. F. Yin3,4,*
1Department of Mathematics, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, New Territories,
Hong Kong, China
2Department of Mathematics, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Clear Water Bay,
Kowloon, Hong Kong, China
3Department of Information Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, New Territories,
Hong Kong, China
4Department of Electronic and Computer Engineering, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology,
Clear Water Bay, Kowloon, Hong Kong, China
*Correspondence: hwlmak@ust.hk (H.W.L.M.); hfyin@ie.cuhk.edu.hk (H.H.F.Y.)
Abstract: In recent decades, the Variational AutoEncoder (VAE) model has shown good potential
and capability in image generation and dimensionality reduction. The combination of VAE and
various machine learning frameworks has also worked effectively in different daily life applications,
however its possible use and effectiveness in modern game design has seldom been explored nor
assessed. The use of its feature extractor for data clustering has also been minimally discussed in the
literature neither. This study ﬁrst attempts to explore different mathematical properties of the VAE
model, in particular, the theoretical framework of the encoding and decoding processes, the possible
achievable lower bound and loss functions of different applications; then applies the established
VAE model to generate new game levels based on two well-known game settings; and to validate
the effectiveness of its data clustering mechanism with the aid of the Modiﬁed National Institute
of Standards and Technology (MNIST) database. Respective statistical metrics and assessments are
also utilized to evaluate the performance of the proposed VAE model in aforementioned case studies.
Based on the statistical and graphical results, several potential deﬁciencies, for example, difﬁculties in
handling high-dimensional and vast datasets, as well as insufﬁcient clarity of outputs are discussed;
then measures of future enhancement, such as tokenization and the combination of VAE and GAN
models, are also outlined. Hopefully, this can ultimately maximize the strengths and advantages of
VAE for future game design tasks and relevant industrial missions.
Keywords: game design; variational autoencoder (VAE); image and video generation; Bayesian
algorithm; loss function; data clustering; data and image analytics; MNIST database; generator
and discriminator
1. Introduction
In the 21st century, enormous mathematical and data analytic techniques and algo-
rithms have been adopted in designing new video games and frames, for the purposes of
enhancing teaching and learning processes in a virtual environment, pushing the innova-
tion and specialty of gameplay mechanics to its furthest extent, and visualizing game scenes
in a human-crafted, realistic and dynamic manner [ 1–3]. The concerned subjects include
the investigation of 3-dimensional geometric properties of characters within a particular
frame [ 4], the capturing of geometric transformations and motion on a real-time basis [ 5],
and the use of simulation games for analyzing and building up complex systems that could
better reﬂect real world conditions [ 6]. Today, credited with the increment of computing
power and resources, the enhancement of data storage capability, and the massive data
volume for simultaneous processing [ 3], the advancement in machine learning (ML) and
Sensors 2023 ,23, 3457. https://doi.org/10.3390/s23073457 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/sensors