Sensors 2023 ,23, 3457 6 of 24
Sensors 2023 , 23, x FOR PEER REVIEW 6 of 24 
 
 2.2.2. Characters from Konachan  
The second type of dataset(s) adopted in this study was obtained from the Konachan 
site, which is an image board site th at consists of more than 60,000 di ﬀerent anime or 
manga wallpapers, as of February 2023 [44]. Figure 3 shows an example of an anime avatar 
extracted from this o ﬃcial website. The size of this image is 512 × 512 digits, with 300 ppi. 
 
Figure 3. An example of  the anime avatar image, from [44]. 
2.2.3. Modi ﬁed National Institute of Standard s and Technology (MNIST) Database 
The third type of dataset was extracted fr om the MNIST database, which was created 
in 1998. The MNIST database cont ains binary images of handwri tten digits and is divided 
into the training set (Special Database 3) an d test set (Special Database 1). The two sets 
were collected from Census Bureau employees and high school students respectively [45]. 
This vast database of handwri tten digits has been shown useful in pa ttern recognition and 
training various image processing systems for classi ﬁcation, with the aid of convolution 
neural network techniques [46,47]. Original images from MNIST were ﬁrst being size-
normalized, with the corresponding aspect ratio remaining unchanged, so that they could ﬁt into a 20 × 20 pixel box; then, the center of  mass of all pixels was computed, so that 
these processed MNIST images could be posi tioned at the centre of a “28 × 28 pixel 
grayscale image” [45]. The database that we adopted in this study consists of 60,000 such 
grayscale images, each of which consists of 10 digits (from 0 to 9, inclusive), along with a 
test set that consists of 10,000 images [48]. In  this context, the MNIST database was selected 
to test and validate the e ﬀects of clustering, because ever y data entry has already been 
pre-labeled with classi ﬁcation labels.  
3. Methodologies: Steps of the VAE Model 
The important steps and statistical measures of the VAE model are provided in this 
section, which provide readers with a crucial reference of how the VAE model was 
constructed; the ideas of data preprocessing; and the important parameters that should be 
optimized (i.e., maximized or minimized) during machine learning stages.  
3.1. Data Preprocessing 
First, the raw images were compressed by applying a speci ﬁc scaling factor, which is 
deﬁned as the ratio of the length of a side of a desired output image to that of the original 
image. In this study, a scaling factor of less than 1 was adopted to speed up the machine 
learning and training processes, at  the same time preventing the over ﬂowing of memory.  
Afterwards, the compressed images were decolorized using the optimization 
approach proposed in [49], with the aim of pr eserving original color contrasts to the best 
extent. In principle, the VAE model is applicable for handling RGB images, however, due 
to the limitations of computer performance, the images obtained from datasets in Section 
2 were converted into grayscale styles. Nevert heless, the texture, color contrast and pixel 
properties were preserved as much as possible, so that the e ﬀectiveness of the VAE model 
could be fairly assessed. In this study, the Intel(R) Xeon(R) CPU E5-2670 v3 (developed by 
Figure 3. An example of the anime avatar image, from [44].
2.2.3. Modiﬁed National Institute of Standards and Technology (MNIST) Database
The third type of dataset was extracted from the MNIST database, which was created
in 1998. The MNIST database contains binary images of handwritten digits and is divided
into the training set (Special Database 3) and test set (Special Database 1). The two sets
were collected from Census Bureau employees and high school students respectively [45].
This vast database of handwritten digits has been shown useful in pattern recognition and
training various image processing systems for classiﬁcation, with the aid of convolution
neural network techniques [ 46,47]. Original images from MNIST were ﬁrst being size-
normalized, with the corresponding aspect ratio remaining unchanged, so that they could
ﬁt into a 2020 pixel box; then, the center of mass of all pixels was computed, so that these
processed MNIST images could be positioned at the centre of a “28 28 pixel grayscale
image” [ 45]. The database that we adopted in this study consists of 60,000 such grayscale
images, each of which consists of 10 digits (from 0 to 9, inclusive), along with a test set that
consists of 10,000 images [ 48]. In this context, the MNIST database was selected to test and
validate the effects of clustering, because every data entry has already been pre-labeled
with classiﬁcation labels.
3. Methodologies: Steps of the V AE Model
The important steps and statistical measures of the VAE model are provided in this
section, which provide readers with a crucial reference of how the VAE model was con-
structed; the ideas of data preprocessing; and the important parameters that should be
optimized (i.e., maximized or minimized) during machine learning stages.
3.1. Data Preprocessing
First, the raw images were compressed by applying a speciﬁc scaling factor, which is
deﬁned as the ratio of the length of a side of a desired output image to that of the original
image. In this study, a scaling factor of less than 1 was adopted to speed up the machine
learning and training processes, at the same time preventing the overﬂowing of memory.
Afterwards, the compressed images were decolorized using the optimization approach
proposed in [ 49], with the aim of preserving original color contrasts to the best extent. In
principle, the VAE model is applicable for handling RGB images, however, due to the
limitations of computer performance, the images obtained from datasets in Section 2
were converted into grayscale styles. Nevertheless, the texture, color contrast and pixel
properties were preserved as much as possible, so that the effectiveness of the VAE model
could be fairly assessed. In this study, the Intel(R) Xeon(R) CPU E5-2670 v3 (developed
by Intel of United States in 2014) with two processors was adopted, and the system was
prescribed as a 64-bit operating system, with 128 GB RAM installed.
As for the Arknights game maps described in Section 2.2.1, since every game map
represents only a class label, while a maximum of 180 different images can be obtained
from the open data source, therefore, each of these 180 images was copied by 10 times, so
that a total of 1800 images were ingested into the VAE model, with most of them being