Sensors 2023 ,23, 3457 19 of 24
number of epochs is feasible in real-life implementation if one can wait for a longer period
of time. In terms of data clustering in Section 4.3, the average accuracy had a sharp increase
when the number of epochs increased from 3 to 30 (from around 0.3 to 0.8), but then, the
increasing trend became steadier when the number of epochs increased from 30 to 50, and
the average accuracy eventually converged to around 0.85 (as shown in Figure 13). This
indicates that 50 epochs or above would be practical enough for image generation, creation
of new game levels, and even data clustering.
As for the choice of scaling factor, as shown in Figure 10a, when it ranged from 0.15
to around 0.4, the time taken for new image generation was increasing at an almost linear
trend. However, when the scaling factor exceeded 0.4, an excessive increment of time
would have taken place. Further, from Figure 10b, when the scaling factor was 0.18 or
0.2, the average loss of information or input attributes would be similar, however, when
the scaling factor increased to 0.3, the average loss was tripled. Such an experimental
testing could explain why the scaling factor of 0.2 should be adopted when designing
new game levels, and such a factor must not exceed 0.4 in all practical implementations
when the VAE model is going to be involved in model development or training processes.
Regarding the model explainability of VAE, since all images or video frames that we
considered were obtained from real observations of corresponding games, corresponding
sub-centroids could be summarized and treated as actual training images within the
model, then these data points or features could also be of practical usage during feature
classiﬁcation. This “ad-hoc explainability” concept was validated in the recently established
deep nearest centroids (DNCs) model [ 60], where human-understandable explanations
could be effectively derived. This was actually quite similar in our VAE model, where the
sub-centroids of each image pixel could also be computed and identiﬁed.
5. Discussions and Limitations
5.1. Deﬁciencies of a Low-Dimensional Manifold & Tokenization
Although the applicability of the VAE model in modern game design, pattern recog-
nition, and data clustering was clearly illustrated in this study, there is some room for
improvements based on the graphical results obtained from some of our case studies. In
particular, in the case study of Arknights, when zooming Figure 7 into details, the image
quality at speciﬁc pixels or regions could be dissatisfactory. This is because the input
image consisted of some discrete pixels or point clouds in a high-dimensional space, and
VAE attempted to ﬁrst compress them into a low-dimensional continuous space (which
was denoted as a “latent space”), then restore the original space via the decoding pro-
cess. It was observed that VAE could work very well when the input dataset is actually a
low-dimensional manifold embedded in a higher-dimensional space [ 61], however, some
graphics, such as those in Arknights, are obviously not a low-dimensional manifold itself
in nature. This has led to some potential errors within the VAE-based retrieval process.
Further, some features of images, such as texture, are relatively hard to be described with
a low data volume, but texture can indeed play an important role in computer vision
applications, for example, surface detection and medical imaging [ 62]. Therefore, to en-
hance the quality of outputs from the VAE model in these industrial applications, other
deep-learning networks and transform-based methods can be adopted to distinguish these
features at an early stage, either via the use of a smooth function for transformation, or
extracting the concerned features in another space, with the aid of wavelet transforms [ 63],
ridgelet transform [ 64], or a Gabor ﬁlter [ 65]. Then, the corresponding attribute(s) can be
combined with the latent space vector in VAE to produce better numerical results, and the
information lost during encoding and decoding processes of VAE can also be minimized.
For label distribution construction, the spherical Fibonacci lattice algorithm proposed by
Gonz ález [66] can be used for point sampling and obtaining a distribution that possesses
unbiased expectation. Afterwards, the loss function introduced in [ 67] can be introduced
into the modeling framework, with an attempt to understand the corresponding parameters
of each input sample.