Sensors 2023 ,23, 3457 12 of 24
datasets, the scaling factor imposed in the preprocessing stage, and the time consumed for
the entire VAE modeling and retrieval process. Then, for attributes that seem to be linearly
related, the least-square ﬁtting approach was adopted to ﬁnd out the best-ﬁt line that
describes the relationship between the two concerned quantities. The resulting coefﬁcient
of determination (R2) is a statistical parameter that ensures the order of accuracy of such a
least-squared ﬁt. Such an approach was implemented in statistical analyses of Case Study 1,
where the linear ﬁt was applied in investigating the relationship between time consumed
with the number of epochs and size of input dataset respectively, as well as the amount of
information loss with the choice of scaling factor.
As for numerical quantities that were not linearly related, we connected every two
neighboring data points and observed the resulting statistical trends (if any). If possible, the
convergence of such a statistical curve will also be our focus, for example, the convergence
of average information loss (Case Study 1) and average recognition accuracy (Case Study 3)
as the number of epochs increased. These threshold values could be particularly useful
for future game designers to determine the optimal settings before model simulations
are conducted.
4. Numerical Experiments and Results
4.1. Case Study 1: Generation of Video Game Maps
The Arknights game maps were downloaded from [ 42] and were preprocessed as
in Section 3.1, where a scaling factor of 0.2 was adopted. Further, the number of epochs
within the VAE model was pre-set to be 50, which means that each sample in the training
dataset would have 50 times to update its internal model parameters. The number “50”
was selected to ensure that the error from the model was sufﬁciently minimized, but at
the same time ensuring the affordability of our computing platform [ 54]. This number of
epochs in testing the effectiveness of a model had been adopted in many studies, such
as [55,56], for practical implementations, for example, forecasting power demand and the
smart utilization of power grids, and the classiﬁcation of coronavirus. The VAE-based
outputs are as shown in Figures 6 and 7, where Figure 6 shows two outputs obtained after
the completion of model training within the VAE architecture and that after the mixing
process was conducted; while Figure 7 shows the detailed output game map obtained after
several original images were mixed together.
Sensors 2023 , 23, x FOR PEER REVIEW 13 of 24 
 
   
(a) ( b) 
Figure 6. Resulting output game maps obtained after ( a) the training of the VAE model, and ( b) the 
mixing process (based on raw game maps  of Arknights obtained from [42]). 
 
Figure 7. The zoom-in version of an output game map of Arknights after the mixing of several 
processed images in the VAE model. 
As observed from Figure 6, the images generated by the VAE model could retain the 
characteristics and features of the original image, and a new image could be e ﬀectively 
generated by mixing several original raw images from [42]. The mixing process was 
feasible (as shown on Figure 6(b)). However, when zooming in the output and a ttempting 
to visualize the ﬁne details of an image, it was noticed that the sharpness of the output 
image was rather insu ﬃcient, mainly due to the noise components induced during the 
training process. It is suggested to apply a suitable Laplacian sharpening ﬁlter or Sobel 
gradient for spatial enhancement, so that the edges of ﬁgures within the image can become 
more obvious [57]. Nevertheless, the new output images from the VAE model can still 
serve as good references for game designers when creating new game levels, or when 
adding in new characters and spatial features into particular video frames.  
After obtaining the output images, numerical experiments were conducted using the 
same dataset for exploring the statistical pr operties of the VAE model. First, Figure 8 
shows one of the most well-known learning curves, with the aim of illustrating the 
Figure 6. Resulting output game maps obtained after ( a) the training of the VAE model, and ( b) the
mixing process (based on raw game maps of Arknights obtained from [42]).