Sensors 2023 ,23, 3457 13 of 24
Sensors 2023 , 23, x FOR PEER REVIEW 13 of 24 
 
   
(a) ( b) 
Figure 6. Resulting output game maps obtained after ( a) the training of the VAE model, and ( b) the 
mixing process (based on raw game maps  of Arknights obtained from [42]). 
 
Figure 7. The zoom-in version of an output game map of Arknights after the mixing of several 
processed images in the VAE model. 
As observed from Figure 6, the images generated by the VAE model could retain the 
characteristics and features of the original image, and a new image could be e ﬀectively 
generated by mixing several original raw images from [42]. The mixing process was 
feasible (as shown on Figure 6(b)). However, when zooming in the output and a ttempting 
to visualize the ﬁne details of an image, it was noticed that the sharpness of the output 
image was rather insu ﬃcient, mainly due to the noise components induced during the 
training process. It is suggested to apply a suitable Laplacian sharpening ﬁlter or Sobel 
gradient for spatial enhancement, so that the edges of ﬁgures within the image can become 
more obvious [57]. Nevertheless, the new output images from the VAE model can still 
serve as good references for game designers when creating new game levels, or when 
adding in new characters and spatial features into particular video frames.  
After obtaining the output images, numerical experiments were conducted using the 
same dataset for exploring the statistical pr operties of the VAE model. First, Figure 8 
shows one of the most well-known learning curves, with the aim of illustrating the 
Figure 7. The zoom-in version of an output game map of Arknights after the mixing of several
processed images in the VAE model.
As observed from Figure 6, the images generated by the VAE model could retain the
characteristics and features of the original image, and a new image could be effectively
generated by mixing several original raw images from [ 42]. The mixing process was feasible
(as shown on Figure 6b). However, when zooming in the output and attempting to visualize
the ﬁne details of an image, it was noticed that the sharpness of the output image was rather
insufﬁcient, mainly due to the noise components induced during the training process. It
is suggested to apply a suitable Laplacian sharpening ﬁlter or Sobel gradient for spatial
enhancement, so that the edges of ﬁgures within the image can become more obvious [ 57].
Nevertheless, the new output images from the VAE model can still serve as good references
for game designers when creating new game levels, or when adding in new characters and
spatial features into particular video frames.
After obtaining the output images, numerical experiments were conducted using the
same dataset for exploring the statistical properties of the VAE model. First, Figure 8 shows
one of the most well-known learning curves, with the aim of illustrating the relationship
between average loss of the ten image-generation process and the number of epochs
within the machine learning stage. In general, the average loss of the model decreased as
the number of epochs increased, but the rate of decrease of average loss was gradually
decreasing with the increase in epochs. Exact statistical ﬁgures of average loss within
different number of epochs (ranging from 1 to 16, inclusive) are provided in Table 2. The
average loss when using 1 epoch was 1259.3, which then decreased to 1122.4 and 1025.6
when 2 and 10 epochs were respectively adopted. Continuing such process, it was observed
that at the 21st epoch, the average loss would decrease to 999.0; while after 50 epochs, the
resulting average loss would only be 968.24. Overall, both graphical and statistical results
have shown that the VAE model is ﬁt to the training dataset extracted from the game map
in [42], and 50 epochs is a reasonable number of epochs to be adopted in the VAE model.