Sensors 2023 ,23, 3457 2 of 24
artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) approaches are taking place and being widely adopted in different
practical disciplines, especially those related to image processing and computer vision, as
well as the emergence of generative models. This new digital era has also promoted the
use of these approaches in handling creative and artistic tasks, for example, a conditional
adversarial neural network has been applied for generating city maps from sketch [ 7]; a
Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) model was established to generate images based
on the simple sentence description of an object or a speciﬁc scenario [ 8]; the Game Design
via Creative Machine Learning (GDCML) mechanism was utilized for setting up an inter-
face with game modules and informing new systems [ 9]. In view of all these successes,
achieving “computational creativity” in the perspective of video game design has now
become a hotspot and new focus; while game companies and developers are seeking ways
to adopt ML and AI algorithms, so that the overall production cost of a game or related
products can be reduced, at the same time, brand new working procedures of the game can
also be implemented in the long run. A research report published by Netease has reviewed
that the incorporation of ML models into game design could reduce the development costs
by millions of Renminbi (RMB) dollars [10].
In the early days of video game development, most games were relatively simple
and “monotonous”, and were conducted via the “third-person shooting” mode, with
the aid of electronic machines. In 1962, Steve Russell and several student hobbyists at
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) developed the ﬁrst ever video game in the
world, called Spacewar! [ 11], and this game was published on the Digital Equipment
Corporation (DEC) platform at a later time. Within the historical development stage,
Spacewar! was considered the ﬁrst highly inﬂuential video game, because it motivated the
advancement of computing resources, reviewed the difﬁculties in transferring programs
and graphics between computing platforms at different places [ 11], and stimulated the
development of different game genres. In the early 1970s, the ﬁrst home video game console
called the “Magnavox Odyssey” and the ﬁrst arcade video game called the “Computer
Space and Pong” were respectively established. At the earlier stages, despite the effective
integration of technology, creativity and computing resources, there was a lack of uniform
standards for classifying game genres in terms of gameplay, however, games can generally
be categorized as in [ 12]. Some key examples include (1) Action Games that emphasize
physical challenges, particularly the coordination of hands and eyes; (2) First Person Shooter
Games that include the use of guns and weapons for competition and ﬁghting against each
other from a ﬁrst-person perspective; (3) Sports and Racing Games, which simulate the
practice of sports or racing originated from real or fantastical environments; (4) Simulation
Games that describe a diverse super-category of video games, so that real world activities
can be effectively simulated and displayed, for example, ﬂight simulation and farming
simulation. With the combination of these genres and capabilities of algorithmic design
and data analytics, the importance and popularity of arcades and consoles had diminished,
and were gradually replaced by games that are compatible with personal computers,
smartphones and mobile devices. Some mainstream game platforms in the 21st century
are as shown in Table 1. Nowadays, most games released are not limited to a particular
genre, for example, “Need for Speed” is considered a Sports and Racing Game, as well as
a Simulation Game [ 13]; while many games can also be released on multiple platforms,
for example, the “Genshin Impact” is compatible with PC, mobile device, and PlayStation
simultaneously [14].
Apart from categorizing video games based on their genres and compatible platforms,
modern games all consist of three major components, namely (1) the program component;
(2) the gameplay component; and (3) the artistic component. Programs form the basis
of a video game, which determine the basic structure and logic of the game; gameplays
decide how the players and the surrounding environment could interact, via the aspects
of designing background settings, battles, balances and stages of the game itself; artistic
components lay down what the player can visualize and hear during the gameplay, which
can include the design of characters, environmental settings, design of background music