Sensors 2023 ,23, 3457 3 of 24
and animations, and the ways of interaction [ 15]. In particular, when designers attempt
to produce artistic materials that put spice into the attractiveness of the video game, they
may either take reference of real world architectural and parametric settings, or create
objects and environments that may not exist in reality. All these have provided possibilities
for the utilization and application of image generation techniques within game design
processes [16,17].
Table 1. Mainstream game platforms and corresponding compatible device in the 21st century.
Game Platform Company Device
Personal Computer (PC) Microsoft Desktop/laptop computers
Mobile Phone Apple, Google, Samsung etc. Smartphones
Xbox [18] Microsoft Xbox game console
PlayStation (PS) [19] Sony PlayStation 1–5
Switch [20] NintendoNintendo 3DS/
Nintendo Switch
Recently, designers and scientists have started exploring how ML and combinatorial
algorithms could play systematic roles in different levels of game design, for example, data
preprocessing, clustering, decoding and encoding, as well as generating attractive and
sustainable image outputs in a speciﬁc game [ 21–24]. In particular, a concept called “game
blending” was adopted by Gow and Coreneli to establish a framework that effectively
produces new games from multiple existing games [ 25]; while the Long Short-Term Memory
(LSTM) technique has also been applied to blend computer game levels based on Mario
and Kid Icarus, then combine with the Variational AutoEncoder (VAE) model to generate
more controllable game levels [ 26,27]. In recent years, Generative Adversarial Network
(GAN) models have become popular, and have been incorporated into the framework of
generating game levels and images under speciﬁc conditions and settings [ 28,29]. These
black-box models allow users to design and generate levels in an automatic manner, thus
Schrum et al. [ 30] utilized such unique features to develop a latent model-based game
designing tool; while Torrado et al. [ 31] investigated the conditional GAN and established
a new GAN-based architecture called “Conditional Embedding Self-Attention GAN”, then
equipped it with the bootstrapping mechanism for the purpose of generating Role-Playing
Games (RPG) levels. On top of this, GANs have been combined with the transfer learning
method (e.g., WGAN-GP and BigGAN) to generate new game characters [ 32], and a 2D
game effect sprite generation technique called GESGAN was also established to generate
images of prescribed styles and features with a near real-time status [ 33]. All these have
shown the capabilities of ML or deep-learning models in generating game levels within
speciﬁc set-ups. Nevertheless, it is incredibly hard to obtain a thorough understanding
of the internal structure of ML-based models, as well as the statistical properties behind
the scene. Therefore, it is of utmost importance to develop and explore the use of a
mathematical model that can perform corresponding tasks, i.e., generate new game levels
that are applicable in modern game design and for future extension, and at the same time,
users can acquire a basic understanding of statistical properties of the model, for example,
time complexity, amount of loss during the model training process, and the relationship
between time consumption and size of the input dataset.
In this study, the effectiveness of the Variational AutoEncoder (VAE) model in generat-
ing images within game design was ﬁrst explored and assessed. It is considered a deep
generative model that consists of a variational autoencoder, which is equipped with a prior
noise distribution. During the model training process, which is usually conducted based on
an Expectation-Maximization meta-algorithm, the encoding distribution was “regularized”,
so that the resulting latent space sufﬁced to generate new and meaningful datasets. The
detailed mathematical derivation will be discussed in Section 3, and readers can also refer