Sensors 2023 ,23, 3457 21 of 24
however, in the case study of Arknights (Case Study 1), there was room for improvements
due to the lack of clarity in terms of the output image, which could essentially represent a
new game level in practice.
Some statistical features of the model and the relationship between different param-
eters were also reviewed from these three case studies, for example, there was a high
possibility that the time complexity of this VAE model is O( n); the loss of the VAE model
decreased as the number of epochs applied increased, but the rate of change of such loss
was also declining in general; and the time consumed for performing the VAE model was
positively and linearly related to the number of epochs. For preventing memory overﬂow
and saving computing resources, an appropriate scaling factor had been applied to each
input dataset or image at the preprocessing stage. It was found that the time consumed
increased as the scaling factor increased, and it was quite clear that the loss derived from
the loss function was positively and linearly related to this scaling factor.
Despite showing some technical deﬁciencies in generating new game levels (as re-
viewed in Case Study 1), the VAE model has shown its capability in data clustering. Further,
for image attributes (or data points) with obviously different characteristics or spatial fea-
tures, the VAE model can also successfully distinguish one class from another via the model
training process, then generate images of a speciﬁc class. On average, the recognition
accuracy under 50 epochs is 85.4%, which is considered satisfactory.
Generally speaking, the VAE model is most effective in generating images with a spe-
ciﬁc graphical pattern, or handling and producing images of low resolution requirements,
for example, clouds, grass and distant views in our nature. It is particularly promising in
terms of clustering and creating new characters within a game.
In view of the technical shortcoming of the current VAE model, we have learnt that
the future enhancement should focus on increasing the resolution of images generated, for
example, via the combination of the VAE model with other machine learning mechanisms,
such as GAN and LSTM, ensuring sufﬁciency with regard to the amount of information in
the model training set, so that all output images will contain more useful information and
attributes, but at the same time consist of the least amount of noise components. This may
be possible by tracing back to the techniques adopted in data preprocessing stages. This
study has opened a new window for utilizing the strengths of VAE for future game design
missions within the industry, at the same time identifying some potential weaknesses of
VAE and proposing potential ways to remedy these deﬁciencies in the foreseeable future.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, H.W.L.M. and R.H.; methodology, H.W.L.M. and R.H.;
software, R.H.; validation, H.W.L.M. and H.H.F.Y.; formal analysis, H.W.L.M. and R.H.; inves-
tigation, H.W.L.M., R.H. and H.H.F.Y.; writing—original draft preparation, H.W.L.M. and R.H.;
writing—review and editing, H.W.L.M. and H.H.F.Y.; supervision, H.W.L.M.; project administration,
H.W.L.M. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: The data presented in this study are available on request from the
corresponding authors.
Acknowledgments: This paper is an extended and modiﬁed version of the master project report of
R.H., which was supervised by H.W.L.M.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest. There was no funder involved in
this study and this paper.