Sensors 2023 ,23, 3457 4 of 24
to [34] for more technical details. The VAE model was ﬁrst proposed by Kingma and
Welling [ 35], and has been widely applied in different disciplines, for example, image gener-
ation, data classiﬁcation and dimensionality reduction [ 36–38]. In particular, Vuyyuru et al.
constructed a weather prediction model based on the combination of VAE and Multilayer
Perceptrons (MLP) models [ 39], and Lin et al. attempted to detect the anomaly of ofﬁce
temperature within a prescribed period via LSTM and VAE models [ 40]. Furthermore, Bao
et al. had effectively combined the Convolutional Variational Autoencoder (cVAN) with the
GAN model to generate human photos by controlling the gender of required ﬁgures [ 41].
All these case studies have demonstrated the systematic and practical usages of the VAE
model, therefore, we expect that with a suitable data processing mechanism, ﬁne-tuning of
model parameters, and minimization of the loss function during training, selected game
functions or level maps can be generated, as a result provide assistance to game developers
in the long run, in terms of auxiliary development, designing new games, and enhancing
the speed and time complexity of image generation within speciﬁc settings.
Section 2 includes the ﬂowchart of how the VAE model was applied in this study,
and the description of datasets used in the three case studies. Then, the mathematical
theories and statistical properties of the VAE model are outlined in Section 3, and Section 4
showcases some numerical experiments conducted and their corresponding statistical
analyses. Section 5 discusses the deﬁciencies and limitations of the current study, as well as
some potential future research directions; then, a short conclusion is provided in Section 6.
2. Flowchart and Data Sources
2.1. Overview of This Study
Figure 1 shows an overall ﬂowchart of the preprocessing and construction of the VAE
model adopted in this study. After raw data or attributes were obtained from games or
available databases, they were preprocessed whenever necessary. Upon the application of
speciﬁc scaling factors within each dimension, these processed datasets could be ingested
into a machine, where a sufﬁcient number of datasets was used for model training. In
particular, the variational autoencoder within the VAE model was constructed, and the
VAE algorithm was iterated such that the optimization of lower bound was achieved under
some constraints, which might depend on the set-up of the corresponding game and/or
application. Such lower bound was called the “Evidence lower bound (ELBO)”. Further,
the loss function during machine learning processes was also minimized, with the aim of
estimating the amount of information that has been lost during model training processes.
For data clustering applications, an alternative form of the loss function was deemed
more appropriate than the aforementioned “loss” during training. After ﬁne-tuning all
parameters of such a statistical model, the optimized VAE model was used to obtain some
graphical outputs after a series of geometric transformations. In this study, we focus on
analyzing the relationship between average loss ﬁgures with the number of epochs; the time
complexity with the size of input datasets; and the effects of scaling factors, etc. Respective
statistical ﬁgures are presented either in graphical or tabular formats, as in Section 4.
2.2. Data Sources and Description
Within this study, three different datasets have been used for model training and
assessing the effectiveness of the developed VAE model. Each of these datasets has its
signiﬁcance, namely, (1) provides good references for game designers; (2) consists of a
“humanistic” character equipped with motion; and (3) is practical for image processing
and/or data clustering.