Sensors 2023 ,23, 3457 17 of 24
computer memory needed will almost be tripled, because the RGB color space requires a
3-dimensional array to record the pixel values (i.e., intensities) of all three different colors.
4.3. Case Study 3: Application of V AE Model to Data Clustering
The VAE model is considered both a generative model and a feature extractor, be-
cause it consists of an encoder and a decoder (which is treated as a generator), and the
distribution of the latent variable can approximately be encoded as a standard normal
distribution. Therefore, the effectiveness of the VAE model in performing data clustering
was tested, because in principle, the feature extractor could conduct the task without any
external supervision.
In this study, the MINST dataset of handwritten numbers (described in Section 2.2.3)
was used to illustrate the applicability of the VAE model in data clustering. Figure 12a
shows the sampled numbers “6, 2, 7”, while Figure 12b showcases the corresponding
numbers generated by the VAE model after data clustering was applied to all numbers
shown in Figure 12a. Obviously, the VAE model had reasonably good performance in
terms of data clustering, and was capable of classifying different data types without any
supervision, then generating appropriate images that correspond to the clustered datasets.
Sensors 2023 , 23, x FOR PEER REVIEW 17 of 24 
 
 Figure 11. Two sample output images obtained from the VAE model based on the anime-girl dataset 
(Section 2.2.2). 
In principle, the creation of new ﬁgures or images is not only limited to grayscale 
representation, but can also be feasible when colored images are desired. The VAE model can generate di ﬀerent new images simply by altering the training dataset, and our 
purpose within this case study is merely to illustrate the possibility of using the VAE 
model for generating new datasets or frames . In practice, when colored images are of 
interests, the computer memory needed will almost be tripled, because the RGB color 
space requires a 3-dimensional array to record the pixel values (i.e., intensities) of all three diﬀerent colors. 
4.3. Case Study 3: Application of VAE Model to Data Clustering 
The VAE model is considered both a generative model and a feature extractor, 
because it consists of an encoder and a decoder (which is treated as a generator), and the 
distribution of the latent variable can approximately be encoded as a standard normal distribution. Therefore, the e ﬀectiveness of the VAE model in performing data clustering 
was tested, because in principle, the feature extractor could conduct the task without any 
external supervision.  
In this study, the MINST dataset of handwri tten numbers (described in Section 2.2.3) 
was used to illustrate the applicability of the VAE model in data clustering. Figure 12(a) shows the sampled numbers “6, 2, 7”, while Figure 12(b) showcases the corresponding 
numbers generated by the VAE model after da ta clustering was applied to all numbers 
shown in Figure 12(a). Obviously, the VAE model had reasonably good performance in 
terms of data clustering, and was capable of classifying di ﬀerent data types without any 
supervision, then generating appropriate images that correspond to the clustered 
datasets.  
   
(a) 
   
(b) 
Figure 12. (a) Sampled datasets of “6, 2, 7” ingested into the VAE model; ( b) Output datasets 
obtained from the VAE model. 
Within this case study, 50 epochs wa s adopted, and the averaged recognition 
accuracy based on conducting 10 similar experiments via the VAE model was 85.4%. The 
Figure 12. (a) Sampled datasets of “6, 2, 7” ingested into the VAE model; ( b) Output datasets obtained
from the VAE model.
Within this case study, 50 epochs was adopted, and the averaged recognition accuracy
based on conducting 10 similar experiments via the VAE model was 85.4%. The corre-
sponding training accuracy was around 83.7%. Table 3 shows the average accuracy of data
clustering when different numbers of epochs were applied.