3.1 Results
Table 3 displays the average accuracy and standard deviation (aft er the±sign)
for: XGBoost with default parameters (shown with label D. XGB), t uned XG-
Boost (as T. XGB in the table), random forest with default paramet rization
(with D. RF), tuned random forest (T. RF), default gradient boos ting (D. GB)
and tuned gradient boosting (T. GB). The best accuracy for each dataset is
highlighted using a yellow background.
From Table 3, it can be observed that the method that obtains the b est
performance in relation to the number of datasets with the highest accuracy is
tuned gradient boosting (in 10 out of 28 datasets). After that, t he methods
in order are: tuned XGBoost, that achieves the best results in 8 da tasets; de-
fault gradient boosting in 5; tuned and default random forest in 4; a nd default
XGBoost in 3. As it can be observed, the default performance of th e three
tested algorithms is quite diﬀerent. Default random forest is the me thod that
performs more evenly with respect to its tuned counterpart. Exc ept for a few
datasets, the diﬀerences in performance are very small in random forest. In fact,
the diﬀerence between the tuned and the default parametrization s of random
forest is below 0 .5% in 18 out of 28 datasets. Default XGBoost and gradient
boosting performgenerallyworsethan their tuned versions. Howe ver, this is not
always the case. This is especially evident in three cases for XGBoost (German,
Parkinson andVehicle), wherethedefaultparametrizationforXGBoostachieves
a better performance than the tuned XGBoost. These cases are a combination
of two factors: noisy datasets and good default settings. The pa rameter esti-
mation process, even though it is performed within train cross-valid ation, may
overﬁt the training set specially in noisy datasets. In fact, it has be en shown
that reusing the training data multiple times can lead to overﬁtting [7 ]. On the
other hand, in these datasets, the default setting is one of the pa rametrizations
that obtains the best results both in train and test (among the bes t≈5%).
In order to summarize the ﬁgures shown in Table 3, we applied the met hod-
ology proposed in [6]. This methodology compares the performance o f several
models across multiple datasets. The comparison is carried out in ter ms of
average rank of the performance of each method in the tested da tasets. The
results of this methodology are shown graphically in Figure 1. In this p lot, a
higher rank indicates a better accuracy. Statistical diﬀerences a mong average
ranks are determined using a Nemenyi test. There are no statistic al signiﬁcant
diﬀerences in average ranks between methods connected with a ho rizontal solid
line. The critical distance over which the diﬀerences are considered signiﬁcant
is shown in the plot for reference (CD = 1.42 for 6 methods, 28 datas ets and
p-value<0.05).
From Figure 1, it can be observed that there are not any statistica lly sig-
niﬁcant diﬀerences among the average ranks of the six tested met hods. The
best method in terms of average rank is tuned XGBoost, followed by gradient
boosting and random forest with default settings.
In Table 4, the average training execution time (in seconds) for the analyzed
datasets is shown. For the methods using the default settings, th e table shows
9