Moreover, a sparsity-aware algorithm is used in XGBoost to eﬀectiv ely remove
missing values from the computation of the loss gain of split candidate s.
The following parameters were tuned for XGBoost in this study:
•The learning rate ( learning_rate ) or shrinkage ν.
•The minimum loss reduction ( gamma): The higher this value, the shallower
the trees.
•The maximum depth of the tree ( max_depth )
•Thefractionoffeaturestobeevaluatedateachsplit( colsample_bylevel ).
•The subsampling rate ( subsample ): sampling is done without replace-
ment.
3 Experimental results
In this section, an extensive comparative analysisof the eﬃciency o f random for-
est, gradient boosting and XGBoost models is carried out. For the e xperiments,
28diﬀerentdatasetscomingfromtheUCIrepository[12]werecon sidered. These
datasets come from diﬀerent ﬁelds of application, and have diﬀeren t number of
attributes, classes and instances. The characteristics of the an alyzed datasets
are shown in Table 1, which displays for each dataset its name, numbe r of in-
stances, number of attributes, if the dataset has missing values a nd number of
classes. For this experiment, the implementation of scikit-learn package [14]
was used for random forest and gradient boosting. For XGBoost, theXGBoost
package1was used. In addition, for the comparison, XGBoost, random fore st
and gradient boosting were analyzed tuning the parameters using a grid search
as well as using the default parameters of the corresponding pack ages.
The comparison was carried out using stratiﬁed 10-fold cross-valid ation. For
eachdatasetandpartitionofthedataintotrainandtest, thefollo wingprocedure
was carried out for random forest, XGBoost and gradient boostin g: (i) the
optimum parameters for each method were estimated with stratiﬁe d 10-fold
cross-validation within the training set using a grid search. A wide ran ge of
parameter values is explored in the grid search. For each of the thr ee methods,
these valuesareshownin Table 2. (ii) The best set ofparametersex tractedfrom
the grid search was used to train the corresponding ensemble using the whole
training partition; (iii) Additionally, for XGBoost, an ensemble was tra ined on
the whole training set for each possible combination of parameters g iven in
Table 2. This allows us, in combination with step (i), to test for diﬀeren t grids
(more details down below); (iv) The default sets of parameters for each method
were additionally used to train an ensemble of each type (Table 2 show s the
default values for each parameter and ensemble type); (v) The ge neralization
accuracy of the three ensembles selected in (i) and of the three en sembles with
1https://github.com/dmlc/xgboost
6