in datasets as Echo,SonarorTic-tac-toe . In addition, when the default setting
is better than the proposed parameters, the diﬀerences are in ge neral small,
except for German,Parkinson andVehicle.
In spite of the improvements on average achieved by the proposed parame-
ter setting, it seems clear that parameter optimization is necessar y to further
improve the performance of XGBoost and to adapt the model to th e character-
istics of each speciﬁc dataset. In this context, we carry out an ex periment to
explore two diﬀerent parameter grids. On one hand, we would like to a nalyze
the diﬀerences between gradient boosting and XGBoost in more det ail. There
are little diﬀerences between both algorithms except that XGBoost is optimized
for speed. The main diﬀerence, from a machine learning point of view, is that
XGBoostincorporatesintothelossfunctionaparametertoexplicit lycontrolthe
complexity of the decision trees (i.e. gamma). In order to analyze wh ether this
parameterprovides any advantagein the classiﬁcationperforman ce of XGBoost,
agridwith thesameparametervaluesasthe onesgivenbyTable2isus edexcept
for gamma, which is always set to 0 .0. On the other hand, we have observed
that, in the case of random forest, tuning the randomization para meters is not
very productive in general. As shown in Figure 1, the average rank o f default
random forest is better than the rank of the forests for which th e randomization
parameters are tuned. Hence, the second proposed grid is to tun e the optimiza-
tion parameters of XGBoost (i.e. learning rate, gamma and depth) k eeping the
randomization parameters (i.e. random features and subsampling) ﬁxed. The
randomization parameters will be ﬁxed to 0.75 for the subsampling ra tio and
to sqrt for the number of features as suggested by Tables 10 and 9 respectively.
The average generalization errors for XGBoost when using these t wo grids are
shown in Table 11. Column “No gamma” shows the results for the grid t hat
does not tune gamma (i.e. gamma=0), and column “No rand tun.” show s the
results for the grid that does not tune the randomization paramet ers. The best
average test error for each dataset is highlighted with a diﬀerent b ackground
color. Additionally, the averageranksfor this table areshown in Figu re 2 follow-
ing the methodology proposed in [6]. In this ﬁgure, diﬀerences among methods
connected with a horizontal solid line are not statistically signiﬁcant.
The results shown in Table 11 and Figure 2 are quite interesting. The
number of best results are 11, 9 and 8 when the grid without random ization
parameter tuning, the full grid and the grid without gamma tuning ar e applied
respectively. Similarly, the average ranks for these three method s, shown in
Figure 2, is favorable to the grid without randomization parameter t uning, then
for the full grid and ﬁnally the grid without gamma tuning. One tenden cy that
is observed from these results is that it seems that including a comple xity term
to control the size of the trees can have a small edge over not usin g it, although
the diﬀerences are not statistically signiﬁcant. A conclusion that ma y be clearer
is that it seems unnecessary to tune the number of random featur es and the
subsampling rate provided that those techniques are applied with re asonable
values (in our case subsampling to 0.75 and feature sampling to sqrt) .
Finally, the time required to perform the grid search and to train the single
models is shown in Table 12 in the same manner as Table 4. As shown in the
15