the training time. For the methods that have been tuned using grid s earch, two
numbers are shown separated with a ‘+’ sign. The ﬁrst number corr esponds
to the time spent in the within-train 10-fold cross-validated grid sea rch. The
secondﬁgurecorrespondstothetrainingtimeofeachmethod, on cetheoptimum
parameters have been estimated. The last row of the table report s the average
ratioofeachexecutiontimewith respecttotheexecutiontimeofXG Boostusing
the default setting. All experimentswererunusinganeight-coreI ntelR/circlecopyrtCoreTM
i7-4790K CPU @ 4.00GHz processor. The reported times are sequen tial times
in order to have a real measure of the needed computational reso urces, even
though the grid search was performed in parallel using all available co res. This
comparison is fair independently of whether the learning algorithms in clude
internal multi-thread optimizations or not. For instance random fo rest and
XGBoost include multi-thread optimizations in their code to compute t he splits
in XGBoost and to train each single tree in random forest whereas gr adient
boostingdoesnot. Notwithstanding, giventhatthegridsearchpr ocedureisfully
parallelizable, these optimizations do not reduce the end-to-end tim e required
to perform a grid search in a real setting.
As it can be observed from Table 4, ﬁnding the best parameters to t une
the classiﬁers through the grid search is a rather costly process. In fact, the
end-to-end training time of the tuned models is clearly dominated by t he grid
search process, which contributes with a percentage over 99.9% t o the training
time. Since the size of the grid is diﬀerent for diﬀerent classiﬁers (i.e. 3840, 256
and 1920 for XGB, RF and GB respectively), the time dedicated to ﬁn ding the
best parameters is not directly comparable between classiﬁers.
However, when it comes to ﬁtting a single ensemble to the training dat a
without taking into account the grid search time, XGBoost clearly sh ows the
fastest performance on average. The time necessary to train XG Boost given
a set of parameters is about 3.5 times faster than training a random forest
and 2.4-4.3 times faster than training a gradient boosting model. This last
diﬀerence can be observed in the time employed in the grid search by X GBoost
and gradient boosting. XGBoost takes less than half of the time to lo ok for the
best parameter setting than gradient boosting, despite the fact that its grid size
is twice the size of the grid of gradient boosting. Finally, for some mult iclass
problems, as Segment orSoybean, the execution time of XGBoost and gradient
boosting deteriorates in relation to random forest.
3.2 Analysis of XGBoost parametrization
In order to further analyze and understand the parametrization of XGBoost,
we carry out further experiments with two objectives. The ﬁrst o bjective is
to try to select a better default parametrization for XGBoost. Th e second is
to explore alternative grids for XGBoost. For the ﬁrst objective, we have an-
alyzed, for each parameter, the relation among single value assignm ents. To
do so, we have computed the average rank (in test error) across all datasets
for the ensembles trained using all parameter conﬁgurations as giv en in Ta-
ble 2 for XGBoost. Recall that we have analyzed 3840 possible param eter
11