number of trees in the forest, the most probable the ensemble has converged
to its asymptotic generalization error. Actually, one of the main adv antages
of random forest is that it is almostparameter-free or at least, the default
parameter setting has a remarkable performance on average [8]. T he best two
methods of that comparative study are based on random forest, for which only
the value of the number of random attributes that are selected at each split is
tuned. Themethodthatplacedﬁfth (outof179methods) intheco mparisonwas
random forest using the default setting. This could also be seen as a drawback
as it is diﬃcult to further improve random forest by parameter tunin g.
Anyhow, other parameters that may be tuned in random forest ar e those
that control the depth of the decision trees. In general, decision trees in random
forest are grown until all leaves are pure. However, this can lead t o very large
trees. Forsuchcases,thegrowthofthetreecanbelimitedbyset tingamaximum
depth or by requiring a minimum number of instances per node before or after
the split.
Among the set of parameters that can be tuned for random fores t, we eval-
uate the following ones in this study:
•Thenumberoffeaturestoconsiderwhenlookingforthebestsplit( max_features ).
•The minimum number of samples ( min_samples_split ) required to split
an internal node. This parameter limits the size of the trees but, in t he
worstcase,thedepthofthetreescanbeaslargeas N−min_samples_split ,
withNthe size of the training data.
•The minimum number of samples ( min_samples_leaf )required to create
aleafnode. Theeﬀectofthislimitisdiﬀerentfromthepreviousparam eter,
as it eﬀectively removes split candidates that are on the limits of the d ata
distribution in the parent node.
•The maximum depth of the tree ( max_depth ). This parameter limits the
depth of the tree independently of the number of instances that a re in
each node.
2.2 Gradient boosting
Boosting algorithms combine weak learners, i.e. learners slightly bett er than
random, into a strong learner in an iterative way [19]. Gradient boos ting is
a boosting-like algorithm for regression [9]. Given a training dataset D=
{xi,yi}N
1, the goalof gradientboosting is to ﬁnd an approximation, ˆF(x), of the
function F∗(x), which maps instances xto their output values y, by minimiz-
ing the expected value of a given loss function, L(y,F(x)). Gradient boosting
builds an additive approximation of F∗(x) as a weighted sum of functions
Fm(x) =Fm−1(x)+ρmhm(x), (1)
whereρmis the weight of the mthfunction, hm(x). These functions are the
models of the ensemble (e.g. decision trees). The approximation is co nstructed
3