based on gradient boosting [9], has been consistently placing among t he top con-
tenders in Kaggle competitions [5]. But XGBoost is not the only one to a chieve
remarkable results over a wide range of problems. Random forest is also well
known as one of the most accurate and as a fast learning method ind ependently
from the nature of the datasets, as shown by various recent com parative studies
[8, 4, 15].
This study follows the path of many other previous comparative ana lysis,
such as [8, 4, 15], with the intent of covering a gap related to gradien t boosting
and its more recent variant XGBoost. None of the previous compre hensive anal-
ysis included any machine learning algorithm of the gradient boosting family
despite of their appealing properties. The speciﬁc objectives of th is study are,
in the ﬁrst place, to compare XGBoost’s performance with respect to the algo-
rithm on which it is based (i.e. gradient boosting). Secondly, the comp arison
is extended to random forest, which can be considered as a benchm ark since
many previous comparisons demonstrated its remarkable perform ance [8, 4].
The comparison is carried out in terms of accuracy and training spee d. Finally,
a comprehensive analysis of the process of parameter setting in XG Boost is per-
formed. We believe this analysis can be very helpful to researchers of various
ﬁelds to be able to tune XGBoost more eﬀectively.
The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes the methods o f this
study, emphasizing the diﬀerent parameters that need to be tune d; Section 3
presents the results of the comparison; Finally, the conclusions ar e summarized
in Section 4.
2 Methodology
2.1 Random forest
One of the most successful machine learning methods is random for est [3]. Ran-
dom forest is an ensemble of classiﬁers composed of decision trees t hat are
generated using two diﬀerent sources of randomization. First, ea ch individual
decision tree is trained on a random sample with replacement from the original
data with the same size as the given training set. The generated boo tstrap
samples are expected to have approximately ≈37% of duplicated instances. A
second source of randomization applied in random forest is attribut e sampling.
For that, at each node split, a subset of the input variables is rando mly selected
to search for the best split. The value proposed by Breiman to be giv en to this
parameter is ⌊log2(#features)+1 ⌋. For classiﬁcation, the ﬁnal prediction of the
ensemble is given by majority voting.
Based on the Strong Law of Large Numbers, it can be proven that t he
generalization error for random forests converges to a limit as the number of
trees in the forest becomes large [3]. The implication of this demonst ration
is that the size of the ensemble is not a parameter that really needs t o be
tuned, as the generalization accuracy of random forest does not deteriorate on
average when more classiﬁers are included into the ensemble. The lar gest the
2