•Thenumberoffeaturestoconsiderwhenlookingforthebestsplit( max_features ):
as in random forest.
•Theminimumnumberofsamplesrequiredtosplitaninternalnode( min_samples_split ):
as in random forest.
2.3 XGBoost
XGBoost [5] is a decision tree ensemble based on gradient boosting de signed to
be highly scalable. Similarly to gradient boosting, XGBoost builds an add itive
expansion of the objective function by minimizing a loss function. Con sidering
that XGBoost is focused only on decision trees as base classiﬁers, a variation of
the loss function is used to control the complexity of the trees
Lxgb=N/summationdisplay
i=1L(yi,F(xi))+M/summationdisplay
m=1Ω(hm) (5)
Ω(h) =γT+1
2λ/⌊ard⌊lw/⌊ard⌊l2, (6)
whereTis the number of leaves of the tree and ware the output scores of the
leaves. This loss function can be integrated into the split criterion of decision
trees leading to a pre-pruningstrategy. Higher values of γresult in simpler trees.
The value of γcontrols the minimum loss reduction gain needed to split an
internal node. An additional regularization parameter in XGBoost is shrinkage,
which reduces the step size in the additive expansion. Finally, the com plexity of
the trees can also be limited using other strategies as the depth of t he trees, etc.
A secondary beneﬁt of tree complexity reduction is that the models are trained
faster and require less storage space.
Furthermore, randomization techniques are also implemented in XGB oost
both to reduce overﬁtting and to increment training speed. The ra ndomization
techniques included in XGBoost are: random subsamples to train indiv idual
trees and column subsampling at tree and tree node levels.
In addition, XGBoost implements several methods to increment the training
speed of decision trees not directly related to ensemble accuracy. Speciﬁcally,
XGBoost focuses on reducing the computational complexity for ﬁn ding the best
split, which is the most time-consuming part of decision tree constru ction algo-
rithms. Split ﬁnding algorithms usually enumerate all possible candidat e splits
and select the one with the highest gain. This requires performing a lin ear
scan over each sorted attribute to ﬁnd the best split for each nod e. To avoid
sorting the data repeatedly in every node, XGBoost uses a speciﬁc compressed
column based structure in which the data is stored pre-sorted. In this way, each
attribute needs to be sorted only once. This column based storing s tructure
allows to ﬁnd the best split for each considered attributes in parallel. Further-
more, instead of scanning all possible candidate splits, XGBoost imple ments a
method based on percentiles of the data where only a subset of can didate splits
is tested and their gainis computed usingaggregatedstatistics. Th is idea resem-
bles the node level data subsampling that is already present in CART t rees [2].
5