andsyntactic structure modeling (Tang et al., 2018;
Hao et al., 2019a), which are essential for natural
language understanding and generation. Experi-
mental results on targeted linguistic evaluation lead
to the following observations:
SSANs can identify the improper word orders
in both local (x4.1) and global (x4.2) ranges
by learning to attend to the expected words.
SSANs produce more syntactic representa-
tions (x5.1) with a better modeling of structure
by selective attention ( x5.2).
The selective mechanism improves SANs by
paying more attention to content words that
posses semantic content and contribute to the
meaning of the sentence ( x5.3).
2 Methodology
2.1 Self-Attention Networks
SANs (Lin et al., 2017), as a variant of attention
model (Bahdanau et al., 2015; Luong et al., 2015),
compute attention weights between each pair of
elements in a single sequence. Given the input
layerH=fh1;;hNg2 RNd, SANs ﬁrst
transform the layer Hinto the queries Q2 RNd,
the keys K2 RNd, and the values V2 RNd
with three separate weight matrices. The output
layerOis calculated as:
O=ATT(Q;K)V (1)
where the alternatives to ATT()can be additive
attention (Bahdanau et al., 2015) or dot-product
attention (Luong et al., 2015). Due to time and
space efﬁciency, we used the dot-product attention
in this study, which is computed as:
ATT(Q;K) =softmax (QKT
p
d) (2)
wherep
dis the scaling factor with dbeing the di-
mensionality of layer states (Vaswani et al., 2017).
2.2 Weaknesses of Self-Attention Networks
Despite SANs have demonstrated its effectiveness
on various NLP tasks, recent studies empirically
revealed that SANs suffer from two representa-
tion limitations of modeling word order encoding
(Yang et al., 2019a) and syntactic structure model-
ing(Tang et al., 2018). In this work, we concentrate
on these two commonly-cited issues.Word Order Encoding SANs merely rely on
attention mechanism with neither recurrence nor
convolution structures. In order to incorporate se-
quence order information, Vaswani et al. (2017)
proposed to inject position information into the
input word embedding with additional position
embedding. Nevertheless, SANs are still weak
at learning word order information (Yang et al.,
2019a). Recent studies have shown that incorpo-
rating recurrence (Chen et al., 2018; Hao et al.,
2019b,c), convolution (Song et al., 2018; Yang
et al., 2019b), or advanced position encoding (Shaw
et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2019a) into vanilla SANs
can further boost their performance, conﬁrming its
shortcomings at modeling sequence order.
Structure Modeling Due to lack of supervision
signals of learning structural information, recent
studies pay widespread attention on incorporat-
ing syntactic structure into SANs. For instance,
Strubell et al. (2018) utilized one attention head to
learn to attend to syntactic parents of each word.
Towards generating better sentence representations,
several researchers propose phrase-level SANs by
performing self-attention across words inside a n-
gram phrase or syntactic constituent (Wu et al.,
2018; Hao et al., 2019a; Wang et al., 2019b). These
studies show that the introduction of syntactic in-
formation can achieve further improvement over
SANs, demonstrating its potential weakness on
structure modeling.
2.3 Selective Self-Attention Networks
In this study, we implement the selective mecha-
nism on SANs by introducing an additional selec-
tor, namely SSANs, as illustrated in Figure 1. The
selector aims to select a subset of elements from
the input sequence, on top of which the standard
self-attention (Equation 1) is conducted. We imple-
ment the selector with Gumbel-Softmax, which has
proven effective for computer vision tasks (Shen
et al., 2018a; Yang et al., 2019c).
Selector Formally, we parameterize selection ac-
tiona2fSELECT;DISCARDgfor each input
element with an auxiliary policy network, where
SELECT indicates that the element is selected
for self-attention while DISCARD represents to
abandon the element. The output action sequence
A2 RNis calculated as:
(A) =sigmoid (Es) (3)
Es=QsKT
s (4)