syntactic structure of the sentence that is being
generated for the prediction. On the other hand,
the problem on content-free words is alleviated on
machine translation tasks due to the informative
sequence signals. SSANs can further alleviate this
problem in all cases with a better modeling of struc-
tures.
6 Conclusion
In this work, we make an early attempt to assess
the strengths of the selective mechanism for SANs,
which is implemented with a ﬂexible Gumbel-
Softmax approach. Through several well-designed
experiments, we empirically reveal that the selec-
tive mechanism migrates two major weaknesses of
SANs, namely word order encoding andstructure
modeling , which are essential for natural language
understanding and generation. Future directions
include validating our ﬁndings on other SAN ar-
chitectures (e.g., BERT (Devlin et al., 2019)) and
more general attention models (Bahdanau et al.,
2015; Luong et al., 2015).
Acknowledgments
We thank the anonymous reviewers for their in-
sightful comments. We also thank Xiaocheng Feng,
Heng Gong, Zhangyin Feng, and Xiachong Feng
for helpful discussion. This work was supported by
the National Key R&D Program of China via grant
2018YFB1005103 and National Natural Science
Foundation of China (NSFC) via grant 61632011
and 61772156.
References
Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Ben-
gio. 2015. Neural Machine Translation by Jointly
Learning to Align and Translate. In ICLR .
Samuel R. Bowman, Gabor Angeli, Christopher Potts,
and Christopher D. Manning. 2015. A large anno-
tated corpus for learning natural language inference.
InEMNLP .
Mia Xu Chen, Orhan Firat, Ankur Bapna, Melvin
Johnson, Wolfgang Macherey, George Foster, Llion
Jones, Mike Schuster, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar,
Ashish Vaswani, Jakob Uszkoreit, Lukasz Kaiser,
Zhifeng Chen, Yonghui Wu, and Macduff Hughes.
2018. The best of both worlds: Combining recent
advances in neural machine translation. In ACL.
Alexis Conneau, German Kruszewski, Guillaume Lam-
ple, Lo ¨ıc Barrault, and Marco Baroni. 2018. WhatYou Can Cram Into A Single Vector: Probing Sen-
tence Embeddings for Linguistic Properties. In
ACL.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and
Kristina Toutanova. 2019. Bert: Pre-training of deep
bidirectional transformers for language understand-
ing. In NAACL .
Xiaocheng Feng, Ming Liu, Jiahao Liu, Bing Qin, Yibo
Sun, and Ting Liu. 2018. Topic-to-essay generation
with neural networks. In IJCAI .
Xiaocheng Feng, Duyu Tang, Bing Qin, and Ting Liu.
2016. English-chinese knowledge base translation
with neural network. In COLING .
Emil Julius Gumbel. 1954. Statistical theory of ex-
treme values and some practical applications: a se-
ries of lectures . U. S. Govt. Print. Ofﬁce.
Maosheng Guo, Yu Zhang, and Ting Liu. 2019. Gaus-
sian transformer: a lightweight approach for natural
language inference. In AAAI .
Jie Hao, Xing Wang, Shuming Shi, Jinfeng Zhang,
and Zhaopeng Tu. 2019a. Multi-granularity self-
attention for neural machine translation. In EMNLP .
Jie Hao, Xing Wang, Shuming Shi, Jinfeng Zhang, and
Zhaopeng Tu. 2019b. Towards better modeling hier-
archical structure for self-attention with ordered neu-
rons. In EMNLP .
Jie Hao, Xing Wang, Baosong Yang, Longyue Wang,
Jinfeng Zhang, and Zhaopeng Tu. 2019c. Modeling
recurrence for transformer. In NAACL .
Shilin He, Zhaopeng Tu, Xing Wang, Longyue Wang,
Michael Lyu, and Shuming Shi. 2019. Towards un-
derstanding neural machine translation with word
importance. In EMNLP .
Tianyu He, Xu Tan, Yingce Xia, Di He, Tao Qin, Zhibo
Chen, and Tie-Yan Liu. 2018. Layer-wise coordi-
nation between encoder and decoder for neural ma-
chine translation. In NIPS .
Xiaochen Hou, Jing Huang, Guangtao Wang, Kevin
Huang, Xiaodong He, and Bowen Zhou. 2019. Se-
lective attention based graph convolutional networks
for aspect-level sentiment classiﬁcation. ArXiv ,
abs/1910.10857.
Eric Jang, Shixiang Gu, and Ben Poole. 2017. Cate-
gorical reparameterization with gumbel-softmax. In
ICLR .
Jian Li, Zhaopeng Tu, Baosong Yang, Michael R. Lyu,
and Tong Zhang. 2018. Multi-Head Attention with
Disagreement Regularization. In EMNLP .
Jian Li, Baosong Yang, Zi-Yi Dou, Xing Wang,
Michael R. Lyu, and Zhaopeng Tu. 2019. Infor-
mation aggregation for multi-head attention with
routing-by-agreement. In NAACL .