How Does Selective Mechanism Improve Self-Attention Networks?
Xinwei Geng1Longyue Wang2Xing Wang2Bing Qin1;3Ting Liu1;3Zhaopeng Tu2
1Harbin Institute of Technology2Tencent AI Lab3Peng Cheng Laboratory
1fxwgeng, qinb, tliu g@ir.hit.edu.cn
2fvinnylywang, brightxwang, zptu g@tencent.com
Abstract
Self-attention networks (SANs) with selective
mechanism has produced substantial improve-
ments in various NLP tasks by concentrat-
ing on a subset of input words. However,
the underlying reasons for their strong per-
formance have not been well explained. In
this paper, we bridge the gap by assessing the
strengths of selective SANs (SSANs), which
are implemented with a ﬂexible and univer-
sal Gumbel-Softmax. Experimental results
on several representative NLP tasks, includ-
ing natural language inference, semantic role
labelling, and machine translation, show that
SSANs consistently outperform the standard
SANs. Through well-designed probing exper-
iments, we empirically validate that the im-
provement of SSANs can be attributed in part
to mitigating two commonly-cited weaknesses
of SANs: word order encoding andstructure
modeling . Speciﬁcally, the selective mecha-
nism improves SANs by paying more attention
to content words that contribute to the meaning
of the sentence. The code and data are released
athttps://github.com/xwgeng/SSAN .
1 Introduction
Self-attention networks (SANs) (Lin et al., 2017)
have achieved promising progress in various nat-
ural language processing (NLP) tasks, including
machine translation (Vaswani et al., 2017), natural
language inference (Shen et al., 2018b), semantic
role labeling (Tan et al., 2018; Strubell et al., 2018)
and language representation (Devlin et al., 2019).
The appealing strength of SANs derives from high
parallelism as well as ﬂexibility in modeling depen-
dencies among all the input elements.
Recently, there has been a growing interest in
integrating selective mechanism into SANs, which
has produced substantial improvements in a variety
Work done when interning at Tencent AI Lab.of NLP tasks. For example, some researchers incor-
porated a hard constraint into SANs to select a sub-
set of input words, on top of which self-attention
is conducted (Shen et al., 2018c; Hou et al., 2019;
Yang et al., 2019b). Yang et al. (2018) and Guo et al.
(2019) proposed a soft mechanism by imposing a
learned Gaussian bias over the original attention
distribution to enhance its ability of capturing local
contexts. Shen et al. (2018c) incorporated rein-
forced sampling to dynamically choose a subset of
input elements, which are fed to SANs.
Although the general idea of selective mecha-
nism works well across NLP tasks, previous stud-
ies only validate their own implementations in a
few tasks, either on only classiﬁcation tasks (Shen
et al., 2018c; Guo et al., 2019) or sequence gen-
eration tasks (Yang et al., 2018, 2019b). This
poses a potential threat to the conclusive effective-
ness of selective mechanism. In response to this
problem, we adopt a ﬂexible and universal imple-
mentation of selective mechanism using Gumbel-
Softmax (Jang et al., 2017), called selective self-
attention networks ( i.e.,SSANs). Experimental re-
sults on several representative types of NLP tasks,
including natural language inference (i.e., classiﬁ-
cation ), semantic role labeling (i.e., sequence la-
beling ), and machine translation (i.e., sequence
generation ), demonstrate that SSANs consistently
outperform the standard SANs ( x3).
Despite demonstrating the effectiveness of
SSANs, the underlying reasons for their strong
performance have not been well explained, which
poses great challenges for further reﬁnement. In
this study, we bridge this gap by assessing the
strengths of selective mechanism on capturing es-
sentially linguistic properties via well-designed ex-
periments. The starting point for our approach is
recent ﬁndings: the standard SANs suffer from two
representation limitation on modeling word order
encoding (Shaw et al., 2018; Yang et al., 2019a)arXiv:2005.00979v1  [cs.CL]  3 May 2020