13.3. Results on speech data 127
the relatively low scores obtained by STORN in these experiments is
given in Section 13.3.4.
13.3.2 Generation of speech spectrograms
In this subsection, we brieﬂy illustrate the ability of the DVAE models
to generate “speech-like” spectrograms with a qualitative example. This
example is the “continuation” of the example that we have seen in
the previous subsection, provided in Figures 13.2, 13.3 and 13.4. In
these ﬁgures, the ﬁrst 2 s of each spectrogram (on the left of the red
line) was obtained with analysis-resynthesis; that is, the latent vectors
were provided by the inference model, using the ground-truth observed
vectors as input, and the output spectrogram was then provided by the
generative model using the inferred latent vectors (and the ground-truth
past observed vectors for the autoregressive models). After 2 s (on the
right of the red line), we turn the models to pure generation mode; that
is, the latent vectors and the output spectrogram are now both provided
by the generative model, without relying on the inference model and
ground-truth past observed vectors anymore. This strategy allows the
generation mode to beneﬁt from a good initialization, induced by the
analysis-resynthesis part. Indeed, at the time instant corresponding
to 2 s, the generation starts with the past latent vectors and current
RNN internal state provided by the analysis-resynthesis part, thus
encoding the past observed speech data. Therefore, we can expect a
smooth transition from the analysized-resynthesized spectrogram to the
generated one.
As expected, we observe in Figure 13.2 that a vanilla VAE is not
able to generate a spectrogram with a realistic speech-like structure. In
particular, the successive spectrogram “chunks” are too short and with
too abrupt transitions to be speech sounds. This is due to the fact that
there is no temporal modeling.
Figure 13.3 shows the results obtained with the nonautoregressive
DVAE models. We can see that the spectrograms generated by DKF
and DSAE, although diﬀerent, both exhibit a harmonic structure and a
variety of diﬀerent speech-like sounds, which smoothly evolve with time.
The smoothness probably comes from the use of a Markov model for