152 Discussion
β-VAE. A similar idea was proposed independently by Kim and Mnih
(2018), with a slightly diﬀerent decomposition of the VLB KL term
and a diﬀerent implementation (based on an adversarial training of the
model). For an extensive discussion and benchmark on disentangled
representation learning with VAEs, see Locatello et al.(2020).
Such a general principle of enforcing latent factor disentanglement
by modifying the loss function is independent of the issue of “static”
against temporal modeling. It can thus, in principle, be applied to the
DVAE framework. Finding a relevant decomposition of the loss function
in the DVAE framework is still an open topic. Due to the more complex
(temporal) intrications of the observed and latent variables, it is diﬃcult
to say if terms equivalent to total correlation or mutual information
can be evidenced easily. Future studies should consider this aspect to
make DVAE models more controllable and interpretable.
14.3.4 Hierarchical VAEs and DVAEs
A structured VAE, or hierarchical VAE, is a general subclass of VAEs
where the latent space is structured by setting a hierarchical prior
distribution on a set of latent variables z={z0,z1,...,zK}(Kingma
and Welling, 2019, Chapter 4) (Salimans, 2016; Sønderby et al., 2016b;
Sønderby et al.,2016a).Here,theindexdenotesdiﬀerentlatentvariables,
not a sample in a training set or a time index in a sequence as before. For
example, a hierarchical “multilevel” VAE was proposed by Bouchacourt
et al.(2018), with two latent vectors deﬁned at diﬀerent data scales:
One latent vector encodes a common content for a group of data and
the other latent vector encodes the style of subgroups of data within a
group. In Bouchacourt et al.’s (2018) paper, data grouping involves a
certain amount of supervision during training.
Another notable example of a hierarchical VAE was presented by
(Salimans, 2016), who proposed to use a (deep) ﬁrst-order autoregressive
prior model:
pθz(z) =pθz(z0)K/productdisplay
k=1pθz(zk|zk−1). (14.2)
In such an approach, the latent space is structured but not the data