13.3. Results on speech data 129
be diﬃcult, so we adopted a scheduled sampling approach (Bengio et al.,
2015). We started with the SRNN model trained in the teacher-forcing
mode used in the previous experiment. Then, we ﬁne-tuned this model
by randomly replacing x1:t−1with ˆx1:t−1at the input of the encoder-
decoder shared module, when estimating xt. We replaced 20% of the
x1:t−1vectors for the ﬁrst 50 epochs, and increased to 40% for the next
50 epochs, and so on, until we completely replaced the ground-truth
clean speech signal with generated speech signals. Then we ﬁne-tuned
with totally generated speech signals for another 300 epochs. Overall, we
ﬁne-tuned the model for 500 epochs. The resulting model is referred to
as SRNN-GM hereinafter. Moreover, we also evaluated the initial SRNN
model (trained with teacher-forcing) in the generation mode (i.e., we use
herex1:t−1during training and ˆx1:t−1during testing when generating
xt). We refer to this “hybrid” conﬁguration as SRNN-TF-GM.
We can see from Table 13.1 that SRNN trained in the teacher-forcing
mode and tested in the generation mode (SRNN-TF-GM) obtains
very poor results. This illustrates the problem of train/test mismatch
discussed in Section 4.4.2. The strategy that consists in training SRNN
in the generation mode using scheduled sampling (SRNN-GM) is shown
to be eﬀective, as the gap between SRNN-TF-GM and SRNN is largely
reduced. Nevertheless, SRNN-GM remains a bit below DKF and RVAE
in this experiment, showing that it is more diﬃcult to exploit the
predictive links in a practical application where the ground-truth values
of the observed vectors are not available, compared to the “oracle”
conﬁguration of teacher-forcing.
13.3.4 Visualization of the latent vector sequence
In this subsection, we illustrate the behavior of the learned latent vector.
Figure 13.5 displays the trajectories of the mean vector of qφz, the
log-variance vector of qφz, a vector ztsampled from qφz, and the KL
divergence term of the VLB, for an example sentence of the speech test
dataset and for the SRNN model trained and applied in the teacher-
forcing mode. We observe that some of the dimensions of the latent
vector, for example the ﬁrst one, show a steady proﬁle of the mean
(Figure 13.5 (a)) and log-variance (Figure 13.5 (b)) for these dimensions,