14.3. VAE improvements and extensions applicable to DVAEs 151
Modiﬁcation of the loss function
A second strategy to improve the disentanglement of latent factors is to
modify the loss function (i.e., the VLB). In this line, Higgins et al.(2017)
introduced a weighting factor, denoted β, to weight the regularization
term in (2.21), so that the VLB becomes
L(θ,φ,β ;X) =Eqφ(Z|X)/bracketleftbiglogpθx(X|Z)/bracketrightbig−βDKL/parenleftbigqφ(Z|X)/bardblpθz(Z)/parenrightbig.
(14.1)
A value of βlarger than 1favors the KL term; hence, it encourages
independence/disentanglement of the latent vector entries, although at
the price of lower reconstruction/generation quality. For example, the
images reconstructed with a β-VAE can be slightly blurred compared
to those reconstructed with a standard VAE. However, the control of
the properties of the objects represented in the image from the latent
vectors is improved (Higgins et al., 2017).
Chenet al.(2018) went a step ahead. Starting from the VLB (2.21),
they introduced the aggregated posterior qφ(z) =1
Ntr/summationtextNtr
n=1qφ(z|xn)
and then decomposed the KL term of the VLB (summed over the
training data) into a sum of three terms. The ﬁrst one, referred to as
the index-code mutual information, quantiﬁes the mutual information
between data and latent variables. The second one, referred to as the
total correlation, is the KL divergence between the aggregated posterior
and the product of its marginals (i.e., DKL/parenleftbigqφ(z)/bardbl/producttextL
l=1qφ(zl)/parenrightbig). It
quantiﬁes the independence of the latent vector entries independently
of data inputs (i.e., marginal independence as opposed to conditional
independence). The third term is the sum over entries of the entry-
wise KL divergence between the marginal aggregated posterior qφ(zl)
and priorp(zl). The authors noted that minimizing the KL term of
the VAE encourages the independence of the latent vector entries
through minimization of the total correlation. However, it also penalizes
the mutual information between the data and latent vectors, hence
decreasingthepoweroflatentcomponentstoexplainthedata.Therefore,
they proposed applying a weighting factor (larger than 1) to the total
correlation only, leaving the mutual information term unchanged. They
experimentally demonstrated the advantage of this strategy over the