32 Recurrent Neural Networks and State Space Models
transform an input vector sequence u1:Tinto an output vector sequence
x1:T, possibly through an internal state vector sequence h1:T. The
input, output, and internal state vectors can have arbitrary (diﬀerent)
dimensions. If u1:Tis an “external” input sequence, the network can
be considered as a “system,” as is usual in control theory ( u1:Tbeing
considered as a command to the system). If ut=∅, the RNN is in the
undriven mode. In contrast, if ut=xt−1, the RNN is in the predictive
mode, or sequence generation mode, which is a usual mode when we
are interested in modeling the evolution of a data sequence x1:T“alone”
(i.e., independently of any external input; in this case, x1:Tcan be seen
both as an input and an output sequence).
A basic single-layer RNN model is deﬁned by
ht=dhid(Winut+Wrecht−1+bhid), (3.1)
xt=dout(Woutht+bout), (3.2)
where Win,WrecandWoutare weight matrices of appropriate dimen-
sions; bhidandboutare bias vectors; and dhidanddoutare nonlinear
activation functions. We also deﬁne the initial internal state vector h0.
This model is extendable to more complex recurrent architectures:
ht=dh(ut,ht−1), (3.3)
xt=dx(ht), (3.4)
wheredhanddxdenote any arbitrary complex nonlinear functions
implemented with a DNN. We assume that this representation includes
long short-term memory (LSTM) networks (Hochreiter and Schmidhu-
ber, 1997) and gated recurrent unit (GRU) networks (Cho et al., 2014),
which comprise additional internal variables called gates. For simplicity
of presentation, these additional internal gates are not formalized in
(3.3)and(3.4). The same is true for multi-layer RNNs, where several
recursive layers are stacked on top of each other (Graves et al., 2013)
(in this case, for the same reason, we do not report layer indexes in
(3.3)and(3.4)). This is also true for combinations of multi-layer RNNs
and LSTMs (i.e., multi-layer LSTM networks). In summary, we assume
that(3.3)and(3.4)are a “generic” or “high-level” representation of an
RNN of arbitrary complexity.