14 Introduction
encoded into a single latent vector, which is in turn decoded into a whole
data sequence (see also Roberts et al.(2018) and Pereira and Silveira
(2018) for examples on music score modeling and anomaly detection
in energy time series, respectively). Even if those models can include
a hierarchical structure at encoding and/or at decoding, they do not
consider a temporal sequence of latent vectors.
All these latent-variable deep temporal models, the ones we detail
and unify in the DVAE class, and the ones we do not detail, remain
strongly connected, with a similar overall encoding-decoding architec-
ture and possibly a similar inference and training VAE methodology.
Therefore, we must keep in mind that some of the propositions made in
the literature for one type of model can be adapted and be beneﬁcial
to the other.
1.4 Aim, contributions, and outline of the paper
This paper aims to provide a comprehensive overview of DVAE models.
The contributions of this paper are detailed as follows.
We provide a formal deﬁnition of the general class of DVAEs .
We describe its main properties and characteristics and how this class is
related to previous classical models, such as VAEs, RNNs, and SSMs. We
discuss the structure of dependencies between the observed and latent
random variables in DVAE pdfs, as well as how these dependencies are
implemented with neural networks. We discuss the design of inference
models considering the general methodology used to identify the actual
dependencies of the latent variables at inference time. We also discuss
the VLB computation for training DVAEs. All these points are presented
in Chapter 4. To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst time this
class of models has been presented in such a general and uniﬁed manner.
We provide a detailed and complete technical description of
seven DVAE models selected from the literature . In Chapter 5,
we start with the deep Kalman ﬁlter (DKF) (Krishnan et al., 2015;
Krishnan et al., 2017), which is a basic combination of an SSM with
DNNs. Then, we examine the Kalman variational autoencoder (KVAE)
(Fraccaro et al., 2017) in Chapter 6, the stochastic recurrent neural