14.4. Perspectives on source coding 155
identity can be exchanged between two sentences while preserving the
same phonetic content, which is a very nice result. Yet, the issues
of disentangling and controlling speech production factors separately
remain largely open. Moreover, basic questions such as the impact of
the size of ztandhton modeling quality and the relevance of extracted
latent factors have been poorly considered so far. For example, for
speech processing, what happens if the size of ztis reduced to a few
entries, while the size of htis kept comparable to that of data xt?
Hsuet al.(2017b) indicated that
“to the best of our knowledge, there has not been any
attempt to learn disentangled and interpretable representa-
tions without supervision from sequential data.”
Regarding SRNN (Fraccaro et al., 2016), VRNN (Chung et al., 2015),
and SVAE (Johnson et al., 2016), Hsu et al.(2017b) said
“[...] it remains unclear whether independent attributes
are disentangled in the latent space. Moreover, the learned
latent variables in these models are not interpretable without
manually inspecting or using labeled data.”
Hence, the models such as STORN, VRNN, and SRNN provide an
elegant and powerful mathematical and methodological framework for
sequential data representation learning; however, there is still a lot of
work to be done on the disentanglement challenge. Solutions for the
disentanglement of ztin DVAEs, inspired by or combined with existing
structured or hierarchical models such as the ones presented by Salimans
(2016) and Sønderby et al.(2016b) and Sønderby et al.(2016a), still
have to be developed.
14.4 Perspectives on source coding
Although VAE and DVAE are excellent frameworks for extracting eﬃ-
cient and compact data representations, there are relatively few studies
on their practical application to source coding (i.e., data compression
including quantization and bitrate issues for data transmission or stor-
age). We have mentioned above the problem of z“vanishing” or “being