146 Discussion
Gregoret al., 2016), or by introducing in the training procedure an
auxiliary loss function that controls which information is captured by
zand what is left to the autoregressive decoder (Lucas and Verbeek,
2018).
The posterior collapse problem has also been observed and discussed
in the context of natural language processing (Bowman et al., 2016;
Serbanet al., 2016). Here, a sequence of words, individually pre-encoded
into word embedding vectors, is encoded into and/or decoded from a
single latent vector z. In Bowman et al.’s (2016) paper, both the encoder
and decoder are single-layer LSTM RNNs. In this case, the problem
is that it is diﬃcult for the latent vector zto encode the content of a
long input sentence, and again, the RNN internal state vectors tend to
encode the whole information, leaving zunused. Bowman et al.(2016)
proposedtwostrategiestoaddressthisproblem.Theﬁrstoneisapplying
annealing to the KL term of the VAE: A weighting factor growing
from 0 to 1 is applied progressively to this term during training, ﬁrst
forcing zto encode the data information and only then forcing zto get
disentangled. The second strategy is, as above, a deliberate weakening
of the decoder, here by masking a part of the word embedding sequence
during training. A more complex strategy was proposed by Yeung et al.
(2017), where an extra latent variable was added to activate/deactivate
certain subvectors of z. As only a small part of the latent representation
is used at each learning step, the VAE does not need to deactivate
some of the dimensions of the latent variable. A heuristic approach was
proposed by He et al.(2018), where the encoder is aggressively trained
(i.e., trained for many iterations) before each training iteration of the
decoder. The main intuition behind this approach is that the encoder
has diﬃculties catching up with the changes in the exact posterior
distribution and is lagging behind. Aggressively training the encoder
allows it to catch up with the evolution of the posterior distribution
at each encoder update. Other more recent solutions to the posterior
collapse problem in VAEs have been proposed and discussed by Lucas
et al.(2019), Razavi et al.(2019), and Dai et al.(2020).
Generally,thesolutionstotheposteriorcollapseproblemproposedin
the literature have yielded a more inﬂuential, as well as a more disentan-
gled latent representation. Yet, there is still room for improvement. The