3.1. Recurrent Neural Networks 33
Notation remark : To clarify the presentation and links between the
diﬀerent models, we use the same generic notation dxfor the generating
function in (2.5)and(3.4), and will do that throughout the paper (and
the same for dhand fordzlater in the paper).
So far, the above RNNs are deterministic: given u1:Tandh0,x1:T
is completely determined. Such networks are trained by optimizing
a deterministic criterion, e.g. the MSE between the target output se-
quences from a training dataset and the corresponding actual output
sequences obtained by the network. The training set of i.i.d. vectors
used for VAE training is replaced with that of vector sequences, and
consecutive vectors within a training sequence are generally correlated,
which is the point of using a dynamical model.
3.1.2 Generative recurrent neural networks
Deterministic RNNs can easily be transformed into generative RNNs
(GRNNs) by adding stochasticity at the output level. We just have to
deﬁne a probabilistic observation model and replace the output data
sequence with an output sequence of distribution parameters, similar
to the VAE decoder:
ht=dh(ut,ht−1), (3.5)
[µθx(ht),σθx(ht)] =dx(ht), (3.6)
pθx(xt|ht) =N/parenleftbigxt;µθx(ht),diag{σ2
θx(ht)}/parenrightbig.(3.7)
Eq.(3.5)is the same recursive internal state model as (3.3). Eqs.(3.6)
and(3.7)constitute the observation model. In (3.7), we use the Gaussian
distribution for its generality and for the convenience of illustration,
although any distribution can be used, just as for the VAE decoder.
Again, one may choose a distribution that is more appropriate for the
nature of the data. For example, Graves (2013) proposed using mixture
distributions. The complete set of model parameters θhere includes
θhandθx, the parameters of the networks implementing dhanddx,
respectively. Because the output of dxin(3.6)is now two vectors of
pdf parameters instead of a data vector in (3.4), its size is twice that of
the deterministic RNN. When the internal state vector htis of (much)