126 Experiments
temporal dependency between xt−1andxt, but only between zt−1(or
z1:t−1for DSAE) and zt. Thus, even if they are expected to have less
“predictive” power compared to SRNN or VRNN, their SSM structure
appears quite eﬃcient at encoding the speech dynamics. DSAE can
be considered as an improved version of DKF, with an additional
sequence-level variable vand inﬁnite-order temporal dependency of
zt(as opposed to ﬁrst-order dependency for DKF). The fact that this
more sophisticated structure does not lead to improved performance
over DKF might be explained by the structure of the inference model.
For DSAE, the inference of ztdepends on x1:T, whereas the exact
posterior distribution depends on z1:t−1andxt:T. Thus, the inference
model of DSAE is not only missing some dependencies it should have
(previous latent variables) but it is adding dependencies that it should
not have (previous observed variables), see Section 11.2. In contrast,
the DKF inference model respects the structure of the exact posterior
distribution. In the end, all these diﬀerences between DKF and DSAE
may compensate each other, leading to similar results. One way to
improve DSAE may be to design an inference model with the structure
of the exact posterior distribution.
The SI-SDR scores obtained by the RVAE model are just below
those of DKF and DSAE, whereas the PESQ score of noncausal RVAE
is slightly superior to those of DKF and DSAE. This is interesting
considering that as DKF and DSAE, RVAE has no predictive link (e.g.,
no direct dependency between xt−1andxt), and contrary to DKF and
DSAE, RVAE does not have a dynamical model on the latent vector
zt(i.e., it is modeled as an i.i.d. variable). However, in the analysis-
resynthesis framework, the sequence z1:t−1orz1:Teﬃciently encodes
x1:Towingtoaneﬃcientinferencemodel,andthen,thegenerativemodel
is able to exploit this whole sequence to regenerate xt. As expected, the
noncausal version of RVAE is slightly better than the causal version.
As for STORN, its performance revealed a bit disappointing in our
speech analysis-resynthesis experiment. Here also, this can be explained
by the fact that the inference model of STORN does not respect the
structure of the exact posterior distribution. In particular it does not use
z1:t−1norxt+1:T,whichisdoublypenalizingcomparedtoifthestructure
of the exact posterior distribution was considered. Another reason for