12 Introduction
1.3 Dynamical VAEs
As a deep BN, the original VAE proposed by Kingma and Welling
(2014) did not include temporal modeling. This means that each data
vector was processed independently of the other data vectors (and the
corresponding latent vector was also processed independently of the
other latent vectors). This is clearly suboptimal for the modeling of
correlated (temporal) vector sequences.
In the years following the publication of Kingma and Welling (2014)
and Rezende et al.(2014), the VAE methodology was extended and
successfully applied to several more complex deep BNs. In particular, it
was applied to deep BNs with a temporal model (i.e., DDBNs) dedicated
tothemodelingofsequentialdataexhibitingtemporalcorrelation.Inthe
present review, we are particularly interested in the models presented in
the following papers: (Bayer and Osendorfer, 2014; Krishnan et al., 2015;
Chunget al., 2015; Gu et al., 2015; Fraccaro et al., 2016; Krishnan et al.,
2017; Fraccaro et al., 2017; Goyal et al., 2017; Hsu et al., 2017b; Li and
Mandt, 2018; Leglaive et al., 2020). In addition to including temporal
dependencies, the unsupervised representation learning essence of the
VAE is preserved and cherished in these studies. These DDBNs combine
the observed and latent variables and aim at modeling not only data
dynamics but also discovering the latent factors governing them.
To achieve this aim, these models are trained using the VAE method-
ology (i.e., design of an inference model and maximization of the cor-
responding VLB). We can thus encompass these models under the
common class and terminology of variational DDBNs (i.e., DDBNs
immersed in the VAE framework). In the following of the paper, as well
as the title, we prefer to refer to them as dynamical VAEs (DVAEs)
(i.e., VAEs including a temporal model for modeling sequential data).
This is simply because we assume that the term “VAE” is currently
more popular than the term “DBN,” and “dynamical VAEs” gives
a more speaking-ﬁrst evocation of these models, compared to “varia-
tional DDBNs.” This convergence of DDBNs and VAEs into DVAEs is
illustrated in Figure 1.1.
In practice, these diﬀerent DVAE models vary in how they deﬁne
the dependencies between the observed and latent variables, how they