13.4. Results on 3D human motion data 135
13.4.4 Visualization of the latent vector sequence
To conclude this set of experiments, we also provide an example of
visualization of the latent space of the 3D human data, as we did for
speech signals.
Figure 13.7 displays the trajectories of the mean vector of qφz, the
log-variance vector of qφz, a vector ztsampled from qφz, and the KL
divergence term of the VLB, for an example sequence of the 3D human
motion test dataset and for the SRNN model trained and applied
in the teacher-forcing mode. Figure 13.8 displays the corresponding
trajectories for the SRNN model trained and applied in the generation
mode (trained with scheduled sampling). We can see in Figure 13.7 that
the trajectories of the parameters (and of the sampled ztvector) are
(much) smoother than in the case of speech signals, as, again, the 3D
human motion data themselves have smoother trajectories compared to
speech data. Some dimensions seem more “active” than others, even if,
without a deeper investigation, it is quite diﬃcult to interpret the range
of values covered by the entries of the latent vector. Such a thorough
investigation is beyond the scope of the present paper. We simply note
here that there are two dimensions, dimensions 1 and 3, that seem to
collapse. For these two dimensions, the mean is steady around zero
and the variance has a large (and steady) value, hence the sampled
trajectory of the corresponding ztentries looks like noise. In contrast,
some other dimensions seem to have an interesting informative proﬁle.
For example, dimensions 4 and 5 have an opposite ﬂuctuation, probably
encoding an opposite evolution of the corresponding factors of data
variation.
In Figure 13.8, the latent vector generally seems more “active” or
informative than in Figure 13.7. For most dimensions, the ratio between
the range of the mean variation and the range of variance variation is
larger. The range of the KL divergence term values is also larger than
in Figure 13.7, indicating that the approximate posterior and the “prior”
(generative distribution of zt) are less close to each other than in the
teacher-forcing case. These observations are consistent with those made
on the speech signals in Section 13.3.4. Our conjecture that the latent
variable was less important in the teacher-forcing mode than in the