106 Brief tour of other models
ThismodelcanbeconsideredanextensionoftheswitchingKalmanﬁlter
(Murphy, 1998; Fox et al., 2011) to a DNN-based observation model
(see also Linderman et al.(2016) for a similar combination). Johnson
et al.(2016) did not provide detailed equations for these models. Rather,
they showed how the use of structured mean-ﬁeld approximation in the
inference model, combined with the use of an observation model that
is conjugate to the latent variable model, can make the inference and
training processes particularly eﬃcient. They called the resulting model
a structured VAE (SVAE). As they presented these developments in
the general framework of probabilistic graphical models (Koller and
Friedman, 2009), which is more general than the DVAE framework, they
did not provide “temporal equations.” This makes this paper somewhat
poorly connected to our review, although they mentioned that the DKF
model (Krishnan et al., 2015) is strongly related to their work (they also
implied that using RNN models for implementing time dependencies is
restrictive in the general framework that they present).
Black-box deep SSM: Similarly, Archer et al.(2015) also focused
on the structure of the approximate posterior distribution to improve
the computational eﬃciency of the inference. They proposed using a
multivariate Gaussian approximate posterior with a block tridiagonal
inverse covariance matrix. They also proposed a corresponding fast
and scalable inference algorithm. This general approach can be applied
with diﬀerent (deep and nondeep) parameterizations of the inference
model and is applicable to a large family of SSMs, hence the “black
box” denomination in the paper title. The authors mainly focused
and experimented on an LG-LDS (to show that their algorithm can
eﬃciently recover the solution of the Kalman ﬁlter), an LDS with a
linear-Poisson observation model (which has no closed-form inference
solution), and a basic one-dimensional nonlinear LDS. This study is
well-connected with the DKF model and with deep SSMs in general.
Interestingly, in this study, which, again, focuses more on the inference
model than on the generative model, only the inference model is deep,
whereas the generative models used in the experiments are nondeep.
This study was later extended, notably addressing online learning and
real-time issues (Zhao and Park, 2017; Zhao et al., 2019).