58 Deep Kalman Filters
dynamics of the data. The VAE methodology circumvents the diﬃculties
encountered in previous approaches (Haykin, 2004; Raiko and Tornio,
2009) concerning the computational complexity and practicability of
model parameter estimation, particularly allowing to move directly from
single-layer neural networks to DNNs.
Hereinafter, for all detailed DVAE models, we ﬁrst present the
generative equations, then the inference model (and we discuss its
choice by referring to the exact posterior distribution structure as
deduced from the generative model), and ﬁnally the detailed form of the
VLB used for model training together with clues about the optimization
algorithm.
5.1 Generative model
We have already seen the generative equations of the DKF, as they are
the same as (3.9)–(3.12), with the speciﬁcity that dzanddxare DNNs
here.2Krishnan et al.(2015) did not specify these DNNs; we can assume
that basic feed-forward neural networks (i.e., MLPs) were used. In their
second paper, Krishnan et al.(2017) implemented dxwith a two-layer
MLP and used a slightly more reﬁned model for dz: a gated linear
combination of a linear model and an MLP for the mean parameter,
where the gate is itself provided by an MLP, and the chaining of MLP,
rectiﬁed linear unit (ReLU) activation, and Softmax activation layers
for the variance parameter (see Section B.1). According to the authors,
this allows “the model have the ﬂexibility to choose a linear transition
for some dimensions while having a nonlinear transition for the others.”
Even if we are still at an early point in our presentation of the
diﬀerent DVAE models, we can make a ﬁrst series of remarks to clarify
the links between the models we have discussed so far.
•The stochastic state ztof an SSM is similar in essence to the latent
state of the VAE. In the present DKF case, where dxis implemented
2In fact, a Bernouilli distribution was considered for xtby Krishnan et al.(2015)
and Krishnan et al.(2017), but we have already mentioned that diﬀerent pdfs can be
considered for pθx(xt|zt)depending on the data, without aﬀecting the fundamental
issues of this review. Hence, we consider here a Gaussian distribution for a better
comparison with the other models.