14.3. VAE improvements and extensions applicable to DVAEs 153
space (we still have a unique observed vector x). In this hierarchical
latent variable model, there is no notion of time, but if we think of
timely ordered variables, then we move toward Markov models (in the
above example, a ﬁrst-order one). In addition, if we consider both timely
ordered latent variables and timely ordered observed variables, we step
into the world of DVAEs. In other words, a DVAE can be considered a
particular case of structured/hierarchical VAEs, with timely ordered
latent and observed variables.
At this point, we can make an interesting parallel among the DVAE
papers that we have reviewed and the hierarchical VAE papers (Sal-
imans, 2016; Sønderby et al., 2016b; Sønderby et al., 2016a; Kingma
and Welling, 2019) concerning the design of the inference model. We
have seen in Section 4.2.1 that the D-separation methodology was not
systematically used in the design of DVAE inference models. Interest-
ingly and quite surprisingly, this methodology is not mentioned either
in the above hierarchical VAE papers. Yet, we recall that D-separation
is a major principled way to guide the design of inference models, in-
cluding in this more general case. In these papers, the authors rather
chose one model among diﬀerent somewhat intuitive structures (e.g.,
top-down against bottom-up inference (Kingma and Welling, 2019)).
One strategy to make the choice is to favor an inference model with
variable dependencies that “mirror” those of the generative model, so
that some “module” and parameters can be shared between them. This
is a suitable feature that we have discussed for DVAEs in Section 4.2.3
and was applied in the VRNN model for example. In the hierarchical
VAE papers, this “module sharing” strategy reportedly led to faster
training and better ﬁtting of model and data.
That being said, module sharing is not incompatible with respecting
the exact posterior distribution structure. For example, in Salimans’s
(2016) paper, the inference model is deﬁned by
qφ(z|x) =qφ(z0|x)K/productdisplay
k=1qφ(zk|zk−1,x). (14.3)
Again, it was chosen by the author because it “mirrors” the generative
model. This inference model follows the structure of the exact posterior
distribution, even though this fundamental latter point was not men-