14.4. Perspectives on source coding 157
the corresponding sequence of latent vectors z1:T, with diﬀerent options
for recurrent connections. One of them, called feedback recurrent au-
toencoder (FRAE), has recurrent connections at both the encoder and
decoder, and a feedback connection from the decoder to encoder. The
recurrent connections are reminiscent of the predictive coding principle
that is classical in source coding theory (Gersho and Gray, 2012). In
fact, FRAE can be considered a nonlinear predictive coding scheme, in
which the encoder forms a latent code that encodes only the residual
information that is missing when reconstructing a data vector from
the deterministic internal state, which depends on past data vectors.
This concept of predictive coding is strongly related to that of the
predictive mode for the DVAE models that we discussed in general
terms in Section 4.1.1 and that we have seen implemented in diﬀerent
(autoregressive) DVAE models. Therefore, from this viewpoint, FRAE
is strongly related to STORN, VRNN, and SRNN. The feedback con-
nection from the decoder to encoder is reminiscent of another classical
principle of source coding – closed-loop coding (Gersho and Gray, 2012)–
even though Yang et al.(2020) did not refer to it explicitly. In short,
closed-loop coding enables the decoder to use the quantized previous
data vectors in place of the unquantized ones (not available at the
decoder) for predicting the current data vector.
This line of research on nonlinear predictive coders based on DVAEs
is quite promising and is only at its infancy. As Yang et al.(2020) wrote
“There is no standard autoencoder architecture for tem-
porally correlated data that has variable-length and long
range dependencies such as video, speech, and text. The
main challenge lies in the diﬃculty in capturing correlation
information at diﬀerent time-scales in an online/sequential
fashion.”
This agrees with the concluding remark of Chen et al.(2017):
“We believe it’s exciting to extend this principle of learning
lossy codes [of the latent variable z] to other forms of data,
in particular those that have a temporal aspect like audio
and video.”