20 Variational Autoencoders
/bracehtipupleft/bracehtipdownright/bracehtipdownleft/bracehtipupright
Encoder/bracehtipupleft/bracehtipdownright/bracehtipdownleft/bracehtipupright
Decoderxez zdx ˆx
Figure 2.1: Schematic representation of an AE. The left trapezoid represents a high-
to-low-dimensional encoder DNN (denoted ez), and the right trapezoid represents
a low-to-high-dimensional decoder DNN (denoted dx). Calculation of the latent
variable zand output ˆxfrom input xis deterministic. In line with probabilistic
graphical models, deterministic variables are represented within diamonds.
The VAE was initially proposed by Kingma and Welling (2014) and
Rezende et al.(2014). It can be seen as a probabilistic version of an AE,
where the output of the decoder is not directly a value of xbut the
parameters of a probability distribution of x. As shown below, the same
probabilistic formulation applies to the encoding of z. The resulting
probabilistic model can be used to generate new data from new values
ofz. It can also be used to transform existing data within an encoding-
modiﬁcation-decoding scheme. For instance, the seminal papers on
VAEs and many subsequent ones have considered image generation and
transformation. Examples of speech/music signals transformation based
on a VAE can be found in the literature (Blaauw and Bonada, 2016;
Hsuet al., 2017a; Esling et al., 2018; Roche et al., 2019; Bitton et al.,
2020). Finally, it can be employed as a prior distribution of xin more
complex Bayesian models for, for example, speech enhancement (Bando
et al., 2018; Leglaive et al., 2018; Pariente et al., 2019; Leglaive et al.,
2019) or source separation (Kameoka et al., 2018).
For clarity of presentation, at this point, it is convenient to separate
the presentation of the VAE decoder (i.e., the generative model) and
that of the VAE encoder (i.e., the inference model).
2.2 VAE generative model
In the following,N/parenleftbig·;µ,Σ/parenrightbigdenotes a multivariate Gaussian distribution
with mean vector µand covariance matrix Σ,diag{·}is the operator
that forms a diagonal matrix from a vector by putting the vector entries