154 Discussion
tioned by Salimans (2016). In the design of a DVAE, we can apply this
principle: We can look for an inference model that both respects the
structure of the exact posterior and shares some module(s) with the
generative model.
In DVAEs, the problem of disentangling the factors of data variation
takes a new ﬂavor, as diﬀerent factors of variation can have diﬀerent
dynamics. In this context, one way to address the disentanglement
challenge is therefore to apply diﬀerent levels of hierarchical modeling of
the latent factors on the time dimension; that is, we can design models
with a diﬀerent time resolution for diﬀerent latent variables, which
is of course not incompatible with other types of hierarchical models.
In particular, one general challenge is to separate the data dynamics
(i.e., their temporal trajectories) and other factors of variations that
are more constant over time (e.g., speaker identity for speech data, or
objects present in the scene for videos).2For example, we have seen in
this review the DSAE model (Li and Mandt, 2018) and the FHVAE
model (Hsu et al., 2017b), which include latent variables deﬁned at the
sequence level, segment level (subsequence of consecutive frames), or
frame level. For speech signal modeling, this appears as a promising way
to separate the modeling and control of phonetic information, which is
deﬁned at the segment or frame level, and speaker/session information,
which is deﬁned at the sequence level. A generalization of this approach
would be to impose a prior distribution of z1:Tthat ﬁts the dynamics
of the latent factors to extract, which can be signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from
the data dynamics.
In general, the issue of separating data dynamics and other factors
of variation is still largely open in the literature on DVAE models with
a sequence of latent vectors. For example, we were surprised to notice
that there are very few experiments and information available on the
explainability of the extracted sequence of latent factors. Experiments
involving swapping of the extracted latent factors across two data
sequences before resynthesizing them were reported by, for example, Hsu
et al.(2017b). These experiments show that for speech signals, speaker
2Several papers dealing with disentanglement and separate control of content
and dynamics in videos have reported impressive results in an adversarial training
framework (Denton and Birodkar, 2017; Villegas et al., 2017; Tulyakov et al., 2018).