2.3. Learning with variational inference 25
measure of ﬁt:
q⋆(z) = arg max
q∈FL(θ,q(z);x) = arg min
q∈FDKL/parenleftbigq(z)/bardblpθ(z|x)/parenrightbig.(2.11)
In the exact EM algorithm, the variational family Fis unconstrained,
so the solution to the E-step is given by the exact posterior distribution:
q⋆(z) =pθ(z|x). As this optimal variational distribution over zis
actually conditioned on x, we will now use the notation q(z|x)instead
ofq(z). The diﬃculty arises when the posterior distribution pθ(z|x)
is intractable, which prevents us from solving the E-step analytically.
Variational inference then consists in constraining the variational family
Fand resorting to optimization methods for solving the E-step (Jordan
et al., 1999).
Seminal works on variational inference relied on the so-called mean-
ﬁeld approximation, which constrains the variational family Fto be a
set of completely factorized distributions (i.e., multivariate distributions
overzthat are written as a product of univariate marginal distributions
over the entries of z). All marginal posterior dependencies between
diﬀerent entries of zare ignored here, while the “structured” mean-ﬁeld
approximation (Saul and Jordan, 1996) partially restores some of them.
Solving the E-step under the mean-ﬁeld approximation leads to a set
of closed-form coupled solutions for each univariate distribution in the
factorization. This approach is also referred to as coordinate-ascent
variational inference in the literature (Bishop, 2006; Blei et al., 2017).
However, closed-form updates are usually only available for conjugate-
exponential models (Winn and Bishop, 2005) when the distribution of
each scalar latent variable, conditionally on its parents, belongs to the
exponential family and is conjugate with respect to the distribution of
these parent variables. Moreover, this coordinate-ascent approach does
not scale well for high-dimensional and large-scale inference problems
(Hoﬀman et al., 2013).
An alternative to the mean-ﬁeld approximation is then to deﬁne the
variational family as a set of distributions with a certain parametric form
qλ(z|x), where the parameters λgovern the shape of the distribution.
For example, we can deﬁne the Gaussian variational family where the