156 Discussion
ignored” when a powerful deterministic temporal encoder-decoder is
used, and a few papers have related this problem to the need to better
encode z, in the source coding sense, with an information-theoretic
interpretation of a VAE as a lossy coder (Kingma et al., 2016; Chen
et al., 2017). Among the few papers on the practical application of
(D)VAE to data coding, we can mention the ConvDRAW model pro-
posed by Gregor et al.(2016), which learns and encodes a hierarchy of
latent variables, resulting in an image lossy compression that performs
similarly to JPEG. Other examples include VQ-VAE, which is a mix of
VAE and vector quantization of z, applied to speech coding (Oord et al.,
2017; Gârbacea et al., 2019) and video compression with rate-distortion
autoencoders (Habibian et al., 2019).
As for a general approach to source coding based on DVAEs with a
sequence of latent variables, we can mention two recent papers: Lom-
bardoet al.(2019) and Yang et al.(2020). Lombardo et al.(2019)
presented a video codec based on the DSAE model (Li and Mandt,
2018), which we reviewed in Chapter 11. The sequence of latent vectors
z1:Textracted by the DSAE encoder is quantized and transformed into
a binary minimum-length sequence by an arithmetic coder, which ex-
ploits the DSAE dynamical model pθz(zt|z1:t−1)for entropy coding. The
chaining of inverse operations (i.e., arithmetic decoding, inverse quanti-
zation and DSAE decoder) enables to obtain the decoded data sequence
ˆx1:T. The global variable v(see Section 11.1) is encoded separately
with a similar scheme. The resulting video codec is shown to exhibit
rate-distortion performance that is comparable to the state-of-the art
video codecs (such as VP9) on generic video sequences while drastically
improving the performance on video sequences with specialized content
(similar to the content of videos used to train the model). Lombardo
et al.(2019) provide no information on the control of the coded data
sequence quality or that of the bitrate. They only mention that the
arithmetic encoding of z1:Trequires a number of iterations. Moreover,
the DSAE model is an SSM-like model; that is, xtis generated from
zt“alone,” not considering the potential of using xt−1(or its quantized
version) for predicting xtand encoding it more eﬃciently.
In contrast, Yang et al.(2020) proposed diﬀerent schemes for en-
coding a data sequence x1:Tthrough the inference and quantization of