1.4. Aim, contributions, and outline of the paper 15
network (STORN) (Bayer and Osendorfer, 2014) in Chapter 7, the
variational recurrent neural network (VRNN) (Chung et al., 2015; Goyal
et al., 2017) in Chapter 8, another type of stochastic recurrent neural
network (SRNN) (Fraccaro et al., 2016) in Chapter 9, the recurrent
variational autoencoder (RVAE) (Leglaive et al., 2020) in Chapter 10,
and ﬁnally the disentangled sequential autoencoder (DSAE) (Li and
Mandt, 2018) in Chapter 11.
We have spent eﬀort on consistency of presentation. For all seven
models that we detail, we ﬁrst present the generative equations in
time-step form and then for an entire data sequence. Then, we present
the structure of the exact posterior distribution of the latent variables
given the observed data and present the inference model as proposed
in the original papers. Finally, we present the corresponding VLB.
In the original papers, some parts of this complete picture are often
overviewed or even missing (not always the same parts), independently
of the authors’ goodwill, because of lack of space.
We discuss the links, similarities, and diﬀerences of the selected
DVAEmodels.Wecommentonthechoicesoftheauthorsofthereviewed
papers regarding the inference model, its relation to the exact posterior
distribution, and implementation issues. In the present review, we
discuss only high-level implementation issues related to the general
structure of the neural network that implements a given DVAE at
generation or inference (e.g., the type of RNN). We do not discuss
practical implementation issues (e.g., the number of layers), which are
too low-level in the present technical review context.
We have also spent some eﬀort making the notations homogeneous
across all models. This is valid for both the review of the seven detailed
models and the other sections of the paper, including the general pre-
sentation of the DVAE class of models in Chapter 4. For some models,
we have changed the time indexation notation, and in some instances,
the names of some variables compared to the original papers. We have
taken great care to do that consistently in the generative model, the
inference part, and the VLB so that these notation changes do not aﬀect
the essence and functioning of the model. Together with consistency of
presentation, this enables us to better put in evidence the commonal-
ities and diﬀerences across models and make their comparison easier.