4.1. Generative model 43
(e.g., the above SSM is in the driven mode but not in the predictive
mode), or even in none of them. In the literature, we did not encounter
any DVAE in both modes at the same time. Moreover, there are mod-
els in the driven and nonpredictive modes that are converted to the
undriven and predictive modes by replacing the control input utwith
the previously generated output xt−1, see (Fraccaro et al., 2016). Note
that a model’s behavior can be quite diﬀerent under the various modes.
This is consistent with the concept of using a model in an open loop or
in a closed loop in control theory. The principle of these diﬀerent modes
has been poorly discussed in the DVAE literature, and it is interesting
to clarify it at an early stage of the DVAE presentation.
4.1.2 Parameterization with (R)NNs
The factorization in (4.4)is a general umbrella for all (causal) DVAEs.
As discussed above, each DVAE model will make diﬀerent conditional
independence assumptions, which will simplify the general factorization
in various ways. Once the conditional assumptions are made, one can
easily determine if there is a need to accumulate the past information
(e.g., ztorxtdepends on past observations x1:t) or if a ﬁrst-order
Markovian relationship holds (e.g., ztandxtdepend at most on zt−1
andxt−1). Usually, the former is implemented using RNNs, whereas
feed-forward DNNs can be used to implement ﬁrst-order Markovian
dependency. Moreover, once the conditional assumptions are made, the
remainingdependenciescanbeimplementedindiﬀerentways. Therefore,
the ﬁnal family of distributions depends not only on the conditional
independence assumptions but also on the networks that are used to
implement the remaining dependencies.
Let us showcase this with a concrete example in which we have the
following conditional independence assumptions:
p(zt|x1:t−1,z1:t−1,u1:t) =p(zt|x1:t−1,ut), (4.7)
p(xt|x1:t−1,z1:t,u1:t) =p(xt|x1:t−1,zt). (4.8)
Here, we assume that the generation of both xtandztdepends on
x1:t−1. In addition, the generation of xtalso depends on ztand that of
ztalso depends on ut. To accumulate the information of all past outputs