13.2. Experimental protocol 119
varianceσ2
θx,f,t(·)amounts to modeling each entry xf,tof the power
spectrogram x1:Twith a Gamma distribution with shape parameter
1and scale parameter σ2
θx,f,t(·)(i.e.,xf,t∼G(1,1/σ2
θx,f,t(·))).1This
also amounts to using the Itakura-Saito divergence between xf,tand
σ2
θx,f,t(·)in the reconstruction term of the VLB (Girin et al., 2019).
We recall that all presented DVAE models are versatile regarding the
conditional pdf of xt, and using a Gamma distribution (more appro-
priate for speech/audio power spectrograms) in place of the Gaussian
distribution that was used in the generic presentation of the models does
not present any problem. The linear layer estimating the parameters of
this distribution has 513output units corresponding to the log-variance
parameters{logσ2
θx,f,t(·)}F
f=1.
13.2.2 3D human motion data
For our experiments with 3D human motion data, we used the H3.6M
dataset (Ionescu et al., 2014), which is one of the largest dataset of the
kind and has been widely used in video prediction (Finn et al., 2016),
human pose and shape estimation (Bogo et al., 2016), and human
motion prediction (Martinez et al., 2017). This dataset was obtained
from multi-view video recordings of 11 professional actors performing 17
various scenarios (e.g., discussing, smoking, taking a picture, or talking
on the phone), using four calibrated cameras with 50 Hz resolution.
The 3D{x,y,z}coordinates of 32 human skeleton joints were extracted
from these multi-view recordings. Each set of coordinates was centered
w.r.t. the coordinates of the pelvis joint.
For our experiments with DVAEs, each data frame is organized
as a96-dimensional vector xtby concatenating the 3D coordinates of
the 32 joints. We used sequences of T= 50consecutive vectors, which
represent a duration of 2 s (the data were previously downsampled
by a factor 2). These sequences were obtained by applying a 50-frame
sliding window on the original H3.6M sequences, with a shift of two
frames. In summary, each example in our dataset is thus a matrix of
3D coordinates of skeleton joints of size 96×50, which corresponds to
1Here, we do not specify the variables generating the variance, as they depend on
the DVAE model. Instead, the subscripts indicate frequency bin fand time frame t.