10 Introduction
as in usual SSMs.
•Deep Bayesian networks combine BNs with DNNs. DNNs are used
to generate the parameters of the modeled distributions. This
enables them to be high-dimensional and highly multi-modal while
having a reasonable number of parameters. In short, deep BNs
have can appropriately combine the “explainability” of Bayesian
models with the modeling power of DNNs.
DDBNs are thus a combination of all these aspects, as illustrated in
Figure 1.1. They can be equally seen as dynamical versions of deep
BNs (i.e., deep BNs including temporal dependencies) or deep versions
of dynamical BNs (i.e., dynamical BNs mixed with DNNs). As an
extension of dynamical BNs, DDBNs are expected to be powerful tools
for modeling dynamical systems and/or data sequences. However, as
mentioned above, the combination of probabilistic modeling with DNNs
in deep BNs can result in a complex and costly model training. This is
an even more serious issue for DDBNs, in which the repeating structure
due to temporal modeling adds a level of complexity.
1.2 Variational inference and VAEs
Recently, the application of the variational inference methodology (Jor-
danet al., 1999; Bishop, 2006, Chapter 10; Šmídl and Quinn, 2006;
Murphy, 2012, Chapter 21) to a fundamental deep BN architecture –a
low-dimensional to a high-dimensional generative feed-forward DNN–
has led to eﬃcient inference and training of the resulting model, called a
variational autoencoder (VAE) (Kingma and Welling, 2014). A similar
approach was proposed the same year (Rezende et al., 2014).1The
VAE is directly connected to the concepts of a latentvariable and
unsupervised representation learning : the observed random variable
representing the data of interest is assumed to be generated from an
unobserved latent variable through a probabilistic process. Often, this
latent variable is of lower dimension than the observed data (which can
be high-dimensional) and is assumed to “encode” the observed data in
1Kingma and Welling (2014) and Rezende et al.(2014) were both pre-published
in 2013 as ArXiv papers. Connections also exist with Mnih and Gregor (2014).