108 Brief tour of other models
themselves, it took inspiration. Here, the data sequence x1:Tis encoded
by a single latent random vector z, instead of the sequence z1:T. The
compact form of the generative model is given by
pθ(x1:T,z) =pθz(z)T/productdisplay
t=1pθx(xt|x1:t−1,z), (12.2)
Fabius and Amersfoort (2014) provided no information about pθz(z).
The generative distribution pθx(xt|x1:t−1,z)is implemented with a
forward RNN that uses zto calculate the ﬁrst hidden state h1and
then iteratively takes xt−1as input to calculate ht, which provides the
parameters of the distribution of xt. Conversely, the inference model
qφz(z|x1:T)is based on a forward RNN that takes x1:Tas input and
delivers a ﬁnal internal state gT, from which we obtain the distribution
parameters for z. In short, the VRAE generative model can be described
by Figure 7.1, where the sequence z1:Tis replaced with a single input z
forh1, and the VRAE inference model can be described by Figure 7.2,
wherethesequence z1:Tisreplacedwithasingleoutput zforgT.Wethus
have a sequence-to-one encoding and a one-to-sequence decoding, which
evokethemodelsdesignedfortext/languageprocessingmentionedinthe
Introduction. As Fabius and Amersfoort’s (2014) paper was published
in 2014 and was part of the early papers on DVAEs, it was probably
inspiring for the natural language processing (NLP) community.
A similar model was proposed by Babaeizadeh et al.(2018), with a
diﬀerence being that several vectors xt:Tare predicted from the past
context x1:t−1and from the unique latent vector z. The inference model
is also of the form qφz(z|x1:T), as in Fabius and Amersfoort’s (2014)
study. Babaeizadeh et al.(2018) compared this model with a “baseline”
model in which the latent vector is deﬁned on a frame-by-frame basis
(i.e.,zt). The observation model of this baseline model is similar to
that of SRNN, and the prior over ztis an i.i.d. standard Gaussian
distribution.
Factorizedhierarchicalvariationalautoencoder(FHVAE): The
FHVAE model was proposed by Hsu et al.(2017b), to learn disentangled
and interpretable latent representations from sequential data without
supervision. To achieve this aim, FHVAE explicitly models the multi-