16 Introduction
Notation remarks are speciﬁed in independent dedicated paragraphs
throughout the paper to facilitate connections with the original papers.
In complement to the detailed review of the seven selected models,
we provide a more rapid overview of other DVAE models pre-
sented in the recent literature in Chapter 12.
We relate the recent developments in DVAEs to the history
and technical background of the classical models DVAEs are
built on, namely VAEs, RNNs, and SSMs . Although there are
already many papers on VAEs, including tutorials, we present them
in Chapter 2 because all subsequent DVAE models rely on the VAE
methodology. Then, as the introduction of temporal models in the VAE
framework is closely linked to RNNs and SSMs, we brieﬂy present these
two classes of models in Chapter 3. The uniﬁed notation that we use
will help readers from diﬀerent communities (e.g., machine learning,
signal processing, and control theory) who are not familiar with the
relations among VAEs, RNNs, and SSMs to discover them comfortably.
We provide a quantitative benchmark of the selected DVAE
models in an analysis-resynthesis task, as well as qualitative
examples of data generation . We have reimplemented the seven
DVAEmodelsdetailedinthisreviewandevaluatedthemontwodiﬀerent
datasets (speech signals and 3D human motion data). This benchmark
is presented in Chapter 13.
The performance comparison of the diﬀerent models from the lit-
erature review is a diﬃcult task for many reasons. First, all models
are not evaluated on the same data. Then, a newly proposed model
generally performs better than some previously proposed model(s), at
least on some aspect(s), but this can depend on model tuning, task,
data, and experimental setup. Moreover, the comparison performed
with a subset of previous models is incomplete in essence. In short,
an extended benchmark of DVAE models is not yet available in the
literature. Conducting an extended benchmark is a huge endeavor, as
there are many possible conﬁgurations for the models and many tasks
for evaluating them. In particular, it is not yet clear how to evaluate the
degree of “disentanglement” of the extracted latent space. The presented