134 Experiments
between the autoregressive models (trained and tested in the teacher-
forcing mode) and the nonautoregressive models is larger than in our
experiment with speech signals. We conjecture that this is because the
3Dhumanmotiondatahaslessvariability(or,say,smoothertrajectories)
compared to speech data. Therefore, for such data, knowing the ground-
truth values of the previous observation(s) ( xt−1orx1:t−1) is a very
strong information for predicting the current observation.
Again, SRNN exhibits the best performance, which is consistent
with the analysis-resynthesis results obtained with the speech data.
In this new experiment with human motion data, STORN is more
eﬃcient than in our experiment with speech data. In contrast, DKF
underperforms compared to the other nonautoregressive models and
exhibits a quite limited improvement over the vanilla VAE.
13.4.2 Generation of 3D human motion sequences
Example videos of a human “skeleton” animated from 3D motion data
sequences generated by the diﬀerent DVAE models are available at
https://team.inria.fr/robotlearn/dvae/.
13.4.3 Training with scheduled sampling
As for the experiment with speech signals, we have tested the inﬂuence of
training and testing the models in the generation mode (using scheduled
sampling for training). Here, we brieﬂy report and comment the results
obtained on the 3D human motion data with SRNN. We can see from
Table 13.2 that, similarly to what we observed in our experiment with
speech signals, SRNN-TF-GM has very poor performance, whereas
trainingSRNNwithscheduledsamplingpartiallyaddressesthisproblem,
placing SRNN-GM between the vanilla VAE and the nonautoregressive
DVAEs. However, the gain in performance of SRNN-GM over the vanilla
VAE is here quite limited, and we believe there is room for improvement
when designing the model adaptation method. In other words, in these
experiments, we adopted a simple scheduled sampling strategy and did
not further investigated this issue, but other strategies to bridge the
gap between ground-truth and generated data could be investigated.