40 Deﬁnition of Dynamical VAEs
parameters θ.
When the model works in the so-called driven mode , one additionally
considers an input sequence of observed random vectors u1:T={ut∈
RU}T
t=1, and in that case, x1:Tis considered the output sequence. In this
case, to deﬁne the full generative model, we need to specify the joint
distribution pθ(x1:T,z1:T,u1:T). However, in practice, we are usually
only interested in modeling the generative process of x1:Tandz1:T
given the input sequence u1:T. Loosely speaking, the input sequence is
assumed deterministic, while x1:Tandz1:Tare stochastic. Therefore,
as is commonly observed in the DVAE literature (Krishnan et al., 2015;
Fraccaro et al., 2016; Fraccaro et al., 2017), we will only focus on
modeling the distribution pθ(x1:T,z1:T|u1:T).
In the following section, we will ﬁrst omit θwhen deﬁning the general
structure of dependencies in the generative model. We will specify the
parameter notation later when introducing how RNNs are used to
parametrize the model. In addition, we will consider the model in the
driven mode (i.e., with u1:Tas input) as it is more general than that in
the undriven mode (i.e., with no “external” input). The undriven mode
equations can be obtained from the driven mode equations by simply
removing u1:T.
4.1.1 Structure of dependencies in the generative model
As we will discuss in detail in Section 14.3, a DVAE can be considered
a structured or hierarchical VAE in which both observed and latent
variables are a set of ordered vectors, and the ordering is imposed by
time. However, the natural order present in the data does not imply a
uniquepossiblestructureofvariabledependenciesforaDVAEgenerative
(or inference) model. In fact, in DVAEs, the joint distribution of the
observed and latent vector sequences is usually deﬁned using the chain
rule; that is, it is written as a product of conditional distributions
over the vectors at diﬀerent time indices. When writing the chain rule,
diﬀerent orderings of the random vectors can be arbitrarily chosen. This
is an important point because the choice of ordering when applying the
chain rule yields diﬀerent practical implementations, which result in
diﬀerent sampling processes.