148 Discussion
stochastic variational inference (Hoﬀman et al., 2013), the approximate
posterior distribution is ﬁxed to a certain parametric form, say Gaussian
for instance, and its mean and variance parameters are “freely” opti-
mized through direct maximization of the VLB. In amortized variational
inference, the approximate posterior distribution is still Gaussian, but
there is an additional constraint imposed by the fact that its parame-
ters are provided by an inference model corresponding to the encoder
network in the VAE case. This is an additional constraint in the deﬁni-
tion of the variational family, and the resulting amortized approximate
posterior distribution is generally less expressive than its counterpart
with free parameters. Consequently, the KL divergence between the
approximate and exact posterior distributions is generally increased
in the amortized variational inference setting, which is referred to as
theamortization gap (Cremer et al., 2018; Krishnan et al., 2018). This
issue can also limit the performance of the learned generative model, as
the amortization gap is directly related to the gap between the VLB
and the intractable log-marginal likelihood of the data, which is the
criterion that we would ideally like to optimize to learn the generative
model parameters (i.e., the parameters of the VAE decoder).
To reduce this gap, several studies have proposed resorting to more
sophisticated inference models. Normalizing ﬂow (Rezende and Mo-
hamed, 2015) builds arbitrarily complex approximate posterior dis-
tributions with tractable densities by applying a series of invertible
transformations to a simple initial distribution. Various normalizing
ﬂows have been proposed in the literature, for instance, based on au-
toregressive models (Kingma et al., 2016; Chen et al., 2017). Because
a normalizing ﬂow consists in chaining multiple transformations of
an initial latent variable, it can be considered a particular case of a
hierarchical model (Kingma and Welling, 2019; Kingma et al., 2016),
a type of model that we will discuss in Section 14.3.4. An expressive
approximate posterior distribution can also be deﬁned as a mixture of
simpler distributions by introducing auxiliary latent variables in the
approximate posterior itself and then marginalizing (Maaløe et al., 2016;
Ranganath et al., 2016; Salimans et al., 2015).
An alternative to the design of more sophisticated inference models
consists in directly modifying the inference algorithm. Marino et al.