144 Discussion
leveraging transformers for generative modeling in the VAE framework.
We found only transformer-based VAEs recently proposed for sentence
generation (Liu and Liu, 2019), story completion (Wang and Wan, 2019),
and music representation learning (Jiang et al., 2020).
14.3 VAE improvements and extensions applicable to DVAEs
Following the seminal VAE papers by Kingma and Welling (2014)
and Rezende et al.(2014), many papers have been proposed for VAE
improvements and extensions. In this subsection, we mention some
of these improvements and extensions and discuss their relation and
possible adaptation to DVAEs. This is a nonexhaustive review; the
purpose of the present paper is not to deepen this rich part of VAE
literature but rather to show that the DVAE development is still largely
open, and one way to improve DVAEs is to get inspired from the
recent studies on VAEs. The interested readers can refer to Kingma
and Welling’s (2019) paper for a more detailed review of the “static”
VAE improvements and extensions.
14.3.1 Improved VAE decoders and the posterior collapse problem
The mathematical formulation of the VAE in the seminal paper by
Kingma and Welling (2014) considered a 1D data vector framework;
that is, xis a ﬁxed-size F-dimensional vector. What happens if we
want to apply the VAE to 2D data, such as images, or more generally,
toN-dimensional data? What happens if one of the dimensions is
variable, like variable-length time sequences? By considering variable-
size sequences and, in particular, variable-length time sequences, we
take a step towards DVAEs. However, we consider models with many-
to-one encoding and one-to-many decoding more as VAEs than DVAEs,
following the line announced in the Introduction.
Kingma and Welling (2014) considered the application of the VAE to
2D image modeling. However, the correlation between neighboring pixels
was poorly exploited, as the conditional generative model (conditioned
on the latent variable) was pixelwise independent.1In such a setting, z
1Technically, an image is arbitrarily reshaped into a vector x, with each pixel