13.3. Results on speech data 121
(SI-SDR) in dB (Le Roux et al., 2019), the perceptual evaluation of
speech quality (PESQ) score in [−0.5,4.5](Rixet al., 2001), and the
extended short-time objective intelligibility (ESTOI) score in [0,1](Taal
et al., 2011). For all metrics, the higher the better. Note that these
metrics are applied on the time-domain signals (i.e., speech waveforms).
We combined the reconstructed magnitude spectrogram with the phase
spectrogram of the original signal to obtain the analyzed-resynthesized
speech waveform (using the inverse STFT).
For 3D human motion data, we can directly compare each original
sequence with the corresponding analyzed-resynthesized sequence. We
used the mean per joint position error (MPJPE) proposed by Ionescu
et al.(2014), which is an averaged Euclidean distance per joint. We
report the results in millimeters (mm). Note that this error corresponds
to the log-likelihood term (or reconstruction error term) of the VLB,
up to a constant factor that is controlled through the setting of the
variance of the data conditional distribution.
13.3 Results on speech data
13.3.1 Analysis-resynthesis
We ﬁrst present the results of analysis-resynthesis performed on the
speech data. The values of the three metrics described in the previous
subsection and averaged over the test dataset are reported in Table 13.1.
In this experiment, all three autoregressive models (STORN, VRNN,
and SRNN) were trained and tested in the teacher-forcing mode (i.e.,
using the ground-truth values of past observed vectors x1:t−1when
generating xt, see Section 4.4.1). Results of analysis-resynthesis in the
generation mode will be discussed in Section 13.3.3.
From Table 13.1, we can draw the following conclusions. First, all
tested DVAE models lead to fair signal reconstruction, with an SI-SDR
ranging in 6.9–11 dB. This range is in accordance with the fact that
we compress each 513-dimensional data vector into a 16-latent vector
(using also the 128-dimensional RNN internal state that encodes the past
data vectors in the case of autoregressive models). The quality of the
reconstructed spectrograms is illustrated in Figures 13.2, 13.3 and 13.4.