4.5. DVAE summary 55
standard VAE.
•Temporal link: At least one element in z1:t−1or in x1:t−1is
parent to either ztorxt. One of the simplest forms of a temporal
link, namely zt−1is a parent of zt, is a fundamental characteristic
of ﬁrst-order SSMs.
In a way, the “minimal DVAE” is the straightforward combination
of a ﬁrst-order SSM and a VAE, which is the DKF model that we
will detail in Section 5. Other DVAEs include additional temporal
links. Moreover, temporal links such as “ zt−1is a parent of xt” can
be considered additional decoding links, in that xtis generated from
ztandzt−1. As for temporal links, in the papers that we detail in
this overview, ztand/or xtdepend either on zt−1and/or xt−1, or on
z1:t−1and/or x1:t−1. In other words, the order of temporal dependencies
is either 1 (implemented with a basic feed-forward neural network,
such as a Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP)) or inﬁnity (implemented
with an RNN). However, one can, in principle, use N-order temporal
dependencies with 1<N <∞, relying, for instance, on convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) with ﬁnite-length receptive ﬁelds. In particular,
temporal convolutional networks (TCNs) (Lea et al., 2016), which are
based on dilated convolutions, are competitive with RNNs on several
sequence modeling tasks, including generative modeling (Aksan and
Hilliges, 2019).
Finally, as discussed before, a DVAE can be in the driven mode , in
thepredictive mode , in both, or in none of these modes. This is also
modeled by parenthood relationships that may or may not exist.
•Driving link: A DVAE is said to be in the driven mode if utis
a parent of either ztorxt, or both.
•Predictive link: A DVAE is said to be in the predictive mode
ifx1:t−1, or part of this sequence, is a parent of either ztorxt, or
both. In practice, a predictive link is implemented either in the
teacher-forcingmode(usingtheground-truthpastvectorsequence)
or in the generation mode (using the previously generated vector
sequence). Generally, better performance is achieved if the same
mode is used at training time and test time.