14.3. VAE improvements and extensions applicable to DVAEs 145
encodes both the local statistics of an image (e.g., local texture) and
the global structural information of the image (e.g., objects), whereas it
is desirable to separate this information, following the essence of latent
factors disentanglement.
Subsequent studies (Gulrajani et al., 2016; Gregor et al., 2016; Chen
et al., 2017; Lucas and Verbeek, 2018; Shang et al., 2018) considered
mixing the VAE latent representation with a more sophisticated decoder
exploiting local pixel correlations with either convolutive or autoregres-
sive decoding (Oord et al., 2016b; Oord et al., 2016c), possibly combined
with a multilevel or hierarchical latent encoding (see Section 14.3.4). For
example, Chen et al.(2017) considered an autoregressive conditional
density of the form pθx(x|z) =/producttext
ipθx(xi|z,xnb[i])with application to
2D image modeling, where xiis thei-th pixel of the image and xnb[i]are
the neighboring pixels. The autoregressive part is typically implemented
with an RNN (Oord et al., 2016c). Ideally, the local statistics of an
image should be modeled by the autoregressive part, whereas the global
structural information of the image should be encoded in z. Another
example of a structured VAE for modeling images is VAEs based on
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) (Gulrajani et al., 2016; Gregor
et al., 2016), which decompose/recompose an image into/from successive
feature maps.
Chenet al.(2017) discussed the tendency of the autoregressive part
of the model to capture all information on the data structure and let
the latent variable remain unused. This problem is referred to as latent
variable vanishing or asposterior collapse in the literature, a term that
wehavealreadyencounteredintheprecedingchapter.Ageneralstrategy
to counter this eﬀect (i.e., controlling the data features encoded by the
RNN and the data features encoded in z) is proposed by Chen et al.
(2017) at an early level of the model design: The local autoregressive
window is constrained to be small, weakening the modeling power of
the decoder. This can also be done with a hierarchical structure of
the latent space (see the next subsection), possibly combined with the
diﬀerent levels of image feature maps in CNNs (Gulrajani et al., 2016;
being an entry of this vector, and the conventional “vector” VAE model, as described
in Section 2, is applied. Therefore, each pixel is modeled independently conditioned
onz, even though all pixels are not assumed marginally independent.