4.2. Inference model 49
current, and future time steps). The exact inference is thus a noncausal
process, even if the generation is causal. This is reminiscent of the
Kalman smoother (i.e., the noncausal solution to inference in LG-LDS,
see Section 3.2.2). As discussed in the previous subsection, the inference
modelqφshould here have the same most general structure as the exact
posterior distribution of (4.20):
qφ(z1:T|x1:T,u1:T) =T/productdisplay
t=1qφ(zt|z1:t−1,x1:T,u1:T). (4.21)
Similar to the generative model, each conditional posterior distribu-
tionqφ(zt|z1:t−1,x1:T,u1:T)should accumulate information from past
latent variables and past observations, but in contrast to the generative
model, it should also accumulate information from present and future
observations. Typically, this process is implemented with a bidirectional
recurrent network.
Depending on the conditional independence assumptions made
when deﬁning the generative model, the posterior dependencies in
pθ(zt|z1:t−1,x1:T,u1:T)can be simpliﬁed using the D-separation prop-
erty of Bayesian networks described in the previous subsection. Thus,
the posterior dependencies in qφ(zt|z1:t−1,x1:T,u1:T)can be simpliﬁed
similarly. Of course, it is always possible to use an approximate posterior
qφthat does not follow the structure of the exact posterior distribution.
In fact, it makes sense to use a simpliﬁed version if one wants to decrease
the computational cost or satisfy other constraints. In particular, for
online or incremental data processing, the inference can be forced to
be a causal process by removing the dependencies of qφon the future
observations (and future inputs). This is similar to the Kalman ﬁlter
for an LG-LDS, see again Section 3.2.2. This will generally be at risk
of degrading the inference performance. Again, we will return to these
points when reviewing the DVAE models proposed in the literature.
4.2.3 Sharingvariablesandparametersatgenerationandinference
We can note a similarity between the (most general causal) generative
distribution pθz(zt|x1:t−1,z1:t−1,u1:t)and the corresponding inference
modelqφ(zt|z1:t−1,x1:T,u1:T)in terms of random variable dependencies.