12.2. Models related to STORN, VRNN, and SRNN 107
Deep variational Bayesian ﬁlters: We have already mentioned this
class of models in Section 6.1. DVBFs, which were proposed by (Karl et
al., 2017), are an extension of the class of SSM-based DVAE models with
dynamical models that depend on stochastic parameters. For example,
the transition model at time t(i.e., between ztandzt+1) can be a
linear-Gaussian model with matrices and vectors that are a weighted
sum of matrices/vectors randomly selected in a predeﬁned set (possibly
learned from data) with weights that are provided by a DNN. A similar
transition model was applied within the KVAE model in Fraccaro et al.’s
(2017) paper (see also Watter et al.(2015)).
Disentangled SSM: Miladinović et al.(2019) recently proposed a
model called the disentangled state-space model (DSSM), in line with
the DSAE model and, more generally, with models that attempt to
separate the encoding of the content/object at the sequence level from
that of its dynamics at the time-frame level. However, in contrast
to DSAE, in which the sequence-level latent variable conditions the
observation model, in DSSM, this sequence-level variable conditions the
dynamical model. It is assumed to model the fact that the dynamics
of an object are dependent on the considered applicative domain (e.g.,
enzyme kinetics or bouncing ball kinematics). In other words, (11.1)for
DSAE can be reshaped in DSSM as1
pθ(x1:T,z1:T,v) =pθv(v)pθz(z0)T/productdisplay
t=1pθx(xt|zt)pθz(zt|zt−1,v).(12.1)
Here, the dynamical model is a (conditioned) ﬁrst-order model. Mi-
ladinović et al.(2019) also proposed a ﬁltering inference model that is
implemented in the more general DVBF framework mentioned above.
12.2 Models related to STORN, VRNN, and SRNN
Variational recurrent autoencoder (VRAE): The VRAE model,
proposed by Fabius and Amersfoort (2014), can been considered a
simpliﬁed version of STORN, from which, according to the authors
1In Miladinović et al.’s (2019) paper, the sequence-level variable is denoted as D
for “domain.” For consistency, we retain the notation vused in DSAE.