84 Variational Recurrent Neural Networks
First,possiblyinspiredbyKrishnan et al.(2017),aswellas(Fraccaro
et al., 2016) (see Section 9.2), they introduced a backward RNN on
xtto feed the approximate posterior distribution qφ(z1:T|x1:T), in line
with DKS (see Section 5.2). Therefore, they accounted for the future
observations in the inference process, as opposed to the original VRNN,
moving toward a better compliance with the structure of the exact
posterior distribution pθ(z1:T|x1:T).
Second, they forced the latent variable ztto contain relevant in-
formation about the future of the sequence by connecting ztwith the
internal state of the inference backward network (denoted btby Goyal
et al.(2017)). This was achieved by introducing an additional condi-
tional model pξ(bt|zt)and adding it in the VLB. Similarly, they also
considered an additional conditional model pξ(xt|bt).
Finally, they slightly modiﬁed the VRNN model itself by removing
the direct link between ztandxt; that is, they replaced (8.2)–(8.3)
with(7.5)–(7.6), while all other equations remained identical to the
VRNN equations. The authors reported that “[they] observed better
performance by avoiding the latent variables from directly producing
the next output.”
An adaptation of VRNN to automatic language translation was pro-
posed by Su et al.(2018). This is doubly interesting because this paper
considers a sequence of discrete inputs and outputs, which contrasts
with the “all continuous” models we focus on. This paper also contrasts
with the previously proposed VAE-based models for text/language pro-
cessing, which, as mentioned in the Introduction, usually consider a
single latent vector to encode the whole input sequence (a full sentence).
In Suet al.’s (2018) paper, it is the sequence of latent vectors z1:Tthat
encodes the semantic content of the sequence to translate “over time.”
Finally, we can also mention the study by Lee et al.(2018), which
uses VRNN for speech synthesis and adopts adversarial training. Besides
VRNN, all these papers illustrate the ﬂexibility of the DVAE class of
models.