60 Deep Kalman Filters
At each time t, the posterior distribution of ztdepends on the previous
latent state zt−1and on the present and futureobservations xt:Tand
inputs ut:T(it is thus a ﬁrst-order Markovian causal process on zt
combined with an anticausal process on xtandut).
Krishnan et al.(2015) indicated this structure and the fact that we
should inspire from it to design the approximate posterior qφ. However,
somewhat surprisingly, they proposed the following four diﬀerent models:
•an instantaneous model: qφ(zt|xt,ut)parameterized by an MLP;
•a model with local past and future context: qφ(zt|xt−1:t+1,ut−1:t+1)
parameterized by an MLP;
•amodelwiththecompletepastcontext: qφ(zt|x1:t,u1:t)parameterized
by an RNN;
•a model with the whole sequence: qφ(zt|x1:T,u1:T)parameterized by
a bidirectional RNN.
We do not detail these implementations of qφhere, as we will provide
other detailed examples in the next chapters. One might wonder why
zt−1is not present in the conditional variables of the approximate
posterior, but this might just be an oversight from the authors. This
is diﬃcult to be determined from the paper, as the implementation is
not detailed. The authors mention an RNN to model the dependencies
onxandu, but the implementation of the dependency on zt−1is
not speciﬁed. The point is that, although the authors pointed out the
dependency of the exact posterior on the present and future observations
and inputs, they did not propose a corresponding approximate model.
Notation remark : Krishnan et al.(2015) denoted by ut−1the input
at timetin the generative model, as in many control theory papers
published on SSMs, and not ut, as we do (as pointed out in a previous
footnote). However, when deﬁning the four approximate posterior mod-
els, they did it exactly as we report here (i.e., with utbeing synchronous
toztandxt). We conjecture that this problem is just a notation mistake
made by Krishnan et al.(2015), which we have implicitly corrected by
using utinstead of ut−1as the input at time tin the generative model.