14.3. VAE improvements and extensions applicable to DVAEs 147
DVAEs focused on in this review do not consider a single latent vector z
for a data sequence; rather, they consider a latent vector sequence z1:T,
which is generally synchronized with the data sequence x1:Tand with
the sequence(s) of internal state vectors of the temporal models. This
raises new issues and challenges, compared to the studies conducted
on, for example, 2D image or language/text modeling. However, an
important remark that is worth mentioning, although quite trivial, is
that this DVAE conﬁguration ﬁrst solves the encoding capacity problem
for large data sequences. As mentioned by Li and Mandt (2018),
“[the model] keeps track of the time-varying aspects of xt
inztfor everyt, making the reconstruction to be time-local
and therefore much easier. Therefore, the stochastic model
is better suited if the sequences are long and complex.”
In short, with DVAEs, it is quite unlikely that a posterior collapse
ﬁnds its origin in the limited capacity of the latent vector. In fact,
we conjecture that it may be the opposite (i.e., a too large capacity
of the latent vector sequence z1:T, depending on the size of zt) that
leads to posterior collapse. This is suggested by what we observed in
our experiments in Sections 13.3.4 and 13.4.4 with the autoregressive
models, where inactive entries of z1:Tmight be considered as “super-
ﬂuous” components. Therefore, adjusting the dimension of ztso that
it can optimally ﬁt to the content of the observed data sequence (i.e.,
adjusting the “coding cost” of the latent representation) while limiting
the computational complexity is a major issue in DVAEs. All that being
said, in autoregressive DVAE models such as SRNN or VRNN, even
if we have a “high-capacity” sequence of latent variables, there is no
guarantee that the autoregressive part of the model will not capture
most of the information, thus ignoring the sequence of latent vectors.
This remains an open problem in the DVAE literature.
14.3.2 Improved inference models and algorithms
As shown in Chapter 2, learning in the VAE framework relies on amor-
tized variational inference techniques. In ﬁxed-form variational inference
(Honkela et al., 2010; Salimans and Knowles, 2013) and, in particular,