52 Deﬁnition of Dynamical VAEs
4.4 Additional dichotomy for autoregressive DVAE models
A DVAE can be used to generate new data, for analysis-synthesis (by
chaining the encoder and decoder), or for data transformation, by mod-
ifying the latent vector sequence in between analysis and synthesis.
In the case of DVAE models functioning in the predictive mode (i.e.,
autoregressive DVAEs, see Section 4.1.1), these tasks can be processed
in diﬀerent manners, leading to an additional dichotomy of functioning
modes. We describe these functioning modes in the next subsection
before we see the implications for model training in the following sub-
section. Because these additional diﬀerent modes concern the recursive
part of the models, nonpredictive DVAEs are not concerned here.
4.4.1 Teacher forcing against generation mode
In practice, for autoregressive DVAE models, we have two generation
modes, for the generation of both xtandzt. A mode in which we
assume that the ground-truth past observed vectors x1:t−1are used
for generating the current vector ( xtorzt), and a mode in which the
generated past observed vectors are used for generating the current
vector. At this point, it is important to distinguish between the notation
for the ground-truth value of the observed data vector xtand that for
its modeled version produced by a DVAE, which we denote by ˆxt. In
practice, x1:Tis a given data sequence that we want to model with a
DVAE (or that we use for model training, as shown below), and ˆx1:Tis
the actual output of the DVAE.
Thisissueofeitherusingtheground-truthpastobserveddatavectors
x1:t−1or reinjecting the previously generated vectors ˆx1:t−1at the input
of a generative model is a classical problem of recursive models and, in
particular, of RNNs. Yet it is poorly discussed in the DVAE literature.
In the RNN literature, the ﬁrst conﬁguration is sometimes referred to
asteacher-forcing (Williams and Zipser, 1989), as it is assumed that
a teacher (or oracle) can provide the model with ground-truth values.
Hereinafter, we will use this terminology. This is a classical conﬁguration
attrainingtime,whenthewholesequence x1:Tisavailableandthemodel
is tuned so that ˆx1:Tﬁtsx1:T. However, this is unrealistic at generation