8 Introduction
plugged into a more general Bayesian framework, not only for gener-
ating data but also for modeling the data structure (without actually
generating them) in various applications (e.g., data denoising or data
transformation). In any case, the pdf model must be as close as possible
to the true pdf of the data, which is generally unknown. To achieve this
aim, the model must be trained from data, and model parameters are
generally estimated by following the maximum likelihood methodology
(Goodfellow et al., 2016; Bishop, 2006; Koller and Friedman, 2009).
These principles are valid for both conventional generative models and
DGMs; however, in the case of DGMs, the pdf parameters are generally
the output of DNNs, which makes model training potentially diﬃcult.
1.1 Deep Dynamical Bayesian Networks
In the present review, we focus on an important subfamily of DGMs,
namely the deep dynamical Bayesian networks (DDBNs), which are
built on the following models:
•Bayesian networks (BNs) are a popular class of probabilistic mod-
els for which i) the dependencies among all involved random
variables are explicitly represented by conditional pdfs (i.e. BNs
are prescribed models), and ii) these dependencies can be schemat-
ically represented using a directed acyclic graph (Bishop, 2006;
Koller and Friedman, 2009). The structure of these dependen-
cies often reﬂects (or originates from) an underlying hierarchical
generative process.
•Dynamical Bayesian networks are BNs that include temporal
dependencies and are widely used to model dynamical systems
and/or data sequences. Dynamical BNs are BNs “repeated over
time”; that is, they exhibit a repeating dependency structure (a
time-slice at discrete time t) and some dependencies across these
time-slices (the dynamical models). Recurrent neural networks
(RNNs) and state-space models (SSMs) can be considered special
cases of dynamical BNs. In fact, a temporal dependency in a
dynamical BN is often implemented either as a deterministic re-
cursive process, as in RNNs, or as a ﬁrst-order Markovian process,