14.2. DVAE outcome: A story of ﬂexibility 143
ﬁrst-order. Therefore, the developed representation can be “visually
misleading.” This duality is important in DVAEs, and we encourage to
provide both representations when presenting and discussing DVAEs,
as done in this review.
Oncethehigh-levelDVAEarchitectureischosen,variouspossibilities
exist for the low-level implementation: network type (e.g., LSTM against
GRU) and low-level (hyper)parameterization (number of layers in a
network, number of units per layer, type of activation function, and
classical deep learning modules, such as batch normalization). We choose
not to detail these low-level implementation aspects in this review, and
instead, considered them a deep learning routine. All these choices (or
at least part of them) depend on data nature and datasets and can
signiﬁcantly impact the modeling performance.
14.2.4 Other network architectures for sequential data modeling
In this review, we focus on deep generative latent-variable models of
sequential data using RNNs (or simple feed-forward fully-connected
DNNs for ﬁrst-order temporal dependencies). However, other neural
network architectures can deal with sequential data of arbitrary length,
the most popular ones probably being convolutional architectures. While
RNNs are (virtually) based on inﬁnite-order temporal modeling, CNNs
generally have a ﬁxed-length receptive ﬁeld, which implies a ﬁnite-order
temporal modeling. In particular, temporal convolutional networks
(TCNs) are becoming increasingly popular due to their competitive
performance with RNNs (e.g., in speech separation (Luo and Mesgarani,
2019)) while being more ﬂexible and computationally eﬃcient (Bai et al.,
2018). A TCN is based on dilated 1D convolutions, sharing similarities
with the Wavenet architecture (Oord et al., 2016a), and just as an
RNN, it outputs a sequence of the same length as that of the input
sequence. The combination of TCNs with VAEs was explored by Aksan
and Hilliges (2019).
Another popular neural network architecture that can deal with
sequential data is the transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017), which is
based solely on attention mechanisms, dispensing with recurrence and
convolutions entirely. However, only a few studies have considered