14.2. DVAE outcome: A story of ﬂexibility 141
Moreover, each model has several variants: Driven/undriven mode, pre-
dictive/nonpredictive mode, and with one or several feature extractors.
When designing a generative model, complexity issues can be con-
sidered. For example, we can quote Bayer and Osendorfer (2014):
“[...] we can restrict ourselves to prior distributions over the
latent variables that factorize over time steps, i.e., p(z1:T) =/producttextT
t=1p(zt). This is much easier to handle in practice, as cal-
culating necessary quantities such as the KL-divergence can
be done independently over all time steps and components
ofzt.”
However, at the same time, the systematic aspect of the VAE method-
ology (and the versatility of the current deep learning toolkits) enables,
in principle, to train a model of arbitrary complexity. Hence, if one
is not limited by computational cost, this oﬀers new possibilities. For
example, we can recall our remark in Section 11.1 about the choice of
the dynamical model in deep SSMs. In the DVAE framework, not only
is it easy to move from a linear dynamical model to a nonlinear one,
but also to move from a ﬁrst-order temporal model to a (much) higher
order.
14.2.2 Flexibility of the inference model(s)
In DVAEs, as in standard VAEs, the exact posterior distribution is
usually intractable due to nonlinearities, which is why we have to deﬁne
an inference model in addition to the generative model (we cannot apply
the Bayes rule analytically). However, a key feature of DVAEs with
respect to standard VAEs is that we must deﬁne an inference model over
asequence oflatentvectors.Eventhoughtheexactposteriordistribution
over this latent sequence is analytically intractable, we can leverage the
chain rule and the D-separation principle to analyze the structure of
the exact posterior distribution induced by the chosen generative model.
It seems quite natural to exploit this knowledge to design the structure
of the inference model so that it is consistent with the structure of
dependencies in the exact intractable posterior. Yet, several seminal
papers on DVAEs have not followed this “consistency principle,” and,