112 Brief tour of other models
was proposed. In other words, Gu et al.(2015) showed that their
sampling-based approach can be used to optimize the observed data
marginal likelihood for estimating the generative model parameters in
the variational framework. For other applications of SMC methods in
the general context of variational approximations, see (Maddison et al.,
2017; Le et al., 2018; Naesseth et al., 2018).
Recurrent state-space model (RSSM): Hafneret al.(2018) used
the RSSM model, which is very similar, if not identical, to the VRNN
model used in the driven mode. In fact, RSSM corresponds to VRNN
with an external input ut(denoted as at−1by Hafner et al.(2018)),
which is used in place of xt−1to compute ht. This is how VRNN was
presented in the “Related Works” section of the SRNN paper (Fraccaro
et al., 2016) (see in particular Figure 4(b) of this latter paper). Hafner
et al.(2018) used this RSSM model for learning the dynamics and
planning the actions of a synthetic agent from image sequences in a
reinforcement learning framework. They also presented a way to perform
multi-step prediction (i.e., prediction several steps ahead).
Stochastic video generation (SVG): Denton and Fergus (2018)
presented a model very similar to STORN and applied it to stochas-
tic video generation and multiple-frame video prediction, similarly to
(Babaeizadeh et al.,2018).Theinferencemodelisoftheform qφz(zt|x1:t).
It is thus also similar to the inference model of STORN (see (7.19)).
A variant of the generative distribution of zt, called “learned prior” in
the paper, is also proposed. It is of the form pθz(zt|x1:t−1)and can be
considered a simpliﬁcation of the generative distribution of ztin VRNN
or SRNN.
12.3 Other models
Factorized variational autoencoder (FVAE): Denget al.(2017)
proposed the FVAE model, which combines a VAE with tensor factor-
ization (Kuleshov et al., 2015; Huang et al., 2016). This latter is applied
on the latent vector z. As one of the tensor factorization dimension is
discrete time, this model implicitly involves data dynamics modeling.
However, the temporal patterns are sampled from a standard log-normal