46 Deﬁnition of Dynamical VAEs
In addition, we propose to call the form of a DVAE or its graphical
representation developed when both random and deterministic vari-
ables appear (e.g., (4.9)–(4.13),(4.14)–(4.19)and Figure 4.1 (middle)
and (right)). Each compact form can have diﬀerent developed forms
corresponding to diﬀerent implementations. The distinction between the
compact and developed forms is important as the optimization occurs
on the parameters of the developed form, which is only a subgroup
of all possible models satisfying the compact form. It is thus impor-
tant to present the developed form of a model. However, the temporal
dependencies of order higher than one are not directly visible in the
developed graphical form, as they might be implicitly encoded in the
internal state variables. Therefore, when reviewing DVAE models in
the following chapters, we will always present both the compact and
developed graphical representations.
4.2 Inference model
In the present DVAE context, the posterior distribution of the state
sequence z1:Tispθ(z1:T|x1:T,u1:T)in the driven mode or pθ(z1:T|x1:T)
in the undriven mode. As for the standard VAE, this posterior dis-
tribution is intractable because of the nonlinearities in the generative
model. In fact, having temporal dependencies only makes things even
more complicated. Therefore, we also need to deﬁne an inference model
qφ(z1:T|x1:T,u1:T), which is an approximation of the intractable pos-
terior distribution pθ(z1:T|x1:T,u1:T). As for the standard VAE, this
model is required not only for performing inference of the latent se-
quence z1:Tfrom the observed sequences x1:Tandu1:Tbut also for
estimating the parameters of the generative model, as will be seen below.
As for the standard VAE again, the inference model also uses DNNs to
generate its parameters.
4.2.1 Exploiting D-separation
In a Bayesian network, and in a DVAE in particular, even though the
computationoftheposteriordistributionisoftenintractable,thereexists
a general methodology to express its general form (i.e., to specify the