54 Deﬁnition of Dynamical VAEs
Section 14.4.
4.4.2 Train/test matching
As mentioned in the previous subsection, teacher-forcing is a conven-
tional strategy used for training recursive models. However, in practice,
when using autoregressive DVAEs for data generation or compression,
the generation mode must be used. This leads to a mismatch between
the training and testing conditions, a general problem in machine learn-
ing that leads to performance degradation compared to the case in
which the same conﬁguration is used for training and testing. There-
fore, if the generation mode is used in a practical DVAE use-case, it
can be beneﬁcial to use the generation mode during model training
as well, so that the training conﬁguration matches the practical use-
case conﬁguration. In practice, this implies replacing x1:t−1with ˆx1:t−1
in the conditioning variables in the VLB equations of Section 4.3. In
Chapter 13, we illustrate this strategy in our experimental benchmark.
We observe in our experiments that using the generation mode at both
model training and testing leads to a signiﬁcant gain in performance
compared to the mismatched conﬁguration, though the performance
remains slightly lower than that in the case where teacher-forcing is used
at both training and testing. More details are given in Section 13.3.3.
4.5 DVAE summary
Dynamical VAEs are constructed with various stochastic relationships
amonng the control variables u1:T, latent variables z1:T, and observed
variables x1:T. We recall that a random variable ais called a parent
of another random variable bwhen the realization of ais used to
compute the parameters of the distribution of b. These parameters can
be obtained with a linear or a nonlinear mapping of the realization of a
(and possibly of other random variables). A DVAE model must contain
two types of relationships:
•Decoding link: ztis always a parent of xt. Graphically, there
is always an arrow from zttoxtin the compact graphical repre-
sentation. This is a fundamental characteristic inherited from the