12.2. Models related to STORN, VRNN, and SRNN 109
scaled aspect of the temporal information contained in the data. This is
done by splitting each sequence of data vectors into a set of ﬁxed-size
consecutive sub-sequences, called segments, and deﬁning two latent
variables zandvat the segment level.2The former is dedicated to
capturing data information at the segment level, whereas the latter is
dedicated to capturing data information across segments (i.e., at the
sequence level). This model is particularly appropriate for speech signals:
In this case, 200-ms segments represent the approximate duration of
a syllable, and thus, zwould typically encode phonetic information,
whereas vwould typically encode speaker information at the level of a
complete utterance. In essence, FHVAE is strongly related to DSAE,
which also contains a sequence-level latent variable vbut preserves
a time-frame resolution for the dynamical latent variable zt(see Sec-
tion 11). In fact, DSAE was published after FHVAE, from which it was
probably inspired.
Even if we do not detail this model, we report a few equations
to help better understand how segmental modeling works. Let here
t∈[1,T]denote the index of a vector within a segment (each segment
hasTvectors), and let n∈[1,N]denote the index of a segment within
a sequence. The FHVAE observation model for each individual segment
of datais given by
h(n)
t=dh(z(n),v(n),h(n)
t−1), (12.3)
[µθx(h(n)
t),σθx(h(n)
t)] =dx(h(n)
t), (12.4)
pθx(x(n)
t|h(n)
t) =N/parenleftbigx(n)
t;µθx(h(n)
t),diag{σ2
θx(h(n)
t)}/parenrightbig.(12.5)
In(12.3),z(n)andv(n)respectively denote the latent vectors zandv
for the considered n-th segment. There is a single pair of such vectors
for each segment, and hence, a many-to-one encoding and one-to-many
decoding at the segment level. In practice, these equations are imple-
mented with an LSTM network. The prior distribution of z(n),pθz(z(n)),
is a centered isotropic Gaussian that is independent of both the segment
and the sequence. In contrast, the prior distribution of v(n)depends on
a latent variable w, which is deﬁned at the sequence level and whose
2In Hsu et al.’s (2017) paper, zandvare denoted z1andz2, respectively. We
changed the notation to avoid confusion between the variable index and time index.