14.3. VAE improvements and extensions applicable to DVAEs 149
(2018a), proposed an iterative amortized inference technique, which
consists in iteratively estimating the approximate posterior parameters
using a parametric iterative inference model that takes as input the
current estimate of the parameters, the approximate gradient of the
VLB (w.r.t. the approximate posterior parameters), and potentially
the observed data. This iterative inference model can, for instance, be
deﬁned using a neural network. Similarly to the “learning to learn”
principle (Andrychowicz et al., 2016), iterative inference models learn to
perform optimization of the VLB for approximate posterior estimation.
Moreover, through the encoding of the VLB gradient, iterative inference
models naturally account for the top-down information obtained from
the data and bottom-up information obtained from the prior to estimate
the approximate posterior distribution. This feature complies with the
fundamental principle of the Bayes rule, in contrast to the standard
inference models, which are purely bottom-up, by simply mapping the
observed data to the approximate posterior. With the same objective of
overcoming the limitations of standard amortized variational inference,
the semi-amortized VAEs proposed by Kim et al.(2018) use a standard
inference model (i.e., an encoder network) to provide an initial esti-
mate of the approximate posterior parameters and then run stochastic
variational inference (Hoﬀman et al., 2013) to reﬁne them.
Of particular relevance to DVAEs, the amortized variational ﬁlter-
ing algorithm proposed by Marino et al.(2018b) generalizes iterative
inference models (Marino et al., 2018a) to a general class of dynamical
latent variable models for sequential data processing. This algorithm
is a general method for performing causal variational inference, using
only past and present observed data. When combined with DNNs,
the considered general class of dynamical latent variable models cor-
responds to the DVAE class. The proposed inference method is thus
applicable to DVAEs, and the authors conducted experiments using
VRNN and SRNN (among other models). An interesting feature of
this method is its versatility. In the context of standard amortized
variational inference, the DVAE inference model should be designed
in accordance with the form of the DVAE generative model, following,
for instance, the structure of the exact posterior distribution which
can be identiﬁed using D-separation (see Chapter 4). In contrast, the