4.4. Additional dichotomy for autoregressive DVAE models 53
time, when the model produces a new sequence ˆx1:T. Here, the second
conﬁguration must be used. We refer to this second conﬁguration as the
generation mode . Regarding the generation of z1:T, the teacher-forcing
concept is irrelevant as the concept of ground-truth values for latent
vectors is questionable in essence. In practice, z1:Tis either the output
of the inference model (this is the case during DVAE training or in
analysis-synthesis) or any arbitrary latent vector sequence (generated
withpθzor predeﬁned). Note also that because of the recursivity of the
generative process, data generation with a DVAE (strongly) depends
on the initialization of the generative process. We do not detail this
aspect in the present review.
If we now focus on the analysis-synthesis task, we have to chain
the encoder and decoder. The encoder takes x1:Tas the input and
produces a sequence of latent vectors z1:T. Then, the decoder uses z1:T
to generate ˆx1:T. Decoding can be performed with either teacher-forcing
or generation mode. The former case is expected to produce a sequence
ˆx1:Tthat is closer to x1:Tthan in the latter case, as it uses ground-truth
values, whereas the generation mode uses approximate values. However,
it suﬀers from the same “unrealistic” aspect as that used for data gener-
ation. This conﬁguration can be used to evaluate the prediction power of
DVAE models in an ideal (oracle) setting. In contrast, analysis-synthesis
with the generation mode is expected to yield lower performance but
is the natural conﬁguration from an information-theoretic viewpoint.
Here, we test the capability of the model to encode the information
of a (generally high-dimensional) data sequence x1:Tinto a (generally
low-dimensional) latent sequence z1:T. From an application point of
view, this corresponds to telecommunication or storage applications,
where x1:Twould be encoded into z1:T,z1:Twould be transmitted or
stored, and then ˆx1:Twould be decoded from z1:T. In short, we apply
DVAEs to source coding, and the DVAE turns into a codec, apart
from quantization issues. Such coding/decoding scheme can be applied
oﬄine by using a noncausal inference model (with an optimal structure
following that of the exact posterior distribution) or online with a (sub-
optimal) causal inference model. If some amount of latency is tolerated,
one can also use a noncausal inference model with a suitable lookahead.
The interest of DVAE models for source coding is further discussed in