118 Experiments
13.2 Experimental protocol
13.2.1 Speech data
For our experiments with speech data, we used the Wall Street Journal
dataset (WSJ0; Garofolo et al., 1993), which comprises speech read
from WSJ news. We used the speaker-independent, medium vocabulary
(5k words) subset of the corpus. More precisely, the si_tr_s subset
(∼25 h) was used for training, the si_dt_05 subset (∼2 h) was used
for validation, and the si_et_05 subset (∼1.5 h) was used for testing.
Therawspeechwaveformwassampledat16kHz.Analysis-resynthesis
was performed with the DVAEs in the time-frequency domain on power
spectrograms. Time-domain speech signals were thus preprocessed with
the short-time Fourier transform (STFT), using a 64-ms sine window
(1,024samples)with 25%-overlaptoobtainsequencesof 513-dimensional
discrete Fourier spectra (for positive frequencies). Then, we computed
the squared magnitude of these STFT spectrograms. For the training
dataset, we set T= 50, meaning that speech utterances of 0.8s were
extracted from the raw dataset and pre-processed with the STFT. In
summary, each training speech sequence is a 513×50STFT power
spectrogram. This data preprocessing resulted in a set of Ntr= 46,578
training sequences (representing about 10.3hours of speech signal) and
Nval= 7,775validation sequences ( ∼1.7h). For testing, we used the
STFT spectrogram of each complete test sequence (with the beginning
and ending silence portions removed), which can be of variable length,
most often larger than 2.4s.
As discussed by Leglaive et al.(2020) and mentioned in Section 10.1,
the complex-valued STFT coeﬃcients are modeled with a zero-mean cir-
cular complex Gaussian distribution (see (10.2)), whereas ztis modeled
as usual with a real-valued Gaussian distribution. The data sequence
x1:Tprocessed by the DVAE models is the squared magnitude of the
STFT spectrogram (i.e., a real-valued nonnegative power spectrogram).
The corresponding phase spectrogram is directly combined with the
DVAE output magnitude spectrogram to reconstruct the output speech
signal using inverse STFT with overlap-add. Modeling the STFT coeﬃ-
cients with a zero-mean circular complex Gaussian distribution with