13.3. Results on speech data 131
Daiet al., 2020). It remains a largely open topic in the framework of
DVAE, as further discussed in Chapter 14.
Overall, the input of the decoder consists of some dimensions con-
taining informative patterns and some other dimensions containing
low-variance stationary noise. In the present example of the SRNN
model, we identiﬁed 8dimensions out of 16that are active and 8di-
mensions that seem to have collapsed, suggesting that we would obtain
similar analysis-resynthesis performance by setting the size of the latent
vector to 8. In these experiments with speech signals, we observed that
VRNN has only 2collapsed dimensions out of 16, whereas STORN had
12collapsed dimensions out of 16; that is, only 4active dimensions for
STORN. This latter point is to be related to the fact that STORN is
the less eﬃcient of the three autoregressive models in these experiments,
with performance signiﬁcantly below that of SRNN and VRNN. In
contrast, we did not observe posterior collapse of any dimension for the
nonautoregressive models (DKF, DSAE, and RVAE) in our experiments;
that is, for the nonautoregressive models, all 16dimensions are useful to
encode xt. This is consistent with the fact that, for these models, there
is no predictive link and all the information in x1:Tmust be encoded in
z1:T.
We have checked that, for a given model, the active/inactive dimen-
sions remain the same across diﬀerent examples. In addition, as shown
in the example of Figure 13.5, the dimensions suﬀering from posterior
collapse are the same over time. In principle, a small KL divergence
at a certain time frame means that the posterior and the generative
distributions of ztare very close to each other for that time frame.
However, this does not guarantee that the generative distribution on
two consecutive frames remains the same, and the same for the pos-
terior distribution. In practice, we observe that both the generative
and posterior distributions of collapsed dimensions are time-invariant
and noninformative. We believe this is due to the way these models
are implemented in practice, since the architectures used to implement
the DVAEs are time-invariant; that is, the same architecture with the
same weights is used at every time step. Combined with the fact that
noninformative generative distributions are zero-mean and low-variance
Gaussians, this leads us to conjecture that posterior collapse in a given