142 Discussion
more importantly, not justiﬁed the chosen structure of the inference
model. Nevertheless, it is not mandatory to follow the structure of
the exact posterior distribution to design the inference model. For
instance, if the structure of the exact posterior distribution implies a
noncausal processing of the observations, the anticausal dependencies
can be dropped for the purpose of online applications. Simplifying
posterior dependencies can also be motivated by a need to reduce the
computational complexity of inference.
Another key diﬀerence between DVAEs and VAEs relates to how
the VLB (or, actually, its estimate) is computed. The VLB involves
intractable expectations, which are usually replaced with empirical
averages, using samples drawn from the inference model. The sampling
procedure in DVAEs has to be recursive due to the dynamical nature of
the model, a constraint that standard VAEs do not have. This recursive
sampling is related to the use of RNNs and can be costly. As will
be discussed below, other neural network architectures can be more
computationally eﬃcient than RNNs.
14.2.3 Flexibility of the implementation
As already discussed in Section 4.1.2, various possibilities exist for the
high-level implementation of DVAEs. We recall that various developed
model representations can correspond to the same compact representa-
tion. In fact, the compact form describes all parent-child relationships
among random variables, regardless of how these relationships are imple-
mented in practice. Therefore, the compact representation is important
to understand the probabilistic dependencies between variables. How-
ever, one must be aware that the optimization does not search for all
possible models satisfying the relationships of the compact represen-
tation but only for a speciﬁc model corresponding to the developed
representation. This representation allows us to understand how the
dependencies are implemented in practice, and therefore, over which
parameter space the model is optimized. This representation typically
involves a recurrent architecture. While such architectures allow the
encoding of high-order temporal dependencies, their developed graphi-
cal representations generally do not exhibit dependencies higher than