2.3. Learning with variational inference 27
(Robbins and Monro, 1951; Bottou, 2004) for maximizing the total
VLB in(2.15)w.r.t. the generative model parameters θ. The gradient
of the total VLB, L(θ,Λ;X), is the sum of the gradients of the local
VLBs,L(θ,λn;xn), deﬁned for each sample xnin the dataset. For large
datasets, computing this sum to perform a single update of θwith a step
of gradient ascent can be ineﬃcient. Therefore, stochastic variational
inference exploits a noisy stochastic estimate of the gradient, computed
from a single example xnor from a mini-batch of examples in the
dataset. This is the same principle as that used in stochastic and mini-
batch gradient descent (Bottou, 2004), such that stochastic variational
inference inherits from the same convergence properties (Robbins and
Monro, 1951).
However,theestimationofthecompletesetofvariationalparameters
can remain expensive for large datasets. Thus, amortized variational
inference makes a stronger assumption for deﬁning the variational family,
by introducing an inference model fφsuch that
λn=fφ(xn), (2.16)
whereφis a set of parameters that is shared among all variational
distributions qλn(zn|xn). This inference model is used to map the obser-
vation xnto the local variational parameter λn. The variational family
Fthen corresponds to the set of variational distributions parametrized
byφ, which are denoted by qφ(zn|xn). For instance, for qφ(zn|xn) =
N(zn;µn,Σn), we haveλn= [µn,Σn] =fφ(xn). This amortization
principle corresponds to a stronger assumption for the variational fam-
ily compared to nonamortized ﬁxed-form and mean-ﬁeld approximations.
Therefore, the KL divergence between the exact posterior and its ap-
proximation is likely to be larger in the amortized case than in the
previous cases. The total VLB for the complete training dataset then
becomes a function of φ:
L(θ,φ;X) =N/summationdisplay
n=1Eqφ(zn|xn)/bracketleftbiglogpθ(xn,zn)−logqφ(zn|xn)/bracketrightbig.(2.17)
This means that the optimization of the set of local variational param-
eters Λ ={λ1,...,λN}is replaced by the optimization of the shared