13.1. DVAE architectures 117
and decoding processes. In particular, we show the types of layers
that compose the encoder and decoder networks. Note that none of
the DVAEs is used in the driven mode; that is, none of them feature
an external input u1:T. The MLPs are generally used to extract high-
level features and/or as a combiner function, whereas the recurrent
networks (RNNs and BRNNs) are used to accumulate the information
over time. All RNNs are instantiated as LSTM networks (and BRNNs
are instantiated as bidirectional LSTM networks). DKF includes a
speciﬁc combiner function (CF) at the end of the encoder and a gated
transition function (GTF) to implement the dynamical model. These
functions are described in the original DKF paper by Krishnan et al.
(2015) and we report them in Appendix B (Sections B.1). We recall
that the internal state vector htof VRNN and SRNN is shared between
the encoder and decoder (see Sections 8.2 and 9.2). In Figure 13.1, we
represent the corresponding shared networks with grey-shaded boxes.
We also recall that RVAE was presented in two versions: causal and
noncausal (see Section 10.1). Figure 13.1 only shows the architecture of
the noncausal RVAE. The schema of the causal RVAE architecture is
obtained by replacing the BRNN in the inference and generative models
with a backward and a forward RNN, respectively. Finally, for all output
variance parameters, we use log-parameterization (i.e., the output of the
network corresponding to a variance parameter σ2is actually logσ2).
The general architectures shown in Figure 13.1 are common to the
two sets of experiments that we conducted on speech data and on
human motion data, although with diﬀerent layer dimensions. For our
experiments with speech data, the observed, latent, and RNN internal
state vectors are of dimension 513,16, and 128, respectively, for all
DVAE models. For our experiments with human motion data, they
are of dimension 96,10, and 64, respectively, for all DVAE models
(see Sections 13.2.1 and 13.2.2 for the deﬁnition of the observed data
vectors). Low-level implementation details such as the number of layers
and the number of units per layer may also diﬀer between the two sets
of experiments on speech and human motion data. These details are
provided in Appendices B and C).