48 Deﬁnition of Dynamical VAEs
Equivalently, AandBare D-separated given Cif they are not connected
by any active path (i.e., a path that is not blocked). Finally, if Aand
Bare D-separated given C, we havep(A,B|C) =p(A|C)p(B|C).
D-separation is helpful even for more conventional (i.e., nondeep)
models because the algebraic derivation of a posterior distribution
from a joint distribution is not always easy. In the present variational
framework, we can exploit the above methodology to design the approx-
imate posterior distribution qφ. It is reasonable to assume that a good
candidate for qφwill have the same structure as the exact posterior
distribution in terms of variable dependency. In other words, if we
cannot derive the exact posterior distribution, let us at least use an
approximation that exhibits the same dependencies between variables
so that it is fed with the same information. Yet, it is quite surprising
to see that a signiﬁcant proportion of the DVAE papers we have re-
viewed, especially the early papers, neither refer to this methodology
nor consider looking at the form of the exact posterior distribution
when designing an approximate distribution. In the early studies in
particular, the formulation of qφis chosen quite arbitrarily and with no
reference to the structure of the exact posterior distribution. In more
recent papers however, the structure of qφgenerally follows that of
the exact posterior distribution. We will come back on this point on a
case-by-case basis when presenting the DVAE models of the literature
in the next chapters.
4.2.2 Noncausal and causal inference
Being aware of this problem, we can now go back to the general form
of the exact posterior distribution and factorize it as follows, applying
again the chain rule the same way as we did for the generative model:
pθ(z1:T|x1:T,u1:T) =T/productdisplay
t=1pθz(zt|z1:t−1,x1:T,u1:T). (4.20)
For the most general generative model deﬁned in (4.4), the dependen-
cies in each conditional distribution pθz(zt|z1:t−1,x1:T,u1:T)cannot be
simpliﬁed. In other words, ztdepends on the past latent vectors z1:t−1
and on the complete sequences of observed vectors x1:Tandu1:T(past,