1.2. Variational inference and VAEs 11
a compact manner so that new data can be generated from new values
of the latent variable. Moreover, one wishes to extract a latent repre-
sentation that is disentangled (i.e., diﬀerent latent coeﬃcients encode
diﬀerent properties or diﬀerent factors of variation in the data). When
successful, this provides good interpretability and control of the data
generation/transformation process.
The automatic discovery of a latent space structure is part of the
model training process. The inference process, which is deﬁned in the
present context as the estimation of latent variables from the observed
data, also plays a major role. As presented in detail later, in a deep
BN, the exact posterior distribution (i.e., the posterior distribution of
the latent variable given the observed variable corresponding to the
generative model) is generally not tractable. It is thus replaced with a
parametric approximate posterior distribution (i.e., an inference model)
that is implemented with a DNN. As the observed data likelihood
function is also not tractable, the model parameters are estimated by
chaining the inference model (also known as the encoder in the VAE
framework) and the generative model (the decoder) and maximizing a
lower bound of the log-likelihood function, called the variational lower
bound (VLB), over a training dataset.2Hereinafter, we refer to this
general variational inference and training methodology as the VAE
methodology .
In summary, the VAE methodology enables deep unsupervised rep-
resentation learning while providing eﬃcient inference and parameter
estimation in a Bayesian framework. As a result, the seminal papers by
Kingma and Welling (2014) and Rezende et al.(2014) have had and
continue to have a strong impact on the machine learning community.
VAEs have been applied to many signal processing problems, such as
the generation and transformation of images and speech signals (we
provide a few references in Chapter 2).
2The idea of using an artiﬁcial neural network to approximate an inference model
and chaining the encoder and decoder dates back to the early studies of Hinton et al.
(1995) and Dayan et al.(1995). However, the algorithms presented in these papers
for model training are diﬀerent from the one used to optimize the VAE.