12.2. Models related to STORN, VRNN, and SRNN 111
According to Hsu et al.(2017b), this can solve scalability issues when
the training sequences become too long.
Deep recurrent attentive writer (DRAW): A somewhat dual
model of VRAE was proposed by Gregor et al.(2015) and called DRAW.
This model considers a sequence of latent vectors z1:Tto encode a single
static but highly structured data x(typically a low-resolution image).
The generative model is of the general form pθx(x|z1:T). It involves the
iterative construction of a sequence ˆx1:Tthat can be considered the
sequence of images resulting from the “natural” drawing of xover time.
The dependency of xonz1:Tis implemented by combining the output
of a decoder RNN (which takes ztas the input) and a so-called canvas
matrix ct−1, which encodes the diﬀerence between the ﬁnal target image
xand the current draw ˆxt−1. Hence, the model combines deep learning
and some form of predictive coding (Gersho and Gray, 2012). The
inference model is of the form qφz(zt|z1:t−1,x)and is implemented with
an encoder RNN. This network takes as inputs a combination of x,ˆxt−1,
and the decoder output at the previous time step; hence, the predictive
coding is implemented in closed-loop mode (Gersho and Gray, 2012).
As the name indicates, DRAW includes a selective attention model that
enables it to focus on the most relevant parts of the observation. The
description of such an attention model is beyond the scope of the present
review (see Gregor et al.(2015) and references therein for details).
Neural adaptive sequential Monte Carlo (NASMC): Guet al.
(2015) proposed the NAMSC generative model, which combines an
inﬁnite-order Markovian model on zt(as that used in DSAE) with
the most general observation model, which is that used in STORN
and VRNN. In one variant of this model, they replaced the Markovian
model on ztwith an i.i.d. model, and thus, this variant is similar to
STORN. The inference model has the same general form as that of
VRNN; that is, it follows (8.14)and is parametrized by an RNN. The
originality of NASMC lies in connecting the DVAE inference framework
with sequential Monte Carlo (SMC) sampling. The inference model was
used as a proposal distribution for SMC sampling. In fact, a complete
framework to learn the parameters of the generative model, the proposal
model, and for sampling from the posterior distribution with SMC