128 Experiments
the latent vector, which precisely enforces smoothness. In the original
DSAE paper, Li et al.(2017) did not provide examples of generated
speech spectrograms but they presented good results in voice conver-
sion obtained by exchanging the value of the variable vacross two
sentences spoken by a diﬀerent speaker. Regarding RVAE, even though
the latent vectors are independently and identically sampled from a
standard Gaussian distribution, we observe a generated spectrogram
with a temporal structure. This means that the RVAE model is able to
“recreate” correlation in the generated data by combining the vectors of
an uncorrelated sequence. However, the energy is mostly concentrated
in low frequencies, and the harmonic structure, although present, is
not as clearly visible as for DKF and DSAE. Moreover, the segments
corresponding to the successive speech sounds are shorter than for DKF
and DSE and seem shorter than what is expected in natural speech.
Figure 13.4 shows the generation results with autoregressive DVAE
models. We see that, as the other models, STORN manages to ensure a
smooth transition between the analysis-resynthesis and generation parts,
but then the quality of the generated spectrogram becomes much lower
than with the other autoregressive DVAE models. SRNN generates a
spectrogram with a speech-like structure and a lot of variability. The
best result for this example sentence is obtained with VRNN, for which
we can observe segments that resemble diﬀerent phonemes, with smooth
transitions between them. The harmonic structure is also clearly visible
and the generated data cover the full bandwidth.
13.3.3 Training with scheduled sampling
Tocomplementthepreviousresults,weperformedanadditionalanalysis-
resynthesis experiment with the autoregressive models being trained
and tested in the generation mode instead of the teacher-forcing mode;
that is, using the previously generated data vectors ˆx1:t−1in place of the
ground-truth past vectors x1:t−1when generating xt(see Section 4.4.1).
Note that here, the sequence z1:Tis still provided by the encoder. For
conciseness, we present only the results for SRNN, which was the model
performing best in the ﬁrst experiment above.
Directly training a model in the generation mode was observed to