1 Scientific  RepoRts  | (2019) 9:10752 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-47148-x
www.nature.com/scientificreportsoptimization of Molecules via Deep 
Reinforcement Learning
Zhenpeng Zhou   1,3, Steven Kearnes   2, Li Li2, Richard N. Zare1 & patrick Riley  2
We present a framework, which we call Molecule Deep Q-Networks (MolDQN), for molecule 
optimization by combining domain knowledge of chemistry and state-of-the-art reinforcement learning 
techniques (double Q-learning and randomized value functions). We directly define modifications on 
molecules, thereby ensuring 100% chemical validity. Further, we operate without pre-training on any dataset to avoid possible bias from the choice of that set. MolDQN achieves comparable or better performance against several other recently published algorithms for benchmark molecular optimization tasks. However, we also argue that many of these tasks are not representative of real optimization 
problems in drug discovery. Inspired by problems faced during medicinal chemistry lead optimization, 
we extend our model with multi-objective reinforcement learning, which maximizes drug-likeness while maintaining similarity to the original molecule. We further show the path through chemical space to achieve optimization for a molecule to understand how the model works.
One fundamental goal in chemistry is to design new molecules with specific desired properties. This is especially 
important in material design or drug screening. Currently, this process is expensive in terms of time and cost: It can take years and cost millions of dollars to find a new drug
1. The goal of this study is to partially automate this 
process through reinforcement learning.
To appreciate our approach, it is necessary to review briefly the previous works that employed machine 
learning in molecule design. One prevalent strategy is to build a generative model, which maps a point in a high-dimensional latent space to a molecule, and perform search or optimization in the latent space to find new 
molecules. Gómez-Bombarelli et al .
2, Blaschke et al .3, Segler et al .4, Lim et al .5, and Putin et al .6 utilized strings 
as molecule representations to build a generator of SMILES7 strings, which is a linear string notation to describe 
molecular structures. One of the most challenging goals in this design is to ensure the chemical validity of the 
generated molecules. Kusner et al .8 and Dai et al .9 added grammar constraints to SMILES strings to improve 
the chemical validity of the generated molecules. Researchers have also built models on graph representations of molecules, which regards atoms as nodes and bonds as edges in an undirected graph. Li et al .
10 and Li et al .11 
described molecule generators that create graphs in a step-wise manner. De Cao & Kipf12 introduced MolGAN 
for generating small molecular graphs. Jin et al .13 designed a two-step generation process in which a tree is first 
constructed to represent the molecular scaffold and then expanded to a molecule. Although almost perfect on generating valid molecules, these autoencoder-based models usually need to address the problem of optimiza-tion. Most published work uses a separate Gaussian process model on the latent space for optimization. However, because the latent space is often high dimensional and the objective functions defined on the latent space is usu-
ally non-convex, molecule property optimization on the latent space can be difficult.
Another strategy is based on reinforcement learning, which is a sub-field of artificial intelligence. 
Reinforcement learning studies the way to make decisions to achieve the highest reward. Olivecrona et al .
14, 
Guimaraes et al.15, Putin et al .16, and Popova et al .17 applied reinforcement learning techniques on top of a string 
generator to generate the SMILES strings of molecules. They successfully generated molecules with given desira-
ble properties, but struggled with chemical validity. Recently, Y ou et al .18 proposed a graph convolutional policy 
network (GCPN) for generating graph representations of molecules with deep reinforcement learning, achieving 100% validity. However, all these methods require pre-training on a specific dataset. While pre-training makes it easier to generate molecules similar to the given training set, the exploration ability is limited by the biases present in the training data.
Here we introduce a new design for molecule optimization by combining chemistry domain knowledge and 
reinforcement learning, which we call Molecule Deep Q-Networks (MolDQN). We formulate the modification 
1Department of c hemistry, Stanford University, Stanford, c alifornia, USA. 2Google Research Applied Science, 
Mountain View, california, USA. 3Work done during an internship at Google Research Applied Science, Mountain View, 
california, USA. correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to P .R. (email: pfr@google.com )Received: 5 March 2019
Accepted: 10 July 2019
Published online: 24 July 2019OPENThere are amendments to this paper