8 Scientific  RepoRts  | (2019) 9:10752 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-47148-x
www.nature.com/scientificreports www.nature.com/scientificreports/As the weight on similarity increases, the distribution of QED improvements moves leftwards because higher 
priority is placed on similarity. Finally, we visually examined the optimized molecules (Fig.  3c). The molecules 
generated under w  >= 0.4 possessed the same scaffold as the starting molecule, indicating that the trained model 
preserves the original scaffold when the similarity weight is high enough.
Optimality vs. diversity. Related work in this area reports results for two distinct tasks: optimization and 
generation (or, to avoid ambiguity, property-directed sampling ). Optimization is the task to find the best molecule 
with regard to some objectives, whereas property-directed sampling is the task of generating a set of molecules 
with specific property values or distributions.
For the results we report in this paper, we note that there is often a trade-off between optimality and diver -
sity. Without the introduction of randomness, execution of our learned policy will lead to exactly one  molecule. 
Alternatively, there are three possible ways to increase the diversity of the molecules generated:
 1. Choose one Q function Q sa(, )i() uniformly for i in …H 1,,  to make decision in each episode.
 2. Draw an action stochastically with probability proportional to the Q-function in each step (as in Haarnoja 
et al.33).
 3. During evaluation, use non-zero ε in the ε-greedy algorithm.
In Strategy 1, we are following the action maximizing the Q -function, which is an optimal choice. However, 
this strategy is slightly less optimal than using a single Q -function in the sense that each Q -function is only 
trained on a subset of the samples. Strategies 2 and 3 are clearly sub-optimal because the policy is no longer pur -
suing the maximum future rewards. In the results above, we focused primarily on optimization tasks and leave 
the question of diversity for future work.
We also conducted experiments to illustrate that we are able to find molecules with properties in specific 
ranges with 100% success (Table S1). In addition, we demonstrated that we can generate molecules that satisfy multiple target values (Table S2). However, because we formulated the property targeting to be an optimization task, it is not fair for us to compare to other generative models that produce diverse distributions of molecules.
Visualization and Interpretation. Users prefer interpretable solutions when they applying methods that 
construct new molecules. Here we demonstrated the decision making process of MolDQN that maximizes the QED, starting from a specific molecule.
In the first step of decision making, the Q -network predicts the Q -value of each action. Figure  4a shows the 
predicted Q-values of the chosen actions. The full set of Q -values of for all actions in the first step are shown in 
Fig. S2. We observe that adding a hydroxyl group is strongly favored, while breaking the five-member ring struc-ture is disfavored.
Note that the Q -value is a measure of future rewards; therefore, it is possible for the algorithm to choose an 
action that decreases the property value in the short term but can reach higher future rewards. Figure  4b shows a 
sample trajectory of maximizing the QED of a molecule (note that 
ε=0 during evaluation). In this trajectory, 
step 6 decreases the QED of the molecule, but the QED was improved by 0.297 through the whole trajectory.Figure 4. (a) Visualization of the Q-values of selected actions. The full set of Q-values of actions are shown in Fig. S2. The original atoms and bonds are shown in black while modified ones are colored. Dashed lines denote bond removals. The Q-values are rescaled to 
[0,1]. (b) The steps taken to maximize the QED starting from a 
molecule. The modifications are highlighted in yellow. The QED values are presented under the modified molecules.