4 Scientific  RepoRts  | (2019) 9:10752 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-47148-x
www.nature.com/scientificreports www.nature.com/scientificreports/where θ =++ yr Qs a max( ,; )t ta t1  is the target value, and fl is a loss function. In our case, we use the Huber loss23 
as a loss function.
=

||<
||−fxxx
x()1
2if 1
1
2otherwisel2
Multi-objective reinforcement learning.  In real-world applications like lead optimization, it is often 
desired to optimize several different properties at the same time. For example, we may want to optimize the selec-
tivity of a drug while keeping the solubility in a specific range. Formally, under the multi-objective reinforcement learning setting, the environment will return a vector of rewards at each step t , with one reward for each objective, 
i.e. 
→=… ∈ rr r [, ,]tt ktTk
1, , , where k is the number of objectives.
There exist various goals in multi-objective optimization. The goal may be finding a set of Pareto optimal 
solutions, or find a single or several solutions that satisfy the preference of a decision maker. Similar to the choice in Guimaraes et al.
15, we adapted the latter one in this paper. Specifically, we implemented the “scalarized” reward 
framework to realize multi-objective optimization, with the introduction of a user defined weight vector 
 =… ∈ w ww w [, ,]kTk
12 , the scalarized reward can be calculated as
∑ =→=
=rw rw rstT
t
ik
iit ,
1,
The objective of the MDP is then to maximize the cumulative scalarized reward.
Exploitation vs. exploration during training. The trade-off between exploitation and exploration pre-
sents a dilemma caused by the uncertainty we face. Given that we do not have a complete knowledge of the rewards for all the states, if we constantly choose the best action that is known to produce the highest reward (exploitation ), we will never learn anything about the rewards of the other states. On the other hand, if we always 
chose an action at random (exploration ), we would not receive as much reward as we could achieve by choosing 
the best action.
One of the simplest and the most widely used approaches to balance these competing goals is called 
ε-greedy, 
which selects the predicted best action with probability ε−1 , and a uniformly random action with probability ε. 
Without considering the level of uncertainty of the value function estimate, ε-greedy often wastes exploratory 
effort on the states that are known to be inferior.
To counter this issue, we followed the idea of bootstrapped-DQN from Osband et al.24 by utilizing randomized 
value functions to achieve deep exploration. We built H independent Q-functions |= … Qi H {1 ,, }i() (actually, a 
multi-task neural network with a separate head for each Qi(); see Section 2.5), each of them being trained on a 
different subset of the samples. At each episode, we uniformly choose ∈…i H {1,, }, and use Qi() for decision 
making. The above approach is combined with ε-greedy as our policy. During training, we annealed ε from 1 to 
0.01 in a piecewise linear way.
Deep Q-learning implementation details.  We implemented the deep Q -learning model described by 
Mnih et al.20 with improvements of double Q -learning25. Recall that a state s  is a pair of molecule m  and time t . 
Unsurprisingly, including t in the model performs better experimentally (see Fig. S4).
We used a deep neural network to approximate the Q-function. The input molecule is converted to a vector 
form called its Morgan fingerprint26 with radius of 3 and length of 2048, and the number of steps remaining in the 
episode was concatenated to the vector. A four-layer fully-connected network with hidden sizes of [1024, 512, 128, 32] and ReLU activations is used as the network architecture. Its output dimension is the number H  (see 
above; for computational efficiency, we implemented these H  different models as multiple outputs on top of 
shared network layers). In the single property optimization task, we only allow generation with ring sizes of 5, 6, 
and 7; while in all other experiments, we allow ring sizes of 5 and 6. In most experiments, we limited the maxi-
mum number of steps per episode to 40, given that most drug molecules have less than 40 atoms (the exception is for the experiments in Section 3.1, where we limit the max number of steps to be 38 for logP optimization to match Y ou et al .
18, and Section 3.2, where the limit is 20.). We trained the model for 5,000 episodes with the Adam 
optimizer27 with a learning rate of 0.0001. We used ε-greedy together with randomized value functions as a explo -
ration policy, and, as mentioned before, we annealed ε from 1 to 0.01 in a piecewise linear way. The discount fac-
tor γ (as defined in Section 2.1) was set to 0.9.
Results and Discussion
In these tasks, we demonstrated the effectiveness of our framework on optimizing a molecule to achieve desired properties. We compared MolDQN with the following state-of-the-art models:
•	Junction Tree Variational Autoencoder (JT-V AE)
13 is a deep generative model that maps molecules to 
a high-dimensional latent space and performs sampling or optimization in the latent space to generate 
molecules.
•	Objective-Reinforced Generative Adversarial Networks (ORGAN)15 is a reinforcement learning based mole-
cule generation algorithm that uses SMILES strings for input and output.