3 Scientific  RepoRts  | (2019) 9:10752 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-47148-x
www.nature.com/scientificreports www.nature.com/scientificreports/•	Double bond → {Triple} Bond.
To generate molecules that are chemically more reasonable, we include several heuristics that incorporate 
chemistry domain knowledge. First, in order to prevent generating molecules with high strain, we do not allow bond formation between atoms that are in rings. In addition, we added an option that only allows formation of rings with a specific number of atoms. Note that it is possible to get a 7-membered ring, even when only rings with 3–6 atoms are allowed, by creating a bicyclic structure and then removing the bridg-ing bond (Fig. S8). As an example, Fig.  1b shows the allowed bond addition actions for cyclohexane.
 3. Bond removal. We define the valid bond removal action set as the actions that decrease the bond order of an existing bond. The transitions include:
•	Triple bond → {Double, Single, No} Bond.
•	Double bond → {Single, No} Bond.
•	Single bond → {No} Bond.
Note that bonds are only completely removed if the resulting molecule has zero or one disconnected atom (and in the latter case, the disconnected atom is removed as well). Therefore, no molecules having discon-nected parts are created in this step.
In our design choice, we do not break an aromatic bond. However, it is still possible to break aromaticity. (See 
the third molecule generated in Section 3.3, 
=.w 04; the removal of the extracyclic double bond from the original 
molecule breaks aromaticity.) Besides, an aromatic system can still be created in a stepwise way by adding single and double bonds alternatively, and the resulting system will be perceived as aromatic by the RDKit SMILES parser. We also include “no modification” as an action, which allows the molecule to remain unchanged before reaching the step limitation T.
•	{P
sa} denotes the state transition probability. Here we define the state transition to be deterministic. For exam-
ple, if we modify a molecule by adding a single bond, the next state we reach will be the new molecule adding 
the bond, with a probability of 1.
•	 denotes the reward function of state mt(, ). In material design or lead optimization, the reward is often a 
property of the molecule m . In our design, a reward is given not just at the terminal states, but at each step, 
which empirically produces better learning performance (see Fig. S3). To ensure that the final state is rewarded most heavily, we discount the value of the rewards at a state with time t  by γ
T–t (where we typically 
used γ = 0.9). Note that the definition of discount factor is different from the usual way. In future discussions 
of reward rt, this discount factor is implicitly included for simplicity.
Implementation details. We implemented the state transition of a molecule with the available software frame-
work of RDKit22. The properties of molecules are calculated with tools provided by RDKit.
Reinforcement Learning. Reinforcement Learning is an area of machine learning concerning how the deci -
sion makers  (or agents) ought to take a series of actions in a prescribed environment so as to maximize a notion 
of cumulative reward, especially when a model of the environment is not available. Here, the environment is the molecule modification MDP we defined above, and our goal is to find a policy π which selects an action for each state that can maximize the future rewards.
Intuitively, we are trying to fit a function 
Qsa(, ) that predicts the future rewards of taking an action a  on state s . 
A decision is made by choosing the action a  that maximizes the Q  function, which leads to larger future rewards.
Mathematically, for a policy π, we can define the value of an action a on a state s to be
∑ ==

ππ
π
=Qs aQ mt ar (, )( ,, )
ntT
n
where π denotes taking an expectation with respect to π , and rn denotes the reward at step n . This action-value 
function calculates the future rewards of taking action a  on state s , and subsequent actions decided by policy π . 
We can therefore define the optimal policy π =π /uni204E/uni204EsQ sa () argmax (, )a .
In our case, however, we have both a deterministic MDP and an accurate model of the environment. Therefore, 
we chose to approximate the value function = Vs Qs a () max( ,)a  and we calculate the Q  function for an action a 
moving from state s to s′ as =′ +′ Qsa sV s (, )( )( ) 
Under the setting that the maximum number of steps is limited, the MDP is time-dependent, and the optimal 
policy will be time-dependent as well. Naturally, if there are many steps left, we can risk pursuing later but larger 
rewards, while if only a few steps remain, we should focus on rewards that can be obtained sooner.
We adopt a deep Q -learning20 algorithm to find an estimate of the Q  function. We refer to a neural network 
function approximator as the parameterized Q-value function θ Qsa(, ;), where θ is the parameter. This approxi-
mator can be trained by minimizing the loss function of
 θθ=− lf yQ sa () [( (, ;))]lt tt