2 Scientific  RepoRts  | (2019) 9:10752 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-47148-x
www.nature.com/scientificreports www.nature.com/scientificreports/of a molecule as a Markov decision process (MDP)19. By only allowing chemically valid actions, we ensure 
that all the molecules generated are valid. We then employ the deep reinforcement learning technique of Deep 
Q-Networks (DQN)20 to solve this MDP , using the desired properties as rewards. Instead of pre-training on a 
dataset, our model learns from scratch. Additionally, with the introduction of multi-objective deep reinforcement learning, our model is capable of performing multi-objective optimization.
Our contribution differs from previous work in three critical aspects:
 1. All the works presented above use policy gradient methods, while ours is based on value function learning. Although policy gradient methods are applicable to a wider range of problems, they suffer from high vari-ance when estimating the gradient
21. In comparison, in applications where value function learning works, 
it is usually more stable and sample efficient20.
 2. Most, if not all, of the current algorithms rely on pre-training on some datasets. Although expert pre-train-ing may lead to lower variance, this approach limits the search space and may miss the molecules which are not in the dataset. In contrast, our method starts from scratch and learns from its own experience, which can lead to better performance, i.e., discovering molecules with better properties.
 3. Our model is designed for multi-objective reinforcement learning, allowing users to decide the relative importance of each objective. See 3.3 for more detail.
Methods
Molecule modification as a markov decision process. Intuitively, the modification or optimization of 
a molecule can be done in a step-wise fashion, where each step belongs to one of the following three categories: (1) atom addition, (2) bond addition, and (3) bond removal. The molecule generated is only dependent on the molecule being changed and the modification made. Therefore, the process of molecule optimization can be for -
mulated as a Markov decision process (MDP). We have several key differences from previous work that employed 
MDP for molecule modification
18.
•	We add an explicit limit on the number of steps. This allows us to easily control how far away from a starting 
molecule we can go. In vast chemical space, this is a very natural way to control the diversity of molecules produced.
•	We do not allow chemically invalid actions (violations of valence constraints). These actions are removed from the action space entirely and are not even considered by our model.
•	We allow atoms/bonds to be removed as well as added.
Formally, we have MDP
P (, ,{ }, )sa SA R, where we define each term in what follows:
•	 denotes the state space, in which each state ∈s  is a tuple of mt(, ). Here m is a valid molecule and t is the 
number of steps taken. For the initial state, the molecule m can be a specific molecule or nothing, and =t 0. 
We limit the maximum number of steps T  that can be taken in this MDP . In other words, the set of terminal 
states is defined as =| = sm tt T {( ,) }, which consists of the states whose step number reaches its maximum 
value.
•	 denotes the action space, in which each action ∈a is a valid modification to a specific molecule m . Each 
modification belongs to one of the following three categories mentioned before:
 1. Atom addition. Firstly, we define the set of  be the set of elements a molecule contains. We then 
define a valid action as adding (1) an atom in  and (2) a bond between the added atom and the 
original molecule wherever possible (all valence-allowed bond orders are considered as separate actions). For example, with the set of elements 
={C,O}, the atom addition action set of cyclohex-
ane contains the 4 actions shown in Fig.  1a. Note that hydrogens are considered implicitly, and all 
atom additions are defined as replacements of implicit hydrogens.
 2. Bond addition. A bond addition action is performed between two atoms with free valence (not count-ing implicit hydrogens). If there is no bond between those two atoms, actions between them consist 
of adding a single, double, or triple bond if the valence allows this change. Additional actions increase 
the bond order between those two atoms by one or two. In other words, the transitions include:
•	No bond → {Single, Double, Triple} Bond.
•	Single bond → {Double, Triple} Bond.Figure 1. Valid actions on the state of cyclohexane. Modifications are shown in red. Invalid bond additions 
which violate the heuristics explained in Section 2.1 are not shown.