102 2.2. Rule -based AI  
 
Machine learning systems can be powerful, particularly for probl ems where the “rules” needed to produce 
certain outcomes (e.g., the weights to be applied to students’ characteristics in order to produce GPA predictions) 
are not known and hence must be inferred from data.  However, there are also problems for which the r ules are 
known, but applying these rules can be cumbersome or time -consuming.  For these types of problems, “rule -
based” approaches to AI —in which computers manipulate data based on a set of pre -defined logical 
propositions, instead of ones inferred from pa tterns in the data —are often used.   
 
One such problem in education is school bus routing.  Large school districts often have fleets of school buses that 
must be scheduled and routed to different stops in order to ensure students get to school on time and sa fely 
(Bertsimas et al., 2019).  In this problem, the rules an AI w ould consider might include: different carrying 
capacities for each bus; times by which certain groups of students must get to school; or specific roads buses can 
and cannot take.  A social pl anner implementing this algorithm may seek to optimize for multiple objective 
functions: for example, minimizing costs and travel times and/or maximizing the diversity of the student body 
that travels together on any given bus.   
 
The most naive rule -based AI algorithm would use a brute force approach to solve this problem, evaluating every 
possible combination of bus, student, and route assignments and selecting the one that yields the most optimal 
response vis -a-vis our multiple objectives.  For many large real-world problems, however, this approach is 
infeasible and could quite literally take hundreds of years (or longer) to compute (Cook, 2012).  To this end, rule -
based AI algorithms often use sophisticated solution strategies to prune down a large set of p ossible 
combinations to a feasible subset that is much easier and more efficient to search through (e.g., Van Hentenryck 
& Michel, 2009).  Unlike machine learning systems, rule -based models will not necessarily make more accurate 
decisions with a larger sca le or diversity of data.  In fact, scale and diversity of data can pose challenges to rule -
based AI algorithms because they increase the size and complexity of the problem at hand.  This said, these 
challenges will likely be alleviated by the increased algor ithmic and hardware efficiencies afforded by the 
current wave of AI described above.  
 
While their underlying mechanisms might differ, r ule-based AI need not be completely distinct from machine 
learning.  For example, we may have historical data on bus route s and road conditions (e.g., traffic patterns) 
which we can use to predict travel times.  We can then leverage these predicted travel times as inputs into our 
objective function during the optimization process.   
 
 
3. Applications of AI in education  
 
Despite  recent interest in applications of AI and education, the two fields have intersected for some time ( e.g., 
Aleven & Koedinger, 2002) —which has long raised important philosophical and ethical questions. This next 
section provides an overview of recent appli cations of AI in education and highlights some of their limitations 
and broader implications.  These examples, far from exhaustive, have been selected in order to highlight the ways 
in which the scale and diversity of available d ata—along with improvements in computational efficiency —have 
created new opportunities for using AI to potentially improve the human condition through educational 
applications.  For a more in -depth review of how AI and other data mining techniques can be applied to 
education -related p roblems, we refer readers to several existing review papers ( e.g., Romero & Ventura, 2010; 
Koedinger et al., 2015; Fischer et al., 2020).  
 
 
3.1. Intelligent tutoring systems  
 
Intelligent tutoring systems (ITS) are a popular application of AI in education.  ITS are tools that seek to adapt to 
students’ existing knowledge and skills, or learning states, to help them build skills in more personalized ways.  
The “I” in ITS often has different definitions for different tools.  For example, some ITS are machine lea rning -
based systems that seek to develop (sometimes Bayesian) learner models trained to maximize the likelihood of a 
student answering a provided question correctly, conditional on their history of responses (Ritter, 2007).  In other 
cases, developers might  simply train a system to predict the likelihood of “correctness” as accurately as possible 
(e.g., using deep reinforcement learning a la Reddy et al., 2017).  These systems then provide students with 
problems that are most likely to be at their “learning e dge” —i.e., the problems they haven’t yet answered that 
they are most likely to answer correctly, given their prior history of answers.  These machine learning systems 
have the capacity to make more accurate predictions of a student’s learning edge as they d raw on larger and more