106 An important type of abstract reasoning is learning how to  learn.  Throughout our lives, we have likely played 
several games, and these experiences have made it easier for us to learn the rules and dynamics of new games.  
Such “meta learning” is a popular area of machine learning research. At present, however, the complex reasoning 
done by humans is broken down into discrete processes for the machines, including teaching a machine “where 
to focus” in the space of input data (Xu et al., 2015) or how to automatically update different parts of its own 
architecture (And rychowicz et al., 2016; Zoph & Le, 2016) in order to make better predictions. Perhaps 
unsurprisingly, this machine “meta learning” generally lacks the higher -order thinking, reflection, and planning 
woven throughout human meta -learning.  Without this abilit y to lear n how to learn, we must be skeptical of how 
well AI can support students, understanding the complex in - and out -of-school factors that impact learning.  AI, 
for example, may be able to suggest problems to students to work on, but will be limited in  identifying why 
students continue to get certain types of problems right or wrong —especially if those factors transcend cognitive, 
skill-based challenges and extend to the home environment or other social forces affecting the child.  
 
 
4.2. Risks that stem  from machine learning’s limitations  
 
4.2.1. Failures in generalizing  
 
Because machine learning models often fail to develop a deep, intuitive understanding of the task they are built 
to perform, they can subsequently fail to generalize to new settings tha n what they were trained for (Murphy, 
2012).  This sometimes leads them to “catastrophically forget” how to perform tasks (Kirkpatrick et al., 2017), or 
become brittle in the face of “adversarial” inputs.  Adversarial inputs are data examples —often derived b y 
making small perturbations to training set examples —that are designed to fool a machine learning model into 
making an incorrect decision.  As an example, (Brown et al., 2017) showed how an object recognition system that 
could classify an image as containi ng a banana with high confidence could easily be fooled into making an 
incorrect classification simply by adding a small sticker of a toaster to the image.  One of the key reasons for this 
brittleness is probably the fact that the model has not “really lear ned” what a banana is, beyond a collection of 
pixels arranged in a certain way.  We can play such a scenario out to imagine several concerning possibilities in 
education , for example: a  ranking system that places a student in a remedial class because of the ir test score 
similarity to a historical batch of remedial students, without factoring in other variables that might better -indicate 
their likelihood of succeeding in more advanced courses (Bergman et al., 2021) ; facial recognition 
misclassifications in cr iminal justice applications that lead to the wrongful incarceration of students or their 
family members (Hill, 2020); and many more.  These scenarios have inspired new directions for building more 
robust deep learning models (e.g. , Tjeng et al., 2019), but the need for awareness about what such models are 
“doing ” in technical terms will remain crucial . 
 
  
4.2.2. Bias and fairness  
 
Lacking a general understanding of the “how” and “why” behind most decisions, many machine learning models 
often recapitulate bia ses in their training data —and hence, risk perpetuating these biases at scale.  For example, a 
recent study illustrated the drastically poor performance of several commercial facial recognition technologies 
when seeking to identify the faces of black women —due in part to underrepresentation in their training data 
(Buolamwini & Gebru, 2018).  In healthcare, a system for neurological disorder screening based on human 
speech proved more accurate for individuals who spoke a particular dialect of Canadian English (Gershgorn, 
2018).  Such shortcomings prevail  in education too —with AIED applications favouring certain groups in the 
content taught, the ways material is covered, and the accuracy of predictions and appropriateness of interventions 
(Mayfield et. al., 2019) . The UK’s intention of using predictive models to assign final grades in the wake of 2020 
school closures due to the COVID -19 pandemic illustrates this risk: under the modelling scheme, which was 
eventually dropped, highly -qualified and capable students f rom historically lower -performing (and lower -
resourced) schools were more likely to receive marks lower than what their teachers would have assigned, 
whereas students in traditionally high -performing private received higher predicted scores (BBC, 2020).   
 
Ultimately, fairness is a highly complex concept, particularly when applied to education (Mayfield et al., 2019); 
and when and how educationalists choose to use AIED is itself a complex ethical question, even if and when 
those AIs are optimized to root out  bias. Addressing the technical limitations of machine learning will help 
mitigate the risks outlined above, but it will be insufficient to preempt the full range of educational and ethical 
issues related to AIED, specifically the application of AI in prac tice. Multiple significant and important critiques 
of AIED, and of the use of data in education more broadly, center on issues such as privacy, instrumentalism, 
surveillance, performance, and governance (Jarke & Berieter, 2019; Holmes, et al., 2021; Willia mson 2017).