104 in automated gameplay (AlphaStar  Team , 2019) —though the exact methods for training and evaluating these 
models in the context of the chatbot are unclear.  The researchers found that the AI -powered sys tem was 
comparable in enhancing college enrolment rates to prior studies that primarily involved human counselors.  As 
more dialogue agent  systems are deployed across campuses , the scale and breadth of available linguistic corpora 
for training models with s marter response strategies are likely to grow.  Nevertheless , a number of open research 
questions persist —particularly concerning how well these systems can serve a diverse student body in answering 
complex educational questions.  
 
      
3.4. (Large) school systems -level processes  
 
At the school systems -level, AI is being used to achieve several objectives, including the equitable 
implementation of school choice.  Over the past two decades, a strand of economics research has focused on 
developing rule -based AI  algorithms for districts that offer families choices on where to send their children to 
school.  These algorithms have been designed to be “strategy -proof ,” matching students to schools in ways that 
do not enable families to “game the system” by mis -statin g preferences in order to exploit loopholes that would 
increase their likelihood of receiving a spot at one of their top choice schools (Pathak & Sönmez, 2008).  This is 
particularly important for those parents who do not have the resources, social capital,  or knowledge necessary  to 
“game the system .” Of course, “strategy -proofness” only helps further equity to the extent that other parts of the 
system are also equitable (Goldstein, 2019).   
 
AI has also been used to help with a range of planning and forecast ing tasks, particularly in larger school -
systems or by those working across large systems of schools. Working with Boston Public Schools, researchers 
built a machine learning model that forecasts changes in demand for schools in response to certain school choice 
policy changes (Pathak & Shi, 2015).  As more data accrues across the diverse spectrum  of families in these 
systems, such models have the potential to become more accurate —and perhaps also shed more light on the 
preferences of families who belong to traditionally underrepresented segments of the population . School districts 
have also turned to rule -based AI systems to help achieve greater logistical efficiency —for example, by 
producing “optimal” bus routes as discussed earlier in this paper —and to sav e money (Bertsimas et al., 2019).  
Yet such systems have been met with mixed reception from some of the families they ultimately impact 
(Scharfenberg, 2018).  Additionally, to improve teacher placement in schools, Teach for America (TFA) designed 
and tested a matching algorithm similar to the school choice matching algorithm described above, to factor in 
both teacher and school preferences; TFA subsequently saw a slight positive effect on students’ academic 
outcomes (Davis, 2017).  With continued increases in computational efficiency, t hese rule -based systems promise 
to be able to operate on larger, more complex proble ms concerning more students, teachers, and other 
stakeholders in the years ahead. Yet these need to be developed with an awareness of concerns ab out the use of 
such market -driven principles to develop an equitable education system ( e.g., Ball, 2017; Biesta, 2015) . 
 
 
3.5. Predicting outcomes  
 
Machine learning systems have  garnered significant attention for their ability to “predict the future” —often  in 
the form of “early warning systems .” These systems, often using different forms of regression, mine large troves 
of historical student data to predict which students are most at risk of failing an exam, dropping out of high 
school or college, etc. (Far ia et al., 2017).  Experimental evidence has suggested that deploying these systems can 
help reduce chronic absenteeism and course failure (Faria et al., 2017).  While early warning systems do not 
always require machine learning —e.g., a simple rule -based sys tem could trigger a warning if a student’s GPA 
falls below a certain level —machine learning -based systems have the potential to identify and exploit patterns of 
which school leaders may not be aware.  These systems can also pool data across disparate contex ts to improve 
individual predictions.  For example, small school districts might face a “cold start” problem: they simply do not 
have enough historical data to train an accurate machine learning model —requiring them to “borrow” data from 
other school distri cts to improve accuracy  (e.g., Coleman et al., 2019).  Increasing scale and diversity of data may 
enable such applications of transfer learning, and more generally, extend the possible applications of machine 
learning to educational settings that have previ ously been left out.  
 
Unfortunately, these warning systems can have several drawbacks.  Being able to predict how well a student is 
going to do in a particular class might help encourage students to take more advanced classes ( Bergman  et al. , 
2021)—but it c ould also lead to tracking, which might limit a student’s desire and ability to explore new topics, 
particularly in college and university.  School leaders may also struggle to calibrate interventions based on the 
outputs of a model. If a model indicates th e probability that any given student drops out of high school, at what