Gillani, N., Eynon, R., Chiabaut, C., & Finkel, K.  (2023). Unpacking the “Black Box” of AI in Education . Educational 
Technology & Society , 26(1), 99-111. https://doi.org/10.30191/ETS .202301_26(1).00 08  
99 ISSN 1436 -4522 (online) and 1176 -3647 (print). DOI 10.30191/ETS . This article of Educational Technology & Society  is available under Creative Commons CC -BY-
NC-ND 3.0 license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by -nc-nd/3.0/). For further queries , please contact Editors at ets .editors@ gmail.com . 
 Unpacking the “Black Box” of AI in Education  
 
Nabeel Gillani1*, Rebecca Eynon2, Catherine Chiabaut3 and Kelsey Finkel3 
1Massachusetts Institute of Technology, USA // 2University of Oxford, UK // 3The Robertson Foundation, USA // 
ngillani@mit.edu // rebecca .eynon@oii.ox.ac.uk // catherine.chiabaut@robertson.org  
 // kelsey.finkel@robertson.org  
*Corresponding author  
 
ABSTRACT:  Recent advances in Artificial Intelligence (AI) have sparked renewed interest in its potential to 
improve education.  However, AI is a l oose umbrella term that refers to a collection of methods, capabilities, and 
limitations —many of which are often not explicitly articulated by researchers, education technology companies, 
or other AI developers.  In this paper, we seek to clarify what “AI” is and the potential it holds to both advance 
and hamper educational opportunities that may improve the human condition . We offer a basic introduction to 
different methods and philosophies underpinning AI, discuss recent advances , explore applications to e ducation, 
and highlight key limitations and risks.  We conclude with a set of questions that educationalists may ask as they 
encounter AI in their research and practice . Our hope is to make often jargon -laden terms and concepts 
accessible, so that all are e quipped to understand, interrogate, and ultimately shape the development of human -
centered AI in education.  
 
Keywords:  K-12 education, Artificial intelligence in education, Educational data mining, Learning analytics, 
Natural language processing   
 
 
1. Intr oduction  
 
Rapid advances in artificial intelligence (AI) over the past several years have raised new questions about the role 
that machines might play in both promoting and impeding humanity.  The field of education has been no 
different.  Emerging AI capabi lities are enabling machines to fuse and make sense of larger, more diverse 
datasets in increasingly efficient ways. While these affordances of scale, diversity, and efficiency might help 
generate insights and guide actions to improve educational opportuni ties and outcomes, they also come with 
several technical limitations and related practical risks —like failures to generalize and identify causal 
relationships —that threaten to perpetuate unfair or harmful applications.  Thus, and rightfully so, the re -
emerg ence of AI has sparked new debates about the political, pedagogic, and practical implications of its 
application in educational contexts (Shum & Luckin, 2019). These debates are critical, especially if we wish for 
machines to be able to better -serve the hu man actors —teachers, learners, administrators, and others in 
education —who may benefit from their emerging capabilities.  
 
Engaging productively in these debates, however, requires one to understand some of the methodological 
paradigms and practices specifi c to Artificial Intelligence in Education (AIED).  However, researchers and 
practitioners not trained in computer science or engineering may find the rapidly advancing field of AI 
inaccessible. In this article, we try to address this gap, providing an overv iew of the meanings, methods, and 
limitations of AI as a re -emerging field and how these intersect with AI’s applications in education. In doing so, 
we hope to build on previous introductions to this topic (e.g. , Luckin, 2018; Holmes et al., 2019) and crit ical 
works that connect data models with ethical and social debates (Perrotta & Williamson, 2018; Perrotta & 
Selwyn , 2020).  By opening up the “Black Box” of AI for those outside of the field, we hope to further human -
centered AI in education by empowering all stakeholders, regardless of disciplinary background, to contribute to 
the development of AI that recognizes and champions human capabilities (Li & Etchemendy, 2018; Yang et al., 
2021).  
 
 
2. Defining “AI”  
 
As Artificial Intelligence evolves, the term “A I” has acquired mystical and rhetorical qualities (Eynon & Young, 
2020).  Some recent advances are impressive: we now have machines that can discover new drug formulas 
(Popova et al., 2018), predict elusive protein structures (AlphaFold  Team , 2020), generat e full -length written 
stories (Brown et al., 2020), and beat world -class performers in games like Starcraft, Go, and Chess (AlphaStar  
Team , 2019; Silver et al ., 2018).  Still, demystifying AI is an important  first step towards  understanding its inner 
workin gs and applications. While the capabilities and performance of today’s AI systems are unprecedented, 
many of the core algorithms that govern how they work are rooted in methods dating back to the early 20th 
century (Tuomi, 2018).  Furthermore, while current  incarnations of AI have achieved unprecedented degrees of