105 point should an intervention be triggered —when there is a 20% chance of a student dropping out?  51%?  90%?  
Even if a school leader feels equipped to intervene after analyzing the data, t here is a fundamental question about 
the obligation to act (Eynon, 2013 ; Prinsloo et al., 2017; Hakimi et al., 2021): which students should receive 
support? And what if the model has a high false -negative rate —meaning there could be many students who 
actua lly need intervention but weren’t flagged by the model as such?  These are difficult questions and, at 
present, there are no standardized responses; school systems approach these questions differently depending on 
their own knowledge and needs.  
 
 
4. Limitat ions and risks of modern machine learning systems  
 
Readers from varied sub -fields of education, learning sciences and data science will bring different critical lenses 
to the areas and applications previously discussed. Here, we will draw from (Lake et al. , 2016) and other 
researchers to discuss several technical limitations of modern machine learning systems and some risks that arise 
from them. We will also look at the key gaps that still exist between what many believe AI can do in 2021, what 
it can actua lly do (and not do), and how these limitations have important implications for education.  
 
 
4.1. Limitations of modern machine learning systems  
 
4.1.1. Transparency and interpretability  
 
Neural network approaches to machine learning are powerful, but their  inner workings are usually not  
transparent, making them difficult to interpret. One implication of this is that it may not be clear which inputs 
were responsible for driving decisions.  For example, in the case of early warning systems, a school leader mig ht 
be informed of the likelihood of any given student failing a course, but not which characteristics of the student 
are most associated with this prediction.  The school leader might obviate this problem by opting for a more 
interpretable, non-deep  learnin g-based model, but this may require sacrificing some degree of predictive 
accuracy.  These are not always salient tradeoffs, but when they arise, it is often unclear how they should be 
made.  Fortunately, model interpretability is an active area of deep lear ning research  with several recent advances 
(e.g., Sundarajan et al., 2017; Kim et al., 2018).  These advances are critical for equity and inclusion in education, 
as they open the door to enabling a wider range of stakeholders —including parents and students who may be 
affected by such algorithms —to understand, interrogate, and ultimately improve their applications (although see 
Ananny  & Crawford , 2018; Tsai et al., 2019 for discussions of questions of the burden such moves could place 
on individuals).     
 
A m ore fundamental issue with machine -learning based systems,  even those that do not leverage deep neural 
networks , is causal attribution.  Machine learning models are designed to identify and exploit correlations (not 
necessarily causal relationships) between  variables in order to make predictions.  For example,  a school leader’s 
early warning system might highlight poverty status, prior grade history, and disciplinary actions as student -level 
factors associated with a higher likelihood of course failure , witho ut explaining the underlying causes  of failure.  
Misunderstanding under lying causes may lead to faulty or incomplete interventions, and ultimately, a 
perpetuation (or exacerbation) of the underlying educational challenges educationalists are seeking to addr ess. 
Advances in machine learning methods for causal analysis ( e.g., Johan sson et al., 2016) are attempting to help 
separate out correlation from causation. However, grasping a rich understanding of causal processes in settings 
as complex as education usua lly requires much more than technical solutions.  
 
 
4.1.2. Abstract reasoning and learning how to learn  
 
Humans are very good at two things that AI -powered machines are not: abstract reasoning and learning how to 
learn. For example, while machines can learn  to play a variety of games better than champion -calibre players, 
they require training on simulations of hundreds of thousands or millions of games to learn how to do so.  
Humans, by contrast, often learn gameplay simply by watching someone else play for a  few minutes (Lake et al., 
2016).  This is  partly  because we are remarkably adept at abstract reasoning: ascertaining the fundamental rules 
of a particular task to generalize and apply these rules to other similar but distinct endeavors.  Teachers do this al l 
the time: unlike most intelligent tutoring systems, they do not need to observe a large number of question 
responses from a student in order to identify and begin addressing key conceptual gaps.