103 disparate historical sources of student performance and behavior —many of which are becoming more ubiquitous 
through computer -aided tutoring and assessment platforms.  Other ITS, like (Kelly et al., 2013), pre -define simple 
rules —like correctly answering three similar questions in a row —to determine if and when a student has 
mastered some concept.   
 
Experimental evidence has largely shown ITS to be effective in increasing students’ grades and test scores (J -
PAL  Evidence Review , 2019).  Of course, grades and test scores offer only one (limited) view into student 
learning.  Crucially, much of the existing efficacy research on ITS has not specifically analysed which underlying 
AI methods make them more or less effective. As such, it is unclea r to what extent machine learning vs rule -
based systems are responsible for helping students improve their outcomes.  As machine learning technologies 
continue to offer new opportunities for personalizing instruction, it will be important to identify the pr ecise 
elements of these systems that offer the greatest promise for enhancing student learning. There is also a need to 
better understand the contexts in which these ITS systems can be meaningfully deployed as a resource for 
teachers and students in ways t hat do not inadvertently narrow the aims and purposes of Education (Biesta, 
2015).  
 
 
3.2. Assessment and feedback  
 
Proponents of AI, particularly machine -learning based systems that seek to infer students’ knowledge states from 
the growing scale and divers ity of data available on digital learning platforms like Khan Academy , argue these 
systems  have the capacity to obviate the need for explicit formative and summative assessments, by seeking to 
infer students’ knowledge states from the growing scale and div ersity of data available on such digital learning 
platforms (Piech et al., 2015) and other systems instrumented for “learning analytics” (Gašević et al., 2015).  
After all, if it is possible to know what a student knows based on how they answer questions in  an ITS, why 
administer an assessment at all?  This line of reasoning, of course, does not consider the positive effects exam 
preparation and studying can have on learning (Karpicke & Roediger III, 2008).   
 
Automated assessment of writing submissions is a popular, albeit complex, example of how machine learning 
might support assessment . To date, most research has focused on training machine learning models to assess 
foundational attributes of writing —for example, spelling, vocabulary, and grammar.  Other syst ems have used 
machine learning to train models that are able to replicate human scores for a given essay (Dong et al., 2017). 
Growing as a writer, however, requires much more than feedback on the mechanics of writing  or collapsing a 
rich composition down t o a single grade.  To this end, (Fiacco et al., 2019) recently designed a neural network -
based machine learning system to identify which rhetorical structures were present in sentences contained within 
a corpus of research study articles: for example, which  sentences sought to describe the study, provide context on 
the study’s methods, or frame new knowledge.  
 
Despite the advancing capabilities of these systems, however, some concerns remain. For instance, it would be 
important to train these AI on a divers e set of linguistic data to fuel their accuracy and minimize bias. M ore work 
also needs to be done to understand how they might inadvertently negatively impact writing development and 
written work in the same ways as plagiarism detection software has (Ross  & Macleod, 2020), and more 
generally, how student surveillance via constant data collection may impact students (Eynon, 2013).  Thus, 
although assessment and feedback is a core focus of AIED, the most appropriate ways to deploy AI for particular 
activities  and in specific contexts remains an area of debate.  
 
 
3.3. Coaching and counselling  
 
The role of coaches and counsellors in schools are multifaceted, time -intensive, and costly.  Researchers have 
therefore started to explore how some of their tasks can be automated.  For example, several studies have 
demonstrated how text -message reminders can help facilitate specific outcomes no rmally under counsellors’ 
purview : e.g., ensuring that graduated high school seniors take the steps needed to matriculate at colleg e in the 
fall (Castleman & Page, 2015) and keeping parents updated about their children’s academics (Bergman & Chen, 
2019). 
 
Recent efforts have also leveraged AI to enable a richer set of interactions between students and “counselors .” A 
recent study (Pag e & Gehlbach, 2017) deployed an AI chatbot to answer questions about forms students would 
need to fill out before starting college at Georgia State University (GSU).  The authors indicate that the chatbot 
was trained using deep reinforcement learning —the sa me technology that has enabled state -of-the-art advances