101 Say, for example, a biased coin is tossed 1 00 times and yields heads on 30 instances . Two friends make a bet that 
they can infer the true bias of the coin and predict the next 100 tosses.  One trains a frequentist machine learning 
model on the observed coin tosses, which si mply factors in the observed data.  The model infers the bias as 
equalling a  30% likelihood of landing on heads.  The other friend, however, devises and trains a Bayesian model : 
in addition to factoring in the observed number of heads, she also factors in a pri or belief drawn from most 
normal coin tossing activities: that there is distribution of possible chances that the coin will land on heads 
(centered around what we usually expect from coins, 50%).  On the next 100 tosses, both observe 40 heads.  In 
this insta nce, factoring in prior beliefs into the model —instead of simply trusting the observed data —produced 
an inference of the coin’s bias as falling between 30% and 50%, which was more accurate than trusting only the 
data from the initial set of coin tosses.  
 
Since they rely on both observed data and prior beliefs, Bayesian methods can sometimes help overcome sparsity 
in datasets —like our limited number of coin tosses —in order to make more accurate predictions.  In other cases, 
such prior beliefs may themselves b e biased and therefore make models less accurate than if they were trained 
only on observations.  Whether a Bayesian or frequentist model is more appropriate to use depends on the nature 
of the problem at hand.  Interestingly, many believe that the rich stru cture of Bayesian models reflects aspects of 
human cognition (Tenenbaum et al., 2011), making them “truer -to-nature” AI . However,  many methods for 
conducting Bayesian posterior inference do not scale well to large datasets, making them difficult to deploy in 
several real -world settings.  In practice, many approaches to machine learning can be implemented from either a 
Bayesian or Frequentist point of view.  
 
 
2.1.3. The rise of deep learning  
 
Deep learning —a popular approach to m achine learning —has become th e dominant school of AI in recent years 
owing largely to a resurgent interest in neural networks.  Neural networks take inspiration from connectionist 
philosophies of cognitive science (Elman et al., 1996) and generally operate by learning (possibly nonline ar) 
relationships between several input variables in order to produce predictions as accurately as possible (see the 
machine learning scenario in the Supplementary Materials for more details).  They are the core, modular  building 
blocks that make  deep learn ing systems “deep” : combining smaller neural networks together to form larger ones 
by feeding  the outputs of one as inputs to another can enable the discovery of more complex and granular 
relationships between these inputs and outputs (LeCun et al., 2015).  Neural networks can manifest through a 
number of different algorithmic architectures, e.g., Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs (Goodfellow et al., 
2016)), Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs (Goodfellow et al., 2016)), and Transformers (Vaswani et al., 
2017) —which underpin recent advances in natural language processing like the popular BERT model (Devlin et 
al., 2019).  Each of these architectures differ in how they process and transform inputs into outputs.  Furthermore, 
RNNs and Transformers are generally bet ter-suited for tasks that involve time -series data, whereas CNNs are 
often applied to image processing problems.  Still, while their precise structures and implementations may differ, 
many of these architectures are trained, evaluated, and eventually used i n similar ways.  
 
Deep learning has been driven by advances across three major areas over the past several years: data, algorithms, 
and hardware.  Large, easy -to-access datasets have enabled, for example, the recent “GPT -3” language model —
which is trained on  over 570 gigabytes of text found across the  open internet (Brown et al., 2020).  The model is 
simply trained to predict the next word in a corpus of text given some sequence of preceding words.  The result is 
a powerful system that can generate entire belie vable stories —an exciting possibility, but also of particular 
concern in our current era of misinformation  (OpenAI  Team , 2019).   
 
In cases where large datasets are not available for a specific task , algorithmic advances like “transfer learning” 
can help  (Pan & Yang, 2009) . Transfer learning enables a model to “pre -train” itself —i.e., initialize its 
parameters —using the outputs of a training process conducted for a separate but related task  for which enough 
data is available . The model can then “fine -tune” o n—or adapt itself to —a smaller dataset that more closely 
represents the task at hand.  For example, early warning systems to detect students likely to drop out may be 
developed for districts that lack a breadth or depth of historical data by “borrowing” the  predictive capacities of 
models pre -trained on data from larger school settings as a starting point (Coleman et al., 2019).  Pre-training, 
however, may also contribute to the amplification and propagation of biases across models.   
 
Finally, recent h ardware  accelerations  like Graphics Processing Units (GPUs)  and Tensor Processing Units 
(TPUs, Hennessy & Patterson, 2019)  are enabling more time -efficient computation, yet their energy demands 
and associated costs have raised concerns about their potential envir onmental impacts (García -Martín et al., 
2019)  and contribution to widening divides between the AI capabilities of large companies and smaller research 
groups (Hao, 2019).