100 sophistication, the “I” of AI systems remains quite rudimentary —as evidenced by how poorly these systems 
often perform on tasks that humans find intuitive.  Such technical limitations entail importa nt risks and ethical 
considerations which have significant bearings on the application of AI to the field of education. Before delving 
into these risks, we expand on two schools of AI that are frequently used in education —machine learning and 
rule-based AI —and outline some of their common applications.  
 
 
2.1. Machine learning -based AI  
 
2.1.1. Machine learning paradigms: supervised, unsupervised, and reinforcement learning  
 
Machine learning algorithms are designed to mine large datasets to uncover —or “learn ”—latent rules and 
patterns that may help inform some future decision.  For example, imagine a large school system has asked a 
research team to develop a tool that accurately predicts what a student’s GPA will be at the end of a given school 
year. “Supervis ed learning” is one approach to machine learning that could help them tackle this problem.  With 
supervised learning, machines are provided a historical dataset of inputs, or features (e.g., student -level 
characteristics like demographic data, attend ance re cords, test scores ), along with a target output, or attribute 
(e.g., GPA).  A model  is then applied to the dataset to learn how these features map to the target attribute  by 
testing out different hypotheses about the relationship to or path from student -level characteristics to GPA.  The 
labels (historical GPAs) of the data in the set help “supervise” the model by indicating how far off its predictions 
are from the observed or existing (i.e., ground -truth) values.  This occurs iteratively for each data point, 
eventually “training” the model by updating the weights it attaches to the inputs or other variables it uses to make 
predictions.  These weights are often the quantities “learned” by the machine (hence, the term “machine 
learning”).  Linear regression offers  a classic approach to supervised machine learning.  In fact, many modern 
approaches using neural networks (described in more detail below), while often described in quasi -mystical 
terms in press articles, operate in fundamentally similar ways and seek to a chieve similar outcomes as linear 
regression.  The scenario in the Supplementary Materials offers additional details about these similarities and 
differences.   
 
In contrast to supervised learning, “unsupervised learning” is a process by which a machine perf orms statistical 
pattern recognition without access to ground -truth labels for the desired output.  A common application of 
unsupervised learning is clustering.  Say a school system asked a research team to develop a “typology” of 
students based on their dif ferent characteristics, to help design and target student supports.  They could use a 
standard clustering algorithm (e.g., the popular “k -means” algorithm proposed by Hartigan  and Wong, 1979) to 
learn a grouping of students that differentiates them from oth er (also automatically inferred) groups.  Our 
resultant groups —or clusters —may comprise students who perform similarly; who take similar classes; live in 
similar parts of the city; or have some other set of related characteristics.  
 
A third paradigm of mac hine learning is “reinforcement learning ,” which has recently been used, among other 
applications, to develop powerful gameplay systems (e.g., Mnih et al., 2015; Silver et al., 2018).  In education, 
some researchers have started to explore applications of r einforcement learning to intelligent tutoring systems 
(Reddy et al., 2017).  At its core, a reinforcement learning algorithm accepts as an input the state of the world 
(e.g., the questions a student has answered correctly or incorrectly in an intelligent tu toring environment of a 
game) and uses this to decide upon some action (e.g., which question to ask the student next).  The action —either 
immediately or over the course of time —eventually contributes to some outcome (e.g. , mastering a concept).  The 
value of  this outcome is then used to assign positive or negative rewards to the algorithm to encourage or 
discourage similar actions when faced with similar states of the world in the future.  Reinforcement learning 
algorithms have been around for several decades (Kaelbling et al., 1996), but have resurged over the past few 
years with large quantities of training data and computational resources more readily available.  
 
 
2.1.2. Machine learning philosophies: frequentist and Bayesian  
 
The paradigms above reflect a “ frequentist” philosophy of machine learning: inferences ( like predictions, cluster 
assignments, and other insights that inform decisions) are made largely based on the frequencies of patterns 
revealed in the training data (Bayyari & Berger, 2004).  By contr ast, “Bayesian” machine learning models 
explicitly incorporate pre -existing beliefs (“priors”) alongside the patterns revealed by training data to produce 
some posterior “belief” or inference about the world (Bayyari & Berger, 2004).