107 We hope that the technical explanations and considerations outlined in this paper can help inform conversations 
and decision -making around issues of fair and equitable use —even if they are insufficient to resolve them.  
 
 
5. Discussion and conclusion  
 
As we have explored, AI is not “one thing”; in this paper we have focused on the more technical aspects of AI to 
highlight the myriad of (sometimes complementary) computational techniques that collectively constitute AI.  
Understanding the working s, limitations, and risks associated with each —and especially those powered by 
machine learning —is critical to developing and deploying them wisely, thoughtfully, and with proper human 
oversight.  Educationalists who do not have a background in computer sci ence or engineering have a vital role to 
play in this endeavor.  To aid with this, we offer the following guiding questions that educationalists may ask as 
they encounter applications of AI in education, to ensure AI is used ethically, responsibly, and ulti mately to 
improve the human condition:  
 
• What kind of AI is it?  The examples contained in this paper illustrate how different types of AI can (and 
cannot) help solve different problems in education, and may help educationalists form a judgement about 
their applicability and risks within their own contexts. Asking this question may encourage a recognition of 
both human expertise and the realities of the ‘intelligence’ of AI systems.  
 
• Does the AI enable something that would be difficult or impossible to achi eve without it?  Unpacking 
any benefits of the scale or diversity of data that the AI operates on, or any efficiencies it enables and 
weighing them against associated risks or limitations may help justify its usefulness.  If an AI -powered 
system does not ena ble capabilities or benefits that could be achieved without it, it may not be worth 
deploying.  Just because AI can be used to power an education technology system, does not mean it should  
be. 
 
• What are the potential risks or drawbacks of deploying this tec hnology?  Even in cases where AI might 
enable high -impact new capabilities, there are likely to be critical failure modes that could lead to 
unintended, perverse outcomes.  Understanding the possibility of, and anticipating, these outcomes is of 
essential im portance.   
 
• How equitably are the anticipated benefits and risks distributed across different groups of students 
and families?  AI, especially machine learning -based systems, can “learn,” replicate, and scale bias and 
inequity. It is therefore important to question whether AI systems might underserve or discriminate against 
students and families from low -income or minority backgrounds; with disabilities; experiencing varying 
levels of linguistic proficiency; or facing other vulnerabilities. Asking about past  performance or evidence of 
bias, or about steps taken to ensure equity in application, could be helpful.  
 
• If you could wave a magic wand and change anything about this technology, what would it be?  All 
technologies (including those powered by AI) have be en designed with a set of values, practices, and use -
cases in mind —and therefore, can be changed, even if they appear opaque or difficult to understand.  Those 
who are closest to the application of AI in educational settings should refuse to accept the stat us quo, using 
their observations and wisdom to share feedback with system developers in order to spark changes that help 
improve the human experience with education.  
 
If and how AI should be designed and used in education remains an active question, which can only be answered 
through conversations between and across different academic communities. As prior work argues, this will 
require AI researchers and engineers to work with educationalists to better -understand the theory and practice of 
education. Howev er, w e hope we have successfully argued that equally important is the need for educationalists 
to understand the more technical aspects of theory and practice of AI, especially when critiquing, rejecting or 
adapting it for their own efforts. Through the pr ovision of an overview of current AI techniques, their use in 
education, and key limitations and risks, we hope this article will contribute to these on -going conversations and 
help advance the quest for AIED to improve the human condition.   
 
 
Acknowledgem ent 
 
We would like to thank John Hood and Eric Chu for many helpful ideas and comments that helped shape this 
paper.  No human subjects were involved in this research.  The authors report no conflicts of interest.