Figure 5: Left: relation between depth at the bid, depth at the ask and the probability
of a price decrease. The x-axis andy-axis display the quantile level corresponding to the
observed bid and ask depth. Right: Contour plot displaying the in
uence of levels deeper in
the order book (5 to 10) on the probability of a price decrease.
depth on the bid and ask sides of the order book and the probability of a price decrease.
Such relations have been studied in queueing models of limit order book dynamics [13, 14].
In particular, it was shown in [14] that when the order 
ow is symmetric then there exists a
`universal' relation | not dependent on model parameters | between bid depth, ask depth
and the probability of a price decrease at the next price move. However, the derivations in
these models hinge on many statistical assumptions which may or may not hold, and the
universality of such relations remained to be empirically veried.
Our analysis shows that there is indeed evidence for such a universal relation, across a
wide range of assets and time periods. Figure 5 (left) displays the probability of a price de-
crease as a function of the depth (the number of shares) at the best bid/ask price. The larger
the best ask size, the more likely the next price prove will be downwards. The probability
is approximately constant along the center diagonal where the bid/ask imbalance is zero.
However, as observed in queueing models [13, 14, 16], even under simplifying assumptions,
the relation between this probability and various measures of the bid/ask imbalance is not
linear. Furthermore, such queueing models typically focus on the in
uence of depth at the
top of the order book and it is more dicult to extract information from deeper levels of the
order book. The right contour plot in Figure 5 displays the in
uence of limit orders deeper
in the order book (here: total size aggregated across levels 5 to 10) on the probability of a
price decrease. We see that the in
uence is less than the depth at the top of the book, as
illustrated by the tighter range of predicted probabilities, but still signicant.
3.2 Universality across assets
A striking aspect of our results is the stability across stocks of the features uncovered by
the deep learning model, and its ability to extrapolate (`generalize') to stocks which it was
not trained on. This may be illustrated by comparing forecasting accuracy of stock-specic
models, trained only on data of a given stock, to a universal model trained on a pooled data
11