weighs in favour of pooling together nancial data from various stocks, rather than designing
stock- or sector-specic models as commonly done. Also, we observe that standard data
transformations such as normalizations based on volatility or average spread, or partitioning
the training data into sectors or categories such as large/small tick stocks, do not improve
training results. On the other hand, inclusion of price and order 
ow history over many
past observations improves forecasting performance, showing evidence of path-dependence
in price dynamics.
Remarkably, the universal model is able to extrapolate, or generalize , to stocks not within
the training set. The universal model is able to perform well on completely new stocks
whose historical data the model was never trained on. This implies that the universal
model captures features of the price formation mechanism which are robust across stocks
and sectors. This feature alone is quite interesting for applications in nance where missing
data problems and newly issued securities often complicate model estimation.
Outline Section 2 describes the dataset and the supervised learning approach used to
extract information about the price formation mechanism. Section 3 provides evidence for
the existence of a universal and stationary relationship linking order 
ow and price history
to price variations. Section 4 summarizes our main ndings and discusses some implications.
2 A data-driven model of price formation via Deep
Learning
Applications such as image, text, and speech recognition have been revolutionized by the
advent of `Deep Learning' | the use of multilayer (`deep') neural networks trained on large
data sets to uncover complex nonlinear relations between high-dimensional inputs (`features')
and outputs [19].
At an abstract level, a deep neural network represents a functional relation y=f(x)
between a high-dimensional input vector xand an output ythrough iterations (`layers')
consisting of weighted sums followed by the application of nonlinear `activation' functions.
Each iteration corresponds to a `hidden layer' and a deep neural network can have many hid-
den layers. Neural networks can be used as `universal approximators' for complex nonlinear
relationships [21], by appropriately choosing the weights in each layer.
In supervised learning approaches, network weights are estimated by optimizing a regular-
ized cost function re
ecting in-sample discrepancy between the network output and desired
outputs. In a deep neural network, this represents a high-dimensional optimization over hun-
dreds of thousands (or even millions) of parameters. This optimization is computationally
intensive due to the large number of parameters and large amount of data. Stochastic gra-
dient descent algorithms (e.g., RMSprop or ADAM) are used for training neural networks,
and training is parallelized on Graphics Processing Units (GPUs).
We apply this approach to learn the relation between supply and demand on an electronic
exchange | captured in the history of the order book for each stock | and the subsequent
variation of the market price. Our data set is a high-frequency record of all orders, transac-
tions and order cancellations for approximately 1000 stocks traded on the NASDAQ between
4