January 1, 2014 and March 31, 2017.1
Figure 1: The limit order book represents a snapshot of the supply and demand for a stock
on an electronic exchange. The `ask' side represents sell orders and the `bid' side, buy orders.
The size represents the number of shares available for sale/purchase at a given price. The
dierence between the lowest sell price (ask) and the highest buy price (bid) is the `spread'
(in this example, 1 ¢).
Electronic buy and sell orders are continuously submitted, cancelled and executed through
the exchange's order book . A `limit order' is a buy or sell order for a stock at a certain price
and will appear in the order book at that price and remain there until cancelled or executed.
The `limit order book' is a snapshot of all outstanding limit orders and thus represents the
visible supply and demand for the stock (see Figure 1). In US stock markets, orders can be
submitted at prices occurring at multiples of 1 cent. The `best ask price' is the lowest sell
order and the `best bid price' is the highest bid price. The best ask price and best bid price
are the prices at which the stock can be immediately bought or sold. The `mid-price' is the
average of the best ask price and best bid price. The order book evolves over time as new
orders are submitted, existing orders are cancelled, and trades are executed.
In electronic markets such as the NASDAQ, new orders may arrive at high frequency |
sometimes every microsecond | and order books of certain stocks can update millions of
times per day. This leads to TeraBytes of data, which we put to use to build a data-driven
model of the price formation process.
When the input data is a time series, causality constraints require that the relation
between input and output respects the ordering in time. Only the past may aect the
present. A network architecture which re
ects this constraint is a recurrent network (see an
example in Figure 2) based on Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) units [17].
Each LSTM unit has an internal state which maintains a nonlinear representation of all
past data. This internal state is updated as new data arrives. Our network has 3 layers
1Historical order book data was reconstructed from NASDAQ Level III data using the LOBSTER data
engine [25].
5