3.3 Stationarity
The relationships uncovered by the deep learning model are not only stable across stocks
but also stationary in time. This is illustrated by examining how forecast accuracy behaves
when the training period and test period are separated in time.
Figure 10 shows the accuracy of the universal model on 500 stocks which were not part
of the training sample. The left histogram displays the accuracy in June-August, 2015,
shortly after the training period (January 2014-May 2015), while the right plot displays
the cross-sectional distribution of accuracy for the same model in January-March, 2017, 18
months after the training period . Interestingly, even one year after the training period, the
forecasting accuracy is stable, without anyadjustments.
Such stability contrasts with the common practice of `recalibrating' models based on
a moving window of recent data due to perceived non-stationarity. If the data were non-
stationary, accuracy would decrease with the time span separating the training set and the
prediction period and it would be better to train models only on recent periods immediately
before the test set. However, we observe that this is not the case: Table 2 reports forecast
results for models trained over periods extending up to 1 ;3;6;and 19 months before the test
set. Model accuracy consistently increases as the length of the training set is increased. The
message is simple: use all available data, rather than an arbitrarily chosen time window.
Note that these results are notincompatible with the data itself being non-stationary.
The stability we refer to is the stability of the relation between the inputs (order 
ow and
price history) and outputs (forecasts). If the inputs themselves are non-stationary, the output
will be non-stationary but that does not contradict our point in any way.
Figure 10: Performance on 500 new stocks which the model has never seen before. Left: out-
of-sample accuracy reported for June-August, 2015. Right: out-of-sample accuracy reported
for January-March, 2017. Universal model trained on data from January 2014-May 2015.
3.4 Path-dependence
Statistical modeling of nancial time series has been dominated by Markovian models which,
for reasons of analytical tractability, assume that the evolution of the price and other state
15