set of 500 stocks, a much larger but extremely heterogeneous data set. As shown in Figure 6,
the universal model consistently outperforms the stock-specic models. This indicates there
are common features, relevant to forecasting, across all stocks. Features extracted from data
on stock A may be relevant to forecasting of price moves for stock B.
Given the heterogeneity of the data, one might imagine that time series from dierent
stocks should be rst normalized (by average daily volume, average price or volatility etc.)
before pooling them. Surprisingly, this appears notto be the case: we have observed that
standard data transformations such as normalizations based on average volume, volatility or
average spread, or partitioning the training data into sectors or categories such as large/small
tick stocks do not improve training results. For example, a deep learning model trained on
small tick stocks does not outperform the universal model in terms of forecasting price moves
for small tick stocks. It appears that the model arrives at its own data-driven normalization
of inputs based on statistical features of the data rather than ad hoc criteria.
Figure 6: Out-of-sample forecasting accuracy of the universal model compared with stock-
specic models. Both are deep neural networks with 3 LSTM layers followed by a ReLU
layer. All layers have 50 units. Models are trained to predict the direction of the next move.
Comparison across 489 stocks, June-August, 2015.
The source of the universal model's outperformance is well-demonstrated by Figure 7.
The universal model most strongly outperforms the stock-specic models on stocks with less
data. The stock-specic model is more exposed to overtting due to the smaller dataset
while the universal model is able to generalize by interpolating across the rich scenario space
of the pooled data set and therefore is less exposed to overtting. So, the existence of these
common features seems to argue for pooling the data from dierent stocks, notwithstanding
their heterogeneity, leading to a much richer and larger set of training scenarios. Using 1
year of the pooled data set is roughly equivalent to using 500 years (!) of data for training a
single-stock model and the richness of the scenario space is actually enhanced by the diversity
and heterogeneity of behavior across stocks.
Due to the large amount of data, very large universal models can be estimated without
overtting. Figure 8 shows the increase in accuracy for a universal model with 150 units
12