Universal features of price formation in nancial markets:
perspectives from Deep Learning
Justin Sirignano∗and Rama Cont†‡
March 20, 2018
Abstract
Using a large-scale Deep Learning approach applied to a high-frequency database
containing billions of electronic market quotes and transactions for US equities, we
uncover nonparametric evidence for the existence of a universal and stationary price
formation mechanism relating the dynamics of supply and demand for a stock, as
revealed through the order book, to subsequent variations in its market price. We assess
the model by testing its out-of-sample predictions for the direction of price moves given
the history of price and order 
ow, across a wide range of stocks and time periods. The
universal price formation model exhibits a remarkably stable out-of-sample prediction
accuracy across time, for a wide range of stocks from dierent sectors. Interestingly,
these results also hold for stocks which are not part of the training sample, showing
that the relations captured by the model are universal and not asset-specic.
The universal model | trained on data from all stocks | outperforms, in terms
of out-of-sample prediction accuracy, asset-specic linear and nonlinear models trained
on time series of any given stock, showing that the universal nature of price formation
weighs in favour of pooling together nancial data from various stocks, rather than
designing asset- or sector-specic models as commonly done. Standard data normal-
izations based on volatility, price level or average spread, or partitioning the training
data into sectors or categories such as large/small tick stocks, do not improve training
results. On the other hand, inclusion of price and order 
ow history over many past
observations improves forecasting performance, showing evidence of path-dependence
in price dynamics.
∗University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.
†CNRS & Department of Mathematics, Imperial College London. Corresponding author.
‡The authors thank seminar participants at the London Quant Summit 2018, JP Morgan and Princeton
University for their comments. Computations for this paper were performed using a grant from the CFM-
Imperial Institute of Quantitative Finance and the Blue Waters supercomputer grant \Distributed Learning
with Neural Networks".
1arXiv:1803.06917v1  [q-fin.ST]  19 Mar 2018