Model-Based Reinforcement Learning with Value-Targeted Regression
Alex Ayoub1Zeyu Jia2Csaba Szepesv ´ari13Mengdi Wang43Lin F. Yang5
Abstract
This paper studies model-based reinforcement
learning (RL) for regret minimization. We focus
on ﬁnite-horizon episodic RL where the transition
model Pbelongs to a known family of models P,
a special case of which is when models in Ptake
the form of linear mixtures: P✓=Pd
i=1✓iPi.
We propose a model based RL algorithm that is
based on the optimism principle: In each episode,
the set of models that are ‘consistent’ with the
data collected is constructed. The criterion of con-
sistency is based on the total squared error that the
model incurs on the task of predicting state values
as determined by the last value estimate along the
transitions. The next value function is then chosen
by solving the optimistic planning problem with
the constructed set of models. We derive a bound
on the regret, which, in the special case of linear
mixtures, takes the form ˜O(dp
H3T), where H,
Tanddare the horizon, the total number of steps
and the dimension of ✓, respectively. In particu-
lar, this regret bound is independent of the total
number of states or actions, and is close to a lower
bound ⌦(p
HdT). For a general model family P,
the regret bound is derived based on the Eluder
dimension.
1. Introduction
In reinforcement learning (RL), a core problem in artiﬁ-
cial intelligence ( Russel & Norvig ,2003 ;Sutton & Barto ,
2018 ), an agent learns to control a possibly complex, ini-
tially unknown environment in a sequential trial and error
process. The application of RL algorithms to various do-
1Amii and Department of Computing Science, University
of Alberta2School of Mathematical Science, Peking University
3DeepMind4Department of Electrical Engineering, Princeton
University5Department of Electrical and Computer Engineer-
ing, University of California, Los Angeles. Correspondence
to: Csaba Szepesv ´ari<csaba.szepesvari@gmail.com >, Mengdi
Wang <mengdiw@princeton.edu >.
Proceedings of the 37thInternational Conference on Machine
Learning , Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the au-
thor(s).mains, such as games, robotics and science, has witnessed
phenomenal empirical advances during the last few years
(e.g., Mnih et al. 2015 ;Silver et al. 2017 ;AlQuraishi 2019 ;
Arulkumaran et al. 2019 ). In online RL, an agent has to
learn to act in an unknown environment “from scratch”, col-
lect data as she acts, and adapt her policy to maximize the
reward collected, or, equivalently, to minimize her regret.
Designing RL algorithms that provably achieve sublinear
regret in some class of environments has been the subject
of much research, mainly focusing on the so-called tabular,
and linear-factored MDP settings (e.g., Jaksch et al. 2010 ;
Osband et al. 2014 ;Azar et al. 2017 ;Dann et al. 2017 ;
2018 ;Agrawal & Jia 2017 ;Osband et al. 2017 ;Jin et al.
2018 ;Yang & Wang 2019a ;Jin et al. 2019 ). An appealing
alternative to studying these structured cases is to consider
learning and acting when the environment is described by a
general model class, the topic of the current paper. Despite
its appeal, as it appears, prior work, considered this option
exclusively in a Bayesian setting. In particular, ( Strens ,
2000 ) introduced posterior sampling to RL, which was later
analyzed by ( Osband & Van Roy ,2014 ;Abbasi-Yadkori
& Szepesv ´ari,2015 ;Theocharous et al. ,2017 ) (for a more
in-depth discussion of related work, the reader is referred to
Section 5). As opposed to these works, in the present paper
we are interested in developing algorithms for bounding the
worst-case expected regret.
The speciﬁc setting that we adopt is that of episodic re-
inforcement learning in an environment where the un-
known transition probability model that describes the en-
vironment’s stochastic dynamics belongs to a family of
models that is given to the learner. The model family P
is a general set of models, and it may be either ﬁnitely
parametrized or nonparametric. In particular, our approach
accommodates working with smoothly parameterized mod-
els (e.g., Abbasi-Yadkori & Szepesv ´ari,2015 ), and can
ﬁnd use in both robotics ( Kober et al. ,2013 ) and queue-
ing systems ( Kovalenko ,1968 ). An illuminating special
case is when elements of Ptake the form P✓=P
i✓iPi
where P1,P2,...,P dare ﬁxed, known basis models and
✓=(✓1,...,✓d)are unknown, real-valued parameters.
Model P✓can be viewed as a linear mixture model that
aggregates a ﬁnite family of known basic dynamical models
(Modi et al. ,2019 ). As an important special case, linear
mixture models include the linear-factor MDP model of