Model-Based Reinforcement Learning with Value-Targeted Regression
(Yang & Wang ,2019a ).
The main contribution of this paper is a new model-based
upper conﬁdence RL algorithm. The main novelty is the
criterion to select models that are deemed consistent with
past data. As opposed to the most common approach where
the models are selected based on their ability to predict next
states or raw observations (cf. Jaksch et al. 2010 ;Yang
& Wang 2019a orStrens 2000 ;Osband & Van Roy 2014 ;
Abbasi-Yadkori & Szepesv ´ari2015 ;Ouyang et al. 2017 ;
Agrawal & Jia 2017 in a Bayesian setting), we propose to
evaluate models based on their ability to predict the values
of a value function at next states, where the value function
used is an estimate of the optimal that our algorithm pro-
duces based on past information. In essence, our algorithm
selects models based on their ability to produce small pre-
diction errors in an appropriately constructed value-targeted
regression (VTR) problem. Our algorithm combines VTR
for constructing sets of plausible models with (standard)
optimistic planning. The idea of using a value function es-
timate to “ﬁt” models has been explored in the context of
batch RL by Farahmand (2018 ).
VTR is attractive for multiple reasons: (i)Firstly, VTR per-
mits model learning to focus on task-relevant aspects of
the transition dynamics. This is important as the dynam-
ics can be quite complicated and in a resource bounded
setting, modelling irrelevant aspects of the dynamics can
draw valuable resources away from modelling task-relevant
aspects. (ii)Secondly, VTR poses model learning as a real-
valued regression problem, which should be easier than the
usual approaches to build probabilistic models. In particular,
when state-representation available to the agent takes values
in a high-dimensional space then building a faithful proba-
bility model can be highly demanding. (iii)Thirdly, VTR
aims to control directly what matters in terms of controlling
the regret. Speciﬁcally the objective used in value-targeted
is obtained from an expression that upper bounds the regret,
hence it is natural to expect that minimizing value prediction
errors will lead to a small regret.
An additional attractive feature of our algorithm is its mod-
ular structure. As a result, advances on the components
(faster optimistic planning, tighter conﬁdence sets for VTR)
are directly translated into an improved algorithm. On the
skeptical side, one may question whether VTR is going “too
far” in ignoring details of the dynamics. In particular, since
the value functions used in deﬁning the regression targets
are derived based on imperfect knowledge, the model may
never get sufﬁciently reﬁned in a way that would keep the
regret small. Similarly, one may be worried about that by ig-
noring details of the observations (i.e., the identity of states),
the approach advocated is ignoring information available
in the data, which may slow down learning. This leads to
central question of our article:Is value-targeted regression sufﬁcient and efﬁcient for
model-based online RL?
The main contribution of this paper is a positive answer
to this question. In particular, the regret bounds we derive
conclusively show that the despite the imperfection and
non-stationarity of the value targets, our algorithm will not
get “stuck” (i.e., it enjoys sublinear regret). Our results
further suggest that in the worst case sense, for common
settings, there may be no performance penalty associated
with using value-targeted regression. We are careful here
as this conclusion is based on comparing worst-case upper
bounds, which cannot provide a deﬁnitive answer. Finally,
it is worth noting that the regret bound does not depend on
the size of either the state orthe action space.
To complement the theoretical ﬁndings, results from a num-
ber of small-scale, synthetic experiments conﬁrm that our
algorithm is competitive in terms of its regret. The exper-
iments also allow us to conclude that it is value-targeted
regression together with optimistic planning that is effective.
In particular, if optimism is taken away (i.e., ✏-greedy for
exploration), value-targeted regression performs worse than
using a canonical approach to estimate the model. Similarly,
if value-targeted regression is taken away, optimism together
with the canonical model-estimation approach is less effec-
tive. Note that our results do not rule out that certain com-
binations of value-targeted regression and canonical model
building are more effective than value-targeted regression.
In fact, given the vast number of possibilities, we ﬁnd this
to be quite probable. While our proofs can be adjusted to
deal with adding simultaneous alternative targets, sadly, our
current theoretical tools are unable to capture the tradeoffs
that one expects to arise as a result of such modiﬁcations.
It is interesting to note that, in an independent and concur-
rent work, value-targeted regression has also been suggested
as the main model building tool of the MuZero algorithm
(Schrittwieser et al. ,2019 ), which was empirically evalu-
ated on a number of RL benchmarks, such as the 57 Atari
“games”, the game of “Go”, chess and shogi, and was found
to be highly competitive with its state-of-the-art alternatives.
This reinforces the conclusion that training models using
value-targeted regression is indeed a good approach to build
effective model-based RL algorithms. Since MuZero does
notimplement optimistic planning and our results show
that optimism is not optional in a worst case sense, the
good results of MuZero on these benchmark may seem
to contradict our experimental ﬁndings that value-targeted
regression is ineffective without an appropriate, ‘smart’ ex-
ploration component. However, there is no contradiction:
Smart exploration may be optional in some environments;
our experiments show that it is not optional on some envi-
ronments. In short, for robust performance across a wide
range of environments, smart exploration is necessary but