60 V. Couteaux et al.
(Sect. 3.2). Finally we show what kind of insight we can get with our method by
applying it to the the real-world use case of liver tumor segmentation (Sect. 3.3).
Fig. 4. Controlled experiment. We trained 7 networks with diﬀerent probabilities pof
marking the positively labeled zones. (a) DeepDream of the network for p= 100% .
(b) Evolution of the characteristic feature during the gradient ascent process. (c) Dice
score on the unmarked test set and characteristic feature at the end of the gradient
ascent process for the 7 networks. Networks that performed poorly on the unmarkedtest set and thus relied on the marking showed a high characteristic feature in their
dream.
For all experiments we use basic contracting-expanding architectures with
3×3 convolutions, max-pooling or up-convolution every 2 convolution layers
and number of ﬁlters doubling at each level, trained with an Adam optimizeruntil convergence.
3.1 DeepDream Sensitivity and Segmentation Performance
In order to get a setting where the actual sensitivity to a feature is known, we ran
the following experiment: For catand dogclasses from the COCO database [ 12],
each image is augmented with a marking with a probability p. We chose a syn-
thetic texture made of 135
◦line segments of random positions and intensities
as the marking. Then, for diﬀerent values of p, we train several networks Gpto
segment cats and dogs on this training dataset.
A simple, intuitive way to assess the robustness of a network with respect
to the marking is then to compute its score on a test dataset with no marking.
Given the score of G0as the baseline, a similar score indicates that a network is
robust to the marking.
We assess the presence of the marking in any DeepDream generated as
described in Sect. 2.2by computing the maximum response of the convolution of
the dream with a 135◦line segment. We call this feature the characteristic fea-
tureof the marking. Starting from the same realization of white noise, we then
compute the characteristic feature at each optimization step, for all networks
Gp. Results are illustrated in Fig. 4.
Networks reaching a Dice score close to the baseline ( p≤20%) did not see
the characteristic feature evolve during DeepDream, in contrast to those which
relied on the marking ( p≥90%). This shows that we are able to correctly assess
the sensitivity of a network to a particular feature by analyzing its DeepDreams.