Interpretability of Segmentation Networks by Analyzing DeepDreams 59
Fig. 3. Diﬀerent steps of gradient ascent performed on a CT slice showing a healthy
liver, with a network trained to segment liver tumors from CT slices. The top row
shows the image being “DeepDreamed”, while the bottom row shows the output of thenetwork (high probabilities of a pixel being part of a tumor are white, low probabilities
are black). The red cross on the leftmost image shows the pixel maximized by gradient
ascent. We observe that a responding area appears during the procedure. (Color ﬁgureonline)
This procedure, derived from activation maximization also known as Deep-
Dream, has been shown to work on many classiﬁcation network architectures
[13,17,19,20] and we found that it was easily applicable on several segmentation
architectures. Figure 3shows how the image and segmentation mask respond to
the activation maximization.
Although any kind of features can be used, we chose to use radiomic features
as they are speciﬁcally designed to characterize segmented tissues in medical
images [ 2,9,21], and have shown to capture enough information for Computer-
Aided Diagnosis [ 3,9].
Our DeepDream analysis consists in computing a set of features fk(Xj,Mj)
at each step jof the DeepDream path. As activation maximization produces
small changes in input but decisive changes in output, we expect the featuresto be tweaked according to the sensitivity of the network to those features.
To interpret the evolution of feature values observed during the DeepDream
analysis, we normalize a particular feature with respect to the distribution of
this feature computed on the validation dataset used during training.
3 Experiments
We conduct three experiments to assess the potential of a DeepDream analysis tointerpret a segmentation network. We show that the sensitivity computed from
the DeepDream analysis is associated with the performance of the network, as
expected (Sect. 3.1). The second experiment shows how our method highlights
the diﬀerence of sensitivities between networks trained on diﬀerent databases