Interpretability of Segmentation Networks by Analyzing DeepDreams 57
the activation in the input space [ 13,17,19,20]. These visualizations are insight-
ful when the network is trained on natural images, as they generate naturalstructures and appearances, but they are harder to interpret on medical images.
Fig. 1. Illustration of the method with a 2-dimensional classiﬁer. Left: input space, ⊕
and/circleminusare resp. positive and negative samples; the classiﬁcation function is the grey
line; the data is described by features f1(green arrow) and f2(orthogonal to f1).
Middle: features space; features are normalized w.r.t. the set of positive samples. Leftand middle: the path of steepest slope (or DeepDream path ) is represented as a dotted
arrow. Right: projection of this path on f
1and f2(DeepDream analysis). (Color ﬁgure
online)
The method in [ 10] is closer to our motivation, i.e.to analyze the inﬂuence
of human-understandable features on the output of a network. Using abstract
concepts deﬁned by sets of example images is appealing, especially for complex
concepts that would be diﬃcult to model. But this transfers the burden to thecreation of concept-labelled databases, which can be challenging in medical imag-
ing. On the other hand, image domain features such as radiomic features can be
used to directly evaluate relevant concepts in medical images when a segmenta-tion mask is available, and seems therefore well suited to the interpretation of
segmentation networks.
We detail our method in Sect. 2, starting by giving an intuitive deﬁnition of
what the sensitivity and robustness to a feature might be for a network. Then we
describe our method based on activation maximization to highlight features that
the network is sensitive to (Sect. 2.2). We show in a controlled setting that the
method correctly assesses the robustness of a network to a speciﬁc feature. Other
experiments show how we can get insights about what a network has learnedusing our method (Sect. 3).
2M e t h o d
2.1 Overview
Segmentation networks achieve state-of-the-art performance on most segmenta-
tion tasks. They can extract complex features at multiple scales and successfully
perform challenging segmentation tasks where modeling approaches using hand-
crafted features would have failed. To interpret this complex decision function,
we want to determine how sensitive orrobust a neural network is to a set of