Towards Interpretability of Segmentation
Networks by Analyzing DeepDreams
Vincent Couteaux1,2(B), Olivier Nempont2, Guillaume Pizaine2,
and Isabelle Bloch1
1LTCI, T´ el´ecom Paris, Institut polytechnique de Paris, Paris, France
vincent.couteaux@telecom-paristech.fr
2Philips Research Paris, Suresnes, France
Abstract. Interpretability of a neural network can be expressed as the
identiﬁcation of patterns or features to which the network can be either
sensitive or indiﬀerent. To this aim, a method inspired by DeepDream is
proposed, where the activation of a neuron is maximized by performinggradient ascent on an input image. The method outputs curves that
show the evolution of features during the maximization. A controlled
experiment shows how it enables to assess the robustness to a givenfeature, or by contrast its sensitivity. The method is illustrated on the
task of segmenting tumors in liver CT images.
Keywords: Interpretability
·Deep Learning ·DeepDream ·
Segmentation ·Liver CT images
1 Introduction
Interpretability of deep neural networks is becoming more and more crucial as
deep learning algorithms perform critical tasks such as driving a car or assist-
ing a physician in establishing a diagnosis. In this work we are interested ininterpreting segmentation networks by appraising their sensitivity to high-level
features. Indeed, segmenting anatomical structures in medical images is one of
the tasks that hugely beneﬁted from Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs),to the point that this framework is now state-of-the-art in most segmentation
tasks [ 5,6,8].
Research on interpretable Deep Learning has been very active for a few years
now. Thorough reviews [ 1,7] extensively describe the ﬁeld, among which so-called
saliency methods are especially popular [ 4,14,16,17]. The understanding of
these methods has grown recently, with some works examining their limitations
[11,18]. More generally, saliency methods address the problem of feature attribu-
tionwhich, in the case of a segmentation network, boils down to pixel attribution
and is thus of limited value.
Another class of interpretability methods consists in visualizing patterns that
activate a particular neuron in the network. Most of them consist in maximizing
c/circlecopyrtSpringer Nature Switzerland AG 2019
K. Suzuki et al. (Eds.): ML-CDS 2019/IMIMIC 2019, LNCS 11797, pp. 56–63, 2019.https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-33850-3
_7