58 V. Couteaux et al.
Fig. 2. Representation of an iteration as described in Sect. 2.2: the current image is
forwarded in a segmentation CNN. We retrieve the output map and the gradient w.r.t.an arbitrary neuron activation from the output map. We compute the features from
the image and segmentation mask and update the image following the gradient for the
next iteration.
high-level features {fk}1≤k≤K, such as the size of the object, statistics on its
intensity distribution or its shape.
We consider that a network is sensitive to a feature fkif its alteration
impacts the network decision. Conversely, we say that the network is robust
- or indiﬀerent - to a feature if it is not sensitive to it. However a feature of anobject cannot in general be modiﬁed without modifying others characteristics,
therefore such properties cannot be directly evaluated. Starting from a baseline
producing a negative response, we can ﬁnd a minimal alteration that producesa positive response by following the path of steepest slope in the input space
(the arrow in Fig. 1), using the network gradients. This procedure is similar to
activation maximization, also known as DeepDream [15]. If the features f
kare
smooth functions, we can assume that the path of steepest slope in the input
space will favor features to which the network is the most sensitive.
In Fig. 1we provide a schematic view of this process in two dimensions.
Intuitively, a network should be indiﬀerent to a feature that is useless (here f2)
for characterizing an object, and sensitive to a feature that is essential (here f1).
2.2 Algorithm
Being given a trained binary segmentation network Sof any architecture, we
compute the DeepDream analysis with an iterative algorithm, illustrated in
Fig.2. It starts from an image X0with no foreground (an image with no lesion
in the case of lesion segmentation for instance), and pick a neuron iwe want to
maximize. At each iteration jand until convergence:
– We forward the image Xjthrough the network and retrieve the segmentation
mask Mj=S(Xj), as well the gradient of the neuron activation∂i
∂X.
– We update the image for the next iteration Xj+1=Xj+α∂i
∂X.
– We compute features fk(Xj,Mj).
The output is a plot of the curves j→fk(Xj,Mj). These curves can be inter-
preted to assess the sensitivity of the network to those features.