Interpretability of Segmentation Networks by Analyzing DeepDreams 61
Fig. 5. DeepDream analysis of 3 networks trained on diﬀerent datasets. (a) Root mean
squared intensity along the DeepDream Path. (b) Maximum diameter of the dreamed
tumor. (c) Elongation (1 means round, and 0 means elongated in the standard deﬁnition
of elgontation in radiomics.)
3.2 Sensitivity to Intensity and Shape Features
In the LiTS database1, tumors appear as hypointense areas in the liver
parenchyma. In this experiment we compare a network trained on real tumorsto a network trained on synthetic tumors, to test how our method highlights the
diﬀerences of two networks trained on seemingly similar tasks.
We generate synthetic tumors by lowering the intensities in random areas of
healthy livers. The DeepDream analysis shows that the network trained on real
tumors is more sensitive to low intensities in the liver (Fig. 5a) than the network
trained on synthetic tumors. This indicates that the synthetic network focuseson other features than the intensity.
To determine if the DeepDream analysis is also able to assess the sensitiv-
ity to shape features, we train a network to segment only synthetic elongatedtumors, as opposed to the overall round shape of real tumors, as observed in
clinical environments. We observe that the network trained on elongated tumors
is indeed more sensitive to elongation (Fig. 5c).
3.3 Analysis of a Tumor Segmentation Network
To illustrate how one can use DeepDream analysis with radiomic features, we
analyze a network trained to segment liver tumors in CT scans. We visualize
the evolution of 6 relevant radiomic features, normalized so that 0 is the mean
value of the feature computed on the validation dataset, and 1 is one standarddeviation above the mean (Fig. 6).
The values of intensity and sphericity quickly evolve towards the normal
range, indicating that the network is sensitive to both features. By contrast, theGrey-Level Co-occurrence Matrix (GLCM) Contrast, a texture feature that mea-
sures intensity disparity among neighboring pixels, as well as the entropy of the
intensities distribution, stay below the normal range, indicating that the network
is robust to heterogeneity. This is coherent with our intuition that the network
should react to ﬂat hypointense areas in the liver, without signiﬁcant texture
1https://competitions.codalab.org/competitions/17094 .