Page 4 of 9 Amann et al. BMC Med Inform Decis Mak          (2020) 20:310 
decision support, the underlying processes and algo -
rithms have therefore to be explained to the individual 
patient. Just like in the case of obtaining consent for 
undergoing an MR imaging procedure, the patient might 
not necessarily need to know every detail but certainly 
has to be informed about core principles, and especially 
the risks. Yet, contrary to an MR imaging procedure, 
physicians are unable to provide this type of information 
for an opaque CDSS. What physicians should at least be 
able to provide are explanations around two principles: 
(1) the agent view of AI, i.e. what it takes as input; what it 
does with the environment; and what it produces as out -
put, and (2) explaining the training of the mapping which 
produces the output by letting it learn from examples—
which encompasses unsupervised, supervised, and rein -
forcement learning. Yet, it is important to note that for 
AI-based CDSS the extent of the information is a priori 
highly difficult to define, has to be adjusted to the respec -
tive use case, and will certainly need clarification from 
the legislative bodies. For this, a framework for defining 
the "right" level of explainability, as Beaudouin et al. put it 
[15], should be developed. Clearly, this also raises impor -
tant questions about the role and tasks of physicians, 
underscoring the need for tailored training and profes -
sional development in the area of medical AI.
With regard to certification and approval as medical 
devices, the respective bodies have been slow to intro -
duce requirements for explainable AI and its implica -
tions on the development and marketing of products. In 
a recent discussion paper, the FDA facilitates in its total 
product lifecycle approach (TPLC) the constant develop -
ment and improvement of AI-based medical products. 
Explainability is not mentioned but an “ Appropriate level 
of transparency (clarity) of the output and the algorithm 
aimed at users” is required [16]. This is mainly aimed at 
the functions of the software and its modifications over 
time. The MDR does not specifically regulate the need 
for explainability with regard to medical devices that use 
artificial intelligence and machine learning in particu -
lar. However, also here, the need for accountability and 
transparency are set and the evolution of xAI might lead 
the legislative and the notified bodies to change the regu -
lations and their interpretation accordingly.
In conclusion, both FDA and MDR are currently rather 
vaguely requiring explainability, i.e. information for 
traceability, transparency, and explainability of develop -
ment of ML/DL models that inform medical treatment. 
Most certainly, these requirements will be defined more 
precisely in the future mandating producers of AI-based 
medical devices/software to provide insight into the 
training and testing of the models, the data, and the over -
all development processes. We would also like to men -
tion that there is a current debate on whether the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) in the European 
Union requires the use of explainable AI in tools work -
ing with patient data [17, 18]. Also here, it cannot be 
ruled out that the currently ambiguous phrasings will be 
amended in favor of one that promotes explainability in 
the future.
Finally, the question arises, to what extent the patient 
has to be made aware that treatment decisions such as 
those derived by a clinical decision support system might 
rely on AI and the legal and litigation question if the phy -
sician adhered to the recommendation or overruled the 
machine. For the US, as Cohen laid out, there is currently 
no clear-cut answer to what extent the integration of ML/
DL into clinical decision-making has to be disclosed with 
regard to liability [14]. Hacker et al. argue that legally it 
is likely that explainability will be a prerequisite from a 
contract and tort law perspective where doctors may 
have to use a certain tool to avoid the threat of a medical 
malpractice lawsuit [17]. The final answer to this lies with 
the courts, however, and will be given rather sooner than 
later as an increasing number of AI-based systems will be 
in use.
Taken together, the legal implications of introducing AI 
technologies into health care are significant and the con -
stant conflict between innovation and regulation needs 
careful orchestration. Potentially life-saving just as new 
cancer medication or antibiotics, AI-based decision sup -
port needs guidelines and legal crash barriers to avoid 
existential infringement on patients’ rights and auton -
omy. Explainability is an essential quality in this context 
and we would argue that performance is only sufficient 
in cases, where it is not possible to provide explainability. 
Overall, there is a strong need for explainability in legal 
aspects and opening the black box has become essential 
and will prove to be the watershed moment for the appli -
cation of AI in medicine.
The medical perspective
From the medical perspective, the first consideration is 
what distinguishes AI-based clinical decision support 
from established diagnostic tools, such as advanced labo -
ratory testing for example? Especially as they do exhibit 
considerable overlaps: Both can provide results used for 
CDSSs, for both performance is a key issue, and their 
results are documentable. We also understand the inner 
working of laboratory testing, as it is often the case with 
other diagnostic tests, such as imaging, so they would not 
be regarded as black box methods. On the other hand, 
for these methods we cannot explain the result of any 
individual test. This makes it evident that from a medical 
perspective, we need to distinguish two levels of explain -
ability. First level explainability allows us to under -
stand how the system arrives at conclusions in general.