Page 8 of 9 Amann et al. BMC Med Inform Decis Mak          (2020) 20:310 
however, violate this principle. Recently, for example, 
Obermeyer et  al. reported on a medical AI system dis -
criminating against people of color [5]. Explainability can 
support developers and clinicians to detect and correct 
such biases—a major potential source for injustice—ide -
ally at the early stage of AI development and validation, 
e.g. by identification of important features indicating 
a bias in the model. However, for explainability to ful -
fill this purpose, the relevant stakeholder groups must 
be sensitized to the risk of bias and its potential conse -
quences for individuals’ health and wellbeing. At times, 
it might be tempting to prioritize accuracy and simply 
refrain from investing resources into developing explain -
able AI. Yet to ensure that AI-powered decision support 
systems realize their potential, developers, and clinicians 
need to be attentive to the potential flaws and limitations 
of these new tools. Thus, also from the justice perspec -
tive, explainability becomes an ethical prerequisite for 
the development and application of AI-based clinical 
decision support.
Conclusion
In this paper, we explored the role of explainable AI in 
clinical decision support systems from the technological, 
legal, medical, and patient perspectives. In doing so, we 
have shown that explainability is a multifaceted concept 
that has far-reaching implications for the various stake -
holder groups involved. Medical AI poses challenges to 
developers, medical professionals, and legislators as it 
requires a reconsideration of roles and responsibilities. 
Based on our analysis, we consider explainability a neces -
sary requirement to address these challenges in a sustain -
able manner that is compatible with professional norms 
and values.
Notably, a move towards opaque algorithms in CDSS 
may inadvertently lead to a revival of paternalistic con -
cepts of care that relegate patients to passive spectators 
in the medical decision-making process. It might also 
bring forward a new type of medicine where physicians 
become slaves to the tool’s output to avoid legal and 
medical repercussions. And, last but not least, opaque 
systems might provoke a faulty allocation of resources 
violating their just distribution. In this paper, we have 
argued that explainability can help to ensure that patients 
remain at the center of care and that together with clini -
cians they can make informed and autonomous decisions 
about their health. Moreover, explainability can promote 
the just distribution of available resources.
We conclude that omitting explainability in clinical 
decision support systems poses a threat to core ethi -
cal values in medicine and may have detrimental con -
sequences for individual and public health. Further 
work is needed to sensitize developers, healthcare professionals, and legislators to the challenges and 
limitations of opaque algorithms in medical AI and to 
foster multidisciplinary collaboration to tackle these 
challenges with joined forces.
Abbreviations
AI: Artificial intelligence; ANN: Artificial neural network; CDSS: Clinical decision 
support system; FDA: Food and Drug Administration; GDPR: General Data Pro -
tection Regulation; ICU: Intensive care unit; MDR: Medical Device Regulation; 
TPLC: Total product lifecycle approach.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Dr. Nora A. Tahy for review of the manuscript.
Authors’ contributions
JA: Conceptualization; analysis, writing—original draft; writing—review and 
editing. AB: analysis; writing—original draft; writing—review and editing. EV: 
analysis; writing—original draft; writing—review and editing. DF: analysis; 
writing—original draft; writing—review and editing. VIM: conceptualization; 
analysis, writing—original draft; Writing—review and editing. All authors read 
and approved the final manuscript.
Funding
This research has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 
research and innovation programme under grant agreement No. 777107 
(PRECISE4Q). The funding body had no role in the study design, the collection, 
analysis, and interpretation of the data nor the preparation of the manuscript.
Availability of data and materials
Not applicable.
Ethics approval and consent to participate
Not applicable.
Consent for publication
Not applicable.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Author details
1 Health Ethics and Policy Lab, Department of Health Sciences and Technol-
ogy, ETH Zurich, Hottingerstrasse 10, 8092 Zurich, Switzerland. 2 Charité Lab 
for Artificial Intelligence in Medicine—CLAIM, Charité - Universitätsmedizin 
Berlin, Berlin, Germany. 3 School of Computing and Digital Technology, Faculty 
of Computing, Engineering and the Built Environment, Birmingham City 
University, Birmingham, UK. 
Received: 22 July 2020   Accepted: 15 November 2020
References
 1. Higgins D, Madai VI. From bit to bedside: a practical framework for 
artificial intelligence product development in healthcare. Adv Intell 
Syst. 2020;2:2000052.
 2. Rudin C. Stop explaining black box machine learning models for high 
stakes decisions and use interpretable models instead. Nat Mach Intell. 
2019;1:206–15.
 3. Doran D, Schulz S, Besold TR. What does explainable AI really mean? 
A new conceptualization of perspectives. ArXiv171000794 Cs. 2017. 
http://arxiv  .org/abs/1710.00794 . Accessed 3 Sept 2019.
 4. Shortliffe EH, Sepúlveda MJ. Clinical decision support in the era of 
artificial intelligence. JAMA. 2018;320:2199–200.