Page 5 of 9
 Amann et al. BMC Med Inform Decis Mak          (2020) 20:310 
 
In analogy to laboratory testing, where we know which 
biological and biochemical reactions lead to the results, 
we can provide feature importance rankings that explain 
which inputs are important for the AI-based CDSSs. 
Second level explainability allows us to identify which 
features were important for an individual prediction. 
Individual predictions can be safe-checked for patterns 
that might indicate a false prediction, e.g. in case of unu -
sual feature distribution in an out-of-sample case. This 
second level explainability will regularly be available for 
AI-based CDSS but not for other diagnostic tests. This 
also has implications for the presentation of explainabil -
ity results to doctors (and patients). Depending on the 
clinical use case and the risk attributed to that particu -
lar use case, first level explanations might be sufficient, 
whereas other use cases will regularly require second 
level explanations to safe-guard patients.
To date, clinical validation is currently the first widely 
discussed requirement for a medical AI system. Explain -
ability is often only considered on second thought. The 
reason for this seems obvious: Medical AI systems and 
especially CDSSs, whether AI-powered or not, have to 
undergo a rigorous validation process to meet regulatory 
standards and achieve medical certification [1]. Once 
this process is completed successfully, there is proof 
that the system can perform in the highly heterogene -
ous real-world clinical setting. Here, it is important to 
understand how clinical validation is measured. A com -
mon performance indicator is prediction performance, 
often referred to as prediction accuracy. Different meas -
ures exist for prediction accuracy, tailored to certain use-
cases, but their common characteristic is that they reflect 
the prediction quality and thus general clinical usefulness 
of a model. Thus, one of the main goals of model devel -
opment is to increase prediction performance and pro -
vide low error rates. And, indeed, AI-powered systems 
have been shown to produce overall lower error rates 
than traditional methods [19–21].
Despite all efforts, however, AI systems cannot provide 
perfect accuracy owing to different sources of error. For 
one, because of naturally imperfect datasets in medi -
cine (e.g. due to noise or recording errors), it is basically 
impossible to develop a model without any  errors. These 
errors are random errors. Thus, there will always be cer -
tain cases of false positive and false negative predictions. 
For another, a particularly important source of error is 
AI bias. AI bias leads to systematic errors, a systematic 
deviation from the expected prediction behavior of the 
AI tool. Ideally, the data used for training fully repre -
sent the population in which the AI tool is later applied. 
A major goal of AI in healthcare product development is 
to approximate this ideal state via thorough clinical vali -
dation and development on heterogeneous data sources [1]. While this ensures that AI bias can be reduced to a 
minimum, it will still be almost impossible to generate 
AI tools without any  trace of bias. If bias is present, then 
there will be prediction errors in patients not represent -
ing the training sample. Taken together, both random 
and systematic sum up to the total number of errors that 
physicians and patients will encounter in the clinical set -
ting, even when a fully validated high-performing AI sys -
tem is used.
This is why, from a medical point-of-view, not only 
clinical validation but also explainability plays an instru -
mental role in the clinical setting. Explainability enables 
the resolution of disagreement between an AI system 
and human experts, no matter on whose side the error 
in judgment is situated. It should be noted that this will 
succeed mostly in cases of systematic error, of AI bias, 
rather than in cases of random error. Random errors are 
much harder to identify and will likely go unnoticed in 
case of agreement between the tool and the physician 
or will lead to situations of disagreement between the 
tool and the physician. This situation is discussed in the 
ethical considerations section. Explainability results are 
usually represented visually or through natural language 
explanations. Both show the clinicians how different fac -
tors contributed to the final recommendation. In other 
words, explainability can assist clinicians in evaluating 
the recommendations provided by a system based on 
their experience and clinical judgment. This allows them 
to make an informed decision whether or not to rely on 
the system’s recommendations and can, consequently, 
strengthen their trust in the system. Particularly in 
cases where the CDSS produces recommendations that 
are strongly out of line with a clinician’s expectations, 
explainability allows verification whether the param -
eters taken into account by the system make sense from 
a clinical point-of-view. By laying open the inner work -
ings of the CDSS, explainability can, thus, assist clinicians 
in identifying false positives and false negatives more 
easily. As clinicians identify instances in which the sys -
tem performs poorly, they can report these cases back 
to developers to foster quality assurance and product 
improvement. Given these considerations, explainability 
may be a key driver for the uptake of AI-driven CDSS in 
clinical practice, as trust in these systems is not yet estab -
lished [22, 23]. Here, it is important to note that any use 
of AI-based CDSS may influence a physician in reaching 
a decision. It will, therefore, be of critical importance to 
establish transparent documentation on how recommen -
dations were derived.
The patient perspective
Looking at the issue of explainability from the patient 
perspective raises the question of whether the use of