Page 7 of 9
 Amann et al. BMC Med Inform Decis Mak          (2020) 20:310 
 
but full autonomy can only be achieved if the patient is 
presented with a range of meaningful options to choose 
from [40]. In this respect, patients’ opportunities to 
exert their autonomy regarding medical procedures get 
reduced as opaque AI becomes more central to medical 
decision making. In particular, the challenge that arises 
with opaque CDSS is that it remains unclear whether 
and how patient values and preferences are accounted 
for by the model. This state of affairs could be addressed 
by means of “value-flexible” AI that provides differ -
ent options for the patient [41]. We further argue that 
explainability is a necessary step towards value-flexible 
AI. The patient needs to be able to understand which 
variables play an important role in the inner workings of 
the AI system to determine—with the aid of the doctor—
whether the goals and weighting of the AI system align 
with their values or not. For example, AI systems primed 
for “survival” as the outcome might not be aligned with 
the value of patients for whom a “reduction of suffering” 
is more important [41]. Lastly, when a choice is made, 
patients need to be able to trust an AI system to decide 
with confidence and autonomy to follow its guidance 
[42]. This is not possible when the AI model is opaque. 
Therefore, explainability is—both from the physician’s 
and patient’s point-of-view—an ethical prerequisite for 
systems supporting critical medical decision making.
While the principles of beneficence and non-malefi -
cence are related, they nonetheless shed light on different 
aspects, also with regards to explainability. Beneficence 
urges physicians to maximize patient benefits. When 
applying AI-based systems, physicians are thus expected 
to use the tools in a manner that promotes the opti -
mal outcome for the respective patient. Yet, to provide 
patients with the most appropriate options to promote 
their health and wellbeing, physicians need to be able 
to use the full capabilities of the system. This implies 
that physicians have knowledge of the system beyond a 
robotic application in a certain clinical use case, allow -
ing them to reflect on the system’s output. For physicians, 
explainability in the form of visualizations or natural lan -
guage explanations enables confident clinical decisions 
instead of having to simply trust an automated output. 
They can critically assess the system-derived outcomes 
and make their own judgments whether the results seem 
trustworthy or not. This allows them to adapt predic -
tions and recommendations to individual circumstances 
where necessary. As such, clinicians can not only reduce 
the risk of eliciting false hope or creating false despair 
but can also flag potentially inappropriate interven -
tions using their clinical judgment [43]. This is especially 
important when we imagine a situation where a physi -
cian and an AI system are in disagreement, a situation 
that is not easily resolved [42]. Fundamentally, this is a question of epistemic authority, and it is unclear how 
physicians should decide whether they can trust the epis -
temic authority of a black box model enough to defer to 
its decision [42]. Grote et al. [42] argue that in the case 
of opaque AI there is not enough epistemic support for 
deference. Moreover, they further argue that confronted 
with a black-box system, clinical decision support might 
not enhance the capabilities of physicians, but rather 
limit them. Here, physicians might be forced into “defen -
sive medicine” where they dogmatically follow the out -
put of the machine to avoid being questioned or held 
accountable [42]. Such a situation would cause a serious 
threat to physician autonomy. Additionally, physicians 
will rarely have the time to perform an in-depth analysis 
of why their clinical judgement is in disagreement with 
the AI system. Thus, looking merely at a performance 
output is not sufficient in the clinical context. The opti -
mal outcome for all patients can only be expected with 
healthcare staff that can make informed decisions when 
to apply an AI-powered CDSS and how to interpret its 
results. It is thus hard to imagine how beneficence in the 
context of medical AI can be fulfilled with any “black 
box” application.
The need for explainability is also evident when assess -
ing the principle of non-maleficence in the context of 
medical AI. Non-maleficence states that physicians have 
a fundamental duty not to harm their patients either 
intentionally or through excessive or inappropriate use of 
medical means. Why is performance not enough? It has 
been argued that a black box medical AI-based only on 
validated maximized performance is ethically justifiable 
even if the causal mechanisms behind a given AI-pre -
scribed intervention remain opaque to the clinician [44]. 
Reliance on anecdotal or purely experiential evidence 
about the efficacy of a given treatment is indeed still quite 
common in medicine. Yet this is no excuse to forego 
explanations as a major requirement of sound clinical 
judgment when such an explanation is indeed possible. 
Recent progress in elucidating at least the principal fea -
tures of AI models, while not providing full mechanistic 
explanations of AI-decisions, create a prima facie ethical 
obligation to reduce opacity and increase the interpret -
ability of medical AI. Failure to do so would mean inten -
tionally undermining a physician’s capacity to control 
for possible misclassifications of individual clinical cases 
due, for instance, to excessive bias or variance in train -
ing datasets. We thus conclude that also with regards to 
beneficence and non-maleficence, explainability is a nec -
essary characteristic of clinically applied AI systems.
The principle of justice postulates that people should 
have equal access to the benefits of medical progress 
without ethically unjustified discrimination of any par -
ticular individuals or social group [36]. Some AI systems,