Page 3 of 9
 Amann et al. BMC Med Inform Decis Mak          (2020) 20:310 
 
explaining machine learning models. Additionally, while 
we can make the qualitative assessment that inherent 
explainability is likely better than approximated explaina -
bility, there exist only exploratory initial attempts to rank 
explainability methods quantitatively [8]. Notwithstand -
ing, for many applications—and generally in AI product 
development—there is a de facto preference for modern 
algorithms such as ANNs. Additionally, it cannot be ruled 
out that for some applications such modern methods do 
exhibit actual higher performance. This necessitates to 
critically assess explainability methods further, both with 
regards to technical development, e.g. for methods rank -
ing and optimization of methods for certain inputs, and 
with regards to the role of explainability from a multiple 
stakeholder view as done in the current work.
From the development point-of-view, explainability 
will regularly be helpful for developers to sanity check 
their AI models beyond mere performance. For exam -
ple, it is highly beneficial to rule out that the prediction 
performance is based on meta-data rather than the data 
itself. A famous non-medical example was the classifica -
tion task to discern between huskies and wolves, where 
the prediction was solely driven by the identification of a 
snowy background rather than real differences between 
huskies and wolves [9]. This phenomenon is also called 
a “Clever Hans” phenomenon [10]. Clever Hans phe -
nomena are also found in medicine. An example is the 
model developed by researchers from Mount Sinai hos -
pital which performed very well in distinguishing high-
risk patients from non-high-risk patients based on x-ray 
imaging. However, when the tool was applied outside of 
Mount Sinai, the performance plummeted. As it turned 
out the AI model did not learn clinically relevant infor -
mation from the images. In analogy to the snowy back -
ground in the example introduced above, the prediction 
was based on hardware related meta-data tied to the 
specific x-ray machine that was used to image the high-
risk ICU patients exclusively at Mount Sinai [11]. Thus, 
the system was able to distinguish only which machine 
was used for imaging and not the risk of the patients. 
Explainability methods allow developers to identify these 
types of errors before AI tools go into clinical validation 
and the certification process, as the Clever Hans predic -
tors (snowy background, hardware information) would 
be identified as prediction relevant by the explainability 
methods rather than meaningful features from a domain 
perspective. This saves time and development costs. It 
should be noted that explainability methods aimed at 
developers to provide insight into their models have 
different prerequisites than systems aimed at techno -
logically unsavvy end-users such as clinical doctors and 
patients. For developers, these methods can be more 
complex in their approach and visualization.The legal perspective
From the legal perspective, the question arises if and, if 
yes, to what extent explainability in AI is legally required. 
Taking the cue from other fields such as public adminis -
tration, transparency and traceability have to meet even 
higher standards when it comes to health care and the 
individual patient [12]. As shown above, artificial intel -
ligence approaches such as machine learning and deep 
learning have the potential to significantly advance the 
quality of health care. Identifying patterns in diagnos -
tics, anomaly detection and, in the end, providing deci -
sion support are already changing standards of care and 
clinical practice. To fully exploit these opportunities for 
improving patients’ outcomes and saving lives by advanc -
ing detection, prevention, and treatment of diseases, 
the sensitive issues of data privacy and security, patient 
consent, and autonomy have to be fully considered. This 
means that from a legal perspective, data—its acquisi -
tion, storage, transfer, processing, and analysis—will 
have to comply with all laws, regulations and further 
legal requirements. In addition, the law and its inter -
pretation and implementation have to constantly adapt 
to the evolving state-of-the-art in technology [13]. Even 
when fulfilling all of these rather obvious requirements 
the question remains if the application of AI-driven solu -
tions and tools demand explainability. In other words, do 
doctors and patients need information not only about the 
results that are provided but also about the characteris -
tics and features these results are based upon, and the 
respective underlying assumptions. And, might the nec -
essary inclusion of other stakeholders require an under -
standing and explainability of algorithms and models.
From a Western legal point-of-view, we identified three 
core fields for explainability: (1) Informed consent, (2) 
Certification and approval as medical devices (acc. to 
Food and Drug Administration/FDA and Medical Device 
Regulation/MDR) and (3) Liability.
Personal health data may be only processed by law 
after the individual consents to its use. In the absence 
of general laws facilitating the use of personal data and 
information, this informed consent is the standard for 
today’s use of patient data in AI applications [14]. This 
is particularly challenging since the consent has to be 
specified in advance, i.e. the purpose of the given project 
and its aims have to be outlined. The natural advantage 
of AI is that it does not necessitate pre-selection of fea -
tures and can identify novel patterns or find new bio -
markers. If restricted to specific purposes—as required 
for informed consent—this unique advantage might not 
be fully exploitable. For obtaining informed consent for 
diagnostic procedures or interventions the law requires 
individual and comprehensive information about and 
understanding of these processes. In the case of AI-based