Page 6 of 9 Amann et al. BMC Med Inform Decis Mak          (2020) 20:310 
AI-powered decision aids is compatible with the inher -
ent values of patient-centered care. Patient-centered 
care aims to be responsive to and respectful of individ -
ual patients’ values and needs [24]. It considers patients 
as active partners in the care process, emphasizing their 
right to choice and control over medical decisions. A key 
component of patient-centered care is shared decision-
making aimed at identifying the treatment best suited to 
the individual patients’ situation [25, 26]. It involves an 
open conversation between the patient and the clinician, 
where the clinician informs the patient about the poten -
tial risks and benefits of available courses of action and 
the patient discusses their values and priorities [27, 28].
Several evidence-based tools have been developed 
to facilitate shared decision-making, among them, so-
called conversation aids [29]. Unlike patient decision aids 
(which are used by the patient in preparation prior to the 
clinical encounter), conversation aids are designed for 
use within the clinical encounter to guide the patient and 
clinician through the shared decision-making process 
[28, 30]. They incorporate established medical facts about 
their conditions and, by synthesizing available informa -
tion, they can help patients to understand their individual 
risks and outcomes, to explore the available options, and 
to determine which course of action best fits their goals 
and priorities [30–32]. So, what if individual risk was not 
calculated using established risk prediction models but 
instead relied on a validated, yet not explainable, data-
driven approach? Would it make a difference from the 
patient’s perspective? Seeking to address these questions, 
it was recently argued that so-called ‘black-box medicine’ 
conflicts with core ideals of patient-centered medicine 
[33]. Since clinicians are no longer able to fully compre -
hend the inner workings and calculations of the decision 
aid they are not able to explain to the patient how certain 
outcomes or recommendations were derived [33].
Explainability can address this issue by providing cli -
nicians and patients with a personalized conversation 
aid that is based on the patient’s individual characteris -
tics and risk factors. By simulating the impact of differ -
ent treatment or lifestyle interventions, an explainable AI 
decision aid could help to raise patients’ choice aware -
ness and support clinicians in eliciting patient values and 
preferences [34]. As described previously, explainabil -
ity provides a visual representation or natural language 
explanation of how different factors contributed to the 
final risk assessment. Yet, to interpret system-derived 
explanations and probabilities, patients rely on the cli -
nician’s ability to understand and convey these explana -
tions in a way that is accurate and understandable. If used 
appropriately, explainable AI decision support systems 
may not only contribute to patients feeling more knowl -
edgeable and better informed but could also promote more accurate risk perceptions [34, 35]. This may, in turn, 
boost patients’ motivation to engage in shared decision-
making and to act upon risk-relevant information [35].
Ethical implications
With the increasing penetration of AI-powered systems 
in healthcare, there is a necessity to explore the ethi -
cal issues accompanying this imminent paradigm shift. 
A commonly applied and well-fitting ethical frame -
work when assessing biomedical ethical challenges are 
the “Principles of Biomedical Ethics” by Beauchamp 
and Childress [36, 37] introducing four key principles: 
autonomy, beneficence, nonmaleficence, and justice [36]. 
While principlism is not the only available bioethical 
framework, it is a very useful basic practical framework 
with high acceptance both in research and medical set -
tings [36–38]. Thus, in the following, we assess explaina -
bility with regards to the aforementioned four principles.
Concerning autonomy, explainability has implica -
tions for patients and physicians alike [31]. One of the 
major safeguards of patients’ autonomy is represented by 
informed consent, that is an autonomous, generally writ -
ten authorization with which the patient grants a doctor 
his or her permission to perform a given medical act [39]. 
Proper informed consent is premised upon exhaustive 
and understandable information regarding the nature 
and risks of a medical procedure, and lack of undue inter -
ference with the patient’s voluntary decision to undergo 
the procedure. At the moment, an ethical consensus has 
not yet emerged as to whether disclosing the use of an 
opaque medical AI algorithm should be a mandatory 
requirement of informed consent. A failure to disclose 
the use of an opaque AI system may undermine patients’ 
autonomy and negatively impact the doctor-patient rela -
tionship, jeopardizing patients’ trust, and might violate 
the compliance with clinical recommendations. If the 
patient were to find out in hindsight that a clinician’s rec -
ommendation was derived from an opaque AI system, 
this may lead the patient to not only challenge the recom -
mendation but might also lead to a justified request for 
explanation—which in the case of an opaque system, the 
clinician would not be able to provide. Opaque medical 
AI can, therefore, represent an obstacle to the provision 
of accurate information and thus potentially jeopardize 
informed consent. Appropriate ethical and explainabil -
ity standards are therefore important to safeguard the 
autonomy-preserving function of informed consent.
Attention should be paid to the risk that the introduc -
tion of opaque AI into medical decision making may 
foster paternalism by limiting opportunities for patients 
to express their expectations and preferences regarding 
medical procedures [39]. A necessary prerequisite for 
shared decision making is full autonomy of the patient,