Page 2 of 9 Amann et al. BMC Med Inform Decis Mak          (2020) 20:310 
the impact of these developments by improving health -
care and making it more cost-effective [1 ]. In clinical 
practice, AI often comes in the form of clinical deci -
sion support systems (CDSS), assisting clinicians in 
diagnosis of disease and treatment decisions. Where 
conventional CDSS match the characteristics of indi -
vidual patients to an existing knowledge base, AI-based 
CDSSs apply AI models trained on data from patients 
matching the use-case at hand. Yet, despite its unde -
niable potential, AI is not a universal solution. As his -
tory has shown, technological progress always goes 
hand in hand with novel questions and significant chal -
lenges. Some of these challenges are tied to the techni -
cal properties of AI, others relate to the legal, medical, 
and patient perspectives, making it necessary to adopt 
a multidisciplinary perspective.
In this paper, we take such a multidisciplinary view on a 
major medical AI challenge: explainability. In its essence, 
explainability can be understood as a characteristic of an 
AI-driven system allowing a person to reconstruct why 
a certain AI came up with the presented predictions. 
An important point to note here is that explainability 
has many facets and, unfortunately, the terminology of 
explainability is not well defined. Other terms such as 
interpretability and/or transparency are often used syn -
onymously [2, 3]. We thus simply refer to explainability 
or explainable AI throughout the manuscript and add the 
necessary context for understanding.
Explainability is a heavily debated topic with far-
reaching implications that extend beyond the technical 
properties of AI. Even though research indicates that AI 
algorithms can outperform humans in certain analyti -
cal tasks (e.g. pattern recognition in imaging), the lack of 
explainability has been criticized in the medical domain 
[4]. Legal and ethical uncertainties surrounding this 
issue may impede progress and prevent novel technolo -
gies from fulfilling their potential to improve patient and 
population health. Yet, without thorough consideration 
of the role of explainability in medical AI, these technolo -
gies may forgo core ethical and professional principles, 
disregard regulatory issues, and cause considerable harm 
[5].
To contribute to the discourse on explainable AI in 
medicine, this paper seeks to draw attention to the inter -
disciplinary nature of explainability and its implica -
tions for the future of healthcare. In particular, our work 
focuses on the relevance of explainability for CDSS. The 
originality of our work lies in the fact that we look at 
explainability from multiple perspectives that are often 
regarded as independent and separable from each other. 
This paper has two central aims: (1) to provide a compre -
hensive assessment of the role of explainability in CDSS 
for use in clinical practice and; (2) to make an ethical evaluation of what explainability means for the adoption 
of AI-driven tools into clinical practice.
Methods
Taking AI-based CDSS as a case in point, we discuss 
the relevance of explainability for medical AI from the 
technological, legal, medical, and patient perspective. 
To this end, we performed a conceptual analysis of the 
pertinent literature on explainable AI in these domains. 
In our analysis, we aimed to identify aspects relevant to 
determining the necessity and role of explainability for 
each domain, respectively. Drawing on these different 
perspectives, we then conclude by distilling the ethical 
implications of explainability for the future use of AI in 
the healthcare setting. We do the latter by examining 
explainability against the four ethical principles of auton -
omy, beneficence, non-maleficence, and justice.
Results
The technological perspective
From the technological perspective, we will explore two 
issues. First, what explainability methods are and, second, 
where they are applied in medical AI development.
With regards to methodology, explainability can either 
be an inherent characteristic of an algorithm or can be 
approximated by other methods [2]. The latter is highly 
important for methods that have until recently been 
labeled as “black-box models” such as artificial neural 
network (ANN) models. To explain their predictions, 
however, numerous methods exist today [6]. Importantly, 
however, inherent explainability will, in general, be more 
accurate than methods that only approximate explain -
ability [2]. This can be attributed to the complex char -
acteristics of many modern machine learning methods. 
In ANNs, for example, the inner workings of sometimes 
millions of weights between artificial neurons need to be 
interpreted in a way that humans can understand. Thus, 
contrasting methods with inherent explainability have a 
crucial advantage. However, these methods are usually 
also traditional methods, such as linear or logistic regres -
sion. For many use cases, there is an inferiority of these 
traditional methods in performance compared to mod -
ern state-of-the-art methods such as ANNs [7]. Thus, 
there is a trade-off between performance and explainabil -
ity, and this trade-off is a big challenge for the developers 
of clinical decision support systems. It should be noted 
that some assume that this trade-off does not exist in 
reality, but it is a mere artifact of suboptimal modelling 
approaches, as pointed out by Rudin et al. [2]. While the 
work of Rudin et al. is important to raise attention to the 
shortcomings of approximating explainability methods, it 
is likely that some approximating methods, in contrast to 
the notion of [2], have value given the complex nature of