IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL 4
TABLE I
SENSORS COMPARISON
Installation Calibration Power Communications Accuracy Cost Privacy
Beam counter easy easy battery wireless high medium high
Thermal sensor hard medium AC wireless low high high
HPD Camera medium hard PoE Ethernet medium medium medium
PIR Sensor hard easy AC wireless binary medium high
WiFi Data existing existing existing existing existing existing low
Calibration and Positioning: Sensor positioning is another
key factor in our comparison. The thermal camera needs to
be positioned at a certain height range (i.e. 2.2m - 4.4m)
recommended by the manufacturer and close to the entrance
allowing the best coverage to count everyone that passes
underneath. This requirement makes it hard or impossible to
use the thermal camera in very large lecture halls with high
ceilings. Beam counters require to be mounted at around waist-
height (too low causes each leg to get counted separately, and
too high causes the swinging arms to get counted!). Once
an appropriate height is chosen for the beam counters, doors
of all classrooms need to be outﬁtted in the same way. The
HPD camera needs prior conﬁguration for zone of interest
that can vary across rooms depending on the room size and
the place at which the camera is mounted. The PIR sensor is
positioned at the center of the room (on the ceiling) to have
a symmetrical coverage over an area that can also vary across
rooms depending on their seating arrangement.
Power and Communications: Provisioning power was
challenging for the thermal camera and PIR sensor, since the
campus has pre-built and ﬁxed wiring only in certain locations
in each classroom. Therefore our Facilities Management was
required to supply new exterior wiring for these three sensors.
The beam counters are battery powered (with stated battery
life in excess of a year), and the HPD camera required a
special PoE switch that provides Ethernet for both power and
communications. The corresponding gateways for the beam
counter, thermal camera, and PIR sensor were hidden inside
a closet with available power and Ethernet.
Accuracy: We performed several spot measurements in our
lab to extract ground truth on occupancy. We found that the
beam counter is the most accurate among the four techniques.
We note that the beam counter has very good accuracy when
the the door is narrow, like in our lab. However, for a wider
doorway its accuracy is worse, since it does not always
capture individuals walking in/out side-by-side (this became
more evident in our ﬁeld-trial, described in the next section).
We found the accuracy of the thermal camera to be very
sensitive to mounting position and distance from the entrance.
Moreover, since the door of our lab opens inwards, it was not
very conducive for the overhead thermal camera (mounting
it on the outside of the room was not an option as it was a
busy corridor). The HPD camera tended to have a non-zero
absolute count error, which made its relative error high when
the number of people in a room is small (e.g. less than 10)
and low when the number of people is high (e.g. more than
40). We could not test its accuracy scaling to larger counts as
our lab can only accommodate around 40 people. Lastly, the
people count derived from the WiFi access points was wildly
inaccurate, because our lab is adjacent to a busy corridor and
Message Broker
Proprietary DatabaseClassroom A
Classroom BCampus VLANMaster Database
Analytics & Applications
Beam countersSensor GatewayFig. 1. System architecture of classroom occupancy monitoring.
study space that is busy with students during regular hours,
and we could not distinguish who was inside versus outside
the room.
Cost: The beam sensors and PIR sensors are priced in
the range of a few hundreds of dollars, while the cameras
are in excess of a thousand. The beam counter and thermal
camera both need a gateway to send their readings to the
back-end server, and each gateway is priced in at nearly a
thousand dollars. Bear in mind that each gateway can connect
up to 20 sensors (though our deployment described in the next
section maps at most 4-5 sensors to a gateway in large lecture
theaters). The beam counters therefore end up as a more cost-
effective solution than the cameras for large-scale deployment
across campus.
Privacy: Among the four sensing techniques, WiFi clearly
endangers students privacy as their IDs are visible (due to
PEAP authentication their devices perform to connect with
the campus WiFi network). The HPD camera does on-board
processing and does not store or transmit any images of people
(though it is possible to log in to it to view the current image),
and can hence be deemed to preserve privacy. The beam
counter and the thermal camera are truly privacy-preserving,
since they can only sense the number of people passing
through the doorways without sensing any private attributes
of the individuals.
Summary: The trade-offs discussed above are summarized
in Table I. WiFi is not an option as it compromises privacy and
is inaccurate. The cameras are eliminated as being expensive,
difﬁcult to install/position, and poor in accuracy (though
we are considering them for open spaces that do not have
doorways). The PIR sensor has only binary output ( i.e.,0 for
unoccupied and 1 for occupied), and is used for re-calibration
rather than counting. We therefore decided on a larger-scale
deployment of the beam counter, based on its relatively lower
cost, easy deployment, high accuracy, and good protection of
privacy. Our deployment in classrooms is described next.