2327-4662 (c) 2018 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/JIOT.2019.2902410, IEEE Internet of
Things Journal
IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL 10
Quantile MLR Quantile RF Quantile SVMMultiple Regression Random Forest SVR
0.0 0.5 1.0 0.0 0.5 1.0 0.0 0.5 1.00.250.500.751.00
0.250.500.751.00
Predicted attendance (normalized)Actual attendance (normalized)
Fig. 8. Predicted vs. actual attendance for test set in 2017 (i.e., DS2).
bottom plots in Fig. 8) result in more over-predictions than
under-predictions, which is an expected output.
We note that the prediction result is fairly consistent in
cross-validation and testing, indicating that a good prediction
can be obtained if part of the data from one semester/year
are used to predict the attendance for the remainder of the
same semester. A more practical implementation that involves
using historical data to predict future year/semester attendance
is discussed next.
Attendance Prediction for Future Semester: We now
predict the attendance for semester 2, 2018 (i.e., DS3) while
the model was trained by the data from the same semester
but in 2017 (i.e., DS1). Results of all the models are shown
by the last column in Table V. In terms of RMSE, it is seen
that RF achieves the best performance with a value of 0:157
– slightly higher than the result from testing DS2. Looking at
WMAE, quantile RF give the most accurate result with the
error of 0:047 (highlighted in green).
From the predictions vs. actual attendance plot in Fig. 9,
as expected, we observe wider dispersions from the ﬁtted line
compared to the scatter plots in Fig. 8 for the within-semester
attendance prediction. RF and quantile RF (blue dots) show the
lowest deviation from the ﬁtted lines compared to predictions
from linear regression models (red dots) and SVR models
(green dots).
The lower performance in prediction of future-semester
attendance is caused by several factors when changing
year/semester – for example, variations in enrollments from
year to year due to popularity of courses, changes made to the
programs (e.g., a certain course may no longer be considered a
core course while another course may become a core), changes
in lecturing staff, changes in students lifestyle (motivation
for attending classes), and increases in availability (or better
quality) of online lecture recordings. Despite all these factors,
we believe that the future-semester prediction results obtained
from quantile RF (with WMAE of 0:047 and RMSE of 0:217)
Quantile MLR Quantile RF Quantile SVMMultiple Regression Random Forest SVR
0.5 1.0 0.5 1.0 0.5 1.00.250.500.751.00
0.250.500.751.00
Predicted attendance (normalized)Actual attendance (normalized)Fig. 9. Predicted vs. actual attendance for test set in 2018 (i.e., DS3).
is acceptable given the non-trivial variations mentioned above.
VI. O PTIMAL ALLOCATION OF CLASSROOMS
Our empirical results from Section IV highlight the sig-
niﬁcant variations in occupancy on a weekly basis which
leads to under-utilization of classrooms. This presents an
opportunity for campus managers to employ a dynamic al-
location scheme to save cost. In this section, we develop
an optimization formulation to determine the potential cost
savings. Our formulation uses prospective attendance counts
computed from our prediction model (discussed in xV). A
practical implementation could develop a dynamic schedule
for a course using our optimization algorithm, while leaving
some margin for error arising from the prediction algorithm.
We ﬁrst formulate a problem with an objective function
and related constraints. We then apply the optimization to
our dataset and quantify the cost savings versus students
discomfort (due to room overﬂows) when adopting dynamic
classroom allocation in comparison to the traditional ﬁxed
enrollment-based allocation.
A. Problem Formulation
First, let there be Lcourses, each with its own start time,
duration, and the attendance number. Each course is allocated
to one ofRclassrooms available on campus, and each room
has a cost associated with it (proportional to its capacity). The
cost of room jis denoted by Cjwhere 1jR. We
consider our optimization problem over a one-day window
with a total of Sslots – each slot accounts for an hour period.
We deﬁne our variables to be xi;sthat indicates the room
to which the course iis allocated during timeslot s, where
1iLand1sS:
xi;s2f0;1;2;:::::;Rg (3)