2327-4662 (c) 2018 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/JIOT.2019.2902410, IEEE Internet of
Things Journal
IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL 2
(SVR). We employ quantile regression technique, allow-
ing asymmetric penalties for under-prediction and over-
prediction of attendance. Our models are able to predict
attendance in advance with a root-mean-square error
(RMSE) of less than 0.16. We also make our attendance
dataset openly available to the research community.
4) Finally, we develop an optimization algorithm for allocat-
ing classes to rooms based on predicted attendance rather
than static enrollments, and show potential saving of over
10% in room costs.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: xII de-
scribes relevant prior work. We present our lab evaluation
of various sensing methods and their trade-offs in xIII, while
xIV describes our ﬁeld deployment across campus and inter-
esting insights obtained therein. We present our techniques
for predicting classroom attendance in xV. Our optimization
formulation for dynamic classroom allocation is described in
xVI, and the paper is concluded in xVII.
II. R ELATED WORK
Occupancy Counting: Various approaches have been pro-
posed in the literature to measure occupancy. Many studies
utilized special-purpose sensors to infer occupancy level of
a given space – a work in [4] used a network of sensors to
obtain various environmental parameters such as CO2, carbon
monoxide (CO ), total volatile organic compounds (TVOC),
acoustics, motion, temperature, and humidity, to derive occu-
pancy count in an open ofﬁce space using machine learning
techniques. The method achieved an average accuracy of 73%,
however it had only been tested in a space that accommodates
only less than 10 people at a time. Works presented in [5],
[6], [7] have also used indoor environmental sensors in com-
bination with supervised learning methods to infer occupancy
and achieved good accuracy results. Nevertheless, none of
these studies have evaluated their methods in a larger room
scenario where over 100 occupants can be accommodated.
This is important for our case as typical lecture room size
at a university can ranged from less than 100 to nearly 500 in
capacity.
In addition, several studies have used video camera based
approaches for people counting. The methods described in
[8], [9] achieved good accuracy of result, but they rely on
complex image processing algorithms which require signiﬁ-
cant computational resources. The authors in [10] successfully
used image processing and Support Vector Machine (SVM) to
measure classroom occupancy in large rooms with more than
100 occupants. However, their method only produces accurate
results when there is minimal movement in the classroom.
Privacy also remains an issue, especially if images and videos
of people are taken without their explicit consent.
Another approach to deduce occupancy count is to leverage
information from existing WiFi access points (AP) infrastruc-
ture where network connection parameters, such as connec-
tions count and received signal strength indicator (RSSI), are
used to infer occupancy [11], [12], [13]. The advantage of
this approach over the others is the fact that no additional
hardware is required. However, there is a number of factorsthat may impact accuracy of the count. For instance, people
who do not carry WiFi enabled devices would not get counted,
individuals with multiple devices (e.g., laptop and phone)
would get counted twice, and people outside the room may
be connected to the AP inside the room and get included
in the room occupancy count. Furthermore, obtaining WiFi
connectivity data may also constitute a violation of privacy if
the identities of connected users can be deduced.
Predicting Occupancy: Some studies have attempted to
perform future forecasting of occupany from historical data.
The authors in [14] compared two approaches of occupancy
estimation based on indoor climate parameters and 3D stereo-
vision camera. Both approaches were tested in 2 rooms (i.e., a
classroom and a study zone), and the camera-based approach
was shown to outperform the indoor climate-based approach.
Historical occupancy estimation with additional contextual
features including day name, day type (weekday or week
end), season, and holiday (binary) were used to perform future
count prediction using decision tree and random forest. The
prediction achieved the best accuracy of 3% error, yet it has
to be noted that the models had only been trained using 20
days data with 1 day test data (using sliding window method).
Moreover, for classroom occupancy, the dynamic variation of
class attendance, which is likely to be inﬂuenced by factors
such as courses and weeks of semester, were not captured by
the models. In [15], the authors collected occupancy data at
a commercial space using depth sensors (Kinect for XBOX
One) for a duration of 9 months, future occupancy prediction
was performed using historical data, however it had suffered
from a very high error of up to 2100 %.
Classroom Scheduling and Allocations: The majority of
existing works primarily use occupancy monitoring to improve
energy efﬁciency of heating, ventilation, and air conditioning
(HV AC) systems. To the best of our knowledge, there is no
work on the application of occupancy measuring in dynamic
allocation of classrooms.
The problem of course timetabling and classroom allocation
have been studied extensively in the past where a variety
of constraints, such as timing requirement of the events
and lecturer availabilities were captured. Several optimization
algorithms were employed to solve the problem, some of
the popular ones include genetic algorithm [16], simulated
annealing [17], and tabu search [18]. However, the number
of students accommodated in the classroom were based on
enrollment numbers rather than actual attendances, leading to
a signiﬁcant under utilization of room spaces in real-world
scenarios.
We believe that our work is the ﬁrst that combines occu-
pancy monitoring system to solve class allocation problem
where courses can be allocated to classrooms based on their
predicted attendance rather than the traditional enrollment
information.
III. S ENSING CLASSROOM OCCUPANCY
In this section, we describe various sensing methods for
counting people, outline their relative trade-offs with a view
towards making appropriate selections suitable for a larger-
scale deployment across the campus, and brieﬂy explain our