2327-4662 (c) 2018 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/JIOT.2019.2902410, IEEE Internet of
Things Journal
IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL 12
Total cost Overflow classes
0 10 20 3084.0%88.0%92.0%96.0%
0.00%0.50%1.00%1.50%2.00%
prediction margin (%)
Fig. 12. Allocation cost versus students discomfort.
sensors), predicted attendance, and also predicted attendance
with additional margin (i.e., 5%, 10%, 15%, 20%, 25%,
and 30%). For each round of our optimization, we obtain
the total cost of allocation. Note that for some cases when
predicted attendance is used, the classroom may overﬂow
due to under-prediction and cause students discomfort. We,
therefore, measure the number of “overﬂow classes” in each
round of allocation.
C. Optimization Results:
We run our optimization algorithm and obtain the cost
of allocation for each day. We then compute the weekly
cost of allocation by adding daily costs across the week.
We plot the weekly total cost in Fig. 10 – total costs are
normalized with respect to the enrollment-based scenario as a
baseline (solid red line). Unsurprisingly, the enrollment-based
approach results a constant cost (i.e., upper bound) as it tries
to meet the ﬁxed constraints every week. On the other hand,
total cost obtained from various scenarios of attendance-based
allocation (dashed lines) falls gradually due to falling pattern
of attendance for majority of the courses. We note that even
though allocation based on actual attendance yields the best
result with lowest cost, it is not feasible in practice. It is
seen that the prediction-based allocation yields a cost slightly
higher than when actual attendance is considered, but still it
is beneﬁcial to the campus by saving on average of 12% per
week of operation (as shown by dotted green lines with no
margin). Obviously, adding margin to the predicted attendance
count would reduce the cost saving, for example 20% margin
gives a saving of about 5% per week.
In addition, we capture the number of overﬂow classes
(i.e., the room capacity is lower than the actual attendance
of the class) as a proxy for the students experience (or
discomfort) from dynamic allocation of classrooms. Fig. 11
shows the fraction of overﬂow classes (out of all allocated
classes) across weeks for various scenarios. As we expect,
allocations based on enrollment and actual attendance count
yield no overﬂow since rooms capacities are well provisioned
in advance. Allocation based on predicted attendance, on the
other hand, causes overﬂow between 1:25% to 2:70% of
classes per week when no margin is considered (as shown
by dotted green lines). The measure of overﬂow is reducedto less than 1% by applying a margin of 20% (as shown by
dashed blue lines).
Lastly, we focus on the impact of margin on our evaluation
metrics. We plot in Fig. 12 the total normalized cost (top) and
the total overﬂow fraction of classes (bottom) for a duration of
6 weeks by varying the prediction margin from 0% to 30%. We
can see that the normalized cost monotonically increases from
84% (with no margin) to 96% (with 30% margin). Conversely,
the overﬂow falls from 2% (accounted for 19 impacted classes)
to0% where no class is impacted. This suggests that campus
can beneﬁt from at least 4% cost saving over 6 weeks of
operation by employing a dynamic allocation of classrooms
with no impact on student experience.
VII. C ONCLUSION
In this paper we have outlined our efforts to address
classroom under-utilization in a real University campus aris-
ing from the gap between enrollment and attendance. We
instrumented classrooms with IoT sensors to measure real-time
usage, used AI to predict attendance, and performed optimal
allocation of rooms to courses minimizing space wastage. We
undertook a lab evaluation of various commercial IoT sensors
and compared them in terms of cost, ease of operation, and
accuracy. We then deployed our sensors in 9 real classrooms
of varying sizes across campus and collected data over two
semesters covering 250+ courses, which we release to the
public. Our data and visualization reveal interesting insights
into course attendance patterns and class utilization measures.
Based on this real data, we developed AI based methods to
predict classroom attendance which fed into our optimization
algorithm for dynamic allocation of classes to classrooms
based on predicted attendance rather than enrollments, and
showed gains of 10% in room costs with a very low risk of
room overﬂows.
REFERENCES
[1] T. Sutjarittham et al., “Data-Driven Monitoring and Optimization of
Classroom Usage in a Smart Campus,” in Proc. ACM/IEEE IPSN, Porto,
Portugal, 2018.
[2] B. Council, “The shape of things to come: higher education global trends
and emerging opportunities to 2020,” British Council, Tech. Rep., 01
2012.
[3] I. P. Mohottige et al., “Estimating Room Occupancy in a Smart Campus
Using WiFi Soft Sensors,” in Proc. IEEE LCN, Chicago, USA, October
2018.
[4] B. Dong, B. Andrews, K. P. Lam, M. H ¨o Ynck, R. Zhang, Y . Chiou,
and D. Benitez, “An information technology enabled sustainability test-
bed (itest) for occupancy detection through an environmental sensing
network,” Energy and Buildings, vol. 42, no. 7, pp. 1038–1046, July
2010.
[5] A. Dey, X. Ling, A. Syed, Y . Zheng, B. Landowski, D. Anderson,
K. Stuart, and M. E. Tolentino, “Namatad: Inferring occupancy from
building sensors using machine learning,” in Proc. IEEE WF-IoT,
Reston, V A, USA, 2016.
[6] L. Zimmermann, R. Weigel, and G. Fischer, “Fusion of Non-Intrusive
Environmental Sensors for Occupancy Detection in Smart Homes,” IEEE
Internet of Things Journal, vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 2343–2352, 2017.
[7] Z. Yang, N. Li, B. Becerik-Gerber, and M. Orosz, “A multi-sensor
based occupancy estimation model for supporting demand driven hvac
operations,” in Proc. Symposium on Simulation for Architecture and
Urban Design, 2012.
[8] Y . Hou and G. K. H. Pang, “People Counting and Human Detection
in a Challenging Situation,” IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and
Cybernetics – Part A: Systems and Humans , vol. 41, no. 1, pp. 24–33,
January 2011.