2327-4662 (c) 2018 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/JIOT.2019.2902410, IEEE Internet of
Things Journal
IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL 7
050100150200250
 9 am 12 pm  3 pm  6 pm  9 pm
TimeNumber of peopleEnrollment
Attendance
Fig. 4. Occupancy pattern of a classroom on 16 August 2017.
050100150200
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
WeekNumber of attendeesCourse-1 (1f3ddbb7f9)
Course-2 (30aa8e3933)Course-3 (29317a9098)
Fig. 5. Attendance pattern of three courses across weeks.
to dynamically re-allocate classrooms in advance based on
attendance – if attendance is much lower than the number of
enrollments of a class then a smaller room may potentially be
allocated to it, thus saving cost. We note that while our system
is typically useful to obtain real-time data, room scheduling
is based on the predicted attendance from historical data
and should be decided several weeks prior to actual classes.
This entails a fairly accurate prediction of attendance for
all classes operated on campus. It is important to note that
underestimated prediction may lead to class overﬂow (i.e.,
signiﬁcant discomfort for students), and overestimation would
lead to wasted capacity and thus not achieving optimal cost
reductions.
In this section, we compare three learning-based algorithms
in predicting class attendance, each using two different func-
tions of regression. We train models using historical labeled
dataset from semester 2, 2017 and test the models with
attendance dataset from semester 2, 2018. Note that it is
infeasible to perform spot measurement at scale to collect
ground-truth data needed for training of our prediction models.
We, therefore, use course-based attendance count (which is
deduced from data measured by sensors) to generate su-
pervised learning models. The error in sensor measurement
and thereafter in prediction, will be considered in xVI when
the predicted attendance is used for dynamic allocation of
classrooms.
Fig. 6. Heat-map of classrooms occupancy on a chosen day.
A. Attributes Impacting Attendance
There are several factors that can inﬂuence class attendance
in universities, especially student motivations, quality of teach-
ing, and characteristics of class lectures [25]. However it is
infeasible to measure students motivation without conducting
extensive surveys of a large population of students. Further,
quality of teaching largely depends on the course lecturer,
which can vary from semester to semester. We instead consider
attributes related to individual course (e.g., engineering faculty,
undergraduate, tutorial) and temporal aspects (e.g., week 3,
Monday) which can be readily obtained.
In order to generalize our prediction model, we do not
use speciﬁc course attributes such as course code or course
instructor as inputs to our model. This allows us to perform
prediction for courses for which no training data is available.
Note that since our data collection started from semester 2
in 2017, there are insufﬁcient data samples that span across
multiple “semester” and “year” combinations. Thus, we do not
include these attributes for our prediction model in this paper
– even though they may have impacts on class attendance.
In summary, the following attributes are used in our predic-
tion models:
class type: type of the class, e.g., lecture, lab, and tutorial.
faculty: faculty the course belongs to, e.g., engineering,
medicine, and science.
school: school the course belongs to (e.g., Material Sci-
ence).
enrollment: number of students enrolled in the course.
course duration: duration of the course (in hours).
degree: degree of study (e.g., undergraduate, postgradu-
ate).
course status: enrollment status of the course (e.g., open,
full).
joint: a binary indicating if the course is combined with
other courses.
week: week of semester (e.g., week 3).
day: day of week (e.g., Monday).
time-of-day: categorical value of time the class be-
gins (e.g., morning: 9am-12pm, afternoon: 12pm-3pm,
evening: 3pm-6pm, and night: 6pm-9pm).
For the output of our prediction model, we use normalized
attendance which is the ratio of maximum classroom occu-
pancy (from course-based method in xIV-A) to the enrollment