2327-4662 (c) 2018 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/JIOT.2019.2902410, IEEE Internet of
Things Journal
IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL 6
BUS105BUS115MAT CMAT D
CLB8MAT BPHYMAT A
CLB7
11 32 32446
0%50%100%150%
100 200 300 400 500
Room capacityMAPE
Fig. 3. The mean absolute percentage error (MAPE) versus room size,
highlighting three clusters.
it is seen that the gap between room-based and course-based
is dilated in larger classrooms – for example a signiﬁcant gap
of more than 100 people is observed in ‘MAT A’ (on the right
plot), compared to a relatively smaller gap in ‘BUS 115’ (on
the left plot).
For our analysis, we use deployed sensors data (without
ground-truth) collected in entire Semester 2, 2018 to inves-
tigate the impact of the two key factors (i.e., rooms size
and number of doorways). We employ the mean absolute
percentage error (MAPE) metric computed by the average
of absolute difference between room-based and course-based
divided by course-based occupancy (i.e., ratio of the gap
between green and red lines in Fig. 2 to green lines). We
illustrate in Fig. 3 the value of MAPE as a function of room
characteristics. Note that x-axis is the room capacity and each
circle on the plot shows the number of doorways for the
corresponding classroom – size of each circle is proportional
to doors count. We observe that the MAPE is positively
correlated with both the room capacity and the number of
doorways, highlighted by three clusters namely small rooms
with less than 100 seats and one door (green circles), medium-
size rooms with 100 to 300 seats and 2 to 3 doors (blue
circles), and large theaters with more than 300 seats and
more than 4 doors (orange circles). We note that for larger
classrooms, the chance of students walking in/out side-by-
side is relatively higher (such instances are usually counted
as a single individual by the beam counters) which results in
a larger MAPE value.
Occupancy and Attendance data: Our weekly occupancy
dataset, computed using the Method-2 above, is openly avail-
able for download [22]. Each row in a CSV ﬁle represents the
real-time measurement from beam sensors comprising time-
stamp, week of semester, room information including room
name, number of doorways, and number of seats, course infor-
mation including course-id (we have intentionally obfuscated
the actual names of courses), course start-time, and course
end-time, sensor measurements including count-in, count-out,
and computed number of attendance (i.e. occupancy). Note
that count-in and count-out are available for the entire day
(even during times with no lectures scheduled), whereas oc-cupancy is available only when a course is scheduled.
Additionally, we release class attendance dataset [23] which
will be used for prediction in xV. We derive class attendance
by taking the maximum value of occupancy count in the room
during the period when the class is operational.
B. Data Visualization
Tool: To provide an intuitive user interface (UI) for real-
time occupancy monitoring, we developed a web application
using R Shiny – our tool is available at [24]. The tool
allows the user to view the attendance pattern of a course
(by choosing from the course dashboard tab), as well as
the utilization rate (number of attendees divided by the total
number seats available for each classroom) for different time-
slots.
Insights: Our UI provides some interesting insights into
attendance patterns. Fig. 4 shows our UI output for an oc-
cupancy pattern of a selected room (CLB8) on a selected
day, comparing the number of attendees (red line) and the
associated enrollments (blue line) for 7 courses scheduled
between 9am-9pm. From the plot, attendance is seen to vary
widely across courses, in the range of 10% to over 90%
of the enrollments. Interestingly, we observe that the lecture
scheduled between 1pm-2pm has an enrollment of 211 but
close to zero attendance; this indicates the cancellation of
lecture which has led to a wastage of room spaces on the
day. The visibility of room occupancy monitoring allows us
to quantify space utilization that is otherwise largely unknown
to facility managers.
Our visualization tool also provides visibility into atten-
dance pattern of all courses scheduled in the classrooms
where sensors were installed. Figure 5 shows an example of
attendance patterns for 3 selected courses (we have obfuscated
course names) across the whole semester from week 1 to week
12. We can observe some interesting trends such as a general
decline in attendance over week, represented in blue line; class
cancellation on week 7, represented in green line; and mid
session class examination during week 6 (red line), which has
been veriﬁed by looking up the course web page.
Furthermore, the tool allows us to generate a room utiliza-
tion heat-map on a chosen day, as shown in Figure 6. Bright
yellow cells represent time slots where rooms are being mostly
occupied with utilization rate approaching 1, whereas color
scale towards dark blue represents time slots when rooms
are under utilized. On the web interface, hovering over a
cell shows further details on the usage of classroom and the
scheduled course. For instance, we can see from the plot
that course df0c74e1e5 has an enrollment number of 193
but only 10 students attending the lecture, leading to a poor
utilization of 4:1%. The interface allows campus managers to
track classroom utilization, with a view towards more optimal
allocation, as described in xVI.
V. P REDICTION OF CLASSROOM ATTENDANCE
In previous section, we observed that the falling atten-
dance pattern results in underutilization of classrooms. In
order to improve the overall utilization, universities may want