2327-4662 (c) 2018 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/JIOT.2019.2902410, IEEE Internet of
Things Journal
IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL 1
Experiences with IoT and AI in a Smart Campus
for Optimizing Classroom Usage
Thanchanok Sutjarittham, Hassan Habibi Gharakheili, Salil S. Kanhere, and Vijay Sivaraman
Abstract —Increasing demand for university education is
putting pressure on campuses to make better use of their real-
estate resources. Evidence indicates that enrollments are rising,
yet attendance is falling due to diverse demands on student
time and easy access to online content. This paper outlines our
efforts to address classroom under-utilization in a real University
campus arising from the gap between enrollment and attendance.
We do so by instrumenting classrooms with IoT sensors to
measure real-time usage, using AI to predict attendance, and
performing optimal allocation of rooms to courses so as to
minimize space wastage.
Our ﬁrst contribution undertakes an evaluation of several
IoT sensing approaches for measuring class occupancy, and
comparing them in terms of cost, accuracy, privacy, and ease
of deployment/operation. Our second contribution instruments
9 lecture halls of varying capacity across campus, collects and
cleans live occupancy data spanning about 250 courses over two
sessions, and draws insights into attendance patterns, including
identiﬁcation of canceled lectures and class tests, while also
releasing our data openly to the public. Our third contribution
is to use AI techniques for predicting classroom attendance,
applying them to real data, and accurately predicting future
attendance with an RMSE error as low as 0.16. Our ﬁnal
contribution is to develop an optimal allocation of classes to
rooms based on predicting attendance rather than enrollment,
resulting in over 10% savings in room costs with very low risk
of room overﬂows.
Index Terms—IoT, smart campus, classroom occupancy, AI,
prediction.
I. I NTRODUCTION
HIGHER education institutes continue to experience
steady growth in enrollment demand [2]. A major factor
limiting universities in fulﬁlling this demand is real-estate,
since enrollment in a course is capped by the capacity of
the classroom to which the course is allocated. However,
with recent trends towards student lifestyles that mix study
with work and other commitments, as well as greater access
to online content, there is ample anecdotal evidence that
classroom attendance is often well below the enrollment
number. This presents an opportunity for education institutes
to better optimize the usage of classroom space based on
T. Sutjarittham, H. Habibi Gharakheili, and V . Sivaraman are with
the School of Electrical Engineering and Telecommunications, Univer-
sity of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW 2052, Australia (e-mails:
t.sutjarittham@unsw.edu.au, h.habibi@unsw.edu.au, vijay@unsw.edu.au).
S. Kanhere is with the School of Computer Science and Engineering,
University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW 2052, Australia (e-mail:
salil.kanhere@unsw.edu.au).
Copyright (c) 2012 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted.
However, permission to use this material for any other purposes must be
obtained from the IEEE by sending a request to pubs-permissions@ieee.org.
This submission is an extended and improved version of our paper presented
at the ACM/IEEE IPSN 2018 conference [1].attendance rather than enrollments. Since class attendance
can vary signiﬁcantly between courses and across weeks of
semester, visibility into actual class attendance and ability to
predict future attendance based on historical data are needed
to dynamically re-allocate courses to rooms while minimizing
risk of overcrowded lecture rooms where class attendance
exceeds room capacity.
Several methods are available to count the number of people
in an indoor space, such as WiFi-based approach [3], camera
image processing, thermal imaging, ultrasound imaging, and
beam counters afﬁxed to entryways [1]. Each method has its
own pros and cons across various dimensions such as cost,
power, communications, ease of deployment and operations,
privacy, and accuracy. For example, using WiFi data and
cameras endanger privacy, thermal and ultrasound imaging
have low accuracy, and camera-based image processing is
computationally expensive. Furthermore, a method that works
well in a small room may not be as effective in a larger
lecture theater, and cost/accuracy may also be impacted by the
layout of the room, the number/width of doorways, and the
availability of power and wired/wireless network connections.
Hence understanding both beneﬁts and challenges of various
approaches in order to adopt the most suitable methods for
the nature of the room is important for the real deployment of
classroom occupancy monitoring system.
This paper describes our experiences in adopting IoT to
measure and AI to predict the attendance of lectures in courses
at our University campus, and to use these to optimize the
usage of lecture rooms. Our speciﬁc contributions are four-
fold:
1) We begin by testing several sensing methods in a lab
environment and characterizing their trade-offs in aspects
such as cost, ease of installation, method of data extrac-
tion, privacy, and accuracy.
2) We then make appropriate sensor selections, build a full
system, and deploy it across 9 lecture theaters of varying
size across the university campus. We collect and clean
the data to obtain visibility of occupancy across these
rooms in real-time over a period of 18 weeks (i.e., a full
semester in 2017 and half a semester in 2018), integrate
it with University timetabling data to infer attendance
patterns of over 250 courses, and highlight interesting
ﬁndings such as attendance trends, canceled lectures, and
class tests. We also make our occupancy data openly
available to the research community.
3) We develop machine-learning models to predict class-
room attendance using three algorithms namely multiple
regression, random forest, and support vector regression