2327-4662 (c) 2018 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/JIOT.2019.2902410, IEEE Internet of
Things Journal
IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL 3
system architecture for collecting, cleansing, and visualizing
sensing data.
A. People Counting Methods
Sensors: We investigated several commercial sensors and
straight-away eliminated those that send data to the vendor’s
cloud servers, since we wanted to: (a) keep the data entirely
on-premises and not risk it leaving our campus infrastructure;
and (b) not be beholden to a vendor to access our own data,
hence freeing us from ongoing service costs. In other words,
we wanted a “sale” model of the device so we could have
unfettered access to our data without any ongoing “service”
fees. We were quite happy to buy spares of the units to cover
for device failures; further, this model allows us to integrate
data into a centralized repository to facilitate better analytics
across the many data feeds we have on campus.
We narrowed our lab trials to four types of commercial
sensors: EvolvePlus Wireless Beam Counter [19], EvolvePlus
Overhead Camera [20], Steinel HPD Camera (pre-market
release), and Steinel Presence Detector [21]. In addition,
the University IT department provided us with timestamped
connections logs from two WiFi access points (one inside
our lab and one just outside), so we could compare our
approaches to those obtained from WiFi logs. We note that
the WiFi logs gave us personal user information such as their
device MAC address, user-ID, and connection durations; we
therefore obtained ethics clearance (UNSW Human Research
Ethics Advisory Panel approval number HC17140) for this
experiment.
The Beam Counter comprises a pair of infrared (IR)
break-beam sensors mounted on the door frame, and counts
the number of people passing through in each direction. It
communicates the counts (for “in” and “out” directions) to a
gateway every 30 seconds using a propriety wireless protocol,
and the gateway then posts these readings via Ethernet to
an SQL database (DB) server hosted on a VM in our on-
premises cloud infrastructure. The Overhead Camera is a
thermal sensor mounted on the ceiling close to the entrance
facing downwards, and counts the number of people passing
below it. It also communicates the counts in each direction to
the same gateway as the beam counter, which then forwards
it on to the SQL DB. We wrote a script that pulls data from
the SQL DB, stamps the data with the time and the unique
UUID of the gateway, and posts as a JSON string to our master
database (which holds data from many sources) via a REST
API.
TheHPD Camera (pre-market release) is a people counting
sensor mounted in a corner with full view of the room. It uses
built-in image processing to compute the number of people
present within a conﬁgurable zone of interest. It is powered
over Ethernet, and comes pre-conﬁgured with a server that
be queried via a REST API. We wrote a “broker” script that
polls the camera every 30 seconds to get the people count,
and posts the time-stamped and sensor UUID-stamped data in
JSON format to our master database. The Presence Detector
is a passive infrared (PIR) sensor mounted on the ceiling in
the middle of the room, and detects motion. Though it doesnot count the number of people in a room, it gives a binary
indication on whether the room is occupied or not – this
sensor can be used as a way to calibrate the other counting
sensors which may accumulate errors with time. The PIR
sensor sends its binary occupancy state every 60 seconds to
its corresponding gateway via a propriety wireless interface,
which then posts it to a broker script that again time- and
sensor-UUID-stamps the data and posts to our master database.
Lastly, we receive a CSV ﬁle of daily WiFi connection
logs for the two access points from our IT department every
morning at 7am – real-time feed of data was not possible due
to technical limitations of the AP vendor. We wrote a script
to parse the log ﬁle and compute the number of unique users
connected to each AP every 30 seconds – this was also posted
to our master database.
With possibility of sourcing data from various sensing
devices, one may want to perform sensor fusion for an accurate
occupancy measurement. At a very minimum, a combination
of PIR sensor and passing people counters (i.e., beam counter
and overhead camera) seems reasonable. PIR sensors are fairly
accurate in detecting whether a room is empty which can be
useful for resetting the errors accumulated over time via the
people counting sensors. It is important to note that detecting
presence is not a trivial task for a large lecture theater due
to limited coverage of PIR sensors, and thus conﬁguring non-
overlapping zones for multiple units of PIR sensors can be
quite challenging. For a second step of fusion, adding WiFi
data or HPD camera would help infer an accurate occupancy
since these methods measure occupants count instantaneously
without keeping states (i.e., not cumulative). But, as explained
next, these sensors come with their own shortcomings. We note
that deploying a collection of sensors at the scale of a univer-
sity campus can signiﬁcantly increase the cost. Therefore, our
primary focus in this paper is to select and deploy one sensor
type for each classroom, and demonstrate its value in optimal
allocation of rooms to courses.
B. Sensor Evaluation and Selection
Our lab trial helped us compare the various counting meth-
ods in terms of their ease of installation, calibration, power and
communications requirements, accuracy, cost, and privacy, as
summarized in Table I.
Our comparison across these measures is qualitative rather
than quantitative. Even aspects such as accuracy, that can
be quantiﬁed, depend on factors like room size and layout,
mounting position, number of doors, and width of doorways,
which can vary widely across deployment environments. We
therefore resort to qualitative measures (low, medium, and
high) in this table, derived from our experience across the
rooms we instrumented, and we back these up with several
data points presented later in the paper.
Installation: The thermal camera, HPD camera, and PIR
sensor needed professional installation by certiﬁed tradesmen,
since each needed special mounting brackets and extra wiring
for mounting on (or near) the ceiling. We could install the
beam counter sensor easily by ourselves using two-sided
adhesive strips on the door frame at around waist-height.