2327-4662 (c) 2018 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/JIOT.2019.2902410, IEEE Internet of
Things Journal
IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL 5
TABLE II
MEASURED ERROR FROM GROUND -TRUTH OF OCCUPANCY .
Error
Room #seats #doors Room-based Course-based
BUS105 35 1 27:7 % 13:0%
BUS115 53 1 34:2 % 17:3%
CLB7 497 4 89:5% 4:6%
CLB8 231 3 26:3 % 16:1%
MAT A 472 6 25:5 % 8:0%
MAT B 246 3 6:3% 9:1%
MAT C 110 2 14:6 % 24:4%
MAT D 110 2 16:9 % 9:2%
PhTh 369 4 NA NA
C. System Architecture and Data Collection
Figure 1 shows a high-level system architecture of the
classroom occupancy monitoring system using beam counters.
First the beam counters communicate their count data to sensor
gateways that are installed in each room via a proprietary
wireless protocol. The gateway is directly connected to an
Ethernet port which has been provisioned to allow connection
to our university private VLAN, where the data is being
stored in a proprietary database. We then wrote a message
broker script to unify the data format into a commonly agreed
structure, where the sensor data is converted into a JSON string
as well as being tagged with timestamp and sensor UUID,
before getting posted to our master database via a REST
API. This provides the feasibility for the platform to collect
data from various sensors which generate heterogeneous data
format.
Similarly, the retrieval of data for analysis or as an input to
applications can be easily performed through a GET RESTful
API. This raw beam counter data only contains timestamped
count in and count out from each sensor installed at the
doorway, hence data preprocessing is required to infer room
occupancy and ﬁnally class attendance number.
IV. D ATA PROCESSING AND VISUALIZATION
We worked with campus staff to identify appropriate class-
rooms for a ﬁeld trial, and picked 9 rooms of varying size, as
shown in the ﬁrst column in Table II. Some of the doorways
to the lecture-halls posed a challenge as they were very wide,
increasing the likelihood that multiple students walking out
side-by-side get counted as one. The data collected over
the ﬁrst few days was manually veriﬁed (volunteers were
used to do head-counts) so as to obtain ground-truth and
calibrate the errors. In what follows we describe our methods
for data cleansing, linking with class-timetabling information,
processing, and visualization using a web-UI.
A. Occupancy and Attendance Calculation
We compare two methods of data processing to deduce the
occupancy from the number of entries and exits at each door:
Method 1: Room-based : Our ﬁrst (naive) method for deriv-
ing occupancy is to set it to the cumulative number of entries
minus the cumulative number of exits across all doorways of a
classroom. However, errors arise when students walk in/out in
BUS 115 MAT A
 9am 12pm  3pm  6pm  9pm  9am 12pm  3pm  6pm  9pm050100150200250
TimeNumber of peopleRoom-based
Course-basedFig. 2. Error of room-based method is higher than course-based and increases
with the size of classroom; ‘BUS 115’: small room and ‘MAT A’: large theater.
groups; though we reset counts to zero at midnight each day,
errors accumulating during the day can become signiﬁcant.
Method 2: Course-based : To reduce the errors accumulating
during the day, we enhance our method by computing course
attendance independent of each other by linking our sensor
data with course timetable databases obtained from our Uni-
versity. We assume that students may enter the room up to
10 minutes prior to start of the scheduled lecture time, and
may leave up to 10 minutes after the scheduled lecture time.
Attributing each entry and exit to a speciﬁc lecture therefore
allows us to compute attendance per-course, and errors are
not carried over from one lecture to the next even if they are
adjacent in time to each other.
Accuracy of Counting: To evaluate the accuracy of our
counting methods, we obtained ground-truth information by
having volunteers physically count attendance during the lec-
tures. We collected a total of 50 samples covering 31 lectures
over 4 days. The ground-truth samples were collected from 8
out of 9 classrooms in which the sensors have been deployed.
Table II shows the average error of the computed occupancy
using the two methods described above applied to the various
rooms. As expected, course-based occupancy computation
yields lower errors (average: 12:71%) compared to room-
based occupancy computation (average error: 30:60%). This is
because the room-based method gradually built-up errors over
the course of a day, whereas the course-based method had a
stable error irrespective of time-of-day (since the errors do not
accumulate). However, it should be noted that the course-based
method requires access to timetabling information, which may
not be generalizable to other environments.
Typological Analysis of Error in Calculating Occupancy:
We now analyze the impact of room characteristic (i.e., size
and number of doorways) on the accuracy of estimating
occupancy. Fig. 2 shows the occupancy computed by room-
based and course-based methods, for two representative rooms
(one small classroom ‘BUS 115’ with 53 seats and one large
lecture theater ‘MAT A’ with 472 seats) on 9-August-2018.
Our ﬁrst observation is that the room-based method, shown by
dashed red lines, results in higher residuals (i.e., accumulated
error in calculated occupancy) than the course-based method,
shown by solid green lines, at the end of the day. Additionally,