scales
scales
scales
scalesofobjects scalerangecoveredbyfeature(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 4. A toy example to illustrate the relation between the ob-
ject scales and the scale range covered by the single feature. The
axis in this ﬁgure denotes the scales. (a) indicates that the feature’s
receptive ﬁeld can only cover a limited scale range; (b) shows that
the enlarged scale ranges enable the feature to cover large objects
while miss covering small ones; (c) represents that all scales can
be covered the feature with multiple receptive ﬁelds.
We begin with enlarging the receptive ﬁeld of the C5
feature by stacking standard and dilated convolutions [ 40].
Although the covered scale range is enlarged to some ex-
tent, it still can not cover all object scales as the enlarging
process multiplies a factor greater than 1to all originally
covered scales. We illustrate the situation in Figure 4(b),
where the whole scale range shifts to larger scales compare
with the one in Figure 4(a). Then, we combine the original
scale range and the enlarged scale range by adding the cor-
responding features, resulting in an output feature with mul-
tiple receptive ﬁelds covering all object scales (Figure 4(c)).
The above operations can be easily achieved by construct-
ing residual blocks [ 11] with dilations on the middle 3×3
convolution layer.
Dilated Encoder: Based on the above designs, we pro-
pose our SiSo encoder in Figure 5, named as Dilated En-
coder . It contains two main components: the Projector and
theResidual Blocks . The projection layer ﬁrst applies one
1×1convolution layer to reduce the channel dimension,
then add one 3×3convolution layer to reﬁne semantic con-
texts, which is the same as in the FPN [ 19]. After that, we
stack four successive dilated residual blocks with different
dilation rates in the 3×3convolution layers to generate
output features with multiple receptive ﬁelds, covering all
objects’ scales.
Discussion: Dilated convolution [ 40] is a common strategy
to enlarge the features’ receptive ﬁeld in object detection.
As reviewed in the Section 2, TridentNet [ 17] use dilated
convolution to generate multi-scale features. It deals with
the scale variation problem in object detection via multi-
branch structure and weight sharing mechanism, which is
different from our single-level feature setting. Moreover,
Dilated Encoder stack dilated residual blocks one by one
without weight sharing. Although DetNet [ 18] also succes-
sively applies dilated residual blocks, its purpose is to main-
tain the spatial resolution of the features and keep more de-
tails in the backbone’s outputs, while ours is to generate a
1×1
3×3
1×1
3×3
1×1
×4C5 P5
Projector ResidualBlocks
Figure 5. An illustration of the structure of Dilated Encoder . In the
ﬁgure,1×1and3×3denotes1×1and3×3convolution layers
and×4means four successive residual blocks. All convolution
layers in Residual Blocks are followed by a batchnorm layer [ 12]
and a ReLU layer [ 24], while in Projector, we only use convolution
layers and batchnorm layers [ 12].
feature with multiple receptive ﬁelds out of the backbone.
The design of Dilated Encoder enables us to detecting all
objects on single-level feature instead of on multiple-level
features like TridentNet [ 17] and DetNet [ 18].
4.2. Imbalance Problem on Positive Anchors
The deﬁnition of positive anchors is crucial for the opti-
mization problem in object detection. In anchor-based de-
tectors, strategies to deﬁne positive are dominated by mea-
suring the IoUs between anchors and ground-truth boxes. In
RetinaNet [ 20], if the max IoU of the anchor and ground-
truth boxes is greater than a threshold 0.5, this anchor will
be set as positive. We call it Max-IoU matching.
In MiMo encoders, the anchors are pre-deﬁned on multi-
ple levels in a dense paved fashion, and the ground-truth
boxes generate positive anchors in feature levels corre-
sponding to their scales. Given the divide-and-conquer
mechanism, Max-IoU matching enables ground-truth boxes
in each scale to generate a sufﬁcient number of positive an-
chors. However, when we adopt the SiSo encoder, the num-
ber of anchors diminish extensively compare to the one in
the MiMo encoder, from 100kto5k, resulting in sparse an-
chors1. Sparse anchors raise a matching problem for detec-
tors when applying Max-IoU matching, as shown in Fig-
ure6. Large ground-truth boxes induce more positive an-
chors than small ground-truth boxes in natural, which cause
an imbalance problem for positive anchors. This imbalance
makes detectors pay attention to large ground-truth boxes
while ignoring the small ones when training.
Uniform Matching: To solve this imbalance problem in
positive anchors, we propose an Uniform Matching strat-
egy: marking the indexes of the k nearest anchor and the k
nearest predicted boxes as positives for each ground-truth
box, which makes sure that all ground-truth boxes can be
matched with the same number of positive anchors uni-
formly regardless of their sizes (Figure 6). Balance in pos-
itive samples makes sure that all ground-truth boxes partic-
1In SiSo encoders, we simply collapse multiple anchors on multiple-
level features to single-level, e.g., we construct 5anchors with different
anchor sizes of {32, 64, 128, 256, 512 }on each position of the C5 feature.
413042