parable performance with the MiMo encoder (i.e., FPN).
The performance gap is less than 1mAP. In contrast, the
performance drops dramatically ( ≥12mAP) in MiSo and
SiSo encoders. These phenomenons suggest two facts: (1)
the C5 feature carries sufﬁcient context for detecting ob-
jects on various scales, which enables the SiMo encoder
to achieve comparable results; (2) the multi-scale feature
fusion beneﬁt is far away less critical than the divide-and-
conquer beneﬁt, thus multi-scale feature fusion might not
be the most signiﬁcant beneﬁt of FPN , which is also demon-
strated by ExFuse [ 44] in semantic segmentation. Thinking
one step deeper, divide-and-conquer is related to the opti-
mization problem in object detection. It divides the com-
plex detection problem into several sub-problems by object
scales, facilitating the optimization process.
The above analysis suggests that the essential factor for
the success of FPN is its solution to the optimization prob-
lem in object detection. The divide-and-conquer solution
is a good way. But it brings memory burdens, slows down
the detectors, and make detectors’ structure complex in one-
stage detectors like RetinaNet [ 20]. Given that the C5 fea-
ture carries sufﬁcient context for detection, we show a sim-
ple way to address the optimization problem.
We propose You Only Look One-level Feature (YOLOF) ,
which only uses one single C5 feature (with a downsample
rate of 32) for detection. To bridge the performance gap
between the SiSo encoder and the MiMo encoder, we ﬁrst
design the structure of the encoder properly to extract the
multi-scale contexts for objects on various scales, compen-
sating for the lack of multiple-level features; then, we ap-
ply a uniform matching mechanism to solve the imbalance
problem of positive anchors raised by the sparse anchors in
the single feature.
Without bells and whistles, YOLOF achieves compa-
rable results with its feature pyramids counterpart Reti-
naNet [ 20] but2.5×faster. In a single feature manner,
YOLOF matches the performance of the recent proposed
DETR [ 2] while converging much faster ( 7×). In a nutshell,
the contributions of this paper are:
•We show that the most signiﬁcant beneﬁts of FPN is its
divide-and-conquer solution to the optimization prob-
lem in dense object detection rather than the multi-
scale feature fusion .
•We present YOLOF, which is a simple and efﬁcient
baseline without using FPN. In YOLOF, we propose
two key components, Dilated Encoder andUniform
Matching , bridging the performance gap between the
SiSo encoder and the MiMo encoder.
•Extensive experiments on COCO benchmark indicates
the importance of each component. Moreover, we con-
duct comparisons with RetinaNet [ 20] and DETR [ 2].We can achieve comparable results with a faster speed
on GPUs.
2. Related Works
Multiple-level feature detectors. It is a conventional tech-
nique to employ multiple features for object detection. Typ-
ical approaches to construct multiple features can be cate-
gorized into image pyramid methods and feature pyramid
methods. Image pyramids based detector such as DPM [ 6]
dominates the detection in the pre-deep learning era. In
CNN-based detectors, the image pyramids method also
wins some researchers’ [ 31,32] praise as it can achieve
higher performance out of the box. However, the image
pyramids method is not the only way to obtain multiple
features; it is more efﬁcient and natural to exploit feature
pyramids’ power in CNN models. SSD [ 23] ﬁrst utilizes
multiple-scale features and performs object detection on
each scale for different scales objects. FPN [ 19] follows
SSD [ 23] and UNet [ 30] and constructs semantic-riched
feature pyramids by combining shallow features and deep
features. After that, several works [ 14,22,7,34] follow
FPN and focus on how to obtain better representations. FPN
becomes an essential component and dominates modern de-
tectors. It is also applied to popular one-stage detectors,
such as RetinaNet [ 20], FCOS [ 35], and their variants [ 42].
Another line of method to get feature pyramids is to use
multi-branch and dilation convolution [ 17]. Different from
the above works, our method is a single-level feature detec-
tor.
Single-level feature detectors. In early times, the R-CNN
series [ 9,8,28] and R-FCN [ 4] only extract RoI features on
a single feature, while their performances lag behind their
multiple feature counterparts [ 19]. Also, in one-stage de-
tectors, YOLO [ 26] and YOLOv2 [ 27] only use the last
output feature of the backbone. They can be super fast
but have to bear a performance decline in detection. Cor-
nerNet [ 16] and CenterNet [ 45,5] follow this fashion and
achieve competitive results while using a single feature with
a downsample rate of 4 to detect all the objects. Using a
high-resolution feature map for detection brings enormous
memory cost and is not friendly to deployment. Recently,
DETR [ 2] introduces the transformer [ 36] to detection and
shows that it could achieve state-of-the-art results only use
a single C5 feature. Due to the totally anchor-free mecha-
nism and transformer learning phase, DETR needs a long
training schedule for its convergence. The long training
schedule characteristic is cumbersome for further improve-
ments. Unlike these papers, we investigate the working
mechanism of multiple-level detection. From the perspec-
tive of optimization, we provide an alternative solution to
the widely used FPN. Moreover, YOLOF converges faster
213040