Backbone Encoder Decoder
catbenchFigure 2. An illustration of the detection pipeline. In this paper, we format the detection pipeline into three parts: (1) the backbone;
(2) the encoder, which receives inputs from the backbone and distributes representations for detection; (3) the decoder, which performs
classiﬁcation and regression tasks and generate ﬁnal prediction boxes. The color for the encoder is corresponding to the one in Figure 1.
and achieves promising performance; thus, YOLOF can
serve as a simple baseline for fast and accurate detectors.
3. Cost Analysis of MiMo Encoders
As mentioned in Section 1, the success of FPN in dense
object detection is due to its solution to the optimization
problem. However, the multi-level feature paradigm is in-
evitable to make detectors complex, brings memory bur-
dens, and slows down the detector. In this section, we pro-
vide a quantitative study on the cost of MiMo encoders.
We design experiments based on RetinaNet [ 20] with
ResNet-50 [ 11]. In detail, we format the pipeline for the
detection task as a combination of three key parts: the
backbone, the encoder, and the decoder (Figure 2). In
this view, we show the FLOPs of each component in Fig-
ure3. Compared with SiSo encoders, the MiMo encoder
brings enormous memory burdens to the encoder and the
decoder(134G vs. 6G) (Figure 3). Moreover, the detector
with MiMo encoder runs much slower than the ones with
SiSo encoders (13 FPS vs. 34 FPS) (Figure 3). The slow
speed is caused by detecting objects on high-resolution fea-
ture maps in the detector with MiMo encoder, such as the
C3 feature (with a downsample rate of 8). Given the above
drawbacks of the MiMo encoder, we aim to ﬁnd an alterna-
tive way to solve the optimization problem while keeping
the detector simple, accurate, and fast simultaneously.
4. Method
Motivated by the above purpose and the ﬁnding that the
C5 feature contains enough context for detecting numerous
objects, we try to replace the complex MiMo encoder with
the simple SiSo encoder in this section. But this replace-
ment is nontrivial as the performance drops extensively
when applying SiSo encoders according to the results in
Figure 3. Given the situation, we carefully analyze the ob-
stacles preventing SiSo encoders from getting a comparable
performance with MiMo encoders. We ﬁnd that two prob-
lems brought by SiSo encoders are responsible for the per-
formance drop. The ﬁrst problem is that the range of scales
matching to the C5 feature’s receptive ﬁeld is limited , which
impedes the detection performance for objects across vari-
ous scales. The second one is the imbalance problem on
positive anchors raised by sparse anchors in the single-level
FPS
020406080100120140
1015202530354045
RetinaNet
MiMo(C=256)
35.9mAPRetinaNet
SiSo(C=256)
23.7mAPRetinaNet
SiSo(C=512)
24.6mAPYOLOF
SiSo(C=512)
37.7mAPBackbone EncoderDecoder SpeedGFLOPsFigure 3. FLOPs, accuracy, and speed comparison between the
models that adopt MiMo and SiSo encoders on COCO. As the
FLOPs of the decoder is affected by the encoder’s outputs, we
stack the FLOPs of the encoder and the decoder in the ﬁgure to
better understanding the effects of encoders on the FLOPs. All
models use the same backbone, ResNet-50. All FLOPs are mea-
sured with a shorter edge size 800 over the ﬁrst 100 images of
COCO val2017. The FPS is calculated with batch size 1 on 2080Ti
from the total inference pure compute time reported in the Detec-
tron2 [ 38]. In the ﬁgure, Crepresents the number of channels used
in the model’s encoder and decoder.
feature. Next, we discuss these two problems in detail and
provide our solutions.
4.1. Limited Scale Range
Recognizing objects at vastly different scales is a fun-
damental challenge in object detection. One feasible so-
lution to this challenge is to leverage multiple-level fea-
tures. In detectors with MiMo or SiMo encoders, they con-
struct multiple-level features with different receptive ﬁelds
(P3-P7) and detect objects on the level with receptive ﬁeld
matching to their scales. However, the single-level feature
setting changes the game. There is only one output feature
in SiSo encoders, whose receptive ﬁeld is a constant. As
shown in Figure 4(a), the C5 feature’s receptive ﬁeld can
only cover a limited scale range, resulting in poor perfor-
mance if the objects’ scales mismatches with the receptive
ﬁeld. To achieve the goal of detecting all objects with SiSo
encoders, we have to ﬁnd a way to generate an output fea-
ture with various receptive ﬁelds, compensating for the lack
of multiple-level features.
313041