0 5 10 15 20Max-IoUATSSTop1Ours smallmediumlarge
Figure 6. Distribution of the generated positive anchors in vari-
ous matching methods with single feature. This ﬁgure aims to
show the balancedness of the generated positive anchors. The pos-
itive anchors in the Max-IoU are dominated by large ground-truth
boxes, causing huge imbalance across object scales. ATSS alle-
viates the imbalance problem by adaptively sampling positive an-
chors when training. The Top1 and Ours adopt a uniform match-
ing, generating positive anchors in a balanced manner regardless
of small, medium, and large objects.
ipate in training and contribute equally. Besides, following
Max-IoU matching [ 20], we set IoU thresholds in Uniform
Matching to ignore large IoU ( >0.7) negative anchors and
small IoU ( <0.15) positive anchors.
Discussion: relation to other matching methods. Apply-
ing topk in the matching process is not new. ATSS [ 42] ﬁrst
select topk anchors for each ground-truth box on Lfeature
levels, then samples positive anchors among k× L candi-
dates by dynamic IoU thresholds. However, ATSS focuses
on deﬁning positives and negatives adaptively, while our
uniform matching focuses on achieving balance on posi-
tive samples with sparse anchors . Although several pre-
vious methods achieve balance on positive samples, their
matching processes are notdesigned for this imbalance
problem. For example, YOLO [ 26] and YOLOv2 [ 27]
match the ground-truth boxes with the best matching cell or
anchor; DETR [ 2] and [ 33] apply Hungarian algorithm [ 15]
for matching. These matching methods can be view as top1
matching, which is a speciﬁc case of our uniform match-
ing. More importantly, the difference between the uniform
matching and the learning-to-match methods is that: the
learning-to-match methods, such as FreeAnchor [ 43] and
PAA [ 13], adaptively separate anchors into positives and
negatives according to the learning status, while uniform
matching is ﬁxed and does not evolve with training. The
uniform matching is proposed to address the speciﬁc imbal-
ance problem on positive anchors under the SiSo design.
The comparison in Figure 6and the results in Table 4e
demonstrate the signiﬁcance of the balance in positives in
SiSo encoders.
4.3. YOLOF
Based on the solutions above, we propose a fast and
straightforward framework with single-level feature, de-
noted as YOLOF. We format YOLOF into three parts: the
backbone, the encoder, and the decoder. The sketch ofYOLOF is shown in Figure 2. In this section, we give a
brief introduction to the main components of YOLOF.
Backbone. In all models, we simply adopt the ResNet [ 11]
and ResNeXt [ 39] series as our backbone. All models are
pre-trained on ImageNet. The output of the backbone is
the C5 feature map which has 2048 channels and with a
downsample rate of 32. To make a fair comparison with
other detectors, all batchnorm layers in the backbone are
frozen by default.
Encoder. For the encoder (Figure 5), we ﬁrst follow FPN
by adding two projection layers (one 1×1and one3×3
convolution) after the backbone, resulting in a feature map
with512 channels. Then, to enable the encoder’s output
feature to cover all objects on various scales, we propose
to add residual blocks, which consist of three consecutive
convolutions: the ﬁrst 1×1convolution apply channel re-
duction with a reduction rate of 4, then a3×3convolution
with dilation is used to enlarge the receptive ﬁeld, at last, a
1×1convolution to recover the number of channels.
Decoder. For the decoder, we adopt the main design of
RetinaNet, which consists of two parallel task-speciﬁc
heads: the classiﬁcation head and the regression head. We
only add two minor modiﬁcations. The ﬁrst one is that we
follow the design of FFN in DETR [ 2] and make the num-
ber of convolution layers in two heads different. There are
four convolutions followed by batch normalization layers
and ReLU layers on the regression head while only have
two on the classiﬁcation head. The second is that we follow
Autoassign [ 46] and add an implicit objectness prediction
(without direct supervision) for each anchor on the regres-
sion head. The ﬁnal classiﬁcation scores for all predictions
are generated by multiplying the classiﬁcation output with
the corresponding implicit objectness.
Other Details. As mentioned in the previous section, the
pre-deﬁned anchors in YOLOF are sparse, decreasing the
match quality between anchors and ground-truth boxes. We
add a random shift operation on the image to circumvent
this problem. The operation shifts the image randomly with
a maximum of 32 pixels in left, right, top, and bottom direc-
tions and aims to inject noises into the object’s position in
the image, increasing the probability of ground-truth boxes
matching with high-quality anchors. Moreover, we found
that a restriction on the anchors’ center’s shift is also helpful
to the ﬁnal classiﬁcation when using a single-level feature.
We add a restriction that the centers’ shift for all anchors
should smaller than 32pixels.
5. Experiments
We evaluate our YOLOF on the MS COCO [ 21] bench-
mark and conduct comparisons with RetinaNet [ 20] and
DETR [ 2]. Then, we provide a detailed ablation study
513043