You Only Look One-level Feature
Qiang Chen1,2∗, Yingming Wang4, Tong Yang4, Xiangyu Zhang4, Jian Cheng1,2,3†, Jian Sun4
1NLPR, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2School of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology
4MEGVII Technology
{qiang.chen, jcheng }@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, {wangyingming, yangtong, zhangxiangyu, sunjian }@megvii.com
Abstract
This paper revisits feature pyramids networks (FPN) for
one-stage detectors and points out that the success of FPN
is due to its divide-and-conquer solution to the optimiza-
tion problem in object detection rather than multi-scale fea-
ture fusion. From the perspective of optimization, we in-
troduce an alternative way to address the problem instead
of adopting the complex feature pyramids - utilizing only
one-level feature for detection . Based on the simple and ef-
ﬁcient solution, we present You Only Look One-level Fea-
ture (YOLOF). In our method, two key components, Di-
lated Encoder and Uniform Matching, are proposed and
bring considerable improvements. Extensive experiments
on the COCO benchmark prove the effectiveness of the pro-
posed model. Our YOLOF achieves comparable results
with its feature pyramids counterpart RetinaNet while be-
ing2.5×faster. Without transformer layers, YOLOF can
match the performance of DETR in a single-level feature
manner with 7×less training epochs. Code is available at
https://github.com/megvii-model/YOLOF .
1. Introduction
In state-of-the-art two-stage detectors [ 19,10,1] and
one-stage detectors [ 20,35], feature pyramids become an
essential component. The most popular way to build fea-
ture pyramids is the feature pyramid networks (FPN) [ 19],
which mainly brings two beneﬁts: (1) multi-scale feature
fusion : fusing multiple low-resolution and high-resolution
feature inputs to obtain better representations; (2) divide-
and-conquer : detecting objects on different levels regarding
objects’ scales. A common belief for FPN is that its success
relies on the fusion of multiple level features, inducing a
∗This work is done during Qiang Chen’s internship at MEGVII Tech-
nology.
†Corresponding author.MiMo
35.9 mAP
C3C4C5
P3P4P5P6P7
(a)Multiple- in-Multiple-outSiMo
35.0 mAP
C3C4C5
P3P4P5P6P7
(b) Single- in-Multiple-out
MiSo
23.9 mAP
C3C4C5
P3P4P5P6P7
(c)Multiple- in-Single-outSiSo
23.7 mAP
C3C4C5
P3P4P5P6P7
(d) Single- in-Single-out
Figure 1. Comparison of box AP among the Multiple-in-Multiple-
out (MiMo), Single-in-Multiple-out (SiMo), Multiple-in-Single-
out (MiSo), and Single-in-Single-out (SiSo) encoders on COCO
validation set. Here, we adopt the original RetinaNet [ 20] as our
baseline model, where C3, C4, and C5 denote output features of
the backbone with a downsample rate of {8,16,32}and P3 to
P7 represent the feature levels used for ﬁnal detection. All results
reported in the ﬁgure use the same backbone, ResNet-50 [ 11]. The
structure of MiMo is same as the FPN in RetinaNet [ 20].
line of studies of designing complex fusion methods manu-
ally [ 22,14,25], or via Neural Architecture Search (NAS)
algorithms [ 7,34]. However, the belief ignores the function
of the divide-and-conquer in FPN. It leads to fewer studies
on how these two beneﬁts contribute to FPN’s success and
may hinder new advances.
This paper studies the inﬂuence of FPN’s two bene-
ﬁts in one-stage detectors. We design experiments by de-
coupling the multi-scale feature fusion and the divide-and-
conquer functionalities with RetinaNet [ 20]. In detail, we
consider FPN as a Multiple-in-Multiple-out (MiMo) en-
coder, which encodes multi-scale features from the back-
bone and provides feature representations for the decoder
(the detection heads). We conduct controlled compar-
isons among Multiple-in-Multiple-out (MiMo), Single-in-
Multiple-out (SiMo), Multiple-in-Single-out (MiSo), and
Single-in-Single-out (SiSo) encoders in Figure 1. Surpris-
ingly, the SiMo encoder, which only has one input feature
C5 and does not perform feature fusion, can achieve com-
1
13039