Inputs AdaIN MST-1
Figure 9: Feature transformation investigation.
ing. Here, we mainly investigate Euclidean distance and co-
sine distance (shown in Eq. ( 2)). As shown in Fig. 7, MST
with Euclidean distance is affected by the huge background
and may fail to transfer desired style patterns, leading to
wash-out artifacts. This is mainly because there is no nor-
malization for the deep features. As a result, the weight of
style cluster center is proportional to its spatial proportion,
weakening its semantic meaning. Instead, MST with cosine
distance performs much better.
Discontinuity Preservation . In Fig. 8, we show the
effectiveness of the smooth term Esmooth(f)in Eq. ( 6).
Speciﬁcally, we set λas 0, 0.1, and 1 respectively. In real-
world style transfer, people would like to smooth the fa-
cial area, as they do in the real photos. Here, we select
one portrait to investigate how λaffects smoothness. When
we setλ=0, the energy function in Eq. ( 6) is minimized
by only considering the data term. This would introduce
some unpleasing artifacts in the facial area near edges and
demonstrate the necessity of smooth term. However, large
smooth term (e.g., λ=1) would over-smooth the styliza-
tion results, decreasing the style diversity. A proper value
ofλwould not only keep better smoothness, but also pre-
serve style diversity. We empirically set λ=0.1through
the whole experiments.
Feature Transform . Here we set K=1 in MST
and compare with AdaIN [ 11] to show the effectiveness
of WCT for feature transfer. As shown in Fig. 9, AdaIN
produces some stroke artifacts in the smooth area. These
artifacts may make the cloud unnatural. This is mainly be-
cause AdaIN uses the mean and variance of the whole con-
tent/style features. Instead, by using whitening and coloring
in a more optimized way, our MST-1 achieves more natural
stylization and cleaner smoothed area. As a result, we in-
troduce whitening and coloring for feature transform.
5.2. Comparisons with Prior Arts
After investigating the effects of each component in our
method, we turn to validate the effectiveness of our pro-
posed MST. We compare with 7 state-of-the-art methods:
method by Gatys et al. [8], CNNMRF [ 19], AdaIN [ 11],
WCT [ 24], Deep feature reshufﬂe (DFR) [ 10], Avatar-
Net [ 36], and LST [ 23]. We obtain results using their of-
ﬁcial codes and default parameters, except for Gatys et al.1.
Qualitative Comparisons . We show extensive compar-
1We use code from https://github.com/jcjohnson/neural-styleisons2in Fig. 10. Gatys et al. [8] transfer style with iterative
optimization, being likely to falling in local minimum (e.g.,
1st and 3rd columns). AdaIN [ 11] often produces less de-
sired artifacts in the smooth area and some halation around
the edges (e.g., 1st, 5th, and 6th columns). CNNMRF [ 19]
may suffer from distortion effects and not preserve content
structure well. Due to the usage of higher-level deep fea-
ture (e.g., Conv 51), WCT [ 24] would generate distorted
results, failing to preserve the main content structures (e.g.,
1st and 2nd columns). DRF [ 10] reconstructs the results by
using the style patches, which could also distort the content
structure (e.g., 1st and 3rd columns). In some cases (e.g.,
5th, 6th, and 7th columns), some tiny style patterns (e.g.,
the eyes in the ﬂowers and tree) would be copied to the re-
sults, leading unpleasing stylizations. AvatarNet [ 36] would
introduce some less desired style patterns in the smooth area
(e.g., 1st column) and also copy some style patterns in the
results (e.g., 6th and 7th columns). LST [ 23] could gener-
ate very good result in some cases (e.g., 6th column). How-
ever, it may suffer from wash-out artifacts (e.g., 3rd and 4th
columns) and halation around the edges (e.g., 5th column).
These compared methods mainly treat the style patterns as
a whole, lacking distinctive ability to style patterns.
Instead, we treat style features as multimodal presenta-
tions in high-dimension space. We match each content fea-
ture to its most related style cluster and adaptively trans-
fer features according to the content semantic information.
These advantages help explain why MST generates clearer
results (e.g., 1st, 3rd, 5th, and 7th columns), performs more
semantic matching with style patterns (e.g., 2nd column),
and alleviates wash-out artifacts (e.g., 4th column). Such
superior results demonstrate the effectiveness of our MST.
Table 1: Percentage of the votes that each method received.
Method Gatys AdaIN WCT DFR AvatarNet MST
Perc./% 21.41 11.31 12.67 11.55 9.61 33.45
User Study . To further evaluate the 6 methods shown
in Fig 10, we conduct a user study like [ 24]. We use 15
content images and 30 style images. For each method, we
use the released codes and default parameters to generate
450 results. 20 content-style pairs are randomly selected
for each user. For each style-content pair, we display the
stylized results of 6 methods on a web-page in random or-
der. Each user is asked to vote the one that he/she like
the most. Finally, we collect 2,000 votes from 100 users
and calculate the percentage of votes that each method re-
ceived. The results are shown in Tab. 1, where our MST
(K=3) obtains 33.45% of the total votes. It’s much higher
than that of Gatys et al. [8], whose stylization results are
usually thought to be high-quality. This user study result
is consistent with the visual comparisons (in Fig. 10) and
further demonstrate the superior performance of our MST.
2The ﬁfth content is from https://www.mordeo.org
5948