



	











Figure 3: An overview of our MST algorithm.
works by taking style images as inputs and generating corre-
sponding image transformation networks directly. Mechrez
et al. [29] proposed contextual loss for image transforma-
tion. However, these methods fail to treat the style patterns
distinctively and neglect to adaptively match style patterns
with content semantic information. For more neural style
transfer works, readers can refer to the survey [ 13].
Graph Cuts based Matching . Many problems that
arose in early vision can be naturally expressed in terms
of energy minimization. For example, a large number of
computer vision problems attempt to assign labels to pix-
els based on noisy measurements. Graph cuts is a power-
ful method to solve such discrete optimization problems.
Greig et al. [9] were ﬁrstly successful solving graph cuts
by using powerful min-cut/max-ﬂow algorithms from com-
binatorial optimization. Roy and Cox [ 32] were the ﬁrst
to use these techniques for multi-camera stereo computa-
tion. Later, a growing number of researches in computer vi-
sion use graph-based energy minimization for a wide range
of applications, which includes stereo [ 16], texture synthe-
sis [17], image segmentation [ 38], object recognition [ 1],
and others. In this paper, we formulate the matching be-
tween content and style features as an energy minimization
problem. We approximate its global minimum via efﬁcient
graph cuts algorithms. To the best of our knowledge, we are
the ﬁrst to formulate style matching as energy minimization
problem and solve it via graph cuts.
3. Proposed Method
We show the pipeline of our proposed MST in Fig. 3.
3.1. Multimodal Style Representation
In previous CNN-based image style transfer works, there
are two main ways to represent style. One is to use the fea-
tures from the whole image and assume that they are in the
same distribution (e.g., AdaIN [ 11] and WCT [ 24]). The
other one treats the style patterns as individual style patches
(e.g., Deep Feature Reshufﬂe [ 10]). Equal treatments to dif-
ferent style patterns lack ﬂexibility in the real cases, where
there has several distributions among style features. Let’s
see the t-SNE [ 28] visualization for style features in Fig. 2,
where the style features are clustered to multiple groups.
Therefore, if a cluster dominates the feature space, e.g.,
second example of Fig. 1, the Gram matrix based methods
[24,23,11] will fail to capture the the overall style pat-
Figure 4: t-SNE [ 28] visualization for style features with
cluster labels. For each style-visualization pair, we set K=
3and label style features with corresponding cluster labels.
terns. On the other hand, patch-based methods which treat
each sub-patch distinctly would suffer from copying multi-
ple same style patterns to the results directly. For example,
in Fig. 1, the eyes in the style images are copied multiple
times, causing unpleasing stylization results.
Based on the observations and analyses above, we argue
that neither a global statics of deep features nor local neural
patches could be a suitable way to represent the complex
real-world cases. As a result, we propose multimodal style
representation, a more efﬁcient and ﬂexible way to repre-
sent different style patterns.
For a given style image Is, we can extract its deep fea-
turesFs∈ℜC×HsWsvia a pre-trained encoder Eθenc(·),
like VGG-19 [ 37].HsandWsare the height and width
of the style feature. To achieve multimodal representation
in high-dimension feature space, we target to segment the
style patterns into multiple subsets. Technically, we simply
apply K-means to cluster all the style feature points into K
clusters without considering spatial style information
Fs=Fl1
s∪Fl2
s∪···∪Flks∪···∪FlKs, (1)
whereFlks∈ℜC×Nkis thek-th cluster with Nkfeatures
and we assign this cluster a label lk. In the clustered space,
features in the same cluster have similar visual properties
and are likely drawn from the same distribution (resembling
Gaussian Mixture Model [ 31]). This process helps us obtain
a multimodal representation of style.
We visualize multimodal style representation in Fig. 4.
For each style image, we extract its VGG feature (at layer
Conv 41 in VGG-19) and cluster it into K=3 clusters.
Then, we conduct t-SNE [ 28] visualization with the cluster
labels. As shown in Fig. 4, clustering results match our as-
sumption of multimodal style representation well. Nearby
feature points tend to be in the same cluster. These obser-
vation not only shows the multimodal style distribution, but
also demonstrates that clustering is a proper way to model
such a multimodal distribution.
3.2. Graph Based Style Matching
Like style feature extraction, we extract deep content fea-
turesFc∈ℜC×HcWcfrom a content image Ic.HcandWc
are the height and width of the content feature. Distance
measurement is the ﬁrst step before matching. To reach a
good distance metric, we should consider the scale differ-
5945