Style cluster centers
Figure 5: Graph based style matching. Example of the
graph containing content features and style cluster centers.
We match content features with style cluster in pixel level.
ence between the content and style features. Computation
complexity should also be taken into consideration, since all
the content features will be used to match. Based on above
analysis, we calculate the cosine distance between content
featureFc,p∈ℜC×1and style cluster center Fs,lk∈ℜC×1
as follows
D(Fc,p,Fs,lk)=1−Fc,pTFs,lk
/bardblFc,p/bardbl/bardblFs,lk/bardbl, (2)
where(·)Tis transpose operation and /bardbl·/bardblis magnitude of
the feature vector.
Then we target to ﬁnd a labeling fthat assigns each
content feature Fc,pwith a style cluster center label fp∈
{l1,l2,···,lK}. We formulate the disagreement between
fand content features as follows
Edata(f)=HcWc/summationdisplay
p=1D/parenleftbig
Fc,p,Fs,fp/parenrightbig
, (3)
where we name Edata as data energy. Minimizing Edata
encourages fto be consistent with content features.
However, the spatial content information here is not
considered, failing to preserve discontinuity and producing
some unpleasing structures in the stylized results. Instead,
we hope pixels in the same content local region have same
labels. Namely, we want fto be piecewise smooth and
discontinuity preserving. So, we further introduce another
smooth term Esmooth(f)as follows
Esmooth(f)=/summationdisplay
{p,q}∈ΩVp,q(fp,fq),(4)
whereΩis the position set of direct interacting pairs of con-
tent features. Vp,qdenotes the distinct penalty for each po-
sition pair of features {p,q}. This has been investigated to
be important in various computer vision applications [ 2].
Also, various forms of energy functions have been inves-
tigated before. Here, we take the discontinuity preserving
function given by the Potts model
Vp,q(fp,fq)=λ·T(fp/negationslash=fq), (5)
whereT(·)is 1 if its argument is true, and otherwise 0. λis
a smooth constant. This model encourages the labeling fto
Content Style Result Style cluster map Style matching map
Figure 6: Visualization of style matching. Here, we cluster
style features into K=2subsets for better understanding.
pursue several regions, where content features in the same
region have same style cluster labels.
By taking Eqs. ( 3) and ( 4) into consideration, we natu-
rally formulate the style matching problem as a minimiza-
tion of the following energy function:
E(f)=Edata(f)+Esmooth(f). (6)
The whole energy E(f)measures not only the disagree-
ment between fand content features, but also the extent to
whichfis not piecewise smooth. However, the global min-
imization of such an energy function is NP-hard even in the
simplest discontinuity-preserving case [ 2].
To solve the energy minimization problem in Eq. ( 6),
we propose to build a graph by regarding content features
asp-vertices and style cluster centers as l-vertices (shown
in Fig. 5). Then the energy minimization is equal to min-
cut/max-ﬂow problem, which can be efﬁciently solved via
graph cuts [ 2]. After ﬁnding a local minimum, the whole
content features can be re-organized as follows
Fc=Fl1
c∪Fl2
c∪···∪Flkc∪···∪FlKc, (7)
whereFlkcdemotes the sub-set whose content features are
matched with the same style label lk.
We show visualization details about graph based style
matching in Fig. 6. We extract style and content features
from Conv 41 layer in VGG-19. Due to several downsam-
pling modules in VGG-19, the spatial resolution of the fea-
tures is much smaller than that of the inputs. We label the
spacial style feature pixels with their corresponding cluster
labels and obtain the style cluster maps. According to the
style cluster maps in Fig. 6, we ﬁnd that style feature clus-
tering grasps semantic information from style images.
After style matching in pixel level, we get the content-
style matching map, which also reﬂects the semantic infor-
mation, matching the content structures adaptively. Such an
adaptive matching alleviates the wash-out artifacts, when
the style is very simple or has large area of uniﬁed back-
ground. Then, we are able to conduct feature transform in
each content-style pair group.
3.3. Multimodal Style Transfer
For each content-style pair group/braceleftbig
Flkc,Flks/bracerightbig
, we ﬁrst
center them by subtracting their mean vectors μ/parenleftbig
Flkc/parenrightbig
and
μ/parenleftbig
Flks/parenrightbig
respectively. We conduct feature whitening and
coloring as used in WCT [ 24].
Flkcs=CsWcFlkc+μ/parenleftbig
Flks/parenrightbig
, (8)
5946