of the reference style images, they will also distort the local
style patterns, resulting unpleasing visual artifacts.
Let’s start with some examples in Fig. 1. In the ﬁrst
row, where the style image consists of complex textures and
strokes, these methods cannot tell them apart and neglect to
match style patterns to content structures adaptively. This
would introduce some less desired strokes in smooth con-
tent areas, e.g., the sky. In the second row, the style image
has clear spatial patterns (e.g., large uniform background
and blue/red hand). AdaIN, WCT, and LST failed to main-
tain the content structures and suffered from wash-out arti-
facts. This is mainly because the uniﬁed style background
occupies a large proportion in the style image, resulting its
domination in the global statistics of style features. These
observations indicate that it may not be sufﬁcient to repre-
sent style features as at may not be sufﬁcient to represent
style features as a unimodal distribution such as a Gram or
covariance matrix. An ideal style representation should re-
spect to the spatially-distributed style patterns.
Inherited from traditional patch-based methods, these
neural patch-based algorithms could generate visually
pleasing results when content and style images have similar
structures. However, the greedy example matching usually
employed by these methods will introduce less desired style
patterns to the outputs. This is illustrated by the bottom two
examples in Fig. 1, where some salient patterns in the style
images, e.g., the eyes and lips, are improperly copied to the
buildings and landscape. Moreover, the last row of Fig. 1
also illustrates shape distortion problem of these methods;
e.g., the appearance for the girl has changed. This phe-
nomenon apparently limits the choice of style images for
these methods.
To address these issues, we propose the multimodal style
transfer (MST), a more ﬂexible and general style trans-
fer method that seeks for a sweet spot between parametric
(gram matrix based) and non-parametric (patch based) ap-
proaches. Speciﬁcally, instead of representing the style with
a unimodal distribution, we propose a multimodal style rep-
resentation with graph based style matching mechanism to
adaptively match the style patterns to a content image.
Our main contributions are summarized as follows:
•We analyze the feature distributions of different style
images (see Fig. 2) and propose a multimodal style
representation that better models the style feature dis-
tribution. This multimodal representation consists of a
mixture of clusters, each of which represents a particu-
lar style pattern. It also allows users to mix-and-match
different styles to render diverse stylized results.
•We formulate style-content matching as an energy
minimization problem with a graph and solve it via
graph cuts. Style clusters are adapted to content fea-
tures with respect to the content spatial conﬁguration.
Figure 2: t-SNE [ 28] visualization for style features. The
original high-dimension style features are extracted at layer
Conv 41 in VGG-19 [ 37] and are reduced to 3 dimensions
via t-SNE. We can see the feature distributions tend to ﬁt as
multimodal distributions rather than single-modal ones.
•We demonstrate the strength of MST by extensive
comparison with several state-of-the-art style trans-
fer methods. The robustness and ﬂexibility of MST
is shown with different sub-style numbers and multi-
style mixtures. The general idea of MST can be ex-
tended to improve other existing stylization methods.
2. Related Works
Style Transfer . Originating from non-realistic render-
ing [ 18], image style transfer is closely related to texture
synthesis [ 5,7,6]. Gatys et al. [8] were the ﬁrst to for-
mulate style transfer as the matching of multi-level deep
features extracted from a pre-trained deep neural network,
which has been widely used in various tasks [ 20,21,22].
Lots of improvements have been proposed based on the
works of Gatys et al. [8]. Johnson et al. [14] trained feed-
forward style-speciﬁc network and produced one stylization
with one model. Sanakoyeu et al. [34] further proposed a
style-aware content loss for high-resolution style transfer.
Jing et al. [12] proposed a StrokePyramid module to enable
controllable stroke with adaptive receptive ﬁelds. However,
these methods are either time consuming or have to re-train
new models for new styles.
The ﬁrst arbitrary style transfer was proposed by Chen
and Schmidt [ 4], who matched each content patch to the
most similar style patch and swapped them. Luan et al. [27]
proposed deep photo style transfer by adding a regulariza-
tion term to the optimization function. Based on markov
random ﬁeld (MRF), Li and Wand [ 19] proposed CNNMRF
to enforce local patterns in deep feature space. Ruder et
al.[33] improved video stylization with temporal coher-
ence. Although their visual stylizations for arbitrary style
are appealing, the results are not stable [ 33].
Recently, Huang et al. [11] proposed real-time style
transfer by matching the mean-variance statistics between
content and style features. Li et al. [24] further introduced
whitening and coloring (WCT) by matching the covariance
matrices. Li et al. boosted style transfer with linear style
transfer (LST) [ 23]. Gu et al. [10] proposed deep fea-
ture reshufﬂe (DFR), which connects both local and global
style losses used in parametric and non-parametric methods.
Sheng et al. [36] proposed AvatarNet to enable multi-scale
transfer for arbitrary style. Shen et al. [35] built meta net-
5944