StyleContent
MST-1 MST-2 MST-3 MST-4 MST-5
Figure 11: Style cluster number investigation. Same content image with complex and simple style images.
Style Content AdaIN WCT MST
Figure 12: Multi-style transfer. MST treats patterns from different style images distinctively and transfers them adaptively.
5.3. Style Cluster Number
We investigate how style cluster number Kaffects the
stylization in Fig. 11. WhenK=1, our MST performs
style transfer by taking the whole style features equally,
resulting in either very complex (1st row) or simple (2nd
row) stylizations. These results are not consistent with the
content structures and lack ﬂexibility, leading to unpleas-
ing feelings to users. Instead, we can produce multiple
results with different K. When we enlarge Kwith mul-
timodal style representation, stylization results would ei-
ther throw unnecessary style patterns (1st row) or introduce
more matched style patterns (2nd row). The stylizations
become more matched with the content structures. This is
mainly because multimodal style representation allows dis-
tinctive and adaptive treatment for the style patterns. More
important, MST reconstructs several stylization results with
differentK, providing multiple selections for the users.
5.4. Adaptive Multi-Style Transfer
Most previous style transfer methods enable style in-
terpolation, which blends the content image with a set of
weighted stylizations. However, we don’t ﬁx the weights
for each style image, but adaptively interpolate the style
patterns to the content. As shown in Fig. 12, the content
image3is stylized by two style images simultaneously. We
use AdaIN [ 11] and WCT [ 24] for reference (because it’s
not strictly fair comparisons) by setting equal weight for
each style image. In Fig. 12, AdaIN and WCT suffer from
wash-out artifacts. While, our MST preserves the content
structures well. MST transfers more portrait hair style to
the cat body and more cloud style to the cat eyes and green
leaves. Our adaptive multi-style transfer is also similar to
spatial control in previous methods [ 11,24]. But, they
need additional manually designed mask as input, consum-
ing more user efforts. Instead, MST automatically allows
good matching between content and style features.
3It’s from https://wallpaperstream.com
Inputs AdaIN AdaIN + MST-2 AdaIN + MST-3
Figure 13: Generalization of MST to AdaIN [ 11].
5.5. Generalization of MST
We further investigate the generalization of our pro-
posed MST to improve some existing style transfer meth-
ods. Here, we take the popular AdaIN [ 11] as an example.
We apply style clustering and graph based style matching
to AdaIN, which is then denoted as “AdaIN + MST- K”. As
shown in Fig. 13, AdaIn may distort some content structures
(e.g., mouth) by switching the global mean and standard de-
viation between style and content features. When we clus-
ter the style feature into Ksub-sets and match them with
content features via graph cuts, such a phenomenon can be
obviously alleviated (see 3rd and 4th columns in Fig. 13).
According to these observations and analyses, we can learn
that our MST can be generalized and will beneﬁt to some
other existing style transfer methods.
6. Conclusion
We propose multimodal style representation to model
the complex style distribution. We then formulate the style
matching problem as an energy minimization one and solve
it using our proposed graph based style matching. As a re-
sult, we propose multimodal style transfer to transform fea-
tures in a multimodal way. We treat the style patterns dis-
tinctively, and also consider the semantic content structure
and its matching with style patterns. We also investigate
that MST can be generalized to some existing style transfer
methods. We conduct extensive experiments to validate the
effectiveness, robustness, and ﬂexibility of MST.
Acknowledgements : This work was supported by Adobe
Research funding.
5950