Application Estimated Needs Possible Evaluation
Virtual assistant clear, pleasant voice likability (s), intelligibility (o, s, b), comprehension (b),
preference (b), voluntary interaction time (b), task suc-
cess and efﬁciency (b)
Humanoid Robot humanoid (but not human-like)
voiceperc. suitability (s), preference and interaction time (b),
task success and efﬁciency (b)
Navigation sufﬁciently loud, clear, timely intelligibility (o, s, b), task success (b), comprehensive-
ness (s,b)
Announcements loud, clear comprehension under noisy or distracted conditions
(o,s,b)
Interactive travel guide clear, pleasant intelligibility (o, s,b), preference (b), voluntary interac-
tion time (b), comprehensiveness (s,b)
Screen readers intelligible at high speed, infor-
mative prosodyintelligibility (o, s, b), comprehensiveness (s,b), efﬁ-
ciency (b)
Audio books (leisure) slow, expressive preference (b), voluntary interaction time (b)
Audio books (educational) optimized for online compre-
hensioncomprehensiveness (s,b), task success and efﬁciency (b)
Video games convincing personality, expres-
sivepreference and interaction time (b), personality ﬁt (s),
convincing (s) and easily identiﬁable (b) emotional dis-
play
V oice prostheses adaptable speaker identity, low
latencysimilarity to original voice (o,s), latency (o), long term
user satisfaction (s)
Dialogue systems timely, incremental, suitable
discourse markerspreference and voluntary interaction time (b), task suc-
cess and efﬁciency (b), adaptive behavior (b)
Speech-to-speech translation adaptable speaker identity similarity to original voice (o,s), latency (o)
Table 1: A ﬁrst top-down sketch of listeners’ demands on TTS for a variety of applications as well as ideas for their subjective (s),
objective (o) or behavioral (b) measurement.
system. To overcome this problem, typical surveys employed in
HCI or HRI tend to be very extensive [34], thereby trying to ad-
dress all potential quality dimensions a user may have employed
in her or his assessment. However, this poses a high risk of get-
ting invalid responses, due to fatigue or boredom [35]. Also,
the questionnaires do not normally address the amount of devi-
ation from a user’s expectations, which may considerably affect
interaction quality. However, global subjective assessments of
interaction quality remain a useful diagnostic.
Most metrics employed in questionnaires try to capture a
global impression of signal quality such as mean opinion score
(MOS) [36]. Alternatively, metrics target more ﬁne-grained
system diagnostics such as multiple stimuli with hidden refer-
ence and anchor (MUSHRA) [37], or pairwise comparison ap-
proaches that ultimately allow for a multidimensional scaling of
systems, but rely on multiple assessments of comparable utter-
ances across systems [38].
An alternative way of grasping TTS related problems dur-
ing an ongoing interaction has been developed by [39]. In their
auditory response system, they have third parties evaluate an
interaction, and giving a simple binary response in moments
where “issues” arise. This method has the advantage of mak-
ing an assessment of subjective interaction quality during in-
teraction, while the behavioral and physiological metrics may
be overly sensitive or difﬁcult to interpret. However, especially
EEG and eye/mouse tracking may be perfect indicators of mis-
matches between a user’s expectation and the actual realization,
and my therefore produce good estimates of interactive quality.
4.3. Behavioral assessment of TTS
If after less impressionistic measures of intelligibility, estab-
lished measures are “semantically unpredictable sentences”(SUSs, [40]), together with word edit distance, word error rate
estimates, or rhyme tests [41, 42]. With the advent of highly
intelligible systems in recent years, the need for speciﬁc intel-
ligibility measurements has become less of an issue. However,
they may still play a role in more experimental systems such as
articulatory synthesis.
Other than intelligibility, the measurement of comprehen-
siveness , i.e. the degree to which a message’s semantics and
pragmatics has been understood, is largely under-researched
and much less understood. While some researchers postulate
to assess it in content repetition tasks [43], [44] suggests it can
only be assessed indirectly, e.g. by asking questions that allow
for an inference about how well a listener has grasped a mes-
sage’s content.
Behavioral performance has been most meaningfully em-
ployed in evaluations of TTS embedded in interactive systems,
e.g. by assessing the amount of retrieved information content
(memory task efﬁciency) after an interaction between a listener
and a dialogue system [5]. Related metrics are efﬁciency and
effectiveness, which take into account task completion time or
the duration of an interaction and are often employed in the
evaluation of dialogue systems [4]. While a long interaction
time is typically regarded an indicator of low interaction qual-
ity in assistance systems, a longer (voluntary) interaction time
with a system intended to entertain, e.g., a game software or an
audio book, may actually be an indicator of a good system per-
formance. Thus, the quality metrics are not independent from
the application they are testing, and operationalizations need to
be adjusted for each evaluation. Yet another form of behav-
ioral analysis was chosen in [45], where participants’ level of
verbal adaptation to different interactive character displays was
analyzed in a dialogue task. A high degree of adaptation to dif-