ferent characters (with individual voice proﬁles) was taken as
evidence of a better user experience.
While measures related to task performance may be indica-
tive of listening effort or a system’s comprehensiveness, they
typically fail to unveil why andwhere the problems occurred
during the interaction. To tackle this issue, methods are needed
that continuously monitor the interaction. Here, both behavioral
and physiological metrics of speech synthesis have been ex-
plored: [46] combined eye tracking in a visual world paradigm
with subjective judgments to explore a facilitating effect of a
TTS for listener comprehension. [47] looked at response times
and task performance durations in a simple GUI-based interac-
tive game, where listeners had to move around geometric shapes
according to a synthetic voice’s instructions. Also, some ﬁrst
attempts of using physiological rather than behavioral metrics
such as pupil dilation or EEG exist [48, 38].
Generally, an advantage of the behavioral (or physiological)
assessment methods described here lies in the circumstance that
they do not expect listeners to have an informed opinion about
their preferences or expectations. This is likely to be the case
unless participants have prior experiences with TTS-based sys-
tems (cf. Section 3). However, it is still unclear to what extent
behavioral metrics correlate with subjectively experienced qual-
ity.
Summing up, although a wide range of metrics have been
explored, and contextualizations are possible, TTS evaluations
still predominantly rely on global quality estimates using MOS-
based tests based on randomly chosen individual utterances.
At least some of the approaches sketched above can be easily
set-up, and could be carried out resource-efﬁciently, e.g., using
web-based interfaces allowing for crowdsourcing approaches,
and have the potential as alternatives or at least supplements to
traditional evaluation procedures.
Take Home Message 3:
Suitable alternatives to traditional decontextualized TTS
evaluation procedures exist!
5. Conclusion
To conclude, it seems to be mostly a lack of alternative recom-
mendation standards that prevent current TTS evaluations from
being more insightful and less mono-cultured. We therefore end
this paper with a proposition, namely that the development of a
set of best practice recommendations (rather than a standardiza-
tion) is a proﬁtable research area in its own right.
Our proposition parallels similar suggestions within the
HCI community, striving to enhance the technology-centered
concept of “Quality of Experience” with the more user-centered
concept of “User Experience” [49]. To initiate research in this
area, a few guiding questions could be the following ones:
1. Are there cases in which global impressions of subjec-
tive quality actually generalize across applications, thus
rendering more complex evaluations unnecessary?
2. How can we improve our estimates of user needs (and
corresponding quality dimensions)?
3. Do mismatches between user expectations and synthetic
styles predict interaction quality in a reliable fashion?
4. Do behavioral (e.g., eye gaze) or subjective
(e.g.,audience responses) online measures of TTSquality reliably point to local issues that affect global
interaction quality?
5. Which dimension of subjective quality do the other met-
rics (objective, physiological, behavioral) actually as-
sess?
6. How can novel high quality synthesis such as WaveNet
be put to use in TTS evaluation?
7. How can we meaningfully generalize from our short-
time evaluations to long-time user experience?
Take Home Message 4:
The development of a set of best practice recommendations for
TTS evaluation should be a research area in its own right!
6. References
[1] M. Wollerton, “V oice wars: Siri vs. alexa vs. google assistant
three voice assistants are ﬁghting for space in your smart
home – is there a clear winner?” 2 2018. [Online].
Available: https://www.cnet.com/news/voice-wars-siri-vs-alexa-
vs-google-assistant/
[2] “Methods for subjective determination of transmission quality,”
International Telecommunication Union, Geneva, ITU-R Recom-
mendation P.800, 1996.
[3] S. Möller, Quality Engineering: Qualität kommunikationstechnis-
cher Systeme . Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag, 2010.
[4] “Subjective quality evaluation of telephone services based on spo-
ken dialogue systems,” International Telecommunication Union,
ITU-R Recommendation ITU-P.851, 2003.
[5] S. Betz, B. Carlmeyer, P. Wagner, and B. Wrede, “Interactive Hes-
itation Synthesis: Modelling and Evaluation,” Multimodal Tech-
nologies and Interaction , vol. 2, no. 1, 2018.
[6] P. Wagner and S. Betz, “Speech Synthesis Evaluation – Realizing
a Social Turn,” in Tagungsband Elektronische Sprachsignalverar-
beitung (ESSV) , 2017, pp. 167–172.
[7] J. Mendelson and M. Aylett, “Beyond the listening test: An in-
teractive approach to tts evaluation,” in Proceedings of the 18th
Annual Conference of the International Speech Communication
Association (Interspeech 2017, Stockholm) , 2017, pp. 249–253.
[8] M. Wester, C. Valentini-Botinhao, and G. E. Henter, “Are we us-
ing enough listeners? No! — an empirically-supported critique of
Interspeech 2014 TTS evaluations,” in Proceedings of Interspeech
2015 , Dresden, Germany, 2015, pp. 3476–3480.
[9] A. Rosenberg and B. Ramabhadran, “Bias and statistical signiﬁ-
cance in evaluating speech synthesis with mean opinion scores,”
inProceedings of the 18th Annual Conference of the International
Speech Communication Association (Interspeech 2017, Stock-
holm) , 2017, pp. 3976–3980.
[10] A. Baird, S. Jørgensen, E. Parada-Cabaleiro, S. Hantke, N. Cum-
mins, and B. Schuller, “Perception of paralinguistic traits in syn-
thesized voices,” in Proceedings of AM ’17 , London, UK, 2017.
[11] M. Aylett and A. Turk, “The smooth signal redundancy
hypothesis: A functional explanation for relationships be-
tween redundancy, prosodic prominence, and duration in
spontaneous speech,” Language and Speech , vol. 47, no. 1,
pp. 31–56, 2004, pMID: 15298329. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1177/00238309040470010201
[12] B. Lindblom, Explaining Phonetic Variation: A Sketch of the
H&H Theory . Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1990, pp. 403–439.
[13] D. Watson, J. Arnold, and M. K. Tanenhaus, “Tic tac TOE: Ef-
fects of predictability and importance on acoustic prominence in
language production,” Cognition , vol. 106, no. 3, pp. 1548–1557,
2008.