Speech Synthesis Evaluation — State-of-the-Art Assessment and Suggestion
for a Novel Research Program
Petra Wagner1;2, Jonas Beskow3, Simon Betz1;2, Jens Edlund3, Joakim Gustafson3, Gustav Eje
Henter3, Sébastien Le Maguer4, Zoﬁa Malisz3, Éva Székely3, Christina Tånnander3, Jana Voße1;2
1Phonetics Workgroup, Faculty of Linguistics and Literary Studies, Bielefeld University
2CITEC, Bielefeld University
3Division of Speech, Music, and Hearing, KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden
4Trinity College, Dublin
petra.wagner@uni-bielefeld.de
Abstract
Speech synthesis applications have become an ubiquity, in nav-
igation systems, digital assistants or as screen or audio book
readers. Despite their impact on the acceptability of the sys-
tems in which they are embedded, and despite the fact that dif-
ferent applications probably need different types of TTS voices,
TTS evaluation is still largely treated as an isolated problem.
Even though there is strong agreement among researchers that
the mainstream approaches to Text-to-Speech (TTS) evaluation
are often insufﬁcient and may even be misleading, there exist
few clear-cut suggestions as to (1) how TTS evaluations may
be realistically improved on a large scale, and (2) how such im-
provements may lead to an informed feedback for system devel-
opers and, ultimately, better systems relying on TTS. This paper
reviews the current state-of-the-art in TTS evaluation, and sug-
gests a novel user-centered research program for this area.
1. Introduction
— Is that what people want?
— It’s what we do.
(Tom Stoppard)
Synthetic speech is ubiquitous. We hear it in our daily lives
as public transport announcements or when interacting with
digital assistants or navigation systems, and synthetic voices
have been made famous by personalities such as Stephen Hawk-
ing. Their perceptual quality has a strong impact on the ac-
ceptability of the systems in which they are embedded, and
voice related quality issues are subject to much public discus-
sion in online platforms, where journalists have even diagnosed
ongoing “voice wars” [1]. Despite this, and despite the fact
that speech synthesis technologies have undergone enormous
technological developments in the past few years, TTS evalua-
tion is approached in more or less the same way as in the late
1990s, when the International Telecommunication Union (In-
ternational Telecommunication Union (ITU)) contributed sub-
stantially towards evaluation standards [2]. However, these
standards were not predominantly designed for TTS evaluation.
Rather, they originated as general recommendations for assess-
ing the output quality of speech transmission systems, where an
undisturbed reference signal can be straightforwardly deﬁned,
and where the speciﬁc application and listening situation need
not be taken into account. Rather, these context factors were
treated as confounds that had to be controlled for in experimen-
tal settings.
The crucial problem with this underlying assumption is,that with respect to speech transmissions, there is no stable ref-
erence or gold standard that exists independently of a situation
it is embedded in. This is easy to understand with the help of a
thought experiment: Imagine a situation in which you consider
the spoken delivery of an utterance as near perfect, e.g., when a
highly skilled actor reads out a poem. Now imagine this exact
style of delivery in a different social setting, e.g. a telephone-
based inquiry, or by a person with a different gender, size, or
personality. The result would most certainly not be perceived as
“optimal” or “perfect”, due to style mismatches between what
is expected or situationally adequate, and what is perceived (cf.
section 2).
In other words, just like clothes do not ﬁt every person alike,
and just like human speakers adapt their way of speaking to the
situational needs and the audience they are addressing, the de-
velopment of TTS is not an all-purpose or one-size-ﬁts-all prob-
lem. Hence, the quality of a particular TTS will most likely
not perceived in a stable fashion across various application con-
texts. This insight is mainstream for related domains such as the
evaluation of dialogue systems, where perceived system quality
cannot be meaningfully assessed in a decontextualized fashion
[3, 4]. First evidence supporting this claim also for the domain
of TTS evaluation has been produced by [5], who show that the
same TTS material is rated differently in a crowdsourced, non-
interactive MOS rating, and an MOS rating following an inter-
action between a human and a virtual agent in a collaborative
task. Despite these insights, a meta analysis [6] revealed that
the vast majority of TTS evaluations remain to rely on decontex-
tualized listening tests, where participants score the quality of
isolated sentences rather than embedding them within realistic
applications or meaningful interactions. Thus, our knowledge
about the practical applicability of the various existing systems
remains vague at best.
In a similar vein, recent times have seen an increasing num-
ber of papers criticizing traditional approaches to TTS evalua-
tion [7, 5], or pointing out frequent methodological ﬂaws such
as the low validity of most TTS evaluations due to small par-
ticipant numbers and a lack of diversity in the tested listener
groups, especially in the light of vast individual differences be-
tween listeners [8, 9], which shows stronger for some traits (age,
human-likeness) than others (gender, accent origin) [10]. Gen-
erally, these investigations point out the necessity for a better
conceptual framing of the perception tasks, together with larger
test populations and more careful statistical approaches.
Despite this repeatedly expressed scepticism of the way
TTS evaluations are typically carried out, the majority of TTS
evaluation appears to follow familiar, seemingly safe, paths.
brought to you by CORE View metadata, citation and similar papers at core.ac.uk
provided by Publications at Bielefeld University