ternatively, we need to ﬁnd diagnostics that point towards poten-
tial problems, without explicitly mentioning them. It is clearly
the case, that users may be unable to express an informed opin-
ion about their expectation of a TTS voice, other than, e.g., an
opinion about the music or food they prefer.
Thus, while a ﬁrst step towards a better tailoring of TTS
evaluations may lie in an in-depth analysis of needs, these
needs probably arise only within a speciﬁc application context
or interactive situation, and may evolve slowly over time and
within a increasing user experience. Our view on evaluation
consequently changes from the perspective that is looking for
a general-purpose synthesis to one that has much in common
with an “audition scenario”, where a highly skilled director or a
team of experts cast several actors throughout a series of differ-
ent scenes, until they have found the ideal person to perform a
particular role.
Given the lack of available empirical data, we are currently
conﬁned to deﬁne the application-speciﬁc needs or relevant
quality dimensions based on top-down assumptions, e.g., a TTS
used in a noisy environment should be sufﬁciently clear, while a
TTS used for leisure-time audio book reading should probably
have some degree of expressivity.
A ﬁrst attempt of such a top-down analysis of user needs
is given below in Table 1. Obviously, this table does not yet
include an estimate for different user groups (elderly, children,
non-native, distracted, visually impaired, ...), and will have to be
ﬁne-tuned to take into account different cognitive, physiological
and personality traits and abilities.
Summing up, our second contention is that we need to in-
tensify the analyses of listener’s needs and expectations, to be
able to develop suitably tailored evaluation settings. An addi-
tional strategy lies in exploring in developing useful diagnostic
tools that point to potential issues during an ongoing interaction
with an TTS.
Take Home Message 2:
We need to assess and take into account listeners’
application-speciﬁc needs and expectations!
4. Reviewing measures of TTS performance
Obviously, a straightforward way of ﬁnding out whether the es-
timated user needs are met by a system, is to simply ask or test
listeners in a subjective evaluation . Another approach is to per-
form an objective evaluation , relying on an automated criterion
that operationalizes an abstract quality dimension. Yet another,
albeit less common strategy is to test whether the system allows
listeners to perform an intended task better or worse, using a
behavioral evaluation . Below, we give a short overview of the
current state-of-the-art in objective, subjective, and behavioral
TTS evaluation. More speciﬁcally, we will show that despite a
current lack of informed quality dimensions, we already have a
large repertoire of objective and subjective metrics at our dis-
posal. In Table 1, we give examples for how a system’s needs,
or quality dimensions, can be operationalized in objective, sub-
jective or behavioral evaluations. Some of these are not com-
pletely independent: Comprehensiveness may be regarded as a
form of task success in an announcement system, and is likely to
be a prerequisite for task success in most speech-based systems.
Still, speech-based systems often will support tasks beyond the
processing of speeech-based information.4.1. Objective assessment of TTS
Objective assessment generally consists of getting a score to
classify a system. While the idea of scoring synthetic speech
in an objective and automated manner is theoretically attrac-
tive, as it reduces the need for expensive, time-consuming, and
noisy subjective evaluations, the truth is that our current ob-
jective metrics do not align well with human perception. This
limits their use mostly to system tuning, while the ﬁnal evalua-
tion still must be based on a subjective listening test. Besides,
not every trait that can be assessed subjectively has an objec-
tively assessable counterpart. Furthermore, many of the more
accurate objective measures require access to natural speech to
compare against, or knowledge about the true noise signal in a
speech-in-noise scenario, which further limits their applicabil-
ity.
The most common speech aspects to score are intelligibility
(especially in noisy or reverberant environments), but also seg-
mental quality, and prosodic correlates such as pitch and voiced-
unvoiced accuracy are assessed. When trying to capture “nat-
uralness”, objective metrics tend to focus on spectral features,
and consider prosody as a secondary problem, an approach that
seems to be based on a bias that is difﬁcult to motivate from a
phonetic point of view - besides the fact that “naturalness” is a
difﬁcult concept in general (cf. section 2).
Speech quality assessment is mainly done using the mel-
cepstral distortion (MCD) and the PESQ family of standards
from the ITU [30], and use the original speech as a reference
against which the corresponding synthetic utterance is scored.
The computation consists of time warping to align the two sig-
nals (in case the speech timings differ), computing the Eu-
clidean distance between each aligned natural and synthetic and
mel-ceptral vectors (frame), and averaging these distances over
time.
There has been substantial effort to develop more advanced
quality-assessment methods for synthetic speech based on ma-
chine learning, e.g. in Hinterleitner’s PhD work [31]. However
in general, the correlation between system-level assessments
might be passable, but stimulus-level correlations are low. More
impressive results were reported by AutoMOS [32], but this
system has only been trained and evaluated on a single speaker,
and is not publicly available. However, with the advent of high-
quality, probabilistic waveform-level synthesis models such as
WaveNet [33], we ﬁnally have synthesizers capable of generat-
ing high-quality speech waveforms [25]. These models encode
a lot of information about what a “natural”-sounding, or rather
human-like, waveform may actually look and sound like. It is
entirely possible that the likelihood that a trained waveform-
level synthesizer assigns to a given speech waveform could be
used as a good indicator of whether or not that waveform is
“human-like” or not, without actual access to a comparable ut-
terance from a human speaker. However, this aspect has to our
knowledge not yet been investigated. In any case, results need
not transfer across speakers and might be sensitive to linear or
nonlinear processing applied to the signals.
4.2. Subjective assessment of TTS
A popular approach to evaluate interaction quality employs
questionnaires, explicitly asking users for their impression of
various quality dimensions (e.g., likability, intelligibility, per-
ceived intelligence). Given our lack of properly understand-
ing the users’ needs and expectations and quality dimensions,
however, this method is risky, as it presupposes a good under-
standing of what a user actually misses or likes in the technical