The likely reason for this is that alternative standards or at least
clear-cut recommendations are still lacking.
This paper will take a ﬁrst step towards suggesting an al-
ternative program for synthesis evaluation, which is based on
contextual appropriateness rather than an unrealistic notion of
an existing gold standard (Section 2). We will then make a ﬁrst
suggestion for an alternative strategy towards speech synthesis
evaluation, resting on an in-depth analysis of application cen-
tered user needs (Section 3), followed by an assessment of exist-
ing approaches towards synthesis quality measurement (Section
4). Finally (Section 5), we suggest that the design and standard-
ization of suitable TTS evaluation schemes should be accepted
as a necessary research area in its own right.
2. Contextual appropriateness as metric of
speech quality?
We contend that just as human speech production is highly vari-
able and comes in many different “styles”, which are continu-
ously adapted by speakers given dynamically changing social
(tutoring, chatting, arguing, counseling...), individual (hearing
problems, attitude, level of distraction, motivation, familiar-
ity), linguistic (frequency, predictability, suprisal, importance)
or environmental settings (external noise, mutual visibility, ...)
[11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18]. Due to this inherent contextual
embedding, human speech production can never be “neutral” or
“perfectly natural”, and no speaking style therefore qualiﬁes as
a reference signal that a speech event of inherently less quality,
e.g. a synthetic one, can be meaningfully compared to. Still,
this remains an underlying assumption in much TTS evaluation
research, where this reference or gold standard is often taken
as being equivalent to “human read speech”. Some researchers
criticize this implicit assumption, and postulate an alternative
reference such as “conversational speech” [19]. While such an
approach may be useful for a particular application such as di-
alogue systems research, neither speaking style is inherently
“neutral” or “natural”: Read speech is entirely appropriate in
certain contexts of human communication, e.g. when reading
a story to a child, and conversational speech in others. Thus,
while no style is inherently neutral, every style can be more
or less appropriate for a given context, e.g. a speaking loudly
may be an optimal choice in a loud pub, but entirely inappro-
priate in more formal situations [18]. Appropriateness given a
certain situation or application may be thus a better indicator
of measuring the suitability of a certain speaking style over an-
other. This is in line with the analysis by [20, 21], who claims
that long-known problems of human machine interaction such
as the uncanny valley can be modeled as a mismatch between a
user’s expectations and a machine’s actual expression. In fact,
attempts at deﬁning suitable voices for robots have found that
some human listeners prefer a robot to sound “robot-like”, with
the typical artifacts created by formant-based speech synthesis,
even though these are often dispreferred in traditional listening
tests [22]. In an evaluation dedicated to ﬁnd a suitable synthetic
voice for Pepper interacting with autistic children, [23] indeed
ﬁnd some support for the hypothesis of TTS quality to be pre-
dictable by a ﬁt between what listeners expect a robot to sound
like, and what it actually does sound like. Also, they conﬁrm
the hypothesis that human voices are not necessarily a suitable
gold standard for TTS quality. Contrary to this, however, are
the results by [24], who shows that human voices are preferred
in more complex tasks. It is unclear, though, whether this ﬁnd-
ing is really caused by the style of voice, or is an effect of theprocessing difﬁculties introduced by speech synthesis artifacts
especially present in more traditional speech synthesis systems
[25].
We therefore contend that even if the goal of the TTS eval-
uation is a “pure” system comparison, without an actual appli-
cation in mind, some kind of conceptual framing may be advis-
able. Indeed, [19] report that simply asking listeners to imagine
a particular interactive situation, had an effect on listener’s im-
pressions. If no such framing is provided, listeners are forced to
imagine some context in which they may listen to the TTS, and
are prone to come up with a corresponding set of quality dimen-
sions. Indeed, this factor is likely to be one of the causes for the
strong variation found among participants of TTS evaluations
[8, 9].
An embedding in a realistic application can also make in-
terlocutors more sensitive for quality issues: in [5], it was
found that an interactive setting increased listener’s sensitiv-
ity for quality losses introduced by synthetic hesitations, even
though the hesitations increased their performance in a memory
task.
For now, we believe that these conceptual framings can be
carried out under controlled, laboratory conditions, as they are
common practice in related ﬁelds such as Human Computer In-
teraction or Human Robot Interaction. In fact, some of these
paradigms, e.g., preference tests, have already been success-
fully applied to the evaluation of prosodic styles [26].
Thus, our ﬁrst contention is that TTS evaluation may proﬁt
from a change of perspectives, moving from the underlying as-
sumption of a stable ideal baseline, to the perspective of choos-
ing and tuning the parameters in such a way that they are most
appropriate to a target application. Even if no such target ap-
plication can be identiﬁed, it is advisable to provide some con-
ceptual framing to participants in order to guide them to a set
of speech quality dimensions that is comparable across partic-
ipants and as general as possible, e.g. by instructing them “to
imagine to listen to a smart phone reading out a newspaper ar-
ticle”. This type of framing is likely to affect the sentence ma-
terial to be chosen for synthesis. Next, we need to specify the
parameter space in which these applications are best evaluated.
Take Home Message 1:
There is no stable gold standard for optimal speech quality!
3. How to assess listener needs, expectations
and preferences
A main problem with the paradigm sketched above is that we
hitherto know very little about the individual and application
centered needs and expectations of listeners with respect to TTS
voices. Still, some approaches towards analyzing user prefer-
ences have been made: In an analysis of blind TTS users’ pref-
erences, [27] found out that participants often prefer formant
synthesis over concatenative systems, as this performs better in
ultrafast conditions. [28] conducted a large-scale survey on user
preferences with respect to voices in car navigation systems. A
more recent study directly used the intelligibility proﬁles of el-
derly listeners to ﬁne-tune a TTS to their particular needs [29].
However, the general lack of information on user expectations
poses a huge difﬁculty for TTS evaluations: if we want to come
up with a diagnostic evaluation of our TTS voice that goes be-
yond a global assessment of quality, we need to ask precise
questions, especially if questionnaires are being employed. Al-