cial images. For example, mismatched facial landmark points
[Yang et al. , 2019 ], ﬁxed size of facial area [Li and Lyu,
2019 ], and unique ﬁngerprints of GANs [Zhang et al. , 2019b;
Yuet al. , 2019 ],etc. These approaches will be invalid in
dealing with improved or advanced GANs. Existing works
are sensitive to perturbation attacks, but robustness is quite
important for a fake detector deployed in the wild.
3 Our Method
In this section, we ﬁrst give our basic insight and present an
overview of FakeSpotter in spotting fake faces by monitor-
ing neuron behaviors. Then, a neuron coverage criteria mean
neuron coverage ( MNC ) is proposed for capturing the layer-
by-layer neuron activation behaviors. Finally, FakeSpotter
differentiates four different types of fake faces with a simple
binary-classiﬁer.
3.1 Insight
Neuron coverage techniques are widely adopted for investi-
gating the internal behaviors of DNNs and play an impor-
tant role in assuring the quality and security of DNNs. It
explores activated neurons whose output values are larger
than a threshold. The activated neurons serve as another
representation of inputs that preserves the learned layer-by-
layer representations in DNNs. Studies have shown that ac-
tivated neurons exhibit strong capabilities in capturing more
subtle features of inputs that are important for studying the
intrinsic of inputs. DeepXplore [Peiet al. , 2017 ]ﬁrst in-
troduces neuron coverage as metrics for DNN testing to as-
sure their qualities. Some work exploits the critical activated
neurons in layers to detect adversarial examples for securing
DNNs [Maet al. , 2019b; Ma et al. , 2019a; Ma et al. , 2018b;
Zhang et al. , 2019a ].
Our work is motivated by the power of layer-wise activated
neurons in capturing the subtle features of inputs which could
be used for amplifying the differences between real and syn-
thesized facial images. Based on this insight, we propose
FakeSpotter by monitoring the neuron behaviors in deep FR
systems ( e.g., VGG-Face) for fake face detection. Deep FR
systems have made incredible progress in face recognition
but are still vulnerable to identifying fake faces [Korshunov
and Marcel, 2018 ]. In Figure 2, we present an overview
of FakeSpotter using layer-wise neuron behavior as features
with a simple binary-classiﬁer to identify real and fake faces.
3.2 Monitoring Neuron Behaviors
In DNNs, a neuron is a basic unit and the ﬁnal layer neu-
ron outputs are employed for prediction. Given an input of
trained DNN, the activation function (e.g., Sigmoid, ReLU)
computes the output value of neurons with connected neurons
xiin the previous layers, weights matrix Wk
i, and biasbj.
Activated neurons in each individual layers are determined
by whether the output value is higher than a threshold .
In this work, we propose a new neuron coverage crite-
rion, named mean neuron coverage ( MNC ), for determin-
ing the threshold . Existing approaches [Maet al. , 2018a;
Classifier
RealFake
Real FacesFake Faces
RealFakeFeaturesFakeSpotter
TraditionalReal FacesFake Faces
ClassifierFigure 2: An overview of the proposed fake face detection method,
FakeSpotter. Compared to the traditional learning-based method
(shown at the bottom), the FakeSpotter uses layer-wise neuron be-
havior as features, as opposed to ﬁnal-layer neuron output. Our ap-
proach uses a shallow neural network as the classiﬁer while tradi-
tional methods rely on deep neural networks in classiﬁcation.
Xieet al. , 2019 ]in calculating threshold are mostly de-
signed for testing DNNs and are not applicable for fake de-
tection. Pei et al.[Peiet al. , 2017 ]deﬁne a global threshold
for activating neurons in all layers, which is too rough.
In DNNs, each layer plays their own unique roles in learn-
ing the representations of inputs [Mahendran and Vedaldi,
2015 ]. Here, we introduce another strategy by specifying a
thresholdlfor each layer l. The threshold lis the aver-
age value of neuron outputs in each layer for given training
inputs. The layer lis the convolutional and fully-connected
layers which are valuable layers preserving more representa-
tion information in the model. Speciﬁcally, we calculate the
thresholdlfor each layer with the following formula:
l=P
n2N;t2T(n;t)
jNjjTj(1)
whereNrepresents a set of neurons in the lth layer andjNj
is the total number of neurons in the N,T=ft1;t2;:::;t kgis a
set of training inputs and jTjindicates the number of training
inputs inT,(n;t)calculates the neurons output value where
nis the neuron in Nandtdenotes the input in T. Finally, our
neuron coverage criterion MNC determines whether a neuron
in thelth layer is activated or not by checking whether its
output value is higher than the threshold l. We deﬁne the
neuron coverage criterion MNC for each layer las follows:
MNC (l;t) =jfnj8n2l;(n;t)>lgj (2)
wheretrepresents the input, nis the neuron in layer l,is a
function for computing the neuron output value, and lis the
threshold of the l-th layer calculated by formula (1).
3.3 Detecting Fake Faces
As described above, we capture the layer-wise activated neu-
rons with MNC . We train a simple binary-classiﬁer with shal-