synthesized face between different persons and is widely ap-
plied in producing fake videos [Agarwal et al. , 2019 ]. More
recently, there is some work that starts to study this topic.
However, none of the previous approaches fully tackle the
aforementioned four types of fake faces and thoroughly eval-
uate their robustness against perturbation attack with various
transformations in order to show their potentials in dealing
with fakes in the wild.
In this paper, we propose a novel approach, named
FakeSpotter , which detects fake faces by monitoring neuron
behaviors of deep face recognition (FR) systems with a sim-
ple binary-classiﬁer. Speciﬁcally, FakeSpotter leverages the
power of deep FR systems in learning the representations of
faces and the capabilities of neurons in monitoring the layer-
by-layer behaviors which can capture more subtle differences
for distinguishing between real and fake faces.
To evaluate the effectiveness of FakeSpotter in detecting
fake faces and its robustness against perturbation attacks, we
collect numerous high-quality fake faces produced with the
state-of-the-art (SOTA) GANs. For example, our entire syn-
thesized fake faces are generated with 1) the freshly released
StyleGAN2 [Karras et al. , 2019b ], 2) the newest STGAN
[Liuet al. , 2019 ]that performs facial attributes editing, 3)
DeepFake that is composed of public datasets ( e.g., Face-
Forensics++ and Celeb-DF [Liet al. , 2019 ]), and 4) the
Facebook announced real-world DeepFake detection compe-
tition dataset ( i.e., DFDC). Experiments are evaluated on our
collected four types of high-quality fake faces and the re-
sults demonstrate the effectiveness of FakeSpotter in spotting
fake faces and its robustness in tackling four perturbation at-
tacks ( e.g.,adding noise ,blur,compression , and resizing ).
FakeSpotter also outperforms prior work AutoGAN [Zhang
et al. , 2019b ]and gives an average detection accuracy of more
than 90% on the four types of fake faces. The average perfor-
mance measured by the AUC score is merely down less than
3.77% in tackling the four perturbation attacks under various
intensities.
Our main contributions are summarized as follows.
New observation of neurons in spotting AI-synthesized
fake faces. We observe that layer-by-layer neuron behav-
iors can be served as an asset for distinguishing fake faces.
Additionally, they are also robust against various perturba-
tion attacks at various magnitudes.
Presenting a new insight for spotting AI-synthesized
fake faces by monitoring neuron behaviors. We propose
the ﬁrst neuron coverage based fake detection approach
that monitors the layer-by-layer neuron behaviors in deep
FR systems. Our approach provides a novel insight for
spotting AI aided fakes with neuron coverage techniques.
Performing the ﬁrst comprehensive evaluation on
four typical AI-synthesized fake faces and robustness
against four common perturbation attacks. Experi-
ments are conducted on our collected high-quality fake
faces synthesized with the SOTA GANs and real dataset
like DFDC. Experimental results have demonstrated the ef-
fectiveness and robustness of our approach.2 Related Work
2.1 Image Synthesis
GANs have made impressive progress in image synthesis
[Zhu et al. , 2017; Yi et al. , 2017 ]which is the most widely
studied area of the applications of GANs since it is ﬁrst pro-
posed in 2014 [Goodfellow et al. , 2014 ]. The generator in
GANs learns to produce synthesized samples that are almost
identical to real samples, while the discriminator learns to dif-
ferentiate between them. Recently, various GANs are pro-
posed for facial image synthesis and manipulation.
In entire face synthesis, PGGAN [Karras et al. , 2018 ]and
StyleGAN, created by NVIDIA, produce faces in high resolu-
tion with unprecedented quality and synthesize non-existent
faces in the world. STGAN and StarGAN focus on face edit-
ing which manipulates the attributes and expressions of hu-
mans’ faces, e.g., changing the color of hair, wearing eye-
glasses, and laughing with a smile or showing feared expres-
sion, etc.FaceApp andFaceSwap employ GANs to generate
DeepFake which involves identity swap.
Currently, GANs can be well applied in synthesizing en-
tire fake faces, editing facial attributes, manipulating facial
expressions, and swapping identities among persons ( a.k.a.
DeepFake). Fake faces synthesized with the SOTA GANs are
almost indistinguishable to humans in many cases. We are
living in a world where we cannot believe our eyes anymore.
2.2 Fake Face Detection
Some researchers employ traditional forensics-based tech-
niques to spot fake faces/images. These work inspect the
disparities in pixel-level between real and fake images. How-
ever, they are either susceptible to perturbation attacks like
compression that is common in producing videos with still
images [B¨ohme and Kirchner, 2013 ], or do not scale well
with the increasing amount of training data, as commonly
found in shallow learning-based fake detection methods such
as[Buchana et al. , 2016 ]. Another line in detecting fake im-
ages is leveraging the power of deep neural networks (DNNs)
in learning the differences between real and fake which are
also vulnerable to perturbation attacks like adding human-
imperceptible noise [Goodfellow et al. , 2015 ].
In forensics-based fake detection, Nataraj et al .[Nataraj
et al. , 2019 ]employ a DNN model to learn the represen-
tation in order to compute co-occurrence matrices on the
RGB channels. McCloskey et al.[McCloskey and Albright,
2018 ]observe that the frequency of saturated pixels in GAN-
synthesized fake images is limited as the generator’s inter-
nal values are normalized and the formation of a color im-
age is vastly different from real images which are sensitive
to spectral analysis. Different from forensics-based fake de-
tection, Stehouwer et al.[Stehouwer et al. , 2020 ]introduce
an attention-based layer in convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) to improve fake identiﬁcation performance. Wang
et al.[Wang et al. , 2020 ]use ResNet-50 to train a binary-
classiﬁer for CNN-synthesized images detection. AutoGAN
[Zhang et al. , 2019b ]trains a classiﬁer to identify the artifacts
inducted in the up-sampling component of the GAN.
Other work explores various ad-hoc features to investigate
artifacts in images for differentiating real and synthesized fa-