Algorithm 1: Algorithm for detecting fake faces with
neuron coverage in deep FR systems.
Input : Training dataset of fake and real faces T, Test
dataset of fake and real faces D, Pre-trained
deep FR model fM
Output: Labeltag
1Lis the convolutional and fully-connected layers in fM.
2.Determine the threshold of neuron activation for each
layer.
3fort2T do
4 Nis a set of neurons in the lth layer of fM.
5 Ssaves neuron output value for a given input t.
6 forl2L,n2Ndo
7 Sl=P(n;t)
8l=1
jLjS
9.Train a binary-classiﬁer for detecting fake/real faces.
10Vcounts activated neurons in L.
11fort2T do
12 forl2L,n2Ndo
13 if(n;t)>lthen
14 Vl n
15Train a binary-classiﬁer eCwith inputs V.
16.Predict whether a face from test dataset Dis real or
fake.
17ford2D do
18tag argmax eC(d)
19returntag
low neural networks. The input of our classiﬁer is the gen-
eral neuron behavior rather than the ad-hoc raw pixels like
traditional image classiﬁcation models. Raw pixels could be
easily perturbed by attackers and trigger erroneous behaviors.
Algorithm 1 describes the procedure of fake face detec-
tion. First, the thresholds for determining neuron activation
in each layer are identiﬁed by our proposed neuron coverage
criterion MNC with fake and real faces as the training dataset,
denoted asT. Then, a feature vector for each input face is
formed as the number of activated neurons in each layer. Let
F=ff1;f2;:::;f i;:::;f mgandR=fr1;r2;:::;r j;:::;r mgrep-
resent the feature vector of fake and real input faces respec-
tively, where fiandrjare the number of activated neurons in
theith andjth layer,mis the total number of layers in deep
FR system. Finally, we train a supervised binary-classiﬁer,
denoted as eC, by receiving the formed feature vectors of fake
and real faces as inputs to predict the input is real or fake.
In prediction, an input face should be processed by a deep
FR system to extract the neuron coverage behaviors with our
proposed criterion MNC , namely the number of activated neu-
rons in each layer. The activated neurons are formed as a
feature to represent the input face. Then, the trained binary-
classiﬁer predicts whether the input is a real or fake face.
4 Experiments
In this section, we conduct experiments to evaluate the ef-
fectiveness of FakeSpotter in spotting four types of fakeFake Faces GAN Type Manipulation Real Source Collection
Entire
SynthesisPGGAN full CelebA self-synthesis
StyleGAN2 full FFHQ ofﬁcially released
Attribute
EditingStarGAN brown-hair CelebA self-synthesis
STGAN eyeglasses CelebA self-synthesis
Expression
ManipulationStyleGAN ctrl. smile intensity FFHQ self-synthesis
STGAN smile CelebA self-syntheis
DeepFakeF. F. ++ face swap unknown FaceForensics++
DFDC face/voice swap unknown Kaggle dataset
Celeb-DF face swap YouTube Celeb-DF(V2)
Table 1: Statistics of collected fake faces dataset. Column Manipu-
lation indicates the manipulated region in face. Column Real Source
denotes the source of real face for producing fake faces. Last col-
umn Collection means the way of producing fake faces, synthesized
by ourselves or collected from public dataset. F .F . ++ denotes Face-
Forensics++ dataset.
faces produced with the SOTA techniques and investigate its
robustness against four common perturbation attacks. We
present the experimental results of detection performance
with a comparison of recently published work AutoGAN
[Zhang et al. , 2019b ]in Section 4.2 and robustness analy-
sis in Section 4.3. In Section 4.4, we provide the comparison
results in detecting a public DeepFake dataset Celeb-DF .
4.1 Experimental Setup
Data Collection. In our experiments, real face samples are
collected from CelebA [Liuet al. , 2015 ]and Flicker-Faces-
HQ (FFHQ) since they exhibit good diversity. We also uti-
lize original real images provided by the public dataset Face-
Forensics++, DFDC2, and Celeb-DF . To ensure the diversity
and high-quality of our fake face dataset, we use the newest
GANs for synthesizing fake faces ( e.g., StyleGAN2) using
the public dataset ( e.g.,Celeb-DF ), and real dataset such as
DFDC dataset. The DFDC dataset is the ofﬁcially released
version rather than the preview edition. Table 1 presents the
statistics of our collected fake face dataset.
Implementation Details. We design a shallow neural net-
work with merely ﬁve fully-connected layers as our binary-
classiﬁer for spotting fakes. The optimizer is SGD with mo-
mentum 0.9 and the starting learning rate is 0.0001, with a
decay of 1e-6. The loss function is binary cross-entropy.
In monitoring neuron behaviors with MNC , we utilize
VGG-Face3with ResNet50 as backend architecture for cap-
turing activated neurons as it can well balance detection per-
formance and computing overhead. Our approach is generic
to FR systems, which could be easily extended to other deep
FR systems. In evaluating the robustness in tackling perturba-
tion attacks, we select four common transformations, namely
compression ,resizing ,adding noise , and blur.
Training and Test Dataset. Using the training dataset T,
we train the model with 5,000 real and 5,000 fake fakes for
each individual GAN. In the test dataset D, we use 1,000
real and 1,000 fake faces for evaluation. The training and
test dataset are based on different identities. The training
2DeepFakes Detection Challenge (DFDC) Dataset by Facebook.
https://www.kaggle.com/c/DeepFake-detection-challenge
3https://github.com/rcmalli/keras-vggface