FakeSpotter : A Simple yet Robust Baseline for Spotting AI-Synthesized Fake Faces
Run Wang1,Felix Juefei-Xu2,Lei Ma3,Xiaofei Xie1,Yihao Huang4,Jian Wang1,Yang Liu1;5
1Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
2Alibaba Group, USA
3Kyushu University, Japan
4East China Normal University, China
5Institute of Computing Innovation, Zhejiang University, China
Abstract
In recent years, generative adversarial networks
(GANs) and its variants have achieved unprece-
dented success in image synthesis. They are widely
adopted in synthesizing facial images which brings
potential security concerns to humans as the fakes
spread and fuel the misinformation. However, ro-
bust detectors of these AI-synthesized fake faces
are still in their infancy and are not ready to
fully tackle this emerging challenge. In this work,
we propose a novel approach, named FakeSpotter ,
based on monitoring neuron behaviors to spot AI-
synthesized fake faces. The studies on neuron cov-
erage and interactions have successfully shown that
they can be served as testing criteria for deep learn-
ing systems, especially under the settings of being
exposed to adversarial attacks. Here, we conjec-
ture that monitoring neuron behavior can also serve
as an asset in detecting fake faces since layer-by-
layer neuron activation patterns may capture more
subtle features that are important for the fake de-
tector. Experimental results on detecting four types
of fake faces synthesized with the state-of-the-art
GANs and evading four perturbation attacks show
the effectiveness and robustness of our approach.
1 Introduction
With the remarkable development of AI, particularly GANs,
seeing is no longer believing nowadays. GANs ( e.g., Style-
GAN [Karras et al. , 2019a ], STGAN [Liuet al. , 2019 ], and
StarGAN [Choi et al. , 2018 ]) exhibit powerful capabilities
in synthesizing human imperceptible fake images and edit-
ing images in a natural way. Humans can be easily fooled by
these synthesized fake images1. Figure 1 presents four typical
fake faces synthesized with various GANs, which are really
hard for humans to distinguish at the ﬁrst glance.
The AI-synthesized fake faces not only bring fun to users
but also raise security and privacy concerns and even panics
to everyone including celebrities, politicians, etc. Some apps
(e.g., FaceApp, Reﬂect, and ZAO) employ face-synthesis
Corresponding author, E-mail: runwang1991@gmail.com
1https://thispersondoesnotexist.com
Entire Synthesis
Expression ManipulationAttribute Editing
DeepFakePGGAN StarGAN
STGAN
STGANOriginal
Swapped
S
N
 N
N
N
S
al
ed
StyleGANStyleGAN2Figure 1: Four types of fake faces synthesized with various GANs.
For the entire synthesis, the facial images are non-existent faces in
the world. For attribute editing, StarGAN changes the color of hair
into brown and STAGN wears eyeglasses. For expression manipula-
tion, both StyleGAN and STGAN manipulate the face with a smile
expression. For DeepFake, the data is from the DeepFake dataset in
FaceForensics++ [R¨ossler et al. , 2019 ]and they involve face swap.
techniques to provide attractive and interesting services such
as face swap, facial expression manipulation with several taps
on mobile devices. Unfortunately, abusing AI in synthesizing
fake images raises security and privacy concerns such as cre-
ating fake pornography [Cole, 2018 ], where a victim’s face
can be naturally swapped into a naked body and indistin-
guishable to humans’ eyes with several photos [Zakharov et
al., 2019 ]. Politicians will also be confused by fake faces,
for example, fake ofﬁcial statements may be announced with
nearly realistic facial expressions and body movements by
adopting AI-synthesized fake face techniques. Due to the po-
tential and severe threats of fake faces, it is urgent to call for
effective techniques to spot fake faces in the wild. In this pa-
per, the AI-synthesized fake face or fake face means that the
face is synthesized with GANs unless particularly addressed.
Entire face synthesis ,facial attribute editing ,facial ex-
pression manipulation , and DeepFake are the four typical
fake face synthesis modes with various GANs [Stehouwer et
al., 2020 ]. Entire face synthesis means that a facial image can
be wholly synthesized with GANs and the synthesized faces
do not exist in the world. Facial attribute editing manipulates
single or several attributes in a face like hair, eyeglass, gender,
etc. Facial expression manipulation alters one’s facial expres-
sion or transforms facial expressions among persons. Deep-
Fake is also known as the identity swap. It normally swapsarXiv:1909.06122v3  [cs.CR]  16 Jul 2020