Manas Jain, Shruthi Narayan, Pratibha Balaji, Bharath K P, Abhijit Bhowmick,  Karthik R,  
Rajesh Kumar Muthu  
School of Electronics Engineering, Vellore Institute of Technology, Vellore.  
jainmanas13@gmail.com ,shruthi.narayan98@gmail.com , balajipratibha@gmail.com ,bharathkp25@gmail.com ,  
abhijit.bhowmick@vit.ac.in ,tkgravikarthik@gmail.com , mrajeshkumar@vit.ac.in . 
 
 
Abstract— In this project, we  aim to classify the speech taken as 
one of the four emotions namely, sadness, anger, fear and 
happiness. The samples that have been taken to complete this 
project are taken from Linguistic Data Consortium ( LDC) and 
UGA database. The  important characterist ics determined from 
the samples are energ y, pitch, MFCC coefficients, LPCC 
coefficients  and speaker rate. The classifier used to classify these 
emotional states is Support Vector Machine ( SVM) and this is 
done using two classification strategies: One again st All ( OAA) 
and Gender Dependent Classification. Furthermore, a 
comparative  analysis has been conducted between the two  and 
LPCC and MFCC algorithms as well.  
 
Keywords — Emotio n; datasets; SVM; MFCC ; framing; 
autocorrelation  
 
I. INTRODUCTION  
 
Human computer intelligence is an upcoming field of research 
which aims to make computers learn from experiences and 
decide how to respond to a particular situation. This has 
resulted in improved interaction between users and the 
computer. With the help of  certain algorithms and procedures, 
the computer can be made fit to detect the various 
characteristics present in the voice sample and deduce the 
emotion underlying  [2]. This emotion detection can be done in 
two methods, one being speech and the other bein g image. 
Since speech is a very important part of communication, it is 
essential to be able to detect the emotion from it. There are 
various methods and classifications that are available like  K-
Nearest Neighbor, Artificial Neural Networks , Hidden 
Markov M odel, Support Vector Machines , and others that 
have been developed to classify human emotions based on 
training datasets  [2-5]. 
 
Feature extraction is the first step that needs to be carried out 
while detecting emotions. In this project, we have used MFCC and LPC to extract features and then used SVM to train the 
data sets to identify the emotion or sentiment  [5].  
SVM is a supervised machine learning technique that is used 
for classification as well as regression. It attempts to 
categorize data by finding suitable  hyperplanes that can 
separate data by the highest margin. Based on the training sets, 
the new values are segregated and analyzed.  
In the paper written by Feng Yu etal, they have used support 
vector machines method to classify basic four types of 
emotions sadness, happiness, anger and neutral using 721 
utterances [ 2]. In the paper written by Sapra etal , they have 
used K -nearest Neighbors  to classify emotions and used only 
one technique of MFCC to extract features [4]. In the paper by 
Utane etal, the y have used MFCC to extract features in the 
speech signal and made a comparative analysis of various 
other classifiers like M arkov model, Gaussian model and 
support vector machines [5]. El Ayadi etal in his paper has 
conducted a surv ey on three important a spects present in 
speech  emotion rec ognition namely how to design emotional 
speech corpora, what are the impacts of speech features on 
performance  and classification systems that are present  in 
speech emotion  recognition  [6]. Kim Samuel etal in their 
paper has built an application for  emotion detection system 
which operates in real time and  uses multi -modal fusion of 
various  features of the speech. [7]. Farouk etal , in his paper 
have conducted the emotion detection using w avelet analysis 
and have concluded that wavelet analysis has helped 
improving the basic features of speech signal as well [8]. 
Schuller etal, in  their paper have used techniques of Hidden  
markov model to classify emotions. While doing so they have 
incorpor ated two varieties in it one that takes global statistics 
and is classified using Gaussian model and the other where 
temporal complexity was introduced using several low level 
instantaneous  features [9].Kwon etal, in their paper have used 
MFCC for feature extraction and have used quadratic 
discriminant analysis to carry out the speech recognition 
resulting in decently good results [10].Schuller etal ,in their 
paper have presented a model firstly by making use of Speech Emotion Recognition using Support 
Vector Machin e