acoustic features after which characteristics  like pitch, energy  
and others are used with respective classifiers to classify 
human emotions[12].  
 
II. METHODOL OGY 
Speech Emotion Detection aims to  identify the emotions of a 
person based on the input voice sample. This is done by 
analyzing the input voice signal and carrying out an in depth 
procedure. First, the speech signal is procured after which 
features are extracting using MFCC, LPC C which contain the 
emotional information, voice pattern and coefficients which 
will be further given as the input to the  classification system 
for further analysis. Our project contains four modules: input 
speech signal, Feature extraction using MFCC and LPC, 
Classification based on SVM and the output  [3].  
  
Figure  1. Proposed Model  
 
On extracting features, the following information is 
collected and they are:  
 i. Pitch:  
The pitch signal is one of the most  important featur es in speech 
emotion recognition [ 6]. Pitch frequency is defined as t he 
vibration rate of  a vocal. It has  all the information about the 
emotion  present be cause what type of emotion depends on the 
stress  present in the vocal folds an d the amount of sub glottal 
air pressure. Therefore  the mean value of pitch  present in the samples , variation range s in the samples  and the contour s are  
different i n various basi c emotional states .  
 
ii. MFCC:  
This method of feature extraction has been used widely in 
feature extraction process.  Its calculation s are  based on the 
characteristics of  human ear , which has a nonlinea r freq uency 
unit to make it  similar to  that of  human a uditory system. The 
process of cal culating MFCC is shown in Fig ure 1[9]. 
 
 
Figure  2. Block diagram of MFCC  
iii. LPC C: 
It is used for representing an e nvelope of the input sp eech 
signal in compressed form. It uses  information from a linear 
productive model . It analyses the input  signal by estimating the 
forma nts or enhanced frequency bands. It removes  their effect s 
from the signal and estimates  the intensity and  frequency of the 
remaining signal . Also this technique is very sensitive to 
transmission errors.  
 
Figure 3 . Block diagram of LP CC 
 
iv. Energy:  
 Energy  calculation  is one of the most  important feature s of 
speech  analysis  [12]. To obtain the  complete  statistics of all 
energy feature s, we use a few short -term function s to extract 
the value of energy in every speech frame. Using the above 
information  we can ob tain the  overall  statistics of energy for  
the entire  speech sample by calculating the energy  such as 
mean value, max imum  value, and variation range  present in the 
voice sample.  
v. Speech Rate:  
Speech rate shows  how fast a human  speak s. It has strong 
correlations  with any emotion  like happy, sad, fear and angry.