We studied the waveform of the speech signal in time domain;  
and the speech is calculated using MATLAB function .  
 
III. SVM  ALGORITHM  
SVM is a very simple and efficient classifying algorithm 
which is used for  classification and pattern recognition. 
Support Vector Machines algorithm was  introduced by 
Vladimir Vapnik in 1995.The main aim of this algorithm is to 
obtain a function that constructs hyper planes or boundaries. 
These hyper planes are us ed to separate different categories  of 
input  data points.  SVM uses binary classification  [2]. 
SVM are systems that use  hyper planes in feature space of 
high dimensions  to differentiate values based on a particular 
specification . Hyper  planes are trained with  specific 
algorithms to use statistical learning.  SVM m ethod of 
classification is similar to  supervised learning that involves the  
feature extraction and generates  desirable  outputs. The  
advantage of SVM is that it is very easy to train. It can scale 
high dimensional data  better  than neural networks  [3]. There 
are typically two types  of SVM classifiers , Linear and Non -
linear.  
Also SVM has kernel f unctions that can be  used in supervising 
environment. In training phase we are using  radial basis kern el 
function because it limits  the training data sets to lie within the 
specified boundaries .  LIBSVM tool is used  for SVM 
class ification. During training of signal , feature va lues of 
speech signals that are extracted from speech signals are send 
to LIBSV M with their clas s labels as Happy, Angry, Sad, and 
Fear. SVM model is obtained  for each emotional state  by 
using their feature values which are extracted.  
Once the t raining model has been prepared with , it is easy to 
predict t he emotional states with testing datasets. F eatures are 
extracted from speech signals and with the help of SVM  
model  values generated by training models , the emotio ns are 
classified automatically as Happy, Angry, Sad or Fear.  
IV. DATASETS  
In this project we have used two datasets, LDC and UGA. The 
UGA datasets contains the speech samples spoken by students 
of Universit y of Georgia. It contains 100 samples. We have 
used 70 samples to train the system and 3 0 samples for testing. 
In LDC dataset each  speech sample  is recorded for one to two 
seconds with 60ms small segments. The total numbers of 
voice samples are  100 (70 for training and 30 for testing) . For 
each emotional class there are about 25 utterances  spoken by 
speakers.  
Some LDC speech samples are:  
 
 cc_001(m)_hotAnger_4.wav  
 
 
 
cl_001(m)_happy_active_positive_4.wav  
 
 
gg_001(f)_sadness_passive_negative_13a.wav  
 
 
 
cc_001(m)_hotAnger_4.wav  
 
V. SIMULATION OUTPUTS AN D RESULTS  
 
Waveform and speaking rate of an utterance is shown in  Fig. 1 
and the features Energy, Pitch  and MFCC coefficients  and 
LPCC co efficient are shown in Fig. 3,4,5,6 and 7  respectively.  
 
Figure 4. Speaking rate and Waveform