Raffel, Shazeer, Roberts, Lee, Narang, Matena, Zhou, Li and Liu
with the data set. For the WMT tasks, this corresponds to using newstest2014 for
English-German, newstest2015 for English-French, and newstest2016 for English-
Romanian. For GLUE and SuperGLUE, we used the benchmark evaluation servers to
compute oﬃcial test set scores.15,16For SQuAD, evaluating on the test set requires
running inference on a benchmark server. Unfortunately, the computational resources
on this server are insuﬃcient for obtaining predictions from our largest models. As
a result, we instead continue to report performance on the SQuAD validation set.
Fortunately, the model with the highest performance on the SQuAD test set also
reported results on the validation set, so we can still compare to what is ostensibly
the state-of-the-art.
Apart from those changes mentioned above, we use the same training procedure and
hyperparameters as our baseline (AdaFactor optimizer, inverse square root learning rate
schedule for pre-training, constant learning rate for ﬁne-tuning, dropout regularization,
vocabulary, etc.). For reference, these details are described in Section 2.
The results of this ﬁnal set of experiments are shown in Table 14. Overall, we achieved
state-of-the-art performance on 18out of the 24tasks we consider. As expected, our largest
(11billion parameter) model performed best among our model size variants across all tasks.
Our T5-3B model variant did beat the previous state of the art in a few tasks, but scaling
the model size to 11billion parameters was the most important ingredient for achieving our
best performance. We now analyze the results for each individual benchmark.
We achieved a state-of-the-art average GLUE score of 90.3. Notably, our performance was
substantially better than the previous state-of-the-art for the natural language inference tasks
MNLI, RTE, and WNLI. RTE and WNLI are two of the tasks where machine performance
has historically lagged behind human performance, which is 93.6and95.9respectively (Wang
et al., 2018). In terms of parameter count, our 11B model variant is the largest model that
has been submitted to the GLUE benchmark. However, most of the best-scoring submissions
use a large amount of ensembling and computation to produce predictions. For example,
the best-performing variant of ALBERT (Lan et al., 2019) uses a model similar in size and
architecture to our 3B variant (though it has dramatically fewer parameters due to clever
parameter sharing). To produce its impressive performance on GLUE, the ALBERT authors
ensembled “from 6 to 17” models depending on the task. This likely results in it being more
computationally expensive to produce predictions with the ALBERT ensemble than it is
with T5-11B.
For SQuAD, we outperformed the previous state-of-the-art (ALBERT (Lan et al., 2019))
by over one point on the Exact Match score. SQuAD is a long-standing benchmark that
was created over three years ago, and most recent improvements have only increased the
state-of-the-art by a fraction of a percentage point. We note that when results are reported
on the test set, they are typically based on an ensemble of models and/or leverage external
data sets (e.g. TriviaQA (Joshi et al., 2017) or NewsQA (Trischler et al., 2016)) to augment
the small SQuAD training set. Human performance on SQuAD is estimated at 82.30and
91.22for the Exact Match and F1 metric respectively (Rajpurkar et al., 2016), so it is not
clear if further improvements on this benchmark are meaningful.
15.http://gluebenchmark.com
16.http://super.gluebenchmark.com
38