Exploring the Limits of Transfer Learning
Appendix A. Contributions
Colin designed the scope of this project and wrote this paper, ran all the experiments in
Sections 3.1 to 3.6, and contributed a large portion of our codebase. Noam contributed
many of the ideas, including the text-to-text framework, unsupervised objectives, and
data set mixing strategies; implemented our base Transformer model and its architectural
variants; and ran the experiments in Section 3.7. Adam oversaw all engineering aspects
for this project, created the C4 data set, implemented our data set pipeline, and added
various benchmark data sets. Katherine coordinated experiments, wrote and updated
documentation, ran experiments to help design our baseline, and contributed to many parts
of our codebase. Sharan contributed some of the required data sets and preprocessors, and
ran assorted preliminary experiments, in addition to co-leading the open-sourcing of our
codebase. Michael owned all aspects of the Winograd data sets, ingested many of the data
sets we used, contributed various improvements and ﬁxes to our infrastructure, and ran some
preliminary experiments. Yanqi ran experiments and implemented methods to help settle on
a reasonable baseline and helped with the ﬁnal ﬁne-tuning of the models in Section 3.7. Wei
also helped with ﬁnal ﬁne-tuning and improved some of our preprocessors. Peter prototyped
an early version of the pre-training data set and resolved issues pertaining to the SQuAD
and CNN/DM tasks. All authors helped set the scope and research direction we followed in
this work.
Appendix B. Converting WNLI to Our Text-to-Text Format
Note that as discussed in Section 2.4, we do not train on any of the data from WNLI. Instead,
when evaluating on the WNLI test set (for the results in Section 3.7), we convert the WNLI
test set to the “referent noun prediction” text-to-text format so that we can evaluate using a
model trained on WSC and DPR. Our WNLI preprocessor is inspired by the one proposed
by He et al. (2019). Recall that examples from WNLI consist of a premise, a hypothesis,
and a label that indicates whether the hypothesis is True or False. Using the example from
Section 2.4, the hypothesis would be “The city councilmen refused the demonstrators a
permit because they feared violence.” with the premise “The demonstrators feared violence.”
and the label False. We ﬁrst ﬁnd the location of all pronouns in the premise (“they” in
our example). Then, we ﬁnd the maximum number of words that precede or follow each
pronoun that are a substring in the hypothesis (“feared violence” in our example), ignoring
case and punctuation. When the premise contains multiple candidate pronouns, we choose
the pronoun that is preceded or followed by the largest substring of the hypothesis. We then
highlight the pronoun in the premise by surrounding it with asterisks. For the candidate
noun (which is compared to our model’s prediction to obtain a True or False label), we
remove the matching substring from the hypothesis and optionally make it non-possessive
(resulting in “the demonstrators”).
Appendix C. Example Predictions on CNN/Daily Mail
To show that our model is generating ﬂuent summaries, we include a few example decodes
from our best model (T5-11B) on the validation set along with the ground-truth summaries.
These examples selected at random and were not cherry-picked.
45