Exploring the Limits of Transfer Learning
client-side inference or federated learning (Konečn` y et al., 2015, 2016). Relatedly, one
beneﬁcial use of transfer learning is the possibility of attaining good performance on
low-resource tasks. Low-resource tasks often occur (by deﬁnition) in settings where
one lacks the assets to label more data. It follows that low-resource applications often
also have limited access to computational resources which can incur additional costs.
As a result, we advocate for research on methods that achieve stronger performance
with cheaper models so that transfer learning can be applied where it will have the
most impact. Some current work along these lines include distillation (Hinton et al.,
2015; Sanh et al., 2019; Jiao et al., 2019), parameter sharing (Lan et al., 2019), and
conditional computation (Shazeer et al., 2017).
More eﬃcient knowledge extraction Recall that one of the goals of pre-training is
(looselyspeaking)toprovidethemodelwithgeneral-purpose“knowledge”thatimproves
its performance on downstream tasks. The method we use in this work, which is
currently common practice, is to train the model to denoise corrupted spans of text.
We suspect that this simplistic technique may not be a very eﬃcient way to teach the
model general-purpose knowledge. More concretely, it would be useful to be able to
attain good ﬁne-tuning performance without needing to train our models on 1trillion
tokens of text ﬁrst. Some concurrent work along these lines improves eﬃciency by
pre-training a model to distinguish between real and machine-generated text (Clark
et al., 2020).
Formalizing the similarity between tasks We observed that pre-training on unlabeled
in-domain data can improve performance on downstream tasks (Section 3.4). This
ﬁnding mostly relies on basic observations like the fact that SQuAD was created using
data from Wikipedia. It would be useful to formulate a more rigorous notion of the
“similarity” between the pre-training and downstream tasks, so that we could make
more principled choices about what source of unlabeled data to use. There is some
early empirical work along these lines in the ﬁeld of computer vision (Huh et al., 2016;
Kornblith et al., 2018; He et al., 2018). A better notion of the relatedness of tasks could
also help choose supervised pre-training tasks, which has been shown to be helpful for
the GLUE benchmark (Phang et al., 2018).
Language-agnostic models We were disappointed to ﬁnd that English-only pre-training
did not achieve state-of-the-art results on the translation tasks we studied. We also
are interested in avoiding the logistical diﬃculty of needing to specify which languages
a vocabulary can encode ahead of time. To address these issues, we are interested in
further investigating language-agnostic models, i.e. models that can perform a given
NLP task with good performance regardless of the text’s language. This is an especially
pertinent issue given that English is not the native language for the majority of the
world’s population.
The motivation for this paper was the ﬂurry of recent work on transfer learning for
NLP. Before we began this work, these advances had already enabled breakthroughs in
settings where learning-based methods had not yet been shown to be eﬀective. We are
happy to be able to continue this trend, for example by nearly matching human-level
performance on the SuperGLUE benchmark, a task speciﬁcally designed to be diﬃcult
43