Raffel, Shazeer, Roberts, Lee, Narang, Matena, Zhou, Li and Liu
For SuperGLUE, we improved upon the state-of-the-art by a large margin (from an
average score of 84.6(Liu et al., 2019c) to 88.9). SuperGLUE was designed to include
tasks that were “beyond the scope of current state-of-the-art systems, but solvable by most
college-educated English speakers” (Wang et al., 2019b). We nearly match the human
performance of 89.8(Wang et al., 2019b). Interestingly, on the reading comprehension tasks
(MultiRC and ReCoRD) we exceed human performance by a large margin, suggesting the
evaluation metrics used for these tasks may be biased towards machine-made predictions.
On the other hand, humans achieve 100%accuracy on both COPA and WSC, which is
signiﬁcantly better than our model’s performance. This suggests that there remain linguistic
tasks that are hard for our model to perfect, particularly in the low-resource setting.
We did not achieve state-of-the-art performance on any of the WMT translation tasks.
This may be in part due to our use of an English-only unlabeled data set. We also note that
most of the best results on these tasks use backtranslation (Edunov et al., 2018; Lample and
Conneau, 2019), which is a sophisticated data augmentation scheme. The state of the art on
the low-resource English to Romanian benchmark also uses additional forms of cross-lingual
unsupervised training (Lample and Conneau, 2019). Our results suggest that scale and
English-language pre-training may be insuﬃcient to match the performance of these more
sophisticated methods. On a more speciﬁc note, the best results on English to German
newstest2014 set use the much larger training set from WMT 2018 (Edunov et al., 2018),
making direct comparison to our results diﬃcult.
Finally, on CNN/Daily Mail we attain state-of-the-art performance, though only by
a signiﬁcant amount on the ROUGE-2-F score. It has been shown that improvements
to the ROUGE score do not necessarily correspond to more coherent summaries (Paulus
et al., 2017). Furthermore, while CNN/Daily Mail is posed as an abstractive summarization
benchmark, purely extractive approaches have been shown to work well (Liu, 2019). It has
also been argued that generative models trained with maximum likelihood are prone to
producing repetitive summaries (See et al., 2017). Despite these potential issues, we ﬁnd
that our models do generate coherent and largely correct summaries. We provide some
non-cherry-picked validation set examples in Appendix C.
To achieve its strong results, T5 combines insights from our experimental study with
unprecedented scale. Note that in Section 3.6 we found that scaling up the pre-training
amount or size of our baseline model produced substantial gains. Given this, we were
interested to measure how much the “non-scaling” changes we introduced into T5 contributed
to its strong performance. We therefore carried out a ﬁnal experiment where we compared
the following three conﬁgurations: First, the standard baseline model, which was pre-trained
on235≈34Btokens; second, the baseline trained instead for about 1 trillion tokens (i.e.
the same amount of pre-training used for T5), which we refer to as “baseline-1T”; and
third, T5-Base. Note that the diﬀerences between baseline-1T and T5-Base comprise the
“non-scaling” changes we made when designing T5. As such, comparing the performance of
these two models gives us a concrete measurement of the impact of the insights from our
systematic study.
The performance of these three model conﬁgurations is shown in Table 15. Consistent
with the ﬁndings in Section 3.6, we ﬁnd that additional pre-training improves performance
over the baseline. Nevertheless, T5-Base substantially outperforms baseline-1T on all
downstream tasks. This suggests that scale is not the only factor that contributes to T5’s
40