Exploring the Limits of Transfer Learning
The results achieved after pre-training on each of these data sets is shown in Table 8. A
ﬁrst obvious takeaway is that removing the heuristic ﬁltering from C4 uniformly degrades
performance and makes the unﬁltered variant perform the worst in every task. Beyond
this, we found that in some cases a pre-training data set with a more constrained domain
outperformed the diverse C4 data set. For example, using the Wikipedia + TBC corpus
produced a SuperGLUE score of 73.24, beating our baseline’s score (using C4) of 71.36.
This is almost entirely attributable to a boost in performance from 25.78(baseline, C4) to
50.93(Wikipedia + TBC) on the Exact Match score for MultiRC (see Table 16). MultiRC
is a reading comprehension data set whose largest source of data comes from ﬁction books,
which is exactly the domain covered by TBC. Similarly, using the RealNews-like data set
for pre-training conferred an increase from 68.16to73.72on the Exact Match score for
ReCoRD, a data set that measures reading comprehension on news articles. As a ﬁnal
example, using data from Wikipedia produced signiﬁcant (but less dramatic) gains on
SQuAD, which is a question-answering data set with passages sourced from Wikipedia.
Similar observations have been made in prior work, e.g. Beltagy et al. (2019) found that
pre-training BERT on text from research papers improved its performance on scientiﬁc tasks.
The main lesson behind these ﬁndings is that pre-training on in-domain unlabeled data can
improve performance on downstream tasks . This is unsurprising but also unsatisfying if
our goal is to pre-train a model that can rapidly adapt to language tasks from arbitrary
domains. Liu et al. (2019c) also observed that pre-training on a more diverse data set yielded
improvements on downstream tasks. This observation also motivates the parallel line of
research on domain adaptation for natural language processing; for surveys of this ﬁeld see
e.g. Ruder (2019); Li (2012).
A drawback to only pre-training on a single domain is that the resulting data sets are
often substantially smaller. Similarly, while the WebText-like variant performed as well or
better than the C4 data set in our baseline setting, the Reddit-based ﬁltering produced a
data set that was about 40×smaller than C4 despite being based on 12×more data from
Common Crawl. Note, however, that in our baseline setup we only pre-train on 235≈34B
tokens, which is only about 8times larger than the smallest pre-training data set we consider.
We investigate at what point using a smaller pre-training data sets poses an issue in the
following section.
3.4.2. Pre-training Data set Size
The pipeline we use to create C4 was designed to be able to create extremely large pre-
training data sets. The access to so much data allows us to pre-train our models without
repeating examples. It is not clear whether repeating examples during pre-training would
be helpful or harmful to downstream performance because our pre-training objective is itself
stochastic and can help prevent the model from seeing the same exact data multiple times.
To test the eﬀect of limited unlabeled data set sizes, we pre-trained our baseline model
on artiﬁcially truncated versions of C4. Recall that we pre-train our baseline model on
235≈34Btokens (a small fraction of the total size of C4). We consider training on truncated
variants of C4 consisting of 229,227,225and223tokens. These sizes correspond to repeating
the data set 64,256,1,024, and 4,096times respectively over the course of pre-training.
27