Exploring the Limits of Transfer Learning
"translate English to German: That is good." 
"cola sentence: The 
course is jumping well." 
"summarize: state authorities 
dispatched emergency crews tuesday to 
survey the damage after an onslaught 
of severe weather in mississippi…" "stsb sentence1: The rhino grazed 
on the grass. sentence2: A rhino 
is grazing in a field." T5"Das ist gut." 
"not acceptable" 
"six people hospitalized after 
a storm in attala county." "3.8"
Figure 1: A diagram of our text-to-text framework. Every task we consider—including
translation, question answering, and classiﬁcation—is cast as feeding our model
text as input and training it to generate some target text. This allows us to use the
same model, loss function, hyperparameters, etc. across our diverse set of tasks. It
also provides a standard testbed for the methods included in our empirical survey.
“T5” refers to our model, which we dub the “ Text-to-TextTransferTransformer”.
summarization, and sentiment classiﬁcation, to name a few. With this uniﬁed approach,
we can compare the eﬀectiveness of diﬀerent transfer learning objectives, unlabeled data
sets, and other factors, while exploring the limits of transfer learning for NLP by scaling up
models and data sets beyond what has previously been considered.
We emphasize that our goal is not to propose new methods but instead to provide a
comprehensive perspective on where the ﬁeld stands. As such, our work primarily comprises
a survey, exploration, and empirical comparison of existing techniques. We also explore the
limits of current approaches by scaling up the insights from our systematic study (training
models up to 11billion parameters) to obtain state-of-the-art results in many of the tasks
we consider. In order to perform experiments at this scale, we introduce the “Colossal Clean
Crawled Corpus” (C4), a data set consisting of hundreds of gigabytes of clean English text
scraped from the web. Recognizing that the main utility of transfer learning is the possibility
of leveraging pre-trained models in data-scarce settings, we release our code, data sets, and
pre-trained models.1
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows: In the following section, we discuss
our base model and its implementation, our procedure for formulating every text processing
problem as a text-to-text task, and the suite of tasks we consider. In Section 3, we present a
large set of experiments that explore the ﬁeld of transfer learning for NLP. At the end of the
section (Section 3.7), we combine insights from our systematic study to obtain state-of-the-art
results on a wide variety of benchmarks. Finally, we provide a summary of our results and
wrap up with a look towards the future in Section 4.
3