Raffel, Shazeer, Roberts, Lee, Narang, Matena, Zhou, Li and Liu
3.7. Putting It All Together
We now leverage the insights from our systematic study to determine how far we can push
performance on popular NLP benchmarks. We are also interested in exploring the current
limits of transfer learning for NLP by training larger models on large amounts of data. We
start with our baseline training approach and make the following changes:
Objective We swap out the i.i.d. denoising objective in our baseline for the span-corruption
objective described in Section 3.3.4, which was loosely inspired by SpanBERT (Joshi
et al., 2019). Speciﬁcally, we use a mean span length of 3and corrupt 15%of the
originalsequence. Wefoundthatthisobjectiveproducedmarginallybetterperformance
(Table 7) while being slightly more computationally eﬃcient due to shorter target
sequence lengths.
Longer training Our baseline model uses a relatively small amount of pre-training (1⁄4as
much as BERT (Devlin et al., 2018),1⁄16as much as XLNet (Yang et al., 2019),1⁄64as
much as RoBERTa (Liu et al., 2019c), etc.). Fortunately, C4 is big enough that we
can train for substantially longer without repeating data (which can be detrimental,
as shown in Section 3.4.2). We found in Section 3.6 that additional pre-training can
indeed be helpful, and that both increasing the batch size and increasing the number of
training steps can confer this beneﬁt. We therefore pre-train our models for 1million
steps on a batch size of 211sequences of length 512, corresponding to a total of about
1trillion pre-training tokens (about 32×as many as our baseline). In Section 3.4.1, we
showed that pre-training on the RealNews-like, WebText-like, and Wikipedia + TBC
data sets outperformed pre-training on C4 on a few downstream tasks. However, these
data set variants are suﬃciently small that they would be repeated hundreds of times
over the course of pre-training on 1trillion tokens. Since we showed in Section 3.4.2
that this repetition could be harmful, we opted instead to continue using the C4 data
set.
Model sizes In Section 3.6 we also showed how scaling up the baseline model size improved
performance. However, using smaller models can be helpful in settings where limited
computational resources are available for ﬁne-tuning or inference. Based on these
factors, we train models with a wide range of sizes:
•Base.This is our baseline model, whose hyperparameters are described in
Section 3.1.1. It has roughly 220million parameters.
•Small.We consider a smaller model, which scales the baseline down by using
dmodel = 512,dﬀ= 2,048,8-headed attention, and only 6layers each in the
encoder and decoder. This variant has about 60million parameters.
•Large. Since our baseline uses a BERT BASE-sized encoder and decoder, we
also consider a variant where the encoder and decoder are both similar in size
and structure to BERT LARGE. Speciﬁcally, this variant uses dmodel = 1,024,
dﬀ= 4,096,dkv= 64,16-headed attention, and 24layers each in the encoder and
decoder, resulting in around 770million parameters.
•3B and 11B. To further explore what kind of performance is possible when
using larger models, we consider two additional variants. In both cases, we use
36