Exploring the Limits of Transfer Learning
The self-attention operations in the Transformer’s decoder use a “causal” masking pattern.
When producing the ith entry of the output sequence, causal masking prevents the model
from attending to the jth entry of the input sequence for j >i. This is used during training
so that the model can’t “see into the future” as it produces its output. An attention matrix
for this masking pattern is shown in Figure 3, middle.
The decoder in an encoder-decoder Transformer is used to autoregressively produce an
output sequence. That is, at each output timestep, a token is sampled from the model’s
predicted distribution and the sample is fed back into the model to produce a prediction for
the next output timestep, and so on. As such, a Transformer decoder (without an encoder)
can be used as a language model (LM), i.e. a model trained solely for next-step prediction
(Liu et al., 2018; Radford et al., 2018; Al-Rfou et al., 2019). This constitutes the second
model structure we consider. A schematic of this architecture is shown in Figure 4, middle.
In fact, early work on transfer learning for NLP used this architecture with a language
modeling objective as a pre-training method (Radford et al., 2018).
Language models are typically used for compression or sequence generation (Graves,
2013). However, they can also be used in the text-to-text framework simply by concatenating
the inputs and targets. As an example, consider the case of English to German translation:
If we have a training datapoint with input sentence “That is good.” and target “Das ist
gut.”, we would simply train the model on next-step prediction over the concatenated input
sequence “translate English to German: That is good. target: Das ist gut.” If we wanted to
obtain the model’s prediction for this example, the model would be fed the preﬁx “translate
English to German: That is good. target:” and would be asked to generate the remainder
of the sequence autoregressively. In this way, the model can predict an output sequence
given an input, which satisﬁes the needs of text-to-text tasks. This approach was recently
used to show that language models can learn to perform some text-to-text tasks without
supervision (Radford et al., 2019).
A fundamental and frequently cited drawback of using a language model in the text-
to-text setting is that causal masking forces the model’s representation of the ith entry of
the input sequence to only depend on the entries up until i. To see why this is potentially
disadvantageous, consider the text-to-text framework where the model is provided with a
preﬁx/context before being asked to make predictions (e.g., the preﬁx is an English sentence
and the model is asked to predict the German translation). With fully causal masking, the
model’s representation of a preﬁx state can only depend on prior entries of the preﬁx. So,
when predicting an entry of the output, the model will attend to a representation of the
preﬁx that is unnecessarily limited. Similar arguments have been made against using a
unidirectional recurrent neural network encoder in sequence-to-sequence models (Bahdanau
et al., 2015).
This issue can be avoided in a Transformer-based language model simply by changing
the masking pattern. Instead of using a causal mask, we use fully-visible masking during
the preﬁx portion of the sequence. This masking pattern and a schematic of the resulting
“preﬁx LM” (the third model structure we consider) are illustrated in the rightmost panels of
Figures 3 and 4, respectively. In the English to German translation example mentioned above,
fully-visible masking would be applied to the preﬁx “translate English to German: That is
good. target:” and causal masking would be used during training for predicting the target
“Das ist gut.” Using a preﬁx LM in the text-to-text framework was originally proposed by
17