Raffel, Shazeer, Roberts, Lee, Narang, Matena, Zhou, Li and Liu
experiments, the model is fed the question and its context and asked to generate the answer
token-by-token. For WMT English to German, we use the same training data as (Vaswani
et al., 2017) (i.e. News Commentary v13, Common Crawl, Europarl v7) and newstest2013
as a validation set (Bojar et al., 2014). For English to French, we use the standard training
data from 2015 and newstest2014 as a validation set (Bojar et al., 2015). For English to
Romanian, which is a standard lower-resource machine translation benchmark, we use the
train and validation sets from WMT 2016 (Bojar et al., 2016). Note that we only pre-train
on English data, so in order to learn to translate a given model will need to learn to generate
text in a new language.
2.4. Input and Output Format
In order to train a single model on the diverse set of tasks described above, we cast all of
the tasks we consider into a “text-to-text” format—that is, a task where the model is fed
some text for context or conditioning and is then asked to produce some output text. This
framework provides a consistent training objective both for pre-training and ﬁne-tuning.
Speciﬁcally, the model is trained with a maximum likelihood objective (using “teacher forcing”
(Williams and Zipser, 1989)) regardless of the task. To specify which task the model should
perform, we add a task-speciﬁc (text) preﬁx to the original input sequence before feeding it
to the model.
As an example, to ask the model to translate the sentence “That is good.” from English
to German, the model would be fed the sequence “translate English to German: That is
good.” and would be trained to output “Das ist gut.” For text classiﬁcation tasks, the
model simply predicts a single word corresponding to the target label. For example, on the
MNLI benchmark (Williams et al., 2017) the goal is to predict whether a premise implies
(“entailment”), contradicts (“contradiction”), or neither (“neutral”) a hypothesis. With
our preprocessing, the input sequence becomes “mnli premise: I hate pigeons. hypothesis:
My feelings towards pigeons are ﬁlled with animosity.” with the corresponding target word
“entailment”. Note that an issue arises if our model outputs text on a text classiﬁcation
task that does not correspond to any of the possible labels (for example if the model
outputs “hamburger” when the only possible labels for a task were “entailment”, “neutral”,
or “contradiction”). In this case, we always count the model’s output as wrong, though we
never observed this behavior in any of our trained models. Note that the choice of text preﬁx
used for a given task is essentially a hyperparameter; we found that changing the exact
wording of the preﬁx had limited impact and so did not perform extensive experiments into
diﬀerent preﬁx choices. A diagram of our text-to-text framework with a few input/output
examples is shown in Figure 1. We provide full examples of preprocessed inputs for every
task we studied in Appendix D.
Our text-to-text framework follows previous work that casts multiple NLP tasks into
a common format: McCann et al. (2018) propose the “Natural Language Decathlon”, a
benchmark that uses a consistent question-answering format for a suite of ten NLP tasks.
The Natural Language Decathlon also stipulates that all models must be multi-task, i.e.
are able to simultaneously tackle all of the tasks at once. We instead allow for separately
ﬁne-tuning the model on each individual task and use short task preﬁxes instead of an explicit
question-answer format. Radford et al. (2019) evaluate the zero-shot learning capabilities of
8