Raffel, Shazeer, Roberts, Lee, Narang, Matena, Zhou, Li and Liu
x1 x2 x3 x4 y1 y2 .Encoder 
Decoder 
x1 x2 x3 y1 y2 x2 x3 y1 y2 .Language model 
x1 x2 x3 y1 y2 x2 x3 y1 y2 .Preﬁx LM 
Figure 4: Schematics of the Transformer architecture variants we consider. In this diagram,
blocks represent elements of a sequence and lines represent attention visibility.
Diﬀerent colored groups of blocks indicate diﬀerent Transformer layer stacks. Dark
grey lines correspond to fully-visible masking and light grey lines correspond
to causal masking. We use “.” to denote a special end-of-sequence token that
represents the end of a prediction. The input and output sequences are represented
asxandyrespectively. Left: A standard encoder-decoder architecture uses fully-
visible masking in the encoder and the encoder-decoder attention, with causal
masking in the decoder. Middle: A language model consists of a single Transformer
layer stack and is fed the concatenation of the input and target, using a causal
mask throughout. Right: Adding a preﬁx to a language model corresponds to
allowing fully-visible masking over the input.
thejth entry of the input sequence. yiis computed as/summationtext
jwi,jxj, wherewi,jis the scalar
weight produced by the self-attention mechanism as a function of xiandxj. The attention
mask is then used to zero out certain weights in order to constrain which entries of the input
can be attended to at a given output timestep. Diagrams of the masks we will consider are
shown in Figure 3. For example, the causal mask (Figure 3, middle) sets any wi,jto zero if
j >i.
The ﬁrst model structure we consider is an an encoder-decoder Transformer, which
consists of two layer stacks: The encoder, which is fed an input sequence, and the decoder,
which produces a new output sequence. A schematic of this architectural variant is shown
in the left panel of Figure 4.
The encoder uses a “fully-visible” attention mask. Fully-visible masking allows a self-
attention mechanism to attend to any entry of the input when producing each entry of
its output. We visualize this masking pattern in Figure 3, left. This form of masking is
appropriate when attending over a “preﬁx”, i.e. some context provided to the model that
is later used when making predictions. BERT (Devlin et al., 2018) also uses a fully-visible
masking pattern and appends a special “classiﬁcation” token to the input. BERT’s output
at the timestep corresponding to the classiﬁcation token is then used to make a prediction
for classifying the input sequence.
16