Exploring the Limits of Transfer Learning
language models by feeding some input to the model as a preﬁx and then autoregressively
sampling an output. For example, automatic summarization is done by feeding in a document
followed by the text “TL;DR:” (short for “too long, didn’t read”, a common abbreviation)
and then the summary is predicted via autoregressive decoding. We mainly consider models
that explicitly process an input with an encoder before generating an output with a separate
decoder and we focus on transfer learning rather than zero-shot learning. Finally, Keskar
et al. (2019b) unify many NLP tasks as “span extraction”, where text corresponding to
possible output choices are appended to the input and the model is trained to extract the
input span corresponding to the correct choice. In contrast, our framework also allows for
generative tasks like machine translation and abstractive summarization where it is not
possible to enumerate all possible output choices.
We were able to straightforwardly cast all of the tasks we considered into a text-to-text
format with the exception of STS-B, which is a regression task where the goal is to predict
a similarity score between 1and5. We found that mostof these scores were annotated
in increments of 0.2, so we simply rounded any score to the nearest increment of 0.2and
converted the result to a literal string representation of the number (e.g. the ﬂoating-point
value 2.57would be mapped to the string “2.6”). At test time, if the model outputs a
string corresponding to a number between 1and5, we convert it to a ﬂoating-point value;
otherwise, we treat the model’s prediction as incorrect. This eﬀectively recasts the STS-B
regression problem as a 21-class classiﬁcation problem.
Separately, we also convert the Winograd tasks (WNLI from GLUE, WSC from Super-
GLUE, and the DPR data set we add to SuperGLUE) into a simpler format that is more
amenable to the text-to-text framework. Examples from the Winograd tasks consist of a
text passage containing an ambiguous pronoun that could refer to more than one of the noun
phrases in the passage. For example, the passage might be “The city councilmen refused
the demonstrators a permit because they feared violence.”, which contains the ambiguous
pronoun “they” that could refer to “city councilmen” or “demonstrators”. We cast the WNLI,
WSC, and DPR tasks as text-to-text problems by highlighting the ambiguous pronoun in
the text passage and asking the model to predict the noun that it refers to. The example
mentioned above would be transformed to the input “The city councilmen refused the
demonstrators a permit because *they* feared violence.” and the model would be trained to
predict the target text “The city councilmen”.
For WSC, examples contain the passage, the ambiguous pronoun, a candidate noun,
and a True/False label reﬂecting whether the candidate matches the pronoun (ignoring any
articles). We only train on examples with a “True” label since we do not know the correct
noun targets for examples with a “False” label. For evaluation, we assign a “True” label if
the words in the model’s output are a subset of the words in the candidate noun phrase
(or vice versa) and assign a “False” label otherwise. This removes roughly half of the WSC
training set, but the DPR data set adds about 1,000pronoun resolution examples. Examples
from DPR are annotated with the correct referent noun, making it easy to use this data set
in the format listed above.
The WNLI training and validation sets have a signiﬁcant overlap with the WSC training
set. To avoid leaking validation examples into our training data (a particular issue in the
multi-task experiments of Section 3.5.2), we therefore never train on WNLI and never report
results on the WNLI validation set. Omitting results on the WNLI validation set is standard
9