Exploring the Limits of Transfer Learning
uniﬁed text-to-text framework, “multi-task learning” simply corresponds to mixing data sets
together. It follows that we can still train on unlabeled data when using multi-task learning
by treating the unsupervised task as one of the tasks being mixed together. In contrast,
most applications of multi-task learning to NLP add task-speciﬁc classiﬁcation networks or
use diﬀerent loss functions for each task (Liu et al., 2019b).
As pointed out by Arivazhagan et al. (2019), an extremely important factor in multi-task
learning is how much data from each task the model should be trained on. Our goal is to not
under- or over-train the model—that is, we want the model to see enough data from a given
task that it can perform the task well, but not to see so much data that it memorizes the
training set. How exactly to set the proportion of data coming from each task can depend on
various factors including data set sizes, the “diﬃculty” of learning the task (i.e. how much
data the model must see before being able to perform the task eﬀectively), regularization,
etc. An additional issue is the potential for “task interference” or “negative transfer”, where
achieving good performance on one task can hinder performance on another. Given these
concerns, we begin by exploring various strategies for setting the proportion of data coming
from each task. A similar exploration was performed by Wang et al. (2019a).
Examples-proportional mixing A major factor in how quickly a model will overﬁt to
a given task is the task’s data set size. As such, a natural way to set the mixing
proportions is to sample in proportion to the size of each task’s data set. This is
equivalent to concatenating the data sets for all tasks and randomly sampling examples
from the combined data set. Note, however, that we are including our unsupervised
denoising task, which uses a data set that is orders of magnitude larger than every
other task’s. It follows that if we simply sample in proportion to each data set’s size,
the vast majority of the data the model sees will be unlabeled, and it will undertrain
on all of the supervised tasks. Even without the unsupervised task, some tasks (e.g.
WMT English to French) are so large that they would similarly crowd out most of
the batches. To get around this issue, we set an artiﬁcial “limit” on the data set sizes
before computing the proportions. Speciﬁcally, if the number of examples in each of
ourNtask’s data sets is en,n∈{1,...,N}then we set probability of sampling an
example from the mth task during training to rm=min(em,K)//summationtextmin(en,K)where
Kis the artiﬁcial data set size limit.
Temperature-scaled mixing An alternative way of mitigating the huge disparity between
data set sizes is to adjust the “temperature” of the mixing rates. This approach was
used by multilingual BERT to ensure that the model was suﬃciently trained on low-
resource languages.14To implement temperature scaling with temperature T, we raise
each task’s mixing rate rmto the power of1⁄Tand renormalize the rates so that they
sum to 1. When T= 1, this approach is equivalent to examples-proportional mixing
and asTincreases the proportions become closer to equal mixing. We retain the data
set size limit K(applied to obtain rmbefore temperature scaling) but set it to a large
value ofK= 221. We use a large value of Kbecause increasing the temperature will
decrease the mixing rate of the largest data sets.
14.https://github.com/google-research/bert/blob/master/multilingual.md
31