Raffel, Shazeer, Roberts, Lee, Narang, Matena, Zhou, Li and Liu
Liu et al. (2018). More recently, Dong et al. (2019) showed that this architecture is eﬀective
on a wide variety of text-to-text tasks. This architecture is similar to an encoder-decoder
model with parameters shared across the encoder and decoder and with the encoder-decoder
attention replaced with full attention across the input and target sequence.
We note that when following our text-to-text framework, the preﬁx LM architecture
closely resembles BERT (Devlin et al., 2018) for classiﬁcation tasks. To see why, consider an
example from the MNLI benchmark where the premise is “I hate pigeons.”, the hypothesis is
“My feelings towards pigeons are ﬁlled with animosity.” and the correct label is “entailment”.
To feed this example into a language model, we would transform it into the sequence “mnli
premise: I hate pigeons. hypothesis: My feelings towards pigeons are ﬁlled with animosity.
target: entailment”. In this case, the fully-visible preﬁx would correspond to the entire input
sequence up to the word “target:”, which can be seen as being analogous to the “classiﬁcation”
token used in BERT. So, our model would have full visibility over the entire input, and then
would be tasked with making a classiﬁcation by outputting the word “entailment”. It is easy
for the model to learn to output one of the valid class labels given the task preﬁx (“mnli” in
this case). As such, the main diﬀerence between a preﬁx LM and the BERT architecture is
that the classiﬁer is simply integrated into the output layer of the Transformer decoder in
the preﬁx LM.
3.2.2. Comparing Different Model Structures
In the interest of experimentally comparing these architectural variants, we would like each
model we consider to be equivalent in some meaningful way. We might say that two models
are equivalent if they either have the same number of parameters or they require roughly
the same amount of computation to process a given (input-sequence, target-sequence) pair.
Unfortunately, it is not possible to compare an encoder-decoder model to a language model
architecture (comprising a single Transformer stack) according to both of these criteria
at the same time. To see why, ﬁrst note an encoder-decoder model with Llayers in the
encoder and Llayers in the decoder has approximately the same number of parameters as a
language model with 2Llayers. However, the same L+Lencoder-decoder model will have
approximately the same computational cost as a language model with onlyLlayers. This
is a consequence of the fact that the Llayers in the language model must be applied to
boththe input and output sequence, while the encoder is only applied to the input sequence
and the decoder is only applied to the output sequence. Note that these equivalences are
approximate—there are some extra parameters in the decoder due to the encoder-decoder
attention and there are also some computational costs in the attention layers that are
quadratic in the sequence lengths. In practice, however, we observed nearly identical step
times forL-layer language models versus L+L-layer encoder-decoder models, suggesting a
roughly equivalent computational cost. Further, for the model sizes we consider, the number
of parameters in the encoder-decoder attention layers is about 10% of the total parameter
count, so we make the simplifying assumption that an L+L-layer encoder-decoder model
has the same number of parameters as an 2L-layer language model.
To provide a reasonable means of comparison, we consider multiple conﬁgurations for
our encoder-decoder model. We will refer to the number of layers and parameters in a
BERTBASE-sized layer stack as LandP, respectively. We will use Mto refer to the number
18