Exploring the Limits of Transfer Learning
<X> <Y>
<X> <Y><Z>
Figure 2: Schematic of the objective we use in our baseline model. In this example, we
process the sentence “Thank you for inviting me to your party last week.” The
words “for”, “inviting” and “last” (marked with an ×) are randomly chosen for
corruption. Each consecutive span of corrupted tokens is replaced by a sentinel
token (shown as <X>and<Y>) that is unique over the example. Since “for” and
“inviting” occur consecutively, they are replaced by a single sentinel <X>. The
output sequence then consists of the dropped-out spans, delimited by the sentinel
tokens used to replace them in the input plus a ﬁnal sentinel token <Z>.
“word dropout” regularization technique (Bowman et al., 2015), we design an objective that
randomly samples and then drops out 15%of tokens in the input sequence. All consecutive
spans of dropped-out tokens are replaced by a single sentinel token. Each sentinel token
is assigned a token ID that is unique to the sequence. The sentinel IDs are special tokens
which are added to our vocabulary and do not correspond to any wordpiece. The target
then corresponds to all of the dropped-out spans of tokens, delimited by the same sentinel
tokens used in the input sequence plus a ﬁnal sentinel token to mark the end of the target
sequence. Our choices to mask consecutive spans of tokens and only predict dropped-out
tokens were made to reduce the computational cost of pre-training. We perform thorough
investigation into pre-training objectives in Section 3.3. An example of the transformation
resulting from applying this objective is shown in Figure 2. We empirically compare this
objective to many other variants in Section 3.3.
3.1.5. Baseline Performance
In this section, we present results using the baseline experimental procedure described above
to get a sense of what kind of performance to expect on our suite of downstream tasks.
Ideally, we would repeat every experiment in our study multiple times to get a conﬁdence
interval on our results. Unfortunately, this would be prohibitively expensive due to the large
number of experiments we run. As a cheaper alternative, we train our baseline model 10
times from scratch (i.e. with diﬀerent random initializations and data set shuﬄing) and
assume that the variance over these runs of the base model also applies to each experimental
variant. We don’t expect most of the changes we make to have a dramatic eﬀect on the
inter-run variance, so this should provide a reasonable indication of the signiﬁcance of
diﬀerent changes. Separately, we also measure the performance of training our model for 218
steps (the same number we use for ﬁne-tuning) on all downstream tasks without pre-training.
This gives us an idea of how much pre-training beneﬁts our model in the baseline setting.
13