Raffel, Shazeer, Roberts, Lee, Narang, Matena, Zhou, Li and Liu
Original target: carbon monoxide
Processed target: carbon monoxide
D.16. WMT English to German
Original input: "Luigi often said to me that he never wanted the brothers to end
up in court," she wrote.
Processed input: translate English to German: "Luigi often said to me that he
never wanted the brothers to end up in court," she wrote.
Original target: "Luigi sagte oft zu mir, dass er nie wollte, dass die Brüder
vor Gericht landen", schrieb sie.
Processed target: "Luigi sagte oft zu mir, dass er nie wollte, dass die Brüder
vor Gericht landen", schrieb sie.
D.17. WMT English to French
Original input: This image section from an infrared recording by the Spitzer telescope
shows a "family portrait" of countless generations of stars: the oldest stars
are seen as blue dots, while more difficult to identify are the pink-coloured
"new-borns" in the star delivery room.
Processed input: translate English to French: This image section from an infrared
recording by the Spitzer telescope shows a "family portrait" of countless
generations of stars: the oldest stars are seen as blue dots, while more difficult
to identify are the pink-coloured "new-borns" in the star delivery room.
Original target: Ce détail d’une photographie infrarouge prise par le télescope
Spitzer montre un "portrait de famille" des innombrables générations d’étoiles:
les plus vieilles étoiles sont en bleu et les points roses, plus difficiles
à identifier, sont les "nouveau-nés" dans la salle d’accouchement de l’univers.
Processed target: Ce détail d’une photographie infrarouge prise par le télescope
Spitzer montre un "portrait de famille" des innombrables générations d’étoiles:
les plus vieilles étoiles sont en bleu et les points roses, plus difficiles
à identifier, sont les "nouveau-nés" dans la salle d’accouchement de l’univers.
D.18. WMT English to Romanian
Original input: Taco Bell said it plans to add 2,000 locations in the US by 2022.
Processed input: translate English to Romanian: Taco Bell said it plans to add
2,000 locations in the US by 2022.
Original target: Taco Bell a afirmat că, până în 2022, intent ,ionează să deschidă
2000 de restaurante în SUA.
54