Raffel, Shazeer, Roberts, Lee, Narang, Matena, Zhou, Li and Liu
2. Setup
Before presenting the results from our large-scale empirical study, we review the necessary
background topics required to understand our results, including the Transformer model
architecture and the downstream tasks we evaluate on. We also introduce our approach
for treating every problem as a text-to-text task and describe our “Colossal Clean Crawled
Corpus” (C4), the Common Crawl-based data set we created as a source of unlabeled text
data. We refer to our model and framework as the “ Text-to-TextTransferTransformer”
(T5).
2.1. Model
Early results on transfer learning for NLP leveraged recurrent neural networks (Peters
et al., 2018; Howard and Ruder, 2018), but it has recently become more common to use
models based on the “Transformer” architecture (Vaswani et al., 2017). The Transformer
was initially shown to be eﬀective for machine translation, but it has subsequently been
used in a wide variety of NLP settings (Radford et al., 2018; Devlin et al., 2018; McCann
et al., 2018; Yu et al., 2018). Due to its increasing ubiquity, all of the models we study are
based on the Transformer architecture. Apart from the details mentioned below and the
variants we explore in Section 3.2, we do not deviate signiﬁcantly from this architecture as
originally proposed. Instead of providing a comprehensive deﬁnition of this model, we refer
the interested reader to the original paper (Vaswani et al., 2017) or follow-up tutorials3,4for
a more detailed introduction.
The primary building block of the Transformer is self-attention (Cheng et al., 2016).
Self-attention is a variant of attention (Graves, 2013; Bahdanau et al., 2015) that processes
a sequence by replacing each element by a weighted average of the rest of the sequence.
The original Transformer consisted of an encoder-decoder architecture and was intended
for sequence-to-sequence (Sutskever et al., 2014; Kalchbrenner et al., 2014) tasks. It has
recently also become common to use models consisting of a single Transformer layer stack,
with varying forms of self-attention used to produce architectures appropriate for language
modeling (Radford et al., 2018; Al-Rfou et al., 2019) or classiﬁcation and span prediction
tasks (Devlin et al., 2018; Yang et al., 2019). We empirically explore these architectural
variants in Section 3.2.
Overall, our encoder-decoder Transformer implementation closely follows its originally-
proposed form (Vaswani et al., 2017). First, an input sequence of tokens is mapped to
a sequence of embeddings, which is then passed into the encoder. The encoder consists
of a stack of “blocks”, each of which comprises two subcomponents: a self-attention layer
followed by a small feed-forward network. Layer normalization (Ba et al., 2016) is applied to
the input of each subcomponent. We use a simpliﬁed version of layer normalization where
the activations are only rescaled and no additive bias is applied. After layer normalization,
a residual skip connection (He et al., 2016) adds each subcomponent’s input to its output.
Dropout (Srivastava et al., 2014) is applied within the feed-forward network, on the skip
connection, on the attention weights, and at the input and output of the entire stack. The
decoder is similar in structure to the encoder except that it includes a standard attention
3.http://nlp.seas.harvard.edu/2018/04/03/attention.html
4.http://jalammar.github.io/illustrated-transformer/
4