Raffel, Shazeer, Roberts, Lee, Narang, Matena, Zhou, Li and Liu
1.Ground-truth: leopard gave up after spiky creature refused to back down
in fight in kruger national park, south africa . wildlife enthusiast lisl
moolman, 41, caught the bizarre battle while out on the road and armed with
her camera . the leopard and porcupine tumbled out of the bushes and began
to fight by roadside - watched by ms moolman .
Prediction: leopard tried to make lunch out of a plucky porcupine in kruger
national park, south africa . but the predator was put firmly in its place
after the spiky creature refused to back down during a fight . wildlife
enthusiast lisl moolman, 41, caught the bizarre battle while out on the
road and armed with her camera .
2.Ground-truth: researchers say homes are a hotbed of undiscovered species
. study of 40 north carolina homes found 8,000 bacterial and archaeal taxa
. 11 houses in california revealed a great variety of fungus among us .
Prediction: researchers estimate that the indoor biome makes up about 0.5
percent of ice-free land, or about 247,000 square miles, almost the size
of texas . a study of 40 houses in north carolina used genomic technologies
to document more than 8,000 bacterial and archaeal taxa . another study
of 50 houses in the same state described more than 750 types of arthropods,
including insects and spiders . an examination of 11 houses in california
found a great variety of fungus among us .
3.Ground-truth: executions have been temporarily halted in the state after
the drug used for lethal injections appeared faulty on monday night . kelly
gissendaner had her death delayed for a second time when it was found that
the lethal pentobarbital dose appeared cloudy . state officials dithered
over the decision , changing their mind three times before deciding not
to take the risk that it wouldn’t work . it is ’essential that executions
are carried out in a constitutional manner,’ said georgia attorney general
sam olens .
Prediction: the execution of kelly gissendaner, the only woman on georgia’s
death row, was delayed for a second time on monday . the execution team
found that the lethal pentobarbital dose appeared cloudy . the cloudy drug
bolstered death penalty opponents, who have been vocal in their opposition
after three botched executions in other parts of the country .
4.Ground-truth: dani alves was not selected for the brazil squad to face
france and chile . barcelona defender was filmed serving up hot dogs to
people on saturday . this week alves released a charity single with former
team-mat jose pinto . alves looks set to leave barcelona on a free transfer
this summer . reports in spanish press claim he will sign for paris saint-germain
.
Prediction: dani alves was not selected for brazil’s friendlies against
france and chile . the barcelona right back has released a charity single
with jose pinto . alves was filmed serving up snacks from behind the counter
46