Exploring the Limits of Transfer Learning
of FLOPs required for an L+L-layer encoder-decoder model or L-layer decoder-only model
to process a given input-target pair. In total, we will compare:
•An encoder-decoder model with Llayers in the encoder and Llayers in the decoder.
This model has 2Pparameters and a computation cost of MFLOPs.
•An equivalent model, but with parameters shared across the encoder and decoder,
resulting in Pparameters and an M-FLOP computational cost.
•An encoder-decoder model with L/2layers each in the encoder and decoder, giving P
parameters and an M/2-FLOP cost.
•A decoder-only language model with Llayers and Pparameters and a resulting
computational cost of MFLOPs.
•A decoder-only preﬁx LM with the same architecture (and thus the same number
of parameters and computational cost), but with fully-visible self-attention over the
input.
3.2.3. Objectives
As an unsupervised objective, we will consider both a basic language modeling objective as
well as our baseline denoising objective described in Section 3.1.4. We include the language
modeling objective due to its historic use as a pre-training objective (Dai and Le, 2015;
Ramachandran et al., 2016; Howard and Ruder, 2018; Radford et al., 2018; Peters et al.,
2018) as well as its natural ﬁt for the language model architectures we consider. For models
that ingest a preﬁx before making predictions (the encoder-decoder model and preﬁx LM),
we sample a span of text from our unlabeled data set and choose a random point to split
it into preﬁx and target portions. For the standard language model, we train the model
to predict the entire span from beginning to end. Our unsupervised denoising objective is
designed for text-to-text models; to adapt it for use with a language model we concatenate
the inputs and targets as described in Section 3.2.1.
3.2.4. Results
The scores achieved by each of the architectures we compare are shown in Table 2. For
all tasks, the encoder-decoder architecture with the denoising objective performed best.
This variant has the highest parameter count ( 2P) but the same computational cost as the
P-parameter decoder-only models. Surprisingly, we found that sharing parameters across the
encoder and decoder performed nearly as well. In contrast, halving the number of layers in
the encoder and decoder stacks signiﬁcantly hurt performance. Concurrent work (Lan et al.,
2019) also found that sharing parameters across Transformer blocks can be an eﬀective means
of lowering the total parameter count without sacriﬁcing much performance. XLNet also
bears some resemblance to the shared encoder-decoder approach with a denoising objective
(Yang et al., 2019). We also note that the shared parameter encoder-decoder outperforms
the decoder-only preﬁx LM, suggesting that the addition of an explicit encoder-decoder
attention is beneﬁcial. Finally, we conﬁrm the widely-held conception that using a denoising
objective always results in better downstream task performance compared to a language
19