Exploring the Limits of Transfer Learning
denoising objectives outperformed language modeling and deshuﬄing for pre-training. We
did not observe a remarkable diﬀerence across the many variants of the denoising objectives
we explored. However, diﬀerent objectives (or parameterizations of objectives) can lead to
diﬀerent sequence lengths and thus diﬀerent training speeds. This implies that choosing
among the denoising objectives we considered here should mainly be done according to
their computational cost. Our results also suggest that additional exploration of objectives
similar to the ones we consider here may not lead to signiﬁcant gains for the tasks and model
we consider. Instead, it may be fortuitous to explore entirely diﬀerent ways of leveraging
unlabeled data.
3.4. Pre-training Data set
Like the unsupervised objective, the pre-training data set itself is a crucial component of
the transfer learning pipeline. However, unlike objectives and benchmarks, new pre-training
data sets are usually not treated as signiﬁcant contributions on their own and are often not
released alongside pre-trained models and code. Instead, they are typically introduced in
the course of presenting a new method or model. As a result, there has been relatively little
comparison of diﬀerent pre-training data sets as well as a lack of a “standard” data set used
for pre-training. Some recent notable exceptions (Baevski et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2019c;
Yang et al., 2019) have compared pre-training on a new large (often Common Crawl-sourced)
data set to using a smaller preexisting data set (often Wikipedia). To probe more deeply
into the impact of the pre-training data set on performance, in this section we compare
variants of our C4 data set and other potential sources of pre-training data. We release all
of the C4 data set variants we consider as part of TensorFlow Datasets.11
3.4.1. Unlabeled Data Sets
In creating C4, we developed various heuristics to ﬁlter the web-extracted text from Common
Crawl (see Section 2.2 for a description). We are interested in measuring whether this
ﬁltering results in improved performance on downstream tasks, in addition to comparing
it to other ﬁltering approaches and common pre-training data sets. Towards this end, we
compare the performance of our baseline model after pre-training on the following data sets:
C4As a baseline, we ﬁrst consider pre-training on our proposed unlabeled data set as
described in Section 2.2.
Unﬁltered C4 To measure the eﬀect of the heuristic ﬁltering we used in creating C4
(deduplication, removing bad words, only retaining sentences, etc.), we also generate
an alternate version of C4 that forgoes this ﬁltering. Note that we still use langdetect
to extract English text. As a result, our “unﬁltered” variant still includes some ﬁltering
because langdetect sometimes assigns a low probability to non-natural English text.
RealNews-like Recent work has used text data extracted from news websites (Zellers
et al., 2019; Baevski et al., 2019). To compare to this approach, we generate another
unlabeled data set by additionally ﬁltering C4 to only include content from one of the
domains used in the “RealNews” data set (Zellers et al., 2019). Note that for ease of
11.https://www.tensorflow.org/datasets/catalog/c4
25