Exploring the Limits of Transfer Learning
from manchester united’s dutch manager louis van gaal . januzaj and fellaini
are joined by some friends as they take to the dance floor ahead of the newcastle
game .
Original target: the belgian duo took to the dance floor on monday night with
some friends . manchester united face newcastle in the premier league on
wednesday . red devils will be looking for just their second league away win
in seven . louis van gaal’s side currently sit two points clear of liverpool
in fourth .
Processed target: the belgian duo took to the dance floor on monday night with
some friends . manchester united face newcastle in the premier league on
wednesday . red devils will be looking for just their second league away win
in seven . louis van gaal’s side currently sit two points clear of liverpool
in fourth .
D.15. SQuAD
Original input:
Question: What does increased oxygen concentrations in the patient’s lungs
displace?
Context: Hyperbaric (high-pressure) medicine uses special oxygen chambers
to increase the partial pressure of O 2 around the patient and, when needed,
the medical staff. Carbon monoxide poisoning, gas gangrene, and decompression
sickness (the ’bends’) are sometimes treated using these devices. Increased
O 2 concentration in the lungs helps to displace carbon monoxide from the
heme group of hemoglobin. Oxygen gas is poisonous to the anaerobic bacteria
that cause gas gangrene, so increasing its partial pressure helps kill them.
Decompression sickness occurs in divers who decompress too quickly after
a dive, resulting in bubbles of inert gas, mostly nitrogen and helium, forming
in their blood. Increasing the pressure of O 2 as soon as possible is part
of the treatment.
Processed input: question: What does increased oxygen concentrations in the patient’s
lungs displace? context: Hyperbaric (high-pressure) medicine uses special
oxygen chambers to increase the partial pressure of O 2 around the patient
and, when needed, the medical staff. Carbon monoxide poisoning, gas gangrene,
and decompression sickness (the ’bends’) are sometimes treated using these
devices. Increased O 2 concentration in the lungs helps to displace carbon
monoxide from the heme group of hemoglobin. Oxygen gas is poisonous to the
anaerobic bacteria that cause gas gangrene, so increasing its partial pressure
helps kill them. Decompression sickness occurs in divers who decompress too
quickly after a dive, resulting in bubbles of inert gas, mostly nitrogen and
helium, forming in their blood. Increasing the pressure of O 2 as soon as
possible is part of the treatment.
53