Raffel, Shazeer, Roberts, Lee, Narang, Matena, Zhou, Li and Liu
performance of “leave-one-out” training was only slightly worse, suggesting that a model
that was trained on a variety of tasks can still adapt to new tasks (i.e. multi-task pre-
training might not result in a dramatic task interference). Finally, supervised multi-task
pre-training performed signiﬁcantly worse in every case except for the translation tasks. This
could suggest that the translation tasks beneﬁt less from (English) pre-training, whereas
unsupervised pre-training is an important factor in the other tasks.
3.6. Scaling
The “bitter lesson” of machine learning research argues that general methods that can
leverage additional computation ultimately win out against methods that rely on human
expertise (Sutton, 2019; Hestness et al., 2017; Shazeer et al., 2017; Jozefowicz et al., 2016;
Mahajan et al., 2018; Shazeer et al., 2018, 2017; Huang et al., 2018b; Keskar et al., 2019a).
Recent results suggest that this may hold true for transfer learning in NLP (Liu et al., 2019c;
Radford et al., 2019; Yang et al., 2019; Lan et al., 2019), i.e. it has repeatedly been shown
that scaling up produces improved performance compared to more carefully-engineered
methods. However, there are a variety of possible ways to scale, including using a bigger
model, training the model for more steps, and ensembling. In this section, we compare these
diﬀerent approaches by addressing the following premise: “You were just given 4×more
compute. How should you use it?”
We start with our baseline model, which has 220Mparameters and is pre-trained and
ﬁne-tuned for 219and 218steps respectively. The encoder and decoder are both sized
similarly to “BERT BASE”. To experiment with increased model size, we follow the guidelines
of “BERT LARGE” Devlin et al. (2018) and use dﬀ= 4096,dmodel = 1024,dkv= 64and
16-head attention mechanisms. We then generate two variants with 16and32layers each in
the encoder and decoder, producing models with 2×and4×as many parameters as our
original model. These two variants also have a roughly 2×and4×the computational cost.
Using our baseline and these two larger models, we consider three ways of using 4×as much
computation: Training for 4×as many steps, training for 2×as many steps with the 2×
bigger model, and training the 4×bigger model for the “baseline” number of training steps.
When we increase the training steps, we scale both the pre-train and ﬁne-tune steps for
simplicity. Note that when increasing the number of pre-training steps, we are eﬀectively
including more pre-training data as C4 is so large that we do not complete one pass over
the data even when training for 223steps.
An alternative way for the model to see 4×as much data is to increase the batch size by a
factor of 4. This can potentially result in faster training due to more eﬃcient parallelization.
However, training with a 4×larger batch size can yield a diﬀerent outcome than training
for4×as many steps (Shallue et al., 2018). We include an additional experiment where we
train our baseline model with a 4×larger batch size to compare these two cases.
It is common practice on many of the benchmarks we consider to eke out additional
performance by training and evaluating using an ensemble of models. This provides an
orthogonal way of using additional computation. To compare other scaling methods to
ensembling, we also measure the performance of an ensemble of 4separately pre-trained and
ﬁne-tuned models. We average the logits across the ensemble before feeding them into the
output softmax nonlinearity to obtain an aggregate prediction. Instead of pre-training 4
34