Raffel, Shazeer, Roberts, Lee, Narang, Matena, Zhou, Li and Liu
data sets that use additional ﬁltering, we found that training on in-domain unlabeled
data could boost performance in a few downstream tasks. However, constraining to
a single domain typically results in a smaller data set. We separately showed that
performance can degrade when an unlabeled data set is small enough that it is repeated
many times over the course of pre-training. This motivates the use of a large and
diverse data set like C4 for generic language understanding tasks.
Training strategies We found that the basic approach of updating all of a pre-trained
model’s parameters during ﬁne-tuning outperformed methods that are designed to
update fewer parameters, although updating all parameters is most expensive. We also
experimented with various approaches for training the model on multiple tasks at once,
which in our text-to-text setting simply corresponds to mixing examples from diﬀerent
data sets when constructing batches. The primary concern in multi-task learning is
setting the proportion of each task to train on. We ultimately did not ﬁnd a strategy
for setting mixing proportions that matched the performance of the basic approach of
unsupervised pre-training followed by supervised ﬁne-tuning. However, we found that
ﬁne-tuning after pre-training on a mixture of tasks produced comparable performance
to unsupervised pre-training.
Scaling We compared various strategies for taking advantage of additional compute, includ-
ing training the model on more data, training a larger model, and using an ensemble
of models. We found each approach conferred a signiﬁcant boost in performance,
though training a smaller model on more data was often outperformed by training
a larger model for fewer steps. We also showed an ensemble of models can provide
substantially better results than a single model, which provides an orthogonal means
of leveraging additional computation. Ensembling models that were ﬁne-tuned from
the same base pre-trained model performed worse than pre-training and ﬁne-tuning
all models completely separately, though ﬁne-tune-only ensembling still substantially
outperformed a single model.
Pushing the limits We combined our above insights and trained substantially larger
models (up to 11billion parameters) to achieve state-of-the-art results across many of
the benchmarks we considered. For unsupervised training, we extracted text from our
C4 data set and applied a denoising objective that corrupts contiguous spans of tokens.
We pre-trained on a multi-task mixture before ﬁne-tuning on individual tasks. Overall,
our models were trained on over 1trillion tokens. In the interest of facilitating the
replication, extension, and application of our results, we release our code, the C4 data
set, and pre-trained model weights for each T5 variant.1
4.2. Outlook
The inconvenience of large models An unsurprising but important result from our
study is that larger models tend to perform better. The fact that the hardware used for
running these models is continually getting cheaper and more powerful suggests that
scaling up may continue to be a promising way to achieve better performance (Sutton,
2019). However, it will always be the case that there are applications and scenarios
where using a smaller or less expensive model is helpful, for example when performing
42