Exploring the Limits of Transfer Learning
mechanism after each self-attention layer that attends to the output of the encoder. The
self-attention mechanism in the decoder also uses a form of autoregressive or causal self-
attention, which only allows the model to attend to past outputs. The output of the ﬁnal
decoder block is fed into a dense layer with a softmax output, whose weights are shared with
the input embedding matrix. All attention mechanisms in the Transformer are split up into
independent “heads” whose outputs are concatenated before being further processed.
Since self-attention is order-independent (i.e. it is an operation on sets), it is common
to provide an explicit position signal to the Transformer. While the original Transformer
used a sinusoidal position signal or learned position embeddings, it has recently become
more common to use relative position embeddings (Shaw et al., 2018; Huang et al., 2018a).
Instead of using a ﬁxed embedding for each position, relative position embeddings produce
a diﬀerent learned embedding according to the oﬀset between the “key” and “query” being
compared in the self-attention mechanism. We use a simpliﬁed form of position embeddings
where each “embedding” is simply a scalar that is added to the corresponding logit used
for computing the attention weights. For eﬃciency, we also share the position embedding
parameters across all layers in our model, though within a given layer each attention head
uses a diﬀerent learned position embedding. Typically, a ﬁxed number of embeddings are
learned, each corresponding to a range of possible key-query oﬀsets. In this work, we use 32
embeddings for all of our models with ranges that increase in size logarithmically up to an
oﬀset of 128beyond which we assign all relative positions to the same embedding. Note
that a given layer is insensitive to relative position beyond 128tokens, but subsequent layers
can build a sensitivity to larger oﬀsets by combining local information from previous layers.
To summarize, our model is roughly equivalent to the original Transformer proposed by
Vaswani et al. (2017) with the exception of removing the Layer Norm bias, placing the layer
normalization outside the residual path, and using a diﬀerent position embedding scheme.
Since these architectural changes are orthogonal to the experimental factors we consider in
our empirical survey of transfer learning, we leave the ablation of their impact for future
work.
As part of our study, we experiment with the scalability of these models, i.e. how their
performance changes as they are made to have more parameters or layers. Training large
models can be non-trivial since they might not ﬁt on a single machine and require a great deal
of computation. As a result, we use a combination of model and data parallelism and train
models on “slices” of Cloud TPU Pods.5TPU pods are are multi-rack ML supercomputers
that contain 1,024TPU v3 chips connected via a high-speed 2D mesh interconnect with
supporting CPU host machines. We leverage the Mesh TensorFlow library (Shazeer et al.,
2018) for ease of implementation of both model parallelism and data parallelism (Krizhevsky,
2014).
2.2. The Colossal Clean Crawled Corpus
Much of the previous work on transfer learning for NLP makes use of large unlabeled data
sets for unsupervised learning. In this paper, we are interested in measuring the eﬀect of the
quality, characteristics, and size of this unlabeled data. To generate data sets that satisfy
our needs, we leverage Common Crawl as a source of text scraped from the web. Common
5.https://cloud.google.com/tpu/
5