Raffel, Shazeer, Roberts, Lee, Narang, Matena, Zhou, Li and Liu
eﬀect of pre-training for more steps in Sections 3.6 and 3.7. Note that 235tokens only covers
a fraction of the entire C4 data set, so we never repeat any data during pre-training.
Duringpre-training, weusean“inversesquareroot”learningrateschedule: 1/slashbig/radicalbig
max(n,k)
wherenis the current training iteration and kis the number of warm-up steps (set to 104
in all of our experiments). This sets a constant learning rate of 0.01for the ﬁrst 104steps,
then exponentially decays the learning rate until pre-training is over. We also experimented
with using a triangular learning rate (Howard and Ruder, 2018), which produced slightly
better results but requires knowing the total number of training steps ahead of time. Since
we will be varying the number of training steps in some of our experiments, we opt for the
more generic inverse square root schedule.
Our models are ﬁne-tuned for 218= 262,144steps on all tasks. This value was chosen
as a trade-oﬀ between the high-resource tasks (i.e. those with large data sets), which
beneﬁt from additional ﬁne-tuning, and low-resource tasks (smaller data sets), which overﬁt
quickly. During ﬁne-tuning, we continue using batches with 128length- 512sequences (i.e.
216tokens per batch). We use a constant learning rate of 0.001when ﬁne-tuning. We save
a checkpoint every 5,000steps and report results on the model checkpoint corresponding
to the highest validation performance. For models ﬁne-tuned on multiple tasks, we choose
the best checkpoint for each task independently. For all of the experiments except those in
Section 3.7, we report results in the validation set to avoid performing model selection on
the test set.
3.1.3. Vocabulary
We use SentencePiece (Kudo and Richardson, 2018) to encode text as WordPiece tokens
(Sennrich et al., 2015; Kudo, 2018). For all experiments, we use a vocabulary of 32,000
wordpieces. Since we ultimately ﬁne-tune our model on English to German, French, and
Romaniantranslation, wealsorequirethatourvocabularycoversthesenon-Englishlanguages.
To address this, we classiﬁed pages from the Common Crawl scrape used in C4 as German,
French, and Romanian. Then, we trained our SentencePiece model on a mixture of 10parts
of English C4 data with 1part each of data classiﬁed as German, French or Romanian.
This vocabulary was shared across both the input and output of our model. Note that
our vocabulary makes it so that our model can only process a predetermined, ﬁxed set of
languages.
3.1.4. Unsupervised Objective
Leveraging unlabeled data to pre-train our model necessitates an objective that does not
require labels but (loosely speaking) teaches the model generalizable knowledge that will be
useful in downstream tasks. Preliminary work that applied the transfer learning paradigm
of pre-training and ﬁne-tuning all of the model’s parameters to NLP problems used a
causal language modeling objective for pre-training (Dai and Le, 2015; Peters et al., 2018;
Radford et al., 2018; Howard and Ruder, 2018). However, it has recently been shown that
“denoising” objectives (Devlin et al., 2018; Taylor, 1953) (also called “masked language
modeling”) produce better performance and as a result they have quickly become standard.
In a denoising objective, the model is trained to predict missing or otherwise corrupted
tokens in the input. Inspired by BERT’s “masked language modeling” objective and the
12