Raffel, Shazeer, Roberts, Lee, Narang, Matena, Zhou, Li and Liu
practice (Devlin et al., 2018) due to the fact that it is “adversarial” with respect to the
training set, i.e. validation examples are all slightly-perturbed versions of training examples
with the opposite label. As such, we do not include WNLI in the average GLUE score
whenever we report on the validation set (all sections except Section 3.7 where results
are presented on the test sets). Converting examples from WNLI to the “referent noun
prediction” variant described above is a little more involved; we describe this process in
Appendix B.
3. Experiments
Recent advances in transfer learning for NLP have come from a wide variety of developments,
such as new pre-training objectives, model architectures, unlabeled data sets, and more.
In this section, we carry out an empirical survey of these techniques in hopes of teasing
apart their contribution and signiﬁcance. We then combine the insights gained to attain
state-of-the-art in many of the tasks we consider. Since transfer learning for NLP is a rapidly
growing area of research, it is not feasible for us to cover every possible technique or idea
in our empirical study. For a broader literature review, we recommend a recent survey by
Ruder et al. (2019).
We systematically study these contributions by taking a reasonable baseline (described
in Section 3.1) and altering one aspect of the setup at a time. For example, in Section 3.3
we measure the performance of diﬀerent unsupervised objectives while keeping the rest of
our experimental pipeline ﬁxed. This “coordinate ascent” approach might miss second-order
eﬀects (for example, some particular unsupervised objective may work best on a model
larger than our baseline setting), but performing a combinatorial exploration of all of the
factors in our study would be prohibitively expensive. In future work, we expect it could be
fruitful to more thoroughly consider combinations of the approaches we study.
Our goal is to compare a variety of diﬀerent approaches on a diverse set of tasks while
keeping as many factors ﬁxed as possible. In order to satisfy this aim, in some cases we do
not exactly replicate existing approaches. For example, “encoder-only” models like BERT
(Devlin et al., 2018) are designed to produce a single prediction per input token or a single
prediction for an entire input sequence. This makes them applicable for classiﬁcation or span
prediction tasks but not for generative tasks like translation or abstractive summarization.
As such, none of the model architectures we consider are identical to BERT or consist of an
encoder-only structure. Instead, we test approaches that are similar in spirit—for example,
we consider an analogous objective to BERT’s “masked language modeling” objective in
Section 3.3 and we consider a model architecture that behaves similarly to BERT on text
classiﬁcation tasks in Section 3.2.
After outlining our baseline experimental setup in the following subsection, we undertake
an empirical comparison of model architectures (Section 3.2), unsupervised objectives
(Section 3.3), pre-training data sets (Section 3.4), transfer approaches (Section 3.5), and
scaling (Section 3.6). At the culmination of this section, we combine insights from our study
with scale to obtain state-of-the-art results in many tasks we consider (Section 3.7).
10