Acknowledgments
This work was supported by a gracious fund from Intel corporation, and in particular Intel VLAB
team. We also acknowledge gracious support from Google Cloud, Google TFTC team, Samsung
SAIT, and Amazon AWS. We also gratefully acknowledge the support of NVIDIA Corporation for
their donation of two Titan Xp GPU used for this research. Michael W. Mahoney would also like
to acknowledge the UC Berkeley CLTC, ARO, NSF, and ONR for providing partial support of this
work. Our conclusions do not necessarily reﬂect the position or the policy of our sponsors, and no
ofﬁcial endorsement should be inferred.
Broader Impact
Deep learning models are rapidly increasing in size and this has created a challenge for deploying
these models in practice. Our work addresses this problem by developing a novel compression
method with minimal impact on accuracy. Our work is applicable to a wide range of NN models, as
depicted in our empirical evaluation. Furthermore, our method can help reduce both the computation
and the memory bottleneck, so that state-of-the-art neural network models can be deployed even
onto edge devices. This helps to realize wider applications of technology, especially in area such
as deep learning based daily applications on smart phones, or basic and always-on applications on
embedded chips.
References
[1]Krste Asanovic and Nelson Morgan. Experimental determination of precision requirements
for back-propagation training of artiﬁcial neural networks . International Computer Science
Institute, 1991.
[2]Haim Avron and Sivan Toledo. Randomized algorithms for estimating the trace of an implicit
symmetric positive semi-deﬁnite matrix. Journal of the ACM (JACM) , 58(2):8, 2011.
[3]Zhaojun Bai, Gark Fahey, and Gene Golub. Some large-scale matrix computation problems.
Journal of Computational and Applied Mathematics , 74(1-2):71–89, 1996.
[4]Yoshua Bengio, Nicholas Léonard, and Aaron Courville. Estimating or propagating gradients
through stochastic neurons for conditional computation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1308.3432 , 2013.
[5]Yaohui Cai, Zhewei Yao, Zhen Dong, Amir Gholami, Michael W Mahoney, and Kurt Keutzer.
Zeroq: A novel zero shot quantization framework. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 13169–13178, 2020.
[6]Zhaowei Cai, Xiaodong He, Jian Sun, and Nuno Vasconcelos. Deep learning with low precision
by half-wave gaussian quantization. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 5918–5926, 2017.
[7]Ting-Wu Chin, Pierce I-Jen Chuang, Vikas Chandra, and Diana Marculescu. One weight
bitwidth to rule them all. Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV) ,
2020.
[8]Jungwook Choi, Zhuo Wang, Swagath Venkataramani, Pierce I-Jen Chuang, Vijayalakshmi
Srinivasan, and Kailash Gopalakrishnan. PACT: Parameterized clipping activation for quantized
neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.06085 , 2018.
[9]Zhen Dong, Zhewei Yao, Amir Gholami, Michael W. Mahoney, and Kurt Keutzer. HAWQ:
Hessian aware quantization of neural networks with mixed-precision. In The IEEE International
Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , October 2019.
[10] Jun Fang, Ali Shaﬁee, Hamzah Abdel-Aziz, David Thorsley, Georgios Georgiadis, and Joseph
Hassoun. Near-lossless post-training quantization of deep neural networks via a piecewise
linear approximation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.00104 , 2020.
10