HAWQ-V2: Hessian Aware trace-Weighted
Quantization of Neural Networks
Zhen Dong, Zhewei Yao, Daiyaan Arfeen,
Amir Gholami, Michael W. Mahoney, Kurt Keutzer
University of California, Berkeley,
{zhendong, zheweiy, daiyaanarfeen, amirgh, mahoneymw, and keutzer}@berkeley.edu
Abstract
Quantization is an effective method for reducing memory footprint and inference
time of Neural Networks. However, ultra low precision quantization could lead to
signiﬁcant degradation in model accuracy. A promising method to address this is
to perform mixed-precision quantization, where more sensitive layers are kept at
higher precision. However, the search space for a mixed-precision quantization is
exponential in the number of layers. Recent work has proposed a novel Hessian
based framework [ 9], with the aim of reducing this exponential search space by
using second-order information. While promising, this prior work has three major
limitations: (i) they only use a heuristic metric based on top Hessian eigenvalue as
a measure of sensitivity and do not consider the rest of the Hessian spectrum; (ii)
their approach only provides relative sensitivity of different layers and therefore
requires a manual selection of the mixed-precision setting; and (iii) they do not
consider mixed-precision activation quantization. Here, we present HAWQ-V2
which addresses these shortcomings. For (i), we theoretically prove that the
right sensitivity metric is the average Hessian trace, instead of just top Hessian
eigenvalue. For (ii), we develop a Pareto frontier based method for automatic bit
precision selection of different layers without any manual intervention. For (iii), we
develop the ﬁrst Hessian based analysis for mixed-precision activation quantization,
which is very beneﬁcial for object detection. We show that HAWQ-V2 achieves
new state-of-the-art results for a wide range of tasks. In particular, we present
quantization results for InceptionV3 (7.57MB with 75:98% accuracy), ResNet50
(7.99MB with 75:92% accuracy), and SqueezeNext (1MB with 68:68% accuracy),
all without any manual bit selection. Furthermore, we present results for object
detection on Microsoft COCO, where we achieve 2.6 higher mAP than direct
uniform quantization and 1.6 higher mAP than the recently proposed method of
FQN, with a smaller model size of 17.9MB.
1 Introduction
Deep convolutional Neural Networks (NNs) have achieved great success in recent years. However,
many of these models, particularly those with state-of-the-art performance, have a high computational
cost and memory footprint. This slows inference and training in the cloud, and prohibits their
deployment on edge devices.
Quantization [ 1,6,15,36,34,17,35,8,32,33,29,9,10,5,7] is a very promising approach to
address this problem by reducing the memory bottleneck, thus allowing the use of lower precision
computational units in hardware. By replacing ﬂoating point weights in the model with low precision
ﬁxed-point values, quantization can shrink the model size without changing the original network
architecture. The gains in speed and power consumption directly depend on how aggressively we
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.