computational cost [ 31], but we show this is not an issue here. For example, we can compute
Hessian trace for all 54 layers in ResNet50 in less than 30 minutes with 4 GPUs (only 33s per
block on average). This is quite fast compared to manual mixed-precision methods which often
take weeks of tuning.
4.We achieve new state-of-the-art results for a wide range of models. We present quantization results
for InceptionV3, ResNet50, and SqueezeNext (Table 1). Furthermore, we present results for object
detection on the Microsoft COCO dataset, where HAWQ-V2 achieves 2.6 higher mAP than direct
uniform quantization and 1.6 higher mAP than the recently proposed method of FQN [ 18], with
even smaller model size 17.9MB (Table 2).
5.We develop mixed-precision activation quantization, as described in §2.2. We propose a fast
method for computing Hessian information w.r.t. activations, and we show that mixed-precision
activation can boost the performance of our object detection model to 34.4 mAP (Table 2).
Outline: In § 2, we discuss theoretical analysis and the relationship between the Hessian spectrum and
quantization; and we then discuss the Pareto frontier and our automatic precision selection method.
Then, in § 3, we show the results of the trade-off between speed and convergence in the Hutchinson
algorithm; and we test HAWQ-V2 with various models on both image classiﬁcation and object
detection tasks. Finally, we provide a conclusion in § 4.
2 Methodology
For a supervised learning framework, the goal is to minimize the empirical risk loss,
L() =1
NNX
i=1f(xi;yi;); (1)
where2Rdis the learnable model parameters, and f(x;y; )is the loss for a datum (x;y)2
(X;Y ). Here,N=jXjis the cardinality of the training set. Assume that the NN can be partitioned
intoLlayers asfB1;B2;;BLg, with corresponding learnable parameters fW1;W2;;WLg.
Furthermore, we denote mini-batch gradient of the loss w.r.t. model parameters as g=1
NBPNB
i=1@f
@,
and sub-sampled Hessian w.r.t. parameters as H=1
NBPNB
i=1@2f
@2, whereNBis the mini-batch.
2.1 Sensitivity Metric
HAWQ uses the top Hessian eigenvalue to determine the relative sensitivity order of different
layers [ 9]. However, a NN model contains millions of parameters, and thus millions of Hessian
eigenvalues. Therefore, just measuring the top eigenvalue can be sub-optimal. As a simple example,
consider two functions F1(x;y) = 100x2+y2andF2(x;y) = 100x2+ 99y2. The top Hessian
eigenvalues of F1andF2are the same (i.e., 200). However, it is clear that F2is more sensitive than
F1sinceF2has much larger function value change along y-axis. Below, we perform a theoretical
analysis and show that a better metric is to compute the average Hessian trace (i.e., average of
all Hessian eigenvalues) instead of just the top eigenvalue, and later in Section 3.4 we perform
an empirical ablation study which supports this ﬁnding. Note that in practice the trace and top
eigenvalues can be signiﬁcantly different, as shown in Figure 6 in Appendix C.
Assumption 1 Assume that:
The model is twice differentiable and has converged to a local minima such that the ﬁrst and
second order optimality conditions are satisﬁed, i.e., the gradient is zero and the Hessian is positive
semi-deﬁnite.
If we denote the Hessian of the ithlayer asHi, and its corresponding orthonormal eigen-
vectors asvi
1; vi
2;:::;vi
ni, then the quantization-aware ﬁne-tuning perturbation, W
i=
arg minW
i+W
i2Q()L(W
i+ W
i), satisﬁes
W
i=bitvi
1+bitvi
2+:::+bitvi
ni: (2)
3