Processes 2020 ,8, 312 16 of 29
An example of the interdependence between the electric power network and the natural gas
system is shown in Figure 4. Several elements for the gas transmission such as PUs and pipeline
compressors directly rely on the electricity supply.
Figure 4. Geographical and functional infrastructure interdependence between the national electricity
grid ( left) and the gas transmission infrastructure ( right ) for Great Britain. Figure adapted from
Reference [243].
5. Discussion and Research Directions
Advances in complex network analysis have boosted their ability to represent more realistic
examples of real cases. For instance, there have been important developments on weighted
networks [ 244] and networks with time-varying characteristics and topology [ 245]. Multiscale complex
networks [ 246] and networks of networks [ 247] have been recently a very active research topic.
Along with the essentials, the current paper already introduced highly advanced methods in complex
networks, MAS, and their combination. However, there are some methods and technologies of
particular interest, having the potential of becoming main topics in future research. This section
highlights important insights and research avenues.
5.1. Discussion
This paper presents a comprehensive review of complex networks and MAS. Both are of
main importance for control and optimisation in systems engineering. Therefore, one of the main
contributions of this review is the emphasis on real-world systems such as critical infrastructures,
manufacturing processes, and supply chain networks. In all cases, complex networks and MAS
have shown to be essential for their control and optimisation. In a world where society and systems
are more connected than ever, it highlights the importance to analyse how such systems are related
between themselves and how their optimal management provide further socioeconomical beneﬁts.
This is the case of interconnected infrastructures such as electricity and gas, or telecommunications
and transport. Still, there is a emergence of research directly focused on hybrid systems development.
In contrast to systems interconnection, hybrid systems naturally ensemble two or more systems into
a new one that cannot be understood without the others. This is the case of electricity and transport