Processes 2020 ,8, 312 12 of 29
 Hierarchical architectures imply components or functions are structured along two or more levels
with the upper levels having broader view and inﬂuence over the lower levels [ 190]. They also
have a command/respond communication across the levels with decision-making in the higher
levels, whereas the modiﬁed hierarchical architecture shifts the command-based communication
to a coordination approach where subordinates might interact with each other within a level
in order to complete some of their tasks, without requiring constant instructions from a higher
level [ 189]. Hierarchical architectures are usually rigid and lack ﬂexibility to adapt to changes
and disturbances [187].
 Heterarchical architectures lack a direct controlling component; instead, the supervision is spread
across the system and cooperatively carried out [ 190,191]. The key aspect is that functions
are allocated in distributed entities that make decisions with a local perspective. These are
autonomous entities and use communication protocols to cooperate with other peers without
a central coordinator. The horizontal distribution nature of the functions implies there is no
consideration of a global view, which prevents autonomous entities from reaching global optimum
goals and incorporates unpredictability to the system.
 Holonic architectures intend to overcome disadvantages of hierarchical and heterarchical
approaches by offering a hybrid solution [ 188,189,192]. In a holonic architecture, the system
is structured around “holons” (entities that are both a sub-whole from an interior perspective
and a part from a system-wide point of view [ 193]) that can be arranged in different forms
according to concrete system requirements. The generic holonic form combines distributed
and centralised optimisation by enabling holons to react timely to disturbances and by considering
updated local views when making decisions while operating under the view of a central
coordinator holon.
MAS organisation may result in control as shown above and also in optimisation processes. This
optimisation takes place thanks to distributed, local objectives of agents (or aggregation of agents) that
negotiate/coordinate/cooperate with other agents (or aggregation) towards a global optimum [194].
4.3. Representative Applications
This subsection presents a number of representative applications of complex networks
and agent-based control tackling key challenges in different systems engineering domains. We give
special emphasis to application requirements and key architectural aspects with designs that have led
to concrete implementations either of real systems or prototypes.
4.3.1. Supply Chain and Manufacturing Networks
Control of manufacturing processes is a challenging work-stream that has obtained attention
from researches from both MAS and complex networks. The production processes incorporate
heterogeneity of functions, goods, workflows, work products (i.e., orders), and resources that are usually
constrained and require efficient utilisation while ensuring the quality of the end products. Several
solutions have been proposed to manage and control production of goods in shop floors [ 192,195–200].
The key control requirements cover scheduling, simultaneous processing or orders, quality assurance,
real-time customisation, and context-aware servicing and maintenance. These requirements can only
be met by flexible and agile factories able to reconfigure and adapt to changes, even at late stages of
the manufacturing process. The need of a supervision function aligned with this dynamics is implicit to
these requirements.
 Complex networks: Supply chain and manufacturing processes have a proper research avenue
within a network science framework [ 201]. To this end, simplistic chain models can be
approached by complex systems allowing, for instance, a deeper interpretation of the relationship
between different supply actors [ 202]. The paper of Hearnshaw et al. [ 203] is a pivotal work
on supply chain network theory where complex network developments are shown to be