Processes 2020 ,8, 312 15 of 29
 Complex networks: Water distribution systems can be considered as complex networks where
nodes are water sources and demand points and links are water pipes, valves, and pump
stations [ 228] (see Table 1). The works of Herrera et al. [ 229] and di Nardo et al. [ 230] present
instances on how complex network analyses provide useful approaches for the operation
and management of water distribution systems. Features and positions of valves and pumps
have special relevance for the global water network performance. Smart water networks
extend the traditional water distribution system elements by including assets such as sensors
and ﬂow-meters, providing information of the network performance. Among other advantages,
Candelieri et al. [ 231] highlighted that the cyber-physical water system is key for more efﬁcient
water distribution network management, hydraulic performance, and optimised network
protection [164].
 MAS: Water networks are heterogeneous, ranging from ad hoc farm irrigation systems to critical
water infrastructures. The authors of Reference [ 232] use agent-based modelling to sample large
size water supply networks graphs and, then, to propose their further division into district
metered areas for management purposes. Similar work is found in References [ 233,234]. From
an asset management point of view, it is worth mentioning the work of Ayala-Cabrera et al. [ 235]
since the authors use an agent-based system to locate and classify buried pipes. Authors of
Reference [ 236] propose an architecture based on a SCADA system that uses model predictive
controller (MPC) [ 237] techniques for controlling an automatic water canal. A key contribution
of this architecture is to extend the standard SCADA system with capabilities for complex
mathematical processing via a dynamic data exchange (DDE) protocol.
4.3.5. Gas Transmission
Gas supply is essential for heating, hygiene, and cooking food. The gas is transported by
high-pressure transmission pipelines from the production facility to the entry point (gate station)
of the distribution network. The transmission systems are made by high-pressure pipelines, compressor
stations, and storage facilities among other elements. From the gate station, natural gas moves into
distribution lines towards users at home. The distribution network consists of smaller distribution
pipes which typically supply urban areas. Each distribution system is connected to the higher pressure
transmission system at a pressure reduction station.
 Complex networks: Pipelines for gas transmission can be considered a complex network [ 238].
Gas pipelines and compressor stations are network-links, and underground storage systems
and gas stations are network nodes (see Table 1). Smart gas grids are controlled near real time
to meet the time-varying gas demand and to interact with the electrical power smart grid [ 239].
In this regard, Bliek et al. [ 240] pictured an ideal smart gas grid as the one that is able
to communicate with the smart electric power grid for an improved energy distribution.
Brown et al. [241] also pointed out the smart grid capacity to transport nonconventional gases
such as biogas or syngas.
 MAS: The authors of Reference [ 242] introduce a holonic architecture for the control of
continuous production complexes. They work with the case of oil production, where various
complex processes take place involving extraction, transportation, treatment, and delivery of oil
and secondary products (e.g., gas). Holons are linked to production groups that are a specialisation
of production units (PU) representing oil wells or ﬂow stations [ 188]. The PUs aggregate orders,
resources, and a component of process supervision and control. The supervisory layer carries
out standard functions of measurement, identify state changes on discrete process, and update
the state. Holons are implemented with temporary agent programs (TAP) that negotiate to
accept mission assignments. A supervisor agent determines the production method to apply for
achieving the missions and requests for external resources to other PUs.