Processes 2020 ,8, 312 14 of 29
the end-user. This is of main importance for society development and well-being as millions of citizens
worldwide use transportation systems on a daily basis.
 Complex networks: Instances of transportation systems are such important infrastructures
as roads and streets, railways, and airline networks. All of them are organised in network
patterns [ 218,219] (see Table 1). For instance, by considering urban streets and roads, it is
possible to take segments of these routes as links. The intersections and ends are considered
as nodes [ 220–222]. Another example is the associated network to a city underground
transit as shown in Figure 3, where the nodes represent the metro-stations and the links are
the train lines connecting such stations. Some of the most common issues in transportation
and communication systems are related to link and node congestion [ 223] in a network which
often have a scale-free topology.
 MAS: Smart transportation systems [ 224] also named intelligent transport systems aim to achieve
trafﬁc efﬁciency by minimising their associated issues such as trafﬁc congestion [ 225]. Having
real-time data of the network status, it is possible to release trafﬁc alert messages and public safety
messages. Associated with the concept of smart transportation systems comes the idea of smart,
resilient, and energy efﬁcient cities. Baronti et al. [ 226] proposed an integration of energy storage
systems for the smart transportation and the smart grid. A distributed hierarchical approach
for control of automated highways is presented in Reference [ 227]. The architecture is based on
a hierarchical control where supervision functions are distributed among four layers. Two layers
(network and link) are in the roadside, and two other layers (coordination and regulation) are in
the vehicle.
Figure 3. London underground scheme as example of complex network: The layout shows
a quasi-planar (few crosses between links) as well as a core-periphery (more densely connected
at the centre) structure.
4.3.4. Water Distribution Systems
Water supply services are naturally related to food availability, health, and hygiene. However,
they are also key for energy, manufacturing, and other fundamental services. Drinking water comes
from reservoirs from which water ﬂows through pressurised pipes to tanks (to storage water for daily
supply operations in small urban areas) and demand points. The risks in water distribution systems
are associated with pipe bursts, contamination events, and lack of resources during drought periods
that are usually of high demand. These events can cause socioeconomic losses but also directly affect
the citizen health and well-being.