Processes 2020 ,8, 312 13 of 29
a useful working environment. There also are speciﬁc applications, as it is the analysis of
supply chains for the aerospace industry [ 29]. Complex networks make, then, possible to
extract useful information such as nonlinear pathways between ﬁrms, geographic locations
and industrial-sectors communities, and connectivity hub ﬁrms.
 MAS: In the last two decades, distributed approaches have gained attention, becoming a solid
alternative to monolithic architectures [ 204,205]. Together, holonic manufacturing systems (HMS)
and multi-agent systems help to overcome the limitations of the centralised approaches such as
lack of ﬂexibility, agility, dynamics and reconﬁguration features [ 198]. In HMS, the scheduling
is intended to be realised from the cooperative interaction of holons while ensuring that global
factory concerns are addressed, sometimes, with some degree of central coordination [ 192].
The agent notion has been used as both a solution domain abstraction and its corresponding
software. When used as software building blocks, agents complement broader engineering
concepts such as holon [206], intelligent products [207,208], and self-service assets [199].
4.3.2. Electricity Power Grids
Electrical power is essential for basic services such as providing lighting, heating, cooling,
and refrigeration in the built environment. Computers, mobile phones, and other domestic appliances
use electrical power. Electricity is generated at power plants and moves through a complex system
called the “grid”. The grid is made of electricity substations, transformers, and power lines that
connect electricity load from source providers to users.
 Complex networks: Electrical power grids can be considered complex networks [ 209]. The nodes
are power plants and distributing and transmission substations [ 210]. The links are the power
lines which may have different voltage (see Table 1). At the urban level, grids often become
a higher inter-connectivity system aiming to get reliability in the supply. Smart grids [ 211] enhance
the traditional electricity supply by adding digital technology which allows utilities and customers
to receive information from and to communicate with the grid. This beneﬁts optimal
energy generation, electricity and meter-reading cost, and reliability in case of interruptions
and blackouts [ 212]. The work of Das et al. [ 213] shows how topological, physical, and electrical
features of a power grid provide complementary information. As a consequence, all of such
features should be considered further to better address near real-time challenges in power grids.
 MAS: Smart grids have been widely supported by SCADA systems. However, other
distributed approaches have been used to overcome limitations of traditional supervisory control
systems [ 214]. Particularly, multi-agent systems have become an enabler of distributed control
for the power systems, providing some of the supervision functions without a hierarchical or
central supervisor. The requirements for control in power systems include reliability, economic
efﬁciency, and capacity to support from individuals to large industrial customers. Some of
the problems addressed include market operations, time-sensitive control, service restoration,
and system evolution/ﬂexibility. The authors of References [ 215,216] present a solution to
improve, in real time, the energy market performance with a large number of multiple production
and consumption units, each one with different objectives. Based on an auction model, agents use
a price vector to gather the quantity of bids for a particular energy demand, and this enables them
to decide on the supplier considering the global desire [ 216]. A similar approach is presented
in Reference [ 217], where a distributed architecture with a single control layer and multiple
distributed agents is organised around a set of central facilities.
4.3.3. Transportation Systems
A transportation system is a spatial network which permits either vehicular movement, ﬂow of
people, or products supply. The transportation system comprises transport infrastructure, vehicles,
and equipment. This should also be considered the transportation assets operation and service to