Processes 2020 ,8, 312 18 of 29
modelling, validation, and calibration of agent-based models across different scientiﬁc disciplines.
A key challenge is how to process these data effectively while providing feedback to the model.
The use of supervised, unsupervised, and semi-supervised learning techniques can produce
new methods for model calibration, for example, by enabling classiﬁcation and comparison of
key features of the model within a particular observation window or by easing the deﬁnition of
baselines for predicted behaviours across the model [255,256].
 Breaking down learning phase with MAS: This future research highlights the problem of agent
breeds learning to teach other agents within an MAS environment. The initial efforts have been via
reinforcement learning [ 257] in which each agent takes the role of student or teacher, requesting
and providing advice, respectively, at the appropriate moments looking forward an improved
overall system performance [ 258]. There is a number of further challenges coming from this
approach to deal with complex domains for real-world applications.
5.3. Future Applications in Systems Engineering
Advances on complex networks and MAS consequently lead to advances further in their
applications for systems engineering. There are foreseen some key applications as a potential
breakthrough in systems engineering brieﬂy introduced in the following bullet points.
 Cyber-physical systems (CPSs): CPSs are representations of physical, spatially distributed
systems into a network of sensors and actuators leading to a suitable monitor and control of
the system processes. The ﬁnal aim is to reach optimal decision-making over the system for their
optimal management. There are emerging challenges for CPSs to address further in which MAS
and complex networks will play a signiﬁcant role. For instance, in industrial systems such as smart
electric grids, there is a need of decentralised, adaptive CPSs framework towards their operative
automation and optimal performance [ 259]. Other systems may also beneﬁt from the use of MAS
and complex networks over their CPSs, from smart manufacturing and logistics [ 260] to food
supply chain systems [261].
 Digital twins (DT): DTs are a digital replica of physical assets and engineering systems taking
into account their internal functioning and external processes that may affect their performance.
Working with digital twins, it is possible to test in advance systems performance under any
regular or anomalous scenario to aid the decision-making process and to accurately foresee
further systems issues. One of the key challenges for future digital twins is on increasing their
dimensionality and complexity. This will make necessary to create a new generation of systems
engineering modelling systems relationships and interdependencies at large scale. To accomplish
this challenge, it will be necessary to combine a set of relevant methods such as complex networks,
MAS and visualisation processes, among others [262].
 Blockchain technologies: Blockchain is a global ledger that records transactions on a chain of
blocks. Within a complex network framework, these blocks can be expressed as network nodes
while transactions are network links representing the exchanges between nodes. Future research
will be based on temporal and dynamic complex networks to model and analyse blockchain
technologies. Still, as the information ﬂow is passing through the network, agent-based systems
will also have a key role in synchronisation and network control tasks [ 263]. Furthermore,
blockchain technologies offer a truly decentralised environment where new network dynamics
and coordination models are emerging facilitating distribution artiﬁcial intelligent processes [ 264].
Author Contributions: The authors equally contributed to this work. All authors have read and agreed to the
published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research was funded by the EPSRC and BT Prosperity Partnership project: Next Generation
Converged Digital Infrastructure, grant number EP/R004935/1.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.