Processes 2020 ,8, 312 7 of 29
intelligence (DAI) ﬁeld [ 102,103]. For the purpose of this review, we distinguish between multi-agent
system (MAS) and agent-based modelling and simulation (ABMS).
 MAS is the sub-ﬁeld of DAI, originated as an approach to tackle complex problems,
with a distributed nature, by splitting work among cooperative computing units (agents) that plan,
reason, and communicate with each other to execute their part of the solution [ 102]. The essence
of a MAS is its ability to enable solutions beyond the individual capabilities of each participating
agent [ 104]. Hence, the role of agents as part of a society and the mechanisms for coordination
and cooperation with others are fundamental characteristics of any MAS [5].
 ABMS is the approach for representing repeated interactions of agents within a social system [ 105,106].
From this perspective, a multi-agent system is simply a network of dynamic entities called agents [ 107].
ABMS focuses on providing tools for observing and analysing the individual and collective behaviour
of agents in a simulated environment. Different sciences and engineering disciplines have benefited
from ABMS by representing humans [ 108], animals [ 109], financial traders [ 110], machines [ 111],
and other active entities. ABMS is used as a tool to explore self-organisation and emergent behaviours
and also to evaluate MAS theories, architectures, protocols, etc. at a macro level, that otherwise would
be costly , time-consuming, or even impossible to achieve.
3.1. Agents and their Properties
Despite the progress made in last decades, there is no agreement about what an agent is and what
its essential properties are. Some authors identify actions as distinctive characteristics of agents [ 112].
Hence, agents are action triggers with a wide spectrum of complexity in the process that lead to
every action. Other researchers use the notion of agency to distinguish between two types of agents:
those that exhibit properties attributed to hardware and software systems, i.e., autonomy, social
ability, reactivity, and pro-activeness, and those that exhibit properties normally attributed to humans,
e.g., based mental or emotional notions such as knowledge [ 113]. From this analysis, agents are
regarded as computer systems that perform autonomous actions within the environment they are
situated in pursuit of meeting their objectives [ 5]. Agents can also be seen as intentional systems, with
representations of the mental attitudes such as belief, desires, and intentions [ 114]. From an ABMS
perspective, agents are autonomous, not necessarily computing, entities that are proactive and interact
with others [ 115]. The agent’s behaviour is deﬁned by a set of simple rules to respond to local events in
a certain environment, hence leading to the emergence of a system behaviour as opposite to predeﬁned
rules for the overall system behaviour [116].
The key properties of agents are presented in Table 3; we group them according to criteria where
these come from. We also provide a relevance assessment indicating if these are mainly found in
literature as essential or optional properties.
As consequence of the different interpretations of the agent notion, multiple authors, mainly
from an MAS perspective, have come out with classiﬁcations. Authors of Reference [ 104] present
a multidimensional scheme where, based on agent’s properties, tasks, and structure, they propose
7 types: collaborative, interface, mobile, information, reactive, hybrid, heterogeneous, and smart agents.
Another classiﬁcation [ 117] incorporates novel agent’s properties such as ﬂexibility (lack of scripts
on agent’s actions) and character (believable personality and emotional state). To date, reactive
and deliberative (goal-oriented) agents have been widely used to differentiate key behaviour
and properties of agents. It is also worth noting from Franklin’s classiﬁcation [ 117] the identiﬁcation of
biological and robotic agents in addition to the computational ones.