Processes 2020 ,8, 312 2 of 29
in a telecommunication system network, nodes (e.g., routers and switches) may suffer over time
a degradation in their properties that may lead them to diminish their performance. However,
just the daily variation on trafﬁc demand also has an impact on such nodes performance. Unexpected,
external intervention such as cyber-attacks or extreme weather conditions may affect the properties,
even the topology of a telecommunication system.
Intelligent distributed systems are capable of modelling how different parts of the network might
work individually and collectively [ 10]. Ultimately, this is used as support for any decision-making
system aiming to achieve better overall system functioning and its consequent performance. Intelligent
distributed systems encompass autonomous learning units that can be associated with the nodes of
a complex network. These intelligent network nodes are able to act independently and also interact
with other nodes to pursue both individual (local) and general system-level targets. The necessary
communication between individuals can be represented by links of the complex network connecting
their nodes. It is natural to understand such nodes as intelligent agents within a MAS framework.
Each agent separately obeying simple rules but working together with other agents makes it possible
to approach complex engineering challenges. Intelligent distributed systems have been proposed in
a broad range of engineered complex systems [ 11,12]. Precisely, the review proposed herein focuses only
on engineered systems and manufacturing processes, given the wide spectrum of the approached topic.
Out of this review fall, then, topics related to social systems analysis such as migration models [ 13,14]
or online social media [ 15,16]. Similarly, natural systems are out of this review scope. This is the case of
computational chemistry [17,18], biology [19,20], and metabolic networks [21,22].
Automatic optimisation and control in an engineering system is associated with a near real-time
data acquisition and an optimal decision-making. The aim is to maximise the quality and performance
of the outcome while minimising the overall costs of the process. The combination of complex networks
and MAS provides an integrated framework for systems optimisation and control. The success of
this framework is mainly based on its high applicability together with the relative simplicity of
the approach. Part of the challenges and research directions in complex networks are coming from
the investigation further of their structure at several dimensions or network layers and from the variety
of resolution levels (mesoscale networks) in which a network can be analysed. These research topics are
complement of those related to network-ﬂow dynamics [23], time-evolving networks [24], and smart
systems [25] for which MAS have emerged in their research.
This paper is a literature review of complex networks and MAS. The bibliographic search is
approached using a list of academic databases and search engines such as Google Scholar, MDPI,
Science Direct, SpringerLink, arXiv, IEEE Xplore, and Scopus. Sections 2 and 3 encompass a literature
review for basic, theoretical essentials on complex networks and MAS, respectively. As a convention,
the candidate articles to be part of the review should contain word combinations in the title, keywords,
or abstract related to “graph theory” or “complex networks” or “multi-agent systems” or “agent-based
modelling” and their variations. The paper continues with Section 4 introducing real-world systems
engineering examples for which control and optimisation processes based on complex networks
and MAS have been shown to be essential for their operation, management, and protection. The above
keywords are subsequently crossed (“and” operator) with others such as “engineering systems”
or “critical infrastructure” or “engineering processes” or “manufacturing” or “supply chain” and their
variations. Section 5 closes the paper with an open discussion about the systems engineering
applications presented in the paper and future research directions on applied complex networks
and MAS.
2. Complex Networks
A mathematical graph, G, is formally deﬁned as an ordered pair (V,x), whereVis a ﬁnite
nonempty set of vertices or nodes and xis the set of edges or links between such nodes
xf(u,v)ju,v2xg.Complex networks are graphs in which vertices represent physical or virtual
items and edges represent the interaction between them. In this paper we refer as nodes and links to