Processes 2020 ,8, 312 17 of 29
networks [ 248], both directly converging for the management of electric bus ﬂeets in metropolitan
areas [ 249]. Another example is the novel concept for water distribution systems integrated into
urban smart grids for energy recovery and production [ 250]. On top of this, any engineering system
(single, interconnected, or hybrid) may be considered to have several levels of domain. That is,
a physical system (already having several levels if it is an interconnected or a hybrid system) is often
coupled with a control system (hardware–software system that can be designed as MAS and organised
as a network). Another way to understand additional domain levels of a system is by including
the level related to the workforce networkas well as the customers network. We can also combine
all of the previously mentioned possibilities. In all the cases, the literature review presented herein
represents the fundamentals for the optimal management of these systems, their optimal control
and optimisation, and their coordination approaches. The following section shows the foreseen work
directions in complex networks and MAS in conjunction with emerging technologies.
5.2. Future Methodology Developments
Applied complex networks to systems engineering should come with developments at multiscale,
dynamic, and multidimensional systems. On top of this, MAS will play an essential role providing
these networks intelligence in their network ﬂow, evolution, and protection (self-healing, resilient
design, and so on). Both complex networks and MAS should be integrated in a process in which
distributed, networked agents agree in a common objective for optimal systems control and decision
making. There is, then, a need for a consensual dynamics in complex networks, working with
the streams of time series varying over time [ 251] and how the agents can reach a consensus at near
real time is a research avenue regarding the methodology development as well as the applications.
The rest of the section describes other main research challenges for complex networks and MAS in
systems engineering.
5.2.1. Complex Networks
 Time series in networks: Temporal networks might well be understood as the study on how
network topology and features vary over time. Some approaches use multilayer networks to
represent as many layers as time units capturing the network status variations through snapshots
at each time. This research framework being relatively new, it should be developed further by
conducting proper analysis on the streams of time series data associated to complex networks,
that is, through the analysis of the temporal evolution of such streams and how it has an impact
on the very network structure and performance. As a consequence, future research will be about
statistics and inference in dynamic graphs [ 252]. The challenge may be extended further to
the more general framework of machine learning in networks.
 Graph convolutional neural networks: Convolutional neural networks (CNN) have been mainly
focused so far on image analysis. A series of convolutional ﬁlters and pooling layers are imposed
over the matrix representing such images. The process ends with a layer where the actual
learning and the image approached, for instance, is classiﬁed. However, there is an emergence of
the so-called geometric deep learning in which the CNN input is a manifold or graph-structured
data [ 253]. In the case of CNN over graphs, the input can be the adjacency or the Laplacian
matrices associated to such a graph. Then, the learning is similar to the developed for study
images since the image input is also a matrix. There is ample room for research on graph-CNN on
the analysis of (evolving) complex networks representing engineering systems [254].
5.2.2. Multi-Agent Systems
 Big data and calibration of ABMS: The validity of agent-based models is given by the real
data and theories it uses to base behaviour of agents in the model. Thanks to the wide
spreading of sensors, we are experiencing an increased ability to capture huge amounts of
data related to physical properties from living/active entities. These data can set the basis for