Processes 2020 ,8, 312 9 of 29
In ABMS, knowledge is usually simpliﬁed and modelled as set of properties and values or as
a state-machine [ 122,123]. More complex knowledge representations have been proposed, mainly from
a MAS perspective, for example, using the fuzzy cognitive model in Reference [ 124] or ontologies in
References [ 125–127]. The approach for representing agent’s knowledge is tied to the decision-making
process. The decision-making approach uses agent’s current knowledge to trigger actions given its
capabilities and, hence, drive individual agent behaviour. A simple approach to decision-making in
ABMS is based on the generation of random numbers [ 128]. Bringing more rationality to the process is
possible by using predeﬁned condition/action rules where a state-machine captures also the conditions
for the transitions among them [123].
The work on intentional systems [ 129] has inﬂuenced more complex models that try to mimic
the way humans make decisions. In the belief-desire-intention (BDI) model, the information perceived,
by the agent as facts, are the beliefs, and the desires and intentions represent a pool of future
states the agent might reach, with the difference that an agent is only committed to working
towards the intentions. Other cognitive, conceptual, and mathematical models for modelling
human decision-making in ABMS are reviewed in Reference [ 130]. From a MAS perspective,
the decision-making models have been widely studied in the context of a more complex reasoning
process and they are the distinctive feature of the agent architectures. The three main classes of
architectures include reactive, deliberative, and hybrid [ 131]. For example, the BDI models are a key
reference for building deliberative architectures [132].
The interaction models drive the collective system behaviour and enable communication
between agents. On top of this communication, the coordination model enables the management of
interdependencies between agent’s activities [ 133]. The interactions between agents might happen
spontaneously within the environment (e.g., in case of agents making decisions randomly) or agents
might try to achieve goals rationally which requires interactions to follow a deﬁned model. In the later
case, different forms of coordination have been explored as it is an essential condition for complex
collective behaviours including conﬂict-resolution, cooperation, organisation, collective learning,
planning, control, and optimisation.
The coordination between agents can be based on direct or indirect communication. In the ﬁrst
case, extensive work has been done around deﬁnition of languages for communication between
agents, for example, using different types of messages according to the purpose and categories of
the speech acts theory [ 134,135]. Indirect coordination is possible when agents observe updates on
the environment state produced by other agents; for example, authors of Reference [ 136] present
a coordination model inspired in the ant colony behaviour that does not require direct agent
communication. One of the main problems in coordination is consensus , i.e., agents agreement over
a certain value of interest, depending on their states [ 137].Consensus can be achieved, for example, by
specifying rules of information exchange [138].
Different techniques for achieving coordination have been proposed. Authors of References [139,140]
present a review of different approaches for coordination that include organisational structures (defined
a priori by agent’s responsibilities, capabilities, connectivity , and control flow), contracting (to accomplish
a set of tasks), planning (centralised or distributed plans that drive their behaviour/operation),
and negotiation (seek agreement with others). In MAS literature, there is no clear distinction
between negotiation and consensus. Other nature-inspired models for coordination include stigmergy
(indirect coordination through, for instance, the environment), chemical coordination, physical
coordination, and biochemical coordination [ 141]. Animal organisation has inspired models for addressing
motion of agents. For example, swarms have enabled distinction of different group of agents as introduced
by [107] and presented in Table 4. Figure 2 identifies some of the most common coordination models
found in literature.