Processes 2020 ,8, 312 5 of 29
 Degree distribution [ 57]: A network node degree is the number of links connecting with that
node. This has associated the following measures:
– Degree density: This measure is regarding how strong the vertices of a graph are connected.
– Degree-correlation measures: This is computed between nodes of different nature or function
for the network (degree assortativity) [58].
Table 2. Some general properties (randomness, mean path length, and clustering coefﬁcient) of main
theoretical graph structures: Summary of parts of Albert and Barabási [59].
Graph Structure Randomness Mean Path Clustering Coeff.
Regular graph Ordered Long High
Small world Medium Medium High
Scale free Medium-high Short Medium
Random graph Disordered Short Low
2.4. Percolation and Node Ranking in Complex Networks
In a context of risk analysis and resilience assessment of engineered systems, it is worth
mentioning how to develop complex network-based measures useful as surrogate indices or
estimations of the network performance [ 60]. Usually, these measures are based on the so-called
percolation analysis. Percolation analysis measures the consequence of nodes/links removal from
the network with respect to how the typical length of a path connecting pairs of nodes increases,
eventually leading to a disconnected network (inﬁnite distance). Network resilience is a measure
on how network performance indices may vary after removal of such nodes and/or links out of
the network. From a more general perspective, percolation may be understood as a methodology
for ranking nodes in complex networks. This subsection presents as well alternative solutions
relying on concepts of diversity in connectivity (vitality) and other solutions based on computational
Epidemiology processes.
2.4.1. Percolation Analysis in Complex Networks
In Stauffer and Aharony [ 61], percolation theory is presented as a method to analyse cascading
failures in networks. Percolation models several types of network failures ranging from a single
node disruption to a scenario in which a critical fraction of the network components have failed [ 62].
Within a complex networks framework, these failures are modelled by removal of the associated
node/link elements. A fully operative network can become into nonfunctional and disconnected
network as increasing the percolation of its components. Given the analogies between percolation
theory and cascading failures, percolation has been widely used for risk analysis and resilience
assessment [63].
Monte Carlo (MC) methods are key for percolation in complex networks [ 64]. MC methods
generate random processes aiding approaching complex or large-scale problems [ 65]. They can be
understood as a sampling mechanism that assigns a probability per node to be removed or to remain
in the network conﬁguration [ 66]. In this way, it is possible to simulate several random disruption
scenarios and to check the global consequences at removing a series of links or nodes. Note that
removing a node consequently removes its connection links. Li et al. [ 67] applied percolation theory
to modelling bottlenecks in transportation networks. Carvalho et al. [ 68] found it also suitable for
the resilience assessment of gas networks. Percolation analysis was also investigated in water networks
by the works of Torres et al. [ 69] and also by [ 70]. Chen et al. [ 71] used percolation analysis to approach
cascading models for cyber-physical power systems.