Processes 2020 ,8, 312 11 of 29
distribution systems, cyber-attacks can be considered to control unexpected scenarios that can
potentially produce shortages and can reduce the water quality for public consumption [ 163,164].
In the case of smart-grids, cyber-attacks can cause damage at connecting physical assets [ 165,166].
In transportation, cyber-attacks might be in the way vehicles dynamics and monitoring is collected
and analysed [ 167]. In telecommunication systems the cyber-attacks may directly affect the network
topology by line-addition, line-removal, and line-switching [ 168]. Also in telecommunications
and mobile networks, cyber-attacks can directly inject false data in the network, spread malware,
send spam, or collect information for illegal purposes [ 169]. Self-organised networks [ 170,171]
and virtual network functions [ 172,173] aid to get an early detection and better mitigation of
cyber-attacks in mobile networks [174,175].
4. Control and Optimisation of Complex Networks and Multi-Agent Systems
This section presents how MAS and complex networks have been used to address a wide set
of control and optimisation problems arising in systems engineering. We particularly focus on
representative applications related to manufacturing processes and critical infrastructure management.
Thanks to them, we show how complex networks and MAS are able to model, control, and optimise
engineering systems of main importance.
4.1. Complex Networks for Control and Optimisation
Controlling complex networks attempts to guarantee that such networks can reach a targeted
performance. This is through monitoring how their state evolves on time, under a range of scenarios,
and what actions are better placed to reach the aimed control. Control is also achieved through MAS,
as it is stated below. However, network dynamics and topology play a key role in the success of such
control process [ 176]. This can also be checked in the paper of Ding et al. [ 177], where the authors
select network key-nodes to be connected to external controllers. Such key nodes can be selected
by their relative importance on propagating errors/information or by their connectivity. Overall,
this is a particular case of the so-called landmark nodes [ 178]. Landmark nodes are special nodes in
the network, typically aiding to speed up internal computations such as centrality measures. This
is of interest in case of dealing with large-scale networks or with near real-time operations [ 179,180].
For instance, in the work of Giudicciani et al. [ 181] landmark nodes are selected as nodes in the boundary
of network communities (nodes with links connecting nodes of other community). This set of landmark
nodes shows to be suitable to get faster computation of the shortest paths in addition to improving
the overall management of complex networks related to critical infrastructures.
Control is naturally related to optimisation tasks. To this end, there are several works on
network dynamics, topology, and design to optimise resilience [ 182], recovery [ 183], connectivity [ 184],
performance [ 185], and even network control [ 186]. Overall, complex networks couple with MAS in
many optimisation processes. Complex networks have shown to be essential to assign agents (or agents
of different breeds) to network nodes depending on their importance. Still, MAS for optimisation
gain the space, distance, and neighbourhood notions thanks to the complex network topology. To this
end, a network of agents (likely different to the complex network aimed to be controlled or optimised)
may also be necessary for an optimal activity between agents, so providing an enhanced response.
4.2. MAS Architectures for Control and Optimisation
The control architecture determines, among others, the components of the system, the responsibilities,
and interactions [ 187]. The control architecture is tailored for each system and might include speciﬁc
domain functions or entities. However, there are some common abstractions and approaches that can
be reused across different problems and domains. This encompasses terminology, structure, a standard
template of components and their relationships, and even examples [ 188]. There are three main
distributed control architectural approaches: hierarchical, heterarchical, and holonic [ 189]. These three
are brieﬂy introduced in the following bullet points: