Processes 2020 ,8, 312 3 of 29
complex networks elements; the same elements are, respectively, referred as vertices and edges within
the graph theory framework.
2.1. Graph Theory: Basic Concepts
Graph theory is the subject of mathematics speciﬁcally dedicated to the study of graphs [ 26].
In order to approach further analysis for graphs, there is a need to represent them as matrices.
A common way to do it is by deﬁning the adjacency matrix, A. In case of undirected graphs, Ais
symmetric and its elements have values aij=aji=wijif nodes iand jare directly connected
and aij=aji=0otherwise. A directed graph is such that the edges are directed from one vertex to
another. In such case, the matrix representing a directed graph is the so-called (oriented) incidence
matrix. The sign of the matrix elements distinguishes between outgoing and incoming edges to each
node. A common criterion is to give a positive sign for outgoing edges and a negative sign for incoming
edges; however, the opposite sign convention is also in use.
Since the physical and performing characteristics of every link may vary, it can be considered
to work with weighted graphs and their respective adjacency matrices deﬁned by wij>0. It can be
understood that the unweighted graph is such that wij=1for all iand j. The adjacency matrix
for directed graphs does not need to necessary be symmetric. In an undirected graph, it is deﬁned
the degree of a vertex as the total number of vertices directly connected to it (adjacent vertices).
The concept of node degree of directed graphs is split between outdegree (number of outgoing edges)
and indegree (number of incoming edges). If the degree of a vertex is 0, then it is a singleton
or isolated vertex.
Note that all the properties and models for graphs and complex networks developed herein
consider, by default, simple graphs. That is, there are not considered parallel edges connecting
2 vertices or any loop connecting a vertex to itself. These characteristics deﬁne the so-called multigraphs
which are out of the scope of the current paper.
2.2. Complex Networks Models
Complex networks are instances of real-world graphs. They include examples such as
the Internet [ 27], social networks [ 28], supply networks [ 29], metabolic networks [ 30], and critical
infrastructures [ 31], among other engineered systems. Table 1 shows examples of engineering systems
and their network characteristics.
Table 1. Elements related to nodes and links for a variety of engineering systems.
Nodes Links Topology Flow Quality of Service Challenges
Electricity transformers, users
substationspower lines
cablesquasi-planar, radial
small-world, core-p.electric load
Ohm’s, Kirchhoffcontinue service
meeting demandpeak demand
energy cuts
Gas transformers, users
gas stationstransmission lines
pipelines, valvesquasi-planar
small-world, core-p.liquid gas
Floyd algorithmcomposition
meeting demandsafety
energy cuts
Water tanks, users
reservoirspump stations
pipes, valvesquasi-planar
core-peripherywater
hydraulic lawsdrinking water
quantity, pressurelow pressure
contamination
Transportation cities
stationsrailways
roads, streetsquasi-planar, radial
core-peripheryvehicles, commodities
circulation rulessafety
synchronisationaccidents
delays
Telecom. computers, routers
peripheral devicescables
wirelessquasi-planar, radial
core-peripheryvoice, data, video
many-to-manyquality
speeddisruption
ubiquity
In theory, graphs can take any topology. However, most of them are analysed either by random
graphs [ 32] or by a completely regular distribution. This is not the case of complex networks,
where underlying mechanisms provide the network of neither random nor regular structures but
follow some distinctive patterns (see Table 2). Some of these structures are the following:
 Small-world network [ 33]: The paths between two randomly chosen network nodes is relatively
short (usually scales with the logarithm of the total number of nodes). Therefore, in a small-world