We start with the same meta-hyperparameter settings used
by DARTS to train the shared weights. Then, we incre-
mentally modify the meta-hyperparameters identiﬁed in
Section 3.1 to improve performance until we either reach
state-of-the-art performance (for PTB) or match the per-
formance of DARTS and SNAS (for CIFAR-10).
For our evaluation of random search with early-stopping
(i.e., ASHA) on these two benchmarks, we apply partial
training to the stage (2) evaluation network and then select
the best architecture for stage (3) evaluation. For both
benchmarks, we run ASHA with a starting resource per
architecture of r=1epoch, a maximum resource of 300
epochs, and a promotion rate of ⌘=4, indicating the top
1/4of architectures will be promoted in each round and
trained for 4⇥more resource.
Due to space limitations, we present the results for the
more commonly studied CIFAR-10 benchmark [ 45,48]
below and defer the results for the PTB benchmark, which
mirror that for CIFAR-10, to Appendix A.3. For the PTB
benchmark, our results in Table 6 of the Appendix show
ASHA to be a competitive baseline for NAS, matching the
published performance of the best architecture found by
ENAS, and random search with weight-sharing to reach
SOTA for NAS methods.
4.1 CIFAR-10 BENCHMARK
The DAG considered for the convolutional cell has N=
4search nodes and the operations considered include
3⇥3and5⇥5separable convolutions, 3⇥3and5⇥5
dilated separable convolutions, 3⇥3max pooling, and
3⇥3average pooling, and zero [ 32]. To sample an
architecture from this search space, we have to choose,
for each node, 2 input nodes from previous nodes and
associated operations to perform on each input (there
are two initial inputs to the cell that are also possible
choices); we sample in this fashion twice, once for the
normal convolution cell and one for the reduction cell
(e.g., see Figure 3).
Due to higher memory requirements for weight-sharing,
Liu et al. [32]uses a smaller network with 8 stacked cells
and 16 initial channels to perform the convolutional cell
search, followed by a larger network with 20 stacked cells
and 36 initial channels to perform the evaluation. Again,
we will refer to the network used in the ﬁrst stage as the
proxy network and the network in the second stage the
proxyless network.
We will next present the ﬁnal search results for the CIFAR-
10 benchmark, and then dive deeper into these results
to explore the impact of meta-hyperparameters on stage
(2) intermediate results, and ﬁnally evaluate associated
reproducibility ramiﬁcations.4.1.1 Final Search Results
We now present our results after performing the ﬁnal eval-
uation in stage (3). We use the same evaluation scheme
used to produce the results in Table 1 of Liu et al. [32].
In particular, we train the proxyless network conﬁgured
according to the best architectures found by different
methods with 10 different seeds and report the average
and standard deviation. We discuss these results in the
context of the three issues—baselines, complex methods,
reproducibility—introduced in Section 1.
First, we evaluate the ASHA baseline using 9 GPU days,
which is comparable to the 10 GPU days we allotted to
our independent run of DARTS. In contrast to the one
random architecture evaluated by Pham et al. [39]and the
24 evaluated by Liu et al. [32] for their random search
baselines, ASHA evaluated over 700 architectures in the
allotted computation time. The best architecture found by
ASHA achieves an average error of 3.03±0.13, which is
signiﬁcantly better than the random search baseline pro-
vided by Liu et al. [32]and comparable to DARTS (ﬁrst
order). Additionally, the best performing seed reached a
test error of 2.85, which is lower than the published result
for ENAS. Similar to the PTB benchmark, these results
suggest that the gap between SOTA NAS methods and
standard hyperparameter optimization is much smaller
than previously reported [39, 32].
Next, we evaluate random search with weight-sharing
with tuned meta-hyperparameters (see Section 4.1.2 for
details). This method ﬁnds an architecture that achieves
an average test error of 2.85±0.08, which is compara-
ble to the reported results for SNAS and DARTS, the
top 2 weight-sharing algorithms that use a comparable
search space, as well as GHN [ 48]. Note that while the
two manually tuned architectures we show in Table 1
outperform the best architecture discovered by random
search with weight-sharing, they have over 7⇥more pa-
rameters. Additionally, the best-performing efﬁcient NAS
method, ProxylessNAS, uses a larger proxyless network
and a signiﬁcantly different search space than the one
we consider. As mentioned in Section 3, random search
with weight-sharing can also directly search over larger
proxyless networks since it trains using discrete architec-
tures. We hypothesize that using a proxyless network and
applying random search with weight-sharing to the same
search space as ProxylessNAS would further improve our
results; we leave this as a direction for future work.
Finally, we examine the reproducibility of the NAS meth-
ods using a comparable search space with available code
for both architecture search and evaluation (i.e., DARTS
and ENAS; to our knowledge, code is not currently avail-
able for SNAS). For DARTS, exact reproducibility was
not feasible since the code is non-deterministic and Liu