Random Search and Reproducibility for Neural Architecture Search
Liam Li
Carnegie Mellon UniversityAmeet Talwalkar
Carnegie Mellon University
Abstract
Neural architecture search (NAS) is a promis-
ing research direction that has the potential to
replace expert-designed networks with learned,
task-speciﬁc architectures. In order to help
ground the empirical results in this ﬁeld, we
propose new NAS baselines that build off the
following observations: (i) NAS is a special-
ized hyperparameter optimization problem; and
(ii) random search is a competitive baseline
for hyperparameter optimization. Leveraging
these observations, we evaluate both random
search with early-stopping and a novel random
search with weight-sharing algorithm on two
standard NAS benchmarks—PTB and CIFAR-
10. Our results show that random search with
early-stopping is a competitive NAS baseline,
e.g., it performs at least as well as ENAS [ 39], a
leading NAS method, on both benchmarks. Ad-
ditionally, random search with weight-sharing
outperforms random search with early-stopping,
achieving a state-of-the-art NAS result on PTB
and a highly competitive result on CIFAR-10.
Finally, we explore the existing reproducibility
issues of published NAS results.
1 INTRODUCTION
Deep learning offers the promise of bypassing the process
of manual feature engineering by learning representations
in conjunction with statistical models in an end-to-end
fashion. However, neural network architectures them-
selves are typically designed by experts in a painstak-
ing, ad-hoc fashion. Neural architecture search (NAS)
presents a promising path for alleviating this pain by au-
tomatically identifying architectures that are superior to
hand-designed ones. Since the work by Zoph and Le[49], there has been explosion of research activity on this
problem [ 29,30,37,11,41,1,21,5,39,48,32,45,7].
Notably, there has been great industry interest in NAS, as
evidenced by the vast computational [ 49,50,41] and mar-
keting resources [16] committed to industry-driven NAS
research. However, despite a steady stream of promising
empirical results [ 49,50,41,32,33,7], we see three fun-
damental issues with the current state of NAS research:
Inadequate Baselines. Leading NAS methods exploit
many of the strategies that were initially explored in the
context of traditional hyperparameter optimization tasks,
e.g., evolutionary search [ 38,19], Bayesian optimization
[42,4,18], and gradient-based approaches [ 2,34]. More-
over, the NAS problem is in fact a specialized instance of
the broader hyperparameter optimization problem. How-
ever, in spite of the close relationship between these two
problems, existing comparisons between novel NAS meth-
ods and standard hyperparameter optimization methods
are inadequate. In particular, to the best of our knowledge,
no state-of-the-art hyperparameter optimization methods
have been evaluated on standard NAS benchmarks. With-
out benchmarking against leading hyperparameter opti-
mization baselines, it difﬁcult to quantify the performance
gains provided by specialized NAS methods.
Complex Methods. We have witnessed a proliferation of
novel NAS methods, with research progressing in many
different directions. New approaches introduce a signiﬁ-
cant amount of algorithmic complexity in the search pro-
cess, including complicated training routines [ 1,39,45,
7], architecture transformations [ 44,41,6,30,11], and
modeling assumptions [ 21,24,48,5,29] (see Figure 1
and Appendix A.1 for more details). While many techni-
cally diverse NAS methods demonstrate good empirical
performance, they often lack corresponding ablation stud-
ies [33,48,7], and as a result, it is unclear what NAS
component(s) are necessary to achieve a competitive em-
pirical result .
Lack of Reproducibility. Experimental reproducibility