Search  SpaceSearch MethodEvaluation Method
Reinforcement  LearningEvolutionary SearchGradient-Based  OptimizationBayesian OptimizationFull TrainingPartial TrainingHypernetworksWeight-SharingNetwork MorphismCell BlockMeta-ArchitectureUnstructured & StructuredContinuous &  DiscreteRandom Search
Figure 1: Components of hyperparameter optimiza-
tion. Primarily NAS-speciﬁc methods are lined in purple.
2.1 INADEQUATE BASELINES
Existing works in NAS do not provide adequate compari-
son to random search and other hyperparameter optimiza-
tion methods. Some works either compare to random
search given a budget of just of few evaluations [ 39,32]
or Bayesian optimization methods without efﬁcient archi-
tecture evaluation schemes [ 21]. While Real et al. [41]
and Cai et al. [6]provide a thorough comparison to ran-
dom search, they use random search with full training
even though partial training methods have been shown
to be orders-of-magnitude faster than standard random
search [27, 28].
Although certain hyperparameter optimization methods
[42,34,25] require non-trivial modiﬁcation in order to
work with NAS search spaces, others are easily applicable
to NAS problems [ 18,4,10,13,27,28]. Of these applica-
ble methods, we choose to use a simple method combin-
ing random search with early-stopping called ASHA [ 28]
to provide a competitive baseline for standard hyperpa-
rameter optimization. Li et al. [28]showed ASHA to be
a state-of-the-art, theoretically principled, bandit-based
partial training method that outperforms leading adaptive
search strategies for hyperparameter optimization. We
compare the empirical performance of ASHA with that
of NAS methods in Section 4.
2.2 COMPLEX METHODS
Much of the complexity of NAS methods is introduced in
the process of adapting search methods for NAS-speciﬁc
search spaces, which usually involve discrete hyperpa-
rameters with a DAG representation where each node
represents local computations and edges of the DAG rep-
resent the ﬂow of data from one node to another [ 39,32].
Evolutionary approaches need to deﬁne a set of possi-
ble mutations to apply to different architectures [40, 41];
Bayesian optimization approaches [ 21,24] rely on spe-cially designed kernels; gradient-based methods trans-
form the discrete architecture search problem into a con-
tinuous optimization problem [ 33,32,45,7]; and Zoph
and Le [49], Zoph et al. [50], and Pham et al. [39] use
reinforcement learning to train a recurrent neural network
controller to generate good architectures. All of these
search approaches add a signiﬁcant amount of complex-
ity with no clear winner, especially since methods some
times use different search spaces and evaluation methods.
To simplify the search process and help isolate important
components of NAS, we use random search to sample
architectures from the search space.
Additional complexity is also introduced by NAS-speciﬁc
evaluation methods—like network morphisms; hypernet-
works and performance prediction; and weight-sharing—
that exploit the structure of NAS search spaces to speed
up the evaluation of the quality of different architectures.
Network morphisms require architecture transformations
that satisfy certain criteria; hypernetworks and perfor-
mance prediction methods encode information from pre-
viously seen architectures in an auxiliary network; and
weight-sharing methods [ 39,32,1,45,7] use a single set
of weights for all possible architectures and hence, can
require careful training routines.
Despite their complexity, these more efﬁcient NAS eval-
uation methods are 1 to 3 orders-of-magnitude cheaper
than full training (see Table 1 and Table 6), at the expense
of decreased ﬁdelity to the true performance. Of these
evaluation methods, network morphism still requires on
the order of 100 GPU days [ 29,11] and, while hyper-
networks and prediction performance based methods can
be cheaper, weight-sharing is less complex since it does
not require training an auxiliary network. In addition to
the computational efﬁciency of weight-sharing methods
[32,39,7,45], which only require computation on the
order of fully training a single architecture, this approach
has also achieved the best result on the two standard
benchmarks [ 32,7]. Hence, we use random search with
weight-sharing as our starting point for a simple and efﬁ-
cient NAS method.
Our work is inspired by the result of Bender et al. [1],
which showed that random search, combined with a well-
trained set of shared weights can successfully differentiate
good architectures from poor performing ones. However,
their work required several modiﬁcations to stabilize train-
ing (e.g., a tunable path dropout schedule over edges of
the search DAG and a specialized ghost batch normaliza-
tion scheme [ 17]). Furthermore, they only report exper-
imental results on the CIFAR-10 benchmark, on which
they fell slightly short of the results for leading NAS meth-
ods. In contrast, our combination of random search with
weight-sharing greatly simpliﬁes the training routine and