Table 4: CIFAR-10 Benchmark: Broad Reproducibility of Random Search WS We report the stage 3 performance
of the ﬁnal architecture from 6 independent runs of random search with weight-sharing.
†This run was performed using the DARTS code before we corrected for non-determinism (see Appendix A.4).
Test Error Across 10 Seeds
Run 1 Run 2†Run 3 Run 4 Run 5 Run 6 Average
2.85±0.08 2 .86±0.09 2 .88±0.10 2 .95±0.09 2 .98±0.12 3 .00±0.19 2.92
respectively.
Finally, we investigate the variance of random search
with weight-sharing with 5 additional runs as shown in
Table 4. The stage (3) evaluation of the best architec-
ture for these 5 additional runs reveal that 2 out of 5
achieve similar performance as Run 1, while the 3 re-
mainder underperform but still reach a better test error
than ASHA. These broad reproducibility results show that
random search with weight-sharing has high variance be-
tween runs, which is not surprising given the change in
intermediate rankings that we observed for DARTS.
5 CONCLUSION
We conclude by summarizing our results and proposing
suggestions to push the ﬁeld forward and foster broader
adoption of NAS methods.
Better baselines that accurately quantify the perfor-
mance gains of NAS methods. The performance of ran-
dom search with early-stopping evaluated in Section 4 re-
veals a surprisingly small performance gap between lead-
ing general-purpose hyperparameter optimization meth-
ods and specialized methods tailored for NAS. In tradi-
tional hyperparameter optimization, an informative mea-
sure of the performance of a novel algorithm is its ‘multi-
ple of random search,’ i.e., how much more compute
would random search need to achieve similar perfor-
mance [ 27]. An analogous baseline could be useful for
NAS, where the impact of a novel NAS method can be
quantiﬁed in terms of a multiplicative speedup relative to
a standard hyperparameter optimization method such as
random search with early-stopping.
Ablation studies that isolate the impact of individual
NAS components. Our head-to-head experimental evalu-
ation of two variants of random search (with early stop-
ping and with weight-sharing) allows us to pinpoint the
performance gains associated with the cheaper weight-
sharing evaluation scheme. In contrast, the fact that
random search with weight-sharing is comparable in
performance to leading NAS methods calls into ques-
tion the necessity of the complicated algorithmic compo-
nents employed by ENAS, SNAS, and DARTS. Relatedly,
while ProxylessNAS achieves better average test error
on CIFAR-10 than random search with weight-sharing,it is unclear to what degree these performance gains are
attributable to the search space, search method, and/or
proxyless shared-weights evaluation method. To promote
scientiﬁc progress, we believe that ablation studies should
be conducted to answer these questions in isolation.
Reproducible results that engender conﬁdence and
foster scientiﬁc progress. Reproducibility is a core tenet
of scientiﬁc progress and crucial to promoting wider adop-
tion of NAS methods. In traditional hyperparameter opti-
mization, it is standard for empirical results to be reported
over 10 independent experimental runs [ 14,25,23,27].
In contrast, as we discuss Section 2, results for NAS
methods are often reported over a single experimental run
[39,7,45,48], without exact reproducibility. This is a
consequence of the steep time and computational cost re-
quired to perform NAS experiments. However, in order to
adequately differentiate between various methods, results
need to be reported over several independent experimental
runs, especially given the nature of the extremal statistics
that are being reported. Consequently, we conclude that
either signiﬁcantly more computational resources need to
be devoted to evaluating NAS methods and/or more com-
putationally tractable benchmarks need to be developed
to lower the barrier for performing adequate empirical
evaluations.
Acknowledgments
We thank Maruan Al-Shedivat, Sebastian Caldas, Greg
Ganger, Kevin Jamieson, Angela Jiang, Mikhail Khodak,
Gregory Plumb, Afshin Rostamizadeh, Virginia Smith,
and Daniel Wong for helpful comments and valuable dis-
cussion. Thanks also to Julien Siems and Frank Hutter’s
group for their efforts to reproduce our work, which led
to insights on reproducibility and motivated additional
experiments. Finally, this work was supported in part
by DARPA FA875017C0141, the National Science Foun-
dation grants IIS1705121 and IIS1838017, an Okawa
Grant, a Google Faculty Award, an Amazon Web Ser-
vices Award, and a Carnegie Bosch Institute Research
Award. Any opinions, ﬁndings and conclusions or rec-
ommendations expressed in this material are those of
the author(s) and do not necessarily reﬂect the views of
DARPA, the National Science Foundation, or any other
funding agency.