performing one as the ﬁnal architecture, i.e., as the output
of our search algorithm.
3.1 RELEVANT META-HYPERPARAMETERS
There are a few key meta-hyperparameters that impact
the behavior of our search algorithm. We describe each
of them below, along with a description of how we expect
them to impact the search algorithm, both in terms of
search quality and computational costs.
Training epochs. Increasing the number of training
epochs while keeping all other parameters the same in-
creases the total number of minibatch updates and hence,
the number of architectures used to update the shared
weights. Intuitively, training with more architectures
should help the shared weights generalize better to what
are likely unseen architectures in the evaluation step. Un-
surprisingly, more epochs increase the computational time
required for architecture search.
Batch size. Decreasing the batch size while keeping all
other parameters the same also increases the number of
minibatch updates but at the cost of noisier gradient up-
date. Hence, we expect reducing the batch size to have a
similar effect as increasing the number of training epochs
but may necessitate adjusting other meta-hyperparameters
to account for the noisier gradient update. Intuitively,
more minibatch updates increase the computational time
required for architecture search.
Network size. Increasing the search network size in-
creases the dimension of the shared weights. Intuitively,
this should boost performance since a larger search net-
work can store more information about different architec-
tures. Unsurprisingly, larger networks require more GPU
memory.
Number of evaluated architectures. Increasing the
number of architectures that we evaluate using the shared
weights allows for more exploration in the architecture
search space. Intuitively, this should help assuming
that there is a high correlation between the performance
of an architecture evaluated using shared weights and
the ground truth performance of that architecture when
trained from scratch [ 1]. Unsurprisingly, evaluating more
architectures increases the computational time required
for architecture search.
Other learning meta-hyperparameters will likely need
to be adjusted accordingly for different settings of the
key relevant meta-hyperparameters listed above. In our
experiments in Section 4, we tune gradient clipping as a
ﬁfth meta-hyperparameter, though there are other possible
meta-hyperparameters that may beneﬁt from additional
tuning (e.g., learning rate, momentum).In Section 4, following these intuitions, we incrementally
explore the design space of our search method in order to
improve search quality and make full use of the available
GPU memory and computational resources.
3.2 MEMORY FOOTPRINT
Since we train the shared weights using a single architec-
ture at a time, the memory footprint of our random search
with weight-sharing can be reduced to that of a single
model. In this sense, our approach is similar to Proxy-
lessNAS [ 7] and allows us to perform architecture search
with weight-sharing on the larger “proxyless” models that
are usually used in the ﬁnal architecture evaluation step
instead of the smaller proxy models that are usually used
in the search step. We take advantage of this in a subset of
our experiments for the PTB benchmark in Section A.3;
performing random search with weight-sharing on a prox-
yless network for the CIFAR-10 benchmark is a direction
for future work.
In contrast, Bender et al. [1]trains the shared weights
with a path dropout schedule that incrementally prunes
edges within the DAG so that the sub-DAGs used to train
the shared weights become sparser as training progresses.
Under this training routine, since most of the edges in the
search DAG are activated in the beginning, the memory
footprint cannot be reduced to that of a single model to
allow a proxyless network for the shared weights.
4 EXPERIMENTS
In line with prior work [ 49,39,32], we consider the two
standard benchmarks for neural architecture search: (1)
language modeling on the Penn Treebank (PTB) dataset
[35] and (2) image classiﬁcation on CIFAR-10 [ 26]. For
each of these benchmarks, we consider the same search
space and use the same experimental setups as DARTS
[32], and by association SNAS [ 45], to facilitate a fair
comparison of our results to existing work.
To evaluate the performance of random search with
weight-sharing on these two benchmarks, we proceed
in the same three stages as Liu et al. [32]:
Stage 1 : Perform architecture search for a cell block on a
cheaper search task.
Stage 2 : Evaluate the best architecture from the ﬁrst stage
by retraining a larger network formed from multiple cell
blocks from scratch. This stage is used to select the best
architecture from multiple trials.
Stage 3 : Perform a full evaluation of the best found archi-
tecture from the second stage by either training for more
epochs (PTB) or training with more seeds (CIFAR-10).