is of paramount importance in the context of NAS re-
search, given the empirical nature of the ﬁeld, the com-
plexity of new NAS methods, and the steep computational
costs associated with empirical evaluation. In particular,
there are (at least) two important notions of reproducibil-
ity to consider: (1) “exact” reproducibility i.e., whether it
is possible to reproduce explicitly reported experimental
results; and (2) “broad” reproducibility, i.e., the degree
to which the reported experimental results are themselves
robust and generalizable. Broad reproducibility is difﬁ-
cult to measure due to the computational burden of NAS
methods and the high variance associated with extremal
statistics. However, most of the published results in this
ﬁeld do not even satisfy exact reproducibility. For exam-
ple, of the 12 papers published since 2018 at NeurIPS,
ICML, and ICLR that introduce novel NAS methods (see
Table 5), none are exactly reproducible.1
While addressing these challenges will require
community-wide efforts, in this work we present results
that aim to make some initial progress on each of these
issues. In particular, our contributions are as follows:
1.We help ground existing NAS results by providing
a new perspective on the gap between traditional hy-
perparameter optimization and leading NAS methods.
Speciﬁcally, we evaluate a general hyperparameter
optimization method combining random search with
early-stopping [ 28] on two standard NAS benchmarks
(CIFAR-10 and PTB). With approximately the same
amount of compute as DARTS [32], a state-of-the-art
(SOTA) NAS method, this simple method provides a
much more competitive baseline for both benchmarks:
(1) on PTB, random search with early-stopping reaches
test perplexity of 56.4 compared to the published result
for ENAS [ 39], a leading NAS method, of 56.3,2and
(2) for CIFAR-10, random search with early-stopping
achieves a test error of 2.85%, whereas the published
result for ENAS is 2.89%. While SOTA NAS methods
like DARTS still outperform this baseline, our results
demonstrate that the gap is not nearly as large as that
suggested by published random search baselines on
these tasks [39, 32].
2.We identify a small subset of NAS components that
1It is important to note that these works vary drastically in
terms of what materials they provide, and some authors such as
Liu et al. [32], provide a relatively complete codebase for their
methods. However, even in the case of DARTS, the code for the
CIFAR-10 benchmark is not deterministic. We were thus not
able to reproduce the results in Liu et al. [32], but we were able
to use the DARTS code repository ( https://github.com/
quark0/darts ) as the launching point for our experimental
setup.
2We could not reproduce this result using the ﬁnal architec-
ture and code provided by the authors.are sufﬁcient for achieving good empirical results. We
construct a simple algorithm from the ground up start-
ing from vanilla random search, and demonstrate that
properly tuned random search with weight-sharing is
competitive with much more complicated methods
when using similar computational budgets. In particu-
lar, we identify the following meta-hyperparameters
that impact the behavior of our algorithm: batch size,
number of epochs, network size, and number of evalu-
ated architectures. We evaluate our proposed method
using the same search space and evaluation scheme as
DARTS [ 32]. We explore a few modiﬁcations of the
meta-hyperparameters to improve search quality and
make full use of available GPU memory and computa-
tional resources, and observe SOTA performance on
the PTB benchmark and comparable performance to
DARTS on the CIFAR-10 benchmark. We emphasize
that we do not perform additional hyperparameter tun-
ing of the ﬁnal architectures discovered at the end of
the search process.
3.We open-source the code, random seeds, and docu-
mentation necessary to reproduce our experiments.3
Our single machine results shown in Table 6 and Ta-
ble 1 follow a deterministic experimental setup, given
a ﬁxed random seed, and satisfy exact reproducibility.
For these experiments on the two standard benchmarks,
we study the broad reproducibility of our random
search with weight-sharing results by repeating our
experiments multiple times. We observe non-trivial
variance across independent runs and identify poten-
tial sources for these differences. Our results highlight
the need for more careful reporting of experimental
results, increased transparency of intermediate results,
and more robust statistics to quantify the performance
of NAS methods.
2 RELATED WORK
Figure 1 shows the three components of a general hyper-
parameter optimization problem, each of which can have
NAS-speciﬁc approaches: (1) the search space deﬁnes
a set of possible hyperparameter conﬁgurations, (2) the
search method is used to select candidate conﬁgurations
to evaluate, and (3) the evaluation method is used to ob-
tain an estimate of the quality of different conﬁgurations.
A more detailed discussion of each component is avail-
able in Appendix A.1. Given this background, we provide
additional context for the three issues we identiﬁed re-
garding the current state of NAS research in Section 1.
3All material available at https://github.com/
liamcli/randomNAS_release .