combine all of them for subsequent tasks rather than learn
a common low-dimensional representation, which makes it
a two-step manner in representation learning. Therefore,
in this paper, we propose the Autoencoder in Autoencoder
Networks (AE2-Nets), which aims to automatically encode
intrinsic information from heterogeneous views into a com-
prehensive representation and adaptively balance the com-
plementarity and consistence among different views.
The key advantage of the proposed model lies in the join-
t view-speciﬁc encoding and multi-view encoding with a
novel nested autoencoder networks. The view-speciﬁc rep-
resentation encoded by the inner-AE networks is responsi-
ble for reconstructing the raw input, while the multi-view
representation encoded by the outer-AE networks can re-
construct the encoded representation by inner-AE network
of each single view. The main contributions of this paper
are summarized as follows:
•We propose a novel unsupervised multi-view represen-
tation learning framework - Autoencoder in Autoencoder
Networks (AE2-Nets) for heterogeneous data, which can
ﬂexibly integrate multiple heterogeneous views into an in-
tact representation.
•The novel nested autoencoder networks could jointly per-
form view-speciﬁc representation learning and multi-view
representation learning - the inner autoencoder networks ef-
fectively extract information from each single view, while
the outer autoencoder networks model the degradation pro-
cess to encode intrinsic information from each single view
into a common intact representation.
•Extensive experimental results verify the effectiveness of
the proposed AE2-Nets on diverse benchmark datasets for
both classiﬁcation and clustering tasks.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Re-
lated algorithms, including multi-view learning and multi-
view representation learning are brieﬂy reviewed in Section
2. Details of our proposed approach are presented in Sec-
tion 3. In Section 4, we present experimental results that
demonstrate the effectiveness of our model on a variety of
real-world datasets. Conclusions are drawn in Section 5.
2. Related Work
Learning based on data with multiple modalities or mul-
tiple types of features aims to conduct learning task by joint-
ly utilizing different views to exploit the complementarity,
and has attracted intensive attentions recently. For super-
vised learning, multimodal metric learning [34, 35] usual-
ly jointly learns multiple metrics for different modalities.
Hierarchical Multimodal Metric Learning (HM3L) [35] de-
composes the metric of each modality into a product of
two matrices: one is modality-speciﬁc, and the other is
shared by all the modalities. Beyond linear case, Fisher-
HSIC Multi-View Metric Learning (FISH-MML) [34] en-
forces the class separability with Fisher discriminant analy-sis (FDA) within each view, and maximizes the consistence
in kernel space among multiple views by using Hilbert-
Schmidt Independence Criteria (HSIC). Under the proba-
bilistic framework, the method [30] learns latent represen-
tations and distance metric from multiple modalities with
the multi-wing harmonium (MWH) learning. There are also
some methods [22, 23] aggregating decisions from multiple
classiﬁers, where each classiﬁer is learned based upon one
single modality. Under speciﬁc assumptions, theoretical re-
sults [11, 6] have advocated the advantages of multi-view
integration for subsequent tasks. For clustering, based on
spectral clustering, co-regularized [16] and co-training [15]
based algorithms enforce clustering hypothesis of different
views to be consistent. Recently, the multi-view subspace
clustering methods [5, 12] relate different data points in a
self-representing manner on the original view and simulta-
neously constrain these subspace representations of differ-
ent views to exploit complementary information. There are
some multi-view methods focusing on other topics, e.g., di-
mensionality reduction [33].
Unsupervised multi-view representation learning is a
rather challenging problem since there is no class infor-
mation guiding the learning process. The main stream of
methods are CCA-based, which searches for projections to
maximize the correlation of two views. Due to the ability of
handling nonlinear correlations, the kernel extension of C-
CA has been widely used for integrating multi-view features
or dimensionality reduction. The Deep CCA [2] aims to
learn two deep neural networks (DNN) to maximize canon-
ical correlation across two views. Under the deep learn-
ing framework, the autoencoder based model [20] learns a
compact representation best reconstructing the input. Dif-
ferent from CCA, based on HSIC, a ﬂexible multi-view di-
mensionality co-reduction method [33] is proposed which
explores the correlations within each view independently,
and maximizes the dependence among different views with
kernel matching jointly. Inspired by deep learning, semi-
nonnegative matrix factorization is extended to obtain the
hierarchical semantics from multi-view data in a layer-wise
manner [36]. The learned representations of all views are
enforced to be the same in the ﬁnal layer.
3. Autoencoder in Autoencoder Networks
In this section, we present the AE2-Nets for learning
the intact representations with a set of multi-view samples
X={X(1),...,X(V)}, whereX(v)∈Rdv×nis the feature
matrix of the vth view with V,nanddvbeing the number
of views, number of samples and dimensionality of feature
space for the vth view, respectively.
3.1. Proposed Approach
The key goal of AE2-Nets (as presented in Fig. 1) is to
recover an intact latent space which can well reveal the un-
2578