H
Graph
Image
Outer AE:  Multi-view encoding 
Inner AE:View-specific encoding 
(a) Heterogeneous inputTask-specific goal 
...
(b) AE networks (c)  Degradation networks (d) Latent representation (e)  TaskFigure 1: Overview of the Autoencoder in Autoencoder Networks (AE2-Nets). The key components are the nested autoen-
coder networks, which are composed of the inner AE networks (shown as the circle with green arrows ) for view-speciﬁc
encoding and the outer AE networks (shown as the circle with red arrows ) for multi-view encoding .View-speciﬁc encod-
ingautomatically extracts features from each view while multi-view encoding ensures the intact latent representation can be
mapped back to each view with degradation process . Accordingly, the intrinsic information from multiple views are encoded
into the learned latent intact representation. The learned latent representation could be used for subsequent tasks, and the
task-speciﬁc goal could ﬂexibly be incorporated into our framework as well (shown in gray dash lines).
derlying structure of data across multiple views. The pro-
posed model jointly learns compact representation for each
single view and the intact multi-view representation which
can be mapped to reconstruct each single view. Then, the
intrinsic information of each view are automatically extract-
ed with the inner-AE networks, and the degradation pro-
cess involved in the outer-AE networks ensures the intrin-
sic information from each view are encoded into the latent
representation. Note that, due to the common intact repre-
sentation and associated non-linear networks, more general
correlations among different views are addressed.
For the inner networks, the reasons of using AE network-
s are: (1) since there is no supervised information guid-
ing the learning process, we employ AE networks instead
of general neural networks ( e.g., for classiﬁcation) to en-
sure the intrinsic information to be preserved; (2) for con-
ventional multi-view representation learning models, learn-
ing processes are usually based on the pre-extracted fea-
tures, which is risky due to the high-dimensionality and
possible noise involved. The introduced encoding network-
s could extract intrinsic information to be encoded into
the latent multi-view representation instead of the original
high-dimensional/noisy features; (3) with variants of AE
(e.g., convolutional autoencoder for images), our model has
the potential of performing representation learning directly
based on raw data.
For simplicity, the inner-AE network for the vth
view is denoted as f(X(v);Θ(v)
ae), where Θ(v)
ae={W(m,v)
ae,b(m,v)
ae}M
m=1is the parameter set for all layers
withM+ 1 being the number of layers of the inner-AE
network, i.e., consisting of Mlayers of nonlinear transfor-
mations. Speciﬁcally, the ﬁrst M/2hidden layers encode
the input as a new representation, and the last M/2lay-
ers decode the representation to reconstruct the input. Let
z(0,v)
i=x(v)
i∈Rdvdenote an input feature vector, then the
output of the mth layer is
z(m,v)
i=a(W(m,v)
aez(m−1,v)
i+b(m,v)
ae),
m= 1,2,···,M,(1)
wherez(m,v)
i∈Rd(m,v)andd(m,v)is the number of
nodes at the mth layer for the vth view. W(m,v)
ae∈
Rd(m,v)×d(m−1,v)andb(m,v)
ae∈Rd(m,v)denote the weights
and bias associated with the mth layer, respectively. a(·)
is a nonlinear activation function. Then, given the feature
matrixX(v)= [x(v)
1,x(v)
2,···,x(v)
n]∈Rdv×nfor thevth
view, the corresponding reconstruct representation is denot-
ed as
Z(M,v)= [z(M,v)
1,z(M,v)
2,···,z(M,v)
n], (2)
wherez(M,v)
i is the reconstructed representation for the ith
sample in the vth view. To obtain the low-dimensional rep-
resentation Z(M
2,v), we should minimize the following re-
2579