AE2-Nets: Autoencoder in Autoencoder Networks
Changqing Zhang1∗, Yeqing Liu1∗, Huazhu Fu2
1College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
2Inception Institute of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Abu Dhabi, UAE
{zhangchangqing; yeqing }@tju.edu.cn; hzfu@ieee.org
Abstract
Learning on data represented with multiple views (e.g.,
multiple types of descriptors or modalities) is a rapidly
growing direction in machine learning and computer vi-
sion. Although effectiveness achieved, most existing algo-
rithms usually focus on classiﬁcation or clustering tasks.
Differently, in this paper, we focus on unsupervised repre-
sentation learning and propose a novel framework termed
Autoencoder in Autoencoder Networks (AE2-Nets), which
integrates information from heterogeneous sources into an
intact representation by the nested autoencoder framework.
The proposed method has the following merits: (1) our
model jointly performs view-speciﬁc representation learn-
ing (with the inner autoencoder networks) and multi-view
information encoding (with the outer autoencoder network-
s) in a uniﬁed framework; (2) due to the degradation pro-
cess from the latent representation to each single view, our
model ﬂexibly balances the complementarity and consis-
tence among multiple views. The proposed model is efﬁ-
ciently solved by the alternating direction method (ADM),
and demonstrates the effectiveness compared with state-of-
the-art algorithms.
1. Introduction
Real-world data are usually described with multiple
modalities or multiple types of descriptors that are consid-
ered as multiple views. Basically, due to the diversity of
sensors or feature extractors, these different views are usu-
ally highly heterogeneous. For example, an image may be
described with color ( e.g., color histogram) and texture de-
scriptors ( e.g., SIFT [18], GIST [21], HOG [7]). In social
networks, there usually exist both link graph describing re-
lationships between different subjects and subject-speciﬁc
attributes [31, 28]. In medical image analysis [10], a sub-
ject may be associated with different types of medical im-
ages used to capture different characteristics of anatomical
∗Changqing Zhang and Yeqing Liu contributed equally to this work.structures. Accordingly, plenty of approaches have been
proposed to jointly exploit multiple types of features [9] or
multiple modalities of data [26, 20].
Most existing multi-view learning algorithms focus on
classiﬁcation [13, 4] or clustering [5, 16, 32]. Basically,
integrating different views into one comprehensive repre-
sentation is of vital importance for downstream tasks since
uniﬁed representation could be easily exploited by on-shelf
algorithms. Although it is important, jointly exploring mul-
tiple views is a long-standing challenge due to the complex
correlations underlying different views. The representative
way of learning a common representation is Canonical Cor-
relation Analysis (CCA) [14], which searches for two pro-
jections to map two views onto a low-dimensional com-
mon subspace where the linear correlation between the two
views is maximized. Then the learned representation can be
used for subsequent tasks ( e.g., classiﬁcation or clustering).
To address more complex correlations beyond linear case,
kernelized CCA (KCCA) [1] introduces kernel techniques.
Furthermore, Deep Canonical Correlation Analysis (DC-
CA) [2] proposes learning highly nonlinear mappings with
deep neural networks to search for a common space that
could maximize the correlations between two views. Be-
yond CCA-based methods, Partial Least Squares (PLS) re-
gression [25] regresses the samples from one view to anoth-
er and the ﬂexible multi-view dimensionality co-reduction
algorithm (MDcR) [33] maximizes the correlations between
different views in kernel space.
Although effectiveness has been achieved on multi-view
learning, there are several main problems left for existing
algorithms. First, previous algorithms usually project dif-
ferent views onto a common space under the underlying
assumption that there exist sufﬁcient correlations between
different views. However, in practice, correlation (consis-
tence) and independence (complementarity) are co-existing
and it is challenging to automatically balance them. Ac-
cordingly, existing algorithms either maximize the correla-
tions [2, 16] for consistence or maximize the independence
for complementarity [5]. Second, existing algorithms usual-
ly project each view onto a low-dimensional space and then
2577