International Journal of Engineering , Science & Information Technology, 2 (3), 202 2, pp. 96-99 97 
 
2. Literature Review  
2.1. Object Detection  
Object detection is an activity that aims to gain an understanding of the classification, concept estimation, and location of  objects in an 
image. As one of the basic computer vision problems, object detection can provide valuable information for semantic understanding of 
images and videos, and is associated with many applications, including image classification  [14]. 
 
2.2. Artificial Intelligence  
Artificial Intelligence  is a simulation of human intelligence that is modeled in a machine and programmed to be able to think like humans. 
Artificial intelligence is a technology that requires data to be used as knowledge so that the intelligence made can be even better so that it 
can continue to grow and learn from previous mistakes  [3]. 
Artificial intelligence can do  self-correction  is because artificial intelligence designed to learn from the mistakes that have been experi-
enced. Artificial intelligence is one of the fo llowing four factors, namely:  acting humanly , thinking humanly , thinking rationally , 
and acting rationally  [4]. 
 
2.3. Machine Learning  
Machine learning  can be defined as computer applications and mathematical algorithms adopted using learning that comes from data and 
produces predictions in the future. The learning process in question is an attempt to acquire intelligence through two stages , includ-
ing training  and testing . The field of  machine learning  deals with the question of how to build computer programs to improve autom ati-
cally based on experience [15]. 
 
2.4. You Only Look Once  
You Only Look Once  (YOLO) is an algorithm for object detection based on  Convolutional Neural Network . In the YOLO architecture, 
there are 24  convolutional layers  that function to get features from the image. Then followed by 2  connected layers  which function to 
predict  probability and co ordinates [12]. 
 
2.5. You Only Look Once v 3 
Single -stage  architecture created is called the YOLO (  You Only Look Once  ) method which produces fast inference time. The frame rate 
for a 448 x 448 -pixel image is 45 fps (0.022 seconds per image) on the Titan X GPU while achieving advanced mAP (precision average). 
Yolov3 has several stages in classifying detection YOLOv3 featu re extraction uses the darknet to predict the class and location of objects, 
after which YOLOv3 will classify objects according to their class  [16] [17]. 
 
2.6. Python  
Python  is a high -level programming language that can execute a number of multi -use instructions directly (  interpretively  ) with  the Ob-
ject Oriented Programming method  and also uses dynamic semantics to provide a level of syntax readability. As a high -level progr am-
ming language, python can be learned easily because it has been equipped with  automatic memory management [18]. 
 
2.7. Tensorflow  
Tensorflow  is a software library or  library  that is  open source  or open, and free for machine learning.  Tensorflow is used  for many things 
but focuses more on training and inference of deep neural Tensorflow library is a library based on data flow and programming [19] [20]. 
Tensorflow  is a computational framework for building machine learning models.  Tensorflow  provides a variety of toolkits that allow you 
to build models at your preferred level of abstraction and run graphics on multiple hardware platforms,  including CPU, GPU, and TPU 
[20]. 
 
3. Methods 
3.1. Object Analysis  
The detection carried out leads to random objects around the researcher. Light intensity is also taken into account.  
 
3.2. System Overview  
To obtain object information, a system will be built, where system will recognize the name of the object t aken from the webcam, then the 
results will detect the name and accuracy of the random object. This system will be built using the python language where the  user must 
run through the  Anaconda prompt  and then continue using  Jupyter Notebook , after that when  the system displays the camera screen, the 
user must scan the object so that the camera can capture the object and generate information on the object.  
Next, there is a training stage where all datasets that are used as training data will be trained using the YOLO (You Only Look Once) 
method. All data will be recognized so that the system can detect objects accurately and accordingly .