873 AI and Ethics (2023) 3:869–877 
1 3
could function as a service composed of an independent 
multi-disciplinary ethics board, a collaboratively developed 
ethical code, and AI practitioners themselves.
However, operationalizing AI ethics promises to be diffi-
cult or even impossible, a daunting challenge underestimated 
by a technically focused industry and even by ethicists. 
Hagendorff [ 28, p 103] for instance, makes a number of sali -
ent points but also suggests that privacy and fairness, which 
occur frequently in ethical frameworks, are aspects for which 
“technical fixes can be or have already been developed.” 
He goes on to suggest that “accountability, explainability, 
privacy, justice, but also other values such as robustness or 
safety are most easily operationalized mathematically and 
thus tend to be implemented in terms of technical solutions” 
[28, p 103]. The ease with which issues like fairness and 
privacy are waved off as being “resolved” is stunning. These 
are highly contested issues, with high stakes. What is fair 
and who gets to decide it? How might the notion of fairness 
respond to historical inequalities suffered by a particular 
people group? And how might fairness play out differently in 
different contexts and conditions? These are complex ques-
tions which have shifted substantially over time and which 
intersect with race, gender, and culture [29, 58].
Of course, this is not to suggest that there has been no 
work around these issues in computer science. When it 
comes to privacy, for instance, cloud-based technologies 
unlock new ways of grouping data entries or encrypting vari-
ables so that the ability to identify subjects or de-anonymize 
them is minimized [53]. But such work adopts one particular 
understanding of privacy and responds to it in one particular 
way. And even within this narrow scope, there are always 
trade-offs and workarounds that need to be considered [ 53]. 
The same point applies to related concepts such as fair -
ness, safety, and justice, which can in no way be considered 
“resolved” by the limited technical responses to-date.
Operationalization is not simply a perfunctory matter 
of “translating” an ethical value into a technological out-
come. There are tensions and trade-offs that must be worked 
through and worked out into the material form of a data 
model or a digital product. Krijger [37] suggests there are 
two key tensions that apply when attempting to operational-
ize AI ethics: an inter-principle tension, where competing 
ethical demands are placed on an AI design; and an intra-
principle tension, which highlights the difficulty of materi-
alizing a principle into a technological form. Based on the 
insights above, then, we can suggest two hurdles to opera-
tionalization: (1) the challenge of wrestling with competing 
principles to arrive at meaningful demands and (2) the chal-
lenge of implementing those demands as concrete features, 
interfaces, and infrastructures. This is difficult work which 
requires engaging with social and political questions and 
prototyping, testing, and rejecting different designs: there 
are no shortcuts.6  Alternatives to ethical principles
The dominant turn to AI principles is simultaneously a 
turn away from alternative approaches. In a zero-sum 
world, the immense human and financial resources poured 
into generating AI ethics frameworks funnels it away 
from other programs of action. It is not enough, then, to 
denounce AI ethics as fruitless or useless. Instead, a criti-
cal assessment of the impact of ethics work to-date must 
conclude that it is dangerous, hoarding expertise and fund-
ing that should be devoted to more effective work. The 
high stakes of AI—its ability to harm some of the most 
vulnerable communities and ecologies in material ways—
only increases the urgency of recognizing this strategic 
misstep and its misallocation of resources.
What would be more productive approaches than the 
de-facto turn to ethical principles? One approach, in 
essence, is to think more broadly about AI justice. Zal-
nieriute [84, p 139] argues that the current focus on AI 
procedural issues like transparency is blinkered, acting 
as an “obfuscation and redirection from more substan -
tive and fundamental questions about the concentration 
of power, substantial policies, and actions of technology 
behemoths.” Similarly, Powles [66] suggests that concen-
trating tightly on bias distracts us from more fundamental 
and urgent questions about power and AI.
AI justice provides a useful term that productively 
expands the ethical scope of inquiry and intervention. As 
Gabriel [22, p 218] notes, AI justice “reframes much of the 
discussion around ‘AI ethics’ by drawing attention to the 
fact that the moral properties of algorithms are not internal 
to the models themselves but rather a product of the social 
systems within which they are deployed.” If ethical prin-
ciples are situated within company cultures and broader 
systems of power (as discussed in Sect.  2), then it makes 
sense to expand the scope of ethical engagement. Or, put 
differently, if machine learning reflects, reproduces, and 
amplifies structural inequalities, then any ethical program 
must operate intersectionally, considering a wide array of 
social and political dynamics [14].
What might this broader analysis entail? As a brief 
example, AI justice may allow us to reflect more critically 
upon the universal notion of the “human” in AI rhetoric 
and the often empty truism that we need to design AI to 
benefit “humanity.” History has shown that some racial 
and ethnic groups were deemed more “human” and deserv -
ing than others, while others were considered less-than-
human or even subhuman [51]. Similarly, AI justice may 
provide useful ways to problematize a taken-for-granted 
principle like “fairness” which appears across many ethi-
cal frameworks. Historically fairness has been defined by 
hegemonic groups in ways that perpetuate their advantage: