870 AI and Ethics (2023) 3:869–877
1 3
and toothless principles. The result of this failure is a gulf 
between high-minded ideals and technological develop-
ment on the ground—a gap between principles and prac-
tice. While recent work has aimed to address this gap by 
operationalizing principles [12, 49], this work is fraught in 
attempting to translate contested social concepts to techni-
cal rules and featuresets. The final section argues that, in 
a zero-sum world, the obsession with AI principles is not 
just useless but dangerous in funneling human and finan -
cial resources away from more productive approaches. The 
article thus concludes by highlighting alternatives: the first 
thinks more broadly about AI justice, considering sociopo-
litical dynamics and systems of oppression [14, 46]; the sec-
ond thinks more narrowly, focusing on concrete issues like 
accuracy, auditing, and governance [25, 67].
2  Meaningless principles
The deluge of AI codes of ethics, frameworks, and guide-
lines in recent years has produced a corresponding raft of 
principles. Indeed, there are now regular meta-surveys which 
attempt to collate and summarize these principles [ 35]. 
However, these principles are highly abstract and ambigu-
ous, becoming incoherent. Mittelstadt [45, p 501] suggests 
that work on AI ethics has largely produced “vague, high-
level principles, and value statements which promise to be 
action-guiding, but in practice provide few specific recom-
mendations and fail to address fundamental normative and 
political tensions embedded in key concepts.” The point here 
is not to debate the merits of any one value over another, but 
to highlight the fundamental lack of consensus around key 
terms. Commendable values like “fairness” and “privacy” 
break down when subjected to scrutiny, leading to disparate 
visions and deeply incompatible goals.
What are some common AI principles? Despite the mush-
rooming of ethical statements, Floridi and Cowls [21] sug-
gest many values recur frequently and can be condensed 
into five core principles: beneficence, non-maleficence, 
autonomy, justice, and explicability. These ideals sound 
wonderful. After all, who could be against beneficence? 
However, problems immediately arise when we start to 
define what beneficence means. In the Montreal principles 
[77, p 545] for instance, “well-being” is the term used, sug-
gesting that AI development should promote the “well-being 
of all sentient creatures.” While laudable, clearly there are 
tensions to consider here. We might think, for instance, of 
how information technologies support certain conceptions of 
human flourishing by enabling communication and business 
transactions—while simultaneously contributing to carbon 
emissions, environmental degradation, and the climate crisis 
[33, 41, 52]. In other words, AI promotes the well-being of some creatures (humans) while actively undermining the 
well-being of others.
The same issue occurs with the Statement on Artificial 
Intelligence, Robotics, and Autonomous Systems [19]. In 
this Statement, beneficence is gestured to through the con-
cept of “sustainability,” asserting that AI must promote the 
basic preconditions for life on the planet. Few would argue 
directly against such a commendable aim. However, there 
are clearly wildly divergent views on how this goal should 
be achieved. Proponents of neoliberal interventions (free 
trade, globalization, deregulation) would argue that these 
interventions contribute to economic prosperity and in that 
sense sustain life on the planet. In fact, even the oil and gas 
industry champions the use of AI under the auspices of pro-
moting sustainability [16]. Sustainability, then, is a highly 
ambiguous or even intellectually empty term [3 , 40] that 
is wrapped around disparate activities and ideologies. In a 
sense, sustainability can mean whatever you need it to mean. 
Indeed, even one of the members of the European group 
denounced the guidelines as “lukewarm” and “deliberately 
vague,” stating they “glossed over difficult problems” like 
explainability with rhetoric [43].
If sustainability is ambiguous, so are many of the key 
terms used in AI ethics frameworks. Safety, well-being, 
autonomy, and justice are contested concepts and often shift 
in significant ways depending on the context. Privacy, for 
example, has long overflowed with competing and contradic-
tory definitions, with scholarship noting the lack of clarity 
and accepted consensus around their term [5 ]. Even the most 
influential conceptions of privacy characterize it as a big 
tent, housing a diverse group of interests and a diverse array 
of meanings [75]. Many key concepts in AI frameworks, 
then, are overburdened, brimming with contradictory mean-
ings. Floridi [20] has suggested that developers of AI may 
conduct ethics shopping, borrowing liberally from different 
frameworks to arrive at a set of easy-to-implement norms. 
However, the fuzziness of AI principles outlined above sug-
gests that this cynical mix-and-match approach may not even 
be necessary. Instead, terms like “beneficence” and “jus-
tice” can simply be defined in ways that suit, conforming to 
product features and business goals that have already been 
decided. Such ambiguity facilitates ethical “box ticking,” 
allowing a company to claim adherence to a set of princi-
ples or ideals without engaging in any meaningful degree of 
reflection or reconfiguration.
3  Isolated principles
AI development does not take place in a vacuum. The devel-
opment and adoption of technology is always highly social 
and cultural [27], embedded within a rich network of human 
and non-human actors [38]. This means that technology is