871 AI and Ethics (2023) 3:869–877 
1 3
influenced by existing practices and structures, whether 
that is company cultures or organizational norms [ 61]. To 
suggest that an AI model is “biased” and only needs to be 
tweaked is to adopt a far too narrow scope, missing out on 
broader or more systemic issues. As Lauer [39] suggests, 
“the failure to build ethical AI can be traced to an organiza-
tion-wide failure of ethics.” In this sense, the lack of mean-
ingful engagement with ethical issues from engineers is a 
symptom of a deeper problem. Unethical AI is the logical 
byproduct of an unethical industry.
The toxicity of tech culture and its propagation of sexism 
and misogyny is well documented [81]. This is a culture 
known for the hypermasculine coder or “brogrammer,” for 
using “booth babes” to attract attention at conventions, and 
for its celebrated company founders who regularly drop porn 
references [10]. One global ride-share company, renowned 
for its innovation and financial success, was long helmed by 
a man who penned a sex memo for a company celebration 
and who described his ability to pick up women as “boober” 
[50]. This type of activity, openly flaunted by some of the 
most worshiped companies and founders, has contributed 
to a highly misogynistic environment. In a survey of over 
200 female tech workers with over 10 year experiences in 
Silicon Valley, 60% of women reported unwanted sexual 
advances [80].
The same toxic conditions can be seen when it comes 
to race. A recent class action lawsuit has accused a widely 
celebrated tech company of fostering racist conditions 
for years, including daily subjection to racial slurs, being 
assigned menial jobs in a segregated area of the factory, 
and being passed over in promotions for management [63]. 
Or we might think of the ten page “anti-diversity” memo 
that circulated at another major tech company renowned for 
its work in artificial intelligence, a screed suggesting white 
men were being marginalized and oppressed [13]. Despite 
claims of being a postracial meritocracy, tech culture is still 
one marked by white, male, heteronormative values—and 
those who fail to conform to this identity are discriminated 
against in subtle but material ways [56].
If the tech industry lacks ethics, so does the education of 
the software engineers and technologists who will soon join 
it. Undergraduate data science degrees emphasize computer 
science and statistics but fall short in ethics training [ 59]. 
Software engineering, computer science, and other degrees 
that lead into AI development are tightly focused on tech-
nical challenges and their solutions. But there is little to 
no consideration of ethical challenges—how technology 
intersects with race, class, and culture and how these might 
introduce new harms or exacerbate existing inequalities [68]. 
Despite the clear ethical dilemmas presented by emerging 
technologies, García-Holgado et al. [ 23] have observed 
a lack of integration of computer ethics in the computer 
science curriculum in Spanish universities. Similarly in Australia, Gorur et al. [26] surveyed 12 curricula in univer -
sities, finding that they focused on micro-ethical concepts 
like professionalism while lacking macro-ethical agendas 
such as betterment of society and the planet. Ethics units 
are rarely included in computer science courses, and several 
of these are even shunted into the last few sessions if time 
allows [ 24], demonstrating the lowly status of ethics in AI 
education.
The lack of ethical training in education, combined with 
the lack of ethical application in the industry, suggests that 
AI development takes place in an ethically empty milieu. AI 
technologists cannot be said to be “unethical” because that 
would imply an awareness of ethical norms and a decision 
to actively ignore or violate them. Instead, these technolo-
gies are conceptualized, developed, and brought to market 
in an “a-ethical” space, a realm where ethical dilemmas 
never even enter the frame. In this sense, the problem-space 
considered when developing a technology is far too narrow, 
failing to encompass the ethical, moral, and social impacts 
of designing a product in a particular way [62]. Given these 
conditions, the presence of an AI code of ethics which 
is tightly focused on a digital product or service appears 
entirely insufficient. Such an ethical framework, situated 
“downstream” from company culture, will fail to address the 
more fundamental inequalities and underlying social issues 
that shape technological development.
4  Toothless principles
Finally, AI ethical principles have failed due to the lack of 
consequences. Rességuier and Rodrigues [69] argue that 
currently AI ethics has no teeth, and this is because ethics 
is being used in place of regulation. Ethics is being asked to 
do something it was never designed to do. AI ethical frame-
works can set normative ideals but lack the mechanisms to 
enforce compliance with these values and principles [69]. 
After surveying 22 sets of guidelines, Hagendorff [28] con-
cludes that AI ethics is failing on many levels; they lack any 
enforcement mechanisms and their values are easily over -
written by economic incentives, often becoming little more 
than marketing devices.
Principles are not “self-enforcing,” notes Calo [11], “and 
there are no tangible penalties to violating them.” In 2019, 
for instance, Google announced the creation of a new inde-
pendent body to review the company’s AI practices. The 
Advanced Technology External Advisory Council, com-
posed of philosophers, engineers, and policy experts, would 
review the company’s projects and evaluate whether they 
contravened their AI principles. However, the group would 
have no actual power to veto projects or halt them in any 
meaningful way [36].