872 AI and Ethics (2023) 3:869–877
1 3
The dominant focus on (toothless) ethics is a boon to 
technology companies, who have long attempted to outrun 
or avoid legislation. Uber outpaced regulation by expanding 
rapidly into cities across the globe with a business model 
designed to bypass labor responsibilities and protections 
[50]. Similarly, Airbnb swiftly expanded worldwide, run-
ning for years in major centers before eventually confronting 
regulation around house rental and hotels. When legislation 
does catch up, companies attempt to impede, resist, or over -
turn regulations, as high profile legal cases involving Apple, 
Google, Facebook, and others demonstrate.
Legislation takes time to draft, pass, and enforce, and 
in this sense, Nemitz [54] describes the focus on AI ethics 
and the subsequent deferral of regulation as a genius move 
by corporations. Placing the production of ethical state-
ments into the limelight allows tech operations to continue 
unchecked, unhindered by lawsuits, fines, or other penalties. 
Ochigame [57] concurs, asserting that ethical AI is “aligned 
strategically with a Silicon Valley effort seeking to avoid 
legally enforceable restrictions of controversial technolo-
gies.” Nemitz [54] thus calls for ethics to be swiftly followed 
by legislation: the law has democratic legitimacy and can be 
enforced, producing a credible threat that AI powerhouses 
would need to take into account.
Toothlessness is not just about lack of penalties, but 
also about the lack of friction between ethical principles 
and existing business principles. Green [ 27, p 209] sug -
gests that ethics is “vague and toothless” and is “subsumed 
into corporate logics and incentives.” Values listed in AI 
ethics statements and proposed by AI ethics organizations 
adhere closely to corporate values (or as the first section 
demonstrated, can be interpreted in ways that align with 
them). Such principles slot neatly into existing corporate 
playbooks, rarely questioning “the business culture, revenue 
models, or incentive mechanisms that continuously push 
these products into the markets” [31, 43]. The Partnership 
on AI, for instance, touts itself as a non-profit community 
of diverse stakeholders ranging from academia and civil 
society to industry and media. The implicit claim of such 
an organization is to give a voice to the people and in this 
way counter corporate overreach or at least keep it in check. 
However, Ochigame [57] observes that the Partnership’s 
recommendations “aligned consistently with the corporate 
agenda” and essentially served to legitimize the activity of 
AI powerhouses.
Toothlessness means that corporations can buffer their 
reputation by carrying out high profile work on ethical 
frameworks, confident in the fact that such ethics will not 
fundamentally alter their product affordances, organizational 
hierarchies, or quarterly earnings. In other words, companies 
can enjoy the appearance of ethics without the substance. 
Borrowing from the well-known concept of “green wash-
ing,” this phenomenon of “ethics washing” as a means of dodging regulation has risen to prominence in debates on 
AI ethics [20, 30, 43, 82].
5  The principles/practice gap
The failure of AI ethical principles is not spectacular but 
silent, resulting in the desired outcome: business as usual. In 
his AI Debate statement, Calo [11] highlights this paradox. 
AI is hailed as revolutionary, a transformation that will dis-
rupt work and life in myriad ways—and yet there has been 
significant resistance to updating legislation and regulation 
to manage this shift. The obsession with AI ethics perpetu-
ates this paradox, upholding the rhetoric of AI innovation 
while never allowing AI’s transformative potential to alter 
legal frameworks or impinge on technical operations in any 
meaningful way.
Business as usual suggests a gulf between ethical guide-
lines and practical implementation, a gap between principles 
and practice. This chasm becomes clear when we turn to the 
production environments where AI technologies are devel-
oped. Industry bodies such as the Association for Computing 
Machinery have adopted codes of ethics that are meant to 
guide and govern engineering practice. However, in a study 
of software engineering students and professional software 
developers, McNamara et al. [42] found that explicitly 
instructing developers to consider this ethical code had no 
discernible difference compared to a control group. Develop-
ers did not alter their established ways of working.
In another study, Vakkuri et al. [79] carried out interviews 
at five different companies which were involved in AI devel-
opment. While all the participants acknowledged the impor -
tance of ethics, when asked whether their AI development 
practices took ethics into account, all respondents answered 
no [79]. Building on this empirically based research, the 
authors suggest that there is a significant gap between the 
research and practice of AI ethics [71]. In a later study, Vak -
kuri et al. [78, p 195] specifically examined the attitudes 
of developers in software startup environments, concluding 
that there is a “complete ignorance of ethical consideration 
in AI endeavors.” Ethics, so lauded in the academy and the 
research institute, are shrugged off when entering the engi-
neering labs and developer studios where technologies are 
actually constructed.
Recognizing the current gap between AI principles and 
AI practice, researchers and companies have aimed to make 
ethical values feasible and actionable in real-world settings. 
There is a drive to bridge this ethics/practice gap [73], to 
operationalize AI ethics principles [12, 47] and to translate 
principles into practices [49]. High-minded normative state-
ments must be integrated in meaningful ways into datasets, 
production pipelines, and product features. Taking a cue 
from software-as-a-service, Morley et al. [48] suggest ethics