874 AI and Ethics (2023) 3:869–877
1 3
far from being “common sense,” fairness is always his-
torical and cultural with major racialized and gendered 
dimensions [83].
What might a commitment to AI justice look like in prac-
tice? At a concrete level, it may mean organizations engag-
ing with groups that bear the brunt of AI impacts but are 
not typically consulted: children, people of color, LGBT -
QIA + communities, migrants, and other groups. Those who 
develop AI need to better understand the particular needs of 
these communities, and then work with them in meaningful 
ways to ensure that AI contributes to their well-being and 
does not exacerbate historical inequities. Large tech compa -
nies and “tech-forward” governments particularly have a role 
to play here in leading by example and thus establishing a 
blueprint for best-practice AI work moving forward.
How else might AI justice manifest? Considering justice 
in AI more broadly might mean confronting the longstand-
ing relationship between capitalism and computation [4 ], 
recognizing the extent to which technologies have margin-
alized women [32], or considering the knowledge-systems 
that have been privileged and the indigenous epistemologies 
that have been ignored [74]. One specific strain of work has 
begun to think more concretely about ways to decolonise 
AI, unraveling histories of inequality and asymmetric sys -
tems of power [46]. However, this work is nascent and it 
remains unclear how AI technologies might be decolonised 
or even what that might entail [1 ]. This is difficult work 
that may entail acknowledging privilege, confronting cor -
porate assumptions, or developing community consensus. 
In contrast to the prominent work on AI principles, Bender 
[6] suggests that this work of reversing power centralization 
and longstanding systems of oppression is harder and less 
trendy—but work on ethical AI is useless without it.
If AI justice and its invitation to broaden our ethical hori-
zon is one approach, the other, in essence, is to think more 
narrowly. Such work does not invoke the grand scope of AI 
ethics, but often uses more mundane but better-understood 
terms: accuracy, alignment, mismatch, and impacts. The 
work of Timnit Gebru and her colleagues is exemplary in 
this regard. If facial analysis misclassifies subjects because 
the datasets are dominated by light-skinned subjects, then 
this problem might be partially diagnosed and addressed 
by introducing a new dataset balanced by gender and skin 
type [9 ]. If the provenance and origins or datasets used in 
AI productions are often obscured, then this problem could 
be mitigated through “datasheets,” standard documents that 
lay out a datasets creation, collection method, limitations, 
recommended uses, and so on [25].
This is granular work or even gruntwork, the less spec-
tacular labor that digs into the data infrastructures and digi-
tal substrates of machine learning and AI production. AI, 
after all, is material not magical, cobbled together from 
datasets, software libraries, engineering expertise and hardware-accelerated computation. As Joanna Bryson [7 ] 
reminds us, AI and machine learning occurs through design 
and produces a material artifact; auditing, governance, and 
legislation should be applied to correct sloppy or inadequate 
manufacturing, just as we do with other products. The basic 
idea across this strain of research is to make concrete pro-
gress in improving AI by breaking the often nebulous con-
cept of “ethics” down into measurable metrics and discrete 
goals.
Two aims emerge when surveying this work. First, there 
is transparency. This is the ability to see how a system oper -
ates, to grasp what its assumptions are, and to understand 
how it responds to different contexts and situations. Over -
sight and auditing are key terms within this theme. As one 
example, Raji et al. [67] have proposed an end-to-end frame-
work for AI production. The system would allow developers 
to audit their work at each stage and see how well it matches 
organizational principles. Such tools aim to provide better 
oversight about the kinds of decisions that are being made 
and the kinds of (potentially harmful) consequences that 
may result. In a similar vein, Mitchell et al. [44] propose 
model cards for model reporting. These short documents 
would accompany trained machine learning models and 
provide benchmarked evaluation. Such tools would allow 
developers to see how the model responds across a variety of 
different conditions, analyzing, for example, its performance 
across different demographic or phenotypic groups.
Once we can understand what is wrong with a model 
or system, we need an ability to act on this information. 
Transparency must then be accompanied by accountability. 
Recourse, responsibility, and governance are key terms here. 
There needs to be clearly defined lines of accountability and 
both producers and consumers of technology must have the 
ability to meaningfully address harmful AI technologies. 
Redressing these harms might entail redesigning a product, 
consulting members of a community, or halting an AI ser -
vice altogether. And accountability must be backed up by 
enforcement: lawsuits, fines, or banning from a particular 
jurisdiction. Such aims suggest a place for conventional gov -
ernance structures using managerial hierarchies and humans 
in the loop to identify responsibility within an organization 
[8]. Equally, however, they suggest grassroot efforts that aim 
to redress harms by reimagining data and models in ways 
that better suit the needs of a particular community [71].
Taken together, these alternative approaches of thinking 
more broadly and more narrowly suggest that many different 
stakeholders have a part to play in reshaping AI. Designers 
and developers are able to code up particular affordances and 
integrate them into digital products and platforms. Managers 
can take the lead in implementing testing and auditing librar -
ies. Business and community leaders can establish cultures 
which are reflective and open to forms of critical question-
ing and exploration. Governments can create new policy