Vol.:(0123456789)1 3AI and Ethics (2023) 3:869–877 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s43681-022-00209-w
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
The uselessness of AI ethics
Luke Munn1 
Received: 6 June 2022 / Accepted: 2 August 2022 / Published online: 23 August 2022 
© The Author(s) 2022
Abstract
As the awareness of AI’s power and danger has risen, the dominant response has been a turn to ethical principles. A flood 
of AI guidelines and codes of ethics have been released in both the public and private sector in the last several years. How -
ever, these are meaningless principles which are contested or incoherent, making them difficult to apply; they are isolated 
principles situated in an industry and education system which largely ignores ethics; and they are toothless principles which 
lack consequences and adhere to corporate agendas. For these reasons, I argue that AI ethical principles are useless, failing 
to mitigate the racial, social, and environmental damages of AI technologies in any meaningful sense. The result is a gap 
between high-minded principles and technological practice. Even when this gap is acknowledged and principles seek to be 
“operationalized,” the translation from complex social concepts to technical rulesets is non-trivial. In a zero-sum world, 
the dominant turn to AI principles is not just fruitless but a dangerous distraction, diverting immense financial and human 
resources away from potentially more effective activity. I conclude by highlighting alternative approaches to AI justice that go 
beyond ethical principles: thinking more broadly about systems of oppression and more narrowly about accuracy and auditing.
Keywords AI · Artificial intelligence · Ethics · Ethical principles · Morality · Social ills · Research
1 Introduction
Artificial intelligence technologies are increasingly being 
deployed in a range of sectors, from healthcare to human 
resources, education, agriculture, manufacturing, and law 
enforcement. However, as the pervasiveness of AI grows, 
so does its capacity to damage lives and livelihoods. Within 
welfare and social support systems, automated decision 
making systems can exacerbate inequality and punish the 
poor [18]. Racialized assumptions can be embedded in infor -
mation infrastructures, perpetuating stereotypes and preju-
dice [55]. Data-driven models can be opaque and biased, 
making detrimental choices in high stakes areas and under -
mining democratic and egalitarian conditions [60]. And all 
of these technologies operate on people and spaces that are 
already economically and socially stratified [51], elevating 
the importance and the difficulty of operating in ways that 
contribute to human rights and dignity. The promises of AI 
have been tempered by its potential for harm [64].As the awareness of AI’s power and danger has risen, 
the dominant response has been a turn to AI ethics—ethics 
being understood here in the narrow but well-established 
sense as “a set of moral principles” according to both the 
OED and Merriam-Webster dictionaries. The public and 
private sectors have released guidelines, frameworks, and 
principles that are meant to apply when creating new AI 
technology. Over 50 of these have been issued by govern-
ment agencies, including national frameworks produced by 
the UK, the USA, Japan, China, India, Mexico, Australia, 
and New Zealand, amongst others [69]. There are the Beijing 
AI Principles, DeepMind’s Ethics, and Society Principles 
[15], IEEE’s Ethically Aligned Design [34], the Guidelines 
for Artificial Intelligence by Deutsche Telekom [ 17], and 
the Vatican AI Principles known as the Rome Call for AI 
Ethics [65]. Indeed, the list of AI Principles at AI Ethicist 
now stretches to over 80 entries, with more being constantly 
added [2 ].
This article argues that this deluge of AI ethical princi-
ples is largely useless. While this view is provocative, it is 
hardly alone: a growing sea of voices have begun critiquing 
the de-facto turn to AI ethical principles as ineffective [39, 
48, 69, 78]. In the first three sections, I lay out three causes 
for this failure: meaningless principles, isolated principles,  * Luke Munn 
 luke.munn@gmail.com
1 Institute for Culture and Society, Western Sydney University, 
Sydney, NSW, Australia