Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
A A CKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We gratefully acknowledge the support of Google, which provided us with access to the TPU resources
necessary to conduct experiments on ImageNet and WMT through the TensorFlow Research Cloud.
In particular, we express our gratitude to Zak Stone.
We gratefully acknowledge the support of IBM, which provided us with access to the GPU resources
necessary to conduct experiments on CIFAR-10 through the MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab. In particular,
we express our gratitude to David Cox and John Cohn.
This work was supported in part by cloud credits from the MIT Quest for Intelligence.
This work was supported in part by the Ofﬁce of Naval Research (ONR N00014-17-1-2699).
This work was supported in part by DARPA Award #HR001118C0059.
B A PPENDIX TABLE OF CONTENTS
Appendix C. We describe the state-of-the-art baselines that we compare against in Section 3.
Appendix D. We evaluate other retraining methods using the algorithm described in Section 5.
Appendix E. We extend the results in the main body of the paper to include more networks, pruning
techniques, baselines, and ablations.
Appendix F. We discuss theoretical speedup via FLOP reduction, rather than just compression.
C S TATE -OF-THE-ARTBASELINES
In Sections 3 and 5, we compare rewinding against state-of-the-art techniques from the literature. In
this section, we describe the techniques we compare against. We speciﬁcally consider the techniques
from the literature on the Pareto frontier of the ACCURACY versus PARAMETER -EFFICIENCY curve,
where ACCURACY is measured as relative loss in accuracy to the original network, and PARAMETER -
EFFICIENCY is measured by compression ratio. As there is no consensus on the deﬁnition of
state-of-the-art in the pruning literature, we base our search on techniques listed in Ortiz et al. (2020).
CIFAR-10 ResNet-56: Carreira-Perpi ˜n´an & Idelbayev (2018). For the CIFAR-10 ResNet-56, we
compare against “Learning Compression” (Carreira-Perpi ˜n´an & Idelbayev, 2018). This technique is
selected as the most accurate technique at high sparsities, from Ortiz et al. (2020).
Carreira-Perpi ˜n´an & Idelbayev (2018) use unstructured gradual global magnitude pruning, derived
from an alternating optimization formulation of the gradual pruning process which allows for weights
to be reintroduced after being pruned. The pruning schedule is a hyperparameter, and the paper does
not explain how the chosen value was found. After gradual pruning, Carreira-Perpi ˜n´an & Idelbayev
ﬁne-tune the remaining weights.
ImageNet ResNet-50: He et al. (2018). For the ImageNet ResNet-50, we compare against AMC (He
et al., 2018). This technique is not listed in Ortiz et al. (2020), but achieves less reduction in accuracy
at a higher sparsity than other techniques, losing 0:02% top-1 accuracy at 5:13compression.
He et al. iteratively prune a ResNet-50, using manually selected per-iteration pruning rates (pruning
by50%, then 35%, then 25%, then 20%, resulting in a network that is 80:5%sparse, a compression
ratio of 5:13), and retrain with ﬁne-tuning for 30 epochs per iteration. On each pruning iteration,
He et al. use a reinforcement-learning approach to determine layerwise pruning rates.
WMT16 EN-DE GNMT: Zhu & Gupta (2018). For the WMT16 EN-DE GNMT model, we
compare against Zhu & Gupta (2018). This technique is not listed in Ortiz et al. (2020), as Ortiz et al.
do not consider the GNMT model. To conﬁrm that this technique is state-of-the-art on the GNMT
model, we extensively searched among papers citing Zhu & Gupta (2018) and Wu et al. (2016) and
found no results claiming a better A CCURACY versus P ARAMETER -EFFICIENCY tradeoff curve.
Zhu & Gupta search across multiple pruning techniques, and ultimately use a pruning technique
that prunes each layer at an equal rate, excluding the attention layers. Zhu & Gupta use a training
13