Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
COMPARING REWINDING AND FINE-TUNING
INNEURAL NETWORK PRUNING
Alex Renda
MIT CSAIL
renda@csail.mit.eduJonathan Frankle
MIT CSAIL
jfrankle@csail.mit.eduMichael Carbin
MIT CSAIL
mcarbin@csail.mit.edu
ABSTRACT
Many neural network pruning algorithms proceed in three steps: train the network
to completion, remove unwanted structure to compress the network, and retrain
the remaining structure to recover lost accuracy. The standard retraining technique,
ﬁne-tuning , trains the unpruned weights from their ﬁnal trained values using a
small ﬁxed learning rate. In this paper, we compare ﬁne-tuning to alternative
retraining techniques. Weight rewinding (as proposed by Frankle et al. (2019)),
rewinds unpruned weights to their values from earlier in training and retrains
them from there using the original training schedule. Learning rate rewinding
(which we propose) trains the unpruned weights from their ﬁnal values using
the same learning rate schedule as weight rewinding. Both rewinding techniques
outperform ﬁne-tuning, forming the basis of a network-agnostic pruning algorithm
that matches the accuracy and compression ratios of several more network-speciﬁc
state-of-the-art techniques.
1 I NTRODUCTION
Pruning is a set of techniques for removing weights, ﬁlters, neurons, or other structures from neural
networks (e.g., Le Cun et al., 1990; Reed, 1993; Han et al., 2015; Li et al., 2017; Liu et al., 2019).
Pruning can compress standard networks across a variety of tasks, including computer vision and
natural language processing, while maintaining the accuracy of the original network. Doing so can
reduce the parameter count and resource demands of neural network inference by decreasing storage
requirements, energy consumption, and latency (Han, 2017).
We identify two classes of pruning techniques in the literature. One class, exempliﬁed by regulariza-
tion(Louizos et al., 2018) and gradual pruning (Zhu & Gupta, 2018; Gale et al., 2019), prunes the
network throughout the standard training process, producing a pruned network by the end of training.
The other class, exempliﬁed by retraining (Han et al., 2015), prunes after the standard training process.
Speciﬁcally, when parts of the network are removed during the pruning step, accuracy typically
decreases (Han et al., 2015). It is therefore standard to retrain the pruned network to recover accuracy.
Pruning and retraining can be repeated iteratively until a target sparsity or accuracy threshold is
met; doing so often results in higher accuracy than pruning in one shot (Han et al., 2015). A single
iteration of the retraining based pruning algorithm proceeds as follows (Liu et al., 2019):
1. T RAIN the network to completion.
2. P RUNE structures of the network, chosen according to some heuristic.
3. R ETRAIN the network for some time ( tepochs) to recover the accuracy lost from pruning.
The most common retraining technique, ﬁne-tuning , trains the pruned weights for a further tepochs
at a ﬁxed learning rate (Han et al., 2015), often the ﬁnal learning rate from training (Liu et al., 2019).
Work on the lottery ticket hypothesis introduces a new retraining technique, weight rewinding (Frankle
et al., 2019), although Frankle et al. do not evaluate it as such. The lottery ticket hypothesis proposes
that early in training, sparse subnetworks emerge that can train in isolation to the same accuracy
as the original network (Frankle & Carbin, 2019). To ﬁnd such subnetworks, Frankle et al. (2019)
propose training to completion and pruning (steps 1 and 2 above) and then rewinding the unpruned
1arXiv:2003.02389v1  [cs.LG]  5 Mar 2020