Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
weights by setting their values back to what they were earlier in training. If this pruned and rewound
subnetwork trains to the same accuracy as the original network (reusing the original learning rate
schedule), then—for their purposes—this validates that such trainable subnetworks exist early in
training. For our purposes, this rewinding and retraining technique is simply another approach for
retraining after pruning. The selection of where to rewind the weights to is controlled by the retraining
timet; retraining for tepochs entails rewinding to tepochs before the end of training.
We also propose a new variation of weight rewinding, learning rate rewinding . While weight
rewinding rewinds both the weights and the learning rate, learning rate rewinding rewinds only the
learning rate, continuing to train the weights from their values at the end of training (like ﬁne-tuning).
This is similar to the learning rate schedule used by cyclical learning rates (Smith, 2017).
In this paper, we compare ﬁne-tuning, weight rewinding, and learning rate rewinding as retraining
techniques after pruning. We evaluate these techniques according to three criteria:
ACCURACY The accuracy of the resulting pruned network.
EFFICIENCY The resources required to represent or execute the pruned network.
SEARCH COST The cost to ﬁnd the pruned network (i.e., the amount of retraining required).
The goal of neural network pruning is to increase EFFICIENCY while maintaining ACCURACY . In
this paper we speciﬁcally study PARAMETER -EFFICIENCY , the parameter count of the pruned neural
network.1We also evaluate the SEARCH COST of ﬁnding the pruned network, measured as the
number of epochs for which the network is retrained.
We compare the pruning and retraining techniques evaluated in this paper against pruning algorithms
from the literature that are shown to be state-of-the-art by Ortiz et al. (2020). These state-of-the-art
algorithms are complex to use, requiring network-speciﬁc hyperparameters (Carreira-Perpi ˜n´an &
Idelbayev, 2018; Zhu & Gupta, 2018) or reinforcement learning (He et al., 2018).
Contributions.
We show that retraining with weight rewinding outperforms retraining with ﬁne-tuning across
networks and datasets. When rewinding to anywhere within a wide range of points through-
out training, weight rewinding is a drop-in replacement for ﬁne-tuning that achieves higher
ACCURACY for equivalent S EARCH COST.
We propose a simpliﬁcation of weight rewinding, learning rate rewinding , which rewinds the
learning rate schedule but not the weights. Learning rate rewinding matches or outperforms
weight rewinding in all scenarios.
We propose a pruning algorithm based on learning rate rewinding with network-agnostic
hyperparameters that matches state-of-the-art tradeoffs between ACCURACY andPARAMETER -
EFFICIENCY across networks and datasets. The algorithm proceeds as follows: 1) train to
completion, 2) globally prune the 20% of weights with the lowest magnitudes, 3) retrain with
learning rate rewinding for the full original training time, and 4) iteratively repeat steps 2 and 3
until the desired sparsity is reached.
We ﬁnd that weight rewinding can nearly match the ACCURACY of this proposed pruning
algorithm, meaning that lottery tickets found by pruning and rewinding are state-of-the-art
pruned networks.
We show that learning rate rewinding outperforms the standard practice of ﬁne-tuning without
requiring any network-speciﬁc hyperparameters in all settings that we study. This technique forms
the basis of a simple, state-of-the-art pruning algorithm that we propose as a valuable baseline for
future research and as a compelling default choice for pruning in practice.
2 M ETHODOLOGY
In this paper, we evaluate weight rewinding and learning rate rewinding as retraining techniques.
We therefore do not consider regularization or gradual pruning techniques, except when comparing
against state-of-the-art. Creating a retraining based pruning algorithm involves instantiating each
1We discuss other instantiations of E FFICIENCY , such as FLOPs, in Section 6 and Appendix F.
2