Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
accuracy than that of the standard ﬁne-tuning schedule. We hope that further work on the optimization
of sparse neural networks can shed light on why learning rate rewinding achieves higher accuracy than
standard ﬁne-tuning and can help derive other techniques for the training of sparse networks (Smith,
2017; Dettmers & Zettlemoyer, 2019).
The retraining techniques we consider reuse the hyperparameters from the original training process.
This choice inherently narrows the design space of retraining techniques by coupling the learning rate
schedule of retraining to that of the original training process. There may be further opportunities to
improve performance by decoupling the hyperparameters of training and retraining and considering
other retraining learning rate schedules. However, these potential opportunities come with the cost of
added hyperparameter search.
SEARCH COST.Achieving state-of-the-art ACCURACY versus PARAMETER -EFFICIENCY tradeoffs
with our pruning algorithm requires substantial SEARCH COST. Our pruning algorithm requires
T(1 +k)total training epochs to reach compression ratio 1=0:8k, where Tis the original network
training time, and kis the number of pruning iterations. In contrast, on CIFAR-10 ( T= 182 epochs )
Carreira-Perpi ˜n´an & Idelbayev (2018) employ a gradual pruning technique followed by ﬁne-tuning,
training for a total of 317epochs to reach any compression ratio. On ImageNet ( T= 90 epochs ),
He et al. (2018) retrain the ResNet-50 for 376epochs to match the accuracy of the original network
at5:13compression. On WMT-16 ( T= 5epochs), Zhu & Gupta (2018) use a gradual pruning
technique that trains and prunes over the course of about 11epochs to reach any compression ratio.
TheSEARCH COSTS of these other methods do not take into account the per-network hyperparameter
search that each method required to ﬁnd the settings that produced the reported results, nor the cost
of the pruning heuristics themselves (e.g., training a reinforcement learning agent to predict pruning
rates). In addition to optimizing ACCURACY andPARAMETER -EFFICIENCY , we believe that pruning
research should also consider S EARCH COST (including hyperparameter search and training time).
EFFICIENCY .In this paper we study PARAMETER -EFFICIENCY : the number of parameters in the
network. This provides a notion of scale of the network (Rosenfeld et al., 2020) and can serve as an
input for theoretical analyses (Arora et al., 2018). There are other useful forms of EFFICIENCY that
we do not study in this paper. One commonly studied form is INFERENCE -EFFICIENCY , the cost of
performing inference with the pruned network. This is often measured in ﬂoating point operations
(FLOPs) or wall clock time (Han, 2017; Han et al., 2016a). In Sections 3 and 4, we demonstrate
that both rewinding techniques outperform ﬁne-tuning after structured pruning (which explicitly
targets INFERENCE -EFFICIENCY ). In Appendix F, we show that iterative unstructured pruning and
retraining with either rewinding technique results in networks that require fewer FLOPs to execute
than those found by iterative unstructured pruning and retraining with ﬁne-tuning.
Other forms of EFFICIENCY include STORAGE -EFFICIENCY (Han et al., 2016b), COMMUNICATION -
EFFICIENCY (Alistarh et al., 2017), and E NERGY -EFFICIENCY (Yang et al., 2017).
The Lottery Ticket Hypothesis. Weight rewinding was ﬁrst proposed by work on the lottery ticket
hypothesis (Frankle & Carbin, 2019; Frankle et al., 2019), which studies the existence of sparse
subnetworks that can train in isolation to full accuracy from near initialization. We present the ﬁrst
detailed comparison between the performance of these lottery ticket networks and pruned networks
generated by standard ﬁne-tuning. From this perspective, our results show that the sparse, lottery
ticket networks that Frankle et al. (2019) uncover from early in training using weight rewinding can
train to full accuracy at compression ratios that are competitive for pruned networks in general.
7 C ONCLUSION
We ﬁnd that both weight rewinding and learning rate rewinding outperform ﬁne-tuning as techniques
for retraining after pruning. When we perform iterative unstructured pruning and retrain with learning
rate rewinding for the full original training time, we match the ACCURACY versus PARAMETER -
EFFICIENCY tradeoffs of more complex techniques requiring network-speciﬁc hyperparameters. We
believe that this algorithm is a valuable baseline for future research and a compelling default choice
for pruning in practice.
10