Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
2.5 M ETRICS
We evaluate a pruned network according to three criteria.
ACCURACY is the performance of the pruned network on unseen data from the same distribution as
the training set (i.e., the validation or test set). Higher accuracy values indicate better performance,
and a typical goal is to match the accuracy of the unpruned network. All plots show the median,
minimum, and maximum test accuracies reached across three different training runs.
For vision networks, we use 20% of the original test set, selected at random, as the validation set;
the remainder of the original test set is used to report test accuracies. For WMT16 EN-DE, we use
newstest2014 as the validation set (following Wu et al., 2016), and newstest2015 as the test
set (following Zhu & Gupta, 2018).
EFFICIENCY is the resources required to represent or perform inference with the pruned network. This
can take multiple forms. We study PARAMETER -EFFICIENCY , the parameter count of the network.
We speciﬁcally measure PARAMETER -EFFICIENCY relative to the full network with the compression
ratio of the pruned network. For instance, if the pruned network has 5%of weights remaining, then
its compression ratio is 20. Higher compression ratios indicate better PARAMETER -EFFICIENCY .
We discuss other instantiations of E FFICIENCY in Section 6 and Appendix F
SEARCH COST is the computational resources required to ﬁnd the pruning mask and retrain the
remaining weights. We approximate SEARCH COST using retraining time , the total number of
additional retraining epochs. Fewer retraining epochs indicates a lower SEARCH COST. Note that this
metric does not consider speedup from retraining pruned networks. For instance, a network pruned to
20compression may be faster to retrain than if only pruned to 2compression.
3 A CCURACY VERSUS PARAMETER -EFFICIENCY TRADEOFF
In this section, we consider the Pareto frontier of the tradeoff between ACCURACY andPARAMETER -
EFFICIENCY using each retraining technique, without regard for SEARCH COST. In other words,
we study the highest accuracy each retraining technique can achieve at each compression ratio.
We ﬁnd that weight rewinding can achieve higher accuracy than ﬁne-tuning across compression
ratios on all studied networks and datasets. We further ﬁnd that learning rate rewinding matches or
outperforms weight rewinding in all scenarios. With iterative unstructured pruning, learning rate
rewinding achieves state-of-the-art ACCURACY versus PARAMETER -EFFICIENCY tradeoffs, and
weight rewinding remains close.
Methodology. For each retraining technique, network, and compression ratio, we select the setting
of retraining time with the highest validation accuracy and plot the corresponding test accuracy.
One-shot pruning results. Figure 1 presents the results for one-shot pruning. At low compression
ratios (when all techniques match the accuracy of the unpruned network), there is little differentiation
between the techniques. However, learning rate rewinding typically results in higher accuracy
than the unpruned network, whereas other techniques only match the original accuracy. At higher
compression ratios (when no techniques match the unpruned network accuracy), there is more
differentiation between the techniques, with ﬁne-tuning losing more accuracy than either rewinding
technique. Weight rewinding outperforms ﬁne-tuning in all scenarios. Learning rate rewinding in
turn outperforms weight rewinding by a small margin.
Iterative pruning results. Figure 2 presents the results for iterative unstructured pruning. As a basis
for comparison, we also plot the drop in accuracy achieved by state-of-the-art techniques (as described
in Appendix C and shown to be state-of-the-art by Ortiz et al. (2020)) as individual black dots. In
iterative pruning, weight rewinding continues to outperform ﬁne-tuning, and learning rate rewinding
continues to outperform weight rewinding. Learning rate rewinding matches the ACCURACY versus
PARAMETER -EFFICIENCY tradeoffs of state-of-the-art techniques across all datasets. In particular,
learning rate rewinding with iterative unstructured pruning produces a ResNet-50 that matches the
accuracy of the original network at 5:96compression, to the best of our knowledge a new state-
of-the-art ResNet-50 compression ratio with no drop in accuracy. Weight rewinding nearly matches
these state-of-the-art results, with the exception of high compression ratios on GNMT.
5