Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
4 A CCURACY VERSUS SEARCH COST TRADEOFF
In this section, we consider the tradeoff between ACCURACY andSEARCH COSTfor each retraining
technique across a selection of compression ratios. In other words, we consider each method’s
ACCURACY given a ﬁxed SEARCH COST. We show that both rewinding techniques achieve higher
accuracy than ﬁne-tuning for a variety of different retraining times t(corresponding to different
SEARCH COSTS ). Therefore, in many contexts either rewinding technique can serve as a drop-in
replacement for ﬁne-tuning and achieve higher accuracy. Moreover, we ﬁnd that using learning rate
rewinding and retraining for the full training time of the original network leads to the highest accuracy
among all tested retraining techniques, simplifying the hyperparameter search process.
Methodology. Figures 3 (unstructured pruning) and 4 (structured pruning) show the accuracy of
each retraining technique as we vary the amount of retraining time; that is, the tradeoff between
ACCURACY andSEARCH COST. Each plot shows this tradeoff at a speciﬁc compression ratio. The
left column shows comparisons for No Accuracy Drop , which we deﬁne as the highest compression
ratio at which any retraining technique can match the accuracy of the original network for any amount
ofSEARCH COST. The right column shows comparisons for 1%/1 BLEU Accuracy Drop , which we
deﬁne as the highest compression ratio at which any retraining technique gets within 1%accuracy
or1BLEU of the original network. We include similar plots for all tested compression ratios in
Appendix E. All results presented in this section are for one-shot pruning; Appendix E also includes
iterative pruning results, which exhibit the same trends.
Unstructured pruning results. Both rewinding techniques almost always match or outperform ﬁne-
tuning for equivalent retraining epochs. The sole exception is using weight rewinding and retraining
for the full original training time, thereby rewinding the weights to the beginning of training: Frankle
et al. (2019) show that accuracy drops if weights are rewound too close to initialization, and we ﬁnd
the same behavior here. We deﬁne the rewinding safe zone as the maximal region (as a percentage of
original training time) across all networks in which both forms of rewinding outperform ﬁne-tuning
for an equivalent SEARCH COST. This zone (shaded gray in Figure 3) occurs when retraining for
25% to90% of the original training time. Within this region, either rewinding technique can serve as
a drop-in replacement for ﬁne-tuning.
With learning rate rewinding, retraining for longer almost always results in higher accuracy. The
same is true for weight rewinding other than when weights are rewound to near the beginning of
training. On most networks and compression ratios, accuracy from rewinding saturates after retraining
for roughly half of the original training time: while accuracy can continue to increase with more
retraining, this gain is limited.
Structured pruning results. Structured pruning exhibits the same trends as unstructured pruning,7
except that retraining with weight rewinding does not result in a drop in accuracy when retraining
for the full training time (thereby rewinding to the beginning of training). This is consistent with
the ﬁndings of Liu et al. (2019), who show that ﬁne-tuning after structured pruning provides no
accuracy advantage over reinitializing and training the pruned network from scratch. Liu et al. (2019)
indicate that initialization is less consequential for retraining after structured pruning than for it is for
retraining after unstructured pruning. Since weight rewinding and learning rate rewinding only differ
in initialization before retraining, we expect and observe that they achieve similar accuracies when
used for retraining after structured pruning.
Takeaway. Both weight rewinding and learning rate rewinding outperform ﬁne-tuning across a
wide range of retraining times, thereby serving as drop-in replacements that achieve higher accuracy
anywhere within the rewinding safe zone. To achieve the most accurate network, retrain with learning
rate rewinding for the full original training time (although accuracy saturates after retraining for about
half of the original training time).
7On the CIFAR-10 ResNet-56 Structured-B at 1%Accuracy Drop, we ﬁnd that learning rate rewinding
reaches lower accuracy than ﬁne-tuning when retraining for 30 epochs. At this retraining time, the techniques are
identical: the learning rate in the last 30 epochs of training, which learning rate rewinding uses, is the same as
the ﬁnal learning rate, which ﬁne-tuning uses. The observed accuracy difference at that point therefore appears
to be a result of random noise, and is not characteristic of the retraining techniques.
7