Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
GEOM -GCN: G EOMETRIC GRAPH CONVOLUTIONAL
NETWORKS
Hongbin Pei1;5;
peihb15@mails.jlu.edu.cnBingzhe Wei2
bwei6@illinois.edu
Kevin Chen-Chuan Chang2;3
kcchang@illinois.eduYu Lei4
csylei@comp.polyu.edu.hkBo Yang1;5;y
ybo@jlu.edu.cn
1College of Computer Science and Technology, Jilin University, China
2Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, USA
3Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, USA
4Department of Computing, Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong
5Key Laboratory of Symbolic Computation and Knowledge Engineering of Ministry of Education, China
ABSTRACT
Message-passing neural networks (MPNNs) have been successfully applied to
representation learning on graphs in a variety of real-world applications. However,
two fundamental weaknesses of MPNNs’ aggregators limit their ability to repre-
sent graph-structured data: losing the structural information of nodes in neigh-
borhoods and lacking the ability to capture long-range dependencies in disassor-
tative graphs. Few studies have noticed the weaknesses from different perspec-
tives. From the observations on classical neural network and network geometry,
we propose a novel geometric aggregation scheme for graph neural networks to
overcome the two weaknesses. The behind basic idea is the aggregation on a
graph can beneﬁt from a continuous space underlying the graph. The proposed
aggregation scheme is permutation-invariant and consists of three modules, node
embedding, structural neighborhood, and bi-level aggregation. We also present
an implementation of the scheme in graph convolutional networks, termed Geom-
GCN, to perform transductive learning on graphs. Experimental results show the
proposed Geom-GCN achieved state-of-the-art performance on a wide range of
open datasets of graphs.
1 I NTRODUCTION
Message-passing neural networks (MPNNs), such as GNN (Scarselli et al., 2008), ChebNet (Deffer-
rard et al., 2016), GG-NN (Li et al., 2016), GCN (Kipf & Welling, 2017), are powerful for learning
on graphs with various applications ranging from brain networks to online social network (Gilmer
et al., 2017; Wang et al., 2019). In a layer of MPNNs, each node sends its feature representation, a
“message”, to the nodes in its neighborhood; and then updates its feature representation by aggregat-
ing all “messages” received from the neighborhood. The neighborhood is often deﬁned as the set of
adjacent nodes in graph. By adopting permutation-invariant aggregation functions (e.g., summation,
maximum, and mean), MPNNs are able to learn representations which are invariant to isomorphic
graphs, i.e., graphs that are topologically identical.
Although existing MPNNs have been successfully applied in a wide variety of scenarios, two fun-
damental weaknesses of MPNNs’ aggregators limit their ability to represent graph-structured data.
Firstly, the aggregators lose the structural information of nodes in neighborhoods . Permutation in-
variance is an essential requirement for any graph learning method. To meet it, existing MPNNs
adopt permutation-invariant aggregation functions which treat all “messages” from neighborhood as
This work is conducted partially during his visit at University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.
yCorresponding author.
1arXiv:2002.05287v2  [cs.LG]  14 Feb 2020