Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
Proof. LetG0be an isomorphic graph of Gafter a permutation  , as deﬁned in Deﬁnition 1. If
2(G)is permutation-invariant, we have 2(G) =2(G0). Therefore, the entire composite function
12(G)is permutation-invariant because 12(G) =12(G0).
Theorem 1. Given a graphG= (V;E)and its structural neighborhood N(v);8v2V, the bi-level
aggregation, Eq. 1, is a permutation-invariant mapping of graph.
Proof. The bi-level aggregation, Eq. 1, is a composite function, where the low-level aggregation
is the input of the high-level aggregation. Thus, Eq. 1 is permutation-invariant if the low-level
aggregation is permutation-invariant according to Lemma 1.
We then prove that the low-level aggregation is permutation-invariant. The low-level aggregation
consists of 2jRjsub-aggregations, each of which is corresponding to the nodes in a neighborhood i
and with a relationship rtov. Firstly, the input of each sub-aggregations is permutation-invariant be-
cause bothi2fg;sgandr2Rare determined by the given structural neighborhood N(v);8v2V,
which is constant for any permutation. Secondly, Eq. 1 adopts a permutation-invariant aggregation
functionpfor the sub-aggregations. Thus the low-level aggregation is permutation-invariant.
2.1 C OMPARISONS TO RELATED WORK
We now discuss how the proposed geometric aggregation scheme overcomes the two aforementioned
weaknesses, i.e., how it effectively models the structural information and captures the long-range
dependencies, in comparison to some closely related works.
To overcome the ﬁrst weakness of MPNNs, i.e., losing the structural information of nodes in neigh-
borhoods, the proposed scheme explicitly models the structural information by exploiting the ge-
ometric relationship between nodes in latent space and then extracting the information effectively
by using the bi-level aggregations. In contrast, several existing works attempt to learn some im-
plicit structure-like information to distinguish different neighbors when aggregating features. For
example, GAT (Velickovic et al., 2017), LGCL (Gao et al., 2018) and GG-NN (Li et al., 2016) learn
weights on “messages” from different neighbors by using attention mechanisms and node and/or
edge attributes. CCN (Kondor et al., 2018) utilizes a covariance architecture to learn structure-aware
representations. The major difference between these works and ours is that we offer an explicit and
interpretable way to model the structural information of nodes in neighborhood, with the assistance
of the geometry in a latent space. We note that our work is orthogonal with existing methods and
thus can be readily incorporated to further improve their performance. In particular, we exploit geo-
metric relationships from the aspect of graph topology , while other methods focus on that of feature
representation – the two aspects are complementary.
For the second weakness of MPNNs, i.e., lacking the ability to capture long-range dependencies,
the proposed scheme models the long-range dependencies in disassortative graphs in two different
ways. First of all, the distant (but similar) nodes in the graph can be mapped into a latent-space-
based neighborhood of the target node, and then their useful feature representations can be used for
aggregations. This way depends on an appropriate embedding method, which is able to preserve
the similarities between the distant nodes and the target node. On the other hand, the structural
information enables the method to distinguish different nodes in a graph-based neighborhood (as
mentioned above). The informative nodes may have some special geometric relationships to the
target node (e.g., a particular angle or distance), whose relevant features hence will be passed to
the target node with much higher weights, compared to the uninformative nodes. As a result, the
long-range dependencies are captured indirectly through the whole message propagation process in
all graph-based neighborhoods. In literature, a recent method JK-Nets (Xu et al., 2018) captures the
long-range dependencies by skipping connections during feature aggregations.
2.1.1 C ASE STUDY ON DISTINGUISHING NON -ISOMORPHIC GRAPHS
In literature, Kondor et al. (2018) and Xu et al. (2019) construct several non-isomorphic exam-
ple graphs that cannot be distinguished by the aggregators (e.g., mean and maximum) in existing
MPNNs. We present a case study to illustrate how to distinguish the non-isomorphic example graphs
once the structural neighborhood is applied. We take two non-isomorphic graphs in (Xu et al., 2019)
as an example, where each node has the same feature aand after any mapping f(a)remains the
same across all nodes, as shown in Fig. 2 (left). Then the aggregator, e.g., mean or maximum, over
f(a)remainsf(a), and hence the ﬁnal representations of the nodes are the same. That is, mean and
maximum aggregators fail to distinguish the two different graphs.
5