Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
a set. For instance, GCN simply sums the normalized “messages” from all one-hop neighbors (Kipf
& Welling, 2017). Such aggregation loses the structural information of nodes in neighborhood be-
cause it does not distinguish the “messages” from different nodes. Therefore, after such aggregation,
we cannot know which node contributes what to the ﬁnal aggregated output.
Without modeling such structural information, as shown in (Kondor et al., 2018) and (Xu et al.,
2019), the existing MPNNs cannot discriminate between certain non-isomorphic graphs. In those
cases, MPNNs may map non-isomorphic graphs to the same feature representations, which is obvi-
ously not desirable for graph representation learning. Unlike MPNNs, classical convolutional neural
networks (CNNs) avoid this problem by using aggregators (i.e., convolutional ﬁlters) with a struc-
tural receiving ﬁled deﬁned on grids, i.e., a Euclidean space, and are hence able to distinguish each
input unit. As shown by our experiments, such structural information often contains clues regard-
ing topology patterns in graph (e.g., hierarchy), and should be extracted and used to learn more
discriminating representations for graph-structured data.
Secondly, the aggregators lack the ability to capture long-range dependencies in disassortative
graphs. In MPNNs, the neighborhood is deﬁned as the set of all neighbors one hop away (e.g.,
GCN), or all neighbors up to rhops away (e.g., ChebNet). In other words, only messages from
nearby nodes are aggregated. The MPNNs with such aggregation are inclined to learn similar repre-
sentations for proximal nodes in a graph. This implies that they are probably desirable methods for
assortative graphs (e.g., citation networks (Kipf & Welling, 2017) and community networks (Chen
et al., 2019)) where node homophily holds (i.e., similar nodes are more likely to be proximal, and
vice versa), but may be inappropriate to the disassortative graphs (Newman, 2002) where node ho-
mophily does not hold. For example, Ribeiro et al. (2017) shows disassortative graphs where nodes
of the same class exhibit high structural similarity but are far apart from each other. In such cases,
the representation ability of MPNNs may be limited signiﬁcantly, since they cannot capture the
important features from distant but informative nodes.
A straightforward strategy to address this limitation is to use a multi-layered architecture so as to
receive “messages” from distant nodes. For instance, due to the localized nature of convolutional
ﬁlters in classical CNNs, a single convolutional layer is similarly limited in its representational
ability. CNNs typically use multiple layers connected in a hierarchical manner to learn complex and
global representations. However, unlike CNNs, it is difﬁcult for multi-layer MPNNs to learn good
representations for disassortative graphs because of two reasons. On one hand, relevant messages
from distant nodes are mixed indistinguishably with a large number of irrelevant messages from
proximal nodes in multi-layer MPNNs, which implies that the relevant information will be “washed
out” and cannot be extracted effectively. On the other hand, the representations of different nodes
would become very similar in multi-layer MPNNs, and every node’s representation actually carries
the information about the entire graph (Xu et al., 2018).
In this paper, we overcome the aforementioned weaknesses of graph neural networks starting from
two basic observations: i) Classical neural networks effectively address the similar limitations thanks
to the stationarity, locality, and compositionality in a continuous space (Bronstein et al., 2017); ii)
The notion of network geometry bridges the gap between continuous space and graph (Hoff et al.,
2002; Muscoloni et al., 2017). Network geometry aims to understand networks by revealing the
latent continuous space underlying them, which assumes that nodes are sampled discretely from a
latent continuous space and edges are established according to their distance. In the latent space,
complicated topology patterns in graphs can be preserved and presented as intuitive geometry, such
as subgraph (Narayanan et al., 2016), community (Ni et al., 2019), and hierarchy (Nickel & Kiela,
2017; 2018). Inspired by those two observations, we raise an enlightening question about the aggre-
gation scheme in graph neural network.
Can the aggregation on a graph beneﬁt from a continuous latent space, such as using geometry in
the space to build structural neighborhoods and capture long-range dependencies in the graph?
To answer the above question, we propose a novel aggregation scheme for graph neural networks,
termed the geometric aggregation scheme . In the scheme, we map a graph to a continuous latent
space via node embedding, and then use the geometric relationships deﬁned in the latent space to
build structural neighborhoods for aggregation. Also, we design a bi-level aggregator operating on
the structural neighborhoods to update the feature representations of nodes in graph neural networks,
which are able to guarantee permutation invariance for graph-structured data. Compared with exist-
2