Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
ing MPNNs, the scheme extracts more structural information of the graph and can aggregate feature
representations from distant nodes via mapping them to neighborhoods deﬁned in the latent space.
We then present an implementation of the geometric aggregation scheme in graph convolutional net-
works, which we call Geom-GCN , to perform transductive learning, node classiﬁcation, on graphs.
We design particular geometric relationships to build the structural neighborhood in Euclidean and
hyperbolic embedding space respectively. We choose different embedding methods to map the graph
to a suitable latent space for different applications, where suitable topology patterns of graph are pre-
served. Finally, we empirically validate and analyze Geom-GCN on a wide range of open datasets
of graphs, and Geom-GCN achieved the state-of-the-art results.
In summary, the contribution of this paper is three-fold: i) We propose a novel geometric aggregation
scheme for graph neural network, which operates in both graph and latent space, to overcome the
aforementioned two weaknesses; ii) We present an implementation of the scheme, Geom-GCN, for
transductive learning in graph; iii) We validate and analyze Geom-GCN via extensive comparisons
with state-of-the-art methods on several challenging benchmarks.
2 G EOMETRIC AGGREGATION SCHEME
In this section, we start by presenting the geometric aggregation scheme, and then outline its ad-
vantages and limitations compared to existing works. As shown in Fig. 1, the aggregation scheme
consists of three modules, node embedding (panel A1 and A2), structural neighborhood (panel B1
and B2), and bi-level aggregation (panel C). We will elaborate on them in the following.
Figure 1: An illustration of the geometric aggregation scheme. A1-A2 The original graph is mapped
to a latent continuous space. B1-B2 The structural neighborhood. All adjacent nodes lie in a small
region around a center node in B1 for visualization. In B2, the neighborhood in the graph contains all
adjacent nodes in graph; the neighborhood in the latent space contains the nodes within the dashed
circle whose radius is . The relational operator is illustrated by a colorful 33grid where each
unit is corresponding to a geometric relationship to the red target node. CBi-level aggregation on the
structural neighborhood. Dashed and solid arrows denote the low-level and high-level aggregation,
respectively. Blue and green arrows denote the aggregation on the neighborhood in the graph and
the latent space, respectively.
A. Node embedding . This is a fundamental module which maps the nodes in a graph to a latent
continuous space. Let G= (V;E)be a graph, where each node v2Vhas a feature vector xv
and each edge e2Econnects two nodes. Let f:v!zvbe a mapping function from a node in
graph to a representation vector. Here, zv2Rdcan also be considered as the position of node vin
a latent continuous space, and dis the number of dimensions of the space. During the mapping, the
structure and properties of graph are preserved and presented as the geometry in the latent space.
For instance, hierarchical pattern in graph is presented as the distance to the original in embedding
hyperbolic space (Nickel & Kiela, 2017). One can employ various embedding methods to infer the
latent space (Cai et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2018).
3