Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
B. Structural neighborhood . Based on the graph and the latent space, we then build a structural
neighborhood,N(v) = (fNg(v);Ns(v)g;), for the next aggregation. The structural neighborhood
consists of a set of neighborhood fNg(v);Ns(v)g, and a relational operator on neighborhoods .
The neighborhood in the graph, Ng(v) =fuju2V;(u;v)2Eg, is the set of adjacent nodes of v.
The neighborhood in the latent space, Ns(v) =fuju2V;d(zu;zv)<g, is the set of nodes from
which the distance to vis less than a pre-given parameter . The distance function d(;)depends
on the particular metric in the space. Compared with Ng(v),Ns(v)may contain nodes which are
far fromvin the graph, but have a certain similarity with v, and hence are mapped together with v
in the latent space though preserving the similarity. By aggregating on such neighborhood Ns(v),
the long-range dependencies in disassortative graphs can be captured.
The relational operator is a function deﬁned in the latent space. It inputs an ordered position
pair(zv;zu)of nodesvandu, and outputs a discrete variable rwhich indicates the geometric
relationship from vtouin the latent space. For u;v2V,
: (zv;zu)!r2R;
whereRis the set of the geometric relationships. According to the particular latent space and
application, rcan be speciﬁed as an arbitrary geometric relationship of interest. A requirement on 
is that it should guarantee that each ordered position pair has only one geometric relationship. For
example,is illustrated in Fig. 1B by a colorful 3 3 grid in a 2-dimensional Euclidean space, in
which each unit is corresponding to a geometric relationship to node v.
C. Bi-level aggregation . With the structural neighborhood N(v), we propose a novel bi-level ag-
gregation scheme for graph neural network to update the hidden features of nodes. The bi-level
aggregation consists of two aggregation functions and operates in a neural network layer. It can ex-
tract effectively structural information of nodes in neighborhoods as well as guarantee permutation
invariance for graph. Let hl
vbe the hidden features of node vat thel-th layer, and h0
v=xvbe the
node features. The l-th layer updates hl
vfor everyv2Vby the following.
ev;l+1
(i;r)=p(fhl
uju2Ni(v);(zv;zu) =rg);8i2fg;sg;8r2R(Low-level aggregation)
ml+1
v=q
i2fg;sg;r2R((ev;l+1
(i;r);(i;r))) (High-level aggregation)
hl+1
v=(Wlml+1
v) (Non-linear transform)(1)
In the low-level, the hidden features of nodes that are in the same neighborhood iand have the same
geometric relationship rare aggregated to a virtual node via the aggregation function p. The features
of the virtual node are ev;l+1
(i;r), and the virtual node is indexed by (i;r)which is corresponding to the
combination of a neighborhood iand a relationship r. It is required to adopt a permutation-invariant
function for p, such as an Lp-norm (the choice of p= 1;2;or1results in average, energy, or max
pooling). The low level aggregation is illustrated by dashed arrows in Fig. 1C.
In the high-level, the features of virtual nodes are further aggregated by function q. The inputs of
functionqcontain both the features of virtual nodes ev;l+1
(i;r)and the identity of virtual nodes (i;r).
That is,qcan be a function that take an ordered object as input, e.g., concatenation, to distinguish the
features of different virtual nodes, thereby extracting the structural information in the neighborhoods
explicitly. The output of high-level aggregation is a vector ml+1
v. Then new hidden features of v,
h(l+1)
v , are given by a non-linear transform, wherein Wlis a learnable weight matrix on the l-th
layer shared by all nodes, and ()is a non-linear activation function, e.g., a ReLU.
Permutation invariance is an essential requirement for aggregators in graph neural networks. Thus,
we then prove that the proposed bi-level aggregation, Eq. 1, is able to guarantee invariance for any
permutation of nodes. We ﬁrstly give a deﬁnition for permutation-invariant mapping of graph.
Deﬁnition 1. Let a bijective function  :V!Vbe a permutation for nodes, which renames
v2Vas (v)2V. LetV0andE0be the node and edge set after a permutation  , respectively.
A mapping of graph, (G), is permutation-invariant if, given any permutation  , we have(G) =
(G0);G0= (V0;E0).
Lemma 1. For a composite function 12(G), if2(G)is permutation-invariant, the entire
composite function 12(G)is permutation-invariant.
4