Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
Figure 2: An illustration to distinguish non-isomorphic graphs by proposed structural neighborhood.
In contrast, the two graphs become distinguishable once we apply a structural neighborhood in
aggregation. With the structural neighborhood, the nodes have different geometric relationships to
the center node V1in the structural neighborhood, as shown in Fig. 2 (right). Taking aggregation
forV1as an example, we can adopt different mapping function fr;r2Rto the neighbors with
different geometric relationship rtoV1. Then, the aggregator in two graph have different inputs,
ff2(a),f8(a)gin the left graph and ff2(a),f7(a),f9(a)gin the right graph. Finally, the aggregator
(mean or maximum) will output different representations for the node V1in the two graphs, thereby
distinguishing the topological difference between the two graphs.
3 G EOM -GCN: A N IMPLEMENTATION OF THE SCHEME
In this section, we present Geom-GCN, a speciﬁc implementation of the geometric aggregation
scheme in graph convolutional networks, to perform transductive learning in graphs. To implement
the general aggregation scheme, one needs to specify its three modules: node embedding, structural
neighborhood, and bi-level aggregation function.
Node embedding is the fundamental. As shown in our experiments, a common embedding method
which only preserves the connection and distance pattern in a graph can already beneﬁt the aggre-
gation. For particular applications, one can specify embedding methods to create suitable latent
spaces where particular topology patterns (e.g., hierarchy) are preserved. We employ three embed-
ding methods, Isomap (Tenenbaum et al., 2000), Poincare embedding (Nickel & Kiela, 2017), and
struc2vec (Ribeiro et al., 2017), which result in three Geom-GCN variants: Geom-GCN-I, Geom-
GCN-P, and Geom-GCN-S. Isomap is a widely used isometry embedding method, by which distance
patterns (lengths of shortest paths) are preserved explicitly in the latent space. Poincare embedding
and struc2vec can create particular latent spaces that preserve hierarchies and local structures in a
graph, respectively. We use an embedding space of dimension 2 for ease of explanation.
The structural neighborhood N(v) = (fNg(v);Ns(v)g;)of nodevincludes its neighborhoods in
both the graph and latent space. The neighborhood-in-graph Ng(v)consists of the set of v’s adjacent
nodes in the graph, and the neighborhood-in-latent-space Ns(v)those nodes whose distances to v
are less than a parameter in the latent space. We determine by increasing from zero until the
average cardinality of Ns(v)equals to that of Ng(v),8v2V– i.e., when the average neighborhood
sizes in the graph and latent spaces are the same. We use Euclidean distance in the Euclidean
space. In the hyperbolic space, we approximate the geodesic distance between two nodes via their
Euclidean distance in the local tangent plane.
Here we simply implement the geometric operator as four relationships of the relative positions
between two nodes in a 2-D Euclidean or hyperbolic space. Particularly, the relationship set R=
fupper left, upper right, lower left, lower right g, and a(zv;zu)is given by Table 1. Note that,
we adopt the rectangular coordinate system in the Euclidean space and angular coordinate in the
hyperbolic space. By this way, the relationship “upper” indicates the node nearer to the origin and
thus lie in a higher level in a hierarchical graph. One can design a more sophisticated operator ,
such as borrowing the structure of descriptors in manifold geometry (Kokkinos et al., 2012; Monti
et al., 2017), thereby preserving more and richer structural information in neighborhood.
Table 1: The relationship operator
(zv;zu) zv[0]>zu[0]zv[0]zu[0]
zv[1]zu[1] upper left upper right
zv[1]>zu[1] lower left lower right
6