XXX -X-XXXX -XXXX -X/XX/$XX.00 ©20XX IEEE  COVID -ResNet: A Deep Learning Framework for 
Screening of COVID19 from Radiographs  
Muhammad Farooq1 and Abdul Hafeez2 
1 Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Alabama, Tuscaloosa, AL, USA  
Email: mfarooq@crimson.ua.edu  
2Dept. of C omputer Science & IT , University of E ngineering & Technology, Peshawar , Pakistan  
Email: abdul.hafeez@uetpeshawar.edu.pk  
Abstract—In the last few months, the novel COVID -19 
pandemic has spread all over the world. Due to its easy  
transmission, develop ing techniques to accurately and easily 
identify the p resence of COVID -19 and distinguish it from other 
forms  of flus and pneumonia  is crucial . Recent research has  
shown that the chest X -rays of patients suffering from COVID -
19 depicts certain abnormalities in the radiography. However, 
those approaches are closed source and not made available to 
the research community for re -producibility and gaining a 
deeper insight. The g oal of this work is to build open source and 
open access datasets and present an accurate Convolutional 
Neural Network framework for differentiating COVID -19 cases 
from other pneumonia cases. Our work utilizes state of th e art 
training techniques including progressive resizing, cyclical 
learning rate finding and discriminative learning rates to 
training fast and accurate residual neural networks. Using 
these techniques, we showed state of the art results on the open 
access  COVID -19 dataset. This work presents a 3 -step 
technique to fine -tune a pre -trained ResNet -50 architecture to 
improve model perform ance and reduce training time – we call 
it COVID -ResNet. This is achieved through progressively re -
sizing of input images to 128x128 x3, 224x224 x3, and 
229x229 x3 pixels and fine -tuning the network at each stage. 
This approach along with the automatic learning rate selection 
enabled us to achieve state of the accuracy of 96.23% (on all 
the classes) on the COVIDx dataset with only 41 epochs . This 
work presented a computationally efficient and highly accurate 
model for multi -class classification of three different infection 
types from along with Normal individuals. This model can help 
in early screening of COVID -19 cases and help red uce burden 
on healthcare systems.  
Keywords —COVID -91, Corona Virus, Deep Learning, COVIDx, 
Classification, ResNet  
I. INTRODUCTION  
The COVID -19 is the result of the infection of individual 
caused by the acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS -
CoV -2). This pandemic is spreading all over the world with 
recorded  rate that is  never seen before for any infectious 
disease. This can be spread even by individuals who are asymptomatic . One of the effective techniques proposed by 
World Health Organization  (WHO)  to control the spread of the 
viral infection is social distancing and contact tracing. 
Therefore, a critical step in this direction is an effective and 
accurate screening of the COVID -19 patients for not only 
receiving quick treatment but also i solation f rom the public to 
halt spreading of the viral infection. State -of-the-art techniques  
for the detection of COVID -19 and those that measure the 
production of antibodies in response to the infection caused by 
the said virus include serology and reverse transc ription 
polymerase chain reaction i.e., rRT -PCR  [1]. Clinical setups 
and population surveillance employ serology for the detection 
of antibodies. The limited availability of the test kits makes it 
challenging to detect every individual affected by the virus. 
Furthermore, these tests take from few hou rs to a day or two to 
produc e the  output, which becomes too tedious, time 
consuming and most of the time error prone in the current state 
of emergency. Therefore, a  faster and reliable screening 
techniques that could be further confirmed by the PCR test  is 
urgently required . 
Some studies have shown the use of imaging techniques such 
as X -rays or Computed Tomography (CT -scans) for finding 
characteristic symptoms of the novel corona virus in these 
imaging techniques  [2], [3] . Recent studies suggest the use of  
chest radiography in the epidemic areas for the initial screenin g 
of COVID -19 [4]. Therefore , the screening of radiography 
images can be used as an alternate to the PCR  method, wh ich 
exhibit higher sensitivity in some cases [5]. Nevertheless, the 
main bottleneck that the radiologists experience in analyzing 
radiography images is the visual scanning of the subtle insights. 
This entails the use of intelligent approaches that can 
automatically extract usef ul insights from the chest X -rays 
those are characteristics of COVID -19.  
A number of studies have shown the ability of neural networks, 
especially convolutional neural networks to accurately detect 
the presence of COVID -19 from CT -scans [2], [6] . However, 
the datasets are often not publicly available , which reduces their 
access  to the wider research community and further 
development of classification techniques on standardized