XXX -X-XXXX -XXXX -X/XX/$XX.00 ©20XX IEEE  datasets. This works builds on the research presented in [7], in 
hopes of building open source and open access techniques to 
help in the fight against the COVID -19 pandemic. Authors in 
[7] presented a dataset that they called COVIDx and a neural 
network architecture called COVID -Net. The dataset consist s 
of chest radiography images belo nging to 4 classes i.e. Normal 
comprising cases without any infections, Bacterial pneumonia, 
Viral pertaining to non -COVID -19 pneumonia , and COVID -19. 
They reported an overall accuracy of 83.5% for these four 
classe s. Their lowest reported positive predictive value was for 
non-COVID -19 class (67.0%) and highest was for Normal class 
(95.1%). We are using the same dataset with the following 
goals:  
1) Improve the overall accuracy of the model for all the four 
classes  with positive predictive values >  90 (among all classes) .  
2) Use network architecture with lower number of parameters 
and computational needs. An architecture that provide a balance 
between performance and computational complexity.  
3) Use techniques for training models which need a lower 
number of epochs  and hence faster training.  
We utilize state of the art techniques to achieve these  goals with 
continuous human input and show that human intervention in 
the training can significantly improve both the performance of 
the models and reduce training time. This work utilizes 
progressive image re -sizing along with automati c learning rate 
finding [8] and discriminative learning rate [9] to achieve state 
of the art results  on this task . The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section II captures 
the Methods that provide details of the dataset and the proposed 
architecture. Section III demonstrates the Results. Discussion is 
illustrated in Section IV and Section V concludes the paper.  
II. METHODS  
A. COVIDx Dataset  
We used the COVIDx  dataset that was recently made pub lic by 
the authors of the COVID -Net [7]. It consists of a total of 5941 
posteroanterior chest radiography images from 2839 patients  
with 4 classes namely 1) Normal (no infections), 2) Bacterial 
(bacterial pneumonia) 3) Viral (non -COVID -19 viral 
pneumonia) 4) COVID -19. The dataset was curated by 
combining two publicly  available datasets. The authors have 
made a pre -processed version of the dataset available  at 
https://github.com/lindawangg/CO VID-Net.  
In th e current version of the  dataset , there are 68 COVID -19 
radiographs from 45 COVID -19 patients. There were a total of 
1203 patients with negative  pneumonia (i.e. Normal class), 931 
patients with a bacterial pneumonia and 660 patients with non -
COVID -19 viral pneumonia cases. As observed,  the COVID -
19 cases are significantly lower than the other classes and we 
are faced with an imbalance classification problem. Details of 
the train and test distribution as well as the distribution of 
patients ar e given in [7] and those we re used in the current 
study . Figure 1 shows random examples of the radiograp hs for 
all 4 classes . Distribution of the training data examples and the 
Figure 1. Example chest radiographs of four classes present in the COVIDx dataset