XXX -X-XXXX -XXXX -X/XX/$XX.00 ©20XX IEEE  number of patients’ distribution is shown in Figure 2 and 3 
respectively. Please refer to [7] for further details.  
 
 
Figure 2 The upper graph shows the d istribution of images for 
individual infection type of the COVIDx dataset. Normal refers to 
negative  infection. The blue bar represents the number of training data, 
while yellow bar represents the aggregate of the test set.  The below sub 
graph r epresents the aggregate of the patients in each category of the 
COVIDx dataset.  
B. Data Augmentation  
Data aug mentati on helps in creating newer examples by 
applying different transformation randomly to the available 
training images. In this work, the transformation that we used 
included vertical flips of the training images, random rotation 
of the images (maximum rotatio n angle was 15 degree), and 
lighting condit ions. Data augmentation  increases the  size of  
input training data along  with the model  regularization and 
hence improving generalization  of the training model . Only the 
training data was augmented,  and the test time augmentation 
was not explored.  
C. Network Architecture  
Rather than proposing our own architecture, we have leveraged 
the knowledge from a pool of the already existing Convolution 
Neural Network architectures that have shown excellent results 
using  a wide variety of classification tasks. We employ a  variant 
of the residual neural network with a total of 50 layers called 
ResNet50  [10]. Residual Networks provide  a good combination 
of performance and number of parameters and have proved 
faster training. Another reason for using the r esidual network 
architecture is the ability  to feed  images of sizes  other than with 
which they are  trained  with. This is a critical p art of the training 
methodology employed for training a high-performance  
network with very few epochs using the techniques introduced 
in fastai  [11]. We call the resultant network as COVID -ResNet.  The weights used in ResNet50 are  pretrained with ImageNet 
dataset  [12]. In COVIDx dataset, the authors have rescaled all 
images to 224x224x3 . Those images are further rescaled to 
128x128x3, 224x224x3 and 299x299x3 and employed in  
different stages of training ( Subsection D ). The  images are 
normalized using the per channel mean and standard deviation 
of the images present in the ImageNet dataset. This is critical as 
we are using the pretrained weight s of the network that is 
previously trained with ImageNet dataset.  
For transfer learning, t he head of the trained model is  replaced 
by another head containing a sequence of Adaptive 
average/max pooling, batch normalization, drop out and linear 
layers as proposed in [11]. This network is  further fine -tuned 
with the COVID x dataset as described below.  
D. Training the Network  
Progressive resizing is used where the network is  initially fine -
tuned with smaller images and the size of the input images is 
gradually  increased as the training progresses . This can be done 
as the features learned by the different layers of the CNN are 
independent of the input image size . Furthermore,  the global 
features are sti ll present in the same resized image with different 
pixel resolutions.  Training i s performed in three stages  where 
each stage corresponds to images of  different input dimensions. 
In each stage, instead of manually twea king the learning rates, 
we use  the Cyclical Learning Rate technique proposed by Leslie 
Smith in  [8] for help selecting optimal learning rate.  
Stage - I: The input images a re resized to 128x128 x3 pixels and 
the COVID -ResNet are tuned in 2 steps. 1) only the new ly 
added head of the network is  trained while preserving the 
Image Net weights for the rest of the body with a learning rate 
of 1e -3 for 3 epochs. 2) the whole network i s fine -tuned (both 
the body and the head of the model) using discriminative  
learning rate proposed in [9] for 5 epochs.  
Stage - II: The head of the  model resulting from stage -I is 
further fine -tuned with images of size 224x224 x3 in the first 
step with learning rate of 1e -4 for 3 epochs. In the s econd step, 
the whole network i s further fine -tuned for  5 epochs with 
discriminative learning rate as before.  
Stage - III: In the last stage, the whole network i s further fine -
tuned with input images of size 229x229 x3 for 25 epochs. In 
this case we use  discriminative learning rates where the earliest 
layer was trained with a learning rate of 1e -6 and the last layer 
was trained with a learning rate of 1e -4. All the layers in 
between were trained with equidistance learning rates between 
these two values.  
Training the model in multiple stages with different input image 
sizes using progressive resizing tends to achieve a better 
generalization. This is also an example of transfer learning from 
one input image size to another. One thing to notice is that as 
we proceed to the later st ages of the training, we ensure  to 
reduce the learning rates. This  ascertains  that the weights are