mechanism. Speciﬁcally, NRTR follows the encoder-decoder
framework, while the encoder uses stacked self-attention
to transform input image sequence to hidden feature rep-
resentation, and the decoder applies stacked self-attention to
output sequence of characters based on the encoder output.
NRTR draws global dependencies between different input
and output positions at once rather than one by one in
RNN, and reduces the whole operation to a constant number
unlike that in CNN. It therefore allows for more computation
parallelization with higher performance.
Besides, unlike [9] that uses 1D sentence as input, scene
text recognizer receives 2D images with large variation in
scales/aspect ratios and backgrounds. We further proposes
a novel modality-transform block as a preprocessing step
before the encoder, to effectively convert 2D image to cor-
responding 1D sequence. Experiments demonstrate that the
specially designed modality-transform block could greatly
inﬂuence the whole recognizer performance.
We conduct extensive experiments on standard bench-
marks, including both regular (IIIT5K, SVT, ICDAR2003
and ICDAR2013) and irregular datasets (SVT-P, CUTE80,
ICDAR2015). Without the bells and whistles, NRTR
achieves state-of-the-art or highly competitive performance
in both lexicon-free and lexicon-based cases without any
rectiﬁcation module, while accompanies with a 8times faster
training speed than the existing best recognizer.
Our contributions are summarized as follows:
We analysis, for the ﬁrst time, the deﬁciency of current
RNN and CNN based recognizers and propose a no-
recurrence seq2seq model based solely on self-attention
mechanism. Our model could be trained with more
computation parallelization and less complexity.
We design a modality-transform block to efﬁciently
map input image to corresponding sequence, combined
with encoder, to extract more discriminative features.
Our model achieves state-of-the-art performance on
various benchmarks and signiﬁcantly surpasses compet-
itive recognizers on both accuracy and training speed.
II. R ELATED WORK
A. Scene Text Recognition
Traditional text recognizers mainly adopt bottom-up
scheme by ﬁrst detecting individual characters using slid-
ing window [10], then integrating characters into texts by
dynamic programming or lexicon search [10]. Others adopt
top-down scheme by directly recognizing texts from images.
Recent methods regard text recognition as a sequence
recognition problem where images and texts are represented
as patch and character sequences separately. Shi et al.
[3] combine CNN and RNN to learn spatial dependencies
and applies CTC to translate per-slice prediction into a
label sequence. They also develop an attention-based spatial
transformer network to rectify irregular texts [6]. Besides,Lee et al. [11] and Cheng et al. [2] both construct attention-
based recurrent network to decode feature sequence and
predict labels recurrently. Instead of RNNs, Gao et al. [4]
and Yin et al. [5] leverage stacked CNN for the pursuit of
greater computational parallelism.
B. Our Method Versus Some Related Works
The most related work to NRTR is Transformer, a recent
development in NLP ﬁeld. Inspired by Transformer, we uses
solely self-attention mechanism as the fundamental module
but has distinct differences indeed. First, Transformer aims
for machine-based English-to-French translation task but
fails to read texts in natural images. As input text images
generally convey much more information than sentences
in machine translation, text recognizers tend to be more
complicated. Our model relies on the speciﬁcally designed
encoder/decoder to efﬁciently solve this problem. Second,
unlike Transformer that receives 1D sentences as input, we
use 2D images with large variation in scales/aspect ratios
and backgrounds. The locations and geometric features of
scene texts lying in images play a more complex role than
the word location in an 1D sentence. To obtain the most
useful sequence for the encoder, we design a novel modality-
transform block to transform each input image effectively.
III. M ETHODOLOGY
The architecture of NRTR is depicted in Fig.2. NRTR
consists of three sub-networks: the encoder, the decoder and
the modality-transform block served as the preprocessing.
As the encoder and the decoder are both based on the self-
attention mechanism, we ﬁrst review it and then describe the
three main sub-networks.
A. Self-Attention Mechanism
Self-attention extracts correlation information between
different input and output positions. Here, we use Scaled
Dot-Product Attention, an effective self-attention module
proposed in [9]. It has three inputs: queries and keys of
dimensiondk, and values of dimension dv. Dot product
is performed between the query and all keys to obtain
their similarity. A softmax function is applied to obtain the
weights on the values. Given a query q, all keys (packed into
matrices K) and values (packed into V), the output value is
weighted average over input values:
vout= softmaxqKt
pdk
V (1)
wheretmeans element numbers of corresponding inputs and
scalar1pdkis used to prevent softmax into regions where
it has extremely small gradients. Therefore, self-attention
could connect all positions with a constant number and allow
parallelization. More details please refer to [9].