NRTR: A No-Recurrence Sequence-to-Sequence Model For Scene Text Recognition
Fenfen Sheng
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
Beijing 100190, China
shengfenfen2015@ia.ac.cnZhineng Chen
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
Beijing 100190, China
zhineng.chen@ia.ac.cn
Bo Xu
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
Beijing 100190, China
xubo@ia.ac.cn
Abstract —Scene text recognition has attracted a great many
researches due to its importance to various applications.
Existing methods mainly adopt recurrence or convolution
based networks. Though have obtained good performance,
these methods still suffer from two limitations: slow training
speed due to the internal recurrence of RNNs, and high
complexity due to stacked convolutional layers for long-term
feature extraction. This paper, for the ﬁrst time, proposes
a no-recurrence sequence-to-sequence text recognizer, named
NRTR, that dispenses with recurrences and convolutions en-
tirely. NRTR follows the encoder-decoder paradigm, where the
encoder uses stacked self-attention to extract image features,
and the decoder applies stacked self-attention to recognize texts
based on encoder output. NRTR relies solely on self-attention
mechanism thus could be trained with more parallelization and
less complexity. Considering scene image has large variation in
text and background, we further design a modality-transform
block to effectively transform 2D input images to 1D sequences,
combined with the encoder to extract more discriminative
features. NRTR achieves state-of-the-art or highly competitive
performance on both regular and irregular benchmarks, while
requires only a small fraction of training time compared to the
best model from the literature (at least 8times faster).
Keywords -No-Recurrence; Self-attention; Modality-
transform block; Faster and better
I. I NTRODUCTION
Scene text recognition has drawn increasing interests as
it could extract rich semantic information relevant to scene
and object. Although extensive studies have been carried out,
recognizing scene texts is still challenging due to its high
complexity, e.g., low quality texts, arbitrary orientations,
cluttered backgrounds and complex deformations, see Fig.1.
Current text recognition methods [1], [2], [3], [4], [5], [6]
mainly follow the sequence-to-sequence (seq2seq) paradigm,
where input images and output texts are separately repre-
sented as patch sequences and character sequences. These
methods could be roughly classiﬁed into two branches: the
recurrent neural network (RNN) based recognizers and the
convolutional neural network (CNN) based ones.
RNN based text recognizers [1], [3], [2], [6], [7] have
Figure 1: Qualitative results of NRTR. (left) Correct results with texts in
yellow. (right) Incorrect results with labels in yellow and outputs in red.
show great success as they are superior to learn contextual
information and capture strong correlation among different
characters in each text. However, the inherently sequen-
tial nature of RNN precludes computation parallelization,
which brings heavy time and computational burdens when
input image sequence is long, as memory constraints limit
batching across examples. Besides, the training procedure
of RNN is sometimes tricky due to the problem of gradient
vanishing/exploding [8].
Recently, CNN based recognizers [4], [5] are proposed to
accelerate sequential computation. By leveraging CNN in-
stead of RNN, they enable to compute hidden representation
in parallel. However, the number of operations required to
relate two arbitrary signals grows along with their distances.
CNN based methods are difﬁcult to learn dependencies
among distant positions, unless much more convolutional
layers are stacked, which in turn increases the complexity.
Therefore, CNN based methods suffer from the dilemma of
low complexity and satisfactory performance.
In this paper, we propose, for the ﬁrst time, a no-
recurrence seq2seq scene text recognizer, named NRTR, that
dispenses with recurrences and convolutions entirely. Moti-
vated by recent success of Transformer [9] in natural lan-
guage processing ﬁeld, NRTR relies solely on self-attentionarXiv:1806.00926v2  [cs.CV]  10 Oct 2019