TOWNES etal. GenomeBiology          (2019) 20:295 Page4of16
of zeros in a sample (cell or droplet) is inversely related
to the total number of UMIs in that sample. Second,
the probability of an endogenous gene or ERCC spike-in
having zero counts is a decreasing function of its mean
expression(equationsprovidedinthe“ Methods”section).
Both of these predictions were validated by the negative
control data (Fig. 1). In particular, the empirical probabil-
ityofagenebeingzeroacrossdropletswaswellcalibrated
to the theoretical prediction based on the multinomial
model. This also demonstrates that UMI counts are not
zeroinflated,consistentwith[ 29].
To further validate the multinomial model, we assessed
goodness-of-fit of seven possible null distributions to
both the Tung and Zheng monocytes negative control
datasets (Additional file 1: Figure S2). When applied to
UMIcounts,themultinomial,Dirichlet-multinomial,and
Poisson (as approximation to multinomial) distributionsfit best. When applied to read counts, the zero-inflated
lognormalwasthebestfittingdistributionfollowedbythe
Dirichlet-multinomial.
Theseresultsareconsistentwith[ 39],whichalsofound
thattherelationshipbetweenaverageexpressionandzero
probability follows the theoretical curve predicted by a
Poissonmodelusingnegativecontroldataprocessedwith
Indrop [4]a n dD r o p s e q[ 3] protocols. These are droplet
protocols with typically low counts. It has been argued
thatthePoissonmodelisinsufficienttodescribethesam-
pling distribution of genes with high counts and the neg-
ative binomial model is more appropriate [ 11]. The Tung
datasetcontainedhighcounts,andweneverthelessfound
the Poisson gave a better fit than the negative binomial.
However, the difference was not dramatic, so our results
do not preclude the negative binomial as a reasonable
sampling distribution for UMI counts. Taken together,
Fig.1Multinomialmodeladequatelycharacterizessamplingdistributionsoftechnicalandbiologicalreplicatesnegativecontroldata. aFractionof
zerosisplottedagainstthetotalnumberofUMIineachdropletforthetechnicalreplicates. bAsabutforcellsinthebiologicalreplicates
(monocytes). cAfterdown-samplingreplicatesto10,000UMIsperdroplettoremovevariabilityduetothedifferencesinsequencingdepth,the
fractionofzerosiscomputedforeachgeneandplottedagainstthelogofexpressionacrossallsamplesforthetechnicalreplicatesdata.Thesolid
curveistheoreticalprobabilityofobservingazeroasafunctionoftheexpectedcountsderivedfromthemultinomialmodel(blue)anditsPoisson
approximation(green). dAscbutforthebiologicalreplicates(monocytes)datasetandafterdown-samplingto575UMIspercell.Here,wealsoadd
thetheoreticalprobabilityderivedfromanegativebinomialmodel(red)