TOWNES etal. GenomeBiology          (2019) 20:295 Page5of16
theseresultssuggestourdata-generatingmechanismisan
accuratemodeloftechnicalnoiseinrealdata.
NormalizationandlogtransformationdistortsUMIdata
Standard scRNA-Seq analysis involves normalizing raw
counts using size factors, applying a log transformation
with a pseudocount, and then centering and scaling each
gene before dimension reduction. The most popular nor-
malization is counts per million (CPM). The CPM are
definedas (yij/ni)×106(i.e.,thesizefactoris ni/106).This
isequivalenttothemaximumlikelihoodestimator(MLE)
forrelativeabundance ˆπijmultipliedby106.Thelog-CPM
are then log2(c+ˆπij106)=log2(˜πij)+C,w h e r e ˜πijis
a maximum a posteriori estimator (MAP) for πij(math-
ematical justification and interpretation of this approach
providedinthe“ Methods”section).Theadditiveconstant
Cis irrelevant if data are centered for each gene after log
transformation, as is common practice. Thus, normaliza-
tion of raw counts is equivalent to using MLEs or MAP
estimatorsoftherelativeabundances.
Log transformation of MLEs is not possible for UMI
counts due to exact zeros, while log transformation of
MAP estimators of πijsystematically distorts the differ-
ences between zero and nonzero UMI counts, depending
on the arbitrary pseudocount c(derivations provided in
the “Methods” section). To illustrate this phenomenon,
we examined the distribution of an illustrative gene
before and after the log transform with varying normal-
izations using the biological replicates negative control
data (Fig. 2). Consistent with our theoretical predictions,
this artificially caused the distribution to appear zero
inflated and exaggerated differences between cells based
onwhetherthecountwaszeroornonzero.
Focusing on the entire negative control datasets, we
applied PCA to log-CPM values. We observed a strong
correlation ( r=0.8 for technical and r=0.98 for
monocytes biological replicates) between the first princi-
pal component (PC) and the fraction of zeros, consistentwith [30]. Application of PCA to CPM values without log
transform reduced this correlation to r=0.1 for tech-
nical and r=0.7 for monocytes biological replicates.
Additionally, the first PC of log-CPM correlated with the
logoftotalUMI,whichisconsistentwiththemultinomial
model(Fig. 3).Notethatindatasetswithstrongbiological
variability, the nuisance variation from zero fraction and
total counts could appear in secondary PCs rather than
thefirstPC,butitwouldstillconfounddownstreamanal-
yses.Basedontheseresults, the logtransformation is not
necessary and in fact detrimental for the analysis of UMI
counts.Thebenefitsofavoidingnormalizationbyinstead
directly modeling raw counts have been demonstrated in
thecontextofdifferentialexpression[ 40].Wherenormal-
izationisunavoidable,weproposetheuseofapproximate
multinomial deviance residuals (defined in the “ Residuals
andz-scores”section)insteadoflog-transformedCPM.
Zeroinflationisanartifactoflognormalization
To see how normalization and log transformation intro-
ducetheappearanceofzeroinflation,considerthefollow-
ingexample.Let yijbetheobservedUMIcountsfollowing
a multinomial distribution with size nifor each cell and
relative abundance πjforeachgene,constantacrosscells.
Focusing on a single gene j,yijfollows a binomial distri-
bution with parameters niandpj. Assume πj=10−4and
thenirange from 1000 −3000, which is consistent with
the biological replicates negative control data (Fig. 1and
Additional file 1: Figure S1). Under this assumption, we
expect to see about 74–90% zeros, 22–30% ones, and less
than4%valuesaboveone.However,noticethatafternor-
malization to CPM and log transformation, all the zeros
remain log2 (1+0)=0, yet the ones turn into values
ranging from log2(1+1/3000×106)=log2(334)≈8.4
to log2(1001)≈10. The few values that are 2 will have
values ranging from log2(668)≈9.4 to log2(2001)≈11.
The large, artificial gap between zero and nonzero val-
ues makes the log-normalized data appear zero-inflated
Fig.2Exampleofhowcurrentapproachestonormalizationandtransformationartificiallydistortdifferencesbetweenzeroandnonzerocounts.
aUMIcountdistributionforgeneENSG00000114391inthemonocytesbiologicalreplicatesnegativecontroldataset. bCountspermillion(CPM)
distributionfortheexactsamecountdata. cDistributionof log2(1+CPM)valuesfortheexactsamecountdata