TOWNES etal. GenomeBiology          (2019) 20:295 Page7of16
section). We implemented both negative binomial and
PoissonGLM-PCA,butwefocusedprimarilyonthelatter
inourassessmentsforsimplicityofexposition.Intuitively,
using Poisson instead of negative binomial implies, we
assume the biological variability is captured by the fac-
tormodel andtheunwanted biologicalvariabilityissmall
relative to the sampling variability. Our implementation
also allows the user to adjust for gene-specific or cell-
specific covariates (such as batch labels) as part of the
overallmodel.
We ran Poisson GLM-PCA on the technical and bio-
logical (monocytes) replicates negative control datasets
and found it removed the spurious correlation between
the first dimension and the total UMIs and fraction of
zeros (Fig. 4). To examine GLM-PCA as a visualization
tool, we ran Poisson and negative binomial GLM-PCAalong with competing methods on the 2 ground truth
datasets (Additional file 1: Figure S3). For the Zheng 4eq
dataset, we directly reduced to 2 dimensions. For the
Zheng 8eq dataset, we reduced to 15 dimensions then
applied UMAP [ 42]. While all methods effectively sep-
arated T cells from other PBMCs, GLM-PCA methods
alsoseparatedmemoryandnaivecytotoxiccellsfromthe
other subtypes of T cells. This separation was not visible
withPCAonlog-CPM.Computationalspeedisdiscussed
in the “Computational efficiency of multinomial models ”
section.
DevianceresidualsprovidefastapproximationtoGLM-PCA
One disadvantage of GLM-PCA is it depends on an iter-
ative algorithm to obtain estimates for the latent factors
and is at least ten times slower than PCA. We therefore
Fig.4GLM-PCAdimensionreductionisnotaffectedbyunwantedfractionofzerosvariabilityandavoidsfalse-positiveresults. aFirstGLM-PCA
dimension(analogoustothefirstprincipalcomponent)plottedagainstthefractionofzerosforthetechnicalreplicateswithcolorsrepresenting the
totalUMIs. bAsabutusingmonocytesbiologicalreplicates. cUsingthetechnicalreplicates,weappliedt-distributedstochasticneighbor
embedding(tSNE)withperplexity30tothetop50GLM-PCAdimensions.Thefirst2tSNEdimensionsareshownwithabluetoredcolorscale
representingthefractionofzeros. dAscbutforthebiologicalreplicatesdata.GLM-PCAusingthePoissonapproximationtothemultinomialwas
appliedtothesame5000randomgenesasinFig. 3