TOWNES etal. GenomeBiology          (2019) 20:295 Page10of16
led to similar clustering performance as deviance
(Additional file 1: Figure S9), because both criteria
identified strongly overlapping gene lists for these data.
The combination of feature selection with deviance and
dimension reduction with GLM-PCA also improved
clustering performance when k-means was used in place
of Seurat (Additional file 1: Figure S11). A complete table
of results is publicly available (see the “Availability of data
andmaterials”section).
Finally, we examined the clustering performance of
competing dimension reduction methods on two pub-
lic datasets with more complex subtypes (Table 1). The
10×Haber dataset [ 33]w a sa n n o t a t e dw i t h1 2t y p e s
of enteroendocrine cells from the intestine. The CEL-
Seq2 Muraro dataset [ 34] was annotated with 9 types
of pancreatic cells. Since these cluster labels were com-
putationally derived, they did not constitute a ground
truth comparison. Nevertheless, GLM-PCA had the clos-
est concordance with the original authors’ annotation in
bothdatasets(Additionalfile 1:T ablesS3,S4).
Conclusions
We have outlined a statistical framework for analysis of
scRNA-Seq data with UMI counts based on a multino-
mial model, providing effective and simple to compute
methods for feature selection and dimension reduction.
WefoundthatUMIcountdistributionsdifferdramatically
from read counts, are well-described by a multinomial
distribution, and are not zero inflated. Log transforma-
tion of normalized UMI counts is detrimental, because
it artificially exaggerates the differences between zeros
and all other values. For feature selection, or identifica-
tion of informative genes, deviance is a more effective
criterionthanhighlyvariablegenes.Dimensionreduction
via GLM-PCA, or its fast approximation using residu-
als from a multinomial model, leads to better clustering
performancethanPCAon z-scoresoflog-CPM.
Although our methods were inspired by scRNA-Seq
UMI counts, they may be useful for a wider array of
datasources.Anyhighdimensional,sparsedatasetwhere
samples contain only relative information in the form of
counts may conceivably be modeled by the multinomial
distribution.Undersuchscenarios,ourmethodsarelikely
tobemoreeffectivethanapplyinglogtransformationsand
standardPCA.Apossibleexampleismicrobiomedata.
We have not addressed major topics in the scRNA-Seq
literature such as pseudotime inference [ 44], differential
expression[ 45],andspatialanalysis[ 46].However,thesta-
tistical ideas outlined here can also be used to improve
methodsinthesemorespecializedtypesofanalyses.
Our results have focused on (generalized) linear mod-
els for simplicity of exposition. Recently, several promis-
ing nonlinear dimension reductions for scRNA-Seq have
beenproposed.Thevariationalautoencoder(VAE,atypeof neural network) method scVI [ 47] utilizes a negative
binomial likelihood in the decoder, while the encoder
reliesonlog-normalizedinputdatafornumericalstability.
The Gaussian process method tGPLVM [ 48]m o d e l sl o g -
transformed counts. In both cases, we suggest replac-
ing log-transformed values with deviance residuals to
improve performance. Nonlinear dimension reduction
methods may also depend on feature selection to reduce
memory consumption and speed computation; here, our
deviancemethodmaybeutilizedasanalternativetohigh
variabilityforscreeninginformativegenes.
Methods
MultinomialmodelforscRNA-Seq
LetyijbetheobservedUMIcountsforcellordroplet iand
geneorspike-in j.Letni=/summationtext
jyijbethetotalUMIsinthe
sample,and πijbetheunknowntruerelativeabundanceof
genejincelli.Therandomvector /vectoryi=(yi1,...,yiJ)/latticetopwith
constraint/summationtext
jyij=nifollows a multinomial distribution
withdensitfunction:
f(/vectoryi)=/parenleftbiggni
yi1,...,yiJ/parenrightbigg/productdisplay
jπyij
ij
F o c u s i n go nas i n g l eg e n e ja tat i m e ,t h em a r g i n a ld i s -
tribution of yijis binomial with parameters niandπij.
The marginal mean is E[ yij]=niπij=μij, the marginal
variance is var[ yij]=niπij(1−πij)=μij−1
niμ2
ij,a n d
the marginal probability of a zero count is (1−πij)ni=/parenleftBig
1−μij
ni/parenrightBigni.Thecorrelationbetweentwogenes j,kis:
cor[yij,yik]=−√πijπik/radicalbig(1−πij)(1−πik)
The correlation is induced by the sum to niconstraint.
As an extreme example, if there are only two genes ( J=
2), increasing the count of the first gene automatically
reducesthecountofthesecondgenesincetheymustadd
up toniunder multinomial sampling. This means when
J=2,thereisaperfectanti-correlationbetweenthegene
counts which has nothing to do with biology. More gen-
erally, when either Jorniis small, gene counts will be
negativelycorrelatedindependentofbiologicalgene-gene
correlations,anditisnotpossibletoanalyzethedataona
gene-by-gene basis (for example, by ranking and filtering
genes for feature selection). Rather, comparisons are only
possiblebetweenpairwiseratiosofgeneexpressionvalues
[49]. Yet, this type of analysis is difficult to interpret and
computationallyexpensiveforlargenumbersofgenes(i.e.,
in high dimensions). Fortunately, under certain assump-
tions, more tractable approximations may be substituted
forthetruemultinomialdistribution.
First,notethatifcorrelationisignored,themultinomial
may be approximated by J-independent binomial distri-
butions.Intuitively,thisapproximationwillbereasonable