TOWNES etal. GenomeBiology          (2019) 20:295 Page8of16
propose a fast approximation to GLM-PCA. When using
PCA a common first step is to center and scale the data
for each gene as z-scores. This is equivalent to the fol-
lowing procedure. First, specify a null model of constant
gene expression across cells, assuming a normal distri-
bution. Next, find the MLEs of its parameters for each
gene (the mean and variance). Finally, compute the resid-
uals of the model as the z-scores (derivation provided in
the “Methods” section). The fact that scRNA-Seq data
are skewed, discrete, and possessing many zeros suggests
the normality assumption may be inappropriate. Further,
usingz-scores does not account for variability in total
UMIsacrosscells.Instead,weproposetoreplacethenor-
mal null model with a multinomial null model as a better
match to the data-generating mechanism. The analogs to
z-scores under this model are called deviance and Pear-
son residuals. Mathematical formulae are presented in
the “Methods” section. The use of multinomial residu-
als enables a fast transformation similar to z-scores that
avoidsdifficultiesofnormalizationandlogtransformation
bydirectlymodelingcounts.Additionally,thisframework
allows straightforward adjustment for covariates such as
cellcyclesignaturesorbatchlabels.Inanillustrativesim-
ulation (details in the “ Residuals and z-scores”s e c t i o n ) ,
residualapproximationstoGLM-PCAlostaccuracyinthe
presence of strong batch effects, but still outperformed
thetraditionalPCA(Additionalfile 1:F igureS4).S ystem-
aticcomparisonsongroundtruthdataareprovidedinthe
“Multinomial models improve unsupervised clustering ”
section.
Computationalefficiencyofmultinomialmodels
We measured time to convergence for reduction to two
latent dimensions of GLM-PCA, ZINB-WAVE, PCA on
log-CPM, PCA on deviance residuals, and PCA on Pear-
son residuals. Using the top 600 informative genes, we
subsampled the PBMC 68K dataset to 680, 6800, and
68,000 cells. All methods scaled approximately linearly
with increasing the numbers of cells, but GLM-PCA was
23–63 times faster than ZINB-WAVE across sample sizes
(Additionalfile 1:FigureS5).Specifically,GLM-PCApro-
cessed 68,000 cells in less than 7 min. The deviance and
Pearson residuals methods exhibited speeds compara-
ble to PCA: 9–26 times faster than GLM-PCA. We also
timeddimensionreductionofthe8eqdataset(3994cells)
from 1500 informative genes to 10 latent dimensions.
PCA (with either log-CPM, deviance, or Pearson residu-
als) took 7 s, GLM-PCA took 4.7 min, and ZINB-WAVE
took86.6min.
Featureselectionusingdeviance
Feature selection, or identification of informative genes,
maybeaccomplishedbyrankinggenesusingthe deviance,
which quantifies how well each gene fits a null modelof constant expression across cells. Unlike the competing
highlyvariableorhighlyexpressedgenesmethods,which
are sensitive to normalization, ranking genes by deviance
operates on raw UMI counts. An approximate multino-
mial deviance statistic can be computed in closed form
(formulaprovidedinthe“ Methods”section).
We compared gene ranks for all three feature selection
methods (deviance, highly expressed, and highly variable
genes) on the 8eq dataset (Table 1). We found a strong
concordance between highly deviant genes and highly
expressedgenes(Spearman’srankcorrelation r=0.9987),
while highly variable genes correlated weakly with both
highexpression( r=0.3835)anddeviance( r=0.3738).
Choosing informative genes by high expression alone
would be ineffective if a gene had high but constant
expression across cells. To ensure the deviance criterion
did not identify such genes, we created a simulation with
three types of genes: lowly expressed, high but constantly
expressed, and high and variably expressed. Deviance
preferentially selected high and variably expressed genes
while filtering by highly expressed genes identified the
constantly expressed genes before the variably expressed
(Additional file 1: Figure S6, Table S1). Furthermore, an
examination of the top 1000 genes by each criteria on
theMurarodatasetshowedthatdeviancedidnotidentify
the same set of genes as highly expressed genes (Addi-
tional file 1: Figure S7, Table S2). Empirically, deviance
seems to select genes that are both highly expressed and
highlyvariable,whichprovidesarigorousjustificationfor
acommonpractice.
Multinomialmodelsimproveunsupervisedclustering
DimensionreductionwithGLM-PCAoritsfastmultino-
mialresidualsapproximationimprovedclusteringperfor-
manceovercompetingmethods(Fig. 5a,Additionalfile 1:
Figure S8a). Feature selection by multinomial deviance
wassuperiortohighlyvariablegenes(Fig. 5b).
Using the two ground truth datasets described under
the “Datasets” section, we systematically compared the
clustering performance of all combinations of previously
described methods for normalization, feature selection,
and dimension reduction. In addition, we compared
against ZINB-WAVE since it also avoids requiring the
user to pre-process and normalize the UMI count data
(e.g., log transformation of CPM) and accounts for vary-
ing total UMIs across cells [ 28]. After obtaining latent
factors, we used Seurat’s Louvain implementation and k-
meanstoinferclusters,andcomparedthesetotheknown
cell identities using adjusted Rand index (ARI, [ 43]). This
quantified accuracy. We assessedcluster separationusing
the silhouette coefficient. We varied the number of latent
dimensions and number of clusters to assess robust-
ness. Where possible, we used the same combinations
of hyperparameters as [ 15] to facilitate comparisons to