TOWNES etal. GenomeBiology          (2019) 20:295 Page2of16
exhibit no meaningful biological variation across sam-
ples. Since scRNA-Seq experiments usually examine cells
within a single tissue, only a small fraction of genes are
expected to be informative since many genes are bio-
logically variable only across different tissues. Dimension
reduction aims to embed each cell’s high-dimensional
expression profile into a low-dimensional representation
tofacilitatevisualizationandclustering.
Whileaplethoraofmethods[ 5,12–15]havebeendevel-
oped for each of these steps, here, we describe what is
considered to be the standard pipeline [ 15]. First, raw
counts are normalized by scaling of sample-specific size
factors,followedbylogtransformation,whichattemptsto
reduce skewness. Next, feature selection involves identi-
fying the top 500–2000 genes by computing either their
coefficient of variation (highly variable genes [ 16,17]) or
average expression level (highly expressed genes) across
all cells [ 15]. Alternatively, highly dropout genes may be
retained [ 18]. Principal component analysis (PCA) [ 19]i s
the most popular dimension reduction method (see for
example tutorials for Seurat [ 17] and Cell Ranger [ 5]).
PCA compresses each cell’s 2000-dimensional expression
profileinto,say,a10-dimensionalvectorofprincipalcom-
ponent coordinates or latent factors. Prior to PCA, data
are usually centered and scaled so that each gene has
mean0andstandarddeviation1( z-scoretransformation).
Finally,aclusteringalgorithmcanbeappliedtogroupcells
with similar representations in the low-dimensional PCA
space.
Despite the appealing simplicity of this standard
pipeline, the characteristics of scRNA-Seq UMI counts
present difficulties at each stage. Many normalization
schemesderivedfrombulkRNA-Seqcannotcomputesize
factors stably in the presence of large numbers of zeros
[20]. A numerically stable and popular method is to set
the size factor for each cell as the total counts divided by
106(counts per million , CPM). Note that CPM does not
alter zeros, which dominate scRNA-Seq data. Log trans-
formation is not possible for exact zeros, so it is common
practice to add a small pseudocount such as 1 to all nor-
malizedcountspriortotakingthelog.Thechoiceofpseu-
docountisarbitraryandcanintroducesubtlebiasesinthe
transformed data [ 21]. For a statistical interpretation of
thepseudocount,seethe“ Methods”section.Similarly,the
use of highly variable genes for feature selection is some-
what arbitrary since the observed variability will depend
on the pseudocount: pseudocounts close to zero arbitrar-
ilyincreasethevarianceofgeneswithzerocounts.Finally,
PCA implicitly relies on Euclidean geometry, which may
notbeappropriateforhighlysparse,discrete,andskewed
data,evenafternormalizationsandtransformations[ 22].
Widely used methods for the analysis of scRNA-Seq
lack statistically rigorous justification based on a plau-
sible data generating a mechanism for UMI counts.Instead,itappearsmanyofthetechniqueshavebeenbor-
rowedfromthedataanalysispipelinesdevelopedforread
counts, especially those based on bulk RNA-Seq [ 23]. For
example,modelsbasedonthelognormaldistributioncan-
not account for exact zeros, motivating the development
of zero-inflated lognormal models for scRNA-Seq read
counts [24–27]. Alternatively, ZINB-WAVE uses a zero-
inflatednegativebinomialmodelfordimensionreduction
of read counts [ 28]. However, as shown below, the sam-
pling distribution of UMI counts is not zero inflated [ 29]
and differs markedly from read counts, so application of
readcountmodelstoUMIcountsneedseithertheoretical
orempiricaljustification.
WepresentaunifyingstatisticalfoundationforscRNA-
Seq with UMI counts based on the multinomial dis-
tribution. The multinomial model adequately describes
negative control data, and there is no need to model zero
inflation. We show the mechanism by which PCA on
log-normalized UMI counts can lead to distorted low-
dimensional factors and false discoveries. We identify the
source of the frequently observed and undesirable fact
that the fraction of zeros reported in each cell drives the
first principal component in most experiments [ 30]. To
remove these distortions, we propose the use of GLM-
PCA, a generalization of PCA to exponential family like-
lihoods[31].GLM-PCAoperatesonrawcounts,avoiding
the pitfalls of normalization. We also demonstrate that
applying PCA to deviance or Pearson residuals provides
a useful and fast approximation to GLM-PCA. We pro-
videaclosed-formdeviancestatisticasafeatureselection
method. We systematically compare the performance of
all combinations of methods using ground truth datasets
and assessment procedures from [ 15]. We conclude by
suggestingbestpractices.
Resultsanddiscussion
Datasets
We used 9 public UMI count datasets to benchmark our
methods (Table 1). The first dataset was a highly con-
trolledexperimentspecificallydesignedtounderstandthe
technical variability. No actual cells were used to gener-
ate this dataset. Instead, each droplet received the same
ratio of 92 synthetic spike-in RNA molecules from Exter-
nal RNA Controls Consortium (ERCC). We refer to this
datasetasthe technicalreplicatesnegativecontrol asthere
is no biological variability whatsoever, and in principle,
eachexpressionprofileshouldbethesame.
The second and third datasets contained cells from
homogeneous populations purified using fluorescence-
activated cell sorting (FACS). We refer to these datasets
asbiological replicates negative controls .B e c a u s et h e s e
cells were all the same type, we did not expect
to observe any significant differences in unsupervised
analysis. The 10 ×Zheng monocytes data had low total