TOWNES etal. GenomeBiology          (2019) 20:295 Page11of16
if allπijare very small, which is likely to be satisfied for
scRNA-Seq if the number of genes Jis large, and no sin-
gle gene constitutes the majority of mRNAs in the cell.
Ifniis large and πijis small, each binomial distribu-
tioncanbefurtherapproximatedbyaPoissonwithmean
niπij. Alternatively, the multinomial can be constructed
by drawing J-independent Poisson random variables and
conditioningontheirsum.If Jandniarelarge,thediffer-
ence between the conditional, multinomial distribution,
and the independent Poissons becomes negligible. Since
in practice niis large, the Poisson approximation to the
multinomialmaybereasonable[ 50–53].
The multinomial model does not account for biologi-
calvariability.As aresult,anoverdispersedversionofthe
multinomialmodelmaybenecessary.Thiscanbeaccom-
modated with the Dirichlet-multinomial distribution. Let
/vectoryibe distributed as a multinomial conditional on the rel-
ative abundance parameter vector /vectorπi=(πi1,...,πiJ)/latticetop.
If/vectorπiis itself a random variable with symmetric Dirich-
let distribution having shape parameter α, the marginal
distribution of /vectoryiis Dirichlet-multinomial. This distribu-
tion can itself be approximated by independent negative
binomials. First, note that a symmetric Dirichlet ran-
domvectorcanbeconstructedbydrawing J-independent
gamma variates with shape parameter αand dividing by
their sum. Suppose (as above) we approximate the condi-
tional multinomial distribution of /vectoryisuch that yijfollows
an approximate Poisson distribution with mean niπij.L e t
λijbe a collection of non-negative random variables such
thatπij=λij/summationtext
jλij. We require that /vectorπifollows a symmet-
ric Dirichlet, which is accomplished by having λijfollow
independentgammadistributionswithshape αandmean
ni/J.T h i si m p l i e s/summationtext
jλijfollows a gamma with shape Jα
and mean ni.A sJ→∞, this distribution converges to
ap o i n tm a s sa t ni,s of o rl a r g e J(satisfied by scRNA-
Seq),/summationtext
jλij≈ni.T h i si m p l i e st h a t yijapproximately
follows a conditional Poisson distribution with mean λij,
where λijis itself a gamma random variable with mean
ni/Jand shape α.I fw et h e ni n t e g r a t eo u t λijwe obtain
the marginal distribution of yijas negative binomial with
shape αand mean ni/J.Hence anegativebinomialmodel
forcountdatamayberegardedasanapproximationtoan
overdispersedDirichlet-multinomialmodel.
Parameter estimation with multinomial models (and
their binomial or Poisson approximations) is straight-
forward. First, suppose we observe replicate samples /vectoryi,
i=1,...,Ifrom the same underlying population of
molecules, where the relative abundance of gene jisπj.
This is a null model because it assumes each gene has a
constantexpectedexpressionlevel,andthereisnobiolog-
ical variation across samples. Regardless of whether one
assumes a multinomial, binomial, or Poisson model, the
maximum likelihood estimator (MLE) of πjisˆπj=/summationtext
iyij/summationtext
iniwhereniis the total count of sample i. In the more real-
isticcasethatrelativeabundances πijofgenesvaryacross
samples,theMLEis ˆπij=yij
ni.
An alternative to the MLE is the maximum a posteri-
ori(MAP)estimator.SupposeasymmetricDirichletprior
with concentration parameter αiis combined with the
multinomial likelihood for cell i. The MAP estimator for
πijisgivenby:
˜πij=αi+yij
Jαi+ni=wi1
J+(1−wi)ˆπij
wherewi=Jαi/(Jαi+ni), showing that the MAP is
a weighted average of the prior mean that all genes are
equally expressed (1 /J)a n dt h eM L E( ˆπij). Compared to
the MLE, the MAP biases the estimate toward the prior
whereallgeneshavethesameexpression.Largervaluesof
αiintroduce more bias, while αi→0 leads to the MLE.
Ifαi>0, the smallest possible value of ˜πijisαi/(Jαi+
ni)rather than zero for the MLE. When there are many
zeros in the data, MAP can stabilize relative abundance
estimatesatthecostofintroducingbias.
Mathematicsofdistortionfromlog-normalizingUMIs
Suppose the true counts in cell iare given by xijfor genes
j=1,...,J. Some of these may be zero, if a gene is not
turned on in the cell. Knowing xijis equivalent to know-
ing the total number of transcripts ti=/summationtext
jxijand the
relative proportionsofeachgene πij,sinc exij=tiπij.T he
total number of UMI counts ni=/summationtext
jyijdoes not esti-
mateti. However, under multinomial sampling, the UMI
relative abundances ˆπij=yij
niare MLEs for the true pro-
portions πij. Note that it is possible that ˆπij=0e v e n
though πij>0. Because/summationtext
jˆπij=1r e g a r d l e s so f ni,t h e
use of multinomial MLEs is equivalent to the widespread
practice of normalizing each cell by the total counts.
Furthermore, the use of size factors si=ni/mleads to
ˆπij×m(ifm=106,thisisCPM).
Traditional bulk RNA-Seq experiments measured gene
expression in read counts of many cells per sample rather
than UMI counts of single cells. Gene counts from bulk
RNA-Seq could thus range over several orders of mag-
nitude. To facilitate comparison of these large numbers,
many bulk RNA-Seq methods have relied on a logarithm
transformation. This enables interpretation of differences
in normalized counts as fold changes on a relative scale.
Also,forcountdata,thevarianceofeachgeneisafunction
of its mean, and log transformation can help to prevent
highlyexpressedoutliergenesfromoverwhelmingdown-
stream analyses. Prior to the use of UMIs, scRNA-Seq
experimentsalsoproducedreadcountswithwideranging
values,andalogtransformwasagainemployed.However,
with single cell data, more than 90% of the genes might
be observed as exact zeros, and log (0)=− ∞which is
not useful for data analysis. UMI data also contain large