TOWNES etal. GenomeBiology          (2019) 20:295 Page3of16
Table1SinglecellRNA-Seqdatasetsused
Number Author Tissue Cells MTU Notes
1 Zheng[ 5] ERCC 1015 11,125 Spike-inonly;technicalnegativecontrol
2 Zheng[ 5] Monocytes 2612 782 1celltype;biologicalnegativecontrol
3T u n g [ 32] iPSCs 57 24,170 1celltype;biologicalnegativecontrol
4 Duo[ 15] PBMCs 3994 1215 4equalclustersofFACS-purifiedcells
5 Duo[ 15] PBMCs 3994 1298 8equalclustersofFACS-purifiedcells
6H a b e r [ 33] Intestine 533 3755 Authorscomputationallyidentified12types
7M u r a r o [ 34] Pancreas 2282 18,795 Authorscomputationallyidentified9types
8 Zheng[ 5] PBMCs 68,579 1292 Benchmarkingcomputationalspeed
Species:all H.sapiens exceptHaber( M.musculus ).Protocols:all10 ×exceptMuraro(CEL-Seq2)andTung(SMARTer). MTUmediantotalUMIcount. iPSCsinducedpluripotent
stemcells
UMI counts, while the SMARTer Tung data had high
counts.
T h ef o u r t ha n df i f t hd a t a s e t sw e r ec r e a t e db y[ 15].
The authors allocated FACS-purified peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMCs) from 10 ×data [5] equally
into four (Zheng 4eq dataset) and eight (Zheng 8eq
dataset) clusters, respectively. In these positive control
datasets,theclusteridentityofallcellswasassignedinde-
pendentlyofgeneexpression(usingFACS),sotheyserved
asthegroundtruthlabels.
Thesixthandseventhdatasetscontainedawidervariety
of cell types. However, the cluster identities were deter-
mined computationally by the original authors’ unsuper-
vised analyses and could not serve as a ground truth. The
10×Haber intestinal dataset had low total UMI counts,
while the CEL-Seq2 Muraro pancreas dataset had high
counts.
The final Zheng dataset consisted of a larger number
of unsorted PBMCs and was used to compare computa-
tional speed of different dimension reduction algorithms.
WerefertoitasthePBMC68Kdataset.
UMIcountdistributiondiffersfromreads
To illustrate the marked difference between UMI count
distributions and read count distributions, we created
histograms from individual genes and spike-ins of the
negative control data. Here, the UMI counts are the com-
putationally de-duplicated versions of the read counts;
both measurements are from the same experiment,
so no differences are due to technical or biological
variation. The results suggest that while read counts
appear zero-inflated and multimodal, UMI counts fol-
low a discrete distribution with no zero inflation
(Additional file 1: Figure S1). The apparent zero inflation
inreadcountsisaresultofPCRduplicates.
MultinomialsamplingdistributionforUMIcounts
Consider a single cell icontaining titotal mRNA tran-
scripts. Let nibe the total number of UMIs for the samecell. When the cell is processed by a scRNA-Seq proto-
col, it is lysed, then some fraction of the transcripts are
captured by beads within the droplets. A series of com-
plexbiochemicalreactionsoccur,includingattachmentof
barcodes and UMIs, and reverse transcription of the cap-
tured mRNA to a cDNA molecule. Finally, the cDNA is
sequenced, and PCR duplicates are removed to generate
the UMI counts [ 5]. In each of these stages, some frac-
tion of the molecules from the previous stage are lost
[5,7,32]. In particular, reverse transcriptase is an ineffi-
cientanderror-proneenzyme[ 35].Therefore,thenumber
of UMI counts representing the cell is much less than
the number of transcripts in the original cell ( ni/lessmuchti).
Specifically, nitypically ranges from 1000 −10,000 while
tiis estimated to be approximately 200,000 for a typical
mammalian cell [ 36]. Furthermore, which molecules are
selected and successfully become UMIs is a random pro-
cess. Let xijb et h et r u en u m b e ro fm R N At r a n s c r i p t so f
genejin celli,a n dyijbe the UMI count for the same
gene and cell. We define the relative abundance πijasthe
true number of mRNA transcripts represented by gene j
in cellidivided by the total number of mRNA transcripts
in celli.R e l a t i v ea b u n d a n c ei sg i v e nb y πij=xij/tiwhere
total transcripts ti=/summationtext
jxij.S i n c eni/lessmuchti,t h e r ei sa
“competitiontobecounted”[ 37];geneswithlargerelative
abundance πijin the original cell are more likely to have
nonzero UMI counts, but genes with small relative abun-
dances may be observed with UMI counts of exact zeros.
The UMI counts yijare a multinomial sample of the true
biological counts xij, containing only relative information
aboutexpressionpatternsinthecell[ 37,38].
The multinomial distribution can be approximated
by independent Poisson distributions and overdispersed
(Dirichlet) multinomials by independent negative bino-
mial distributions. These approximations are useful for
computational tractability. Details are provided in the
“Methods”section.
The multinomial model makes two predictions which
we verified using negative control data. First, the fraction