side information includes attributes [ 11], word vectors [ 39],
sentences [ 36], and gaze [ 18], among which, attributes draw
the greatest attention, and are adopted in this paper. A gen-
eral scenario for ZSL is to ﬁnd an embedding space based
on seen images. Typically, the semantic space (e.g., the s-
pace in Fig. 1(a), which is spanned by quantized attributes,
i.e., semantic vectors) [ 37,13,20,1,3,36,44,39,8,42,35,
27,40], the image feature space [ 4,26,45,26], and the la-
tent intermedium space [ 41] usually serve as the embedding
space. In that space, to further distinguish unseen images,
nearest neighbour search is used to match the tested image
representation with that of unseen class prototypes, i.e., se-
mantic vector w.r.t. each unseen class.
Most leading ZSL methods, whether end-to-end convo-
lutional neural network (CNN) based [ 27,42,22], or deep
feature-based approaches [ 19,51,26,53,54,34], empha-
size on learning the embedding between the (learned) glob-
al image (or feature) and the counterpart semantic vector.
However, all these methods are actually based on global
projection of the whole image. After acquiring the seman-
tic vectors w.r.t. seen/unseen classes, there exist two draw-
backs for these global projection methods: 1) due to the
subtle difference of the seen image (tiger) and unseen im-
ages (bobcat, leopard) in the global feature space, they are
neighbors (circles in Fig. 1(b)) in the projected semantic s-
pace, where, it is hard to distinguish them; 2) the annotated
ground-truth semantic vectors of bobcat, leopard and tiger
are extremely similar (Fig. 1(a)). It is thus hard, by feed-
ing the global features to the embedding model, to learn a
desirable projection for matching the input similar images
with their confused semantic vectors. In contrast, ARE can
ﬁt input images with their confused ground-truth seman-
tic vectors pretty well (in Fig. 1(c), squares are near their
ground-truth, i.e., crosses).
Since the high-level abstractions of some image regions
can lead to the attribute concept [ 10], and in order to alle-
viate the above problems, we resort to the regions (parts)
in the images. We observe that 1) besides the global im-
age representation, properly discovered regions account for
better knowledge transfer from seen to unseen class, and 2)
some regions can capture local appearance differences for
the same attribute concept, e.g., the region blocks of dif-
ferent tails are different in appearance. In this sense, part
regions are more discriminative than the corresponding at-
tribute. Therefore, projecting region representation into the
semantic space can preserve more such local differences.
In this way, tiger, bobcat, zebra, and leopard can be well
recognized from each other (Fig. 1(c), squares). In term of
discriminative feature learning, the part based feature has
long been established as a powerful one [ 12,25]. Moti-
vated by the above observations, to facilitate the seman-
tic transfer between seen/unseen images in the part level,
we propose an end-to-end attentive region embedding net-work (AREN) (Fig. 2) for ZSL. To sum up, our contribu-
tions are:
1) An attention mechanism is leveraged to automatical-
ly discover semantic/discriminative regions (parts), without
any part detection or annotation. Moreover, a novel adap-
tive thresholding mechanism is further proposed to suppress
redundant attentive regions and introduce robustness, there-
fore leading to the attentive region embedding (ARE) sub-
net. This is the ﬁrst attempt to introduce attention to ZS-
L/GZSL freely, without any part detection/annotation.
2) To capture second-order appearance differences col-
laboratively with different attentive regions, an attentive
compressed second-order embedding (ACSE) is further in-
corporated into the AREN framework. This is the ﬁrst
time second-order statistics have been explored within ZS-
L/GZSL.
3) Integrating ARE and ACSE together yields the end-to-
end AREN framework, which is trained with the guidance
of a compatibility loss with frozen classiﬁer weights (taken
from the seen class attributes).
2. Related Works
(Generalized) Zero-shot Learning. As the pioneering
work of ZSL, Lampert et al. [ 21] propose direct attribute
prediction (DAP) model, which ﬁrst learns the attribute
classiﬁers, and then calculates the posterior of a test class
for a given image. However, DAP neglects the association-
s between different attributes. To mitigate the unreliabili-
ty of the individually learned attribute classiﬁers, a random
forest solution [ 17] is advocated. As a whole, the leading
methods for ZSL are the embedding based ones equipped
with the compatibility loss, which can well associate the
images and their attributes. Speciﬁcally, Akata et al. [ 1]
proposed ALE, where a bilinear-style hinge loss is lever-
aged. LATEM [ 44] was then introduced to incorporate non-
linearity to the model. Other embedding based approach-
es include DEVICE [ 13], SJE [ 3], CMT [ 39], ESZSL [ 37],
SAE [ 20], and DEM [ 52]; for a more detailed description of
them, refer to [ 46]. Most of the methods mentioned above
adopt deep features and emphasize the model itself, thus
resulting in relatively inferior ZSL performances. Most re-
cently, another branch of approaches, i.e., end-to-end train-
able CNN models, have been proposed. The most repre-
sentatives of these train CNN model by 1) alleviating pre-
diction bias, i.e., QSFL [ 42], 2) gradually zooming global
image objects, i.e., LDF [ 22], and 3) automatically learning
the relations, i.e., RN [ 50]. However, none of them focus on
the part (region) level for enhancing the semantic transfer in
ZSL. By expanding the search label space to also consider
seen classes during testing, ZSL becomes Generalized ZS-
L (GZSL). All ZSL methods can be adopted to solve GZSL
task by obeying the data splits proposed in [ 46].
Attention. Attention [ 49], widely used and extensive-
9385