agex, is fed into the ARE, which ﬁrst undergoes the At-
tentive Region Discovery (ARD) module, followed by an
adaptive thresholding (AT) procedure. In this way, the at-
tention regions can be effectively focused and highlighted.
The AT operation can further purify the generated attention
regions by ﬁltering out the ones with low attentive strength,
thus generating some feature maps with all zero elements.
Afterward, unlike the widely-used global average pooling,
we leverage the global maximum pooling for these feature
maps and then concatenate them, which leads to the repre-
sentation vARE(x)for an image xin the region space. Specif-
ically, we formulate vARE(x)as follows:
vARE(x) =G(T(R(Z))),Z= B(x), (1)
whereB,R,T, andGare the backbone network opera-
tion, the ARD operation, the AT operation, and the GM-
P/concatenation operation, respectively. The model param-
eters in Eqn. ( 1) are omitted to ease reading.
Due to our AT operation, some segments of the cascaded
region vector vAREwill be all zeros. As validated in the ex-
periments of subsection 4.5,vAREcan achieve an improved
performance over its counterpart without an AT operation.
Finally, to accomplish the ZSL/GZSL task, vAREis embed-
ded into the semantic space. The projected representation
yAREin the semantic space for xis deﬁned as
yARE=E(vARE). (2)
The parameters in Eqn. ( 1) and ( 2) are jointly trained
with the guidance of a cross-entropy-like compatibility
function[ 22,1,42,3,27] (we will revisit the compatibili-
ty loss in detail in subsection 3.2).
Attentive Region Discovery Module: To discover the
multiple attentive regions of an input image x, which serve
as the bridge for semantic transfer from the part level, we
leverage the attention mechanism to automatically learn
to focus. With the supervision of high-level semantic at-
tributes (from compatibility loss) in the topmost layer of the
net, we hope that the discovered regions can match with the
annotated semantic attributes. In this way, the yielded re-
gions are essentially communicating between seen/unseen
classes, e.g., a child has heard the description of “zebra” as
looking like a “horse” with black-white stripes; then when
she sees the picture of “zebra”, by focusing on the black-
white stripy regions, she can tell it’s a “zebra”. In this sec-
tion, we will elaborate on the ARD module, i.e., mapping
R:Z→ R(Z), where,Zis the last convolutional feature
map of the backbone net. Zis a 3D tensor, and we suppose
Z∈RH×W×C, whereC,H, andWare the size of the
channel, height, and width, respectively. Let z(h,w,c)∈R
be the response value in location (h,w)of thec-th channel
fromZ. We further denote the desirable region number as
K, where, desirable means that 1) the number of regions is
discriminative for distinguishing seen/unseen images; and2) some of these regions are matched with the semantic at-
tributes, e.g., the region of leg matches the attribute “leg”.
Inspired by the application of attention models to various
ﬁelds, such as image captioning [ 49], we employ the atten-
tion mechanism to the ZSL ﬁeld as well, with the aim of
grasping the semantic regions and further narrowing the se-
mantic gap between seen/unseen images.
Speciﬁcally, by taking Zas input, we generate K2-
dimensional masks Mk∈RH×W, (k= 1,2,···,K):
Mk=MMaskGenerate k(Z), (3)
whereMMaskGenerate k(·)is a mask generation operation
which is implemented by convolution on Zfollowed by the
Sigmoid thresholding. Thus, the value mk(h,w)in location
(h,w)ofMkcan reﬂect the strength that location (h,w)of
Zfalls into the k-th region. Furthermore, suppose the k-
th attentive convolutional feature map is Γk∈ R(Z). In
particular, Γkis obtained by
Γk=OReshape(Mk)⊗Z. (4)
In Eqn. ( 4),OReshape(·)reshapes the input to be the same
size as that of Z,⊗indicates an element-wise product.
Adaptive Thresholding: After the ARD, the generat-
edKattentive maps usually have redundancy, such as the
background noises. To purify these maps, we propose the
AT operation. AT takes these Kattentive feature maps (in
Eqn. ( 4)) as inputs, calculates the maximum value of each
2D mask map ( Mk), yielding the maximum value vector
mv∈RK×1w.r.t. these Kmask maps. Then, the maxi-
mum value of mvis achieved, denoted as AT max:
AT max= max
1/lessorequalslantk/lessorequalslantKmv(k). (5)
AT maxis the global maximum value of these Kattention
mask maps in Eqn. ( 3). An adaptive coefﬁcient α(0/lessorequalslantα/lessorequalslant
1) is introduced, based on which, we denote the ﬁnal thresh-
olding bound as TB=α×AT max. To this end, if the k-th
value inmvis less than TB, the corresponding attentive
feature map Γkwill be set as all zero elements. Throughout
the paper, for a given ﬁxed K, there is only one parameter α
to be tuned. Experimental evaluation shows improvements
in performance by setting a proper value for α.
3.1.2 Attentive Compressed Second-order Embedding
In Fig. 2, after acquiring the last convolutional feature
mapZand theKpuriﬁed attentive feature maps (from the
ARE), i.e., T(Γk),k= 1,2,···,K, with some of them
having all zero-elements, we resort to second-order pool-
ing [ 24] to alleviate the semantic gap between seen/unseen
images. We ﬁrst compress Zby a1×1convolution. The re-
sulting compressed feature map ZcpshasNcps(=20through-
out this paper) channels. In this way, the resulting com-
pressed second-order representation will be compact and
efﬁciently trainable.
9387