For each T(Γk), the second-order pooling with Zcps
yields the k-th second-order representation Pk, which may
be equal to all zero vector due to the attentive mechanism.
Pkis formulated as:
Pk=Zcps⊚T(Γk), (6)
where⊚is the seconder-order operation [ 24] between two
input matrices. A vector maximum pooling is utilized to
pool these Kvectors, thus generating the ﬁnal ACSE repre-
sentation vACSE(x)for the input image x.
Similarly, vACSE(x)is embedded into the semantic space
to achieve ZSL/GZSL. The projected representation yACSE
implies the second-order statistics for better semantic trans-
fer. To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst time that
second-order representation is incorporated into ZSL.
3.2. The Compatibility Loss
In this section, we discuss the problem of embedding to
the semantic space, which is the most utilized strategy for
making ZSL extendable. In general, the ZSL task formu-
lates a mapping (prediction) function f:XS/mapsto→ Y from
the (seen) training set, as follows:
f(x,W) = argmax
y∈YF(x,y;W). (7)
Given the trained parameters W, the function in Eqn. ( 7)
is used to predict an unseen image xu. To associate the
visual and semantic information, the score function F(·),
parameterized by W, is typically formulated as the bilinear
compatibility function [ 1,13,37,3,22,42,27,46]:
F(x,y;W) =θ(x)Wφ(y), (8)
whereθ(x)andφ(y)are the visual embedding of image x
and the semantic embedding of label y, respectively.
In the context of the proposed ARE and ACSE, vARE(x)
andvACSE(x)serve as the visual embeddings of input image
x, i.e., Eqn. ( 8) can be reformulated as follows:
FARE(x,y;ΘARE,W ARE) =vARE(x)TW AREay∗,
FACSE(x,y;ΘACSE,W ACSE) =vACSE(x)TW ACSEay∗,(9)
whereΘAREandΘACSEare the whole learnable parameters
w.r.t.vARE(x)andvACSE(x)respectively, W AREandW ACSEare
the embedding parameters for mapping vARE(x)andvACSE(x)
to the semantic embedding ay∗, which is the L-2 normal-
ized semantic vector w.r.t. class y.
We further denote the normalized attribute matrix w.r.t.
all theseCsseen classes as A ∈RQ×Cs, and the class out-
puts of image xon the ﬁnal layer of ARE and ACSE are
OARE(x;ΘARE,W ARE) =ATWT
AREvARE(x),
OACSE(x;ΘACSE,W ACSE) =ATWT
ACSEvACSE(x),(10)To learn all these parameters ( ΘARE,W ARE,ΘACSE,W ACSE) in
Eqn. ( 10) in an end-to-end manner, i.e., to train the proposed
AREN (Fig. 2), the loss function is
L=λ1LARE+λ2LACSE, (11)
whereλ1andλ2are trade-off parameters. LAREandLACSE
are speciﬁed as
LARE=1
NsNs/summationdisplay
i=1L(OARE(xs
i;ΘARE,W ARE),ys
i),
LACSE=1
NsNs/summationdisplay
i=1L(OACSE(xs
i;ΘACSE,W ACSE),ys
i),(12)
whereLis some classiﬁcation loss. In this paper, cross-
entropy (CE) loss is used. Compared with traditional CE
loss, the difference lies in that the weights of the CE loss
layer are frozen as Aand are ﬁxed without updating dur-
ing the training phase. In this way, the attribute matrix A
can guide the attentive region discovery, and progressively
project the input image to the direction of its semantic rep-
resentation. To this end, we term the designed two stream
loss function Las compatibility loss.
3.3. Prediction
In the AREN framework, the tested unseen image can be
projected into the semantic space by ARE/ACSE, enabling
it to perform a separate prediction.
Prediction by ARE: A test image xucan be projected into
the semantic space, thus resulting in the ARE representation
φARE(xu)(=WT
AREvARE(xu)). To predict the class label, the
location of the maximum compatibility score can be chosen
as the predicted label:
yu∗= arg max
c∈YUφARE(xu)Tau
c. (13)
Prediction by ACSE: Similarly, suppose the ACSE repre-
sentation of xuisφACSE(xu)(=WT
ACSEvACSE(xu)). The pre-
dicted class label is:
yu∗= arg max
c∈YUφACSE(xu)Tau
c. (14)
Combining ARE and ACSE: After obtaining the ARE and
ACSE representations of xu, i.e.,φARE(xu)andφACSE(xu),
we ﬁrst calculate their combined vector, and then predict
the label in the same way as Eqn. ( 13) / Eqn. ( 14):
yu∗= arg max
c∈YU(γ1φARE(xu)T+γ2φACSE(xu)T)au
c. (15)
4. Experiments
4.1. Datasets and Settings
Four widely used ZSL datasets, i.e., CUB [ 43],
AWA2 [ 46], SUN [ 30], and APY [ 11], are employed to
9388