Attentive Region Embedding Network for Zero-shot Learning
Guo-Sen Xie1, Li Liu1, Xiaobo Jin3, Fan Zhu1, Zheng Zhang2, Jie Qin1, Yazhou Yao1, Ling Shao1
1Inception Institute of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, UAE
2University of Queensland, Australia
3Xi’an Jiaotong-Liverpool University, China
Abstract
Zero-shot learning (ZSL) aims to classify images from
unseen categories, by merely utilizing seen class images
as the training data. Existing works on ZSL mainly lever-
age the global features or learn the global regions, from
which, to construct the embeddings to the semantic space.
However, few of them study the discrimination power im-
plied in local image regions (parts), which, in some sense,
correspond to semantic attributes, have stronger discrim-
ination than attributes, and can thus assist the semantic
transfer between seen/unseen classes. In this paper, to dis-
cover (semantic) regions, we propose the attentive region
embedding network (AREN), which is tailored to advance
the ZSL task. Speciﬁcally, AREN is end-to-end trainable
and consists of two network branches, i.e., the attentive
region embedding (ARE) stream, and the attentive com-
pressed second-order embedding (ACSE) stream. ARE is
capable of discovering multiple part regions under the guid-
ance of the attention and the compatibility loss. Moreover,
a novel adaptive thresholding mechanism is proposed for
suppressing redundant (such as background) attention re-
gions. To further guarantee more stable semantic transfer
from the perspective of second-order collaboration, ACSE
is incorporated into the AREN. In the comprehensive evalu-
ations on four benchmarks, our models achieve state-of-the-
art performances under ZSL setting, and compelling results
under generalized ZSL setting.
1. Introduction
Zero-shot learning (ZSL) [ 29,1,21,46] is proposed for
solving challenging classiﬁcation tasks, wherein, the label
spaces for the training set and test set are disjoint from each
other, and there are no training samples (zero-shot) for test
categories. Most recently, for traditional recognition sys-
tems [ 16,23,33,32,31,47], two issues hinder their ad-
vancements, i.e., 1) annotating large-scale samples is both(b) Direct Embedding
Tiger
Zebra
Bobcat
Leopard
Wrongly classified
= 
TigerTiger
X
XAttentive regions
(c) Attentive Region EmbeddingBobcat
Leopard≠
 
 Correctly classified(a) Semantic vector generation
Tiger
Zebra
Bobcat
Leopard
longlegSemantic vectors
Spots
hoovesstripestailclawsbig010 0 1 11101 11 0 0000 11 1 1
010 01 1 0Seen
Seen
Unseen
Unseen
Attributes:Semantic space
Ground-truth semantic 
vectors in semantic space
Tiger
Zebra
Bobcat
Leopard
Unseen image test Unseen image test
Figure 1. (a) Toy example of generating semantic vectors; cross-
es indicate ground-truth semantic vectors in the semantic space.
Four animals all have the attribute “tail” (shown in red dashed
box), as such, “tail” is misleading the afterward classiﬁcation. (b)
Circles represent samples in the semantic space by direct embed-
ding (DE) images to this space. For DE, Bobcat and Leopard are
wrongly recognized as Tiger. (c) Squares are these samples in
the semantic space embedded by ARE; in this case, by preserv-
ing the discrimination from the part level, the confused unseen
images (Bobcat and Leopard) can be well distinguished andcor-
rectly recognized . Best viewed in color.
time consuming and expensive [ 52], and 2) new categories
are constantly emerging [ 50], and some of them are difﬁ-
cult (or even dangerous) to be collected, e.g., the identiﬁed
cofﬁnﬁsh in the deep-sea. In contrast, ZSL has the intrinsic
advantages of tackling the image annotation and novel class
recognition problems, which makes it a hot topic in recent
years.
To transfer semantic knowledge for images from two dis-
joint category spaces, the semantic description of each cat-
egory (for both seen/unseen classes), as the high-level side
information, is key for accomplishing ZSL. Widely-used
9384