Classification of Astronomical Bodies by Efficient 
Layer Fine -Tuning of Deep Neural Networks
 
 
 
 
Sabeesh Ethiraj  
Data Science  
UpGrad Education  Private Limited  
Mumbai , India  
sabeesh90@yahoo.co.uk  
  
 
 
Bharath Kumar Bolla  
AI & Data  
Verizon, India  
Bangalore , India  
bolla111@gmail.com  
 
Abstract— The SDSS -IV dataset contains information about 
various astronomical bodies such as Galaxies, Stars , and 
Quasars captured by observatories. Inspired by our work on 
deep multimodal  learning , which utilized transfer learning to 
classify the SDSS -IV dataset, w e further extended our research 
in the fine tuning of these architectures to study the effect in the 
classification scenario . Architectures such as Resnet -50, 
DenseNet -121 VGG -16, Xception , EfficientNet B2, MobileNetV2 
and NasnetMobile have been built using  layer wise fine tuning 
at different levels. Our findings suggest that freezing all layers 
with Imagenet weights and adding a final trainable layer may 
not be the optimal solution.  Further, baseline models and models 
that have higher number of trainable la yers performed similarly 
in certain architectures.  Model need to be fine tuned at different 
levels and a specific training ratio is required for a model to be 
termed ideal . Different architectures had different response s to 
the change in the number of trai nable layers w.r.t accuracies. 
While models such as DenseNet -121, Xception, EfficientNetB2 
achieved peak accuracies that were relatively consisten t with 
near perfect  training curves , models  such as Resnet -50,VGG -16, 
MobileNetV2  and NasnetMobile  had lower, delayed peak 
accuracies with poorly fitting training curve s. It was also found 
that though mobile neural networks have lesser parameters and 
model size, they may not always be ideal for deployment on a 
low computational device as they had consistent ly lower 
validation accuracies.  Customized evaluation metrics such as 
Tuning Param eter Ratio and Tuning Layer Ratio  are used for 
model evaluation . 
Keywords —Efficient Transfer Learning models , Deep Neural 
Networks , Layer -wise Fine Tuning , Resnet50, MobileNe tV2, 
NasNetMobile, Xception, EfficientNetB2, SDSS  
I. INTRODUCTION  
There have been numerous large -scale surveys that have 
been done to map the universe and various astronomical 
objects present in it . The Sloan Digital Sky Survey (SDSS)  
(Blanton et al., 2017)  contains information captured by the 
observatories  which include optical, spectroscopic , and 
photometric information , along with an array of other 
observations.  This paper aims to evaluate transfer learning 
models by sequentially fine tuning the laye rs in a classification 
task. Various transfer learning architectures including mobile 
architectures are evaluated  to identify the ideal methodology 
apt for these class of models. The experiments will help us 
gain insights on the transfer learning models an d study the 
effect of sequential fine tuning and model performance. 
Models are evaluated using metrics such as validation 
Accuracy, Tuning Layer Ratio and Tuning Parameter Ratio. 
The objective of this paper is as follows:  1) To evaluate transfer learning on variety of 
architecture s using layer wise fine tuning  
2) To evaluate the models based on the training curves  
II. RELATED WORK  
Machine learning and Deep learning architectures are 
being continually designed and utilized in many large -scale 
astronomical surveys. Algorithms such as SKYNET that are 
based on Artificial neural networks have also been used in 
Astronomical datasets. Skyn et [1] is one such neural network 
used in regression, classification, and clustering algorithms. A 
similar neural network called AstroNN [2] was designed and 
built specifically for astronomical surveys used to analyze 
spectroscopic data of the APO - Apache  Point Observatory - 
Galactic Evolution Experiment The work done by [1] 
demonstrates the use of this network in astronomical 
classification.  
A. Machine Learning on SDSS Dataset  
The work done by Acharya et al . [2] in 2018 wherein th e 
entire SDSS -3, DR-12 dataset was classified . The 
classification was built on the same photometric parameters 
you, g, i, r , and z using PySpark on Google Proc. Cloud -based 
computing was used in this case due to the sheer volume of 
the data. Models such as KNN, Support Vec tor Machines , and 
Random Forest were evaluated for their performance, with 
Random Forest showed the highest performance in both 
binary and  multi -class classification. This study was later 
followed by a comparative evaluation study in 2020 by 
Petrusevich   [3] on the SDSS -4 DR 14 dataset. Baseline 
machine learning models such as Logistic regression, Naive 
Bayes Classifier, Gradient Boosting, Decision Trees , and 
Random Forest were applied to this dataset a nd the enhanced 
version using feature engineering tec hniques. It was shown 
that these baseline machine learning models performed better 
than or as good as conventional deep learning models in terms 
of Accuracy, Precision , and Recall on both the baseline and 
enhanced dataset. Similar machine learning models w ere also 
used in the classification of images, as is the work done by du 
Buisson et al.  in 2015  [6], where differen t images were created 
from the actual images of the sky at two different points in 
time on the transient images of the SDSS 2 - survey.  
B. Deep Learning on Astronomical Classification  
Deep learning architectures have been created using 
photometric parameters  of the SDSS dataset  and passing them 
through a customized CNN architecture using temporal and 
filter convolutions  [5]. Combining these models with a 
baseline machine learning model such as KNN and Random