Fig 4.Resnet, MobileNetV2 and Nasnet Training Curves - Val Accuracies  
 
Fig 5. Xception, EfficientNetB2 , and DenseNet121 Training Curves -Val Accuracies  
B. Baseline Models Analysis  
Baseline  models contain the trainable weights of only the 
last softmax layer. The weights of the other layers are frozen 
and not trained. As shown in Table 6, it is evident that baseline 
models without any fine-tuning perform poorly on the given 
dataset , with accur acy as low as 44% in the case of VGG16. 
It is observed that older architectures perform poorly 
compared  to newer architectures such as Xception and 
EfficientNetB2, which perform significantly better as 
indicated by the validation accuracies. Additionally, it is 
observed that baseline mobile architectures outperform older 
architectures with accuracy comparable to that of Google's 
architectures. Trainable layers vs . Accuracy  
 Optimum model identification requires fine -tuning the 
number of trainable layers. As  the number of trainable layers 
increases, the accuracy increases gradually until it either 
reaches a plateau with no further increase or a dip in the 
accuracy is observed . The models can be classified into three 
categories based on their number of paramet ers, trainable 
layers, and validation accuracies.  
- Consistently higher accuracies of newer 
architectures  
- Lesser Performing Older Architectures including 
Mobile Architectures  
- Ideal Densenet121 architecture  
C. Xception and EfficientNetB2 – Consistency of Accurac ies. 
As illustrated in Figures 6 and 7, newer architectures such as 
Xception and EfficientNetB2 achieve higher accuracy even 
in baseline models with a single trainable layer, and the 
accuracy remains consistent across a range of trainable 
layer s. Our experiments revealed that accuracy is 
proportional to the number of trainable layers, as 
EfficientNetB2 achieved 95.5 percent accuracy at 36 
trainable layers and Xception achieved 95 percent accuracy 
at 18 trainable layers, which is slightly lower than 
Densenet121. Even with more trainable layers added, the 
accuracies  remain relatively constant  after attaining a peak 
efficien cy.  
 
Fig 6. EfficientNetB2 Accuracy vs . Trainable Layers vs . Param eters 
 
  
 
 
Fig 7. Xception Accuracy vs . Trainable Layers vs . Param eters 
D. Resnet50  – Dipping Accuracies  
 Resnet50 architecture in Fig ure 8 shows an increase in 
accuracy as the number of trainable layers increase s; however , 
the accuracies show a dip after 30 trainable layers . The 
highest accuracy attained by this architecture is 93.5% which 
is slightly lower than other models.