111:26 Ren and Chang, et al.
recognition [ 4,7,113], machine translation [ 1,3,143,151], semantic segmentation [ 144,145,150],
object detection [ 8,148,149], and video understanding [ 146,147] and so on. Although the NAS-
related research has been quite rich, compared with the rapid development of artificial neural
architecture design in various fields, NAS is still in the preliminary research stage. The current NAS
is primarily focused on improving image classification accuracy, compressing the time required to
search for neural architecture, and making it as light and easy to promote as possible. In this process,
a proper baseline is crucial, as this helps to avoid NAS search strategy research being masked by
various powerful augmenting technologies, regularization, and search space design tricks. Besides,
the search strategies currently used by NAS are relatively concentrated, especially GO based on
supernets, and there are many theoretical deficiencies in the related research. Therefore, improving
the related research background is of great benefit to the development of NAS.
More specifically, from the original intention of NAS design, early NAS was very close to people’s
expectations for automatic neural architecture design. For example, Large-scale Evolution [ 15] uses
an EA as a NAS search strategy, and emphasizes that there is no need for manual participation
once network evolution begins. In the case of reducing human interference as much as possible,
the algorithm is allowed to autonomously determine the evolution direction of the network. This is
a good start, although the search performance at the time was insufficient. This is mainly because
Large-scale Evolution emphasizes the reduction of artificial restrictions to the greatest extent
possible, and also evolves from the simplest single-layer network (as shown in Fig.3). This means
that the population must contain a sufficient number of individuals to evolve satisfactory results.
Besides, due to the limitations of evolutionary efficiency and the huge search space, it is difficult to
evolve a network structure that can achieve outstanding performance. Therefore, subsequent NAS
works began to discuss how to reduce the search space as much as possible while also improving
network performance. NASNet [ 32] benefited from the idea of artificial neural architecture design
[4,30,31], and proposes a modular search space that was later widely adopted. However, this comes
at the expense of the freedom of neural architecture design. Although this modular search space
does significantly reduce the search cost, it is unclear in reality whether a better neural architecture
has been ignored in the process of turning global search into modular search. This is also the main
reason why it is unclear whether the modular search is better than a global search (related research
is also lacking). Besides, the freedom of neural architecture design and the search cost presents a
contradiction. How to balance the two and obtain good performance remains an important future
research direction.
Also, there are two issues worthy of vigilance. From the perspective of the baseline, as analyzed
in Section 4, a widely criticized problem of NAS is the lack of a corresponding baseline and sharable
experimental protocol, which makes it difficult to compare NAS search algorithms with each other.
While RS has proven to be a strong baseline [ 24,34,105,129], there is still insufficient research
on this subject. [ 24] pointed out that the performance of the current optimal NAS algorithm is
similar to the random strategy, which should arouse researchers’ concerns. Therefore, more ablation
experiments are necessary, and researchers should pay more attention to which part of the NAS
design leads to performance gains. Blindly stacking certain techniques to increase performance
should also be criticized. Therefore, relevant theoretical analysis and reflection are crucial to the
future development of NAS.
Another issue that requires vigilant is the widely used parameter sharing strategy [ 19]; although
it effectively improves NAS search efficiency, an increasing body of evidence shows that the
parameter sharing strategy is likely to result in a sub-optimal inaccurate candidate architecture
ranking [ 21,24,25,100]. This would make it almost impossible for NAS to find the optimal neural
architecture in the search space. Therefore, relevant theoretical research and improvements are
expected in the future. Besides, the current NAS works are mainly focused on improving the
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2020.