111:4 Ren and Chang, et al.
ControllerSearch Space
Candidate 
ArchitectureOptimal 
Architecture
Training & RankSelectPerformance 
Evaluation Evaluation 
Strategy
Fig. 1. The general framework of NAS.
2 CHARACTERISTICS OF EARLY NAS
In this section, we first analyze the early work of NAS and then summarize their overall framework
and characteristics.The general framework of NAS is summarized in Fig.1. NAS generally begins
with a set of predefined operation sets and uses a controller to obtain a large number of candidate
neural architectures based on the search space created by these operation sets. The candidate
architectures are then trained on the training set and ranked according to their accuracy on the
validation set. The ranking information of the candidate neural architecture is then used as feedback
information to adjust the search strategy, enabling a set of new candidate neural architectures to
be obtained. When the termination condition is reached, the search process is terminated to select
the best neural structure. The chosen neural architecture then conducts performance evaluation on
the test set.
Early NAS also followed the above process to a large extent [ 11,12,15,16]. The idea behind
NAS-RL [ 11] comes from the very simple observation that the architecture of a neural network can
be described as a variable-length string. Therefore, an intuitive idea is that we can use RNN as a
controller to generate such a string, then use RL to optimize the controller, and finally obtain a satis-
factory neural architecture. MetaQNN [ 12] regards the selection process of the neural architecture
as a Markov decision process, and uses Q-learning to record rewards to obtain the optimal neural
architecture. Large-scale Evolution [ 15] aims to learn an optimal neural architecture automatically
using evolutionary algorithms (EA) while reducing human intervention as much as possible. This
approach uses the simplest network structure to initialize a large population, then obtains the best
neural architecture by reproducing, mutating, and selecting the population. GeNet [ 16], which also
uses EA, proposes a new neural architecture coding scheme, that represents the neural architecture
as a fixed-length binary string. It randomly initializes a group of individuals, employs a predefined
set of genetic operations to modify the binary string to generate new individuals, and finally selects
the most competitive individual as the final neural architecture.
These early NAS approaches eventually made the automatically generated neural architecture a
reality. To understand the reasons behind restricting the widespread use of early NAS, we have
summarized the common characteristics existing in early NAS work from the perspective of a
latecomer, as follows:
•Global search space. This requires the NAS to use a search strategy that searches all
necessary components of the neural architecture. This means that NAS needs to find an
optimal neural architecture within a very large search space. The larger the search space, the
higher the corresponding search cost.
•Discrete search strategy. This regards the differences between different neural architectures
as a limited set of basic operations; that is, by discretely modifying an operation to change
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2020.