A Comprehensive Survey of Neural Architecture Search: Challenges and Solutions 111:19
enables CAS to inherit the experience gained from the previous task when training a new task,
thereby allowing the model parameters can to continuously trained. This is highly beneficial to
NAS research on multi-tasking. Moreover, AutoGAN [ 54] first introduced NAS into generative
adversarial networks (GANs) [ 93] and used the Inception score (IS) [ 94] as the reward value of RL
to accelerate the search process through parameter sharing ENAS [ 19] and dynamic-resetting.
Further, progressive GAN training [ 95] has been used to introduce multi-level architecture search
(MLAS) into AutoGAN and gradually implement NAS. Compared with the most advanced manual
GANs [ 95–98], AutoGAN is highly competitive. The parameter sharing mechanism is also used
to accelerate the deployment research of the NAS architecture model across multiple devices and
multiple constrained environments. At the kernel level, OFA [ 100] uses an elastic kernel mechanism
to meet the application needs of multi-platform deployment and the diverse visual needs of different
platforms. Small kernels share the weight of large kernels; this is done to avoid repeatedly centering
sub-kernels (centering sub-kernels is used for both an independent kernel and a part of a large kernel)
to reduce the performance of certain sub-networks, OFA also introduces a kernel transformation
matrix. At the network level, OFA recommends training the largest network first, while the smaller
network shares the weight of the larger network before fine-tuning. Moreover, the weight of the
large network can provide a small network with good initialization, which greatly accelerates the
training efficiency.
Besides, the one-shot based method also employs parameter sharing. SMASH [ 23] proposes to
train an auxiliary HyperNet [ 89], which is used to generate weights for other candidate neural
architectures. Besides, SMASH also uses the early training performance of different networks
derived from the research in Hyperband [ 90] to provide meaningful guidance suggestions for
the ranking of candidate neural architectures. Parameter sharing is primarily reflected in the
hypernetwork and between candidate neural architectures. The use of the auxiliary HyperNet avoids
the need to completely train each candidate neural architecture. By comparing the performance of
the candidate neural architectures using weights generated by the HyperNet on the verification set,
their relative rankings can be obtained; this allows SMASH to quickly obtain the optimal neural
architecture at the cost of a single training session. Understanding One-Shot Models [ 22] conducts
a comprehensive analysis of the rationality of the parameter sharing approaches used in SMASH
[23] and ENAS [ 19]. Besides, Understanding One-Shot Models also discussed the necessity of the
hypernetwork in SMASH and the RL controller in ENAS, pointing out that a good enough result
can be obtained without the use of the hypernetwork and RL controller. Unlike SMASH, which
encodes an architecture into a three-dimensional tensor via a memory channel scheme, Graph
HyperNetwork (GHN) [ 91] employs computation graphs to represent the neural architecture, then
uses graph neural networks to perform architecture searches. Compared to SMASH, which can
only use the hypernetwork to predict some weights, GHN can predict all the free weights through
the use of a graph model. Therefore, network topology modeling-based GHN can predict network
performance faster and more accurately than SMASH.
A typical one-shot NAS must randomly sample a large number of candidate architectures from
the hypernetwork using parameter sharing, then evaluate these architectures to find the best
one [ 22,23]. SETN [ 92] noted that finding the best architecture from these sampled candidate
architectures is extremely difficult. This is because, in the relevant NAS [ 22,23,83], the shared
parameters are closely coupled with the learnable architectural parameters. This will introduce
deviations into the template parameters, which will cause some of the learnable architectural
parameters to be more biased towards simple networks (these networks have fewer layers and
are more lightweight). Because they converge faster than more complex networks, this will lead
to a simplified search architecture. At the same time, it also results in the sampled candidate
architectures having a very low good rate. To this end, SETN adopts a uniformly stochastic training
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2020.