A Comprehensive Survey of Neural Architecture Search: Challenges and Solutions 111:17
⋯⋯Seed NetworkSuper Network Target Architecture
Target Network
Network
Expansion Architecture
AdaptationParameter
Adaptation
Parameter Remapping
Fig. 12. The overall framework of FNA [ 60]. It starts from a seed network, expands this network into a super
network in its operation set, and then uses the NAS method to adapt the neural architecture to obtain the
target architecture. The seed network is then used to map the parameters to the super network and the target
network to initialize the parameters. Finally, the target network is obtained via fine-tuning the target task.
3.4 Incomplete Training
The key technology behind NAS involves using a search strategy to find the best neural architecture
by comparing the performance of a large number of candidate neural architectures. Accordingly,
the performance ranking of candidate neural architectures is extremely important. Early versions of
NAS [ 11,12,15,16] usually fully train the candidate neural architecture, then obtain the rankings
of the candidate neural architectures based on their performance on the validation set. However,
this method is excessively time-consuming because there are excessively many candidate neural
architectures to compare.
It should however be noted here that these works have also used some methods to accelerate the
ranking of candidate neural architectures. For example, NAS-RL [ 11] uses parallel and asynchro-
nous updates [ 42] to accelerate candidate neural architecture training. MetaQNN [ 12] compares
the performance of the candidate neural architecture after the first epoch of training with the
performance of the random predictor to determine whether it is necessary to reduce the learning
rate and restart training. Large-scale Evolution [ 15] allows the mutated child neural architecture
to inherit the weight of the parent to the greatest possible extent, thereby reducing the burden
associated with retraining the candidate neural architecture. However, there are still a large number
of child networks whose structural changes are unable to inherit the weight of their parents after
mutation, meaning that these candidate networks will be forced to retrain. Although the above
methods also accelerate the training of candidate neural architectures to a certain extent, they still
require a lot of computing power and their acceleration effects are relatively limited. Therefore, it is
necessary to conduct some research that can be used to further accelerate the training of candidate
neural architectures to obtain their relative ranking.
3.4.1 Training from scratch? Can we only train each candidate’s neural architecture from scratch?
This may ignore the interconnection between neural architectures. Parameter sharing brings us a
new possibility.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2020.