111:6 Ren and Chang, et al.
Fig. 3. Taking Large-scale Evolution [ 15] as an example, beginning from the simplest neural architecture to
gradually generate the final neural architecture. 𝐶,𝐵𝑁and𝑅denote the convolution, Batch Normalization
and ReLU operations in sequence.
where⊙can be a sum operation or a merge operation; for example, ⊙is a merge operation in
NAS-RL [ 11], and⊙is an element-wise summation operation in GeNet [ 16]. It should be pointed
out here that NASNet [ 32] considers these two operations in the experiment, but the experimental
results demonstrate that the sum operation is better than the merge operation. Accordingly, since
then, a large number of works have taken the summation operation as the connection method of
the feature map obtained between different branch operations [ 17,37,38]. Like the chain structure,
Mnasnet [ 29] suggests searching for a neural architecture that is composed of multiple segments
and connected in sequence, with each segment having its repeating structure.
Besides, in early NAS works, searching from scratch was a commonly adopted strategy. NAS-RL
[11] expresses the neural architecture as a string of variable length that is generated by RNN as a
controller. The corresponding neural architecture is then generated according to the string, after
which reinforcement learning is used as the corresponding search strategy to adjust the neural
architecture search. MetaQNN [ 12] trains an agent to sequentially select the layer structure of the
neural network on the search space constructed by the predefined operation set. This approach
regards the layer selection process as a Markov decision process, and also uses Q-learning as a
search strategy to adjust the agent’s selection behavior. Similar to NAS-RL [ 11], GeNet [ 16] also
adopts the concept of encoding the network structure. The difference is that in GeNet [ 16], the
neural architecture representation is regarded as a string of fixed-length binary codes, which are
regarded as the DNA of the neural architecture. The population is initialized randomly, after which
evolutionary learning is used to reproduce, mutate and select the population, and then to iterate
to select the best individual. It can be seen from the above analysis that these methods do not
employ the existing excellent artificially designed neural architecture, but instead, search the neural
architecture from scratch in their respective methods. More simply, Large-scale Evolution [ 15]
uses only a single-layer model without convolution as the starting point for individual evolution.
Evolutionary learning methods are then used to evolve the population, and then to select the most
competitive individuals in the population. We take Large-scale Evolution [ 15] as an example and
present an example of searching from scratch in Fig.3.
The common characteristics of these early NAS works are also the collective challenges faced
by the automatic generation of neural architecture. We summarize the solutions to the above-
mentioned challenges in the subsequent NAS-related research work in Section 3.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2020.