A Comprehensive Survey of Neural Architecture Search: Challenges and Solutions 111:15
Conv(32,3,1) Pool(2,2) Conv(64,5,1) Pool(2,2) FC(64)LSTM LSTM LSTM LSTM LSTMLSTM LSTM LSTM LSTM LSTM
Layer EmbeddingEnconder
NetworkNetwork Transformation 
Net2Wider
Actor NetworkNet2Deeper
Actor NetworkUpdate the network
Multiple
Actor Networks ⋯
Fig. 9. In EAS [ 51], architecture search based on network transformation. After the existing network layer is
encoded by the layer encoder, Bi-LSTM [ 48] is used as a meta-controller to learn the low-dimensional feature
representation of the neural architecture. The multi-actor network combines these features to decide whether
the corresponding network transformation operation (deepening layer or widening layer) should be adopted.
Finally, reinforcement learning is used to update the meta-controlled parameters.
Fig. 10. The internal structure of two actor networks in EAS [ 51]: Net2Wider and Net2Deeper. In Net2Wider,
the actor network shares the same sigmoid classifier and decides whether to widen the layer according to
each hidden state of the encoder. In Net2Deeper, the actor network inputs the state of the final hidden layer
of Bi-LSTM into the recurrent network, after which the recurrent network decides where to insert the layer
and the parameters of the inserted layer.
include: addandconcatenation . We present an example of the process of implementing a path-level
network transformation by using a multi-branch operation rather than a single layer in Fig.11.
Another similar work, NASH-Net [ 85], further proposes four network morphism types based
on Net2Net [ 47]. NASH-Net can begin with a pre-trained network, apply network morphism to
generate a set of sub-networks, and obtain the best sub-network following a short period of training.
Then, after starting from the best sub-network, this process is iterated using the Neural Architecture
Search by Hill-climbing (NASH) to get the best neural architecture.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2020.