111:14 Ren and Chang, et al.
In this section, we provide a comprehensive and systematic overview of optimized NAS work
that employs gradient strategies on a continuous search strategy. Due to the simplicity and elegance
of the DARTS architecture, the research work related to DARTS is quite rich. Moreover, gradient
optimization in a continuous search strategy is an important trend of NAS.
3.3 Neural Architecture Recycling
Early NAS works [ 11,12,15,16] and many subsequent works [ 17,39–41] aim to search the neural
architecture from scratch. From a certain perspective, this type of approach does increase the
freedom of neural architecture design, and it is very likely to result in the design of a new high-
performance network structure unknown to humans. However, it is clear that this idea also increases
the time complexity of searching for the best neural architecture; this is because it does not make
full use of the prior knowledge regarding the existing artificially designed high-performance
neural architecture. Therefore, a new idea would be to use the existing, artificially designed high-
performance neural architecture as a starting point, then use the NAS method to modify or evolve
these neural architectures, as this would enable a more promising neural architecture to be obtained
at a lower computing cost. This process is generally referred to as ’network transformation’.
Net2Net [ 47] conducts a detailed study of network transformation technology and proposes
function-preserving transformations to facilitate the reuse of model parameters after transformation.
This approach can effectively accelerate the training of new and larger networks. Based on this idea,
[51] proposes efficient architecture search (EAS), which uses the encoder network as a meta-controller
to learn the low-dimensional representation of the existing neural architecture, and further refers to
the multiple actor networks in Net2Net [ 47] to decide whether to make corresponding adjustments
to the neural architecture at the layer level (deepening or widening layer). Besides, this approach
uses reinforcement learning strategies to update the parameters in the meta-controller. EAS takes
the view that the network transformation at the layer level needs to combine the information of
the entire neural architecture; thus, a bidirectional recurrent network (Bi-LSTM) [ 48] is used as
the network encoder. Since EAS is a network transformation on an existing network, models and
weights can be reused to substantially reduce the amount of calculation required. We illustrate
the overall neural architecture of EAS in Fig.9. In Fig.10, we also present the internal structure
of two actor networks: Net2Wider and Net2Deeper. In Net2Wider, the actor network shares the
same sigmoid classifier and decides whether to widen the layer according to each hidden encoder
state. In Net2Deeper, the actor network inputs the state of the final hidden Bi-LSTM layer into the
recurrent network, after which the recurrent network decides both where to insert the layer and
the parameters of the inserted layer.
Rather than widening or deepening the layers of the existing network in EAS [ 51], N2N learning
[52] compresses the teacher network by removing or shrinking the layers. In more detail, it
compresses the teacher network through a two-stage operation selection: first, the layer removal
is performed on the macro level, after which the layer shrinkage is performed on the micro-level.
Reinforcement learning is used to explore the search space, while knowledge distillation [ 56] is
used to train each generated neural architecture. In the next step, a locally optimal student network
is learned. Using this method, under similar performance conditions, a compression ratio of more
than 10×is achieved for networks such as ResNet-34 [ 30]. Moreover, unlike EAS [ 51] and N2N
learning [ 52], which can only deepen (remove) and widen (shrink) the network at the layer level,
Path-level EAS [ 57] realizes a network transformation at the path level. The inspiration behind
this concept stems from the performance gains achieved by the multi-branch neural architecture
included in the manually designed network [ 30,31,58,59], which achieves network path-level
transformation by replacing a single layer with multi-branch operations incorporating allocation
and merge strategies. Allocation strategies include: replication andsplit, while merge strategies
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2020.