111:20 Ren and Chang, et al.
strategy to treat each candidate architecture fairly, meaning that they are fully trained to obtain
more accurate verification performance. Besides, SETN is also equipped with a template architecture
estimator. Unlike the random sampling methods previously used in Understanding One-Shot Models
[22] and SMASH [ 23], the estimator in SETN can be used to determine the probability that the
candidate architecture has a lower verification loss, as well as to ensure that the low verification
loss architecture with a higher probability will be selected for one-shot evaluation. At the same
time, the estimator is trained on the validation set. Therefore, SETN improves the excellent rate
of the sampling candidate architecture compared to Understanding One-Shot Models [ 22] and
SMASH [23], making it more likely to find the optimal architecture.
[24], through evaluating the effectiveness of the NAS search strategy, find that the weight sharing
strategy in ENAS [ 19] resulted in inaccurate performance evaluation of the candidate architecture,
making it difficult for the NAS to identify the best architecture. Besides, the research of Fairnas [ 101]
and [ 102] also demonstrates that candidate neural architectures based on these parameter sharing
methods also cannot be adequately trained, which lead to an inaccurate ranking of candidate neural
architectures. In NAS works based on gradient optimization [ 17,103,104], the joint optimization
of supernet weights and architectural parameters also introduces bias between sub-models. In light
of this, DNA [ 21] proposes to modularize the NAS’s large-scale search space to ensure that the
candidate architecture is adequately trained to reduce the representation shift caused by parameter
sharing. Besides, DNA [ 21] also uses block-wise search to evaluate all candidate architectures
within the block. These methods are used to evaluate candidate architectures more accurately.
GDAS-NSAS [ 25] also considered and improved the weight sharing mechanism in one-shot NAS,
proposing an NSAS loss function to solve the problem of multi-model forgetting (when weight
sharing is used to sequentially train a new neural architecture, the performance of the previous
neural architecture is reduced) that arises due to weight sharing during the super network training
process. Finally, GDAS-NSAS [ 25] applies the proposed method to RandomNAS [ 105] and GDAS
[83]; this approach effectively suppresses the multi-model forgetting problem and consequently
improves the training quality of the supernet,
Differentiable neural architecture search also employs similar parameter sharing ideas. Examples
include DARTS-like work [ 17,44,80,84]; for details, refer to Section.3.2. In ENAS, a controller is
used to sample subgraphs in a supercomputing graph. Subgraphs with the same information flow
share parameters in the search phrase, so only the sampled subgraphs need to be optimized in
each iteration. The difference is that the DARTS-like method chooses to optimize a super network
directly, and the best sub-network is decoupled from the super network according to the learned
mixed operation weights. Parameters are shared among different sub-networks in the super network.
Moreover, optimization strategies based on neural architecture recycling can often be initialized
with the help of function preservation [ 47] to inherit the parameters of the template network,
thereby avoiding the retraining of sub-neural architecture. More detailed content can be found in
Section.3.3, for example: EAS [51], Path-level EAS [57] and N2N learning [52], etc.
3.4.2 Training to convergence? Can we only train each candidate neural architecture to conver-
gence? This may ignore the guiding role of early performance curves in predicting the potential of
neural architecture. Early termination brings us a new possibility.
To quickly analyze the effectiveness of a specific model in deep learning, human experts often
judge whether this model is necessary to continue training according to the model’s learning
curve. Therefore, the training of models with no potential will be terminated as soon as possible;
this means that there is no need to wait for this model to converge, which saves resources for
new exploration. Similar strategies can also be used to rank the performance of NAS candidate
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2020.