111:16 Ren and Chang, et al.
Fig. 11. In Path-level EAS [ 57], an example of a process for implementing path-level network transformation
using a multi-branch operation rather than a single layer. (a) Using the replication -add strategy to add
branches to a single layer. (b) Using the split-concat strategy to further add branches to the network. (c)
Replacing identity mapping with a 3×3depthwise-separable convolution. (d) The tree structure of the neural
architecture in (c).
For complex tasks such as semantic segmentation or object detection, previous works have
often used networks designed for image classification, such as the backbone network. Under these
circumstances, performance gains can be obtained by specifically designing networks for complex
target tasks. Although some works [ 63,65,66] have used NAS to design backbone networks for
semantic segmentation or object detection tasks, pre-training is still necessary and the computa-
tional cost is high. Fast Neural Network Adaptation (FNA) [ 60] proposes a method that can adapt
a network’s architecture and parameters to new tasks at almost zero cost. It starts from a seed
network (a manually designed high-performance network), expands it into a super network in
its operation set, and then uses the NAS method [ 17,19,43] to adapt the neural architecture in
a way that allows it to obtain the target architecture. Moreover, it uses the seed network to map
the parameters to the super network and the target network to initialize the parameters. Finally,
the target network is obtained by fine-tuning the target task. We illustrate this process in Fig.12. It
is precisely due to the low cost of FNA in network transformation that NAS can design a special
neural architecture for large-scale tasks, such as detection and segmentation.
Different from the above methods which mainly focus on using the NAS method to improve the
visual model, Evolved Transformer [ 155] is committed to using the NAS method to design a better
feedforward architecture for seq2seq tasks. Specifically, Evolved Transformer first constructed
a large search space and then run an evolutionary architecture search with warm starting by
seeding our initial population with the Transformer, thereby search for better alternatives to
the Transformer. Besides, to be able to dynamically allocate more computing resources to more
promising candidate networks, Evolved Transformer also developed the Progressive Dynamic
Hurdles method and achieved continuous improvement on four well-established language tasks.
In this section, we present a comprehensive overview of NAS based on architecture recycling.
This method makes it possible to utilize a large number of high-performance networks that are
previously artificially designed. This saves the NAS from having to search the neural architecture
from scratch, which substantially reduces the number of unnecessary random searches required in
the massive search space. Compared with other optimization strategies, there are relatively few
studies on NAS based on neural architecture recycling.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2020.