A Comprehensive Survey of Neural Architecture Search: Challenges and Solutions 111:13
0
12 3
sampled
unsampled
intermediate features
Fig. 8. In GDAS [ 83], an example of sampling subgraphs in a DAG with three intermediate nodes. Colored
lines indicate operations in the candidate operation set, while black lines indicate corresponding information
flows. The circles indicate the intermediate features following operation processing. Each intermediate node
is equal to the sum of all the sampled intermediate features. In one iteration, only one sampled subgraph is
trained.
by each other, thereby destroying the entire optimization process. To this end, GDAS [ 83] proposes
to use a differentiable architecture sampler in each training iteration to sample only one subgraph
in the DAG, meaning that only one part of the DAG needs to be optimized in any one iteration. We
illustrate this process in Fig.8. At the same time, in the verification stage, the architecture sampler
can be optimized by using the gradient-based method, thereby further improve the search efficiency
of GDAS.
To reduce DARTS’s memory usage during search and improve the search efficiency, PC-DARTS
[84] opts to start from the channel, as opposed to GDAS’ sampling subgraphs in DAG and training
only one subgraph in one iteration. During the search process, PC-DARTS samples the channels
and convolves only the sampled channel features to achieve efficient gradient optimization. To
deal with the problem of inconsistent information brought about by the channel sampling strategy,
PC-DARTS uses edge normalization to solve this problem. It reduces the uncertainty in the search
process by adding a set of edge-level parameters. As a result, PC-DARTS can save memory and
is more efficient and stable. [ 111] recently find that DARTS [ 17] exhibits poor test performance
for architecture generated in a wide search space. This work contends that when the discovered
solutions are consistent with the high verification loss curvature in the architecture space, the
discovered architecture is difficult to promote. Moreover, various types of regularization are added
to explore how to make DARTS more robust. Finally, [ 111] proposes several simple variants and
achieve good generalization performance. Although we have conducted many reviews, there are
still many improvements that have been made based on DARTS [115, 153].
In the above-mentioned gradient-based methods, local optimization is a common problem. There-
fore, we conduct a comprehensive review of the solution to this problem here. The experimental
results of DARTS [ 17] show that an appropriate learning rate helps the model converge to a better
local optimal value. As shown in Fig.7b, I-DARTS [ 80] relaxes the softmax-based relaxation on
each edge of DARTS to all incoming edges of a given node, thereby alleviating the impact of bias
caused by local decision-making. PC-DARTS [ 84] uses channel sampling to replace the convolution
operation on all channels in DARTS, thereby reduces the possibility of falling into a local optimum.
In general, local optimization is still an important challenge faced by gradient-based optimization
methods, so more related research is needed in the future.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2020.