A Comprehensive Survey of Neural Architecture Search: Challenges and Solutions 111:27
accuracy of image classification and reducing the search cost. In the future, NAS will play a greater
role in areas that require complex neural architecture design, such as multi-object architecture
search, network transformation that employs NAS based on existing models, model compression,
target detection, and segmentation, and so on.
RobNet [ 152] uses the NAS method to generate a large number of neural architectures by
analyzing the differences between strongly and poorly performing architectures; this will enable
the identification of which network structures help to obtain a robust neural architecture. Inspired
by this, the once feasible idea would be to use a similar concept to RobNet in a search space with
a higher degree of freedom, analyze the structural features common to promising architectures,
and increase their structural proportion in the search space. Besides, it enables a reduction in the
proportion of the common structural features of poorly performing architectures in the search space,
to gradually reduce the search space in stages. The algorithm should be allowed to autonomously
decide which network structures should be removed or added rather than artificially imposing
constraints.
On the other hand, in the design of deep neural networks, in addition to the design of the
neural architecture that consumes a lot of researchers’ energy, another headache is the setting of
non-architecture hyperparameters (for example optimizer type, initial learning rate, weight decay,
mixup ratio [ 159], drop out ratio and stochastic depth drop ratio [ 160], etc.). Because the impact of
these hyperparameters on network performance is also crucial. Moreover, the number of possible
related non-architectural hyperparameter groups and architectural combinations is often very
large, and it is difficult and inefficient to manually design all possible combinations. Therefore, it
is also a very promising research direction to consider how to integrate the hyperparameters in
the neural architecture into the search space and allow the algorithm to automatically adjust the
settings of the hyperparameters. Although some early methods also explored the joint search of
hyperparameters and architectures, they mainly focused on small data sets and small search spaces.
Fortunately, the experiments of FBNetV3 [ 157] and AutoHAS [ 158] show that this direction has
great potential, and it is expected to find higher-accuracy architecture-recipe combinations.
In short, the emergence of NAS is an exciting development. At present, NAS is still in its initial
stages, and additional theoretical guidance and experimental analysis are required. Determining
which NAS designs lead to improved performance is a critical element of improving NAS. If NAS is
to completely replace the design of artificial neural architecture, more research, and a more solid
theoretical basis are required. There is still a long way to go.
6 REVIEW THREATS
We made the above summary and discussion based on the open NAS related work. We objectively
state the viewpoints in some unpublished papers that need to be further confirmed. Due to the
limited time and energy, we directly applied the results in the references without reproducing their
results.
7 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
This survey provides an insightful observation of the early NAS work and summarizes the four
characteristics shared by the early NAS. In response to these challenges, we conducted a compre-
hensive and systematic analysis and comparison of existing work in turn. For the first time, we
reviewed all NAS-related work from the perspective of challenges and corresponding solutions.
And the performance of existing NAS work was comprehensively compared and discussed. Finally,
we conducted a comprehensive discussion on the possible future direction of NAS and raised two
questions worthy of vigilance. This is very useful for future NAS research.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2020.