111:10 Ren and Chang, et al.
modules [ 30], or connects all previous modules [ 36]. This connection method may not be optimal.
Moreover, it uses the modified gradient method to explore the connection method between modules.
Besides, other works [ 71–73] have also explored searching for neural architecture on continuous
domains. However, the search for these neural architectures is limited to fine-tuning the specific
structure of the network.
In order to solve the above challenges, DARTS [ 17] was developed. DARTS continuously relaxes
the originally discrete search strategy, which makes it possible to use gradients to efficiently
optimize the architecture search space. DARTS follows the cell-based search space of NASNet [ 32]
and further normalizes it. Every cell is regarded as a directed acyclic graph (DAG), which is formed
by sequentially connecting 𝑁nodes. Each of these cells has two input nodes and one output node.
For convolutional cells, the input node is the output of the first two cells; for the recurrent cell, one
is the input of the current step, while the other is the state of the previous step. The cell output
is the concatenation result of all intermediate nodes. Each intermediate node 𝑥(𝑗)in the cell is a
potential feature representation, and is linked with each previous intermediate node 𝑥(𝑖)in the cell
through a directed edge operation 𝑜(𝑖,𝑗). For a discrete search strategy, each intermediate node can
be expressed as follows:
𝑥(𝑗)=∑︁
𝑖<𝑗𝑜(𝑖,𝑗)
𝑥(𝑖)
. (2)
The DARTS approach makes the discrete search strategy continuous by relaxing the selection of
candidate operations to a softmax of all possible operations. The mixed operation ¯𝑜(𝑖,𝑗)(𝑥)applied
to feature map 𝑥can be expressed as follows:
¯𝑜(𝑖,𝑗)(𝑥)=∑︁
𝑜∈Oexp
𝛼(𝑖,𝑗)
𝑜
Í
𝑜′∈Oexp
𝛼(𝑖,𝑗)
𝑜′𝑜(𝑥) (3)
whereOrepresents a set of candidate operations, while 𝛼(𝑖,𝑗)
𝑜represents the weight of operation 𝑜
on directed edge 𝑒(𝑖,𝑗). Therefore, the neural architecture search has evolved into an optimization
process for a set of continuous variables 𝛼={𝛼(𝑖,𝑗)}. Once the search is complete, the most likely
operation𝑜(𝑖,𝑗)on the directed edge 𝑒(𝑖,𝑗)is selected while other operations is discarded.
𝑜(𝑖,𝑗)=argmax𝑜∈O𝛼(𝑖,𝑗)
𝑜 (4)
By solving a bilevel optimization problem [ 67,68], the probability of mixed operations (the param-
eters𝛼of the neural architecture) and network weights 𝑤can be jointly optimized as follows:
min
𝛼L𝑣𝑎𝑙(𝑤∗(𝛼),𝛼)
s.t.𝑤∗(𝛼)=argmin𝑤L𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑛(𝑤,𝛼)(5)
whereL𝑣𝑎𝑙andL𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑛 denote validation and training losses, respectively, while 𝛼is the upper-level
variable and 𝑤is the lower-level variable. By jointly optimizing this problem, the optimal 𝛼is
obtained, after which the discretization is performed to obtain the final neural architecture. We
illustrate this process in Fig.6.
Compared with DARTS, the neural architecture search process is changed from the selection of
discrete candidate operations to the optimization of the probability of continuous mixed operations.
During the same period, NAO [ 74] opts to encode the entire neural architecture to map the origi-
nally discrete neural architecture to continuously embedded encoding. Subsequently, the output of
the performance predictor is maximized by the gradient optimization method to enable the optimal
embedded coding to be obtained. Finally, a decoder is used to discretize the optimal continuous
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2020.