A Comprehensive Survey of Neural Architecture Search: Challenges and Solutions 111:7
3 OPTIMIZATION STRATEGY
Regarding the characteristics and challenges of early NAS [ 11,12,15,16], in this section, we
summarize the existing NAS research work regarding the following four aspects:
•Modular search space. Corresponding to the global search space, the modular search space
treats the neural architecture as a stack of multiple different types of modules. Therefore,
the search task is simplified from the original global search to only one or more modules of
different types.
•Continuous search strategy. Corresponding to the discrete search strategy, the continuous
search strategy continuously relaxes the structural parameters of the neural architecture so
that they can be gradient optimized like network parameters.
•Neural architecture recycling. Corresponding to the search from scratch, neural architec-
ture recycling takes the existing artificially designed high-performance neural architecture
as a starting point and uses the NAS method to perform network transformations on them to
improve their performance.
•Incomplete training. Corresponding to fully training, incomplete training aims to speed
up the relative performance ranking of candidate architectures by making full use of the
shared structure between candidate architectures or performance prediction, thereby avoiding
resource consumption caused by complete training of all candidate architectures.
3.1 Modular Search Space
Search space design has a critical impact on the final performance of the NAS algorithm. It not
only determines the freedom of the neural architecture search but also directly determines the NAS
algorithm’s upper-performance limit to some extent. Therefore, the reconstruction of the search
space is necessary.
One widely used approach is to transform the global search into a modular search space. As
a result, cell or block-based search space is commonly used in various NAS tasks because it can
effectively reduce the complexity of NAS search tasks. This is mainly because the cell-based search
space often needs to search only a few small cell structures, after which it repeatedly stacks such
cells to form the final neural architecture. However, the global search space needs to search for all
the components involved in building the entire neural architecture. Besides, the cell-based search
space can be migrated to different data set tasks by stacking different numbers of cells, but this
is often not possible when the global search space is used. Therefore, compared with the global
search space, the cell-based search space is more compact and flexible.
This concept mainly stems from the observation of the excellent neural architectures that have
been artificially designed in recent years [ 4,30,31]. These artificial neural architectures typically
accomplish the construction of the overall neural architecture by repeatedly stacking a certain unit
operation or a small structure. In the NAS context, this small repeating structure is often called a
cell. The construction of cell-based neural architecture is based on this idea. Neural architecture
constructed in this way is not only superior in terms of performance but also easy to generalize.
NASNet [ 32] is one of the first works to explore this idea. It proposes to search for two types of
cells, namely normal cells and reduction cells. Normal cells are used to extract advanced features
while keeping the spatial resolution unchanged, and reduction cells are mainly used to reduce the
spatial resolution. Multiple repeated normal cells are followed by a reduction cell; this connection
is then repeated multiple times to form the final neural architecture. In Fig.4 (left), we illustrate this
kind of neural architecture based on two cells. In Fig.4 (right), we present the internal structure
of an optimal normal cell in NASNet [ 32]. The structures of the corresponding reduction cell and
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2020.