A Comprehensive Survey of Neural Architecture Search: Challenges and Solutions 111:9
Fig. 5. Using unit operations to replace the reduction cell in [ 32], while having a densely connected neural
architecture. The curved dotted line indicates the dense connection in Dpp-net [ 35]. The initial convolution is to
extract low-level features. After the cell is repeated multiple times, a unit operation is used for downsampling.
This connection is repeated multiple times to form the final neural architecture.
training and easier to be searched, but the generalization effect is poor. This provides guidance that
helps us to understand the cell-based NAS. Besides, there are many cell-based NAS-related works
[54, 92].
In addition to repeatedly stacking one or more identical cells, FPNAS [ 39] also considers the
diversity of blocks when stacking blocks. The experimental results of FPNAS show that stacking
diversified blocks is beneficial to the improvement of neural architecture performance, and FPNAS
treats the search process as a bi-level optimization problem, which reduces the search cost to a
level similar to that of the most advanced NAS method [ 17,19,92]. Similar to FPNAS, FBNet [ 103]
explores a layer-wise search space. Specifically, FBNet fixes the macro-architecture and searches
for blocks with multiple layers. Moreover, each block can have a different layer structure, and the
blocks can also be different.
In this section, we conduct a comprehensive review of the modular search space. Compared with
global search, the modular search space more effectively reduces the search space and makes NAS
more accessible to researchers. Of course, this does not mean that the modular search space can
meet all task requirements. Global search still has a unique research value because it provides the
neural architecture design with a higher degree of freedom [104, 154].
3.2 Continuous Search Strategy
NAS is regarded as a revolution in neural architecture design. However, NAS also requires high
computational demand. For example, NASNet [ 32] uses the RL methods to spend 2000 GPU days to
obtain the best architecture in CIFAR-10 and ImageNet. Similarly, AmoebaNet-A [ 43] spends 3150
GPU days using evolutionary learning. One internal reason why these mainstream search methods
based on RL [ 11,12,32], EA [ 15,43], Bayesian optimization [ 61], SMBO [ 37] and MCTS [ 62] are so
inefficient is that they regard neural architecture search as a black-box optimization problem in a
discrete search strategy.
To address this issue, DAS [ 69] explores the possibility of transforming the discrete neural
architecture space into a continuously differentiable form, and further uses gradient optimization
techniques to search the neural architecture. This approach mainly focuses on the search of the
hyperparameters of convolutional layers: filter sizes, number of channels, and grouped convolutions.
MaskConnect [ 70] find that the existing cell-based neural architecture tends to adopt a predefined
fixed connection method between modules; for example, each module only connects its first two
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2020.