A Comprehensive Survey of Neural Architecture Search: Challenges and Solutions 111:3
Table 1. Comparison of article frameworks of different NAS-related surveys.
SurveysClassification
standardMain frame
Survey 1 [27] Basic componentsSearch space, Search strategy and Evaluation strategySurvey 2 [28] Basic components
OurChallenges
and solutions(Challenge→Solution:)
Global search space →Modular search space
Discrete search strategy →Continuous search strategy
Search from scratch →Neural architecture recycling
Fully trained→Incomplete training
More concisely, this survey has the following motivations:
•Previous surveys often use the basic components of NAS to associate NAS-related work,
which makes it difficult for readers to grasp the research ideas of NAS-related work.
•NAS-related fields are developing rapidly, and related work is complex and rich. There are
obvious connections between different works, and existing surveys have not conducted a
detailed and clear analysis of these links.
So a comprehensive and systematic survey based on challenges and solutions is highly beneficial
to NAS research.
1.2 Our Contributions and Related Surveys
The contributions of this survey are summarized as follows:
•As far as we know, this is the first comprehensive and systematic review from the perspective
of NAS challenges and corresponding solutions.
•We conduct a comprehensive analysis and comparison on the performance of existing NAS-
related work and the optimization strategies they adopted.
•We analyze multiple possible development directions of NAS and point out two issues worthy
of vigilance. The hyperparameter search of NAS is also discussed. They are very beneficial to
the development of NAS.
Previous related surveys classify existing work mainly based on the basic components of NAS:
search space, search strategy, and evaluation strategy [ 27,28]. Although this classification method
is more intuitive, it is not conducive to assisting readers in capturing the research clues. Therefore,
in this survey, we first summarize the characteristics and corresponding challenges of the early
NAS methods. Based on these challenges, we then summarized and categorized existing research
to present readers with a comprehensive and systematic overview of the extant challenges and
solutions. A more specific NAS-related survey framework comparison is shown in Table 1.
1.3 Article Organization
We first made an insightful summary of the characteristics of early NAS in Section 2. Then, in
response to the challenges faced by early NAS, we conducted a comprehensive and systematic
analysis of the optimization strategy used by NAS in Section 3 according to the following four parts:
modular search space, continuous search strategy, neural architecture recycling, and incomplete
training. In Section 4, we conducted a comprehensive performance comparison of NAS related
work. In Section 5, we discussed the future direction of NAS in detail. In Section 6, we explained
the corresponding review threats. Finally, in Section 7, we made a summary and conclusion of this
survey.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2020.