A Comprehensive Survey of Neural Architecture Search: Challenges and Solutions 111:21
IterationsValidation Accuracy
Early
termination
Fig. 14. Assuming learning curve for performance prediction. The black curve represents an attempt to use an
observable early performance learning curve (solid line) to predict the neural architecture’s final performance
on the validation set [ 20,37,110]. The three red curves indicate the hypothesis that the performance of the
neural architecture during early training and convergence is consistent with ranking [ 50]. Using performance
prediction and early performance ranking assumptions can facilitate the termination of the training of neural
architectures that lack potential as early as human experts, as well as the use of minimal computing resources
to explore more potential neural architectures. This speeds up the NAS architecture search process.
architectures: for candidate architectures with no potential, training can be terminated early, while
more adequate training can be obtained for more promising architectures.
Early termination of training is not a new idea; many researchers have done a large amount of
related research on this subject. For example, [ 107] uses the probabilistic method to simulate the
learning curve of the deep neural network and terminates the training of poorly running models in
advance. However, this approach requires a long early training period to accurately simulate and
predict the learning curve. [ 108] extends [ 107]; in [ 108], the probability model of the learning curve
can be set across hyperparameters, and a mature learning curve is used to improve the performance
of the Bayesian neural network. Similar strategies have also been used to solve hyperparameter
optimization problems [90, 109].
The above methods are based on the use of partially observed early performance to predict
the learning curve and design the corresponding machine learning model. To imitate human
experts to the extent that NAS search can also automatically identify below-standard candidate
architectures and terminate their training early, [ 20] combines learning curve prediction with NAS
tasks for the first time. This approach builds a set of standard frequentist regression models and
obtains the corresponding simple features from the neural architecture, hyperparameters, and
early learning curve. These features are then used to train the frequentist regression model and
are then used to predict the final verification set performance of the neural architecture with early
training experience. Performance prediction is also used in PNAS [37]. To avoid the need to train
and evaluate all child networks, it learns a predictor function that can be trained based on the
observable early performance of the cell. The predictor is used to evaluate all candidate cells, then
the top-𝑘cells are selected, and this process is repeated until a sufficient number of blocks of cells
are found. The black curve in Fig.14 shows the learning curve prediction trying to predict the final
performance from the premature learning curve.
NAO [ 74] uses a performance predictor similar to previous work [ 20,37,110]. This is dissimilar
to PNAS [ 37], which uses a performance predictor to evaluate and select the generated neural
architecture to speed up the search process. In NAO [ 74], after the encoder completes the continuous
representation of the neural architecture, the performance predictor is taken as the optimization goal
of the gradient ascent. By maximizing the output of the performance predictor 𝑓, the continuous
representation of the best neural architecture can be obtained. Finally, the decoder is used to
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2020.