A Comprehensive Survey of Neural Architecture Search: Challenges and Solutions 111:5
Input
Output𝑜𝑜1
𝑜𝑜2
𝑜𝑜𝑛𝑛𝑧𝑧(1)
𝑧𝑧(𝑛𝑛)𝑧𝑧(2)
𝑆𝑆𝑜𝑜𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆Input
Output𝑆𝑆𝑜𝑜𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑜𝑜1
𝑜𝑜2
𝑜𝑜3𝑧𝑧(1)
𝑧𝑧(𝑛𝑛)𝑧𝑧(2)𝑧𝑧(1)
𝑧𝑧(2)
Fig. 2. Two common global search spaces with chain structure in early NAS work. Left: The simplest example
of a chain structure. Right: The chain structure example after adding skip connections. 𝑜𝑖is an operation in
the candidate set of operations and the 𝑖-th operation in the chain structure. The feature map generated by
𝑜𝑖is represented as 𝑧(𝑖). The input undergoes a series of operations to obtain the final output.
the neural architecture. This means that we cannot use the gradient strategy to quickly adjust
the neural architecture.
•Search from scratch. In this approach, the model is built from scratch until the final neural
architecture is generated. These methods ignore the existing neural architecture design
experience and are unable to utilize the existing excellent neural architecture.
•Fully trained. This approach requires training each candidate neural architecture from
scratch until convergence. The network structures of the subsequent network and previous
neural architectures are similar, as are those of the neural architectures at the same stage.
Therefore, it is clear that this relationship not be fully utilized if each candidate neural archi-
tecture is trained from scratch. Also, we only need to obtain the relative performance ranking
of the candidate architecture. Whether it is necessary to train each candidate architecture to
convergence is also a question worth considering.
To more clearly show the relationship between the characteristics of early NAS and NAS key
components, we follow the expressions in the previous two NAS-related surveys [ 27,28], they
generally regard search space, optimization methods, and performance estimation strategies as the
three major components of NAS. In this paper, the global search space and full training of early
NAS correspond to the two components of NAS search space and performance evaluation strategy
respectively. The discrete search strategy and search from scratch in the early NAS correspond to
the search strategy used in the RL and EA optimization methods in NAS.
More specifically, the search space is determined by the predefined operation set and the hy-
perparameters of the neural architecture (for example architectural template, connection method,
the number of convolutional layer channels used for feature extraction in the initial stage, etc.).
These parameters define which neural architectures can be searched by the NAS. Fig.2 presents
examples of two common global search spaces with a chain structure in early NAS work. 𝑜𝑖is an
operation in the candidate operation set and the 𝑖-th operation in the chain structure. The feature
map generated by 𝑜𝑖is represented as 𝑧(𝑖). The input undergoes a series of operations to obtain the
final output. Fig.2 (left): The simplest example of a chain structure MetaQNN [ 12]. At this point, for
any feature map 𝑧(𝑖), there is only one input node 𝑧(𝑖−1), and𝑧(𝑖)=𝑜𝑖{(𝑧(𝑖−1))}. Fig.2 (right): The
example after skip connections are added [ 11,15,16]. At this time, there can be multiple inputs for
any feature map 𝑧(𝑖), and
𝑧(𝑖)=𝑜(𝑖)n
𝑧(𝑖−1)o
⊙n
𝑧(𝑘)|𝛼𝑘,𝑖=1,𝑘<𝑖−1o
, (1)
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2020.