111A Comprehensive Survey of Neural Architecture Search:
Challenges and Solutions
PENGZHEN REN∗and YUN XIAO∗,Northwest University
XIAOJUN CHANG, Monash University
PO-YAO HUANG, Carnegie Mellon University
ZHIHUI LI†,Qilu University of Technology (Shandong Academy of Sciences)
XIAOJIANG CHEN and XIN WANG, Northwest University
Deep learning has made breakthroughs and substantial in many fields due to its powerful automatic represen-
tation capabilities. It has been proven that neural architecture design is crucial to the feature representation of
data and the final performance. However, the design of the neural architecture heavily relies on the researchers’
prior knowledge and experience. And due to the limitations of human’ inherent knowledge, it is difficult for
people to jump out of their original thinking paradigm and design an optimal model. Therefore, an intuitive
idea would be to reduce human intervention as much as possible and let the algorithm automatically design
the neural architecture. Neural Architecture Search (NAS) is just such a revolutionary algorithm, and the
related research work is complicated and rich. Therefore, a comprehensive and systematic survey on the
NAS is essential. Previously related surveys have begun to classify existing work mainly based on the key
components of NAS: search space, search strategy, and evaluation strategy. While this classification method is
more intuitive, it is difficult for readers to grasp the challenges and the landmark work involved. Therefore, in
this survey, we provide a new perspective: beginning with an overview of the characteristics of the earliest
NAS algorithms, summarizing the problems in these early NAS algorithms, and then providing solutions for
subsequent related research work. Besides, we conduct a detailed and comprehensive analysis, comparison,
and summary of these works. Finally, we provide some possible future research directions.
CCS Concepts: •Computing methodologies →Machine learning algorithms .
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Neural Architecture Search, AutoDL, Modular Search Space, Continuous
Search Strategy, Neural Architecture Recycle, Incomplete Training.
ACM Reference Format:
Pengzhen Ren, Yun Xiao, Xiaojun Chang, Po-Yao Huang, Zhihui Li, Xiaojiang Chen, and Xin Wang. 2020. A
Comprehensive Survey of Neural Architecture Search: Challenges and Solutions. ACM Comput. Surv. 37, 4,
Article 111 (August 2020), 33 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/1122445.1122456
1 INTRODUCTION
Deep learning has already exhibited strong learning capabilities in many fields, including machine
translation [ 1–3], image recognition [ 4,6,7] and object detection [ 8–10]. This is mainly due to
∗Both authors contributed equally to this research.
†Corresponding author.
Authors’ addresses: Pengzhen Ren, pzhren@foxmail.com; Yun Xiao, yxiao@nwu.edu.cn, Northwest University; Xiaojun
Chang, cxj273@gmail.com, Monash University; Po-Yao Huang, Carnegie Mellon University; Zhihui Li, Qilu University of
Technology (Shandong Academy of Sciences); Xiaojiang Chen; Xin Wang, Northwest University.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee
provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and
the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored.
Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires
prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
©2020 Association for Computing Machinery.
0360-0300/2020/8-ART111 $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/1122445.1122456
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2020.arXiv:2006.02903v3  [cs.LG]  2 Mar 2021