111:22 Ren and Chang, et al.
get the final discrete neural architecture. Unlike previous NAS based on performance prediction
[20,37,110], in multinomial distribution learning for NAS, MdeNAS [ 50] put forward a performance
ranking hypothesis: that is, the relative performance ranking of the neural architecture at each
training stage is consistent. In other words, the neural architecture that performed well in the early
days still maintains good performance when the training converges. MdeNAS [ 50] has conducted
a large number of experiments to verify this hypothesis; according to these results, the early
performance of candidate architectures can be used to quickly and easily obtain their relative
performance rankings, thereby speeding up the neural architecture search process. We illustrate an
early performance ranking hypothesis in Fig.14 (as shown by the three red curves).
In this section, we focus on the challenge of fully trained candidate architectures, starting with the
necessity of two aspects (training from scratch and training to convergence), and comprehensively
and systematically summarizing the existing work. Compared with other optimization strategies,
this aspect of the research work is relatively small, but still very necessary.
4 PERFORMANCE COMPARISON
NAS is a highly promising study. In this section, we classify and compare the performance of
existing NAS based on mainstream search methods [ 27,28], while also reporting the optimization
strategies they use according to Section 3. These search methods primarily include the following:
reinforcement learning (RL), evolutionary algorithm (EA), gradient optimization (GO), random search
(RS) and sequential model-based optimization (SMBO) [ 162]. We summarized in Fig.15 the general
framework comparison of RL, SMBO, and EA in the context of NAS. Fig.15a shows the general
framework of RL in the context of NAS. The agent (controller) makes corresponding actions
(sampling neural framework) to modify the system state (neural architecture), and the environment
gives the agent corresponding rewards (accuracy on the verification set) and updates the agent
accordingly (adjusting algorithm parameters). Fig.15b shows the general framework of SMBO in
the context of NAS. The surrogate model ˆ𝑓(performance predictor) evaluates all candidate cells 𝛼
(the structure description of the neural architecture) [ 37] and selects promising candidate cells, and
then evaluates the performance of the neural architecture composed of the candidate cells on the
validation set and get the response value 𝑓(𝛼)(loss value) of the corresponding response function
𝑓[161]. The cell𝛼𝑖and the corresponding response value 𝑓(𝛼𝑖)are added as a new meta instance
(𝛼𝑖,𝑓(𝛼𝑖))to the history record 𝐻of cell measurement performance, and the surrogate model is
updated again according to 𝐻until convergence. Through iteration, the surrogate model value
ˆ𝑓(𝛼)of the cell𝛼is continuously approximated to the corresponding response value 𝑓(𝛼)to avoid
time-consuming training steps. Fig.15c shows the general framework of EA in the context of NAS.
The algorithm first initializes the population and selects parents, then cross or mutate based on the
parent to generate a new individual offspring (neural architecture), and evaluate the adaptability of
the offspring (the performance evaluation of the new neural architecture), and select a group of
individuals with the strongest adaptability (the best performing neural architecture) to update the
population. GO has been described in detail in Fig.6, so it is no longer repeated here.
We intend to obtain their similarities and differences from these summaries. The situation is
not as simple as it might appear. In fact, it is relatively difficult to compare NAS performance,
because NAS lacks certain baselines. Besides, different types of NAS have great differences in
preprocessing, hyperparameters, search space, and trick, which increase the difficulty of NAS
performance comparison. These tricks include learning rate decay, regularization (e.g., DropPath
[32,136]), augmenting techniques (e.g., Cutout [ 131]), etc. The random search strategy is considered
to be a strong baseline. For example, in [ 24], the random search identifies the best RNN cells
compared to other strategies. The findings presented in [ 129], [34] and [ 105] also prove this.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2020.