111:18 Ren and Chang, et al.
Fig. 13. Parameter sharing mechanism in ENAS [ 19]. The candidate neural architecture in NAS can be
represented as a directed acyclic subgraph that is sampled in a supercomputing graph constructed by the
search space. The nodes in the graph represent local calculations, while the edges represent information flow.
Each node has its corresponding weight parameter, as indicated in the upper right. Only when a specific
edge is sampled will the corresponding parameter be activated and updated. The ENAS mechanism allows all
subgraphs (that is, candidate neural architectures) to share parameters.
When treating the candidate neural architecture as an independent individual, each candidate
neural architecture is trained from scratch, after which the candidate neural architecture is ranked
according to their performance on the validation set. This may provide a more accurate ranking,
as has occurred in other works [ 11,32,34,37]. In this process, the parameters of each trained
candidate neural architecture are directly discarded. This does not result in full utilization of these
trained parameters; accordingly, a new idea of parameter sharing has emerged.
ENAS [ 19] is the first NAS work to explicitly proposes parameter sharing. The ENAS work
has noted that the candidate neural architecture in NAS can be regarded as a directed acyclic
subgraph, which is in a supercomputing graph constructed by the search space. We illustrate this
sampling process in Fig.13. Based on this observation, ENAS uses LSTM as a controller for use in
searching the optimal subgraph on a large computation graph to obtain the neural architecture. In
transfer learning and multi-task learning, the weights obtained by training a model designed for
a specific task on a data set are also applicable to other models designed for other tasks [ 86–88].
Encouraged by this, ENAS proposes forcing the sharing of parameters among all different child
models (candidate architecture). Through the use of this mechanism, the child models can obtain
empirical performance, thereby avoiding the need to completely train each child model from scratch.
We present an example of different subgraphs sharing weights in Fig.13. The supercomputing
graph can be expressed as a DAG: the nodes in the graph are defined as local calculations, while
the edges represent the flow of information. Each node has its corresponding weight parameter,
as illustrated in the upper right of Fig.13. However, the corresponding parameters can only be
activated when a specific edge is sampled. The ENAS mechanism allows all subgraphs (i.e. candidate
neural architectures) to share parameters. Therefore, EANS has greatly improved search efficiency
compared to [11, 32, 34, 37].
Subsequently, CAS [ 55] explored a multi-task architecture search based on ENAS. This approach
extends NAS to transfer learning across data sources, and further introduces a novel continuous
architecture search to solve this ’forgetting’ problem in the continuous learning process. This
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2020.