ASurveyof NaturalLanguage Generation 1:29
7 NLGEVALUATION METRICS
In the research ﬁeld of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, the evaluatio n metrics for models of kinds of tasks
have always been the focusof attention for a long time, and the sa me is true in the ﬁelds of NLP
[119]. In this section, we mainly introduce several automatic e valuation metrics for NLG, which
canbedividedintotwocategories:untrainedevaluationmetri cs,andmachine-learnedevaluation
metrics[12].
7.1 UntrainedEvaluationMetrics
This category of metric is most widely used in the NLG communit y since it is easy to be imple-
mented and does not involve additional training cost, which compare s machine-generated texts
tohuman-generatedonessimplybasedoncontentoverlap,stringdi stanceorlexicaldiversity.We
mainly introduce ﬁve metrics ofsuch category,including BLEU,R OUGE, METEOR,Distinct, and
Self-BLEU.
TheBilingual Evaluation Understudy(BLEU)metric[87]isuse dto calculatetheco-occurrence
frequencyoftwosentencesbasedontheweightedaverageofmatc hedn-gramphrases.BLEUwas
originallyused toevaluate machinetranslation, andhasbeenuse d formoreandmoreNLG tasks,
such as question generation [158], topic-to-essay generatio n [146], text style transfer [72], and
dialogue generation[4,64].
TheRecall-OrientedUnderstudyforGistingEvaluation(ROUGE )metric[62]isusedtomeasure
the similarity between the generated and reference texts based on the recall score. This metric is
commonly used in the ﬁeld of text summarization, including four t ypes: ROUGE-n measures the
n-gramco-occurrencestatistics;ROUGE-lmeasuresthelonges tcommonsubsequence;ROUGE-w
measures the weighted longest common subsequence; ROUGE-s me asures the skip-bigram co-
occurrence statistics. ROUGE has also been widely applied to other NLG tasks such as question
generation [158],distractor generation [98],and dialogue ge neration[4].
The Metric for Evaluation of Translation with Explicit Order ing (METEOR) metric [3] is an
improvement over BLEU to address several weaknesses including f our aspects: lack of recall, use
of higher order n-grams, lack of explicit word-matching betwe en translation and reference, and
useofgeometricaveragingofn-grams,whichiscalculatedbyt heharmonicmeanoftheunigram
precision and recall. In addition to machine translation, METEO R has also been widely used in
text summarization [96],question generation [158],anddial ogue generation [4].
The Distinct metric [54] is used to measure the diversity of re sponse sequences for dialogue
generation. It calculates the number of distinct unigrams and bigr ams in generated responses to
reﬂectthediversitydegree.Toavoidpreferenceforlongsequ ences,thevalueisscaledbythetotal
numberofgenerated tokens.
The Self-BLEU metric [162] is also a metric to measure the div ersity. Diﬀerent from BLEU that
only evaluates the similarity between two sentences, Self-BLE U is used to measure the resem-
blancedegreebetweenonesentence(hypothesis)andtherestsente nces(reference)inagenerated
collection. It ﬁrst calculates the BLEU score of every generat ed sentence against other sentences,
then the average BLEU score is deﬁned as the Self-BLEU score of the document, where a lower
Self-BLEU scoreimplies higherdiversity.
7.2 Machine-learned EvaluationMetrics
This category of metric is based on machine-learned models to s imulate human judges, which
evaluatesthesimilaritybetweenmachine-generatedtextsor betweenmachine-generatedtextsand
human-generated ones. We mainly introduce three metrics of such c ategory, containing ADEM,
BLEURT,andBERTScore.
ACMComput. Surv.,Vol. 1,No. 1,Article1. Publication date: Ja nuary 2022.