ASurveyof NaturalLanguage Generation 1:7
2.8 Pre-trainedModel
The pre-trained models can be divided into two categories: non-c ontextual and contextual. The
non-contextualpre-trainedmodels(e.g.,Word2vec[79],GloVe [91])canlearnhighqualityofword
and phrase representations, and are widely used to initialize the embeddings and improve the
modelperformanceforgenerationtasks.However,sincethenon-c ontextualembeddingsarestatic,
it is unable to handlecontext-dependent words andout-of-vocabul arywords.
To overcome these problems, contextual pre-trained models ar e proposed, which can dynam-
ically change the word embeddings when the word appears in diﬀe rent sentences. Traditional
contextualmodelsmainlyfocusonthetasksofnaturallanguageu nderstanding(NLU),whichare
based onthe architecturesofLSTM(e.g.,ELMo[93])or Transf ormerencoder(e.g.,BERT[18]).
Totacklethe more challengingtasksof natural languagegenerati on (NLG),the architecture of
Transformerdecoderiswidelyadopted,andthepre-trainingobj ectiveisfurthermodiﬁedtoadapt
to the NLG task. For example, GPT [7] uses the standard language modeling as the pre-training
objective. T5 [99] designs a uniﬁed text-to-text framework fo r both NLU and NLG. During pre-
training, each corrupted token span in the input sequence is repl aced with a sentinel token, and
the output sequence is composed of the dropped-out spans. MASS [116] predicts the sentence
fragment with input of masked sequence during pre-training. UniLM [ 23] propose a uniﬁed pre-
training frameworkfor both NLUand NLG tasks, whichis based on a shared Transformermodel
withthreediﬀerenttypesofself-attentionmaskstoswitcham ongdiﬀerent tasks,includingunidi-
rectional, bidirectional, and sequence-to-sequence. BART [53] designs a reconstruction objective
torestorecorrupteddocuments,whereﬁvetypesoftransforma tionstrategiesareproposed,includ-
ing token masking, token deletion, text inﬁlling, sentence permuta tion, and document rotation.
PLATO [4] propose a pre-training framework targeting the dialo gue generation tasks with two
reciprocal pre-training tasks, i.e., response generation and la tent act recognition. The latent dis-
cretevariablesarealsointroducedtosolvetheone-to-manyma ppingproblem.ERNIE-GEN[141]
isamulti-ﬂow Seq2Seqpre-training model,whichpaysattentio n to theexposure biasproblemof
pre-trainingmodelsondownstreamNLGtaskssuchasquestionge neration,andaimstomakethe
NLG models generate more human-like and ﬂuent texts. OFA [132] pr esent a uniﬁed multimodal
pre-trainingframeworktounifyvariousvisionandlanguagetask s,suchasNLU,NLG,andimage
classiﬁcation. Transformer is applied as the backbone archite cture, and the sparse coding and a
uniﬁed vocabularyare utilized to represent the imagesand lingu istic words.
3 TEXTABBREVIATION
3.1 Task
The goal of text abbreviation is to distill key information fr om long texts to short ones, which
consists ofthree subtopics: text summarization,question ge neration,and distractor generation.
Therearetwokindsofmethodsfortextabbreviation:extracti veandabstractivemethods.Since
theabstractiveapproachismoreﬂexibleandcancreatemoreh uman-likesentencesthantheextrac-
tive approach,it hasbeenpaid moreandmoreattentions in recent yearsandis ourmainfocusin
thispaper.Textsummarizationistheprocessofgeneratingent irelynewphrasesandsentencesto
capture themeaningofthe source document.Question generation concentrateson automatically
generating questions from a given sentence or paragraph. Distrac tor generation is the automatic
generationofadequatedistractorsforagivenquestionanswe rpairgeneratedfromagivenarticle
toformanadequatemultiple-choicequestion.Wesummarizet hemostrepresentativemethodsfor
eachsubtask in Table 1.
ACMComput. Surv.,Vol. 1,No. 1,Article1. Publication date: Ja nuary 2022.