VOLUME XX, 2017 1 Date of publication xxxx 00, 0000, date of current version  xxxx  00, 0000. 
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/ACCESS.2017.Doi Number 
PestNet: An End-to-End Deep Learning 
Approach for Large-Scale Multi-Class Pest 
Detection and Classification 
Liu Liu1,2, Rujing Wang1, Chengjun Xie1,*, Po Yang3,*, Senior Member, IEEE , Fangyuan 
Wang1,2, Sud Sudirman3 and Wancai Liu4 
1Institute of Intelligent Machin es, and Hefei Institute of Physi cal Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Hefei, 230031 China 
2University of Science and Tec hnology of China, Hefei, 230026 Ch ina 
3Liverpool John Moores University, Liverpool, L3 3AF United K ingdom 
4National Agro-Tech Extension and Service Center, Beijing, 1001 25 China 
*Corresponding authors: Chengjun Xie (e-mail: cjxie@iim.ac.cn),  Po Yang (e-mail: poyangcn@gmail.com) 
This work was supported by The N ational Key Technology R&D Prog ram of China under Grant 2018YFD 0200300 and the National Natura l Science 
Foundation of China under grant 31401293, 31671586, 61773360. 
ABSTRACT  Multi-class pest detection is one of crucial components in pes t management involving 
localization in addition to classification which is mu ch more d ifficult than generic object detection because 
of the appearance differences among pest species. This paper pr oposes a region-based end-to-end approach 
named PestNet for large-scale multi-class pest detection and cl assification based on deep learning. PestNet 
consists of three major parts. Firstly, a novel module Channel- Spatial Attention (CSA) is proposed to be 
fused into Convolutional Neural N etwork (CNN) backbone for feat ure extraction and enhancement. The 
second one is called Region Proposal Network (RPN) that is a dopted for providing region proposals as 
potential pest positions based on extracted feature ma ps from i mages. Position-Sensitive Score Map 
(PSSM), the third component, is u sed to replace Fully Connected  (FC) layers for pest classification and 
bounding box regression. Furthermore, we apply Contextual RoI ( Contextual Region of Interest) as 
contextual information of pest features to improve detection ac curacy. We evaluate PestNet on our newly 
collected large-scale pests image dataset, Multi-class Pest Dat aset 2018 (MPD2018) captured by our 
designed task-specific image acquisition equipment, coveri ng mo re than 80k images with over 580k pests 
labeled by agricultural experts and categorized in 16 classes. Experimental results show that the proposed 
PestNet performs well on multi-class pest detection with 7 5.46%  mean Average Precision (mAP), which 
outperforms the state-of-the-art methods. 
INDEX TERMS  Channel-Spatial Attention, Con volutional Neural Network, Multi -class Pest Detection, 
Position-Sensitive Score Map, Region Proposal Network 
I. INTRODUCTION 
In agriculture field, specialized control of numerous pe sts has  
always been a key issue affecting agricultural productivity 
for decades. Thus, monitoring for the number of pest species 
is of great significance to eliminate pests without delay to 
avoid blind use of pesticides which result in unhealthy crops. 
There are millions of species of pests in the world making 
pest detection becoming one of the major challenges in 
agriculture pest management. P reviously, pest detection is 
performed by manual observation which is obviously 
laborious and error-prone.  
With the development of modern computer science, 
computer vision has become an increasingly and widely used approach to categorize pests as huge time consumption and 
intensive labor are serious lim itations in conventional manual 
pest classification methods [1,2]. However, advancement in 
agricultural pest detection has slowed down significantly in 
recent years and the recent methods in computer vision using 
machine learning as ready-to-u se recipes could not achieve 
satisfied pest detection performance. This might be attributed 
to many factors such as powerless hand-crafted features. In 
addition, single insect may shift in a series of statistic imag es 
with large different motions and poses which leads to 
d i f f e r e n t  f e a t u r e  v e c t o r s  i n  f e a t u r e  s p a c e  f o r  t h e  p e s t s  f r o m  
same species. Furthermore, most researchers focus on 
increasing the identification accuracy of certain type of pest