VOLUME XX, 2017 1 rotation, scale and translation. To deal with it, empl oyed 
Scale-invariant feature transform (SIFT) was employed with 
LOSS algorithm to classify five insects [4]. Meanwhile, 
compared with previous classifiers such as k-nearest 
neighbors [18] and linear discriminate analysis (LDA) [19], 
support vector machine (SVM) was proposed with Haar-like 
features to classify insects and obtained a better performance 
than the state-of-the-art methods [20]. In terms of neural 
network approaches, Artificial Neural Network (ANN) was 
adopted as well as SVM based on their own designed 
features [21]. In addition, ANN was also used for 
categorizing butterfly and other insects [22,23].  
Although the aforementioned pest identification methods 
have achieved great success to some extent, their results rely 
too much on hand-crafted featur es selection such as SIFT and 
Haar. In this case, one potential consequence is that the 
extracted descriptors show strong similarity to others among 
pests. i.e. the feature vectors with different species are high ly 
close in feature space because o f the relative variability of 
their texture, color, shape and so on. Furthermore, the 
processing of designing features is laborious and insufficient 
to represent all aspects of the insects. As a result, sustai nable 
insect detection methods should rely on greater depth to mine 
more valuable information and learn features automatically 
instead of blind low-level feature descriptors. 
Another limitation is that few previous works using 
traditional machine learning methods aim to address multi-
class pest detection issue that focuses more on pest 
localization which is much more difficult than classific ation. 
As it is well known, CNN in deep learning has made an 
obvious breakthrough on computer  vision in the recent years 
for generic object detection [24-26]. Many sorts of 
algorithms based on CNN have emerged to significantly 
improve current systems performance for classification as 
well as object localization [27]. Besides, CNN architecture 
could also achieve automatic feature extraction. In 
agricultural area, deep learning has also received widespread 
attention in the past two years. Among these works, the 
region-based architectures especially Faster RCNN are the 
most popular choice to detect generic in-field insects [28,29].  
Besides, Single-Shot Detector (SSD) [30] is another common 
method used in plant disease and pest detection [31]. For pest 
identification task, ResNet has becom e a widely used CNN 
backbone to extract pest features. Therefore, we propose 
region-based end-to-end appro ach named PestNet for large-
scale multi-class pest detecti on and classification based on 
deep learning, which improves performance by the following 
aspects. Firstly, a novel module Channel-Spatial Attention 
(CSA) is proposed into CNN based network for feature 
extraction and enhancement. Secondly, for pest localization, 
we employ a region proposal method combined with PSSM 
module generating candidate boxes automatically, in which 
Contextual RoI (Contextual Region of Interest) as contextual 
information are augmented. Such this end-to-end method 
does not require any preprocessing as well as human 
intervention and could yield state-of-the-art performance. 
 
FIGURE 3.  Pest Image Acquisition Equipment. 
 
 
FIGURE 4.  Part of MPD2018 dataset samples visualization. 
III. MATERIALS AND METHODS 
A.  MULTI-CLASS PEST DATASET 2018 (MPD2018) 
For agriculture pest identification, there exist a few open 
datasets released such as Butterfly Dataset [32]. However, to 
our best knowledge, few open datasets suitable for multi-
class pest detection task are released while our purpose is to 
detect different kinds of pest s simultaneously in one image. 
As a result, we build a dataset for our large-scale multi-cl ass 
pest detection task. Specifically, the pest image acquisition 
equipment designed for capturing images of multi-class pests 
in our dataset is shown in Fig. 3. In this device, the 
multispectral light trap could emit light for attracting multi-
class pests, in which the wavelengths could vary with time 
according to habits of pests in the day to ensure different 
types of pests could be capture d. Then these attracted pests 
would be stunned by the screen and fall into the pest 
collection tray on the bottom. At the same time, the H D 
camera in the tray above is set to take pictures periodically a t 
15 second intervals. After being photographed, the pests 
would be swept away from the pest collection tray 
immediately to avoid accumula tion and overlapping. The 
captured images are stored in JPG format at 2592 1944   
resolution. Hereafter, each pes t in images are annotated by 
agricultural experts with labels and bounding boxes. Finally, 
88,670 images containing 582,170 pest objects categorized in 
16 classes are captured. Our newly built dataset is named 
Multi-class Pest Dataset 2018 (MPD2018) and part of 
examples are visualized in Fig. 4. 
In order to verify the effectiveness of our method, we 
randomly split our entire collected images into training and 
test subsets at ratio of 9:1. Among these subsets, training set  
is our 'gold standard' to train the model as the annotations ar e 
labeled by agricultural experts while test set is adopted to 
validate the performance of PestNet. Table 1 provides the  
statistics on entire dataset and two subsets for each pest 
category. Note that the pests would take up no more than 1% 
size in our images because 'tiny' is one of the challenges of 
pests in MPD2018.