VOLUME XX, 2017 1 
 
FIGURE 1.  Technical pipeline of our PestNet. The components 
surrounded by red bold dotted box will go through the p rior tra ining 
phase on training images before test phase. The red ar rows in t his box 
represent the gradient descent process of the backward propagat ion 
stage during training.   
 
 
FIGURE 2.  Sample images of 16 Pest Species in our Work. Note tha t these 
sample images are partially taken from images of MPD2018 . 
 
by introducing new features, yet paying more attentions on 
developing novel architectures for large-scale multi-class 
pest detection task that requires to achieve not only pest 
recognition but also localization and number counting, which 
is more helpful for pest monitoring [3,4]. 
In this context, motivated by the various applications of 
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) in deep learning [5-8] 
and the development of region-based CNN detection 
techniques in generic objects [9,10], we develop an end-to-
end architecture PestNet based on deep learning for multi-
class pest detection, whose pipeline is shown in Fig. 1, in 
which features are extracted and learned from original 
images automatically without any preprocessing rather than 
hand-crafted. In order to validate our PestNet, we design an 
image capture equipment to bu ild our 10-year-term of task-
specific dataset Multi-class Pest Dataset 2018 (MPD2018) 
covering more than 80k images with over 580k pests labeled 
by agricultural experts and categorized in 16 classes, and 
some of pests’ examples are shown in Fig. 2. In PestNet, 
images are firstly input into a CNN backbone for feature 
extraction and the output is so-called 'feature maps'. In this 
phase, we propose Channel-Spat ial Attention (CSA) module 
to enhance the channel and sp atial information between 
every two convolutional blocks. Then we apply Region 
Proposal Network (RPN) to compute region proposals for 
each position in feature maps. These regions could 
distinguish between pests and non-pests so they indicate the 
potential pests’ positions. 
The goal of the following step is to predict pests’ 
categories and fine-tune bounding boxes from region 
proposals. In generic object detection methods, the feature 
maps are taken a pooling operation based on the region proposals for cropping into a fixed size. In PestNet, we 
augment contextual information named Contextual Regions 
of Interest (Contextual RoIs) into the region proposals and 
fuse them together for more accurate prediction. Furthermore, 
many state-of-the-art CNN methods for detecting generic 
objects adopt Fully Connected (FC) layer to achieve 
prediction [11]. But FC might be insensitive to spatial 
location which is a major limitation leading to worse results. 
Besides, FC holds large number of parameters causing much 
more computational cost, which might affect real time 
performance. In PestNet, to address these issues, a module 
called Position-Sensitive Score Map (PSSM) is used to 
replace FC layer, which could compute confidence scores of 
each position in proposed regions. Moreover, Online Hard 
Example Mining (OHEM) [12] strategy is used for 
improving the effectiveness of training. The entire training 
and test phase could run automatically to achieve pest 
detection and classification so PestNet is an end-to-end 
system. 
The major contributions of this paper are as follows: 
1) A novel end-to-end convolutional neural network based 
automatic pest detection architecture PestNet is designed and 
developed for large-scale multi-class pest detection and 
classification. 
2) PestNet is a region-based approach adopting Region 
Proposal Network (RPN) for providing pest regions and 
Position-Sensitive Score Map ( PSSM) for pest classification 
and bounding box regression. Furthermore, our method 
obtains improved pest detection accuracy by integrating a 
novel feature enhancement module Channel-Spatial 
Attention (CSA) and considering Contextual Regions of 
Interest (Contextual RoIs) for accurately classifying the types  
of pests and qualifying their positions. 
3) We build a 10-year-term of large-scale pest dataset 
Multi-class Pest Dataset 2018 (MPD2018) captured by our 
designed task-specific image acquisition equipment, covering 
more than 80k images with over 580k pests labeled by 
agricultural experts and cat egorized in 16 classes. 
II. RELATED WORK 
There is plenty of advanced techniques developed and 
applied in modern agricultural field such as leaf diseases 
identification [13] and insect recognition [14]. Among these 
works, two key steps of traditional computer vision methods 
could be summarized: (1) feature extraction that extracts 
information as feature vectors from images. (2) pattern 
recognition that trains a model to classify categories of input  
images. The relatively early works for pest identification was 
done by [15] who achieved classification through RGB 
multispectral analysis as well as the method proposed by [16] 
which recognized insects through eigen-images extracted by 
Principle Component Analysis (PCA) algorithm. Since then, 
a great deal of achievements emerged in the past few years. 
Size and color features were also extracted to categorize 
whiteflies, aphids and thrips [17]. Apart from size, shape and 
texture features were also chosen for identifying flower [3].   
However, these features were too weak to be insensitive to