VOLUME XX, 2017 1 data with original training images for doubling data volume 
to enlarge data amount for learning more invariant features. 
Therefore, we could obtain more examples for training to 
avoid over-fitting problem. In the aspect of experiments 
d e s i g n ,  w e  t r a i n  f o u r  C N N  b ackbones with Faster RCNN 
[11] that contains RPN and fu lly connected network (FC) as 
the baseline in our experiments , which is one of the state-
of-the-art architectures. Fu rthermore, we compare the 
performance of our PestNet with a state-of-the-art one-stage 
object detection method SSD [42] that is also a common 
choice in pest detection task. In addition, we a dopt transfer 
learning [41] method to use CNN backbones pre-trained on 
ImageNet dataset as our model initial parameters. 
B.  CNN BACKBONES 
In our experiments, we are going to consider four CNN 
architectures of different complexity as prior CNN 
backbones with our CSA module for feature extraction 
which are ZF [24], VGG16 [25], ResNet50 and ResNet101 
[ 2 6 ]  w h o s e  d e t a i l s  a r e  s h o w n  i n  F i g .  9 ,  w h e r e  Z F  a n d  
VGG16 are shallow CNNs wh ile ResNet50 and ResNet101 
are deep CNNs. In deep networks that contain residual 
blocks, we use bottle neck [43] to reduce computational cost 
by adopting extra convolution operation. 
 
 
FIGURE 9.  CNN backbones Details in PestNet. The integers followed  by 
'Conv' denote the kernel sizes. 
 
C.  EVLUATION METRICS 
In order to accurately validate our model, mean Average 
Precision (mAP) is used as a major evaluation metrics that 
takes mean of Average Precision (AP) value among classes. 
AP value is defined as the ar ea under Precision-Recall (PR) 
curve: 
1
0( ) Prcision(c)  Recall(c)CAP c d                (9) 
where c denotes the class, Pre cision-Recall is calculated by: 
 #( )()#( ) # ( )TP cPrecision cTP c FP c               (10) 
 #( )()#( ) # ( )TP cRecall cTP c FN c                  (11) 
in which TP, FPand FN represent True Positive, False 
Positive and False Negative samples respectively so the 
Precision measures the samples that are incorrectly detected while higher Recall indicates the lower misdetection rate. 
So, the mAP could be obtained by taking mean: 
1()cCmAP AP cC                       (12) 
V. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
A.  TRAINING LOSS ANALYSIS 
Training iteration is one of the major hyper-parameters in 
PestNet because proper iteration could assist to avoid 
overfitting problem. As it can be seen in Fig. 10 illustrating 
the training loss curves, with  the iteration increasing, the 
training losses could keep dropping at approximately first 
20k iterations, which indicates t hat our models could learn 
to detect the pests’ features well at the beginning of training  
phase. When networks continue iterating, the decline of 
training loss turns to be slower. During the iteration of 100k  
to 120k, the models become to achieve convergence. 
Therefore, we choose 120k as the best training iteration 
parameter in our experiments for training our model. It also 
could be observed in Fig. 10 that deep CNN architectures 
could obtain lower loss than the shallow network ZF. 
Furthermore, the training losses of ResNet50 as well as 
ResNet101 are more stable while there are large fluctuations 
in the curves of ZF and VGG16 networks. 
 
 
  
FIGURE 10.  Training loss on four different architectures grouped into  
‘shallow’ models and ‘deep’ models based on their ne twork’s dep th. 
Training loss is calculated by summing loss and boun ding box 
regression loss. 
 
B.  FEATURE VISUALIZATION 
In order t o prove  the  learning ca pacity of PestNet,  part of  
feature maps outputted from 2 middle blocks in ResNet101 
are visualized in Fig. 11. As it is shown, lots of feature 
maps in shallow convolutional block are influenced by grid 
lines of background while only a small part of those could 
filter the objects well. With the layer going deeper, points 
of pests are activated bette r and become clearer, which 
could neglect irrelevant cont ent and extract valuable 
features of the pests. Meanwhile, features maps in deep 
convolutional block could separate the objects and the 
activation values of points are much brighter than 
background in feature maps. Among these figures, it is 
obvious that PestNet could progressively learn the pests' 
features using deep CNN. 
C.  PRECISION-RECALL ANALYSIS 
In the experimental results o f pest detection on MPD2018, 
to investigate the false positives and misdetections, PR 
curves comparing PestNet with Faster RCNN and SSD are 
shown in Fig. 12. As it can be observed in Fig. 12(a),