VOLUME XX, 2017 1 large background noises as shown in Fig. 5 (left part). This 
is because that the convoluti onal operation owns a well-
known defect of limited receptive field. Thus, it is possible 
to obtain a higher detection performance by applying global 
spatial attention to filter the feature maps. 
Inspired by these two observations, we propose a novel 
module Channel-Spatial Attention (CSA) for weighting 
channel and spatial information on output from each CNN 
block to enhance the representational power of feature 
maps. Fig. 5 shows an intuitive framework of our CSA 
module in the backbone that consists of two parts. In the 
first part of Channel Attention module (the upper part), the 
3D feature map with shape of WHC  extracted by 
CNN block is input into an extra global pooling layer that 
takes average pooling from the whole feature maps in each 
channel to generate a lower di mensional (1D) feature vector, 
in which the averaged value represents the global feature 
for each channel. Then, we apply a group of convolutional 
layers with non-linear activation ReLU following. This 1D 
feature vector is mapped into (0,1) area by adopting 
Sigmoid function and the output with shape of 11C  is 
so-called channel attention factor. Thus, the output of 
Channel Attention module is the broadcast element-wise 
product of the original input 3D feature map and the 1D 
channel attention factor. In this way, the input 3D feature 
map is activated i n channel level. 
 
 
FIGURE 5.  Channel-Spatial Attention architecture. 
 
The lower part in Fig. 5 is Spatial Attention module, 
whose operations are simil ar with Channel Attention 
module. In this part, the input 3D feature map ( WHC ) 
is fed into another convolutional layer with 11 kernel and 
only 1 filter to achieve global convolution. The output is a 
2D feature map with shape of 1WH , so each value 
could be a global feature for spatial level. To extract the 
global spatial information, we adopt an extra convolution 
operation with a large kernel size (e.g. 77)and to zoom 
out the feature map into / 2 / 2 1 WH  shape. Next, a 
corresponding deconvolution operation is applied to 
generate the spatial attention factor ( 1WH ) and the 
input 3D feature map is multip lied by the spatial attention 
factor in each spatial position so the feature map is 
activated in spatial level. Finally, the output of CSA is the 
sum of two activated feature maps. 
3)  REGION PROPOSAL NETWORK (RPN) 
Our PestNet is a region-based CNN method so we adopt 
RPN module to search potential regions of object followed 
by CNN backbone. As RPN holds its own objectness scores 
and bounding box regression layer, it could effectively provide regions automatically. In contrast to other relevant 
methods e.g. selective search [34] and edge boxes [35] 
which spends much time on thousands of regions, RPN 
could reduce a large number of proposal regions when 
ensuring the quality by introducing various anchor boxes 
for box regression reference. 
 
 
FIGURE 6.  Region Proposal Netwo rk architecture. 
 
Fig. 6 shows an intuitive fr amework of RPN module in 
training phase. As it can be s een, the feature map extracted 
by base CNN is input into an extra convolutional layer 
which takes sliding windows to generate a lower 
dimensional region feature. For every sliding window in 
standard RPN module, there are  9 rectangular region boxes 
totally with 3 kinds of scales 222{ 128 , 256 ,512 }  and ratios 
{ 1:1 ,1:2,2:1 } . Here for detecting pests with tiny sizes in 
MPD2018, we compute our own scales 22 2{64 ,128 , 256 }  
specifically which ensures effec tive receptive field on input 
images for finding tiny pests. These boxes are also calle d 
anchors and could be referenced for coarse-tuning in next 
two sibling regression layers, which are fully connected. 
The two layers are called box classification and regression  
layers respectively employed for bounding boxes revision 
and the output is 29 scores and 49 coordinates based 
on 9 reference boxes, describing class scores for 
background and non-background regions and bounding 
boxes m i nm i nm a xm a x(, , , )xyxy . Finally, RPN provides large 
number of region proposals also called Region of Interest 
(RoI) for next processing. 
4)  POSITION-SENSITIVE SCORE MAP (PSSM) 
The following step is to classify the categories and fine-
tune RoIs. In order to ensure translational invariance of 
RoIs, we adopt position-sensitive score maps (PSSM) to 
encode position information. As it is shown in Fig. 7, an 
extra convolutional layer is firstly extended after CNN 
backbone to produce a 27( 1 )C  channels score map 
because we want to have a location sense for each category, 
in which 1C is the number of object categories plus 
background. Each region provided from RPN is mapped 
into this score map and divided into 77 grid. Secondly, 
the local corresponding score map is processed by RoI 
pooling layer [11] to reduce weight and height by applying 
average pooling in each regi on. Finally, the score map 
could calculate 77  confidence scores for 1C 
categories which represent th e possibility of each position 
and then the 77 scores are used to vote for the final class 
score by averaging them. Similarly, we also achieve