VOLUME XX, 2017 1 bounding box fine-tuning by augmenting an extra 
247 ( 1 )C  channels convolutional layer and it could 
produce 4( 1)C channels in a similar way. Therefore, in 
PSSM method, the two score maps are sensitive to 
positions of region proposals because various channels 
indicate differe nt positions. 
 
 
FIGURE 7.  Position-Sensitive Sco re Map architecture. 
 
For predicting categories as well as bounding boxes, we 
employ softmax regression which is an expansion of 
logistic regression [36]. Besides, we define a threshold to 
filter most of boxes which hold low scores and non-
maximum suppression (NMS) [37] is also applied to retain 
regions with locally maximal scores, in which Intersection-
over-Union (IoU) is adopted as metrics to eliminate most of 
overlapping boxes, in which: 
(,)ABIoU A BAB                              (4) 
5)  PEST CONTEXTUAL ROIS 
To enhance the RoI information during box regression 
phase in PSSM, we take full advantage of contextual 
information of RoIs. The motiva tion is that the input of RoI 
pooling operation is derived from the original region 
proposals that are outputted from RPN, in which the 
information of pest might not be completely covered. In 
this case, some su pportive contextual information that 
could help bounding boxes fine-tuning would lose leading 
to unsatisfied regression results. Thus, as shown in Fig. 8, 
we augment extra contextual information called Contextual 
RoI, which are expansion of 1.5 times larger than original 
RoIs. Then we append another RoI pooling on these extra 
contextual RoIs and fuse the two results. Through this way, 
the contextual information could be added into RoIs and 
fully utilized as extra auxiliary  information for better result s. 
C.  MODEL OPTIMIZATION 
1)  LOSS FUNCTION AND OPTIMIZER 
Loss function is the criterion for training process. Our loss 
function is defined as the sum of the cross-entropy loss and 
the box regression loss: 
(,) ( ) [ 0 ] ( , )cls regcLst L s c L tt                (5) 
where cs denotes the predicted score class c while t and 
t denote {, , ,}xywhtttt  of bounding boxes. [0 ]c 
indicates that we only consider the boxes of non-background (the box is background if 0c). This loss 
function contains two parts  for classification loss clsL and 
bounding box regression loss regL, in which: 
( ) log( )clsccLs s                            (6) 
and 
1 (,, ,)(, ) ( )reg L i i ix y w hLt t s m o o t htt
            (7) 
where: 
2
10.5              if x <1()0.5        otherwiseLxsmooth xx             (8) 
I n  t e r m s  o f  o p t i m i z e r ,  t h e  m o m e n t u m  S G D  [ 3 8 ]  i s  
chosen as our optimizer w ith momentum 0.9, which 
updates parameters based on one sample at each iteration. 
This optimizer could partly k eep the update gradient at 
previous iteration and fine-tune the final gradient. In order 
to avoid over-fitting problem, we utilize dropout method 
[39] as well as early-s topping strategy [40] to select the best  
training iteration. As to learnin g rate policy, 'step' strategy  
is applied in gradient descent, in which we initialize 
learning rate to 0.001 and the  learning rate will be divided 
by 10 per 50000 iterations. In addition, mini-batch size is 
set to 1 and the number of region proposals of every 
training example is at least 256. 
 
 
FIGURE 8.  Process of Contextual RoI. 
 
2)  ONLINE HARD EXAMPLE MINING (OHEM) 
In order to achieve efficient tr aining in our task, we append 
Online Hard Example Mining ( O H E M )  [ 1 2 ]  a s  a  t r a i n i n g  
example selection strategy  to enhance our learning 
consequent during training phase. OHEM mines hard 
regions for more effective backward propagation. In 
OHEM approach, we compute the loss of all N region 
proposals for one image in forward propagation. Then NMS 
method is applied to select B regions that have highest loss 
because highly overlapping regions might result in loss 
double counting problem. Therefore, in backward 
propagation, the model parameters are updated only based 
on these selected regions while we set the gradients of other 
N-B regions to 0. 
IV. EXPERIMENTS 
A.  EXPERIMENTAL SETTINGS 
In this section, we present some experiments to validate the 
PestNet architecture for multi-class tiny pest classification, 
localization and counting. Our codes are based on Caffe 
framework with Python and run on a GeForce GTX TITAN 
X GPU. Before training phase, we employ ‘mirror’ data 
augmentation strategy that appends horizontally-flipped