Appl. Sci. 2022 ,12, 8983 2 of 17
1.2. Background
1.2.1. Vulnerability Outbreak Trend
According to NVD statistics, the number of vulnerabilities exhibited a year-over-
year increase and entered a period of rapid expansion in 2017. The relevant trend is
shown in Figure 1, as of 18 June 2022, the NVD vulnerability database has registered
189,155 vulnerabilities. So far this year, 11,644 vulnerabilities have been accepted, with
2757 vulnerabilities undergoing analysis and 259 vulnerabilities awaiting investigation [ 8].
Work on vulnerability assessment must be expedited in order to respond to the present
circumstances of a widespread outbreak of vulnerabilities.
Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW   2 of 17 
 
1.2. Background   
1.2.1. Vulnerability  Outbreak  Trend 
According  to NVD statistics,  the number of vulnerabilities  exhibited  a year‐over‐year 
increase and entered a period of rapid expansion  in 2017. The relevant trend is shown in 
Figure 1, as of 18 June 2022, the NVD vulnerability  database  has registered  189,155 vul‐
nerabilities.  So far this year, 11,644 vulnerabilities  have been accepted,  with 2757 vulner‐
abilities undergoing  analysis and 259 vulnerabilities  awaiting  investigation  [8]. Work on 
vulnerability  assessment  must be expedited  in order to respond to the present circum‐
stances of a widespread  outbreak  of vulnerabilities.  
 
Figure 1. Vulnerability  severity distribution  over time(2000–2022).  
1.2.2. The Common  Vulnerability  Scoring System 
CVSS Overview  
The Common  Vulnerability  Scoring System (CVSS) is an open framework  developed  
by FIRST.Org,  Inc. (FIRST) to characterize  and quantify vulnerabilities.  CVSS consists of 
three metric groups: base metric group, temporal  metric group, and environmental  metric 
group. Since major vulnerability  databases  only provide base scores, the base metric 
group is the most used. The focus of this study is the base metric group. The base metric 
group reflects the inherent properties  of vulnerabilities  that remain unchanged  over time 
and across user environments  [9]. The base metric group generates  scores ranging from 0 
to 10. The score and severity mapping  table defined by CVSS is shown in Table 1. The 
CVSS score can also be shown as a vector string, which is a textual and compact way of 
representing  the metric value. The NVD, when using the CVSS, usually gives a string rep‐
resentation  of the description  and the corresponding  vulnerability  metric values. The 
composition  and value range of the base metric group and the vector strings correspond ‐
ing to the metric values for both versions are shown in Tables 2 and 3. When using CVSS 
for scoring, the metric values for each metric in Tables 2 and 3 are selected.  The metric 
values are substituted  into the CVSS quantification  formula to obtain the base score. Fi‐
nally, the base score can be converted  into a vulnerability  rating according  to Table 1. The 
data in Tables 1–3 are from the CVSS official website [10,11]. 
   
Figure 1. Vulnerability severity distribution over time(2000–2022).
1.2.2. The Common Vulnerability Scoring System
CVSS Overview
The Common Vulnerability Scoring System (CVSS) is an open framework developed
by FIRST.Org, Inc. (FIRST) to characterize and quantify vulnerabilities. CVSS consists of
three metric groups: base metric group, temporal metric group, and environmental metric
group. Since major vulnerability databases only provide base scores, the base metric group
is the most used. The focus of this study is the base metric group. The base metric group
reﬂects the inherent properties of vulnerabilities that remain unchanged over time and
across user environments [ 9]. The base metric group generates scores ranging from 0 to 10.
The score and severity mapping table deﬁned by CVSS is shown in Table 1. The CVSS score
can also be shown as a vector string, which is a textual and compact way of representing the
metric value. The NVD, when using the CVSS, usually gives a string representation of the
description and the corresponding vulnerability metric values. The composition and value
range of the base metric group and the vector strings corresponding to the metric values
for both versions are shown in Tables 2 and 3. When using CVSS for scoring, the metric
values for each metric in Tables 2 and 3 are selected. The metric values are substituted into
the CVSS quantiﬁcation formula to obtain the base score. Finally, the base score can be
converted into a vulnerability rating according to Table 1. The data in Tables 1–3 are from
the CVSS ofﬁcial website [10,11].