Citation: Shi, F.; Kai, S.; Zheng, J.;
Zhong, Y. XLNet-Based Prediction
Model for CVSS Metric Values. Appl.
Sci.2022 ,12, 8983. https://doi.org/
10.3390/app12188983
Academic Editor: Tao Zhou
Received: 22 July 2022
Accepted: 5 September 2022
Published: 7 September 2022
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁl-
iations.
Copyright: © 2022 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
applied  
sciences 
Article
XLNet-Based Prediction Model for CVSS Metric Values
Fan Shi, Shaofeng Kai *
 , Jinghua Zheng and Yao Zhong
College of Electronic Engineering, National University of Defense Technology, Hefei 230037, China
*Correspondence: kaishaofeng@nudt.edu.cn
Abstract: A plethora of software vulnerabilities are exposed daily, posing a severe threat to the Inter-
net. It is almost impossible for security experts or software developers to deal with all vulnerabilities.
Therefore, it is imperative to rapidly assess the severity of the vulnerability to be able to select which
one should be given preferential attention. CVSS is now the industry’s de facto evaluation standard,
which is calculated with a quantitative formula to measure the severity of a vulnerability. The CVSS
formula consists of several metrics related to the vulnerability’s features. Security experts need to
determine the values of each metric, which is tedious and time-consuming, therefore hindering the
efﬁciency of severity assessment. To address this problem, in this paper, we propose a method based
on a pre-trained model for the prediction of CVSS metric values. More speciﬁcally, this method
utilizes the XLNet model that is ﬁne-tuned with a self-built corpus to predict the metric values
from the vulnerability description text, thus reducing the burden of the assessment procedure. To
verify the performance of our method, we compare the XLNet model with other pre-trained models
and conventional machine learning techniques. The experimental results show that the method
outperforms these models on evaluation metrics, reaching state-of-the-art performance levels.
Keywords: cybersecurity; vulnerability assessment; pre-trained model; ﬁne-tuning; CVSS; machine
learning; predictability
1. Introduction
1.1. Motivations
Vulnerabilities are weaknesses in the computational logic (e.g., code) of software
and hardware components that, when exploited, have a negative effect on conﬁdentiality,
integrity, or availability [ 1–3]. New vulnerabilities will be added to the numerous vulner-
ability databases, with the National Vulnerability Database (NVD) of the United States
being among the most well-known. According to NVD statistics, there is a time delay
between the Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures (CVEs) in the National Vulnerabil-
ity Database (NVD) and the Common Vulnerability Scoring System (CVSS) information
attached to the published CVEs. Research by Chen, H. and Ruohonen, J. showed that
vulnerability assessors’ assessment of the severity of vulnerability lags behind the time
of vulnerability exposure by more than 130 days [ 4,5]. However, there is an urgent need
for the repair of high-risk vulnerabilities. For instance, the US BINDING OPERATIONAL
DIRECTIVE 19-02 states that federal agencies in the US must remediate critical vulnera-
bilities within 15 calendar days of initial detection and vulnerabilities with high severity
within 30 calendar days of initial detection [ 6,7]. If vulnerability severity is not evaluated
in a timely manner, vulnerability remediation efforts will be greatly hampered in the face
of rising vulnerabilities. This study aims to provide a method for rapidly assessing vul-
nerability metric values in order to aid assessment experts in accelerating the assessment
process and reducing the time necessary for evaluation.
Appl. Sci. 2022 ,12, 8983. https://doi.org/10.3390/app12188983 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/applsci