Appl. Sci. 2022 ,12, 8983 15 of 17
5. Discussion
The experimental ﬁndings demonstrate that the ﬁne-tuned XLNet model indeed
enhanced the vulnerability metric prediction, which beneﬁts both the strength of the pre-
trained model and the domain knowledge provided by the ﬁne-tuning. Compared to
conventional machine learning and deep learning, the XLNet model acquired substantial
knowledge from the large-scale corpus. This information partially compensated for the
difﬁculty created by inadequate data in the downstream tasks, thus signiﬁcantly improving
the downstream tasks. In addition, the ﬁndings indicate that the ﬁne-tuned XLNet model
is not signiﬁcantly superior to the logistic regression method in terms of prediction impact,
and that the model’s interpretability is weak. In our future studies, we will conduct
research on the fusion of pre-trained and traditional models, combining the advantages of
pre-trained and classic models to produce superior outcomes. We will also research model
interpretability in order to make the model’s output more convincing.
6. Conclusions
Every year, the Internet discloses tens of thousands of vulnerabilities to the public. In
order to remedy high-priority vulnerabilities promptly, it is critical to assess the severity
of the vulnerability rapidly. Nevertheless, manual assessment of vulnerabilities using
the CVSS metric has proved to be time-consuming. To ﬁnd a faster way of assessing
vulnerability severity, this paper proposed a method for vulnerability metric prediction
using an XLNet pre-trained model. With this method, the XLNet model was ﬁne-tuned
based on a self-built cybersecurity corpus, and then the ﬁne-tuned XLNet model was used
to extract semantic features from the vulnerability description text. Subsequently, the CVSS
metric values were split, the multi-classiﬁcation problem was converted into a multi-label
classiﬁcation problem, and ﬁnally, multi-label classiﬁcation was performed based on the
extracted text features in order to achieve the purpose of predicting vulnerability metric
values. The experimental results on 276,357 actual vulnerabilities demonstrate that XLNet
can achieve state-of-the-art performance in CVSS metric value prediction.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, F.S. and S.K.; methodology, S.K.; software, S.K.; validation,
J.Z. and Y.Z.; formal analysis, F.S.; investigation, S.K.; resources, F.S.; data curation, Y.Z.; writing—
original draft preparation, S.K.; writing—review and editing, F.S.; visualization, Y.Z.; supervision, F.S.
All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research was funded by the National Key Research and Development Program of
China, grant number 2021YFB3100500. This is a project led by Professor Shi Fan, which focuses on
the network public nuisance governance.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: Not applicable.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
References
1. National Vulnerability Database. Available online: https://nvd.nist.gov/vuln (accessed on 1 September 2022).
2. Tang, M.; Alazab, M.; Luo, Y. Big data for cybersecurity: Vulnerability disclosure trends and dependencies. IEEE Trans. Big Data
2017 ,5, 317–329. [CrossRef]
3. Viegas, V .; Kuyucu, O. IT Security Controls , 1st ed.; Apress: Berkeley, CA, USA, 2022; p. 193.
4. Chen, H.; Liu, J.; Liu, R.; Park, N.; Subrahmanian, V . VEST: A System for Vulnerability Exploit Scoring & Timing. In Proceedings
of the Twenty-Eighth International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-19), Macao, China, 10–16 August 2019;
pp. 6503–6505.
5. Ruohonen, J. A look at the time delays in CVSS vulnerability scoring. Appl. Comput. Inform. 2019 ,15, 129–135. [CrossRef]
6. Binding Operational Directive 19-02—Vulnerability Remediation Requirements for Internet-Accessible Systems. Available online:
https://www.cisa.gov/binding-operational-directive-19-02 (accessed on 15 June 2022).