Appl. Sci. 2022 ,12, 8983 6 of 17
consuming to assess. In contrast to the non-basic aspects of the CVSS scores, there are also
researchers who evaluate vulnerabilities from a different perspective. Exploit Prediction
Scoring System (EPSS) improves vulnerability prioritization by combining descriptive
information about vulnerabilities (CVEs) with evidence of actual exploitation in the wild in
order to assess the likelihood of vulnerabilities being exploited [ 17,18]. Keskin, Omer et al.
evaluated vulnerabilities by considering the functional dependencies between vulnerable
assets, other assets, and business processes. The severity of the vulnerabilities assessed
based on this approach changed signiﬁcantly compared to their CVSS base score [ 19]. These
different ideas provide good inspiration for vulnerability assessment work.
1.3.2. Limitation of Previous Studies
Currently, there are two versions of CVSS: v2 [ 14] and v3 [ 20]. Although the latest
version is v3.1, the v2 version is still widely used and has a certain lifespan. Current
research on vulnerability assessment is often limited to a single CVSS version. However,
the metric systems of the two versions are different, and the ﬁndings of one version cannot
be effectively transferred to the other. Current research on vulnerability metrics tends
to study metrics individually. However, there may be correlations between the metrics
of vulnerabilities. Thus, predicting metrics separately may diminish the effectiveness of
prediction. Shahid, M.R. [ 21], Gong, X. [ 22], and Costa, J.C. [ 23] applied pre-trained models
and deep learning algorithms to metric prediction work in order to improve the prediction
of metric values. Nevertheless, they did not consider the correlation of the metrics’ rela-
tionships. Some studies have used word vector techniques to characterize text, although
such methods do not consider the inﬂuence of context, which may contain rich information
that could enhance the ﬁnal prediction. Khazaei, A. [ 24], Wang, P . [ 25], Han, Z. [ 26], and
Liu, K. [27] characterized vulnerability descriptions using traditional word vector algo-
rithms. However, these methods did not incorporate contextual information, and hence the
amount of information needed to be enhanced. Other studies directly gave possible values
for severity without the intermediate process values, which is not substantially helpful
to an industry that relies on CVSS quantitative equations for vulnerability assessment
work. Spanos, G. [ 28], Ali, M. [ 29], Ameri, K. [ 30], and Kudjo, P .K. [ 31] applied traditional
machine learning algorithms and deep learning algorithms to CVSS score prediction. These
methods allowed CVSS assessment work to become more convenient, although they did
not give speciﬁc metric values. This did not help in the quantitative formulation of CVSS
scores that relied on metric values for scoring.
1.4. Contributions
This study provides a vulnerability metric value prediction method based on the
XLNet model to enable rapid vulnerability metric value prediction. The method discovers
contextual characteristics from vulnerability descriptions in order to forecast potential met-
ric values. As compared to previous work, the paper’s main contributions are as follows:
1. The concept of transfer learning [ 24] is presented in the realm of vulnerability as-
sessment. The existing pre-trained model has increased maturity. Compared with
the traditional model, the performance has been greatly improved. However, the
application is not popular. The study extends the pre-trained model to the subject of
vulnerability assessment, therefore generating novel ideas for cyber security research.
2. Traditional machine learning techniques simply assess the inﬂuence of word frequency
on the outcomes, ignoring the context-based improvement on the ﬁnal output. This
paper employs the XLNet model, which incorporates contextual information and
enhances the classiﬁcation impact of the model.
3. This paper constructs two versions of the CVSS v2 and v3.1 datasets. It concurrently
investigates CVSS v2 and v3.1, providing assessment experts with reasonable metric
value suggestions and reducing the workload of assessors, therefore speeding up the
vulnerability severity assessment.