Appl. Sci. 2022 ,12, 8983 4 of 17
Introduction to CVSS Metrics
 CVSS v2 base metric group interpretation
1. Attack Vector
 This metric indicates the method of exploiting the vulnerability. The farther
a potential attacker is, the higher its vulnerability score.
2. Access Complexity
 This metric measures how difﬁcult it is to exploit the vulnerability.
3. Authentication
 This metric measures how frequently an attacker must authenticate to ex-
ploit a vulnerability.
4. Conﬁdentiality Impact
 This metric quantiﬁes the impact of a successfully exploited vulnerability
on conﬁdentiality.
5. Integrity Impact
 This metric evaluates the effect a successfully exploited vulnerability has on
the system’s integrity.
6. Availability Impact
 This metric assesses the consequences of a successfully exploited vulnerabil-
ity on the worst-affected component.
 CVSS v3.1 base metric group interpretation
1. Attack Vector
 This metric represents the conditions under which exploiting a vulnerability
is conceivable. The farther an attacker permitted to exploit a susceptible
component is, the higher this metric becomes.
2. Attack Complexity
 This metric reﬂects the attacker-uncontrolled circumstances needed to ex-
ploit the vulnerability.
3. Privileges Required
 This metric represents an attacker’s privileges before exploitation. The score
is the highest when no privileges are necessary.
4. User Interaction
 This metric represents the necessity for a human user other than the attacker
to be involved in the successful penetration of the susceptible component.
5. Scope
 This metric measures whether one component’s vulnerability impacts other
components’ resources.
6. Conﬁdentiality
 This metric quantiﬁes the conﬁdentiality of a successfully exploited vulnera-
bility on the component most directly and predictably affected by the attack.
7. Integrity
 This metric represents a vulnerability’s inﬂuence on integrity. Integrity
means truthfulness and trustworthiness.
8. Availability
 This metric assesses a vulnerability’s inﬂuence on a component’s availability.