Appl. Sci. 2022 ,12, 8983 7 of 17
2. Problem Formulation
Vulnerability metric value prediction is a multi-label text classiﬁcation problem.
A multi-label text classiﬁcation algorithm is used to obtain possible metric values from
vulnerability descriptions. The vulnerability description as textual information cannot
be directly input into the classiﬁcation model. The text information is usually converted
into word vector information by the word vector algorithm. Common algorithms include
One-hot, TFIDF [32], word2vec [33], and BERT [34].
This paper deﬁnes the vulnerability metric value generation model as follows:
ˆy=f1(Q,x) (2)
where xis a feature extracted from the text information, Qis an adjustable model parameter,
f1()is the structure of the generative model required to determine a prediction function,
ˆydenotes the probability that the value of the vulnerability metric to be predicted is
within [0, 1].
yt=f2(ˆy) (3)
f2()is used to transform the probabilistic form of the metric values into a textual
form, ytdenotes the transformed metric values.
In this paper, the dataset of vulnerability metrics prediction is denoted as D=fX,Yg,
where X=[V1,V2,,Vn], and Viis the description of the ith vulnerability. Accord-
ingly, Y=h
y(1),y(2),,y(n)i
is the truth-value label vector, while y(i)is the label of Vi.
In this paper, a multi-label classiﬁcation text problem is investigated. To get the proba-
bility of each label value, we split the multi-label multi-classiﬁcation text problem into
a multi-label text binary classiﬁcation problem, where y(i)=[y1,y2, . . . , ym],m=åk
1ci,ci
refers to the number of categories owned by the ith metric, krepresents the total number
of metric values to be predicted, and yi2f1, 0gdenotes whether the ith metric value
exists. To achieve vulnerability metric prediction, Xis converted into the feature matrix
x= [x1,x2,. . .,xn], where xi2Rnare the features extracted from Vi, while nis the number
of feature dimensions. As stated in (2), the expected result for xisˆy=f1(Q,x), where
ˆy=[ˆy1,ˆy2,,ˆyn],ˆyi=[y(1),y(2),,y(m)],y(i)is the predicted probability corre-
sponding to each metric value. Since vulnerability metric value generation is a multi-label
binary classiﬁcation task, the objective of prediction model parameter optimization is to
lower the model’s loss function according to the machine learning convention. Therefore,
the mission of this study is to construct a better f1()and to ﬁnd the appropriate Qin order
to achieve the task of predicting vulnerability metric values with better performance.
3. Methods
This study aims to design an efﬁcient machine learning approach using vulnerability
description text to predict multiple vulnerability features. This approach will help security
analysts to quickly analyze the CVSS metric values of vulnerabilities. As opposed to
building multiple prediction models to predict various metric values, this paper proposes a
learning method based on the XLNet model, which ﬁne-tunes the XLNet model to improve
the model’s learning efﬁciency and prediction accuracy.
3.1. Methodology Overview
Figure 3 depicts this paper’s two primary phases: XLNet transfer learning and vulner-
ability metric value prediction. By employing XLNet transfer learning, a ﬁne-tuned model
is developed to predict vulnerability metric values. Metric value prediction is a three-step
process, i.e., text tokenization, transfer layer token embedding, and metric value prediction.
These steps are shown in Figure 3. First, the vulnerability description content is divided
into numerous tokens during the tokenization stage, and then tokens are embedded into the
XLNet model. Finally, the softmax function to predict the likelihood ˆyof the vulnerability
metric values is used. The remainder of this section will provide a detailed description of
the framework.