LEARNING LATENT REPRESENTATIONS FOR STYLE CONTROL AND TRANSFER IN
END-TO-END SPEECH SYNTHESIS
Ya-Jie Zhang1?, Shifeng Pan2, Lei He2, Zhen-Hua Ling1
1National Engineering Laboratory for Speech and Language Information Processing,
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, P.R.China
2Microsoft China
zyj008@mail.ustc.edu.cn, fpeterpan, helei g@microsoft.com, zhling@ustc.edu.cn
ABSTRACT
In this paper, we introduce the Variational Autoencoder
(V AE) to an end-to-end speech synthesis model, to learn the
latent representation of speaking styles in an unsupervised
manner. The style representation learned through V AE shows
good properties such as disentangling, scaling, and combi-
nation, which makes it easy for style control. Style transfer
can be achieved in this framework by ﬁrst inferring style
representation through the recognition network of V AE, then
feeding it into TTS network to guide the style in synthesizing
speech. To avoid Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence collapse
in training, several techniques are adopted. Finally, the
proposed model shows good performance of style control
and outperforms Global Style Token (GST) model in ABX
preference tests on style transfer.
Index Terms —unsupervised learning, variational au-
toencoder, style transfer, speech synthesis
1. INTRODUCTION
End-to-end text-to-speech (TTS) models which generate
speech directly from characters have made rapid progress
in recent years, and achieved very high voice quality [1–3].
While the single style TTS, usually neutral speaking style,
is approaching the extreme quality close to human expert
recording [1, 3], the interests in expressive speech synthesis
also keep rising. Recently, there also published many
promising works in this topic, such as transferring prosody
and speaking style within or cross speakers based on end-to-
end TTS model [4–6].
Deep generative models, such as Variational Autoencoder
(V AE) [7] and Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) [8],
are powerful architectures which can learn complicated distri-
bution in an unsupervised manner. Particularly, V AE, which
explicitly models latent variables, have become one of the
most popular approaches and achieved signiﬁcant success on
Paper accepted by IEEE ICASSP 2019
?Work done during internship at Microsoft STC Asiatext generation [9], image generation [10, 11] and speech
generation [12, 13] tasks. V AE has many merits, such
as learning disentangled factors, smoothly interpolating or
continuously sampling between latent representations which
can obtain interpretable homotopies [9].
Intuitively, in speech generation, the latent state of
speaker, such as affect and intent, contributes to the prosody,
emotion, or speaking style. For simplicity, we’ll hereafter use
speaking style to represent these prosody related expressions.
The latent state plays a pretty similar role as the latent variable
does in V AE. Therefore, in this paper we intend to introduce
V AE to Tacotron2 [1], a state-of-the-art end-to-end speech
synthesis model, to learn the latent representation of speaker
state in a continuous space, and further to control the speaking
style in speech synthesis. To be speciﬁc, direct manipulation
can be easily imposed on the disentangled latent variable,
so as to control the speaking style. On the other hand, with
variational inference the latent representation of speaking
style can be inferred from a reference audio, which then
controls the style of synthesized speech. Style transfer, from
reference audio to synthesized speech, is thus achieved. Last
but not least, directly sampling on prior of latent distribution
can generate a lot of speech with various speaking style,
which is very useful for data augmentation. Comprehensive
evaluation shows the good performance of this method.
We have become aware of recent work by Akuzawa et
al. [12] which combines an autoregressive speech synthesis
model with V AE for expressive speech synthesis. The pro-
posed work differs from Akuzawa’s as follows: 1) their goal
is to synthesize expressive speech, which is achieved by direct
sampling from prior of latent distribution at inference stage,
while our goal is to control the speaking style of synthesized
speech through direct manipulate latent variable or variational
inference from a reference audio; 2) the proposed work is on
end-to-end TTS model while Akuzawa’s not.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2
introduces V AE model, our proposed model architecture and
tricks for solving KL-divergence collapse problem. Section 3
presents the experimental results. Finally, the paper will bearXiv:1812.04342v2  [cs.CL]  14 Feb 2019