Fig. 2 . Spectrograms generated by interpolation between
twoz. The interpolation coefﬁcient is : (a) za, (b)1
3za+2
3zd,
(c)2
3za+1
3zd, (d)zd.
worth mentioning that, after comparing L2-loss with negative
log likelihood of Gaussian distribution, we ﬁnally choose L2-
loss of mel spectrograms as reconstruction loss.
2.3. Resolve KL collapse problem
During training, we observe that the KL loss KL[q(zjx)jjp(z)]
is always found collapsed before they learned a distinguish-
able representation, which is a common phenomenon but
a crucial issue in training V AE models. In other words,
the convergence speed of KL loss far surpasses that of the
reconstruction loss and the KL loss quickly drops to nearly
zero and never rises again, which means the encoder doesn’t
work. Thus, KL annealing [9] is introduced to our task to
solve this problem. That is, during training, add a variable
weight to the KL term. The weight is close to zero at
the beginning of training and then gradually increase. In
addition, KL loss is taken into account once every K steps.
By combining these two tricks, the KL loss keeps nonzero
and avoids to collapse.
3. EXPERIMENTS AND ANALYSIS
3.1. experimental setup
An 105-hour audiobook recordings dataset read with various
storytelling styles by a single English speaker (Blizzard
Challenge 2013) was used in our experiments. The dataset
contains 58453 utterances for training and 200 for test. 80-
dimensional mel spectrograms were extracted with frame
shift 12.5 ms and frame length 50 ms. GST model [4]
with character inputs was used as our baseline model. The
hyperparameters are set according to [4]. As for our proposed
model, the dimension of latent variables is 32. The parameter
K mentioned in 2.3 is 100 before 15000 training steps and 400
after the threshold.
At inference stage, in evaluation of style control, we
directly manipulate zwithout going through the whole recog-
nition model. With regard to evaluation of style transfer, we
feed audio clips as reference and go through the recognition
model. Both parallel and non-parallel style transfer audios are
Fig. 3 . Spectrograms generated to demonstrate disentangled
factors. The ﬁrst row exhibits the control of pitch height only
by adjusting latent dimension 6 to be -0.9, -0.1, 0.7. The
second row shows that the local pitch variation is gradually
magniﬁed by increasing the value of dimension 10, which is
0.1, 0.5, 0.9, respectively.
generated and evaluated1. Parallel transfer means the target
text information is the same as reference audio’s, vice versa.
3.2. Style control
3.2.1. Interpolation of latent variables
As mentioned in [9], V AE supports smoothly interpola-
tion and continuous sampling between latent representations,
which obtains interpretable homotopies. Thus, we did in-
terpolation operation between two z2. One can generate
speech with high speaking rate and high-pitch, the other with
low speaking rate and low-pitch. The mel spectrograms of
generated speech are shown in Fig. 2. As we can see,
both pitch and speaking rate of generated speech gradually
decrease along with the interpolating. The result shows that
the learnt latent space is continuous in controlling the trend of
spectrograms which will further reﬂect in the change of style.
3.2.2. Disentangled factors
A disentangled representation means that a latent variable
completely controls a concept alone and is invariant to
changes from other factors [10]. In experiments, we found
that several dimensions of zcould independently control
different style attributes, such as pitch-height, local pitch
1The audio samples can be found at http://home.ustc.edu.cn/
˜zyj008/ICASSP2019 .
2These two zare derived by feeding two audios to the recognition model,
one with high speaking rate and high-pitch, the other with low speaking rate
and low-pitch.