On the Robustness of ChatGPT: An Adversarial and
Out-of-distribution Perspective
Jindong Wang1∗,Xixu Hu1,2‡†,Wenxin Hou3†,Hao Chen4,Runkai Zheng1,5‡,Yidong Wang6,
Linyi Yang7,Wei Ye6,Haojun Huang3,Xiubo Geng3,Binxing Jiao3,Yue Zhang7,Xing Xie1
1Microsoft Research,2City University of Hong Kong,3Microsoft STCA,4Carnegie Mellon University,
5Chinese University of Hong Kong (Shenzhen),6Peking University,7Westlake University
https://github.com/microsoft/robustlearn
Abstract
ChatGPT is a recent chatbot service released by OpenAI and is receiving increasing
attention over the past few months. While evaluations of various aspects of Chat-
GPT have been done, its robustness, i.e., the performance to unexpected inputs, is
still unclear to the public. Robustness is of particular concern in responsible AI,
especially for safety-critical applications. In this paper, we conduct a thorough eval-
uation of the robustness of ChatGPT from the adversarial and out-of-distribution
(OOD) perspective. To do so, we employ the AdvGLUE and ANLI benchmarks to
assess adversarial robustness and the Flipkart review and DDXPlus medical diag-
nosis datasets for OOD evaluation. We select several popular foundation models
as baselines. Results show that ChatGPT shows consistent advantages on most
adversarial and OOD classification and translation tasks. However, the absolute
performance is far from perfection, which suggests that adversarial and OOD
robustness remains a significant threat to foundation models. Moreover, ChatGPT
shows astounding performance in understanding dialogue-related texts and we find
that it tends to provide informal suggestions for medical tasks instead of definitive
answers. Finally, we present in-depth discussions of possible research directions.
1 Introduction
Large language models (LLMs), or foundation models (Bommasani et al., 2021), have achieved
significant performance on various natural language process (NLP) tasks. Given their superior
in-context learning capability (Min et al., 2022), prompting foundation models has emerged as a
widely adopted paradigm of NLP research and applications. ChatGPT is a recent chatbot service
released by OpenAI (OpenAI, 2023), which is a variant of the Generative Pre-trained Transformers
(GPT) family. Thanks to its friendly interface and great performance, ChatGPT has attracted over
100million users in two months.
It is of imminent importance to evaluate the potential risks behind ChatGPT given its increasing
worldwide popularity in diverse applications. While previous efforts have evaluated various aspects
of ChatGPT in law (Choi et al., 2023), ethics (Shen et al., 2023), education (Khalil and Er, 2023),
and reasoning (Bang et al., 2023), we focus on its robustness (Bengio et al., 2021), which, to our
best knowledge, has not been thoroughly evaluated yet. Robustness refers to the ability to withstand
disturbances or external factors that may cause it to malfunction or provide inaccurate results. It is
∗Contact: jindong.wang@microsoft.com.
†Equal contribution.
‡Work done during internship at Microsoft Research Asia.
Technical report.arXiv:2302.12095v5  [cs.AI]  29 Aug 2023