100101102
Model Parameters (Billions)020406080Attack Success Rate (%)Adversarial Robustness
100101102
Model Parameters (Billions)020406080Zero-shot F1 Score (%)Out-of-distribution Robustness
DeBERTa-L
BART-L
GPT-J-6B
Flan-T5-L
GPT-NEOX-20B
OPT-66B
BLOOM
text-davinci-002
text-davinci-003
ChatGPT
RandomFigure 1: Robustness evaluation of different foundation models: performance vs. parameter size.
Results show that ChatGPT shows consistent advantage on adversarial and OOD classification tasks.
However, its absolute performance is far from perfection, indicating much room for improvement.
important to practical applications especially the safety-critical scenarios. For instance, if we apply
ChatGPT or other foundation models to fake news detection, a malicious user might add noise or
certain perturbations to the content to bypass the detection system. Without robustness, the reliability
of the system collapses.
Robustness threats exist in a wide range of scenarios: out-of-distribution (OOD) samples (Wang
et al., 2022), adversarial inputs (Goodfellow et al., 2014), long-tailed samples (Zhang et al., 2021),
noisy inputs (Natarajan et al., 2013), and many others. In this paper, we pay special attention to two
popular types of robustness: the adversarial and OOD robustness, both of which are caused through
input perturbation. Specifically, adversarial robustness studies the model’s stability to adversarial
and imperceptible perturbations, e.g., adding trained noise to an image or changing some keywords
of a text. On the other hand, OOD robustness measures the performance of a model on unseen data
from different distributions of the training data, e.g., classifying sketches using a model trained for
art painting or analyzing a hotel review using a model trained for appliance review. More background
of these robustness is elaborated in Section 2.2.
Zero-shot robustness evaluation. While robustness research often requires training and optimization
(e.g., fine-tuning, linear probing, domain adaptation and generalization, Section 2.2), in this work, we
focus on zero-shot robustness evaluation. Given a foundation model, we perform inference directly on
the test dataset for evaluation. We argue that it becomes more expensive and unaffordable to train, or
even load existing (and future, larger) foundation models. For instance, the largest Flan-T5 model has
11billion parameters (Chung et al., 2022), which is already beyond the capability of most researchers
and practitioners. Thus, their zero-shot performance becomes important to downstream tasks. On the
other hand, foundation models are typically trained on huge volumes of datasets with huge amount of
parameters, which seems to challenge conventional machine learning theories (Appendix C):
Are large foundation models all we need for robustness?
In this work, we conduct a thorough evaluation of ChatGPT on its adversarial and OOD robustness
for natural language understanding tasks. It is challenging to select appropriate datasets for evaluating
ChatGPT since it is known to be trained on huge text datasets as of 2021. Eventually, we leverage
several recent datasets for our evaluation: AdvGLUE (Wang et al., 2021) and ANLI (Nie et al., 2020a)
for adversarial robustness and two new datasets for OOD robustness: Flipkart review (Vaghani and
Thummar, 2023) and DDXPlus medical diagnosis datasets (Tchango et al., 2022). Furthermore, we
randomly selected 30samples from AdvGLUE to form an adversarial translation dataset to evaluate
the translation performance. These datasets represent various levels of robustness, thus provide a fair
evaluation. The detailed information of these datasets are introduced in Section 3. We then select
2