several popular foundation models from Huggingface model hub and OpenAI service4to compare
with ChatGPT. In summary, we have 9tasks and overall 2,089test examples.5
Our findings. We perform zero-shot inference on all tasks using these models and Fig. 1 summarizes
our main results. The major findings of the study include:
1. What ChatGPT does well:
•ChatGPT shows consistent improvements on most adversarial and OOD classification
tasks.
•ChatGPT is good at translation tasks. Even in the presence of adversarial inputs, it can
consistently generate readable and reasonable responses.
•ChatGPT is better at understanding dialogue-related texts than other foundation models.
This could be attributed to its enhanced ability as a chatbot service, leading to good
performance on DDXPlus dataset.
2. What ChatGPT does not do well:
• The absolute performance of ChatGPT on adversarial and OOD classification tasks is
still far from perfection even if it outperforms most of the counterparts.
•The translation performance of ChatGPT is worse than its instruction-tuned sibling
model text-davinci-003.
•ChatGPT does not provide definitive answers for medical-related questions, but instead
offers informed suggestions and analysis. Thus, it can serve as a friendly assistant.
3. Other general findings about foundation models:
•Task-specific fine-tuning helps language models perform better on related tasks, e.g.,
NLI-fine-tuned RoBERTa-L has similar performance to Flan-T5-L.
•Instruction tuning benefits large language models, e.g., Flan-T5-L achieves comparable
performance to text-davinci-002 and text-davinci-002 with significantly less parameters.
Beyond evaluations, we share more reflections in the discussion and limitation sections, providing
experience and suggestions to future research. Finally, we open-source our code and results at
https://github.com/microsoft/robustlearn to facilitate future explorations.
2 Background
2.1 Foundation Models, ChatGPT, and Existing Evaluation
Foundation models have become a popular research and application paradigm for natural language
process tasks. Since foundation models are trained on large volumes of data, they show significant per-
formance improvement on different downstream tasks such as sentiment analysis, question answering,
automatic diagnosis, logical reasoning, and sequence tagging. ChatGPT is a generative foundation
model that belongs to the GPT-3.5 series in OpenAI’s GPT family, coming after GPT (Radford et al.,
2018), GPT-2 (Radford et al., 2019), GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020), and InstructGPT (Ouyang et al.,
2022). In contrast to its predecessors, ChatGPT makes it easy for every one to use just through a
browser with enhanced multi-turn dialogue capabilities. Although the technical details of ChatGPT
is still not released, it is known to be trained using reinforcement learning from human feedback
(RLHF) (Christiano et al., 2017) with instruction tuning. Other than natural language processing,
there are also emerging efforts in building foundation models for computer vision (Dehghani et al.,
2023), music generation (Agostinelli et al., 2023), biology (Luo et al., 2022; Lee et al., 2020), and
speech recognition (Radford et al., 2022).
Previous efforts evaluate ChatGPT in different aspects (van Dis et al., 2023). Bang et al. (2023)
proposes a multi-task, multi-modal, and multilingual evaluation of ChatGPT on different tasks.
They showed that ChatGPT performs reasonably well on most tasks, while it does not bring great
performance on low-resource tasks. Similar empirical evaluations are also made by Gozalo-Brizuela
and Garrido-Merchan (2023); Azaria (2022). Specifically, Qin et al. (2023) also did several evaluations
4Huggingface: https://huggingface.co/models . OpenAI service: https://openai.com/api .
5Although the sample size may seem small, it must be noted that due to the current unavailability of an API
service for ChatGPT, conducting experiments on a larger scale is challenging.
3