5.2 Can OOD Generalization be Solved by Large Foundation Models?
Larger models like ChatGPT and text-davinci-003 have the potential to achieve superior performance
on OOD datasets with better prompt engineering, inspiring us to think of the problem: is OOD
generalization solved by these giant models? The huge training data and parameters are a double-
edged sword: overfitting vs. generalization. It is also intuitive to think that OOD data is unseen
during training, so adding it into training set is enough, which is what these large models did. Is
the “unreasonable effectiveness of data” (Sun et al., 2017) real? However, as the model sizes are
becoming larger, it still remains unknown when and why LLMs will overfit.
Another possible reason is the training data of ChatGPT and text-davinci-003 actually encompass
similar distributions to our test sets even if they are collected after 2021. Flipkart is for product review
and DDXPlus is for medical diagnosis, which in fact are common domains widely existing on the
Internet. Thus, they could be not OOD to these models, that could lead to overfitting. New datasets
from long-tailed domains are in need for more fair evaluations.
Finally, our analysis does not show that ID-OOD performances are always positively correlated (Miller
et al., 2021), but can sometimes inversely correlated (Teney et al., 2022). Regularization and other
techniques should be developed to improve the OOD performance of language models.
5.3 Beyond NLP Foundation Models
Adversarial and OOD robustness do not only exist in natural language, but also in other domains. In
fact, most research comes from machine learning and computer vision communities. Researchers in
computer vision area could possibly think: can we solve OOD and adversarial robustness in image data
by training a vision foundation model? For instance, the recent ViT-22B (Dehghani et al., 2023) scales
vision Transformer (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020) to 22 billion parameters by training it on the 4 billion
JFT dataset (Zhai et al., 2022) (a larger version of the previous JFT-300M dataset (Sun et al., 2017)),
which becomes the largest vision foundation model to date. ViT-22B shows superior performance on
different image classification tasks. However, it does not show “emergent abilities” (Wei et al., 2022)
with the increment of parameters as other LLMs. Not only LLMs, the robustness in other areas also
remains to be solved.
Back to theory, algorithms, and optimization areas, which foundational research areas in artificial
intelligence. Will the large foundation models disrupt these areas? First, we should acknowledge
that the success of foundation models should also attribute to these areas, e.g., most LLMs adopt the
Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017) and other advanced learning and training research. Second, the
success of foundation models shed light on these areas: can we solve the problems like adversarial
and OOD by developing new theories, algorithms, and optimization methods? Such research could
offer valuable contribution to foundation models, e.g., improve the data and training efficiency
and efficacy. Finally, researchers in these areas should not be dis-encouraged since the advance of
scientific research should be diverse and not restricted to those done with rich computing resources.
6 Limitation
This paper offers a preliminary empirical study on the robustness of large foundation models, which
has the following limitations.
First, we only perform zero-shot classification using ChatGPT and other models. Results of these
models could change if we perform fine-tuning or adaptation given enough computing resources. But
as we stated in introduction, it is expensive and un-affordable to perform further operation on today’s
latest foundation models, we believe zero-shot evaluation is reasonable.
Second, it seems controversial to evaluate large foundation models on small datasets in this work.
However, since the training data of ChatGPT and some large models remains unclear, it is difficult
to find larger datasets. Especially, ChatGPT is trained on huge datasets on the Internet as of 2021,
making it more difficult to find appropriate datasets for thorough evaluation. We do believe more
datasets can be used for such evaluation.
Third, we did most evaluations on text classification and only minor evaluations on machine trans-
lation. It is well-known that ChatGPT and other foundation models can do more tasks such as
9