and they found that ChatGPT does not do well on fine-grained downstream tasks such as sequence
tagging. In addition to research from artificial intelligence, researchers from other areas also showed
interest in ChatGPT. Hacker et al. (2023); Shen et al. (2023) expressed concerns that ChatGPT and
other large models should be regulated since they are double-edged swords. The evaluations on ethics
are done in (Zhuo et al., 2023). There are reflections and discussions from law (Choi et al., 2023),
education (Khalil and Er, 2023; M Alshater, 2022; Susnjak, 2022; Guo et al., 2023), human-computer
interaction (Tabone and de Winter, 2023), medicine (Jeblick et al., 2022), and writing (Biswas, 2023).
To the best of our knowledge, a thorough robustness evaluation is currently under-explored.
2.2 Robustness
In the following, we present the formulation of robustness with the classification task (other tasks
can be formulated similarly). We are given a K-class classification dataset D={xi, yi}n
i=1, where
x∈Rdandy∈[K]are its d-dimensional input and output, respectively. We use ℓ[·,·]to denote the
loss function.
Adversarial robustness An adversarial input (Goodfellow et al., 2014) x′is generated by adding a
ϵ-bounded, imperceptible perturbation δto the original input x. The optimal classifier can be learned
by optimizing the following objective (Madry et al., 2017):
min
f∈HE(x,y)∈Dmax
|δ|≤ϵℓ[f(x+δ), y].
Out-of-distribution robustness On the other hand, OOD robustness (generalization) (Wang et al.,
2022; Shen et al., 2021) aims to learn an optimal classifier on an unseen distribution by training on
existing data. One popular formulation for OOD robustness is to minimize the average risk on all
distributions e, which is sampled over the set of all possible distributions (could be large than D):
min
f∈HEe∼QE(x,y)∈Deℓ[f(x), y].
Yang et al. (2022) presented GLUE-X, a benchmark based on GLUE and then conducted a thorough
evaluation of the OOD robustness of language models by training on in-distribution (ID) sets and
then testing on OOD sets. Ours, however, performs zero-shot evaluation. The OOD robustness of
ChatGPT cannot be evaluated by GLUE and GLUE-X benchmarks since it may include the entire
GLUE datasets in its training data.
3 Datasets and Tasks
3.1 Adversarial Datasets
We adopt AdvGLUE (Wang et al., 2021) and adversarial natural language inference (ANLI) (Nie
et al., 2020a) benchmarks for evaluating adversarial robustness. AdvGLUE is a modified version of
the existing GLUE benchmark (Wang et al., 2019) by adding different kinds of adversarial noise to
the text: word-level perturbation (typo), sentence-level perturbation (distraction), and human-crafted
perturbations. We adopt 5tasks from AdvGLUE: SST-2, QQP, MNLI, QNLI, and RTE. Since the
test set of AdvGLUE is not public, we adopt its development set instead for evaluation. Although
AdvGLUE is a classification benchmark, we additionally construct an adversarial machine translation
(En→Zh) dataset, termed AdvGLUE-T, by randomly selecting 30samples from AdvGLUE.
ANLI is a large-scale dataset designed to assess the generalization and robustness of natural language
inference (NLI) models, which was created by Facebook AI Research. It comprises 16,000 premise-
hypothesis pairs that are classified into three categories: entailment, contradiction, and neutral. The
dataset is divided into three parts (R1, R2, and R3) based on the number of iterations used during
its creation, with R3 being the most difficult and diverse. Therefore, we select the test set of R3 for
evaluating the adversarial robustness of our models. Detailed information of AdvGLUE and ANLI
can be found in Appendix A.1.
4