possible reason for the success of ChatGPT is its ability to understand the conversational context of
DDXPlus, which consists of doctor-posed diagnostic questions and patient responses. ChatGPT has
demonstrated superior performance in understanding conversational context compared to previous
models, which likely contributes to its improved performance on this dataset.
Finally, it is worth noting that due to the critical nature of the healthcare field, ChatGPT does not
provide definitive answers in medical-related questions but instead offers informed suggestions
and analysis, followed by a recommendation for further offline testing and consultation to
ensure accurate diagnosis. When the provided information is insufficient to make a judgment,
ChatGPT will acknowledge this and offer an explanation, demonstrating its responsible approach
to medical-related inquiries. This highlights the benefits of using ChatGPT for medical-related
inquiries compared to search engines, as it can provide comprehensive analysis and suggestions
without requiring the users to have medical expertise, while also being responsible and cautious in
its responses. This suggests a promising future for the integration of ChatGPT in computer-aided
diagnosis systems.
4.2 Zero-shot Machine Translation
4.2.1 Setup
We further evaluate the adversarial robustness of ChatGPT on an English-to-Chinese (En →Zh)
machine translation task. The test set (AdvGLUE-T) is sub-sampled from the adversarial English
text in AdvGLUE and we manually translate them into Chinese as ground truth. We evaluate the
zero-shot translation performance of ChatGPT against text-davinci-002 and text-davinci-003. We
further adopt two fine-tuned machine translation models from the Huggingface model hub: OPUS-
MT-EN-ZH (Tiedemann and Thottingal, 2020) and Trans-OPUS-MT-EN-ZH9More details of the
models used are included in Appendix D. We report BLEU, GLEU, and METEOR in experiments to
conduct a fair comparison among several models.10
4.2.2 Results
The results of zero-shot machine translation are shown in Table 3. Note that all three models from the
GPT family outperforms the fine-tuned models. Interestingly, text-davinci-003 generalizes the best
on all metrics. The performance of ChatGPT is better to text-davinci-002 on BLUE and GLUE, but
slightly worse on METOR. While differing in metrics, we find the translated texts of ChatGPT
(and text-davinci-002 and text-davinci-003) is very readable and reasonable to humans, even
given adversarial inputs. This indicates the adversarial robustness capability on machine translation
of ChatGPT might originate from GPT-3.
Table 3: Zero-shot machine translation results on adversarial text sampled from AdvGLUE.
Model BLEU↑GLEU ↑METOR ↑
OPUS-MT-EN-ZH 18.11 26.78 46.38
Trans-OPUS-MT-EN-ZH 15.23 24.89 45.02
text-davinci-002 24.97 36.30 59.28
text-davinci-003 30.60 40.01 61.88
ChatGPT 26.27 37.29 58.95
4.3 Case Study
Table 4 shows some results of ChatGPT across word-level (typo) and sentence-level (distraction)
adversarial inputs. It is evident that both adversaries pose a considerable challenge to ChatGPT,
through their ability to mislead the model’s judgement. It should be noted that these adversaries are
prevalent in everyday interactions, and the existence of numerous forms of textual adversarial attacks
highlights the necessity of defensive strategies for ChatGPT. Table 6 presents some cases of ChatGPT
on OOD inputs. Unlike adversarial inputs, it is not easy to analyze why ChatGPT performs bad for
OOD datasets since the notion of “distribution” is hard to quantify.
9Note that there are only few En →Zh machine translation models released on Huggingface model hub and
we pick the top two with the most downloads.
10We use NLTK ( https://www.nltk.org/ ) to calculate these metrics.
7