Theory 2 indicates that the error bound on the target domain is bounded by four terms: 1) source
empirical error, 2) the distribution discrepancy between source and target domains, 3) ideal joint
error, and 4) some constant related to sample size and VC dimension.
Conventional OOD generalization and adaptation research (Wang et al., 2022) focus on minimizing
the distribution discrepancy between source and target domains ( dH(ˆDs,ˆDt)) while assuming the
source risk ( ˆϵs(h)) is determined. Meanwhile, the last term (√·) can also be reduced due to the
increment of m. Similar to the above generalization analysis, we can also interpret the success of
large foundation models as they simply achieving low generalization error on the source data, thus
also minimizes the risk on the target domain. But it is also important to note that this analysis is
not rigorous. Finally, VC-dimension has no correlation with the distribution of datasets, which also
cannot explain the strong OOD performance of these foundation models.
D Foundation Models used in Experiments
In this section, we provide a brief introduction to the foundation models used in our experiments.
BART-L (Lewis et al., 2020) BART is based on bidirectional and auto-regressive transformer.
It is trained on a combination of auto-regressive and denoising objectives, which makes BART
feasible for both generation and understanding tasks. In a nutshell, BART is designed to handle both
understanding and generation tasks, making it a more versatile model, while BERT is more focused
on understanding.
DeBERTa-L (He et al., 2020) DeBERTa introduces a disentangled attention mechanism and an
enhanced decoding scheme for BERT. The disentangled attention mechanism allows DeBERTa to
capture the contextual information between different tokens in a sentence more effectively, while the
enhanced decoding scheme makes the model generate natural language sentences with higher quality.
GPT-J-6B (Wang and Komatsuzaki, 2021) is a transformer model trained using Mesh Transformer
JAX (Wang, 2021). It is a series of models with ‘6B’ denoting 6 billion parameters.
Flan-T5 (Raffel et al., 2020; Chung et al., 2022) Flan-T5 adopts a text-to-text strategy where input
and output are both natural language sentences to execute a variety of tasks like machine translation,
summarization, and question answering. This input-output form allows Flan-T5 to accomplish
held-out tasks when given an input sentence as prompt.
GPT-NEOX-20B (Black et al., 2022) GPT-NeoX-20B is a language model with 20 billion parameters
trained on the Pile. It is the largest public dense autoregressive model. It outperformed GPT-3 and
FairSeq models with similar size in five-shot reasoning tasks.
OPT (Zhang et al., 2022a) Open Pre-trained Transformers (OPT) is a suite of pre-trained transformer
models that are decoder-only and have parameter sizes ranging from 125 million to 175 billion. While
offering comparable performance to GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020), OPT-175B was developed with just
1/7th of the carbon footprint.
BLOOM (Scao et al., 2022) BLOOM extends pre-training from mono-lingual to cross-lingual.
BLOOM combines one unsupervised objective and one supervised objective for pre-training. The
unsupervised one only uses monolingual data, and the supervised one adopts parallel data. The
cross-lingual language models can bring significant improvements for low-resource languages.
text-davinci-002 and text-davinci-003 text-davinci-002 and text-davinci-00311are based on GPT-
3 (Brown et al., 2020). They accomplish any task that other models can, generally produce output
that is of higher quality, longer in length, and more faithful to instructions.
E Details on Prompts
E.1 Prompts
We list all prompts used in this study in Table 5.
11https://platform.openai.com/docs/models/gpt-3
18