Table 1: Statistics of test sets in this paper
Area Dataset Task #Sample #Class
Adversarial
robustnessSST-2 sentiment classification 148 2
QQP quora question pairs 78 3
MNLI multi-genre natural language inference 121 3
QNLI question-answering NLI 148 2
RTE textual entailment recognition 81 2
ANLI text classification 1200 3
AdvGLUE-T machine translation (En →Zh) 30 -
OOD
robustnessFlipkart sentiment classification 331 2
DDXPlus medical diagnosis classification 100 50
3.2 Out-of-distribution Datasets
We adopt two new datasets6for OOD robustness evaluation: Flipkart (Vaghani and Thummar, 2023)
and DDXPlus (Tchango et al., 2022). Flipkart is a product review dataset and DDXPlus is a new
medical diagnosis dataset, both of which are released in 2022. These two datasets can be used to
construct classification tasks. We randomly sample a subset of each dataset to form the test sets.
Detailed introduction and construction of each test set can be found in Appendix A.2. Table 1 shows
the statistics of each dataset.
Remark: Finding an OOD dataset for large models like ChatGPT is difficult due to the unavailability
of its training data. Consider these datasets as ‘out-of-example’ datasets since they did not show up
in ChatGPT’s training data. Additionally, distribution shift may happen at different dimensions: not
only across domains, but also across time. Thus, even if ChatGPT and other LLMs may already use
similar datasets like medical diagnosis and product review, our selected datasets are still useful for
OOD evaluation due to temporal distribution shift. Finally, we must admit the limitation of these
datasets and look forward to brand new ones for more thorough evaluation.
4 Experiment
4.1 Zero-shot Classification
4.1.1 Setup
We compare the performance of ChatGPT on AdvGLUE classification benchmark with the following
existing popular foundation models: DeBERTa-L (He et al., 2020), BART-L (Lewis et al., 2020),
GPT-J-6B (Wang and Komatsuzaki, 2021), Flan-T5 (Raffel et al., 2020; Chung et al., 2022), GPT-
NEOX-20B (Black et al., 2022), OPT-66B (Zhang et al., 2022a), BLOOM (Scao et al., 2022), and
GPT-3 (text-davinci-002 and text-davinci-003)7. The latter two are from OpenAI API service and the
rest are on Huggingface model hub. The notation ‘-L’ means ‘-large’, as we only evaluate the large
version of these models. The detailed information of these models are introduced in Appendix D.
For adversarial classification tasks on AdvGLUE and ANLI, we adopt attack success rate (ASR) as
the metric for robustness. The metric details are listed in Appendix B. For OOD classification tasks,
F1-score (F1) is adopted as the metric. As mentioned before, we only perform zero-shot evaluation.
Thus, we simply run all models on a local computer with plain GPUs, which could be the case in
most downstream applications.8Note that we use the NLI-fine-tuned version of DeBERTa-L and
BART-L on natural language inference tasks to perform zero-shot classification since they are not
originally designed for text classification. For other models, we adopt the prompt-based paradigm to
6Considering ChatGPT is reported to be trained on a substantial corpus of internet language data as of 2021,
identifying an out-of-distribution dataset poses a difficulty. Furthermore, we concern that previous natural
language processing datasets predating 2022 may have been assimilated by ChatGPT, so we only utilize datasets
that are recently released.
7Note that the classification task may be unfavorable to the generative models since we did not limit their
output space as discriminative models like DeBERTa-L do.
8Even the local computer is not that “plain” since it requires at least 1A100GPU with 80GB of memory.
5