A Detailed Introduction of Datasets and Tasks
A.1 AdvGLUE and ANLI
AdvGLUE (Wang et al., 2021) is an evaluation benchmark for natural language processing models,
with a specific focus on adversarial robustness. It includes five natural language understanding tasks
from the GLUE benchmark: Sentiment Analysis (SST-2), Duplicate Question Detection (QQP),
and Natural Language Inference (NLI, including MNLI, RTE, QNLI). It includes different types
of attacks including word-level transformations, sentence-level manipulations, and human-written
adversarial examples.
SST-2 The Stanford Sentiment Treebank (Socher et al., 2013) is composed of sentences originating
from movie reviews, along with corresponding human-annotated sentiments. The goal is to predict
the sentiment (positive or negative) when given a review sentence.
QQP Quora Question Pairs (QQP) dataset consists of pairs of questions gathered from Quora,
which is a platform for community question-answering. The aim is to predict if two questions are
semantically equivalent.
MNLI Multi-Genre Natural Language Inference Corpus (Williams et al., 2018) is a dataset of
sentence pairs for textual entailment. The task is to predict whether the premise sentence entails,
contradicts, or is neutral to the hypothesis sentence.
QNLI The Question-answering NLI (QNLI) dataset consists of question-sentence pairs extrated and
modified from the Stanford Question Answering Dataset (Rajpurkar et al., 2016). The task is to
predict if the context sentence has the answer to a given question.
RTE The Recognizing Textual Entailment (RTE) dataset contains examples constructed using news
and Wikipedia text from annual textual entailment challenges. The goal is to predict the relationship
between a pair of sentences, which can be categorized into two classes: entailment and not entailment.
Note that neutral and contradiction are considered as not entailment.
AdvGLUE-T We create an adversarial machine translation dataset (En →Zh) called AdvGLUE-T
by randomly extracting 30 samples from AdvGLUE.
Adversarial NLI (ANLI) (Nie et al., 2020b) is a benchmark for natural language understanding
collected by using human-and-model-in-the-loop training method. This benchmark is designed to
challenge the current models in natural language inference. Human annotators acted as adversaries
by trying to fool the model into mis-classifying with the found vulnerabilities, while these sentences
are still understandable to other humans.
A.2 Flipkart and DDXPlus
Flipkart (Vaghani and Thummar, 2023) includes information on 104 different types of products from
flipkart.com , such as electronics, clothing, home decor, and more. It contains 205,053 data and
their corresponding sentiment labels (positive, negative, or neutral). In our study, we select all its
instances with review text length between 150and160to ease the experiments. This leads to 331
samples in total.
DDXPlus (Tchango et al., 2022) is a dataset designed for automatic medical diagnosis, which consists
of synthetic data of around 1.3million patients, providing a differential diagnosis and the true
pathology, symptoms, and antecedents for each patient. We randomly sampled 100 records from the
test set. As the original records were in French, we translated them into English using the evidences
and conditions dictionaries provided in the dataset. The resulting data was then formatted into a
context of age, gender, initial evidence, and inquiry dialogue, enabling the model to select the most
probable disease from all considered pathology using the information provided in the conversation.
B Evaluation Metrics
Attack Success Rate (ASR) Following (Wang et al., 2021), the metric of ASR is adopted for
evaluating the effectiveness of the system against adversarial inputs. Specifically, given a dataset
D={(xi, yi)}N
i=1consisting of Nsamples xiand corresponding ground truth labels yi, the success
16