generation. Again, because of lack of appropriate datasets, evaluating generation performance is also
difficult. We also admit that introducing more proper prompts could improve its performance.
Fourth, it is worth noting that ChatGPT is mainly designed to be a chatbot service rather than a tool
for text classification. Our evaluations are mainly for classification, which have nothing to do with the
robustness of ChatGPT for online chatting experience. We do hope every end-user can find ChatGPT
helpful in their lives.
Finally, we could further provide detailed synopsis by conducting experiments on data before 2021
as comparisons and analyzing more OOD cases to see why ChatGPT succeeds or fails. Other
experiments include detailed ablation study using different language models and investigation of
induced outputs by LLMs through prompts. These can be done in future work. Another claim is that
ChatGPT is not perfect for adversarial tasks. But we also need to develop certain metrics to show
‘how good’ is the performance.
7 Conclusion
This paper presented a preliminary evaluation of the robustness of ChatGPT from the adversarial
and out-of-distribution perspective. While we acknowledge the advance of large foundation models
on adversarial and out-of-distribution robustness, our experiments show that there is still room for
improvement to ChatGPT and other large models on these tasks. Afterwards, we presented in-depth
analysis and discussion beyond NLP area, and then highlight some potential research directions
regarding foundation models. We hope our evaluation, analysis, and discussions could provide
experience to future research.
Acknowledgement
This paper received attentions from many experts since its first version was released on ArXiv.
Authors would like to thank all who gave constructive feedback to this work.
Disclaimer
Potential Ethics and Societal Concerns raised by ChatGPT Robustness The increasing popular-
ity of ChatGPT and other chatbot services certainly face some new concerns from both ethics and
society. The purpose of this paper is to show that ChatGPT can be attacked by adversarial and OOD
examples using existing public dataset, but not to attack it intentionally. We hope that this will not be
leverage by end-users. Finally, we also hope the community can realize the importance of robustness
research and develop new technologies to make our systems more secure, robust, and responsible.
ChatGPT usage Some authors in this paper are from mainland China where ChatGPT is currently
unavailable. In order to conduct this research without disobeying local laws and OpenAI service
terms, Hao Chen, who is one of our coauthors and lives in U.S., did all experiments related to
ChatGPT and OpenAI. All experiments on ChatGPT are based on its Feb 13 version. Further updates
of ChatGPT may lead to change of the results in this paper.
The contribution of each author Jindong led the project, designed experiments, wrote the code
framework, and wrote the paper. Xixu and Wenxin shared equal contributions. Xixu was in charge of
processing, experimenting, and writing about the DDXPlus and ANLI datasets. Wenxin designed all
prompts to generative models and wrote about this part. Hao did the machine translation experiments,
wrote necessary codes, and was in charge of code organization and reproducibility. Runkai helped
polish the paper and organized case study. Other authors actively participated in this project from day
one, reviewed the paper carefully, and provided valuable comments to improve this work.
References
Andrea Agostinelli, Timo I Denk, Zalán Borsos, Jesse Engel, Mauro Verzetti, Antoine Caillon,
Qingqing Huang, Aren Jansen, Adam Roberts, Marco Tagliasacchi, et al. Musiclm: Generating
music from text. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.11325 , 2023.
10