In SI literature, a quite extensive body of work has tackled the analysis of formal models in
the context of disembodied SI (e.g., addressing optimization and decision-making scenarios), while
embodied SI (e.g., swarm robotics and general CPSs) fall shorter in this respect because of presenting
additional challenges.
In SI approaches for disembodied scenarios, mostly in optimization problems (e.g., ACO and
PSO), the majority of the eorts towards formal properties are about stability and convergence.
However, how it is discussed in [70] (for PSO, but similar considerations hold for ACO), analysis
is often performed on simplied or restricted models mainly by removing algorithmic components
or by imposing specic assumptions (e.g., for the PSO, using a random dynamical systems [71],
applying Lyapunov stability analysis [72], and deriving graphical parameters from dynamic system
theory [73]). Furthermore, it is often restricted to asymptotic properties of convergence per se,
rather than dealing with the more dicult (and interesting) aspects of speed of convergence [74].
In general, in a number of practically used variants, PSO and ACO models rapidly become too
complex to be amenable to theoretical analysis. Often, the only way for a performance analysis
or parameter tuning is the use of empirical procedures possibly restricted on the assumption of
dened theoretical properties (e.g., for the PSO by using a specically designed objective function for
convergence analysis [75], reviewing self-adaptive PSO algorithms related to stable points in parameter
selection [76], studying continuous optimization algorithms for parameter tuning for swarm algorithms
in general [77], applying experimental analysis of how particular design choices aect the quality and
the shape of the Pareto front approximations generated in multi-objective ACO [78]).
In the case of embodied SI, giving formal guarantees for predictability and controllability seems to
be more problematic compared to the above case of disembodied SI. Each real-world problem scenario
presents its own peculiarities, that result in dierent performance objectives, metrics, constraints,
requirements, and disturbances. At the same time, the physical characteristics and the behaviors
of the individual CPSs composing the swarm (e.g., the robots) are dierent from implementation to
implementation. Putting the two things together, the result is that each scenario, together with the
specic choice of individual CPSs that apply specic behaviors, sets a new problem in practice. In this
context it becomes dicult to abstract properties and reuse results across dierent works. However, by
some mathematical abstraction, it is still possible to identify and perform an analysis of typical classes
of swarm behaviors that include, among others, foraging [79, 80, 81, 82], coverage [83, 84, 85, 86],
aggregation and pattern formation [87, 88, 89, 80], and cooperative tracking [83, 90, 91] (an extensive,
and well discussed list of swarm behaviors can be found in [92, 93], and an extension in [13]).
3.2. Challenges Designing the Local Rules
SI design follows a bottom-up approach, where the global behavior is implicitly specied through
the denition of local interaction rules: a system designer has to solve an inverse problem.
In the case of disembodied SI scenarios, such as optimization, it is relatively easy to heuristically
dene the rules that can lead to a desired global behavior. Instead, in the case of CPS swarms this is
considerably more complex due to the multi-faceted, uncertain, and hardly predictable structure of
the environment. Most of the work in this direction has addressed the case of the automatic synthesis
of behavioral and interaction rules in swarm robotic systems.
In [94] articial evolution techniques (provided by the FREVO [95] software) are used to generate
neural controllers for homogeneous robot soccer teams; [96] applies novelty search to generate neural
controllers for homogeneous robot swarms; in [97] the authors generate robot controllers by combining
the use of an evolutionary approach with a formal language; in [98] supervisory control theory, a
formal language based on a discrete-event representation of the system is used to automatically
generate controllers that come with built-in proofs and have wider reusability across dierent robot
systems; instead, in [99] the automatic design of control software for robot swarms is obtained by
the generation of a probabilistic nite state machine resulting from an optimization process that
maximizes a task-specic objective function; in [100] dierent evolutionary approaches are used for
the generation of task-allocation mechanisms.
All these works (among others) provide valuable contribution to the automatic generation of
rules that can be reused or expanded for the more general case of CPSs. Nevertheless, it must be
acknowledged that they have been validated only in relatively simple scenarios, and have been applied
12