2.3. Swarm models of Cyber-Physical systems
As pointed out in the Introduction, a CPS encompasses dierent aspects of optimization, net-
working, and physical embodiment: it precisely merges and interleaves software agents, mechatronic
devices, and communications [1, 3]. We can model a CPS as a swarm of multiple components, where
each component
integrates one or more physical devices (sensors, actuators, communication, memory, processor,
etc.),
acts autonomously (i.e., control is distributed and/or decentralized),
responds and possibly adapts to changing conditions, and
locally communicates and interacts with other swarm components to possibly produce eective
and useful behaviors at the system level.
For successfully developing SI solutions for swarms of CPSs it is important to consider both the
physical and cyber aspects of CPSs. Furthermore, it is important to consider not only a single CPS
but also ensembles of CPSs forming a CPSoS as dened in the Introduction that makes swarms of
swarms operating at dierent spatial and temporal scales under dierent integration constraints.
For instance, we can describe an autonomous car with all its components as a CPS. At a smaller
scale, each of the major components of the car (e.g., the Anti-lock Braking System (ABS)) can be
described as CPSs. At a larger scale, a 
eet of autonomous cars interacting and communicating with
each other represents a swarm of CPSs. In order to acquire real-time sensor and trac data, the cars
in the swarm would also interact with further CPSs that are part of the surrounding environment and
the supporting infrastructures. These CPSs form yet another swarm enabling interaction between
dierent swarms of swarms. As there is no general limit to the number of devices and number
of swarms, we can naturally arrive at a large-scale, multi-leveled swarm system integrating many
interacting CPSs.
This simple yet realistic example shows that we expect the scale of the CPS swarms that we will
have to deal with in the near future is extremely large. Moreover, these swarms will feature a high
diversity on many scales. First, the swarms can have structural dierences as well as dierences
on the individual level, both in CPS hardware and software. Second, the spatial scale ranges from
close proximity interaction, such as two autonomous cars that interact in order to avoid collisions, to
large-scale interactions between trac guidance systems that must interact over parts of the city to
optimize 
ows. Third, dierent CPSs work on dierent temporal scales, e.g., real-time reactions for
emergency breaking or trac proling for trac 
ow optimization.
In order to map SI solutions and frameworks to this diversity and complexity of CPSs, it is
convenient to make rst a taxonomic eort in order to categorize the most relevant aspects of CPSs.
We start it by noting that individual CPS properties can be roughly divided into capabilities and
constraints.
A CPS can have very diverse capabilities. We identied the most important classes of capabilities
to be mobility, communication, sensing, actuation, and processing [55]. For instance, mobile robots
and autonomous cars have a high degree of mobility, while infrastructure-based CPSs such as used
in smart grids have no or only little mobility. Communication capabilities are crucial when we talk
about swarms of networked CPSs. Some CPSs such as sensor networks in IoT scenarios might have
constrained wireless connections whereas others such as those used in industrial process control might
have high capacity network access. For interacting with the physical world, it is crucial for CPSs
to have sensing and/or actuation capabilities. In many cases it might be enough to have sensors to
monitor the environment. Other applications such as smart homes require the CPSs to manipulate
the environment, e.g., by closing the blinds or dimming the light. Finally, the processing capabilities
allow the CPSs to process data and make informed decisions. Depending on the processing power
of individual CPSs, some tasks might be delegated between devices to enable an ecient use of the
processing resources.
On the constraints side we have limited resources in time and space [56]. Time constraints
include limited energy supply which allows the CPSs to work only for a limited time period, limited
10