of a swarm however, was rather simple, only referring to a group of animals moving together. This
is still the basic denition of the Oxford Dictionary, where a swarm is \A large or dense group of

ying insects" . The term swarm intelligence (SI) was rst introduced in 1989 by Beni and Wang [14]
in order to describe the dynamics of a group of cellular robots that could be framed as a form of
intelligent collective behavior. This marks the point at which swarm behaviors were started to be
studied outside of natural sciences, although animal behavior has always continued to be a major
source of inspiration for SI developments.
In the animal kingdom, nature has evolved dierent swarm behaviors as a way for the dierent or-
ganisms to collaboratively reach common global goals like foraging, nest-building, or ghting enemies.
The animals in the group coordinate their actions based on their sensory-motor characteristics, giv-
ing raise to swarm behaviors such herding, shoaling, schooling, and 
ocking. SI models build on the
observation of natural systems to gain an understanding of the patterns and rules governing a swarm
behavior in general terms. It has been observed in animal systems that although the goal of the group
can be rather complex, each individual swarm member follows a set of relatively simple rules, and
locally interacts with other individuals and with the environment. Typically, a single swarm member
is not capable of nding an ecient solution by itself [15], but under the appropriate conditions the
swarm is capable of nding eective solutions. The quest of SI is to understand conditions, rules,
and interactions patterns that can prime swarm behaviors. In turn, this understanding can be used
to shed a light on how swarming happens in natural systems and to design novel articial systems
exhibiting eective swarm behaviors.
In this paper we do not try to give yet-another-denition of SI, but we rather build on existing
ones to discuss additional relevant aspects for the characterization and verication of SI properties.
Bonabeau and Meyer [16] eectively summarize the characteristics of natural swarm systems to
provide the following denition of SI: \Social insects work without supervision. In fact, their teamwork
is largely self-organized, and coordination arises from the dierent interactions among individuals
in the colony. Although these interactions might be primitive (one ant merely following the trail
left by another, for instance), taken together they result in ecient solutions to dicult problems
(such as nding the shortest route to a food source among myriad possible paths). The collective
behavior that emerges from a group of social insects has been dubbed swarm intelligence." This
representation of collective behaviors has been at the core of the design of a number of successful
SI algorithms for optimization, networking, and decision-making problems. The Particle Swarm
Optimization (PSO) [17] and Ant Colony Optimization (ACO) [18] meta-heuristics are probably the
most popular SI frameworks in this respect, where the agent is a minimalist unit, designed after
the properties of an individual animal in a natural swarm of reference (e.g., 
ocking birds for PSO,
ant colonies for ACO). Usually, agents are abstracted software agents. The extension of the same
concepts to embodied systems was started with the eld of swarm robotics, which is well captured
by the denitions of S ahin and Spears [19]: \Swarm robotics is the study of how a swarm of relatively
simple physically embodied agents can be constructed to collectively accomplish tasks that are beyond
the capabilities of a single one" and \Swarm robotics emphasizes self-organization and emergence,
while keeping in mind the issues of scalability and robustness."
2.1. Properties and Fingerprints of a Swarm
Typical principles of SI were dened in literature several times, the most specic denition was
most likely coined by Marc Millonas [20], dening specic requirements of how SI algorithms should
operate. The recurrent idea is that they should be able to produce complex and scalable group
behavior from simple and local rules/computations. In nature, the behavior of social animals appears
to be adaptive, robust, and scalable (see Figure 1) [21]. These are desirable properties of a system
that SI design precisely aims to replicate in technical systems. Adaptability represents the ability
of a swarm to adapt to dynamic environments, and to cope with dierent tasks. By exploiting
robustness, a swarm can cope with disturbances and failures, such as the loss or the malfunctioning
of individual agents. Scalability gives a swarm the ability to perform well with dierent numbers of
swarm members and with dierently sized problems. Adding or removing swarm members does not
lead to a signicant decline in performance, as long as their number does not fall below a critical
4