level decision-making; v) swarm members and human teammates can locally interact and exchange
information in a transparent way; vi) cooperative and collaborative behaviors are in place at individual
level such that eective behaviors can emerge at global level.
The eective real-world deployment of a mixed team (heterogeneous swarm) requires still substan-
tial progress especially in terms of the capability of autonomous decision-making, data exchange and
fusion, and acting in complex, uncharted environments. In heterogeneous swarms, e.g., drones and
ground rovers cooperate to deliver rst aid kids, or guide the victim to the closest emergency exit.
For example, in Saez-Pons et al. [163] a swarm of autonomous robots was developed for SAR applica-
tions. They can generate a formation and navigate while keeping this formation using so-called social
potential elds. There existed several other projects in this eld [164, 165, 166], but unfortunately
none of them has produced applicable results for real-world missions, yet. Designing and deploying
a heterogeneous swarm for such missions comes with a number of open questions, including number,
type, and initial location of robots [167]. Especially, within the interaction of human teammates,
intuitive and transparent ways for multi-modal dialogue and data exchange between humans and
CPSs have to be designed [168] in terms of interfaces and easy control [169, 170, 171]. For an emer-
gency response application (e.g., post earthquake) we mostly have a destroyed infrastructure, e.g.,
the communication infrastructure. Therefore, we need new relaying concepts, so that the swarm of
CPSs is able to create its own communication network. For example, in Hauert et al. [172] a swarm of
autonomous Micro Air Vehicles (MAVs) is developed to deploy and manage an ad-hoc WiFi network
[173]. Moreover, the (destroyed) environment asks for high coordination and collaboration activities
of the swarm member. This can be done with exchanging dierent status updates or, if the bandwidth
allows, full images, detected points of interest, etc. Compact image processing algorithms aligned
with the local processing capabilities is needed.
4.2.3. Environmental monitoring
Monitoring our Earth's threatened ecosystems is another future application scenario of autonomous
large-scale CPS swarms. These swarms can act as an active sensor network that re-congures itself
based on the data it has previously collected and evaluated in the habitat. In this way, points of
interest can be monitored with a ner granularity, e.g., by aggregating a higher density of CPSs or
by achieving a higher measurement frequency at the specic location.
Supporting environmental monitoring with a swarm of CPSs is feasible as i) each individual swarm
member acts according to local rules to facilitate autonomous behavior; ii) the individual information
is exchanged among the CPSs to decide on the new behavior; iii) the natural environment to be
monitored is usually not known and subjected to natural dynamics including unforeseeable events;
iv) in environmental monitoring the ecosystem may not be disturbed from extra-natural intruders,
thus the system asks for high autonomy; v) to reach the goals described above, the individual swarm
members need to cooperate leading to an emergent behavior.
Swarms are well-suited for operation in unforeseen environments, capable to compensate loss
or failure of swarm members. Thus, this technology is an ideal candidate for long-term autonomous
operation [174] during unforeseeable events in unknown environments. Lightweight and ecient com-
munication protocols between CPSs [175] can be suitable especially in environmental monitoring, as
each communication may disturb the natural communication network of the ecosystem. The less the
CPSs communicate or act, the more undisturbed the environments will be, and the more the real
natural behavior and processes can be analyzed. Thus, a regime like act only when needed but then
act smartly and gently might be a suitable principle for such applications. Additionally, this sounds
not too far away from the behavioral optimization that natural organisms would employ. Another
advantage of lightweight and ecient communication is energy saving: such swarms are typically de-
ployed to monitor the ecosystem over months or even years. Thus, an intelligent energy consumption
needs to be aligned to the duration of observation. Such a CPS swarm for environmental monitoring
could consist of actively moving agents. Thus, it can be capable of performing an important special
task at the end of the monitoring: self-removal of the swarm from the ecosystems without leaving
harm for nature in a eco-friendly and sustainable way. There are several successful real-world research
projects on environmental monitoring using real-robots such as subCULTron [176], CORATAM [177],
and CoCoRo [178].
18