describe collective motion in active solids and active crystals that apply elasticity-based mechanisms
to realize self-organization. These models can be applied to the collective motion of CPS swarms
such as pattern formation or morphogenesis. They are especially suited for CPSs as they exhibit
robustness to heterogeneity that can be analytically derived.
4.2. Most promising Future Applications
While so far SI implementations in the real world are quite limited, we acknowledge the fact that
SI ideas and methods can potentially nd their application in a wide spectrum of practical scenarios.
Already Bonabeau and Meyer stated that the application of SI is only limited by imagination [16].
This statement strongly supports our hypothesis, stated in the introduction, about the ubiquitous
presence of SI to tackle the challenges of the increasingly connected world. Especially in form of many
variations of the ACO [144] and PSO [17] algorithms, SI has been applied to complex optimization
scenarios in the real world, where typically the swarm members encode individual solution candidates.
In contrast, there have been only few applications of physically embodied swarm algorithms up to
now|most engineering solutions follow more traditional top-down or centralized approaches.
The intuition is that SI will increasingly nd their application in real-world scenarios, when there is
not enough information to solve the problem in an eective top-down manner, a centralized approach
would be computationally infeasible, or when real-time constraints inherently limit the ability to
nd optimal solutions. These are often the cases in complex CPSs, or in scenarios without existing
infrastructure, where the requirement is to provide an ad-hoc working solution without the possibility
to (re)establish an infrastructure framework rst (e.g., after a disaster scenario [145]). More in general,
we foresee the high potential of swarm applications when venturing from well-dened environments,
such as well planned factory plants or warehouses into more complex environments such as trac
systems, urban environments, social networks, extreme/hostile environments, or unexplored territory.
More specically, we can ask what will the next frontier be for the application of SI in CPS
swarms. Here we point to specic application scenarios that are (partially) not possible today but
show the potential for fully exploiting swarm characteristics. This is also indicated by the many
pieces of research works, that are sometimes (only) in need of a system integration to confront future
application requirements. In the following examples we envision the application of CPS swarms,
describe their swarm characteristics, and indicate a set of open points still asking for research work
to reach the desired application. For reasons of readability, we use the term CPS swarm only which
serves as umbrella topic for the multiple dierent technologies (see Section 1).
4.2.1. Autonomous Driving and Smart Trac
Autonomous driving is a trend topic nowadays, and asks for several computational complex tasks
in a dynamic environment with real-time processing capabilities. That is where the concept of SI plays
a role: thousands of cars (using dierent types of levels of autonomy [146]) and road infrastructure
cooperate to nd a common solution. Several advantages arise in such a smart trac management
system if a swarm model for autonomous cars and infrastructure is applied, including a reduced
highway load, coordinated building of an emergency lane, improved trac throughput, and reduced
carbon emission. One application could be the navigation in swarms or 
eets including information
from other swarm members, the infrastructure and the dynamic environment.
Modeling networked, autonomous cars and smart infrastructure as a swarm is both feasible and
benecial for several reasons as i) each CPS is able to retrieve and evaluate information locally and
follows local rules; ii) the local information can be exchanged with other CPSs, and can form a global
one or one at the swarm level; iii) the infrastructure is known in advance or faces slight dynamics,
e.g., in the case of accidents or construction sites; iv) a central trac management system would not
be able to coordinate and manage each CPS taking part in the trac, while the individual CPSs can
locally cooperate possibly resulting in emerging behaviors.
While transport logistics is already a prominent application for the active usage of, e.g., ants [147,
148, 149, 150] and bees [151] algorithms pre-calculating and optimizing routes for dispatchers, the
concept of smart trac is rather untouched. Although, swarms of autonomous cars and smart in-
frastructure are very present in media [152, 153, 154], setting up such swarms still requires multiple
considerations especially in terms of swarm management: What is the joint motivation to form a
16