visionary applications. For other applications, not mentioned here, exist many other research ques-
tions. However, they are strongly application-specic. General topics in swarms are independent of
the domain or application. Nevertheless, we want to describe them on the example of swarms of
CPSs.
There are several requirements a swarm of CPSs needs to deal with. This includes the design,
programming, and implementation of highly distributed and connected digital technologies that are
embedded in a multitude of devices. Beside these processes, there is the challenge to design increas-
ingly autonomous physical systems with various dynamics and satisfying multiple critical constraints.
In addition, we need to address systems of systems with a high degree of autonomy ensuring adapt-
ability, scalability, robustness, complexity management, security and safety, and providing trust to
humans in the loop. To get an overview on the open research topics, the general topics are split into
following categories. They only address several general topics as the underlying details would run
out of the scope of this paper.
4.3.1. Modeling
Forming models from natural or other inspirational sources is a big topic in the community. As
mentioned in Section 4.1 there are still a lot of new sources of inspiration to be considered. This
research also includes application-specic parameter ne-tuning for existing algorithms. In addition,
algorithmic topics include algorithm scalability, rate of control, rate of convergence, and the trade-
o between exploitation and exploration [206]. Moreover, a combination of dierent inspirational
sources could be achieved to meet today's high complexity problems with self-organization capa-
bilities. The main idea would be to customize application-specic SI algorithms to an underlying
problem denition.
4.3.2. Design
The more swarms of CPSs are spread over dierent application contexts and the more massive
their adoption, the more challenging becomes the issue of eectively designing systems able to reach
pre-dened goals 
exibly, reliably and adapting to changing surrounding conditions. Broad challenges
that shall be addressed for designing next generation CPSs [207] include i) integration of complex,
heterogeneous large-scale systems, ii) interaction between human and systems, iii) dealing with un-
certainty, iv) measuring and validating system performance, v) enriching the systems with learning
capabilities, and vi) system design. From a fundamental point of view, individual theories allowing
formal description of the dierent aspects of CPS design including physical, technical, organizational,
and human-system interaction are available, at dierent degrees of maturity. However, such disci-
plines are not fully integrated in a common systems theory. In other words, while methodologies,
representations and tools exist for addressing single aspects of CPS design, a support to the whole
design life cycle is still an open challenge. Furthermore, a formal design methodology must contain
some kind of process that revisits and iteratively renes the micro level behaviors in order to create
a bridge between local and global level behaviors. Although Brambilla et al. [92] describes behavior-
based design and automatic design methods for swarms of CPSs, there is no implemented toolchain
yet that is able to map these design processes. One approach for such a toolchain is given with
the CPSwarm workbench [208]. It has the vision of combining several tools to guide a CPS swarm
designer through the whole life cycle from design over optimization and simulation to deployment.
4.3.3. Validation and Verication
Verication and validation in swarms of CPSs include a broad range of systems and systems-
of-systems. These systems may include hardware, software, information, processes, personnel, and
facilities. Reliable methodologies to validate a swarm of CPS need to be explored and, where possible,
detailed standardized key performance indicators together with standardized scenarios, testbeds, and
benchmarks need to be dened to ensure the re-use of measurement methodologies. Results should
be fed back in order to enable necessary modications in the design specications, model denitions
and validation activities and the subsequent re-engineering and validation of the aected artifacts.
22