c
Elsevier, 2021. This is the author's version of the work. Personal use of this material is permitted. However, permission to
reprint/republish this material for advertising or promotional purpose or for creating new collective works for resale or redistribution
to servers or lists, or to reuse any copyrighted component of this work in other works must be obtained from the copyright holder. The
denite version will be published within the Journal Swarm and Evolutionary Computation, Volume 60, February 2021.
Swarm Intelligence and Cyber-Physical Systems:
Concepts, Challenges and Future Trends
Melanie Schranza, Gianni A. Di Carob, Thomas Schmicklc, Wilfried Elmenreichd, Farshad Arvine,
Ahmet S ekercio gluf, Micha Sendea
aLakeside Labs, Austria
bCarnegie Mellon University, Qatar
cKarl-Franzens University Graz, Austria
dAlpen-Adria-Universit at, Austria
eUniversity of Manchester, UK
fSorbonne Universit es, France
Abstract
Swarm Intelligence (SI) is a popular multi-agent framework that has been originally inspired by
swarm behaviors observed in natural systems, such as ant and bee colonies. In a system designed
after swarm intelligence, each agent acts autonomously, reacts on dynamic inputs, and, implicitly or
explicitly, works collaboratively with other swarm members without a central control. The system
as a whole is expected to exhibit global patterns and behaviors. Although well-designed swarms can
show advantages in adaptability, robustness, and scalability, it must be noted that SI system havent
really found their way from lab demonstrations to real-world applications, so far. This is particularly
true for embodied SI, where the agents are physical entities, such as in swarm robotics scenarios.
In this paper, we start from these observations, outline dierent denitions and characterizations,
and then discuss present challenges in the perspective of future use of swarm intelligence. These
include application ideas, research topics, and new sources of inspiration from biology, physics, and
human cognition. To motivate future applications of swarms, we make use of the notion of cyber-
physical systems (CPS). CPSs are a way to encompass the large spectrum of technologies including
robotics, internet of things (IoT), Systems on Chip (SoC), embedded systems, and so on. Thereby,
we give concrete examples for visionary applications and their challenges representing the physical
embodiment of swarm intelligence in autonomous driving and smart trac, emergency response,
environmental monitoring, electric energy grids, space missions, medical applications, and human
networks. We do not aim to provide new solutions for the swarm intelligence or CPS community, but
rather build a bridge between these two communities. This allows us to view the research problems
of swarm intelligence from a broader perspective and motivate future research activities in modeling,
design, validation/verication, and human-in-the-loop concepts.
Keywords: Swarm intelligence, Cyber-physical systems, Swarm robotics
1. Introduction
The trend in today's technologies is that computers are becoming embedded in everyday objects.
Such systems range from Systems on Chip (SoC) that make the computational core of modern ev-
eryday devices such as smartphones, to the Internet of Things (IoT) that connects billions of edge
devices, and the Internet of Everything (IoE), which brings together people, processes, data, and
devices. In short, we can say that the world is becoming truly collective and connected, increasingly
featuring systems that integrate large numbers of multiple interacting components at dierent scales.
Email addresses: schranz@lakeside-labs.com (Melanie Schranz), gdicaro@cmu.edu (Gianni A. Di Caro),
thomas.schmickl@uni-graz.at (Thomas Schmickl), wilfried.elmenreich@aau.at (Wilfried Elmenreich),
farshad.arvin@manchester.ac.uk (Farshad Arvin), ahmet@sekerci.info (Ahmet S ekercio glu),
sende@lakeside-labs.com (Micha Sende)
Preprint submitted to Journal of Swarm and Evolutionary Computation DOI:10.1016/j.swevo.2020.100762