networks. We have identied two main classes of applications: as an integral part of the human
network, and as a physical service that the human network can use, trade, and negotiate. Nowadays,
we are already using many types of digital assistants in our daily lives (e.g., Alexa [199], Siri [200],
Cortana [201]) embodied in our physical world. They are probably one of the most advanced exam-
ples of CPSs operating in the real-world: they interact with humans (text-, speech-based), are fully
connected, often mobile, do a lot of computation for a precise interaction with humans, are proactive
proposing or reminding, etc. With the continuous developments they are more and more autonomous
and capable in terms of decision-making, adaptation, and life-long learning. In future, we can expect
that we will be able to delegate a number of tasks to these digital aliases, that can do the job for us
potentially 24/7. Once we will get at this stage, a society of digital uswill be acting in parallel to
our physical society, searching information for us, establishing connections, trading, etc.
A CPS swarm approach is a model for managing these billion-sized systems as i) the agents of
the swarm are autonomous, possibly driven by a relative simple set of behavioral rules re
ecting
personality traits and preferences of the human counterpart; ii) they interact locally, based on some
dynamic notion of social neighborhood, but can also gather and share global information; iii) the
environments where the agents live, the forthcoming Web 3.0, and the physical world, are both
highly dynamic, hard to predict, inherently parallel and distributed; iii) the same raison-d'^ etre of
a digital assistant is to provide services based on information gathering, that in the presence of a
swarm of digital assistants requires continual information exchange, search, negotiation, and trading
among the swarm members; iv) each agent is inherently selsh, being the alias of a (selsh) human,
but socially-aware patterns can globally emerge by setting the right interaction rules.
Several useful applications of the digital assistants can be realized as CPS swarms. If consented
(and with adequate privacy protection measures), our digital assistants will continually exchange
information among them, such that it will be possible to know what is a CPS's and human's physical
location. This information could play a phenomenal role in the case of epidemics to track potential
exposures and automatically implement containment measures. Also in the case of emergency escape,
swarm member assistants could build on local, real-time information exchange to let a safe escape plan
emerging in a crowd by guiding the motion of the individual human counterparts. Circulation of fake
news are a serious issue in social networks [202]. A limit to eectively spot fake news can be related
to the lack of collaboration among dierent web miners employed by dierent entities (e.g., in [203]),
that sets limits to the amount of gathered information and performed inference. Using a collaborative
CPS swarm, a large amount of information can be eectively gathered in parallel, shared, used for
miners coordination and to jointly perform powerful analysis and inference. Another possible future
application of CPS swarms of digital assistants can be envisioned in nding, negotiating, and trading
other CPS swarms that can act directly in the physical world. The idea is that multiple levels of CPS
swarms interacting with each other. Currently, sensing-as-a-service (SaaS) is a business approach
which is growing in the IoT eld [204], where users pay for data gathered by specic sensors. This
can naturally be extended with the use of more general CPS swarms [205], once endowed with enough
mobility and autonomy for sensing and actuation (including manipulation). Therefore, at one level,
CPS swarms are made available, oering sensing and actuation services at dierent locations. At
another level, digital swarm members nd and negotiate use and cost of available CPS resources to
perform tasks of interest (e.g., clean a building, irrigate a eld, monitor lack water, transport people),
exchange experiences and mistakes to learn or get strategies for task solving by collaborating with
each other. This will amount to set up a complex society of CPS swarms interacting at multiple
levels among them. The blockchain technology, which is rapidly arming as a fully decentralized
and distributed system for secure transactions, will be a fundamental component to let this view of
multiple CPS swarms acting upon the real-world happening. In fact, it will be essential to have a
trust system in place, in order to guarantee security and correctness of all type transactions among
swarm members [204].
4.3. Research Challenges
As SI is still considered as a rather young topic, there are several important open research question.
Domain specic topics were already described in the previous subsections related to the individual
21