4.2.4. Electric Energy Grids
Electric energy grids are large interconnected complex systems, which make them a candidate for
swarm-based solutions. Venayagamoorthy [179] identies several application elds of computational
intelligence in electrical energy grids, among them energy and power 
ow management algorithms,
voltage and reactive power control, forecasting dynamic loads, and vehicle-to-grid (V2G). Although,
swarm algorithms are not explicitly pointed out as example, many of these coordination tasks are
potential applications of SI.
Besides applications of swarm-based optimization algorithms like PSO, there exist a number of
approaches where a part of the electrical energy grid is directly modeled as the swarm. An example
for coordinating houses in a neighborhood with a swarm-like approach is presented in [180] with a
demand side management approach that uses geographically close coupling to ensure fairness between
consumers of a neighborhood. In [181], Steber, Bazan and German describe a virtual mass storage
system composed of small distributed battery energy storage units installed in households with a
roof-top photovoltaic system. In [182], a concept named SmartGRID is presented, which provides a
decentralized and interoperable grid scheduling framework using a SI approach. Ramachandran [183]
proposes a hybrid swarm/immune-based auction system for coordinating generation and consumption
in a smart microgrid. Another application of swarm-based energy grids is swarm electrication
using microgrids [184]. Instead of a traditional top-down designed energy grid, swarm electrication
builds upon the integration of small o-grid system into a connected microgrid. Such a swarm-based
electrication is especially of interest for rural under-developed areas [185, 186].
Considering a swarm of CPS to model electric energy grids is of interest because i) there is an
increasing number of renewable distributed energy resources (DERs) installed, the system becomes
more and more distributed, ii) renewable energy plants like photovoltaic and wind power cannot
adjust their output to compensate for higher demand, which makes central control dicult, and iii)
with the electrication of transportation comes an increased power consumption caused by a high
number of individual consumers. These issues motivate a transition from a centralized control of few,
manageable power plants to a distributed swarm-like system where producers, storage, and consumers
align themselves in a self-organized way.
The eective real-world deployment of CPS swarm models in electric energy grids still requires
substantial progress in research. An open question is how systems can be validated and tested before
deployment, since electric energy grids are critical infrastructure. Deploying new control strategies in
even a small part of the system can become the source of oscillations in the system [187] and aect
the overall system stability. This problem can be either addressed by simulation, where one has to
mind the reality gap [188] or by applying CPS swarm models within smart microgrids [189] that are
suciently large to benet from a swarm-based approach while being encapsulated from the national
grid.
4.2.5. Space Missions
Space missions are very attractive for swarms of CPSs. For example, swarms could be used to
check for damage all around the hull of a communication satellite or to perform disposal of space
debris in a coordinated way. Another example is a 
ock of glittering re
ective spheres that could
sweep past an asteroid in the solar system to measure the pull of its gravity. Exploration of water,
raw materials, and even life on (exo)planets will be the rst missions, before thinking of human
colonization. Low-cost and fault-tolerance are key characteristics that could be fullled by a swarm
of a large number of CPSs when exploring unknown environments autonomously [190]. Furthermore,
the data collected through the swarm should be returned to Earth stations. Therefore, e.g., the
NASA Marsbees [191] should use the Mars rover as base and charging station. The Japan Aerospace
Exploration Agency goes even further and envisions swarms of autonomous machinery to prepare
the ground excavate, and build facilities for astronauts on the moon and Mars [192]. The rst real-
world tests in swarms of satellites, typically related to networking and communication in the dierent
spheres, were and are already launched (Nodes [193], Proba-3 [194], KickSat [195]).
Using a swarm of CPSs for this type of visionary applications is feasible as i) each individual CPS
uses local rules to facilitate autonomous behavior; ii) local information is exchanged among the CPSs
and with a station on the Earth (probably through a relay station in the orbit of the planet); iii) in
19