4.3.4. Human-in-the-Loop
Enabling human interactions with the swarm system [209, 210] can provide a number of advantages
since the CPS can potentially exploit humans' cognitive and sensory-motor capabilities, and, vice
versa, human agents can use the CPS in closed loop interaction as an augmented external sensor-
actuator system. The design and implementation of such mixed initiative systems [211] brings a
number of scientic and technological challenges, ranging from how the interaction is physically
performed in both directions (from single CPSs or CPS swarms to humans and vice versa), to how
(and with which frequency) the complex state of the (distributed) CPS is presented to the human,
to how the information or the commands from the human are disseminated to the CPS swarm. A lot
of research interest has focused on developing interfaces and modalities for bi-directional interaction
and dialogue, considering for instance the use of dierent multi-modal interfaces [168, 212, 213, 214]
for proximal interaction with the swarm. Once a direct interaction of human operators in the loop
of a swarm system is allowed, new potential risks also arise. In particular, system security, safety,
stability, and reliability of response might get negatively aected by the presence of the human (i.e.,
if he/she acts irresponsibly or in a malevolent way). These aspects haven't attracted much attention
so far but will be of a major concern in the near future, in particular the aspects of security and
privacy that need to be guaranteed across all levels.
5. Conclusions
While originated out of a biological context, the concept of SI has been treated more frequently
in the domain of technical systems. In this paper we focus on CPSs that link the physical world
with a cyber representation and thereby address the vertical studies of systems such as cybernetics,
mechatronics, design, and many more. The complexity of CPS interactions asks for a framework that
is able to cope with the arising emergent behaviors. Swarm-based applications will play an important
role when there is not enough information to solve the problem in a centralized way, when there are
time constraints which do not allow to nd an analytical solution, and when the operation needs to
be performed in a dynamically changing environment. With an increasing complexity in upcoming
applications this will mean that SI will be applied to solve a signicant part of ubiquitous complex
problems.
This paper provides research inspirations, topics and ideas to bridge the gap between the SI and
CPS community. We are convinced that the following issues will pave the way: i) Further inves-
tigation on nding and using inspiring examples from biology, physics, medicine, cognitive sciences
and interdisciplinary research for research on SI, ii) elaborating visionary, but useful applications be-
yond the current ones, and iii) driving forward research on SI addressing especially modeling, design,
validation / verication and human-in-the-loop concepts.
Acknowledgment
The research leading to these results has received funding from the European Union Horizon
2020 research and innovation program under grant agreement No. 731946, CPSwarm project. The
contribution of Gianni A. Di Caro was made possible by NPRP Grant #10-0213-170458 from the
Qatar National Research Fund (a member of Qatar Foundation).
References
[1] E. A. Lee, Cyber physical systems: Design challenges, in: Proceedings of the 11th IEEE International
Symposium on Object Oriented Real-Time Distributed Computing, 2008, pp. 363{369.
[2] N. S. Foundation, Cyber Physical Systems, https://www.nsf.gov/funding/pgm_summ.jsp?pims_id=
503286 , [Online; accessed 15-March-2018].
[3] E. A. Lee, S. A. Seshia, Introduction to embedded systems: A cyber-physical systems approach, MIT
Press, 2016.
[4] J. Zeng, L. T. Yang, M. Lin, H. Ning, J. Ma, A survey: Cyber-physical-social systems and their
system-level design methodology, Future Generation Computer Systems 105 (2) (2020) 1028{1042.
23