the concept of a swarm system, and the above list of goals overlaps quite well with the typical features
that are expected to be found in a system designed after SI.
SI builds on concepts of self-organized coordination and control in natural swarm systems, such as
insect colonies that live in extremely diverse and dynamic environments. An engineered swarm system
consists of a population of autonomous agents/components that might range from being relatively
simple (e.g., articial ants) to quite complex (e.g., self-driving cars), depending on the scenario and
on computational or money budgets. The agents reach a common global goal collaboratively using
relative simple rules locally. If rules are well-designed, a collective behavior that can solve complex
tasks emerges through these interactions with each other and/or with the environment. Typical
properties of a system designed after SI shall include parallel and distributed processing and control,
locality of interactions, scalability of performance, adaptation to dynamic variations, and resilience
to losses and individual component failures.
This paper precisely revolves about the equivalence between CPSs and SI to gain a better under-
standing of how SI can fruitfully be used to tackle the core challenges presented by CPSs.
Applying SI concepts to CPSs is not an entirely new idea. For instance, if we look at swarm
robotics it is apparent that a lot of work exists in this respect, with notable progress in the recent
years [12, 13]. However, applying SI to more general CPSs, and more specically to real-world CPSs
of the kind of the large, heterogeneous, multi-scale systems discussed above, it is clear that several
issues still need to be addressed. In particular, two fundamental problems can be readily identied.
First, the plethora of dierent existing CPSs needs a formalization from the perspective of SI. This
includes deriving properties and parameters common among dierent CPSs, which are relevant for
the design of SI behavior. Second, the domain of SI has still many open research topics itself. They
need to be classied and analyzed for their relevance to CPSs. To summarize, there is the compelling
need to clearly identify challenges and research directions of controlling CPSs using SI.
In this paper, we contribute to solve this challenge by reviewing the SI approach from a CPS
perspective and reviewing the challenges in CPS design when applying methodologies from SI. The
bulk of work in swarm robotics provides a good starting point in this respect since it integrates
multiple physical agents and computations. We rst characterize properties of CPSs that are relevant
for the design of SI algorithms and provide denitions of swarms of CPSs. Based on that we highlight
challenges when applying SI and give an outlook for future inspirations, visionary applications, and
open research challenges.
We do not aim to provide new solutions to research problems of the SI or CPS community but
rather build a bridge between these two communities. This allows us to view the research problems
of SI from a broader perspective and motivate future research activities. This is highly relevant as
in future there will be more and more connected CPSs, which will be hard to design, implement,
and deploy with traditional approaches. Therefore, we require new approaches that are applicable in
general and do not require the control of individual agents but rather let them be self-organized.
The paper has following structure: In Section 2 SI denitions and characterizations are described
in the context of CPS swarms. This includes properties and inspirational sources of SI as well as
CPS properties. Section 3 summarizes challenges when using SI and discusses why SI algorithms are
comparably seldom used in real-world applications. Section 4 gives a broad overview of future work
in terms of potential inspirations for SI algorithms and visionary applications for swarms of CPSs.
The main contribution is to provide new ideas and prospects for applications in the dierent domains
of CPS swarms and additionally to highlight their limitations and opportunities. Finally, Section 5
summarizes the paper and motivates researchers for future research work.
2. Denitions and Characterizations
Even though SI algorithms have started to appear in the research literature relatively recently,
according to the Google's Ngram viewer2the term swarm was quite popular until the 1960s. It has
then fallen out of fashion for a while and made a strong comeback after year 2000. The early denition
2https://books.google.com/ngrams/graph?content=swarm
3