only for homogeneous swarms. Therefore, these methods can hardly account for the heterogeneous
swarms of CPSs. Moreover, they incur into a dimensionality curse once the search space becomes
reasonably large and complex.
Therefore, as CPS swarms require the synthesis of complex behaviors, current automatic genera-
tion systems might be unfeasible to use, at least in a systematic way. It can be noted that in any case,
a convergence between model-checking methods [101] in general CPSs, and automatic rule synthesis
and verication in physical swarms will be needed to provide some guarantees in both design and
control stages of a CPS swarm.
3.3. Real-World Deployment Challenges
So far, the large majority of the works that have been deployed and tested on physical swarms
are in the domain of swarm robotics. Furthermore, they have been restricted to the use of small,
simple and rather minimalistic robots, equipped with simple sensors, exchanging minimal amounts
of data (e.g., in [102, 103, 104]). As a result, and in spite of the interesting self-organizing behaviors
that might be observed, most of these works are proof-of-concepts that can hardly scale to useful
applications in the real world: hardly they could be ported to complex real-world tasks in a reliable,
predictable, and ecient manner.
Instead, nowadays impressive individual CPSs and robotic systems are being built, such as self-
driving cars (Uber, Google), incredibly stable quadruped robots (Spot from Boston Dynamics), and
advanced humanoid robots (Atlas by Boston Dynamics, Sophia by Hanson Robotics, Asimo by
Honda). All these examples are extremely complex, from a mechatronic, algorithmic, and behav-
ioral point of view. Compared to them, the tasks performed by currently implemented robot swarms
look much alike toy examples. The question is whether swarm robotics, or rather CPS swarms, will
be able soon to pass from the stage of studying group behaviors in quite abstract terms to the stage
of producing systems that can reliably do useful things in the real world. This might require to pass
from current oversimplied robot models and controls, to models and controls that are based on a
more convenient trade-o between simplicity of design and capability of doing complex things in an
eective and reliable way. This might include to pass from an extremely parsimonious use of resources
and information to a more intensive use of sensor data and information sharing.
The example of the Intel's swarm of Shooting Star drones [105] is exemplary in this respect. For
the 2018 Winter Olympics opening ceremony, an impressive air show with 1,218 drones was performed
by Intel (previous air shows were performed around the world with less drones). The system is labeled
as a swarm and it is in terms of numbers, but it is not a swarm-intelligent system: it is actually a
partially distributed system with a central controller. Individual drones get pre-computed trajectory
scripts, and rely on a very precise external positioning system to nd and adjust their way. The
take-home message is: in order to do things in the real world, it might be necessary to give up some
overly restrictive assumptions, and be pragmatic and balancing when integrating SI bottom-up design
with top-down methods whenever possible.
A further challenge that is aligned with deployment of real systems is the maintenance of a
deployed swarm system. Analog to the discussion in [106], despite being a swarm system, a complex
technical system that must operate over a considerable lifetime will require maintenance in order
to continuously provide its service during an extended system lifetime. It is an open question if
maintenance of a technical system with such properties will be easier or more complicated to maintain
than a traditionally designed technical application. In principle maintaining a system with many
autonomous components is expected to be a dicult task. Indeed, the task might becomes easier if
the same presence of multiple components is used to monitor and maybe x problems from within
the system. An example is provided in [107], where failed robots are detected and isolated in a timely
manner from within the robot swarm.
3.4. How to Address the Challenges
We have already discussed a few general limitations of SI. In order to better support formal analysis
and a systematic reuse of results, a possible way is more solidly framing SI in the context of the elds
of complex systems and network science. This framing will ease the adoption of the sophisticated
mathematical and modeling tools that are extensively used in the study of complex systems for
13