aspects concerning locality of interaction have to be considered while building the model and the
models have to explicitly account for overcrowding issues in order to achieve predictions that compare
well to experiments with physically embodied agents (robots, living honeybees). Indeed, this usually
requires the use of PDE models, or even stochastic PDEs, which are inherently more problematic to
deal with compared to ODEs.
In general terms, abstractions towards simple models can become quickly useless when it comes
to real-world implementation of CPS swarms. Algorithms that are predicted to scale perfectly in
simple models might easily fall prey to overcrowding, blocking, or trac jams. This can lead to a
situation where the swarm members spend much more time in collision prevention and jam-avoiding
procedures than in the actual SI algorithm procedures, and therefore not scaling at all. This happened,
for example, when the perfectly working ODE-based model of a system based on ant pheromone trails
was ported into a robotic system that tried to exploit stigmergic cues in the real world [31].
Scaling properties are indeed an essential ngerprint of a swarm behavior. For being called
swarm-intelligent, an algorithm should work better and better, the larger the swarm gets, within
feasible swarm size bounds. This was shown for instance by Bodi et al. [27] with the SI algorithm
BEECLUST [32].
We suggest here the following simple test consisting of two questions to classify whether a system
is swarm-intelligent or not. A good comparison of empiric data suggesting such a test can be found
in [12].
1. Does it work even if only one swarm member acts alone? If the system shows the same capa-
bilities even when it consists of only one active agent, then these capabilities do not arise from
any swarm behavior, even if many of such agents are operating in parallel.
2. Does the ratio of overall performance to number of swarm members decrease with larger swarm
sizes? If the average performance per member goes down with increasing swarm size across
the whole size spectrum then this system has obviously problems with scaling up, instead of
drawing an advantage from larger population sizes.
If, and only if, both questions are answered with No, the system should be considered to be truly
swarm-intelligent . In particular, these aspects should hold for gradually increasing the swarm size
from one up to a feasible amount of swarm members and not up to innity because every swarm
system has some physical limitations.
2.2. Sources of Inspiration
Originally, SI algorithms were considered as a subset of bio-inspired algorithms, while these are
considered as a subset of nature-inspired algorithms [33]:
swarm intelligence bio-inspired nature-inspired ;
This makes sense as those natural systems that are identied as swarms have provided and can
provide a rich source of inspiration for algorithms that aim to exhibit SI properties. However, the
bio-inspired source of inspiration is not a strict line of separation, as today the eld seems open
towards multiple sources of inspiration. Many SI algorithms have been published recently that are
not strictly inspired from natural systems, but from other processes that may still produce collective
behaviors. Notable examples are the Fireworks algorithm and its variants [34], the Swarm Chemistry
Particle algorithms [35], and various variants of the Harmony Search algorithm [36], that show typical
SI properties but lack a concrete biological source of inspiration for their microscopic rule set.
While many algorithms without a biological inspiration are being labeled as SI, it is worth noticing
that a number of approaches that indeed are bio-inspired, population-based, and aim to produce
system-level outputs, are usually not classied as SI. For example, this is the case of evolutionary
computation, self-organizing neural networks, and cellular automata. The reason might be related
to the fact that SI was historically restricted to be the domain of the algorithms inspired by swarm
behaviors in animal groups.
Other frameworks that are inspired by natural processes but are not SI, include biomimetic algo-
rithms, that are based on the imitation of biological processes and models, and as such can totally
8