depart from the ideas of SI, given that not all biological systems are swarm-like (e.g., 
ower pol-
lination algorithm [37], great salmon run [38], dolphin echolocation [39]). Other more generically
nature-inspired algorithms and frameworks mimic physical or chemical laws instead of biological
ones. Notable examples of these type of algorithms include simulated annealing [40], spiral optimiza-
tion [41], water cycle algorithm [42], and galaxy-based algorithm [43].
Given this plethora of dierent approaches and sources of inspiration, where the borders are par-
tially very blurry, it might be dicult to identify categories or processes that uniquely can be tagged
as the recognized sources of inspiration for SI or not. Thus, instead of using semantic denitions
or denitions through specic inspiring animal systems, it may be better to characterize the source
of inspiration of SI algorithms through collective properties and functionalities that can be designed
after a system.
Given a collective system (i.e., a complex system featuring multiple interacting components, where
the components are not necessarily living organisms), the key point to use it as a source of inspiration
to design an SI system is to extract the why it works? and the how it works? Therefore, a rst step
towards an SI algorithm is the modeling of the system, which already leads to abstraction of the system
down to its core functionalities. From there, further generalization can yield simple disembodied
algorithms, or after translation from one physical domain to another, even totally dierently embodied
systems, e.g., in SI for CPSs. Good sources for this procedure of extracting system-level phenomena
of interest and distilling them into algorithmic or embodied functionalities are all complex systems
that show one of the following core collective capabilities:
Collective decision making: This capability describes the behavior of systems that can collec-
tively choose one option over one or several other options, e.g., ants choose shortest paths using
pheromones, bees decide on the best foraging area, or on the best nest location [23, 44, 45, 26].
Within such systems we nd mostly positive feedback loops|the local behavior is reinforced
and activates other elements of the system to participate|governing the global (macroscopic)
behavior of the system population. The challenge is to identify the microscopic proximate
mechanisms that produce these collective phenomena.
Collective regulation and homeostasis: Another interesting feature of complex systems, and
mostly of biological organisms, is collective regulation aimed to keep specic system variables
around a viable and ecient set point [46, 47]. We often nd such collective mechanisms in
resource allocation mechanisms of social animals, e.g., collective food processing in ant [48]
and bee colonies [49], regulation of building material in paper wasp nests [50], and collective
brood care in honeybee hives [51]. In such systems, the crucial point is to identify the regulatory
negative feedback loops that allows control. Also here the involved microscopic proximate mech-
anisms that ultimately produce the macroscopically observable homeostasis on the population
level are to be identied.
Collective periodic patterns: Collective systems can also show complex dynamics of state changes
over time, sometimes even producing interesting complex spatial patterns like circular or spiral
waves [52]. Due to state changes, such spatio-temporal waves can be exploited for collective
computation, self-assessment of the swarm states (e.g., estimating the local group size), or
signaling purposes [53, 54]. The characteristic oscillations in such systems originate either in
communication delays or in complex internal state-changing mechanisms of the involved agents.
The oscillations in the end aect the robustness and the time constants of the aforementioned
feedback loops that govern the macroscopic system behavior. Coupled-oscillator systems and
excitable media are among the most prominent examples of such natural systems.
To summarize the discussions of this section, we can say that today SI algorithms dene themselves
less often by their source of inspiration, but more by the way they perform their operations. More
specically, inspiration for SI is not restricted to natural systems, but rather to any complex system
featuring an ensemble of interacting components that can display useful properties such as collective
decision-making, regulation, homeostasis, and periodic patterns.
9