novel SI systems. Integration of autonomous robots into existing animal societies [117, 118, 119] has
been performed several times successfully with honeybees [120, 121], sh [122, 123, 124], cockroaches
[125] and cows [126]. This is an emerging eld of science, as embedding robots in living animal
societies will allow both sides to bring in their special capabilities and to merge them in a symbiotic
way, in order to generate a novel bio-hybrid system, a social cyborg.
(Programmable) Bacteria already serve as inspiration today. Their foraging [114] as well as their
collective decision making process allows them to thrive and spread in dicult environments [127].
Furthermore, bacteria are programmable by altering their genetic code [128]. These characteristics
could allow a swarm of bacteria to deliver drugs to tumors inter organic [129].
4.1.2. Chemistry and Physics
Molecular networks are studied in dierent disciplines [130], but especially for complex diseases.
Networks are used to model molecular interactions to let the complex structure of, e.g., cancer or
schizophrenia, being understood [131]. Therein, the nodes represent molecules (e.g., genes, RNA or
proteins) and the edges represent relationships between them. Such network structures can give inspi-
ration for designing the complex interactions between agents in a swarm. An outstanding property of
molecular-level interaction networks is their scalability and resilience. The physiological interaction
network of a single cell comprises many thousands of chemical reactions altering the concentration
levels of hundreds or thousands of chemical components. Even though these networks are extremely
complex and of enormous size, their dynamics are still reacting quickly and 
exible by staying, in
parallel, within precisely controlled bounds, otherwise these organisms would quickly die. These prop-
erties of 
exibility, robustness, scalability and emergent complexity arising from simple interactions
have striking similarities with the desired features of SI. The properties of molecular networks, as
well of the above-mentioned bacterial interaction patterns, can be studied in laboratory experiments
under controlled conditions, as each study site is just a few microliters of 
uid in a cuvette or a small
agar plate on the lab desk. This makes bacterial and molecular networks excellent candidates for
systematic searches for sources of inspiration of future SI algorithms.
Nanonetworks are interconnected nanomachines (arranged set of molecules) that have several abil-
ities including computation, data storage, sensing, and actuation. Most of the nanonetwork-research
is related to their non traditional communication types: electromagnetic or molecular communication
[132]. SI could get inspired especially by the molecular communication between cells using synthesis,
transformation, emission, propagation, and reception of molecules [133].
4.1.3. Human Cognition
Also humans use certain strategies for interacting with each other to solve a task [134, 135, 136],
e.g., collective patterns in crowd dynamics. To nd the corresponding behavioral rules, experimental
studies are applied, e.g., for single avoidance tasks among pedestrians [137]. For example, in [138] they
observed environmental distributed humans with limited perception to solve a collective coordination
task. This was one of the rst experiments, before designing formal strategies to learn human-
inspired behavior and maybe adapting it to CPS swarms as well. Overall, compared to the plethora
of algorithms derived from (eu)social animals, it seems that almost no work was done trying to extract
behaviors from human groups or societies in order to convert them into SI algorithms [139]. This
is in fact very surprising, because humans as sources of inspiration can be easily queried by natural
language and, as humans form the most-advanced and most complex societies and cultures, thus one
would assume that these are the richest source of inspiration for SI algorithms.
4.1.4. Interdisciplinary Approaches
Active matter , much like a swarm, is composed of many individual agents that follow simple rules
and give rise to an emerging behavior for collective motion. These agents consume energy to move
or exert mechanical forces. Active matter combines agent-based representation possibilities from
biological systems, physics, computer graphics, and robotics. Most extensively studied is the model
in [140] from 1995, a self-propelled particle model that was extended to emulate multiple life-like
systems, up to creating particle systems that produces self-replicating morphogenesis [141], which are
swarms that form structures that create new structures of similar kind. The authors in [142, 143], e.g.,
15