characterizing time-evolution and stability properties, as well as analyzing the systems in terms of
their structural and topological properties. In particular this latter has gained considerable attention
in recent times, since information 
ows are keys to prime self-organization and emergence [108, 109].
Moreover, in the same line of developing the connections with related elds, the relationship
between SI and the elds of game theory and multi-agent systems [110] should be acknowledged.
Hence, this fact has not been exploited adequately, which can be benecial to the study of the formal
properties of SI systems. Game theory's equilibrium concepts and designing of interaction rules by
adopting (and possibly adapting) mechanism design approaches [111, 112] could be a valid, sound
alternative to current approaches for automatic rule generation.
When considering the limited applicability of current CPS swarms, we foresee that the study of
physical swarms should move closer to the eld of multi-agent systems, while keeping an emphasis
on self-organized behaviors and scalability. Actually, the dierence between swarms and multi-agent
decentralized systems is not sharply dened. For instance, from a recent survey on multi-robot
systems [113], the properties that are invoked for an algorithm of distributed control are locality of
sensing and communications, scalability, safety, emergence, and the tasks that are considered are very
much aligned with those in [93] considering swarm robotics. This says that dierences are blurred,
and sometimes it is just a matter of terms rather than substance.
4. Future Trends and Directions
As pointed out in the introduction, the world is featuring the increasing presence of complex
dynamic systems that are increasingly collective and connected. These systems are cyber or physical,
or, more generally both, cyber-physical. Given the nature and characteristics of the systems, we
envisage that SI will play a major role addressing forthcoming challenges. Therefore, novel swarm
models might be needed and novel application elds will open up. In the following subsections we
discuss from where novel inspirational models could come from, in which kind of future applications
SI will prove to be a prominent tool, and what the general open research topics in swarms of CPSs
are.
4.1. Future Inspirations
SI models and algorithms have been mainly inspired from the observation of social interactions
taken from models that were originally made on animal groups and societies [114]. If we compress
these models down to the main functional building blocks required in most of SI models, we can
identify the essential microscopic and local interaction rules that are eective in many agent systems
by producing self-organized behavior that can emerge at macroscopic system level. In this perspective,
we can think of enlarging the spectrum of potential inspirational models to include organic, inorganic,
and social systems that show similar core properties. The goal is to build and extract abstract models
from all natural sources of inspiration in a way that we explore time-eective, decentralized techniques
from the specic scenarios studied in various research disciplines, and employ them to build new
models and tackle the complex problems of real-world CPS applications.
The following list discusses specic elds that can provide new ideas for developing SI models. In
most of the cases, these elds have already been exploited for some SI development. Our claim is
that their potential has not really been unleashed in this respect, such that they can provide (more)
disruptive inspirational contributions.
4.1.1. Biology
Animal societies have been the main source of inspiration in SI. In most cases, these systems
have been considered in terms of purely collaborative societies, while predator-prey systems, and
more in general, con
icting scenarios have attracted much less attention from SI practitioners [114].
However, to deal with cyber threats, as well as in the perspective of the interaction among multiple
and possibly con
icting or competing CPSs, more attention should be devoted to non-collaborative
systems. In this general eld, a vast amount of research has been performed in the context of
population dynamics [115], game theory [110], and evolutionary game theory [116]. We expect that
ideas and models from these scenarios and research elds could be fruitfully integrated in the design of
14