Nevertheless, the era of pervasive computing is still at the very beginning, and a number of funda-
mental issues related to design, computation, prediction, and control in large systems of interacting
autonomous components still need to be addressed.
In this respect, Cyber-physical systems (CPSs) have recently emerged as the leading domain for
the study and implementation of multi-component systems where computational and physical re-
sources are strictly interconnected [1]. The National Science Foundation precisely denes CPSs as
\Engineered systems that are built from, and depend upon, the seamless integration of computa-
tion and physical components.". They integrate sensing, computation, control, and networking into
physical objects and infrastructure, and let them interact [2]. CPSs represent a major paradigm in
the framework of collective and connected systems, as well as a vertical study of systems: they are
inherently transdisciplinary, generalizing and expanding individual sub-elds such as embedded sys-
tems, robotics, and networking, by simultaneously merging concepts from cybernetics, mechatronics,
design, and process science [3].
The CPS model is hence well-suited to describe and reason on the plethora of complex mechatron-
ical components that are being to be pervasively deployed, connected, and integrated with our social
networks and our lifes in general, creating what can be termed a cyber-physical-socialsystems [4].
Indeed, each potentially complex component of these large systems is a CPS. Such that their multi-
scale interconnection and interaction is better captured by the notion of Cyber-Physical System of
Systems (CPSoS), dening a large and distributed complex system of CPSs. CPSoS are a specic
(yet very broad) instance of a System of Systems (SoS) [5]: an ecosystem of CPSs.
It is well understood that aspects related to decisional autonomy, system integration, cyber-
security, control, scalability, optimization, validation, and verication, all play a major role in CPSs'
design and control. Moreover, CPSs are meant to operate in the physical world, which typically faces
continual dynamic changes, features events and external conditions that are hard to predict or model,
include other CPSs as well as human agents. The presence of all these aspects to account for, as
well as the fact that a CPS is the product of integration of heterogeneous systems, pose several open
research challenges [6].
If we escalate to the more general CPSoS model, the design and control challenges become even
harder, since individual component autonomy must be glued by explicitly addressing interdependence
and coordination, interoperability, distributed control and emergence of behaviors (e.g., [5], Table IV).
In general, centralized and static management and control model are not expected to be the right
solution approach to address all these challenges. Instead, the methods that should be employed
should achieve the following goals:
distributed control, supervision and management,
local coordination among the composing subsystems,
partial autonomy of the subsystems,
capability of dynamic reconguration of the system as a whole on dierent time-scales,
evolution of the overall system during its operation,
possibility of generating useful emerging behaviors at the system level [7].
No single framework or recipe can obviously tackle all these dierent and multi-disciplinary chal-
lenges. In this case, even solution approaches need to be based on a systems-of-solutions! Summaries
of approaches for dierent domains can be found for instance in [6, 8, 9, 10].
Among the approaches that can potentially be a good match to tackle the numerous challenges of
CPS/CPSoS,1the framework of swarm intelligence [11] (SI) is expected to play a prominent role. In
fact, it can be immediately noted that the above given characterizations for CPSs naturally match
1Given that a CPSoS is a CPS itself, in the following, we will use the acronym CPSs to refer in a general sense to
either a single CPS or to a system of CPSs if the distinction is not semantically relevant in the given context.
2