swarm? What do CPSs need to have in common therefore (characteristics, properties, sensor data,
etc.)? How to join or leave a swarm? What decisions should be taken to set preference parameter-
ization, such as: Which decisions can favor the local driver goal over the swarm goal over a global
smart trac goal? What is the number of CPSs to form a swarm to draw a benet? Integrating
the data retrieved by the infrastructure to the swarm of autonomous cars could further enrich the
decision process to reach the above mentioned goals. The technology to realize CPS swarms in smart
trac are partially already there: While local retrieval and evaluation of sensor data [155] is a stan-
dard in today's cars, there are already specic attempts for V2X [156] standardized communication
protocols realized on manufacturer side, where V2X describes vehicle-to-vehicle (V2V) and vehicle-
to-infrastructure (V2I) communication. V2V is the inter-car communication, V2I communication is
realized between cars and smart infrastructure, which is the result of combining physical infrastructure
(streets, cameras, trac lights, etc.) with digital infrastructure (sensors, communication networks,
etc.). Furthermore, communication technologies like 5G [157] or Ultra-Wideband [158] oer a high
security level, low latency, and high data rates to allow self-localization and real-time data exchange
among the CPSs. These achievements will enable a swarm of autonomous cars to exchange their local
information and react on it accordingly in real-time on a dynamic, reactive way. For example, the
authors in [159] describe a swarm behavior module step-wise from selecting and abstracting sensor
data to path planning for an autonomous car. In their approach the swarm members are detected
objects which were moving during observation. In [160] the authors develop local rules based on SI
that enables the interconnected autonomous cars running eciently on arterial roads. Furthermore,
introducing mobility concepts is no longer restricted to research. The Hondas SAFE SWARMTM
concept can improve trac 
ow by taking information from vehicles ahead including on-board sen-
sors and systems, and V2X communication [161]. For an ecient and eective implementation of a
smart trac system, we would probably need to start from the very beginning. This includes a whole
new architecture for gathering, processing, and analyzing real-time data. Additionally to the swarm
system, a central trac management system (TMS) can be installed that can have several supportive
roles. First, it acts as data submission system as local event information needs to be accessible for all
other cars to plan their routes appropriately. Second, it should provide an overview of global trac
situations, with the capability to fuse individual swarm information on the road. The process of data
exchange among and between cars and TMS is additionally enriched with information from smart
road infrastructure.
4.2.2. Emergency Response
The availability of professional teams of rst responders in emergency situations plays a critical
role to save lives and/or restore primary services. Conventional teams of rst responders include
police, army troops, re brigades, and rescue forces from civil protection agencies. Swarms of CPSs
of several kinds (e.g., all-terrain or 
ying robots [145, 162]) could support and facilitate emergency
response activities by working in tight collaboration and cooperation with human teams, creating
a heterogeneous, multi human-CPS swarm. Activities where such mixed teams could play a key
role include, e.g., cases of accidents on industrial or power plants, or environmental disasters (e.g.,
forest res, 
oods, storms, earthquakes). CPS agents can possibly navigate through a destroyed or
human-hostile environment more eectively and safely than humans, gathering multi-sensorial data,
coordinating with humans to focus on spotted regions of interest (e.g., possible presence of survivors),
remove obstacles, re-establish structures, and save lives. In more general terms, a CPS swarm can be
used as a dynamic, distributed augmented sensor-actuator system that could be an invaluable tool
to help human rst responders to conduct missions eciently and eectively.
Establishing a mixed team with swarms of CPSs is feasible as long as i) each individual swarm
member is capable to act according to local rules and is independent of a xed infrastructure; ii) the
infrastructure is typically transformed, paths are blocked, others are rather unstable, thus forming a
dynamic environment; ii) individual information can be exchanged with other members, other swarms
or the local control stations; iii) some dynamic ad-hoc communication infrastructure is established
to replace the pre-existing one, usually not (anymore) available, allowing for intra and inter swarm
communication and communication from the swarm to the control centers; iv) high-level decision-
making can be performed at the control centers if feasible, balancing local autonomy vs. system-
17