processing power that denes the minimum required time for a given computation, and limitations
on communication, sensing, and actuation that constrain the rate at which CPSs can perceive or
manipulate their environment. Spatial constraints include kinematic constraints such as limited
maneuverability, limited communication range, and the physical dimensions of individual CPSs that
can inhibit them to enter conned spaces.
For the CPS swarm properties, the CPSoS scenarios, we look at the features that the CPSs exhibit
as an ensemble. These features can be split into those related to swarm composition and those about
the network topology that allows communication among the individual CPSs in the swarm. The
swarm composition parameters include the size of the swarm, the spatial re-congurability which is
closely related to the mobility and communication capabilities of individual CPSs, and the diversity
of the CPSs that constitute the swarm [57, 58]. The network topology is mainly dened by the
communication capabilities of individual CPSs. Nevertheless, when forming a network of connected
CPSs, dierent topologies can be chosen for the swarm [59]. For example, mesh networks are typically
a good choice since they allow all swarm members in communication range of each other to exchange
messages. In some cases it might make sense though to have a hierarchy and only exchange messages
with higher layers of the hierarchy. One example are sensor networks, where the information sensed
by individual CPSs needs to be forwarded to a central CPS in charge of consolidating, processing,
and forwarding the data.
3. Challenges using Swarm Intelligence
While the adoption of SI approaches in CPSs can potentially bring potential advantages in terms
of adaptability, robustness, and scalability of the systems (see Section 2.1), it is also true that the
use of a SI design comes with a number of challenges and drawbacks. In the following subsections we
discuss the main limitations and challenges that can be associated to the use of SI design in general,
and in the context of CPS swarms specically. At the end of the section we provide suggestions about
how to overcome or deal with these issues.
3.1. Challenges deriving Formal Properties
When designing a system, fundamental questions regard the capability to make predictions about
the behaviors of the system. In turn, predictability is related to controllability that aects the ability
to let the system achieving desired congurations. Predictability and controllability are properties
that are inherently hard to achieve in complex systems design following a bottom-up approach, such
as SI.
A number of works have addressed these topics, a few recent developments are related to network
science [60] and to the observability itself of complex systems [61]. Moreover, systems are usually
described as dependent on a set of parameters (numeric and structural) whose eects on the resulting
dynamics can be somehow extreme in a complex system, resulting in phase transitions [62, 63, 64],
self-organized criticality [65], and in deterministic chaotic behaviors [66, 67]. This is to say that in
general, not only predictability and controllability are challenges, but also any parameter setting can
have a major impact on the resulting dynamics of a SI system.
In the specic case of swarm systems that are also CPSs, the situation is even more challenging.
CPSs are in fact \characterized by the tight interaction between a digital computing component (the
cyber part) and a continuous-time dynamical system (the physical part)" [68]. This amounts to the
coupling between two complex systems that makes it extremely hard to reason for instance in terms of
model checking for deriving formal properties. Moreover, CPSs are plugged in the real-world, making
them exposed to external random disturbances that are hard to model, or would require adaptive
runtime models to be understood. The diculty lies in creating models that are precise enough for
timely adaption in order to exhibit the desired resilience to the dynamicity of the environment [69].
Coupling the inherent diculties in obtaining formal guarantees from both sides, SI and CPSs,
impose challenges and restrictions on the design and use of CPS swarm systems. This also says that
SI systems may nd limited use in life-critical applications such as the control of an airplane, precisely
because of the lack of a clear denition of the possible behaviors of the system.
11