members' performance, the overall system is a well designed swarm application. This can only be
achieved when the local control algorithms of the swarm members are well-designed for the problem.
In fact, this means that within the bounds of feasible swarm sizes, not only the eciency of the whole
swarm as a group, but also the eciency of each single individual has to increase. We refer to this
asswarm eect ,
performancelarge swarm
sizelarge swarm>performancesmall swarm
sizesmall swarm; (1)
where performanceimay represent any quantitative performance metric of the swarm iin which
larger metric values identify a higher or better performance of the swarm, and size iindicates the size
of that swarm, given by the number of swarm members.
Figure 2 illustrates the expected performance scaling properties of three dierent systems:
(a) The performance of a hypothetical perfectly scaling disembodied algorithm or a swarm model
that does not care for physical constraints at all, which will scale linear with O(n) as the dashed line
in Figure 2, where n is the number of swarm members.
(b) The performance scaling of an algorithm that shares resources with other algorithm instances
or a swarm model that considers space as a shared resource for agents, which will scale O(logn) as
the dotted line in Figure 2.
(c) The performance of a physically embodied swarm system operating in the real world as the
solid hat-shaped curve in Figure 2.
The inequality of Equation 1 holds only for swarms of a size between the threshold values C1and
C3as indicated by the dashed area in Figure 2. Thus, it is important to dene the number of agents
in a swarm in a way that the nal performance falls within this parameter-space region of the swarm
eect
With very low swarm size or density N < C 1, the depicted swarm shows almost no performance
at all, as the connectivity between the agents is not high enough to allow them to perform their
cooperative work at a signicant level. As the swarm gets larger, the swarm performs better and
better and better as the swarm eect starts to kick in and the swarm increases its performance quickly.
At a swarm size of N > C 1the swarm can exploit the synergies between swarm members to an extent
that it starts to scale in a super-linear way with swarm size. It can keep this extraordinary performance
level for a given size range of C1> NC3and keep its performance still above a logarithmic scale
for all N < C 4. The overall peak performance of the total swarm system is exceeded at a threshold
ofC2, in consequence any further swarm member added to the swarm beyond this size starts already
to decrease the average performance of each member due to crowding or similar issues. As soon as
the swarm size exceeds another critical level N > C 4the swarm performance deteriorates converging
towards a total loss of performance. We think that these are typical features of swarm systems as
soon as they operate in a physically embodied way.
Many SI algorithms rely on mathematical models, for example ordinary dierential equations
(ODE) or partial dierential equations (PDE) models. Such models necessarily abstract many aspects
of the physical, chemical and biological system they depict. This can be a critical issue when it comes
to physical implementations. Thus, it may happen that a swarm is predicted to be perfectly working
when modeled as an ODE or PDE, but this happen dierently when the model is tested in the real
world. The problem is that, e.g., ODE models by denition implicitly assume that all swarm members
are innitesimally small points in space, thus they cannot crowd or even jam the collective motion. In
such models, members are assumed to be always uniformly distributed in space so that interactions
are possible among all swarm members in all moments of time at a non-zero extent. However, in
a real swarm systems none of these assumptions really hold, some are even explicitly unwanted as,
e.g., the agent-to-agent interaction is often on purpose restricted to local neighbors. Of course,
we can construct ODE models in a way to respect some of the properties of physically embodied
swarms. However, this requires extra treatment and makes these models immediately signicantly
more complex, and therefore less eective for predictions. One analysis of such an approach can
be seen in [29], describing several model-building steps for a very simple swarm algorithm: the
BEECLUST algorithm. This algorithm is derived from honeybee experiments that studied natural
collective decision-making [23] and was in consequence implemented in a robot swarm [30]. Spatial
6