mass3. A collection of individuals can be considered a swarm if it exhibits a veriable swarm behavior
including all characteristics mentioned above.
Figure 1: Swarm advantages adaptability, robustness, and scalability (adapted from [22]).
In addition to these characteristics that are already well understood to be the ngerprints of true
swarm behavior, two additional crucial aspects should be noted as well: Critical mass and super-linear
scaling of the system performance are two system features that can be seen as mandatory for a true
swarm system and have been discussed in current literature only marginally.
Critical mass: The advantages of SI algorithms can only be exploited if a critical mass of swarm
members is reached. In natural swarm systems, such as honeybees' or cockroaches' collective aggre-
gation decisions [23, 24] as well as in autonomous robotic swarms [25], it was found that the number
or density of agents plays an important role for the swarm performance and that swarm systems
below a critical number of agents do not function well as a collective.
Such a critical mass threshold can be illustrated by the example of the formation process of a
sand dune: Given three grains of sand, together they do not form a sand dune although they have
to obey to the same physical laws as the billions of sand grains that form a massive dune. This is
because the order-generating feedback loops do not impart any eect strongly enough to overcome
the system's noise that drives it towards the disorder. In general, SI applications do not work well
below a critical mass, but increasingly well above this threshold up to a size where other eects reduce
swarm performance again.
Super-linear performance scaling: When scaling up beyond the critical mass, it is expected that in
any collective system a large group of agents will achieve more work in total than a smaller group in
the same time. In a true swarm, the interactions between the swarm members should exhibit super-
linear characteristics, i.e., the eect of the overall system is required to be more than the sum of the
eects of its individual parts. Examples are described for honeybees [23], for robotic swarms [26, 27],
and for multi-processor systems [28]. Only if the synergies of cooperation boost each individual swarm
3It should be noted that it is not yet claried what this critical threshold (the minimum number of swarm members)
should be [12].
5