such application scenarios information on the infrastructure is not given, the environment is dynamic
and unknown; iv) a central control could not be used, related to the time-delay between operating
swarm and human control; v) to reach the goals described above, the individual swarm members need
to cooperate.
The aforementioned missions would still require expensive ground control to meet their objectives,
nowadays. The vision is to make satellite formations autonomous|human intervention is costly in
terms of communication delay between space and Earth. The formations are strongly dependent on
the movement of a spacecraft: gravity, solar radiation pressure and atmospheric drag on a spacecraft
in orbit in
uence the movement and causes the deviations from movement we know on Earth [196].
Guidance, navigation and control system are eected by the movement model that needs to be
developed. As soon as planets can be explored directly on their surface, autonomous swarms can be
deployed, whereby several points are open related to their transportation to the planet, their launch
at the planet, navigation, examination of the ground, and nally returning the retrieved data to
Earth including in
uences like planet-specic temperature, ground conditions, or gravity.
4.2.6. Medical Applications
Applications of swarms in medicine show an increased interest to overcome complex problems,
e.g., in cancer cure. In health care, nanoparticles are important as they can leak out of blood vessels
and go to target sites. These particles are too small to be programmed. Nevertheless, they can be
made ready for using them in swarms: interaction can be achieved using changes of their coating,
charge or size. If a group of nanoparticles shows swarm behavior, they could potentially travel to
the target cancer cells, contain a coating of medicine, be activated by external stimuli, and destroy
targeted tissue eectively. Whereas other medications diuse into tissues, a swarm of nanoparticles
has more intelligence and thus could more eectively target diseased tissue [197, 198].
Using swarms of nanoparticles can be supported as: i) each individual nanoparticle acts according
to local rules to facilitate autonomous behavior; ii) the local information is exchanged among the
nanoparticles and probably with an out-of-the-body monitoring station; iii) in such scenarios there
is no infrastructure at all; iv) the environment is the human or animal body, partially unknown and
highly dynamic, and iv) to reach the goals described above, the individual nanoparticles need to
cooperate leading to an emergent behavior.
In such a cancer cure application with nanoparticles several basic questions are still open when it
comes to form a swarm. For example, how the swarm communication is achieved between individual
swarm members, between swarm members and environment, and between swarm and the outer-
body world. Furthermore, the question is how to implement typical swarm characteristics related
to complexity, local intelligence, and local processing. The swarm system needs to be simple, re-
congurable, inexpensive, scalable, and veriable. From these elaborations, we could get answers
how to perform even more complex tasks including optimization, computation, decision-making,
construction, self-assembly, and collective motion [197, 198]. This application vision is still at the
very beginning. Nevertheless, the question arises, whether other medical applications could be realized
byinjecting a swarm to the human body.
4.2.7. Human networks
Human organizations and social networks driven by Web 2.04are further examples of collective
systems. In particular, the swarm nature in social networks is apparent: Large numbers of highly
heterogeneous individuals interact and communicate locally based on some notion of social neighbor-
hood and continually generate global behavioral patterns (e.g., online trends, popularization of certain
products or ideas). On the one hand, a SI methodology can be applied to study human networks,
using their huge amount of online data sources, and perform analytical prediction and evaluation via
simulation to forecast and maybe control the behavior of these inherently complex systems. On the
other hand, swarms could nd their practical application in many dierent ways in these humans
4Denition Oxford Dictionary "Web 2.0": "The second stage of development of the Internet, characterized especially
by the change from static web pages to dynamic or user-generated content and the growth of social media."
20