Figure 2. Extracting 16 frames evenly from a video of the abseiling category in the Kinetics-400 dataset [21]. Analyzing the video’s full
context and attending to the relevant parts is much more intuitive than analyzing several clips built around specific frames, as many of these
frames might lead to false predictions.
mation in a video of hours, or even a few minutes, can be
grasped using only a snippet clip of a few seconds. Nev-
ertheless, current networks are not designed to share long-
term information across the full video.
VTN’s temporal processing component is based on a
Longformer [1]. This type of transformer-based model can
process a long sequence of thousands of tokens. The atten-
tion mechanism proposed by the Longformer makes it fea-
sible to go beyond short clip processing and maintain global
attention, which attends to all tokens in the input sequence.
In addition to long sequence processing, we also explore
an important trade-off in machine learning – speed vs. ac-
curacy . Our framework demonstrates a superior balance
of this trade-off, both during training and also at inference
time. In training, even though wall runtime per epoch is
either equal or greater, compared to other networks, our ap-
proach requires much fewer passes of the training dataset
to reach its maximum performance; end-to-end, compared
to state-or-the-art networks, this results in a 16.1×faster
training. At inference time, our approach can handle both
multi-view and full video analysis while maintaining simi-
lar accuracy. In contrast, other networks’ performance sig-
nificantly decreases when analyzing the full video in a sin-
gle pass. In terms of GFLOPS x Views , their inference cost
is considerably higher than those of VTN, which concludes
to a1.5×fewer GFLOPS and a 5.1×faster validation wall
runtime.
Our framework’s structure components are modular
(Fig. 1). First, the 2D spatial backbone can be replaced
with any given network. The attention-based module can
stack up more layers, more heads or can be set to a differ-
ent Transformers model that can process long sequences.
Finally, the classification head can be modified to facilitate
different video-based tasks, like temporal action localiza-
tion.
2. Related Work
Spatial-temporal networks. Most recent studies in video
recognition suggested architectures that are based on 3D
ConvNets [20, 36]. In [5], a two-stream architecture was
used, one stream for RGB inputs and another for Optical
Flow (OF) inputs. Residual connections are inserted intothe two-stream architecture to allow a direct link between
RGB and OF layers. The idea of inflating 2D ConvNets into
their 3D counterpart (I3D) was introduced in [3]. I3D takes
2D ConvNets and expands its layers into 3D. Therefore it
allows to leverage pre-trained state-of-the-art image recog-
nition architectures in the spatial-temporal domain and ap-
ply them for video-based tasks.
Non-local Neural Networks (NLN) [39] introduced a
non-local operation, a type of self-attention, that computes
responses based on relationships between different loca-
tions in the input signal. NLN demonstrated that the core
attention mechanism in Transformers can produce good re-
sults on video tasks, however it is confined to processing
only short clips. In order to extract long temporal context,
[41] introduced a long-term feature bank that acts as the
entire video memory and a Feature Bank Operator (FBO)
that computes interactions between short-term and long-
term features. However, it requires precomputed features,
and it is not efficient enough to support end-to-end training
of the feature extraction backbone.
SlowFast [14] explored a network architecture that op-
erates in two pathways and different frame rates. Lateral
connections fuse the information between the slow pathway,
focused on the spatial information, and the fast pathway fo-
cused on temporal information.
The X3D study [13] builds on top of SlowFast. It argues
that in contrast to image classification architectures, which
have been developed via a rigorous evolution, the video
architectures have not been explored in detail, and histor-
ically are based on expanding image-based networks to fit
the temporal domain. X3D introduces a set of networks that
progressively expand in different axes, e.g., temporal, frame
rate, spatial, width, bottleneck width, and depth. Compared
to SlowFast, it offers a lightweight network (in terms of
GFLOPS and parameters) with similar performance.
Transformers in computer vision. The Transformers ar-
chitecture [37] reached state-of-the-art results in many NLP
tasks, making it the de-facto standard. Recently, Transform-
ers are starting to disrupt the field of computer vision, which
traditionally depends on deep ConvNets. Studies like ViT
and DeiT for image classification [10, 35], DETR for ob-
ject detection and panoptic segmentation [2], and VisTR for
3164