modelpretrain
(ImageNet accuracy (%))top-1 top-5
R50-VTN ImageNet (76.2 [27]) 71.2 90.0
R101-VTN ImageNet (77.4 [27]) 72.1 90.3
DeiT-B-VTN ImageNet (81.8 [35]) 75.5 92.2
DeiT-BD-VTN ImageNet (83.4 [35]) 75.6 92.4
ViT-B-VTN ImageNet-21K (84.0 [10]) 78.6 93.7
ViT-B-VTN†ImageNet-21K (84.0 [10]) 79.8 94.2
Table 1. VTN performance on Kinetics-400 validation set for dif-
ferent backbone variations. A full video inference is used. We
show top-1 and top-5 accuracy. We report what pre-training was
done for each backbone and the related single-crop top-1 accuracy
on ImageNet. ( †) Training with extensive data augmentation.
video instance segmentation [40] are some examples show-
ing promising results when using Transformers in the com-
puter vision field. Binding these results with the sequential
nature of video makes it a perfect match for Transformers.
Applying Transformers on long sequences. BERT [8]
and its optimized version RoBERTa [24] are transformer-
based language representation models. They are pre-trained
on large unlabeled text and later fine-tuned on a given target
task. With minimal modification, they achieve state-of-the-
art results on a variety of NLP tasks.
One significant limitation of these models, and Trans-
formers in general, is their ability to process long se-
quences. This is due to the self-attention operation, which
has a complexity of O(n2)per layer ( nis sequence
length) [37].
Longformer [1] addresses this problem and enables
lengthy document processing by introducing an attention
mechanism with a complexity of O(n). This attention
mechanism combines a sliding window local-context self-
attention and task-specific global attention.
Similar to ConvNets, stacking up multiple windowed at-
tention layers results in a larger receptive field. This prop-
erty of Longformer gives it the ability to integrate informa-
tion across the entire sequence. The global attention part
focuses on pre-selected tokens (like the [CLS]token) and
can attend to all other tokens across the input sequence.
3. Video Transformer Network
Video Transformer Network (VTN) is a generic frame-
work for video recognition. It operates with a single stream
of data, from the frames level up to the objective task head.
In the scope of this study, we demonstrate our approach us-
ing the action recognition task by classifying an input video
to the correct action category.
The architecture of VTN is modular and composed of
three consecutive parts. A 2D spatial feature extraction
model (spatial backbone), a temporal attention-based en-
coder, and a classification MLP head. Fig. 1 demonstrates
our architecture layout.VTN is scalable in terms of video length during infer-
ence, and enables the processing of very long sequences.
Due to memory limitation, we suggest several types of in-
ference methods. (1) Processing the entire video in an end-
to-end manner. (2) Processing the video frames in chunks,
extracting features first, and then applying them to the tem-
poral attention-based encoder. (3) Extracting all frames’
features in advance and then feed them to the temporal en-
coder.
3.1. Spatial backbone
The spatial backbone operates as a learned feature ex-
traction module. It can be any network that works on
2D images, either deep or shallow, pre-trained or not,
convolutional- or transformers-based. And its weights can
be fixed (pre-trained) or trained during the learning process.
3.2. Temporal attention-based encoder
As suggested by [37], we use a Transformer model ar-
chitecture that applies attention mechanisms to make global
dependencies in a sequence data. However, Transformers
are limited by the number of tokens they can process at the
same time. This limits their ability to process long inputs,
such as videos, and incorporate connections between distant
information.
In this work, we propose to process the entire video at
once during inference. We use an efficient variant of self-
attention, that is not all-pairwise, called Longformer [1].
Longformer operates using sliding window attention that
enables a linear computation complexity. The sequence of
feature vectors of dimension dbackbone (Sec. 3.1) is fed to the
Longformer encoder. These vectors act as the 1D tokens
embedding in the standard Transformer setup.
Like in BERT [8] we add a special classification token
([CLS]) in front of the features sequence. After propagat-
ing the sequence through the Longformer layers, we use the
final state of the features related to this classification token
as the final representation of the video and apply it to the
given classification task head. Longformer also maintains
global attention on that special [CLS]token.
3.3. Classification MLP head
Similar to [10], the classification token (Sec. 3.2) is pro-
cessed with an MLP head to provide a final predicted cat-
egory. The MLP head contains two linear layers with a
GELU non-linearity and Dropout between them. The input
token representation is first processed with a Layer normal-
ization.
3.4. Looking beyond a short clip context
The common approach in recent studies for video action
recognition uses 3D-based networks. During inference, due
to the addition of a temporal dimension, these networks are
3165