Figure 3. Illustrating all the single-head first attention layer weights of the [CLS]token vs.16 frames pulled evenly from a video. High
weight values are represented by a warm color (yellow) while low values by a cold color (blue). The video’s segments in which abseiling
category properties are shown ( e.g., shackle, rope) exhibit higher weight values compared to segments in which non-relevant information
appears ( e.g., shoes, people). The model prediction is abseiling for this video.
Figure 4. Evaluating the influence of attention on the training
(solid line) and validation (dashed line) curves for Kinetics-400.
A similar ViT-B-VTN with three Longformer layers is trained for
both cases, and we modify the attention heads between a learned
one (red) and a fixed uniform version (blue).
schedule decay for the R50/101-VTN versions. In order to
report the wall runtime, we use an 8-V100-GPU machine.
Since we use 2D models as the spatial backbone, we can
manipulate the input clip shape xclip∈RB×C×T×H×Wby
stacking all frames from all clips within a batch to create a
single frames batch of shape x∈R(B·T)×C×H×W. Thus,
during training, we propagate all batch frames in a single
forward-backward pass.
For the Longformer, we use an effective attention win-
dow of size 32, which was applied for each layer. Two other
hyperparameters are the dimensions set for the Hidden size
and the FFN inner hidden size . These are a direct derivative
of the spatial backbone. Therefore, in R50/101-VTN we
use 2048 and 4096, respectively, and for ViT-B-VTN we
use 768 and 3072, respectively. In addition, we apply At-
tention Dropout with a probability of 0.1. We also explore
the impact of the number of Longformer layers.
The positional embedding (PE) information is only rele-
vant for the temporal attention-based encoder (Fig. 1). We
explore three positional embedding approaches (Table 2b):
(1)Learned positional embedding - since a clip is repre-sented using frames taken from the full video sequence, we
can learn an embedding that uses as input the frame loca-
tion (index) in the original video, giving the Transformer
information regarding the position of the clip in the entire
sequence; (2) Fixed absolute encoding - we use a similar
method to the one in DETR [2], and modified it to work on
the temporal axis only; and (3) No positional embedding -
no information is added in the temporal dimension, but we
still use the global position to mark the special [CLS]token
position.
Inference. In order to show a comparison between differ-
ent models, we use both the common practice of infer-
ence in multi-views and a full video inference approach
(Sec. 3.4).
In the multi-view approach, we sample 10 clips evenly
from the video. For each clip, we first resize the shorter
side to 256, then take three crops of size 224×224from
the left, center, and right. The result is 30 views per video,
and the final prediction is an average of all views’ softmax
scores.
In the full video inference approach, we read all the
frames in the video. Then, we align them for batching pur-
poses, by either sub- or up-sampling, to 250 frames uni-
formly. In the spatial domain, we resize the shorter side to
256 and take a center crop of size 224×224.
5. Experiments
5.1. Ablation Experiments on Kinetics-400
Kinetics-400 dataset. The original Kinetics-400 dataset
[21] consists of 246,535 training videos and 19,761 vali-
dation videos. Each video is labeled with one of 400 hu-
man action categories, curated from YouTube videos. Since
some YouTube links are expired, we could only download
234,584 of the original dataset, thus missing 11,951 videos
from the training set, which are about 5%. This leads to a
slight drop in performance of about 0.5%1.
In the validation set, we are missing one video. To test
our data’s validity and compare it to previous studies, we
1https://github.com/facebookresearch/
video-nonlocal-net/blob/master/DATASET.md
3167