Video Transformer Network
Daniel Neimark Omri Bar Maya Zohar Dotan Asselmann
Theator
{danieln, omri, maya, dotan }@theator.io
Abstract
This paper presents VTN, a transformer-based frame-
work for video recognition. Inspired by recent developments
in vision transformers, we ditch the standard approach in
video action recognition that relies on 3D ConvNets and
introduce a method that classifies actions by attending
to the entire video sequence information. Our approach
is generic and builds on top of any given 2D spatial
network. In terms of wall runtime, it trains 16.1×faster
and runs 5.1×faster during inference while maintaining
competitive accuracy compared to other state-of-the-art
methods. It enables whole video analysis, via a single
end-to-end pass, while requiring 1.5×fewer GFLOPs. We
report competitive results on Kinetics-400 and Moments
in Time benchmarks and present an ablation study of
VTN properties and the trade-off between accuracy and
inference speed. We hope our approach will serve as a
new baseline and start a fresh line of research in the video
recognition domain. Code and models are available at:
https://github.com/bomri/SlowFast/blob/
master/projects/vtn/README.md .
1. Introduction
Attention matters. For almost a decade, ConvNets have
ruled the computer vision field [22, 7]. Applying deep
ConvNets produced state-of-the-art results in many visual
recognition tasks, i.e., image classification [32, 19, 34], ob-
ject detection [17, 16, 28], semantic segmentation [25], ob-
ject instance segmentation [18], face recognition [33, 30]
and video action recognition [9, 38, 3, 39, 23, 14, 13,
12]. But, recently this domination is starting to crack as
transformer-based models are showing promising results in
many of these tasks [10, 2, 35, 40, 42, 15].
Video recognition tasks also rely heavily on ConvNets.
In order to handle the temporal dimension, the fundamen-
tal approach is to use 3D ConvNets [5, 3, 4]. In contrast to
other studies that add the temporal dimension straight from
the input clip level, we aim to move apart from 3D net-
works. We use state-of-the-art 2D architectures to learn the
spatial feature representations and add the temporal infor-
Figure 1. Video Transformer Network architecture. Connecting
three modules: A 2D spatial backbone ( f(x)), used for feature ex-
traction. Followed by a temporal attention-based encoder (Long-
former in this work), that uses the feature vectors ( ϕi) combined
with a position encoding. The [CLS]token is processed by a clas-
sification MLP head to get the final class prediction.
mation later in the data flow by using attention mechanisms
on top of the resulting features. Our approach input only
RGB video frames and without any bells and whistles (e.g.,
optical flow, streams lateral connections, multi-scale infer-
ence, multi-view inference, longer clips fine-tuning, etc.)
achieves comparable results to other state-of-the-art mod-
els.
Video recognition is a perfect candidate for Transform-
ers. Similar to language modeling, in which the input words
or characters are represented as a sequence of tokens [37],
videos are represented as a sequence of images (frames).
However, this similarity is also a limitation when it comes
to processing long sequences. Like long documents, long
videos are hard to process. Even a 10 seconds video, such
as those in the Kinetics-400 benchmark [21], are processed
in recent studies as short, ˜2seconds, clips.
But how does this clip-based inference would work on
much longer videos (i.e., movie films, sports events, or sur-
gical procedures)? It seems counterintuitive that the infor-
3163