15
Qiuqiang Kong (S’17) received the B.Sc. degree in
2012, and the M.E. degree in 2015 from South China
University of Technology, Guangzhou, China. He
received the Ph.D. degree from University of Surrey,
Guildford, UK in 2020. Following his PhD, he
joined ByteDance AI Lab as a research scientist. His
research topic includes the classiﬁcation, detection
and separation of general sounds and music. He
is known for developing attention neural networks
for audio tagging, and winning the audio tagging
task in the detection and classiﬁcation of acoustic
scenes and events (DCASE) challenge in 2017. He was nominated as the
postgraduate research student of the year in University of Surrey, 2019. He
is a frequent reviewer for journals and conferences in the area including
IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing.
Yin Cao (M’18) received the B.Sc. degree in Elec-
tronic Science and Engineering from Nanjing Uni-
versity, China in 2008, and Ph.D. degree from In-
stitute of Acoustics, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
China in 2013. He then worked in Acoustics group
at Brigham Young University, US, and at Institute of
Acoustics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China. In
2018, he joined Centre for Vision, Speech and Signal
Processing at the University of Surrey. His research
topic includes active noise control, air acoustics
and signal processing, detection, classiﬁcation and
separation of audio. He is known for his work on decentralized active noise
control, weighted spatial gradients control metric, and polyphonic sound event
detection and localization. He was the winner of urban sound tagging in
detection and classiﬁcation of acoustic scenes and events (DCASE) 2020
challenge and achieved second-best of sound event detection and localization
tasks in DCASE 2019 challenge. He has served as an Associate Editor for
Noise Control Engineering Journal since 2020. He is also a frequent reviewer
for IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing.
Turab Iqbal received the B.Eng. degree in Elec-
tronic Engineering from the University of Surrey,
U.K., in 2017. Currently, he is working towards a
Ph.D. degree from the Centre for Vision, Speech
and Signal Processing (CVSSP) in the University
of Surrey. During his time as a Ph.D. student, he
has worked on a number of projects in the area of
audio classiﬁcation and localization using machine
learning methods. His research is mainly focused on
learning with weakly-labeled or noisy training data.
Wenwu Wang (M’02-SM’11) was born in Anhui,
China. He received the B.Sc. degree in 1997, the
M.E. degree in 2000, and the Ph.D. degree in 2002,
all from Harbin Engineering University, China. He
then worked in King’s College London, Cardiff Uni-
versity, Tao Group Ltd. (now Antix Labs Ltd.), and
Creative Labs, before joining University of Surrey,
UK, in May 2007, where he is currently a professor
in signal processing and machine learning, and a
Co-Director of the Machine Audition Lab within
the Centre for Vision Speech and Signal Processing.
He has been a Guest Professor at Qingdao University of Science and
Technology, China, since 2018. His current research interests include blind
signal processing, sparse signal processing, audio-visual signal processing,
machine learning and perception, machine audition (listening), and statistical
anomaly detection. He has (co)-authored over 200 publications in these
areas. He served as an Associate Editor for IEEE Transactions on Signal
Processing from 2014 to 2018. He is also Publication Co-Chair for ICASSP
2019, Brighton, UK. He currently serves as Senior Area Editor for IEEE
Transactions on Signal Processing and an Associate Editor for IEEE/ACM
Transactions on Audio Speech and Language Processing.
Mark D. Plumbley (S’88-M’90-SM’12-F’15) re-
ceived the B.A.(Hons.) degree in electrical sciences
and the Ph.D. degree in neural networks from Uni-
versity of Cambridge, Cambridge, U.K., in 1984 and
1991, respectively. Following his PhD, he became a
Lecturer at King’s College London, before moving
to Queen Mary University of London in 2002, where
he subsequently became Professor and Director of
the Centre for Digital Music. He joined the Uni-
versity of Surrey in 2015 as Professor of Signal
Processing, and in 2019 became Head of School of
Computer Science and Electronic Engineering. He is known for his work on
analysis and processing of audio and music, using a wide range of signal
processing techniques, including matrix factorization, sparse representations,
and deep learning. He is a co-editor of a recent book on Computational
Analysis of Sound Scenes and Events, and Co-Chair of the recent DCASE
2018 Workshop on Detection and Classiﬁcations of Acoustic Scenes and
Events. He is a Member of the IEEE Signal Processing Society Technical
Committee on Signal Processing Theory and Methods, and a Fellow of the
IET and IEEE.