4
extraction. LeeNet consists of several one dimensional con-
volutional layers, each followed by a downsampling layer of
size 2. The original LeeNet consists of 11 layers.
3) Adapting one-dimensional CNNs for AudioSet tagging:
We modify LeeNet by extending it to a deeper architecture
with 24 layers, replacing each convolutional layer with a
convolutional block that consists of two convolutional lay-
ers. To further increase the number of layers of the one-
dimensional CNNs, we propose a one-dimensional residual
network (Res1dNet) with a small kernel size of 3. We replace
the convolutional blocks in LeeNet with residual blocks, where
each residual block consists of two convolutional layers with
kernel size 3. The ﬁrst and second convolutional layers of
convolutional block have dilations of 1 and 2, respectively,
to increase the receptive ﬁeld of the corresponding residual
block. Downsampling is applied after each residual block. By
using 14 and 24 residual blocks, we obtain a Res1dNet31 and
a Res1dNet51 with 31 and 51 layers, respectively.
III. W AVEGRAM -CNN SYSTEMS
Previous one-dimensional CNN systems [31][42][15] have
not outperformed the systems trained with log mel spectro-
grams as input. One characteristic of previous time-domain
CNN systems [31][42] is that they were not designed to
capture frequency information, because there is no frequency
axis in the one-dimensional CNN systems, so they can not
capture frequency patterns of a sound event with different pitch
shifts.
A. Wavegram-CNN systems
In this section, we propose architectures which we call
Wavegram-CNN and Wavegram-Logmel-CNN for AudioSet
tagging. The Wavegram-CNN we propose is a time-domain
audio tagging system. Wavegram is a feature we propose
that is similar to log mel spectrogram, but is learnt using
a neural network. A Wavegram is designed to learn a time-
frequency representation that is a modiﬁcation of the Fourier
transform. A Wavegram has a time axis and a frequency axis.
Frequency patterns are important for audio pattern recognition,
for example, sounds with different pitch shifts belong to
the same class. A Wavegram is designed to learn frequency
information that may be lacking in one-dimensional CNN
systems. Wavegrams may also improve over hand-crafted log
mel spectrograms by learning a new kind of time-frequency
transform from data. Wavegrams can then replace log mel
spectrograms as input features resulting in our Wavegram-
CNN system. We also combine the Wavegram and the log mel
spectrogram as a new feature to build the Wavegram-Logmel-
CNN system as shown in Fig. 1.
To build a Wavegram, we ﬁrst apply a one-dimensional
CNN to time-domain waveform. The one-dimensional CNN
begins with a convolutional layer with ﬁlter length 11 and
stride 5 to reduce the size of the input. This immediately
reduces the input lengths by a factor of 5 times to reduce
memory usage. This is followed by three convolutional blocks,
where each convolutional block consists of two convolutional
layers with dilations of 1 and 2, respectively, which are
WaveformConv1D, k=11, s=5Conv1D blockMaxPooling1D, s=4Conv1D blockMaxPooling1D, s=4Conv1D blockMaxPooling1D, s=4Reshape to (N, C, T, F)WavegramLogmelConv2D blockFeature maps2D CNNlayersConcatPredictionFig. 1. Architecture of Wavegram-Logmel-CNN
designed to increase the receptive ﬁeld of the convolutional
layers. Each convolutional block is followed by a downsam-
pling layer with stride 4. By using the stride and downsampling
three times, we downsample a 32 kHz audio recording to
32;000=5=4=4=4 = 100 frames of features per second. We
denote the output size of the one-dimensional CNN layers
asTC, whereTis the number of frames and Cis
the number of channels. We reshape this output to a tensor
with a size of TFC=F by splitting Cchannels into
C=F groups, where each group has Ffrequency bins. We
call this tensor a Wavegram . The Wavegram learns frequency
information by introducing Ffrequency bins in each of C=F
channels. We apply CNN14 described in Section II-A as a
backbone architecture on the extracted Wavegram, so that we
can fairly compare the Wavegram and log mel spectrogram
based systems. Two dimensional CNNs such as CNN14 can
capture time-frequency invariant patterns on the Wavegram,
because kernels are convolved along both time and frequency
axis in a Wavegram.
B. Wavegram-Logmel-CNN
Furthermore, we can combine the Wavegram and log mel
spectrogram into a new representation. In this way, we can
utilize the information from both time-domain waveforms and
log mel spectrograms. The combination is carried out along the
channel dimension. The Wavegram provides extra information
for audio tagging, complementing the log mel spectrogram.
Fig. 1 shows the architecture of the Wavegram-Logmel-CNN.