Recent Advancements in End-to-End Autonomous Driving using Deep Learning: A Survey
Therearespecificmetricsthatevaluateinfractions;each
metrichaspenaltycoefficientsappliedeverytimeaninfrac-
tiontakesplace.Collisionswithpedestrians,collisionswith
other vehicles, collisions with static elements, collisions
layout, red light infractions, stop sign infractions, and off-
roadinfractionsaresomeofthemetricsused[143].Closed-
loopevaluationprovidesdynamictestingadaptabilitywhere
one can provide customized configuration and sensor set-
tings.Thefeedbackloopinitallowsforiterativerefinement,
enabling the system to learn and improve from mistakes
andexperiences.However,severalchallengesareassociated
withclosed-loop.Theseincludethecomplexityoftheinitial
setup and the domain gap, which might require additional
fine-tuning.
11. Datasets and simulator
11.1. Datasets
In End-to-End models, the quality and richness of data
are critical aspects of model training. Instead of using dif-
ferent hyperparameters, the training data is the most crucial
factor influencing the model’s performance. The amount of
information fed into the model determines the kind of out-
comes it produces. We summarized the self-driving dataset
basedontheirsensormodalities,includingcamera,LiDAR,
GNSS, and dynamics. The content of the datasets includes
urbandriving,traffic,anddifferentroadconditions.Weather
conditions also influence the model’s performance. Some
datasets, such as ApolloScape [146], capture all weather
conditions from sunny to snowy. The details are provided
in Table 8.
11.2. Simulators and toolsets
Standard testing of End-to-End driving and learning
pipelines requires advanced software simulators to process
information and make conclusions for their various func-
tionalities. Experimenting with such driving systems is ex-
pensive, and conducting tests on public roads is heavily
restricted. Simulation environments assist in training spe-
cificalgorithms/modulesbeforeroadtesting.Simulatorslike
Carla [109] offer flexibility to simulate the environment
basedonexperimentalrequirements,includingweathercon-
ditions, traffic flow, road agents, etc. Simulators play a
crucial role in generating safety-critical scenarios and con-
tribute to model generalization for detecting and preventing
such scenarios.
Widely used platforms for training End-to-End driv-
ing pipelines are compared in Table 9. MATLAB/Simulink
[147] is used for various settings; it contains efficient plot
functions and has the ability to co-simulate with other soft-
ware,suchasCarSim[148],whichsimplifiesthecreationof
different settings. PreScan [149] can mimic real-world en-
vironments,includingweatherconditions,whichMATLAB
and CarSim lack. It also supports the MATLAB Simulink
interface,makingmodelingmoreeffective.Gazebo[150]is
well-knownforitshighversatilityandeasyconnectionwith
ROS. In contrast to the CARLA and LGSVL [151] simula-
tors,creatingasimulatedenvironmentwithGazeborequiresmechanical effort. CARLA and LGSVL offer high-quality
simulationframeworksthatrequireaGPUprocessingunitto
operateatadecentspeedandframerate.CARLAisbuilton
theUnrealEngine,whileLGSVLisbasedontheUnitygame
engine.TheAPIallowsuserstoaccessvariouscapabilitiesin
CARLAandLGSVL,fromdevelopingcustomizablesensors
to map generation. LGSVL generally links to the driving
stack through various bridges, and CARLA allows built-in
bridge connections via ROS and Autoware.
12. Future research directions
This section will highlight the possible research direc-
tionsthatcandrivefutureadvancementsinthedomainfrom
the perspective of learning principles, safety, explainability,
and others.
12.1. Learning robustness
Current research in End-to-End autonomous driving
mainly focuses on reinforcement learning (Section 6.2)
and imitation learning (Section 6.1) methods. RL trains
agentsbyinteractingwithsimulatedenvironments,whileIL
learns from expert agents without extensive environmental
interaction.However,challengeslikedistributionshiftinIL
and computational instability in RL highlight the need for
further improvements.
12.2. Enhanced safety
Ensuringthebehavioralsafetyofvehiclesandaccurately
predicting uncertain behaviors are key aspects in safety re-
searchasdiscussedinSection8.Aneffectivesystemshould
becapableofhandlingvariousdrivingsituations,contribut-
ing to comfortable and reliable transportation. To facilitate
the widespread adoption of End-to-End approaches, it is
essentialtorefinesafetyconstraintsandenhancetheireffec-
tiveness.
12.3. Advancing model explainability
The lack of interpretability poses a new challenge for
the advancement of End-to-End driving. However, ongoing
efforts(Section9)arebeingmadetoaddressthisissuebyde-
signing and generating interpretable features. These efforts
have shown promising improvements in both performance
and explainability. However, further exploration is required
in global explanation strategies, including designing novel
approaches to explain model actions leading to failures
and suggesting potential solutions. Future research can also
explore ways to improve feedback mechanisms, allowing
users to understand the decision-making process and infuse
confidence in the reliability of End-to-End driving systems.
12.4. Collaboration perception systems
Vehicles can communicate directly utilizing collabora-
tive perception to observe surroundings beyond their line
of sight and field of view. This approach addresses issues
relatedtoocclusionandlimitedreceptivefields.Cooperative
orcollaborativeperceptionenablesvehiclesinthesamearea
to communicate and jointly assess the scene.
P.S. Chib et al. Page 20 of 28