Recent Advancements in End-to-End Autonomous Driving using Deep Learning: A Survey
2.2. Input and output modality of modular
pipeline
The output modality of each module is designed to be
compatible with the input modality of subsequent modules
inthepipelinetoensurethatinformationiscorrectlypropa-
gated through the modular system.
Sensory data: At this level (Fig. 3), the raw data from
the embedded multi-sensor array is retrieved, filtered, and
processedforsemanticmapping.LiDAR,RADAR,Camera,
GPS, and Odometer are some of the sensor inputs to the
perception stack. LiDAR and RADAR are used for depth
analysis, while cameras are employed for detection. The
INU, GPS, and Odometer sensors capture and map the
vehicle’sposition,state,andthecorrespondingenvironment,
which can be further utilized by decision-level stages.
Input to the mapping and localization: Localization
aims to estimate the vehicle’s position at each time stamp.
Utilizing information from the perception module, the ve-
hicle’s position and the environment are mapped based on
parameters such as position, orientation, pose, speed, and
acceleration. Localization techniques [3] allow for the inte-
gration of multiple objectsand the identification of their re-
lationships, resulting in a more comprehensive, augmented,
and enriched representation.
AsshowninFig.4,wedefine 𝑋𝑡asthevehicle’sposition
estimate at time 𝑡, and𝑀as the environment map. These
variables can be estimated using control inputs 𝐶𝑡, which
aretypicallyderivedfromwheelencodersorsensorscapable
ofestimatingthevehicle’sdisplacement.Themeasurements
derivedfromsensorreadingsaredenotedby 𝑆𝑡andareused
to aid in the estimation of the vehicle’s pose.
Figure 4: Visualization of temporal correlations from localiza-
tion that can be used to identify specific behaviors and predict
future positions.
Input to the path planning and decision module: Path
planning is broadly categorized into local and global path
planners. The purpose of the local planner is to execute thegoalssetbytheglobalpathplanner.Itisresponsibleforfind-
ingtrajectoriesthatavoidobstaclesandsatisfyoptimization
requirements within the vehicle’s operational space.
Theproblemoflocaltrajectorypredictioncanbeformu-
lated as estimating the future states ( 𝑡𝑓) of various traffic
actors (𝑅𝑡) in a given scenario based on their current and
past states (𝑡ℎ). The state of traffic actors includes vehicles
or pedestrians with historical trajectories at different time
stamps.
𝐼𝑛𝑝𝑢𝑡 = {𝑅1,𝑅2,𝑅3,𝑅3......,𝑅𝑡ℎ} (1)
where𝑅𝑡contains the coordinates of different traffic
actors at each time stamp 𝑡(up toℎpast time stamps).
𝑅𝑡= {𝑥𝑡
0,𝑦𝑡
0,𝑥𝑡
1,𝑦𝑡
1...𝑥𝑡
𝑛,𝑦𝑡
𝑛} (2)
where𝑛represents all traffic vehicles detected by the ego
vehicle; (𝑥𝑡
𝑖,𝑦𝑡
𝑖) are the coordinates of the vehicle at the 𝑡
timestamp.𝑋istheinputtothepathplanningmodule,and
thevehicletrajectory 𝑌ispredictedfromthemodelatfuture
time stamp𝑡𝑓.
𝑌={𝑅𝑡ℎ+1,𝑅𝑡ℎ+2,𝑅𝑡ℎ+3⋅ ⋅ ⋅𝑅𝑡ℎ+𝑡𝑓}(3)
Input to the control module: Therearetwoprimaryforms
of trajectory command that the controller receives: (i) as a
series of commands ( 𝑇𝑐) and (ii) as a series of states ( 𝑇𝑠).
Controller subsystems that receive a 𝑇𝑠trajectory may be
categorized as path tracking techniques, while those that
receive a𝑇𝑐trajectory can be classified as direct hardware
actuation control methods.
•Direct hardware actuation control methods: The Pro-
portionalIntegralDerivative(PID)[5]controlsystem
is a commonly used hardware actuation technique for
self-driving automobiles. It involves determining a
desired hardware input and an error measure gauging
how much the output deviates from the desired out-
come.
•Path tracking methods: Model Predictive Control
(MPC) [4] is a path-tracking approach that involves
choosing control command inputs that will result
in desirable hardware outputs, then simulating and
optimizing those outputs using the motion model of
the car over a future prediction horizon.
3. End-to-End system architecture
In general, modular systems are referred to as the medi-
ated paradigm and are constructed as a pipeline of discrete
components (Fig. 5) that connect sensory inputs and motor
outputs.Thecoreprocessesofamodularsystemincludeper-
ception,localization,mapping,planning,andvehiclecontrol
[1]. The modular pipeline starts by inputting raw sensory
datatotheperceptionmoduleforobstacledetection[46]and
localizationviathelocalizationmodule[3].Thisisfollowed
P.S. Chib et al. Page 5 of 28