Recent Advancements in End-to-End Autonomous Driving using Deep Learning: A Survey
(a) PlanT agent’s attention
LeftViewFrontViewRightViewObjectDensityMapt0t1t2ReasonsforthefailureInaccurately predict of thevehicle’ s headingInaccurately predict of thebicycle’ s speedFailtodetectthefallenpedestrianahead (b) InterFuser failure explanation
Figure 12: Explainability Methods: (a) PlanT [18] visualization showing the attention given to the agent in various scenarios.
(b) Using InterFuser [8], failure cases can be visualized by integrating three RGB views and a predicted object density map. The
orange boxes indicate objects that pose a collision risk to the ego-vehicle. The object density map offers predictions for the current
traffic scene ( 𝑡0) and future traffic scenes at 1-second ( 𝑡1) and 2-second ( 𝑡2) intervals.
9.1.2. Counterfactual explanation
Saliency approaches focus on answering the ‘where’
question,identifyinginfluentialinputlocationsforthemodel’s
decision.Incontrast,counterfactualexplanationsaddressthe
‘what’ question by seeking small changes in the input that
alterthemodel’sprediction.Counterfactualanalysisaimsto
identifyfeatures 𝑋withintheinput 𝑥thatledtotheoutcome
𝑦=𝑓(𝑥)by creating a new input instance 𝑥′where𝑋is
modified, resulting in a different outcome 𝑦′. The modified
input instance 𝑥′serves as the counterfactual example, and
𝑦′representsthecontrastingclass,suchas‘Whatchangesin
thetrafficscenariowouldcausethevehicletostopmoving?’
It could be a red light.
Since the input space consists of semantic dimensions
and is modifiable, assessing the causality of input compo-
nents is straightforward. Li et al. [125] proposed a causal
inferencetechniqueforidentifyingriskyobjects.Steex[134]
developedacounterfactualmethodthatmodifiesthestyleof
the region to explain the visual model. The semantic input
provides a high-level object representation, making it more
interpretable compared to pixel-level representations.
Bansal et al. [135] explore the underlying causes of
particular outcomes by examining the ChauffeurNet model
using manually crafted inputs that involve omitting particu-
lar objects.
In End-to-End driving, the steering, throttle, and brake
drivingoutputscanbecomplementedwithauxiliaryoutputs
suchastheoccupancyandinterpretablesemanticstodemon-
strate a specific degree of counterfactual understandability.
Chitta et al. [7] introduce an auxiliary output (semantics
map)thatemploystheA*plannertoaddressacounterfactual
inquiry of “What is the possibility of a collision without
braking".Shaoetal.[8]designedasystem,asshowninFig.
12(b),whichinferscounterfactualreasoningforthepotential
failureswiththeassistanceofanintermediateobjectdensity
map.Sadatetal.[90]generateaprobabilisticsemanticoccu-
pancymapoverspaceandtime,capturingthepositionsofdi-
verseroadagents.Occupancymapsprovideacounterfactual
explanation as they act as an intermediary representation tothemotionplanningsystem,higheroccupancyprobabilities
willdiscouragesthemaneuverswhileloweroccupancywill
encourage them.
9.2. Global explanations
Global explanations aim to provide an overall under-
standing of a model’s behavior by describing the knowl-
edge it possesses. They are classified into model translation
(9.2.1)andrepresentationexplanationtechniques(9.2.2)for
analyzing global explanations.
9.2.1. Model translation
The objective of model translation is to transfer the
informationfromtheoriginalmodeltoadifferentmodelthat
isinherentlyinterpretable.Thisinvolvestraininganexplain-
able model to mimic the input-output relationship. Recent
studies have explored translating deep learning models into
decision trees [136], rule-based models [137], or causal
models[138].However,onelimitationofthisapproachisthe
potential discrepancies between the interpretable translated
model and the original self-driving model.
9.2.2. Explaining representations
Explaining representations aims to explain the informa-
tion captured by the model’s structures at various scales.
Zhang et al. [139] and Bau et al. [140] make efforts to gain
insights into what the neurons capture. The activation of a
neuron can be understood by examining input patterns that
maximizeitsactivity.Forexample,onecansampletheinput
using gradient ascent [141] or generative networks [142].
Tian et al. [120] employ the concept of neuron coverage to
identifyfalseactionsthatcouldpotentiallyleadtofatalities.
They partition the input space based on neuron coverage,
assuming that inputs with the same neuron coverage will
result in the same model decision. Their objective is to
increase neuron coverage through transformations such as
linear changes in image intensity and affine transformations
like rotation and convolution.
P.S. Chib et al. Page 18 of 28