Recent Advancements in End-to-End Autonomous Driving using Deep Learning: A Survey
(a) Roach Expert Supervision
 (b) Human Copilot Learning
Figure 9: RL-based learning method for training the agent to drive optimally: (a) Illustrating the reinforcement learning expert
[54] that maps the BEV to the low-level driving actions; the expert can also provide supervision to the imitation learning agent.
(b) Human-in-the-loop learning [55] allows the agent to explore the environment, and in danger scenarios, the human expert
takes over the control and provides the safe demonstration.
learning encompasses various models, including value-
basedmodelssuchasDeepQ-Networks(DQN)[95],actor-
criticbasedmodelslikeDeepDeterministicPolicyGradient
(DDPG) and Asynchronous Advantage Actor Critic (A3C)
[95], maximum entropy models [92] such as Soft Actor
Critic (SAC) [96], and policy-based optimization methods
such as Trust Region Policy Optimization (TRPO) and
Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) [97].
Liang et al. [98] demonstrated the first effective RL ap-
proachforvision-baseddrivingpipelinesthatoutperformed
the modular pipeline at the time. Their method is based
on the Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient (DDPG), an
extended version of the actor-critic algorithm. Chen et al.
[99] uses tabular-RL to first learn an expert policy and
then uses policy distillation to learn a student policy in an
imitation learning approach.
Recently,Human-In-The-Loop(HITL)approaches[100,
55, 56, 54, 14] have gained attention in the literature. These
approachesarebasedonthepremisethatexpertdemonstra-
tions provide valuable guidance for achieving high-reward
policies. Several studies have focused on incorporating hu-
man expertise into the training process of traditional RL or
ILparadigms.OnesuchexampleisEGPO[56],whichaims
to develop an expert-guided policy optimization technique
where an expert policy supervises the learning agent.
HACO [55] allows the agent to explore hazardous en-
vironments while ensuring training safety. In this approach,
a human expert can intervene and guide the agent to avoid
potentially harmful situations or irrelevant actions (see Fig.
9(b)). Another reinforcement learning expert, Roach [54],
translates bird’s-eye view images into continuous low-level
actions (see Fig. 9(a)). Experts can provide high-level su-
pervisionforimitationlearningorreinforcementlearningin
general.Policiescanbeinitiallytaughtusingimitationlearn-
ing and then refined using reinforcement learning, which
helps reduce the extensive training period required for RL.
Jia et al. [19] utilize features extracted from Roach to learn
the ground-truth action/trajectory, providing supervision in
their study. Therefore, reinforcement learning provides a
solution to address the challenges of imitation learning by
enabling agents to actively explore and learn from theirenvironment. There are also associated challenges, such
as sample inefficiency, exploration difficulties leading to
suboptimal behaviors, and difficulties generalizing learned
policies to new scenarios.
7. Learning domain adaptation from
simulator to real
Large-scale virtual scenarios can be constructed in vir-
tual engines, enabling the collection of a significant quan-
tity of data more readily. However, there still exist signifi-
cantdomaindisparitiesbetweenvirtualandreal-worlddata,
which posechallenges increating andimplementing virtual
datasets. By leveraging the principle of domain adaptation,
we can extract critical features directly from the simulator
and transfer the knowledge learned from the source domain
to the target domain, consisting of accurate real-world data.
The H-Divergence framework [101] resolves the do-
main gap at both the visual and instance levels by ad-
versarially learning a domain classifier and a detector si-
multaneously. Zhang et al. [102] propose a simulator-real
interaction strategy that leverages disparities between the
source domain and the target domain. The authors create
two components to align differences at the global and local
levels and ensure overall consistency between them. The
realistic-lookingsyntheticimagesmaysubsequentlybeused
to train an End-to-End model. A number of techniques rely
on an open pipeline that introduces obstacles in the current
environment. PlaceNet [103] places objects into the image
space for detection and segmentation operations. GeoSim
[104]isageometry-awareapproachthatdynamicallyinserts
objects using LiDAR and HD maps. DummyNet [105] is
a pedestrian augmentation framework based on a GAN
architecture that takes the background image as input and
inserts pedestrians with consistent alignment. Some works
takeadvantageofvirtualLiDARdata[106,107,108].Sallab
etal.[106]performlearningonvirtualLiDARpointclouds
fromCARLA[109]andutilizeCycleGANtotransferstyles
fromthevirtualdomaintotherealKITTI[110]dataset.Fang
et al. [107] propose a LiDAR simulator that
P.S. Chib et al. Page 11 of 28