Recent Advancements in End-to-End Autonomous Driving using Deep
Learning: A Survey
Pranav Singh Chiba, Pravendra Singha,∗
aDepartment of Computer Science and Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee, Uttarakhand, India
ARTICLE INFO
Keywords :
Autonomous Driving
End-to-End Driving
Deep Learning
Deep Neural NetworkABSTRACT
End-to-Enddrivingisapromisingparadigmasitcircumventsthedrawbacksassociatedwithmodular
systems, such as their overwhelming complexity and propensity for error propagation. Autonomous
drivingtranscendsconventionaltrafficpatternsbyproactivelyrecognizingcriticaleventsinadvance,
ensuringpassengerssafetyandprovidingthemwithcomfortabletransportation,particularlyinhighly
stochastic and variable traffic settings. This paper presents a comprehensive review of the End-to-
End autonomous driving stack. It provides a taxonomy of automated driving tasks wherein neural
networks have been employed in an End-to-End manner, encompassing the entire driving process
from perception to control. Recent developments in End-to-End autonomous driving are analyzed,
and research is categorized based on underlying principles, methodologies, and core functionality.
These categories encompass sensorial input, main and auxiliary output, learning approaches ranging
fromimitationtoreinforcementlearning,andmodelevaluationtechniques.Thesurveyincorporatesa
detailed discussion of the explainability and safety aspects. Furthermore, it assesses the state-of-the-
art, identifies challenges, and explores future possibilities. We maintain the latest advancements and
their corresponding open-source implementations at this link.
1. Introduction
Autonomous driving refers to the capability of a vehi-
cle to drive partly or entirely without human intervention.
The modular architecture [1, 2, 3, 4, 5] is a widely used
approachinautonomousdrivingsystems,whichdividesthe
driving pipeline into discrete sub-tasks. This architecture
relies on individual sensors and algorithms to process data
andgeneratecontroloutputs.Itencompassesinterconnected
modules,includingperception,planning,andcontrol.How-
ever, the modular architecture has certain drawbacks that
impede further advancements in autonomous driving (AD).
One significant limitation is its susceptibility to error prop-
agation. For instance, errors in the perception module of a
self-drivingvehicle,suchasmisclassification,canpropagate
to subsequent planning and control modules, potentially
leading to unsafe behaviors. Additionally, the complexity
ofmanaginginterconnectedmodulesandthecomputational
inefficiencyofprocessingdataateachstageposeadditional
challengesassociatedwiththemodularapproach.Toaddress
these shortcomings, an alternative approach called End-to-
End driving [6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11] has emerged. This approach
aimstoovercomethelimitationsofthemodulararchitecture.
The End-to-End approach streamlines the system, im-
proving efficiency and robustness by directly mapping sen-
sory input to control outputs. The benefits of End-to-End
autonomous driving have garnered significant attention in
the research community as shown in Fig. 1. Firstly, End-
to-End driving addresses the issue of error propagation,
as it involves a single learning task pipeline [12, 13] that
∗Corresponding author: Pravendra Singh
pravendra.singh@cs.iitr.ac.in (P. Singh)
ORCID(s):0000-0003-4930-3937 (P.S. Chib); 0000-0003-1001-2219 (P.
Singh)
Figure 1: The number of articles in the Web of Science
database containing the keywords ‘End-to-End’ and ‘Au-
tonomous Driving’ from 2014 to 2022 illustrates the increasing
trend in the research community.
learns task-specific features, thereby reducing the likeli-
hood of error propagation. Secondly, End-to-End driving
offers computational advantages. Modular pipelines often
entail redundant computations, as each module is trained
for task-specific outputs [4, 5]. This results in unnecessary
and prolonged computation. In contrast, End-to-End driv-
ing focuses on the specific task of generating the control
signal,reducingtheneedforunnecessarycomputationsand
streamlining the overall process. End-to-End models were
previously regarded as “black boxes", lacking transparency.
However,recentmethodologieshaveimprovedinterpretabil-
ity in End-to-End models by generating auxiliary outputs
[7, 13], attention maps [14, 15, 16, 9, 17, 18], and in-
terpretable maps [18, 19, 8, 20, 12, 21]. This enhanced
interpretability provides insights into the root causes of
P.S. Chib et al. Page 1 of 28arXiv:2307.04370v2  [cs.RO]  19 Sep 2023