Recent Advancements in End-to-End Autonomous Driving using Deep Learning: A Survey
Thesedemonstrationstrainthesystemtomimictheexpert’s
behavior in various driving scenarios. Large-scale expert
drivingdatasetsarereadilyavailable,whichcanbeleveraged
by imitation learning [62] to train models that perform at
human-like standards.
The main objective is to train a policy 𝜋𝜃(𝑠)that maps
eachgivenstatetoacorrespondingaction(Fig.7)asclosely
as possible to the given expert policy 𝜋∗, given an expert
dataset with state action pair (𝑠,𝑎):
arg min
𝜃𝐸𝑠∼𝑃(𝑠∣𝜃)𝐿(𝜋∗(𝑠),𝜋𝜃(𝑠)) (4)
where𝑃(𝑠∣𝜃)represents the state distribution of the
trained policy 𝜋𝜃.
BehaviouralCloning(BC),DirectPolicyLearning(DPL),
andInverseReinforcementLearning(IRL)areextensionsof
imitation learning in the domain of autonomous driving.
6.1.1. Behavioural cloning
Behavioural cloning [87, 7, 13, 12, 49, 23, 88] is the
supervised imitation learning task where the goal is to treat
each state-action combination in expert distribution as an
IndependentandIdenticallyDistributed(I.I.D)exampleand
minimise imitation loss for the trained policy:
arg min
𝜃𝐸(𝑠,𝑎∗)∼𝑃∗𝐿(𝑎∗,𝜋𝜃(𝑠)) (5)
where𝑝∗(𝑠∣𝜋∗)is an expert policy state distribution,
and (state s, action 𝑎∗) is provided by expert policy 𝑝∗.
Figure 8: Behaviorcloning[49]isaperception-to-actiondriving
model that learns behavior reflex for various driving scenarios.
The agent acquires the ability to integrate expert policies in a
context-dependent and task-optimized manner, allowing it to
drive confidently.
Prakashetal.[14],Chittaetal.[7],NEAT[12],Ohnetal.
[49]utilizeapolicythatmapsinputframestolow-levelcon-
trolsignalsintermsofwaypoints.Thesewaypointsarethen
fedintoaPIDtoobtainthesteering,throttle,andbrakecom-
mands based on the predicted waypoints. Behavior cloning
[49]assumesthattheexpert’sactionscanbefullyexplained
byobservation,asittrainsamodeltodirectlymapfrominputto output based on the training dataset (Fig. 8). However,
this leads to the distribution shift problem, where the actual
observations diverge from the training observations. Many
latentvariablesimpactandgoverndrivingagent’sactionsin
real-world scenarios. Therefore, it is essential to learn these
variables effectively.
6.1.2. Direct policy learning
Within the context of BC, which maps sensor inputs to
control commands and is limited by the training dataset,
DLPaimstolearnanoptimalpolicy[48]directlythatmaps
inputstodrivingactions.TheDLPalgorithmobtainsexpert
evaluations[56]duringruntimetogathermoretrainingdata,
particularlyforscenarioswheretheinitialpolicyfallsshort.
It combines an expert dataset with Imitation Learning for
initial training and iteratively augments the dataset with
additional trajectories collected by the trained policy. The
agent can explore its surroundings and discover novel and
efficient driving policies.
The online imitation learning algorithm DAGGER [89]
provides robustness against cascading errors and accumu-
lates additional training instances. Chen et al. [10] intro-
duced automated dagger-like monitoring, where the privi-
leged agent’s supervision is collected through online learn-
ing and transformed into an agent that provides on-policy
supervision. However, the main drawback of direct policy
learning is the continuous need for expert access during the
training process, which is both costly and inefficient.
6.1.3. Inverse reinforcement learning
Inverse Reinforcement Learning (IRL) [90, 48] aims to
deduce the underlying specific behaviours through the re-
wardfunction.Expertdemonstrations 𝐷={𝜁1,𝜁2,𝜁3,......,𝜁𝑛}
are fed into IRL. Each 𝜁𝑖={(𝑠1,𝑎2),(𝑠2,𝑎2),.....(𝑠𝑛,𝑎𝑛)}
consists of a state-action pair. The principal goal is to
get the underlying reward which can be used to repli-
cate the expert behaviour. Feature-based IRL [91] teaches
the different driving styles in the highway scenario. The
human-providedexamplesareusedtolearndifferentreward
functions and capabilities of interaction with road users.
MaximumEntropy(MaxEnt)inversereinforcementlearning
[92] is an extension of the feature-based IRL based on
the principle of maximum entropy. This paradigm robustly
addresses reward ambiguity and handles sub-optimization.
The major drawback is that IRL algorithms are expensive
to run. They are also computationally demanding, unstable
duringtraining,andmaytakelongertoconvergeonsmaller
datasets.
6.2. Reinforcement learning
Reinforcement Learning (RL) [93, 57, 56, 53] is a
promising approach to address the distribution shift prob-
lem.Itaimstomaximizecumulativerewards[94]overtime
byinteractingwiththeenvironment,andthenetworkmakes
drivingdecisionstoobtainrewardsorpenaltiesbasedonits
actions. IL cannot handle novel situations significantly dif-
ferentfromthetrainingdataset,RLisrobusttothisissueasit
explores scenario under given environment. Reinforcement
P.S. Chib et al. Page 10 of 28