Recent Advancements in End-to-End Autonomous Driving using Deep Learning: A Survey
Figure 3: The perception module receives and processes various raw sensor inputs, which are then utilized by the localization and
mapping module.
2.1. Components of modular pipeline
Preception: The perception module seeks to achieve a
better understanding [32] of the scene. It is built on top
of algorithms such as object detection and lane detection.
The perception module is responsible for sensor fusion,
information extraction, and acts as a mediator between the
low-level sensor input and the high-level decision module.
Itfusesheterogeneoussensorstocaptureandgeneralizethe
environment. The primary tasks of the perception module
include: (i) Object detection (ii) Object tracking (iii) Road
and lane detection
Localization and mapping: Localization is the next im-
portantmodule,whichisresponsiblefordeterminingthepo-
sition of the ego vehicle and the corresponding road agents
[35]. It is crucial for accurately positioning the vehicle and
enablingsafemaneuversindiversetrafficscenarios.Theend
productofthelocalizationmoduleisanaccuratemap.Some
of the localization techniques include High Definition map
(HD map) and Simultaneous Localization And Mapping
(SLAM), which serve as the online map and localize the
trafficagentsatdifferenttimestamps.Thelocalizationmap-
ping can further be utilized for driving policy and control
commands.Planning and driving policy: The planning and driving
policy module [36] is responsible for computing a motion-
level command that determines the control signal based on
the localization map provided by the previous module. It
predicts the optimal future trajectory [37] based on past
traffic patterns. The categorization of trajectory prediction
techniques (Table 1) is as follows:
•Physics-based methods: These methods are suitable
forvehiclemotionthatcanbeaccuratelycharacterized
bykinematicsordynamicsmodels.Theycansimulate
variousscenariosquicklywithminimalcomputational
cost.
•Classic machine learning-based methods: Compared
tophysics-basedapproaches,thisclassofmethodscan
considermorevariables,providereasonableaccuracy,
and have a longer forecasting span, but at a higher
computing cost. Most of these techniques use histori-
cal motion data to estimate future trajectories.
•Deep learning-based methods: Deep learning algo-
rithms are capable of reliable prediction over a wider
range of prediction horizons. In contrast, standard
trajectory prediction methods are only suited for ba-
sic scenes and short-term prediction. Deep learning-
based systems can make precise predictions across a
P.S. Chib et al. Page 3 of 28