Recent Advancements in End-to-End Autonomous Driving using Deep Learning: A Survey
Figure 5: Comparison between End-to-End and modular pipelines. End-to-End is a single pipeline that generates the control signal
directly from perception input, whereas a modular pipeline consists of various sub-modules, each with task-specific functionalities.
byplanningandprediction[44]todeterminetheoptimaland
safe trajectory for the vehicle. Finally, the motor controller
generates commands for safe maneuvering.
Ontheotherhand,directperceptionorEnd-to-Enddriv-
ing directly generates ego-motion from the sensory input.
It optimizes the driving pipeline (Fig. 5) by bypassing the
sub-tasks related to perception and planning, allowing for
continuouslearningtosenseandact,similartohumans.The
first attempt at End-to-End driving was made by Pomerleau
Alvinn [47], which trained a 3-layer sensorimotor fully
connectednetworktooutputthecar’sdirection.End-to-End
drivinggeneratesego-motionbasedonsensoryinput,which
can be of various modalities. However, the prominent ones
are the camera [48, 49, 50], Light Detection and Ranging
(LiDAR) [6, 10, 7], navigation commands [51, 49, 23],
and vehicle dynamics, such as speed [52, 53, 50]. This
sensory information is utilized as the input to the backbone
model, which is responsible for generating control signals.
Ego-motion can involve different types of motions, such as
acceleration, turning, steering, and pedaling. Additionally,
many models also output additional information, such as a
costmapforsafemaneuvers,interpretableoutputs,andother
auxiliary outputs.There are two main approaches for End-to-End driving:
either the driving model is explored and improved via Re-
inforcement Learning (RL) [54, 53, 55, 56, 21, 57], or it is
trainedinasupervisedmannerusingImitationLearning(IL)
[18,6,19,15,17,58,7]toresemblehumandrivingbehavior.
The supervised learning paradigm aims to learn the driving
style from expert demonstrations, which serve as training
examplesforthemodel.However,expandinganautonomous
driving system based on IL [23] is challenging since it is
impossibletocovereveryinstanceduringthelearningphase.
On the other hand, RL works by maximizing cumulative
rewards [59, 55] over time through interaction with the
environment, and the network makes driving decisions to
obtain rewards or penalties based on its actions. While RL
model training occurs online and allows exploration of the
environment during training, it is less effective in utilizing
data compared to imitation learning. Table 3 summarizes
recent methods in End-to-End driving.
4. Input modalities in End-to-End system
The following section explores the input modalities es-
sential for end-to-end autonomous driving. These encom-
passcamerasforvisualinsights,LiDARforprecise3Dpoint
P.S. Chib et al. Page 6 of 28