Recent Advancements in End-to-End Autonomous Driving using Deep Learning: A Survey
Figure 2: The charts illustrate statistics of the papers included in this survey according to learning approaches (section 6),
environment being utilized for training (sections 10, 11), input modality (section 4), and output modality (section 5).
errors and model decision-making. Furthermore, End-to-
End driving demonstrates resilience to adversarial attacks.
Adversarial attacks [22] involve manipulating sensor inputs
to deceive or confuse autonomous driving systems. In End-
to-End models, it is challenging to identify and manipulate
the specific driving behavior triggers as it is unknown what
causes specific driving patterns. Lastly, End-to-End driv-
ing offers ease of training. Modular pipelines require sep-
arate training and optimization of each task-driven module,
necessitating domain-specific knowledge and expertise. In
contrast,End-to-Endmodelscanlearnrelevantfeaturesand
patterns[23,24]directlyfromrawsensordata,reducingthe
need for extensive engineering and expertise.
Related Surveys :Anumberofrelatedsurveysareavail-
able, though their emphasis differs from ours. The author
Yurtsever et al. [25] covers the autonomous driving domain
withaprimaryemphasisonthemodularmethodology.Sev-
eralpastsurveyscenteraroundspecificlearningtechniques,
such as imitation learning [26] and reinforcement learning
[27]. A few end-to-end surveys, including the work by
Tampuuet al.[28], provideanarchitectural overviewofthe
complete end-to-end driving pipeline. Recently, Chen et al.
[29] discuss the methodology and challenges in end-to-end
autonomous driving in their survey. Our focus, however, is
on the latest advancements, including modalities, learning
principles, safety, explainability, and evaluation (see Ta-
ble 3).
Motivation and Contributions : The End-to-End ar-
chitectures have significantly enhanced autonomous driv-
ing systems. As elaborated earlier, these architectures have
overcomethelimitationsofmodularapproaches.Motivated
by these developments, we present a survey on recent ad-
vancements in End-to-End autonomous driving. The key
contributions of this paper are threefold. First, this survey
exclusively explores End-to-End autonomous driving using
deep learning. We provide a comprehensive analysis of
theunderlyingprinciples,methodologies,andfunctionality,delving into the latest state-of-the-art advancements in this
domain.Second,wepresentadetailedinvestigationinterms
ofmodality,learning,safety,explainability,andresults,and
provideaquantitativesummaryinTable3.Third,wepresent
an evaluation framework based on both open and closed-
loopassessmentsandcompileasummarizedlistofavailable
datasets and simulators.
Paper Organization : The survey is organized as per
the underlying principles and methodologies (see Fig. 2).
We present the background of modular systems in Sec-
tion 2. Section 3 provides an overview of the End-to-End
autonomous driving pipeline architecture. This is followed
by sections 4 and 5, which discuss the input and output
modalitiesoftheEnd-to-Endsystem.Section6comprehen-
sively covers End-to-End learning methods, from imitation
learning to reinforcement learning. The domain adaptation
is explained in section 7. Next, we explore the safety aspect
of End-to-End approaches in section 8. The importance of
explainability and interpretability is discussed in section 9.
The evaluation of the End-to-End system consists of open
and closed-loop evaluations, which are discussed in section
10. The relevant datasets and the simulator are presented in
section 11. Finally, sections 12 and 13 provide the future
research direction and conclusion, respectively.
2. Modular system architecture
Themodularpipeline[30,31,32,2,3,33,34]beginsby
inputting the raw sensory data into the perception module
for obstacle detection and localization via the localization
module,followedbyplanningandpredictionfortheoptimal
and safe trajectory of the vehicle. Finally, the motor con-
troller outputs the control signals. The standard modules of
the modular driving pipeline are listed below:
P.S. Chib et al. Page 2 of 28