POPQORN: Quantifying Robustness of Recurrent Neural Networks
Ching-Yun Ko* 1Zhaoyang Lyu* 2Tsui-Wei Weng3Luca Daniel3Ngai Wong1Dahua Lin2
Abstract
The vulnerability to adversarial attacks has been
a critical issue for deep neural networks. Address-
ing this issue requires a reliable way to evaluate
the robustness of a network. Recently, several
methods have been developed to compute robust-
ness quantiﬁcation for neural networks, namely,
certiﬁed lower bounds of the minimum adversar-
ial perturbation. Such methods, however, were
devised for feed-forward networks, e.g. multi-
layer perceptron or convolutional networks. It re-
mains an open problem to quantify robustness for
recurrent networks, especially LSTM and GRU.
For such networks, there exist additional chal-
lenges in computing the robustness quantiﬁca-
tion, such as handling the inputs at multiple steps
and the interaction between gates and states. In
this work, we propose POPQORN (Propagated-
outputQuantiﬁed R obustness for RNNs), a gen-
eral algorithm to quantify robustness of RNNs,
including vanilla RNNs, LSTMs, and GRUs. We
demonstrate its effectiveness on different network
architectures and show that the robustness quan-
tiﬁcation on individual steps can lead to new in-
sights.
1. Introduction
Deep learning has led to remarkable performance gains on
a number of tasks, i.e.image classiﬁcation, speech recogni-
tion, and language processing. Nevertheless, recent litera-
ture has demonstrated that adversarial examples broadly ex-
ist for deep neural networks in these applications (Szegedy
et al., 2014; Kurakin et al., 2017; Jia & Liang, 2017; Car-
*Equal contribution1The University of Hong
Kong, Hong Kong2The Chinese University of Hong
Kong, Hong Kong3Massachusetts Institute of Technol-
ogy, Cambridge, MA, USA. Source code is available
athttps://github.com/ZhaoyangLyu/POPQORN .
Correspondence to: Ching-Yun Ko <cyko@eee.hku.hk >,
Zhaoyang Lyu <lyuzhaoyang@link.cuhk.edu.hk >.
Proceedings of the 36thInternational Conference on Machine
Learning , Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).lini & Wagner, 2018). A small perturbation that humans
are mostly immune to can be crafted to mislead a neural
network’s predictions. As deep neural networks have been
widely employed in many safety-critical applications (Sharif
et al., 2016; Kurakin et al., 2017; Eykholt et al., 2018), it is
crucial to know when such models will fail and what can be
done to make them more robust to the adversarial attacks.
Studies on the robustness of neural networks mainly fall in
two categories: (1) Attack-based approaches – researchers
try to design strong adversarial attack algorithms to attack
deep neural networks and the robustness is measured by
the distortion between successful adversarial examples and
the original ones. (2) Veriﬁcation-based approaches (Katz
et al., 2017; Cheng et al., 2017), which aim to ﬁnd the mini-
mum distortion of neural networks or its lower bounds that
areagnostic to attack methods . Existing veriﬁcation-based
methods were mainly devised for feed-forward networks,
such as multi-layer perceptron. Robustness veriﬁcation for
recurrent neural networks (RNNs), which have been widely
used in speech recognition and natural language processing,
has not been systematically investigated.
To verify the robustness of RNNs, we face several new
challenges: (1) Some popular RNN formulations, including
LSTM and GRU, involve hidden states that are indirectly
determined by three to four gates. These nonlinear gates
are tightly coupled together, which we refer to as cross-
nonlinearity . This substantially complicates the veriﬁcation
of robustness. (2) RNNs are widely adopted for applica-
tions with sequential inputs, e.g.sentences or time series.
However, previous veriﬁcation methods typically assume
that the inputs were fed into the network at the bottom layer.
Hence, they are not directly applicable here. (3) For ap-
plications with sequential inputs, imperceptible adversarial
examples may correspond to texts with least number of
changed words (Gao et al., 2018). Thus it is critical to evalu-
ate the hardness of manipulating one single word (one input
frame) instead of all words.
In this paper, we tackle the aforementioned problems by
proposing an effective robustness quantiﬁcation frame-
work called POPQORN ( Propagated- outputQuantiﬁed
Robustness for RNNs) for RNNs. We bound the non-
linear activation function using linear functions. Starting
from the output layer, linear bounds are propagated back to