Dataset Images Boxes Categories Boxes/img Fully Annotated
Pascal VOC 11.5k 27k 20 2.4 Yes
ImageNet All 477k 534k 200 1.1 Yes
ImageNet Dense 80k 186k 200 2.3 Yes
COCO 123k 896k 80 7.3 Yes
OpenImages 1,515k 14,815k 600 9.8 Partial
Objects365 638k 10,101k 365 15.8 Yes
Table 1. Comparison of the dataset statistics with existing object detection benchmarks. The table includes statistics for training and
validation sets.
Super-category 
Tagging
Animal
Kitchen
Clothes......
¬Bounding Boxes
Annotation ¬
Label Bounding BoxesFiltering
Pick
Discard
Figure 2. Our annotation pipeline for Objects365.
3.2.1 Annotation Pipeline
It is almost impossible for an annotator to remember and
annotate all 365 categories. Also, a small number of im-
ages should be rejected due to the iconic images or the im-
ages without 365 object categories. Motivated by existing
datasets like ImageNet [5] and COCO [24] as well as the
discussion of scalable multi-class annotation in [6], we de-
sign our annotation pipeline as the following three steps.
The ﬁrst step performs a two-class classiﬁcation. If the im-
age is non-iconic or contains at least one object instance
in the eleven super-categories, it will be passed to the next
step. In the second step, the image-level tags with the eleven
super-categories will be labeled. An image may be labeled
with more than one tag. In the third step, one annotator
will be assigned to label the object instances in one spe-
ciﬁc super-category. All object instances belonging to the
super-category should be labeled with a bounding box to-
gether with an object name. An illustration of our annota-
tion pipeline is in Figure 2.
Based on the proposed annotation pipeline, each anno-
tator only needs to be familiar with the object categories
in one super-category rather than all 365 object categories.
This will not only improve annotation efﬁciency but also
boost annotation quality.
3.2.2 Annotation Team
We divide all the team members (hired as vendors) into
three groups: annotators, inspectors, examiners. All the im-
ages are ﬁrst annotated by the annotators, and then checked
1https://www.flickr.com/
2https://www.objects365.orgby the inspectors. By accumulating around 100 labeled (and
checked) images as a job, we involve the examiner to fur-
ther review the quality of the annotation. The job will be
rejected if any of the steps exists annotation error.
Annotator The annotators need to perform the annota-
tion which involves all three steps in the annotation pipeline
shown in Figure 2. Each annotator will be assigned one and
only one annotation task. Before starting the annotation,
they should take a course and pass an examination to be
qualiﬁed for the annotation.
Inspector The work of inspector is to examine all the an-
notated images labeled by the annotators. If an annotation
error is found in one image, the image will be rejected and
annotated again by the same annotator. This reﬁning step
can greatly prevent the annotator from making the same
mistakes in the following annotation process.
Examiner Examiners are usually geographically isolated
from the annotators and inspectors to make a fair judgment.
The job, which usually contains around 100 images veriﬁed
by the inspectors, will be reviewed again by the examiner.
If an annotation error is found in one image, the whole job
which includes the mislabeled image will be rejected. The
rejection rate of the jobs is one of the key factors to deter-
mine the income for the annotators and inspectors.
3.2.3 Annotation Process Consistency
Due to the large scale of the dataset, there will be a lot of
annotators involved in this project. Without consistent deﬁ-
nition and rules for the annotation, the labeling for the same
image will provide different annotation results. To reduce
the ambiguities during the annotation process, we deﬁne a
number of rules. Two important rules are: classiﬁcation rule
and bounding-box rule.
Classiﬁcation Rule It deﬁnes a clear priority order with
function -ﬁrst principle for the ambiguity case in labeling.
For instance, in the left Figure 3, the object can be consid-
ered as either “tap” or “teapot”. Based on our classiﬁcation
rule, we use the function-ﬁrst principle and the object will
be labeled as “tap” in this case.
8432