Entropy 2021 ,23, 18 2 of 45
produce explainable results—with common examples, including linear [ 11] and decision-
tree based [12] models. Although more explainable and interpretable, the latter models
are not as powerful and they fail achieve state-of-the-art performance when compared
to the former. Both their poor performance and the ability to be well-interpreted and
easily-explained come down to the same reason: their frugal design.
Systems whose decisions cannot be well-interpreted are difﬁcult to be trusted, espe-
cially in sectors, such as healthcare or self-driving cars, where also moral and fairness issues
have naturally arisen. This need for trustworthy, fair, robust, high performing models for
real-world applications led to the revival of the ﬁeld of eXplainable Artiﬁcial Intelligence
(XAI) [ 13]—a ﬁeld focused on the understanding and interpretation of the behaviour of
AI systems, which. in the years prior to its revival, had lost the attention of the scientiﬁc
community, as most research focused on the predictive power of algorithms rather than the
understanding behind these predictions. The popularity of the search term “Explainable
AI” throughout the years, as measured by Google Trends, is illustrated in Figure 1. The
noticeable spike in recent years, indicating the of rejuvenation of the ﬁeld, is also reﬂected
in the increased research output of the same period.
Figure 1. Google Trends Popularity Index (Max value is 100) of the term “Explainable AI” over the last ten years (2011–2020).
The Contribution of this Survey
As the demand for more explainable machine learning models with interpretable
predictions rises, so does the need for methods that can help to achieve these goals. This
survey will focus on providing an extensive and in-depth identiﬁcation, analysis, and
comparison of machine learning interpretability methods. The end goal of the survey is
to serve as a reference point for both theorists and practitioners not only by providing a
taxonomy of the existing methods, but also by scoping the best use cases for each of the
methods and also providing links to their programming implementations–the latter being
found in the Appendix A section.
2. Fundamental Concepts and Background
2.1. Explainability and Interpretability
The terms interpretability and explainability are usually used by researchers inter-
changeably; however, while these terms are very closely related, some works identify
their differences and distinguish these two concepts. There is not a concrete mathematical
deﬁnition for interpretability or explainability, nor have they been measured by some
metric; however, a number of attempts have been made [ 14–16] in order to clarify not
only these two terms, but also related concepts such as comprehensibility. However, all
these deﬁnitions lack mathematical formality and rigorousness [ 17]. One of the most
popular deﬁnitions of interpretability is the one of Doshi-Velez and Kim, who, in their
work [ 15], deﬁne it as “the ability to explain or to present in understandable terms to a
human”. Another popular deﬁnition came from Miller in his work [ 18], where he deﬁnes
interpretability as “the degree to which a human can understand the cause of a decision”.
Although intuitive, these deﬁnitions lack mathematical formality and rigorousness [17].
Based on the above, interpretability is mostly connected with the intuition behind
the outputs of a model [ 17]; with the idea being that the more interpretable a machine
learning system is, the easier it is to identify cause-and-effect relationships within the