Entropy 2021 ,23, 18 3 of 45
system’s inputs and outputs. For example, in image recognition tasks, part of the reason
that led a system to decide that a speciﬁc object is part of an image (output) could be certain
dominant patterns in the image (input). Explainability, on the other hand, is associated
with the internal logic and mechanics that are inside a machine learning system. The
more explainable a model, the deeper the understanding that humans achieve in terms of
the internal procedures that take place while the model is training or making decisions.
An interpretable model does not necessarily translate to one that humans are able to
understand the internal logic of or its underlying processes. Therefore, regarding machine
learning systems, interpretability does not axiomatically entail explainability, or vice versa.
As a result, Gilpin et al. [ 16] supported that interpretability alone is insufﬁcient and that
the presence of explainability is also of fundamental importance. Mostly aligned with the
work of Doshi-Velez and Kim [15] , this study considers interpretability to be a broader
term than explainability.
2.2. Evaluation of Machine Learning Interpretability
Doshi-Velez and Kim [ 15] proposed the following classiﬁcation of evaluation methods
for interpretability: application-grounded, human-grounded, and functionally-grounded,
subsequently discussing the potential trade-offs among them. Application-grounded eval-
uation concerns itself with how the results of the interpretation process affect the human,
domain expert, end-user in terms of a speciﬁc and well-deﬁned task or application. Con-
crete examples under this type of evaluation include whether an interpretability method
results in better identiﬁcation of errors or less discrimination. Human-grounded evaluation
is similar to application-grounded evaluation; however, there are two main differences:
ﬁrst, the tester in this case does not have be a domain expert, but can be any human end-
user and secondly, the end goal is not to evaluate a produced interpretation with respect
to its ﬁtness for a speciﬁc application, but rather to test the quality of produced interpre-
tation in a more general setting and measure how well the general notions are captured.
An example of measuring how well an interpretation captures the abstract notion of an
input would be for humans to be presented with different interpretations of the input, and
them selecting the one that they believe best encapsulates the essence of it. Functionally-
grounded evaluation does not require any experiments that involve humans, but instead
uses formal, well-deﬁned mathematical deﬁnitions of interpretability to evaluate quality
of an interpretability method. This type of evaluation usually follows the other two types
of evaluation: once a class of models has already passed some interpretability criteria via
human-grounded or application-grounded experiments, then mathematical deﬁnitions can
be used to further rank the quality of the interpretability models. Functionally-grounded
evaluation is also appropriate when experiments that involve humans cannot be applied
for some reason (e.g ethical considerations) or when the proposed method has not reached
a mature enough stage to be evaluated by human users. That said, determining the right
measurement criteria and metric for each case is challenging and remains an open problem.
2.3. Related Work
The concepts of interpretability and explainability are hard to rigorously deﬁne;
however, multiple attempts have been made towards that goal, the most emblematic works
being [14,15].
The work of Gilpin et al. [ 16] constitutes another attempt to deﬁne the key concepts
around interpretability in machine learning. The authors, while focusing mostly on deep
learning, also proposed a taxonomy, by which the interpretability methods for neural
networks could be classiﬁed into three different categories. The ﬁrst one encompasses
methods that emulate the processing of data in order to create insights for the connections
between inputs and outputs of the model. The second category contains approaches
that try to explain the representation of data inside a network, while the last category
consists of transparent networks that explain themselves. Lastly, the author recognises the
promising nature of the progress achieved in the ﬁeld of explaining deep neural networks,