Entropy 2021 ,23, 18 19 of 45
classiﬁcation tasks are analysed. The ﬁrst presented technique, which is called suppres-
sion, detects the features that correlate the most, according to some threshold with any
sensitive features, such as gender or age. In order to diminish the impact of the sensitive
features in the model’s decisions, the sensitive features along with their most correlated
features are removed before training. This forces the model to learn from and, therefore,
base its decisions on other attributes, thus not being biased against certain demographic
segments. The second technique is called “massaging the dataset” and it was originally
proposed in [ 74]. In order to remove the discrimination from the input data, according to
this technique, some relabelling is applied to of some instances in the dataset. First, using
a ranker, the instances most likely to be victims (discriminated ones) or most likely to be
proﬁters (favoured ones) are detected, according to their probability of belonging to the
corresponding class without taking the sensitives attributes into account. Subsequently,
their labels are changed and a classiﬁer is trained on this modiﬁed data that is free of bias.
Finally the idea behind the third preprocessing technique, as initially presented in [ 75], is
to apply different weights to the instances of the dataset based on frequency counts with
respect to the sensitive column. The weight of an instance is calculated as the expected
probability that its sensitive feature value and class appear together, while assuming that
they are independent, divided by the respective observed probability. Reweighing has a
similar effect to the “massaging” approach, but its major advantage is that it does alter
the labels of the dataset. Similarly to disparate impact testing, the described data preproe-
cessing methods might fail to pick up on local occurrences of discrimination, especially in
complex models.
Another data preprocessing technique for removing the bias from machine learning
models was proposed in [76]. More speciﬁcally, having the following three goals in mind:
controlling discrimination, limiting distortion in individual instances, and preserving
utility, the authors derived a convex optimization for learning a data representation that
captures these goals.
Adversarial debiasing [ 77] is a framework for mitigating biases concerning demo-
graphic segments in machine learning systems by selecting a feature regarding the segment
of interest and, subsequently, training a main model and an adversarial model simulta-
neously. The main model is trained in order to predict the label, whereas the adversarial
model based on the main model’s prediction for each instance tries to predict the demo-
graphic segment of the instance; the objective is to maximize the main model’s ability to
correctly predict the label, while, at the same time, minimizing the adversarial model’s
ability to predict the demographic segment in question. Adversarial debiasing can be
applied to both regression and classiﬁcation tasks, regardless of the complexity of the
chosen model. With regards to the sensitive features of interest, both continuous and
discrete values can be handled and any imposed constraints can enforced across multiple
deﬁnitions of fairness.
Kamiran et al. [ 78] pointed out that many of the methods that make classiﬁers aware of
discriminatory biases require data modiﬁcations or algorithm tweaks and they are not very
ﬂexible with respect to multiple sensitive feature handling and control over the performance
vs. discrimination trade-off. As a solution to these problems, two new methods methods
that utilise decision theory in order to create discrimination-aware classiﬁers were proposed,
namely Reject Option based Classiﬁcation (ROC) and Discrimination-Aware Ensemble
(DAE), neither of which require any data preprocessing or classiﬁer adjustments. ROC
can be viewed as a cost-based classiﬁcation method, in which misclassifying an instance
of a non-favoured group as negative results is much higher punishment than wrongly
predicting a member of a favored group as negative. DAE employs an ensemble of
classiﬁers. Ensembles, by nature, can be very useful in reducing bias. According to
the authors, this is because the greater the number of classiﬁers and the more diverse
these classiﬁers are, the higher the probability that some of them will be fair. Under
this assumption, the discrimination awareness of such an ensemble can be controlled by
adjusting the diversity of its voting classiﬁers, while the trade-off between accuracy and