Entropy 2021 ,23, 18 30 of 45
employed to attack any model and, secondly, it does not require of any knowledge of the
model’s internal workings.
Carlini and Wagner [ 123] introduced three novel adversarial attack algorithms, based
on the L 0, L2, and L ¥norms, respectively, which were very effective against neural net-
works, even those where defensive distillation technique [ 124] had been applied. The pro-
posed attacks aim to address the same minimal perturbation problem as Szegedy et al [115] ,
but they formulate it using the margin loss instead of cross-entropy loss, thus minimising
the distance between adversarial and benign examples in a more direct way. In [ 125],
Carlini et al. demonstrated how to construct a provable strongest attack, also called the
ground truth attack. The problem of ﬁnding adversarial examples proven to be of minimal
distortion was formulated as a linear-like optimisation problem. The deduced adversarial
example, having the most similarity to the original instance, is called the ground truth
adversarial example.
Spatially Transformed Attack: Xiao et al. [ 126] proposed perturbing images by per-
forming a slight spatial transformation such as translating, rotating and/or distorting the
image features. Such perturbations are small enough to escape human attention but are
able to trick models.
One-pixel Attack: Su et al. [ 127] showed how neural networks can be fooled by
altering the value of just a single input pixel. By constraining the L 0norm, they enforced a
limit on the number of pixels that were allowed to be perturbed.
Zeroth order optimisation based attack (ZOO): assuming that the one has access to the
prediction probability scores (rather than just the predicted labels) of a classiﬁer and the
respective inputs, Chen et al. [ 128] proposed an algorithm to infer the gradient information
by observing the changes in the prediction scores, thus eliminating the need for a substitute
model when creating adversarial examples.
In their study [ 129], Narodytska et al. focused on generating adversarial examples for
any deep convolutional neural network without prior knowledge of the internal workings
of the network in question. To this end, they proposed two pixel-perturbing methods that
operate without using any gradient information: the ﬁrst one is to randomly select and
perturb a set of pixels, while the second one improves upon the ﬁrst one by incorporat-
ing a greedy local-search algorithm to efﬁciently locate a better set of pixels to perturb.
Introduced in [ 130], HopSkipJumpAttack is a group of adversarial-example generating
algorithms that rely on binary information regarding the decision boundary and Monte
Carlo methods in order to approximate the direction of the gradient. The method is able
to produce both targeted and non-targeted examples that are optimised for the L2 and
L¥norms.
Liu et al. [ 131] performed a thorough investigation on the transferability of both non-
targeted and targeted adversarial examples while using models and datasets of large scale,
concluding that while transferring non-targeted adversarial examples can be very effective
in fooling neural networks, targeted adversarial examples do not work as well. To this
end, they proposed new ways of producing effective, transferable adversarial examples,
both targeted and non-targeted, with a high success rate when tested against a black-box
image classiﬁcation model. Houdini [ 132] is an approach that was proposed by Cisse et
al. that is able to produce adversarial instances for any speciﬁed task, according to the
respective measure of performance. Houdini’s adversarial attacks were employed with
success to a variety of structured prediction tasks, including the typical image classiﬁcation
challenge, but also extending the use of adversarial examples to other problems, such as
voice recognition, pose estimation, and semantic segmentation. Finally, it should not be
left unnoted that, in terms of measures of performance for the different tasks, Houdini is
capable of handling complex measures, even non-decomposable ones as well as combina-
tions of measures. In [ 133], a novel approach that uses an elastic net-based regularisation
framework (the combination of the L 1and L 2norms) to generate adversarial instances
against deep neural networks was proposed. Empirical results on three different image
datasets showed that the proposed framework was able to produce adversarial examples