Entropy 2021 ,23, 18 4 of 45
but also highlights the lack of combinatorial approaches, which would attempt to merge
different techniques of explanation, claiming that such types of methods would result in
better explanations.
Adadi and Berrada [ 17] conducted an extensive literature review, collecting and
analysing 381 different scientiﬁc papers between 2004 and 2018. They arranged all of
the scientiﬁc work in the ﬁeld of explainable AI along four main axes and stressed the
need for more formalism to be introduced in the ﬁeld of XAI and for more interaction
between humans and machines. After highlighting the trend of the community to explore
explainability only in terms of modelling, they proposed embracing explainability in other
aspects of machine learning. Finally, they suggested a potential research direction that
would be towards the composition of existing explainability methods.
Another survey that attempted to categorise the existing explainability methods is
this of Guidotti et al. [ 19]. Firstly, the authors identiﬁed four categories for each method
based on the type of problem that they were created to tackle. One category for explaining
black-box models, one for inspecting them, one for explaining their outcomes, and, ﬁnally,
one for creating transparent black box models. Subsequently, they proposed a taxonomy
that takes into account the type of underlying explanation model (explanator), the type of
data used as input, the problem the method encounters, as well as the black box model
that was “opened”. As with works previously discussed, the lack of formality and need
for a deﬁnition of metrics for evaluating the performance of interpretability methods was
highlighted once again, while the incapacity of most black-box explainability methods
to interpret models that make decisions based on unknown or latent features was also
raised. Lastly, the lack of interpretability techniques in the ﬁeld of recommender systems
is identiﬁed and an approach according to which models could be learned directly from
explanations is proposed.
Upon identifying the lack of formality and ways to measure the performance of inter-
pretability methods, Murdoch et al. [ 20] published a survey in 2019, in which they created
an interpretability framework in the hope that it would help to bridge the aforementioned
gap in the ﬁeld. The Predictive, Descriptive, Relevant (PDR) framework introduced three
types of metrics for rating the interpretability methods, predictive accuracy, descriptive
accuracy, and relevancy. To conclude, they dealt with transparent models and post-hoc
interpretation, as they believed that post-hoc interpretability could be used to elevate the
predictive accuracy of a model and that transparent models could increase their use cases
by increasing predictive accuracy—making clear, that, in some cases, the combination of
the two methods is ideal.
A more recent study carried out by Arrieta et al. [ 21] introduced a different type
of arrangement that initially distinguishes transparent and post-hoc methods and subse-
quently created sub-categories. An alternative taxonomy speciﬁcally for the deep learning
interpretability methods, due to their high volume, was developed. Under this taxonomy,
four categories were proposed: one for providing explanations regarding deep network
processing, one in relation to the explanation of deep network representation, one con-
cerned with the explanation of producing systems, and one encompassing hybrids of
transparent and black-box methods. Finally, the authors dived into the concept of Respon-
sible Artiﬁcial Intelligence, a methodology introducing a series of criteria for implementing
AI in organizations.
3. Different Scopes of Machine Learning Interpretability: A Taxonomy of Methods
Different view-points exist when it comes to looking at the the emerging landscape of
interpretability methods, such as the type of data these methods deal with or whether they
refer to global or local properties. The classiﬁcation of machine learning interpretability
techniques should not be one-sided. There are exist different points of view, which distin-
guish and could further divide these methods. Hence, in order for a practitioner to identify
the ideal method for the speciﬁc criteria of each problem encountered, all aspects of each
method should be taken into consideration.