Entropy 2021 ,23, 18 13 of 45
in domains, such as healthcare and criminology. Luss et al. [ 52] extended the CEM
framework to images with much richer structure. This was achieved by deﬁning monotonic
functions that correspond to, and enable, the introduction of more concepts into an image
without the deletion of any existing ones.
Wachter et al. [ 53] proposed a lightweight model agnostic interpretability method
providing counterfactual explanations, called counterfactuals. A counterfactual explanation
of a prediction describes the smallest possible change that can be applied to the feature
values, so that the output prediction can be changed to a desired predeﬁned output. The
goal of this approach was not to shed light on the inner workings of a black-box system or
provide insight on its decision-making, but, instead, to identify and reveal which external
factors would require changing in order for the desired output to be produced. The authors
highlight that counterfactual explanations, being a minimal interpretability form, are not
appropriate in all scenarios and pinpoint that, in cases where the goal is the understanding
of a black-box system’s functionality or the rationalisation of automated decisions, using
counterfactual explanations alone may even be insufﬁcient. Despite the downsides that are
described above, counterfactual explanations can serve as an easy ﬁrst step that balances
between the desired properties of transparency, explainability, and accountability, as well
as regulatory business interests.
Van Looveren et al. [ 54] underlined some problems with the previous counterfactual
approach [ 53], most notably that it does not take local, class-speciﬁc interpretability into
account, as well as that the counterfactual searching process, growing proportionally
to the dimensionality of the feature space, can be computationally expensive. In order
to address these issues, they proposed an improved faster, model agnostic technique for
ﬁnding explainable counterfactual explanations of classiﬁer predictions. This novel method
incorporates class prototypes, constructed using either an encoder or class speciﬁc k-d trees,
in the cost function to enable the perturbations to converge much faster to an interpretable
counterfactual, hence removing the computational bottleneck and making the method
more suitable for practical applications. In order to illustrate the effectiveness of their
approach and the quality of the produced counterfactuals, the authors introduced two new
metrics focusing on local interpretability at the instance level. By conducting experiments
on both image data (MNIST dataset) and tabular data (Wisconsin Breast Cancer dataset),
they showed that prototypes help to produce counterfactuals of superior quality. Finally,
they pointed out that the perturbation of an input variable implies some notion of distance
or rank among the different values of the variable; a notion that is not naturally present
in categorical variables. Therefore, producing meaningful perturbations and subsequent
counterfactuals for categorical features is not as straightforward. To this end, the authors
proposed the use of embeddings, based on pairwise distances between the different values
of a categorical variable, and empirically demonstrated the effectiveness of the proposed
embeddings when combined with their method on census data.
Protodash: the work that was detailed in [ 55] regarding prototypes was extended
in [56] by associating non-negative weightings to prototypes corresponding to their con-
tribution, consequently creating a unifying coherent framework for both prototypes and
criticisms/outliers. Moreover, under the proposed framework, since any symmetric pos-
itive deﬁnite kernel can be used, resulting in objective functions with nice properties.
Subsequently, the authors propose ProtoDash, a fast, mathematically sound approximation
algorithm for prototype selection that operates under the proposed framework to optimally
select prototypes and learn their non-negative weights.
Permutation importance (PIMP) [ 57] is a heuristic approach that attempts to correct
the feature importance bias through the normalisation of feature importance measures.
The method, following the assumption that the random importance of a feature follows
some probability distribution, attempts to estimate its parameters. This is achieved by
repeatedly permuting the output array of predictions and subsequently measuring the
distribution of importance for each variable on the non-permuted output. The derived
p-value serves as a proxy to the corrected measure of feature importance. The usefulness of