Entropy 2021 ,23, 18 28 of 45
the unconditional output distribution and output distribution when conditioned on one
or more input variables. Building on from the work of Borgonovo, Plischke et al. [ 113]
introduced a new class of estimators for approximating density-based sensitivity measures,
independent of the sampling generation method used.
Being introduced by Sobol and Kucherenko [ 114], the method of derivative-based
global sensitivity measures (DGSM) is based on ﬁnding the averages of local derivatives
while using Monte Carlo or Quasi Monte Carlo sampling methods. DGSM, which can
be seen as the generalization of the Morris method, are much easier to implement and
evaluate when compared to the Sobol sensitivity indices.
3.4.2. Adversarial Example-based Sensitivity Analysis
Adversarial examples are datapoints whose features have been perturbed by a subtle
yet sufﬁcient amount, enough to cause a machine learning model make incorrect predictions
about them. Adversarial examples are like counterfactual examples; however, they do not
focus on explaining the model, but on misleading it. Adversarial example-based sensitivity
analysis methods are methods that create adversarial examples for different kinds of data
such as images or test.
It was Szegedy et al. [ 115] who ﬁrst discovered that the functions learnt by deep neural
networks can be signiﬁcantly discontinuous, thus their output is very fragile to certain
input perturbations. The term “adversarial examples” was coined for such perturbations
and it was found that adversarial examples can be shared among neural networks with
different architectures, trained on different subsets, disjoint or not, of the same data: the
very same input perturbations that caused one network to misclassify can cause a different
network to also alter its output dramatically. The problem of ﬁnding the minimal necessary
perturbations was formulated as a box-constrained L 2-norm optimisation problem and
the L-BFGS optimisation algorithm was employed in order to approximate its solution.
Goodfellow et al. [ 116] argued that high-conﬁdence neural network misclassiﬁcations that
are caused by small, yet intentionally, worst-case datapoint perturbations, were not due to
nonlinearity or overﬁtting, but instead due to neural networks’ linear nature. In addition to
their ﬁndings, they also proposed a fast and simple yet powerful gradient-based method of
generating adversarial examples while using the L ¥norm, called fast gradient sign method
(FGSM). Figure 8 illustrates the effectiveness of the FGSM method, where instances of
the MNIST dataset are perturbed while using different values of e, resulting in the model
misclassifying them.
In order to test the sensitivity of deep learning models, Moosavi-Dezfooli et al. pro-
posed DeepFool [ 117], a method that generates minimum-perturbation adversarial exam-
ples that are optimised for the L 2norm. By making the simplifying assumptions, DeepFool
employs an iterative process of classiﬁer linearisation, producing adversaries that work
well against both binary and multi-class classiﬁers. Moosavi-Dezfooli et al. [ 118] also
came up with a formulation that is able to produce a single perturbation, such that the
classiﬁer mis-classiﬁes most of the instances. The existence of these so called “universal
adversarial examples” exposed the inherent weaknesses of deep neural networks on all
of the inputs. Papernot et al. [ 119] conducted a thorough investigation regarding the
adversarial behaviour within the deep learning framework and proposed a new class of
algorithms able to generate adversarial instances. More speciﬁcally, the method exploiting
the mathematical relationship between the inputs and outputs of deep neural networks
to compute forward derivatives and subsequently construct adversarial saliency maps.
Finally, the authors pointed towards the development and utilisation of a distance metric
between non-adversarial inputs and the corresponding target labels as a way to defend
against adversarial examples. Kurakin et al. [ 120] highlighted that, although in most
studies regarding machine learning sensitivity it is assumed the adversary examples can
be input directly into the classiﬁer, this assumption does not always hold true for classiﬁers
engaging with the physical world, such as those receiving input in the form of signals from
other devices. To this end, among the other methods used, a new method that improves