Entropy 2021 ,23, 18 6 of 45
such as deep neural networks. That is also why they sometimes are referred to as post-hoc
interpretability methods in the related scientiﬁc literature.
Under this taxonomy, this category, due to the volume of scientiﬁc work around
deep learning related interpretability methodologies, is split into two sub-categories, one
speciﬁcally for deep learning methods and one concerning all other black-box models.
For each of these sub-categories, a summary of the included methods is shown in Tables 1
and 2 respectively.
3.1.1. Interpretability Methods to Explain Deep Learning Models
The widespread adoption of deep learning methods, combined with the fact that
it is in their very nature to produce black-box machine learning systems, has led to a
considerable amount of experiments and scientiﬁc work around them and, therefore, tools
regarding their interpretability. A substantial portion of attention regarding python tools
is focused on deep learning for images more speciﬁcally on the concept of saliency in
images, as initially proposed in [ 22]. Saliency refers to unique features, such as pixels or
resolution of the image in the context of visual processing. These unique features depict the
visually alluring locations in an image and a saliency map is a topographical representation
of them.
Gradients: ﬁrst proposed in [ 23], the gradients explanation technique, as its name
suggests, is gradient-based attribution method, according to which each gradient quantiﬁes
how much a change in each input dimension would a change the predictions in a small
neighborhood around the input. Consequently, the method computes an image-speciﬁc
class saliency map corresponding to the gradient of an output neuron with respect to
the input, highlighting the areas of the given image, discriminative with respect to the
given class. An improvement over the initial method was proposed in [ 24], where the
well-known Krizhevsky network [ 25] was utilised in order to outperform state-of-the-art
saliency models by a large margin, increasing the amount of explained information by 67%
when compared to state-of-the art. Furthermore, in [ 26], a task-speciﬁc pre-training scheme
was designed in order to make the multi-context modeling suited for saliency detection.
Integrated Gradients [ 27] is gradient-based attribution a method that attempts to
explain predictions that are made by deep neural network by attributing them to the
network’s input features. It is essentially is a variation on calculating the gradient of the
prediction output with respect to the features of the input, as implemented by the simpler
Gradients method. Under this variation, a much desired property, which is known as
completeness or Efﬁciency [ 28] or Summation to Delta [ 29], is satisﬁed: the attributions
sum up to the target output minus the target output that was evaluated at the baseline.
Moreover, two fundamental axioms that attribution methods ought to satisfy are identiﬁed:
sensitivity and implementation invariance. Upon highlighting that most known attribution
methods do not satisfy these axioms, they propose the integrated gradients method as
a simple way obtain great interpretability results. Another work, closely related to the
integrated gradients method, was proposed in [ 30], where attributions are used in order to
help identify weaknesses of three question-answer models better than the conventional
models, while also to provide workﬂow superiority.
DeepLIFT [ 29] is a popular algorithm that was designed to be applied on top of deep
neural network predictions. The method, as described in [ 29], is an improvement over its
ﬁrst form [ 29], also known as the “Gradient Input” method, where it was observed that
saliency maps that were obtained using the gradient method can be greatly enhanced by
multiplying the gradient with the input signal—an operation that is essentially a ﬁrst-order
Taylor approximation of how the output would change if the input were set to zero. The
method’s superiority was demonstrated by showing considerable beneﬁts over gradient-
based methods when applied to models that were trained on natural images and genomics
data. By observing the activation of each neuron, it assigns them contribution scores,
calculated by comparing the difference of the output from some reference output to the
differences of the inputs from their reference inputs. By optionally giving separate consid-