Entropy 2021 ,23, 18 20 of 45
discrimination in DAEs depends on the disagreements between the voting classiﬁers and
number of instances that are incorrectly classiﬁed.
Liu et al. [ 79] highlighted that most work in machine learning fairness had mostly
studied the notion of fairness within static environments, and it had not been concerned
with how decisions change the underlying population over time. They argued that seem-
ingly fair decision rules have the potential to cause harm to disadvantaged groups and
presented the case of loan decisions as an example where the introduction of seemingly fair
rules can all decrease the credit score of the affected population over time. After empha-
sising the importance of temporal modelling and continuous measurement in evaluating
what is considered fair, they concluded that in order for fairness rules to be set, rather than
just considering what seems to be fair at a stationary point, an approach that takes the
long term effects of such rules on the population in dynamic fashion into consideration
is needed.
The problem of algorithmically allocating resources when in shortage was studied
in [80] and, more speciﬁcally, the notion of fairness within this procedure in terms of
groups and the potential consequences. An efﬁcient learning algorithm is proposed that
converges to an optimal fair allocation, even without any prior knowledge of the frequency
of instances in each group; only the number of instances that received the resource in a
given allocation is known, rather than the total number of instances. This can be translated
to the fact that the creditworthiness of individuals not given loans is not known in the
case of loan decisions or to the fact that some crimes committed in areas of low policing
presence are not known either. As an application their framework, the authors considered
the predictive policing problem, and experimentally evaluated their proposed algorithm
on the Philadelphia Crime Incidents dataset. The effectiveness of the proposed method
was proven, as, although trained on arrest data that were produced by its own predictions
for the previous days, potentially resulting in feedback loops, the algorithm managed to
overcome them.
Feedback loops in the context of predictive policing and the allocation of policing
resources were also studied in [ 81]. More speciﬁcally, the authors ﬁrst highlighted that
feedback loops are a known issue in predictive policing systems, where a common scenario
includes police resources being spent repeatedly on the same areas, regardless of the true
crime rate. Subsequently, they developed a mathematical model of predictive policing
which revealed the reasons behind the occurrence of feedback loops and showed that a
relationship exists between the severity of problems that are caused by a runaway feedback
loop and the variance in crime rates among area. Finally, upon acknowledging that
incidents reported by citizens can alleviate the impact of runaway feedback, the authors
demonstrated ways of altering the model inputs, though which predictive policing systems,
which are able to overcoming the runaway feedback loop and, therefore, capable of learning
the true crime rate, can be produced.
Models of strategic manipulation is a category of models that attempt to capture the
dynamics between a classiﬁer and agents in an environment, where all of the agents are
capable, to the same degree, of manipulating their features in order to deceit the classiﬁer
into making a decision in their favour. In real world social environments, however, an
individual’s ability to adapt to an algorithm does not merely relate to their personal beneﬁt
of getting a favourable decision, instead it heavily depends on a number of complex
social interactions and factors within the environment. In [ 82] strategic manipulation
models were studied and adapted in an environment of social inequality, in which different
social groups have to pay different costs of manipulation. It was proven that, in such
a setting, a decision making model exhibited a behaviour where some members of the
advantaged group incorrectly received a favourable decision, while some members of
the disadvantaged group incorrectly received a non-favourable one. The results also
demonstrated that any tools attempting to evaluate an individual’s ﬁtness or eligibility can
potentially have harmful social consequences when the individuals’ capacities to adaptively
respond differ. Finally, the authors conclude that the increasing use of decision-making