Entropy 2021 ,23, 18 14 of 45
the method was demonstrated while using both simulated and real-word data to improve
interpretability. As a result, an improved Random Forest (RF) model, called PIMP-RF, was
proposed, which was trained on the most important features, as determined by the PIMP
algorithm. PIMP can be used to complement and improve any feature-importance ranking
algorithm by assigning p-values to each variable according to their permuted importance,
thus improving model performance as well as model interpretability.
L2X [ 58] is a real-time instance-wise feature selection method that can also be used
for model interpretation. More speciﬁcally, given a single training example, it tries to ﬁnd
the subset of its input features that are more informative in terms of the corresponding
prediction for that instance. The subset is decided by a feature selector, through variational
approximation, which is solely optimised towards maximising the mutual information
between input features and the respective label. In the same study, a new measure called
post-hoc accuracy was proposed in order to evaluate the performance of the L2X method
in a quantitative way. Experiments using both real and synthetic data sets illustrate the
effectiveness of the method not only in terms of post-hoc accuracy, but also terms of human-
judgment evaluation, especially when it comes to nonlinear additive and feature-switching
data sets.
Friedman [ 59] proposed PDPs, a visualisation tool that helps to interpret any black box
predictive model by plotting the impact of speciﬁc features or subsets of features on a the
model’s predictions. More speciﬁcally, PDPs show how a certain set of features affects the
average predicted value by marginalizing the rest of the features (its complement feature
set) out. PDPs are usually very simplistic and they do not take all the different feature
interactions into account. As a result, most of the time they cannot provide a very accurate
approximation of the true functional relationships between the dependent and independent
variables. However, they can often reveal useful information, thus greatly assisting in
interpreting black box models, especially in cases where most of these interactions are of
low order. Although primarily used to identify the partial relationship between a set of
given features and the corresponding predicted value, PDPs can also provide visualisations
for both single and multi-class problems, as well as for the interactions between features.
In Figure 5, the PDP of a Random Forest model is presented, illustrating the relationship
between age (feature) and income percentile (label) while using the Census Income dataset
(UCI Machine Learning Repository).
Originally proposed in [ 60], ICE plots is a model agnostic interpretability method,
which builds on the concept of PDPs and improves it. After highlighting the limitations
of PDPs in capturing the complexity of the modeled relationship in the case where of
substantial interaction effects are present, the authors present a reﬁnement of he original
concept. Under this innovative reﬁnement, each plot illustrates the functional relationship
between the predicted value and the feature for individual instances. As a result, given
a feature, the entire distribution of individual conditional expectation functions becomes
available, which enables the identiﬁcation of heterogeneities and their extent.
Another method that is closely-related to PDPs is the Accumulated Local Effect (ALE)
plots [ 61]. ALE plots trying to address the most signiﬁcant shortcoming of PDPs, their
assumption of independence among features, compute the conditional instead of the
marginal distribution. More speciﬁcally, in order to average over other features, instead of
averaging the predictions, ALE plots calculate the average differences in predictions, thus
blocking the effect of correlated features.