Entropy 2021 ,23, 18 36 of 45
to be competitive on more than one tasks and knowledge transfer from one domain to
another is becoming a recurring theme, white-box models, being able to perform well
only in a single given task, are losing traction within the literature and are quickly falling
further behind in terms of interest. The most notable work in this category is that of
Caruana et al. [65] , who proposed a version of generalized additive models with pairwise
interactions (GA2Ms), originally proposed in [ 66], reporting state-of-the-art accuracy in
two healthcare applications.
A great deal of effort and progress has been made towards tackling discrimination and
supporting fairness in machine learning that sensitive domains, like banking, healthcare,
or law, could beneﬁt from. However, these methods are neither commonly found, nor well-
promoted within the dominant machine learning frameworks. In this category, the work
of Hardt et al. [ 92], introducing a generalised framework for quantifying and reducing
discrimination in any supervised learning setting, has been a milestone and the point of
reference for many other studies. That being said, only few studies deal with fairness in
non-tabular data, such as images and text, which leaves plenty of room for improvements
and innovation in these unexplored areas in the coming years.
Sensitivity analysis, which is the last category of intepretability methods under this
taxonomy, has seen tremendous growth over the past several years following the break-
through work of Szegedy et al. [ 115] on adversarial examples and the weaknesses of deep
learning models against adversarial attacks. Numerous methods for producing adversarial
examples have been developed, with some of them focusing on a more general setting,
while others being tailored to speciﬁc data types, such as image, text, or even graph data,
and to speciﬁc learning tasks, such as reading comprehension or text generation.
Despite its rapid growth, explainable artiﬁcial intelligence is still not a mature and
well established ﬁeld, often suffering from a lack of formality and not well agreed upon
deﬁnitions. Consequently, although a great number of machine learning interpretability
techniques and studies have been developed in academia, they rarely form a substantial
part of machine learning workﬂows and pipelines.
The volume of studies on machine learning interpretability methods over the past
years demonstrated the room for improvement that exists by showcasing the beneﬁts and
enhancements that these methods can bring to existing machine learning workﬂows, but
also exposed their ﬂaws, weaknesses, and how much they lack performance-aside. In any
case, it is our belief that explainable artiﬁcial intelligence still has unexplored aspects and a
lot of potential to unlock in the coming years.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, S.K.; formal analysis, V .P . and P .L.; investigation, P .L. and
V .P .; methodology, V .P . and P .L.; project administration; resources, P .L. and V .P .; S.K.; supervision,
S.K.; validation, V .P . and P .L.; visualization, P .L. and V .P .; writing—original draft preparation, P .L.;
and writing—review and editing, V .P .; All authors have read and agreed to the published version of
the manuscript.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
Abbreviations
The following abbreviations are used in this manuscript:
W Whit-Box/Interpretable Models
PH Post-Hoc
F Fairness
S Sensitivity
L Local
G Global
Agnostic Model Agnostic
Speciﬁc Model Speciﬁc
tab Tabular Data