Entropy 2021 ,23, 18 7 of 45
eration to positive and negative contributions, DeepLIFT can also reveal dependencies that
are missed by other approaches, such as the Integrated Gradients approach [27].
Guided BackPropagation [ 31], which is also known as guided saliency, is a variant
of the deconvolution approach [ 32] for visualizing features learned by CNNs, which can
also be applied to a broad range of network structures. Under this approach, the use
of max-pooling in convolutional neural networks for small images is questioned and
the replacement of max-pooling layers by a convolutional layer with increased stride is
proposed, resulting in no loss of accuracy on several image recognition benchmarks.
Deconvolution, as proposed in [ 32], is a technique for visualizing Convolutional Neu-
ral Networks (CNNs or ConvNets) by utilising De-convolutional Networks (DeconvNets
or DCNNs), as initially proposed in [ 33]. DeconvNets use the same components, such as
ﬁltering and pooling, but in reverse fashion: instead of mapping pixels to features, they
apply the opposite. Originally, in [ 33] DeconvNets were proposed as a way of performing
unsupervised learning; however, in [ 32] they are not used in any learning capacity, but
rather as a tool to provide insight into the function of intermediate feature layers and pieces
of information of an already trained CNN. More speciﬁcally, a novel way of mapping
feature activity in intermediate layers back to the input feature space (pixels in the case of
images) was proposed, showing what input pattern originally caused a given activation in
the feature maps. This is done through a DeconvNet being attached to each of CNN layers,
providing a continuous path back to image pixels.
Class Activation Maps, or CAMs, ﬁrst introduced in [ 34], is another deep learning
intrepretability method used for CNNs. More speciﬁcally, it’s used to indicate the dis-
criminative regions of an image used by a CNN to identify the category of the image. A
feature vector is created by computing and concatenating the averages of the activations of
convolutional feature maps that are located just before the ﬁnal output layer. Subsequently,
a weighted sum of this vector is fed to the ﬁnal softmax loss layer. Using this simple
architecture, the importance of the image regions, pertaining to their classiﬁcation, can,
therefore, be identiﬁed by projecting back the weights of the output layer on to the convo-
lutional feature maps. CAM has two distinct drawbacks: Firstly, in order to be applied, it
requires that neural networks have a very speciﬁc structure in their ﬁnal layers and, for all
other networks, the structure needs to be changed and the network needs to be re-trained
under the new architecture. Secondly, the method, being constrained to only visualising
the ﬁnal convolutional layers of a CNN, is only useful when it comes to interpreting the
very last stages of the network’s image classiﬁcation and it is unable to provide any insight
into the previous stages.
Grad-CAM [ 35] is a strict generalization of CAM that can produce visual explanations
for any CNN, regardless of its architecture, thus overcoming one of the limitations of
CAM. As a gradient-based method, Grad-CAM uses the class-speciﬁc gradient information
ﬂowing into the ﬁnal convolutional layer of a CNN in order to produce a coarse localiza-
tion map of the important regions in the image when it comes to classiﬁcation, making
CNN-based models more transparent. The authors of Grad-CAM also demonstrated how
the technique can be combined with existing pixel-space visualizations to create a high-
resolution class-discriminative visualization, Guided Grad-CAM. By generating visual
explanations in order to better understand image classiﬁcation of popular networks while
using both Grad-CAM and Guided Grad-CAM, it was shown that the proposed techniques
outperform pixel-space gradient visualizations (Guided Backpropagation and Deconvo-
lution) when evaluated in terms of localisation (the ability to localise objects in images
using holistic image class labels only) and faithfulness (the ability to accurately explain
the function learned by a model). While an improvement over CAM, Grad-CAM has its
own limitations, the most notable including its inability to localize multiple occurrences
of an object in an image, due its partial derivative assumptions, its inability to accurately
determine class-regions coverage in an image, and the possible loss in signal due the
continual upsampling and downsampling processes.