Entropy 2021 ,23, 18 26 of 45
Figure 7. Comparison of the level of race bias (bias disparity) among different groups in the sample population.
In conclusion, fairness is a relatively new domain of machine learning interpretability,
yet the progress made in the last few years has been tremendous. Various methods have
been created in order to protect disadvantaged demographic segments against social bias
and ensure fair allocation of resources. These different methods concern data manipulations
prior to model training, algorithmic modiﬁcations within the training process as well as
post-hoc adjustments. However, most of these methods, regardless of which step of
the process they are applied, focus too much on group-level fairness and often ignore
individual-level factors both within the groups and at a global scale, potentially mistreating
individuals in favour of groups. Furthermore, only a tiny portion of the scientiﬁc literature
is concerned with fairness in non-tabular data, such as images and text; therefore, a large
gap exists in these unexplored areas that are to be ﬁlled in the coming years.
3.4. Interpretability Methods to Analyse the Sensitivity of Machine Learning Model Predictions
This category includes interpretability methods that attempt to assess and challenge
the machine learning models in order to ensure that their predictions are trustworthy and
reliable. These methods apply some form of sensitivity analysis, as models are tested with
respect to the stability of their learnt functions and how sensitive their output predictions
are with respect to subtle yet intentional changes in the corresponding inputs. Sensitivity
analysis can be both a global and local interpretation technique, depending on whether
the change to the output is analysed with respect to a single example or across all exam-
ples in the dataset. Traditional and adversarial example-based sensitivity methods are
presented and discussed in this section, while their corresponding summaries are provided
in Tables 5 and 6 respectively.
3.4.1. Traditional Sensitivity Analysis Methods
Traditional sensitivity analysis methods try to represent each input variable with a
numeric value, which is called the sensitivity index. Sensitivity indices can be ﬁrst-order
indices, measuring the contribution of a single input variable to the output variance or
second, third of higher-order indices, measuring the contribution of the interaction between
two, three, or more input variables to the output variance respectively. the total-effect
indices, combining the contributions of ﬁrst-order and higher-order interactions with
respect to the output variance.
An output variance sensitivity analysis that is based on the ANOVA decomposi-
tion was formalised by Sobol, who proposed the approximation of sensitivity indices of
ﬁrst and higher order while using Monte-Carlo methods [ 101], while Saltelli [ 102] and