Entropy 2021 ,23, 18 33 of 45
high success rates when its adversarial examples were used to attack sentiment analysis
models as well as textual entailment models. A similar idea was later also proposed by
Kuleshov et al. [ 154], which uses word replacement by greedy heuristics, while later
Wang et al. [155] improved upon the genetic algorithm, achieving not only higher success
rates, but also lower word substitution rates and more transferable adversarial examples
when compared to [153].
DeepWordBug: the basic idea behind DeepWordBug [ 156] is to come up with a
scoring strategy that is able to determine those text pieces, which, if manipulated, are
most likely to force a model into mis-classiﬁcations. Such maniupulations include token
insertions, deletions, substitutions as well as k-nearest neighbour token swaps based on
cosine similarity. Textbugger [ 157] works in similar fashion, providing improvements over
DeepWordBug through the introduction of novel scoring functions.
Seq2Sick: Cheng et al. [ 158] considered adversarial attacks against seq2seq models,
which were widely adopted in text summarisation and neural machine translation tasks.
The two main challenges in producing successful seq2seq attacks include the discrete input
domain and the almost inﬁnite output domain. The former problem was addressed through
the development of a projected gradient method that combines the regularization method
with group lasso, while the latter was handled by using newly-proposed loss functions.
Feng et al. [ 159] introduced a process, called “input reduction”, which can expose
issues regarding overconﬁdence and oversensitivity in natural language processing models.
Under input reduction, non-important words are removed from the input text in interative
fashion, while the model’s prediction for that input remains unchanged. The authors
demonstrated that input texts can have their words removed to a degree where they make
no sense to humans, without any impact on the model’s output. Ren et al. [ 160] proposed
a greedy algorithm for textual adversarial example generation , alled probability weighted
word saliency (PWWS), which follows the synonyms substitution strategy, but replaces
words that are based on the word saliency and classiﬁcation probability TextFooler [ 161]
generates adversarial examples for text by utilising word embedding distance and part-of-
speech matching to ﬁrst identify the most important words in terms of the model’s output
and subsequently greedily replaces them with synonyms that ﬁt both semantically and
grammatically until a mis-classiﬁcation occurs. The BERT language model was utilised in
two studies in order to create textual adversarial examples: Garg and Ramakrishnan [162]
and Li et al. [ 163], both of which proposed generating adversarial examples through
text perturbations that are based on the BERT masked language model, as part of the
original text is masked and alternative text pieces are generated to replace these masks. In
their work [ 164], Tan et al. proposed Morpheus, which is a method for generating textual
adversarial examples by greedily perturbing the inﬂections of the original words in the text
to ﬁnd the inﬂected forms with the greatest loss increase, only taking into considerations
the inﬂections that belong to the same part of speech as the original word. Unlike most
work on textual adversarial examples, Morpheus produces its adversaries by exploiting the
morphology of the text. Zang et al. [ 165] suggested applying word substitutions using the
minimum semantic units, called sememes. The assumption was that the sememes of a word
are indicative of the word’s meaning and, therefore, words with the same sememes should
be good substitutes for each another. To search for such words efﬁciently, an algorithm
based on particle swarm optimization (PSO) was proposed.
Studies on sensitivity analysis over the recent years have focussed on exposing the
weaknesses of deep learning models and their vulnerability against adversarial attacks.
The literature is very complete when it comes to fooling models in computer vision and
natural language processing tasks. However, minimal work has been done in terms of
tabular data—in theory, some of the adversarial example generation techniques from
computer vision could be applied to tabular data, but their effectiveness has not yet been
clearly demonstrated.