Entropy 2021 ,23, 18 31 of 45
that can break through the defensive distillation technique and have high transferablity.
Lastly, the inner workings of the method and its way of exploiting the L 1norm revealed
new useful insights behind the relationship between the L 1norm and generation of effec-
tive adversarial examples. Papernot et al. [ 134] proposed a novel method for generating
adversarial examples by examining the inputs that were provided to a deep neural network
and the corresponding the labels that were assigned by the network. The method consists
of training a model using synthetic instances, generated by an adversary, as input and
the neural network’s predictions of these instances as the true labels. The trained model
is subsequently used to create adversarial examples to attack the neural network. Such
examples would be misclassiﬁed not only by the trained model, but also by the neural
network, as, by deﬁnition, they would have similar decision boundaries.
Brendel et al. [ 135] highlighted the lack of scientiﬁc studies regarding decision-based
adversarial attacks and pinpointed to the beneﬁts and the versatility of such attacks, namely
that they can be used against any black-box model, require only the observing of the model’s
ﬁnal decisions, are easier to implement compared to transfer-based attacks, and, at the
same time, are more effective against simple defences when compared to gradient-based or
score-based attacks. To support their arguments, they introduced the so-called Boundary
Attack, a decision-boundary based adversarial attack, which, in principle, begins with
creating adversarial instances of high degree perturbations and, subsequently, decreasing
the level of perturbation. More speciﬁcally, through a rejection process, the method learns
the decision boundary between non-adversarial and adversarial instances and, with this
knowledge, is able to generate effective adversaries. Brendel et al. [ 136] also developed
a novel family of gradient-based adversarial attacks that not only performed better than
previous gradient-based attacks, but were more effective against gradient-masking, more
efﬁcient in terms of querying the defended model, and able to optimise for a variety of
adversarial criteria. Unlike other methods that explore areas far away from the decision
boundary and, as a result, might get stuck, the point-wise attack only stays in areas close
the boundary, where gradient signals are more reliable, in order to minimise the distance
between the adversarial and original example. Koh and Liang [ 137] proposed an indirect
method of generating adversarial examples. The proposed method is capable of explicitly
calculating what the difference would be in the ﬁnal loss if one training example was
altered without retraining the model. By identifying the training instances with the highest
impact on model’s predictions, powerful adversaries can be deducted.
In the works of Zugner et al. [ 138] and Dai et al. [ 139], adversarial examples in
graph-structured data were studied. The former method is a greedy approach that is
concerned with attacking node classiﬁcation models, through the modiﬁcation of the
node connections (add/remove edges between nodes) or node features (ﬂip the feature
of nodes with limited number of operations). Three different settings were considered:
manipulation of all nodes in the graph, of a set of nodes, including the node in question,
and a set of nodes excluding the node in question. The latter attack method is based on a
reinforcement learning formulation of the problem and, more speciﬁcally, a Q-Learning
game. Under this approach only the addition and removal of edges is allowed when
altering the graph structure.
In [140], a graph attack based on meta-learning was proposed. Meta-learning has
been historically employed for fast reinforcement learning, hyperparameter tuning, and
few-shot image recognition. In this scenario, the graph structure of the network was used
as input to a meta-learning algorithm as the hyperparameter to be optimised.
Sharif et al. [ 141] proposed a method for fooling face recognition neural networks by
modifying the original images through the insertion of 3D printed sunglasses in the original
face images. The colour of these glasses was optimised towards leading the neural network
to mis-classify the faces in question. Hayes and Danezis [ 142] introduced a generative
universal adversarial example framework, whereby image perturbations are produced by
a generative model, such that, when incorporated into a normal, non-adversarial instance,
they transform it to an adversarial instance. Because the generator is not conditioned