Entropy 2021 ,23, 18 10 of 45
of importance of a concept if and only if the network has learned about it. Furthermore,
TCAV can reveal any concept learnt, even if it was not explicitly tagged within the training
set or even if was not part of the input feature set.
Yosinski et al. [ 40] proposed applying regularisation as an additional processing
step in the saliency map creating process. More speciﬁcally, by introducing four primary
regularization techniques, they enforced stronger prior distributions in order to promote
bias towards more recognisable and interpretable visualisations. They showed that the
best results were obtained when the different regularisers were combined, while each of
these regularisation methods can also individually enhance interpretability.
In [43], an interpretability technique for neural networks operating in the natural
language processing (NLP) domain was proposed. Under this approach, smaller, tailored
pieces of the original input text are extracted and then used as input in order to try and
produce the same output prediction as the original full-text input. These small pieces,
called rationales, provide the necessary explanation and justiﬁcation for the output in terms
of the input. The architecture consists of two components, a generator and an encoder,
which are trained to function well as a whole. The generator produces candidate rationales,
and the encoder uses them to produce predicted probability scores. The generator and the
encoder are trained jointly, and, through the minimization of the cost function, it is decided
which candidates will be characterised as rationals. Essentially, the two components work
together in order to ﬁnd subsets of text that are highly associated with the predicted score.
Deep Taylor decomposition [ 41] is a method that decomposes a neural network’s
output, for given input instance, into contributions of this instance by backpropagating the
explanations from the output layer to the input. Its usefulness was demonstrated within
the computer vision paradigm, in order to measure the importance of single pixels in image
classiﬁcation tasks; however, the method can also be applied to different types of data
as both a visualization tool as well as a tool for more complex analysis. The proposed
approach has strong links to relevance propagation; the theoretical connections between
the Taylor decomposition of a function and rule-based relevance propagation techniques
are thoroughly discussed, demonstrating a close relationship between the two approaches
for a particular class of neural networks. Deep Taylor decomposition produces heatmaps,
enable the user to deeply understand the impact of each single input pixel when classifying
a previously unseen image. It does not require hyperparameter tuning, is robust under
different architectures and datasets, and works both with custom deep network models as
well as with existing pre-trained ones.
Kindermans et al. [ 44] showed that, while the Deconvolution [ 32], Guided BackPropa-
gation [ 31], and LRP [ 37] methods help in interpreting deep neural networks, they do not
produce the theoretically correct interpretation, even in the simplest neural network setting;
a linear model developed while using data that were produced by a linear generative
model. Using this simpliﬁed setup, the authors showed that the direction of the network’s
gradient does not necessarily provide an estimate for the signal in the data, but instead
corresponds to the relationship between the signal and noise; the array of parameters that
are learnt by the network is in the noise-cancelling direction rather than the direction of the
signal. In order to address this issue, after introducing a quality criterion for neuron-wise
signal estimators in order to evaluate existing methods and ultimately obtain estimators
that optimize towards this criterion, the authors propose two interpretation methods that
are are theoretically sound for linear models, PatternNet and PatternAtrribution. The
former is used to estimate the correct direction, improving upon the DeConvNet[ 32] and
Guided BackPropagation[ 31] visualizations, while the latter to identify how much the
different signal dimensions contribute to the output through the network layers. As both
of the methods treat neurons independently, the produced interpretation is a superposition
of the interpretations of the individual neurons.
In Figure 3, a comparison of several interpretability methods for explaining deep
learning models on ImageNet sample images, while using the innvestigate package,
is presented.