Entropy 2021 ,23, 18 17 of 45
need, as most methods focus on either a speciﬁc type of model, or a speciﬁc type of data,
or their scope is either local or global, but not both. Of the methods presented, SHAP is
the most complete method, providing explanations for any model and any type of data,
doing so at both a global and local scope. However, SHAP is not without shortcomings:
The kernel version of SHAP , KernelSHAP , like most permutation based methods, does not
take feature dependence into account, thus often over-weighing unlikely data points and,
while TreeSHAP , the tree version of SHAP , solves this problem, its reliance on conditional
expected predictions is known to produce non-intuitive feature importance values as
features with no impact on predictions can be assigned an importance value that is different
to zero.
3.2. Interpretability Methods to Create White-Box Models
This category encompasses methods that create interpretable and easily understand-
able from humans models. The models in this category are often called intrinsic, transpar-
ent, or white-box models. Such models include the linear, decision tree, and rule-based
models and some other more complex and sophisticated models that are equally trans-
parent and, therefore, promising for the interpretability ﬁeld. This work will focus on
more complex models, as the linear, decision tree and elementary rule-based models have
been extensively discussed in many other scientiﬁc studies. A summary of the discussed
interpretability methods to create white-box models can be found in Table 3.
Ustun and Rudin [ 64] proposed Supersparse Linear Integer Models (SLIM), a type of
predictive system that only allows for additions, subtraction, and multiplications of input
features to generate predictions, thus being highly interpretable.
In [65], Microsoft presented two case studies on real medical data, where naturally
interpretable generalized additive models with pairwise interactions (GA2Ms), as originally
proposed in [ 66], achieved state-of-the-art accuracy, showing that GA2Ms are the ﬁrst step
towards deploying interpretable high-accuracy models in applications like healthcare,
where interpretability is of utmost importance. GA2Ms are generalized additive models
(GAM) [ 67], but with a few tweaks that set them apart, in terms of predictive power, from
traditional GAMs. More speciﬁcally, GA2Ms are trained while using modern machine
learning techniques such as bagging and boosting, while their boosting procedure uses
a round-robin approach through features in order to reduce the undesirable effects of
co-linearity. Furthermore, any pairwise interaction terms are automatically identiﬁed
and, therefore, included, which further increases their predictive power. In terms of
interpretability, as additive models, GA2Ms are naturally interpretable, being able to
calculate the contributions of each feature towards the ﬁnal prediction in a modular way,
thus making it easy for humans to understand the degree of impact of each feature and
gain useful insight into the model’s predictions.
Boolean Rule Column Generation [ 68] is a technique that utilises Boolean rules, either
in their disjunctive normal form (DNF) or in their conjunctive normal form (CNF), in
order to create predictive models. In this case, interpretability is achieved through rule
simplicity: a low number Boolean rules with few clauses and conditions in each clause can
more easily be understood and interpreted by humans. The authors highlighted that most
column generation algorithms, although efﬁcient, can lead to computational issues when
it comes to learning rules for large datasets, due to the exponential size of the rule-space,
which corresponds to all possible conjunctions or disjunctions of the input features. As
a solution, they introduced an approximate column-generation algorithm that employs
randomization in order to efﬁciently search the rule-space and learn interpretable DNF
or CNF classiﬁcation rules while optimally balancing the tradeoff between classiﬁcation
accuracy and rule simplicity.
Generalized Linear Rule Models [ 69], which are often referred to as rule ensembles,
are Generalized Linear Models (GLMs) [ 70] that are linear combinations of rule-based
features. The beneﬁt of such models is that they are naturally interpretable, while also
being relatively complex and ﬂexible, since rules are able to capture nonlinear relationships