Entropy 2021 ,23, 18 21 of 45
machine learning tools in our imperfect social world will require the design of suitable
models and the development of a sound theoretical background that would explicitly
address critical issues, such as social stratiﬁcation and unequal access, in order for true
fairness to be achieved.
Milli et al. [ 83] also studied how individuals adjust their behaviour strategically to
manipulate decision rules in order to gain favourable treatment from decision-making
models. They reiterated that the design of more conservative decision boundaries in an
effort to enhance robustness of decision making systems against such forms of distributional
shift is signiﬁcantly needed in order for fairness to be achieved. However, the authors
showed, through experimentation, that although stricter decision boundaries add beneﬁt
to the decision maker, this is done at the expense of the individuals being classiﬁed. There
is, therefore, some trade-off between the accuracy of the decision maker and the impact to
the individuals in question. More speciﬁcally, a notion of “social burden” was introducedin
order to quantify the cost of strategic decision making as the expected cost that a positive
individual needs to meet to be correctly classiﬁed as positive, and it was proven that
any increase in terms of the accuracy of the decision maker necessarily corresponds to an
increase in the social burden for the individuals. Lastly, they empirically demonstrated
that any extra costs occurring for individuals have the potential to be disproportionately
harmful towards the already disadvantaged groups of individuals, highlighting that any
strategy towards more accurate decision making must also weigh in social welfare and
fairness factors.
Counterfactual fairness, which is deﬁned strictly in [ 84], attempts to capture the
intuition that a decision affecting an individual is fair if it would affect the same individual
in the same way both the actual world and in a counterfactual world, where the individual
would be a member of a different demographic group. In the same study, it was argued
that it was crucial for causality in fairness to be addressed and subsequently a framework
for modeling fairness using tools from causal inference was proposed. According to
the authors, any measures of causality in fairness measures should not only consist of
quantities free of counterfactuals, but is also essential that counterfactual causal guarantees
are pursued. The proposed framework, which is based on the idea of counterfactual
fairness, allows for the users to produce models that, instead of merely ignoring sensitive
attributes that potentially reﬂect social biases towards individuals, are able to take such
features into consideration and compensate for them accordingly.
The fairness of word embeddings, a vectorised representation of text data, used in
many real world machine learning application, was studied in [ 85] and it was revealed
that word embeddings, even those that were trained on Google News articles, carry strong
gender bias. More speciﬁcally, two very useful, in terms of embedding debiasing, properties
were shown. Firstly, it was shown that there exists a direction in the embedding space
towards which gender stereotypes can be captured. Secondly, it was shown that gender
neutral words can be linearly separated from gender deﬁnition words in the embedding
space. Subsequently, metrics for quantifying both the direct and indirect gender stereotypes
present in the word embeddings were created and an algorithm that utilises the previous
two properties and tweaks the embedding vectors in order for gender bias to be removed
was proposed by the authors.
According to [ 86], fairness should be realised not only segment-wise, but also at an
individual level. In order to achieve this, fairness was formulated into a data representation
problem, where any representations learnt would need to be optimised towards two
competing objectives: similar individuals should have similar encodings; however, such
encodings should be ignorant of any sensitive information regarding the individual.
In [87], three approaches for making the naive Bayes classiﬁer discrimination-free were
proposed. The ﬁrst approach was to regulate the conditional probability distribution of the
sensitive feature values given that the label is positive, by simply boosting the probability of
the disadvantaged sensitive feature values given the positive label, while, at the same time,
decreasing the probability of the favoured sensitive feature values given the positive label.