Entropy 2021 ,23, 18 12 of 45
Figure 4. Local interpretable model-agnostic explanations (LIME) is used to explain the rationale behind the classiﬁcation
of an instance of the Quora Insincere Questions Dataset.
SHAP: Shapley Additive explanations (SHAP) [ 48] is a game-theory inspired method
that attempts to enhance interpretability by computing the importance values for each
features for individual predictions. Firstly, the authors deﬁne the class of additive feature at-
tribution methods, which uniﬁes six current methods, including LIME [ 45],DeepLIFT [29] ,
and Layer-Wise Relevance Propagation [ 49], which all use the same explanation model.
Subsequently, they propose SHAP values as a uniﬁed measure of feature importance that
maintains three desirable properties: local accuracy, missingness, and consistency. Finally,
they present several different methods for SHAP value estimation and provide experiments
demonstrating not only the superiority of these values in terms of differentiating among
the different output classes, but also in terms of better aligning with human intuition when
compared to many other existing methods.
Ancors: in [ 50], another model-agnostic interpretability approach that works for any
black-box model with a high probability guarantee was proposed. Under this approach,
high-precision, if-then rules, called anchors, are created and utilised in order to represent
local, sufﬁcient conditions for prediction. More speciﬁcally, given a prediction for an
instance, an anchor is deﬁned as a rule that sufﬁciently decides the prediction locally, which
means that any changes to other feature values of the instance do not essentially affect
the prediction value. The anchors are constructed incrementally while using a bottom-up
approach. More speciﬁcally, each anchor is initialized with an empty rule, one that applies
to every instance. Subsequently, in iterative fashion, new candidate rules are generated
and the candidate rule with the highest estimated precision replaces the previous for that
speciﬁc anchor. If, at any point, the current candidate rule meets the deﬁnition of an anchor,
the desired anchor has been identiﬁed and the iterative process terminates. The authors
note that this approach, attempting to discover the shortest anchor, does not directly
compute and optimise towards the highest coverage. However, they highlight that such
short anchors are likely to have a high coverage. By conducting a user study, the authors
demonstrated that anchors not only lead to higher human precision when compared to
linear explanations, but they require less effort by the user in both their application and
understanding/interpretation.
Originally proposed in [ 51], the contrastive explanations method (CEM) is capable
of generating, what the authors call, contrastive explanations for any black box model.
More speciﬁcally, given any input and its corresponding prediction, the method can
identify not only which features should be minimally and sufﬁciently present for that
speciﬁc prediction to be produced, but also which features what should be minimally and
necessarily absent. Many interpretation methods focus on the former part and ignore the
features that are minimally, but critically, absent when trying to form an interpretation.
However, according to the authors, these absent parts play an important role when it comes
to forming interpretations and such interpretations are natural to humans, as demonstrated