Entropy 2021 ,23, 18 5 of 45
A especally important separation of interpretability methods could happen based on
the type of algorithms that could be applied. If their application is only restricted to a
speciﬁc family of algorithms, then these methods are called model-speciﬁc. In contrast,
the methods that could be applied in every possible algorithm are called model agnostic.
Additionally, one crucial aspect of dividing the interpretability methods is based on the
scale of interpretation. If the method provides an explanation only for a speciﬁc instance,
then it is a local one and, if the method explains the whole model, then it is global. At
last, one crucial factor that should be taken into consideration is the type of data on which
these methods could be applied. The most common types of data are tabular and images,
but there are also some methods for text data. Figure 2 presents a summarized mind-
map, which visualizes the different aspects by which an interpretability method could be
classiﬁed. These aspects should always be taken into consideration by practitioners, in
order for the ideal method with respect to their needs to be identiﬁed.
Figure 2. Taxonomy mind-map of Machine Learning Interpretability Techniques.
This taxonomy focuses on the purpose that these methods were created to serve
and the ways through which they accomplish this purpose. As a result, according to
the presented taxonomy, four major categories for interpretability methods are identiﬁed:
methods for explaining complex black-box models, methods for creating white-box models,
methods that promote fairness and restrict the existence of discrimination, and, lastly,
methods for analysing the sensitivity of model predictions.
3.1. Interpretability Methods to Explain Black-Box Models
This ﬁrst category encompasses methods that are concerned with black-box pre-
trained machine learning models. More speciﬁcally, such methods do not try to create
interpretable models, but, instead, try to interpret already trained, often complex models,