Entropy 2021 ,23, 18 22 of 45
While easy to follow and implement, this approach brings the downside of either reducing
or boosting the number of positive labels that are produced by the model, depending
on the difference between the frequency of the favoured sensitive values and frequency
of the discriminated sensitive values in the input data. The second approach involves
training a different model for every sensitive attribute value. The case where a sensitive
feature has two values, and, therefore, two models were trained, was illustrated: one model
was developed using only the rows that had a favoured sensitive value, while another
model only utilised the rows that had a discriminated sensitive value. The different models
are part of a meta-model, where discrimination is mitigated by adjusting the conditional
probability, as described in the ﬁrst approach. In the third approach, a latent variable is
introduced to the modelling procedure, which corresponds to the non-biased label and
the model parameters were optimized towards likelihood-maximisation while using the
expectation-maximization (EM) algorithm.
In [88], a framework for fair classiﬁcation, which consisted of two parts, was presented.
More speciﬁcally, the ﬁrst part involves the development of a task-speciﬁc metric in order
to evaluate the degree of similarity among individuals with respect to the classiﬁcation
task, whereas the second part consists of an algorithmic procedure that is capable of
maximizing the objective function, subject to the fairness constraint, according to which,
similar decisions should be made for similar individuals. Furthermore, the framework
was adjusted towards the much related goal of guaranteeing statistical parity, while, as
previously, ensuring that similar individuals are provided with analogous decisions. Finally,
the close relationship between privacy and fairness was discussed and, more speciﬁcally,
how fairness can be further promoted using tools and approaches developed within the
framework of differential privacy.
The difference between the fairness of the decision making process, also known as
procedural fairness, and the fairness of the decision outcomes, also known as distributive
fairness, was brought up by the authors of [ 89], who also emphasised that the majority of
the scientiﬁc work on machine learning fairness revolved around the latter. For this gap to
be bridged, procedural fairness metrics were introduced in order for the impact of input
features used in the decision to be taken into consideration and for the moral judgments of
humans regarding the use of these features to be quantiﬁed.
Building on from [ 90], where the concept of meritocratic fairness was introduced,
Kearns et al. [ 91] performed a more comprehensive analysis on the broader issue of realising
superior guarantees in terms of performance, while relaxing the model assumptions.
Furthermore, the issue of fairness in inﬁnite linear bandit problems was studied and a
scheme for meritocratic fairness regarding online linear problems was produced, which
was signiﬁcantly more generic and robust than the existing methods. Under this scheme,
fairness is satisﬁed by ensuring optimality in terms of reward: no actions that lead to
preferential treatments are taken, unless the algorithm is certain that the reward of such
an action would be higher reward. In practice, this is achieved by calculating conﬁdence
intervals around the expected rewards for the different individuals and, based on this
process, two individuals are said to be linked if their corresponding conﬁdence intervals
are overlapping, and chained if they can reach each other through a chain of intermediate
linked individuals.