Entropy 2021 ,23, 18 11 of 45
Figure 3. Comparison of Interpretability Methods to Explain Deep Learning Models on ImageNet sample images, using the
innvestigate package.
3.1.2. Interpretability Methods to Explain any Black-Box Model
This section focuses on interpretability techniques, which can be applied to any black-
box model. First introduced in [ 45], the local interpretable model-agnostic explanations
(LIME) method is one of the most popular interpretability methods for black-box models.
Following a simple yet powerful approach, LIME can generate interpretations for single
prediction scores produced by any classiﬁer. For any given instance and its corresponding
prediction, simulated randomly-sampled data around the neighbourhood of input instance,
for which the prediction was produced, are generated. Subsequently, while using the
model in question, new predictions are made for generated instances and weighted by their
proximity to the input instance. Lastly, a simple, interpretable model, such as a decision
tree, is trained on this newly-created dataset of perturbed instances. By interpreting this
local model, the initial black box model is consequently interpreted. Although LIME is
powerful and straightforward, it has its drawbacks. In 2020, the ﬁrst theoretical analysis
of LIME [ 46] was published, validating the signiﬁcance and meaningfulness of LIME, but
also proving that poor choices in terms of parameters could lead LIME to missing out
on important features. Figure 4 illustrates the application of the LIME method, in order
to explain the rationale behind the classiﬁcation of an instance of the Quora Insincere
Questions Dataset.
Zafar and Khan [ 47] supported that the random perturbation and feature selection
methods that LIME utilises result in unstable generated interpretations. This is because, for
the same prediction, different interpretations can be generated, which can be problematic
for deployment. In order to address this uncertainty, a deterministic version of LIME,
DLIME is proposed. In this version, random perturbation is replaced with hierarchical
clustering to group the data and k-nearest neighbours (KNN) to select the cluster that is
believed where the instance in question belongs. Using three medical datasets among
multiple explanations, they demonstrate the superiority of DLIME over LIME in terms of
the Jacart Similarity.