Entropy 2021 ,23, 18 32 of 45
on the given images, the generated perturbations can be applied to any image and then
transform it into an adversarial one. Schott et al. also developed a high-accuracy, robust
against adversarial attacks, image classiﬁcation model that utilises the analysis by synthesis
approach [ 143]. More speciﬁcally, for each instance in the datase, a lower bound of the
ELBO loss given each class is calculated and, subsequently, these class-conditional ELBOs
are synthesised in order to produce the ﬁnal prediction. Furthermore, two new attacks
were developed: one speciﬁcally tailored to work well against the proposed model by
exploiting its structure and a decision-based attack that optimises towards the smallest
number of perturbed pixels.
In noise-based adversarial attacks, original examples are perturbed with the addition
of some form of noise and before being passed as input to a machine learning model.
However, in many cases, this addition of noise can cause some input values to fall outside
their originally deﬁned domain and therefore clipping is required if they are to passed to
the model. The proposed clipping methods prior to [ 144] were relatively slow and they
only provided approximations to the optimal solution, thus diminishing the effectiveness of
the produced. adversarial examples. In order to improve both the effectiveness and speed
of the previously proposed clipping methods, Rauber and Bethge [ 144] proposed a fast
and differentiable algorithm to rescale perturbation vectors, under which a perturbation
with the desired norm after clipping can be analytically calculated while using a closed
form solution.
Adversarial example vulnerability also exists in deep reinforcement learning mod-
elling, as demonstrated by Huang et al. [ 145]. By employing the FGSM method [ 116], the
authors created adversarial states to manipulate the network’s policy. They showed that
even slight state perturbations can potentially lead to very signiﬁcant differences in terms
of performance and decisions.
Yang et al. [ 146] focussed on generating adversarial examples for discrete data such
as text. Firstly, a two-step greedy approach that locates which words in a piece of text to
perturb and then alters them accordingly was implemented, and, secondly, they proposed a
novel method, called Gumbel, where the two steps of the ﬁrst approach were parameterised
and a model was trained to ﬁnd the optimal ones. Samanta and Mehta [ 147] as well as
Iyyer et al. [ 148] proposed methods for generating adversarial sentences that are both
grammatically correctly and in agreement with the syntax of the original sentences. To this
end, the former replaced original words with synonyms and exploited words that, when
used in different contexts, have have different meanings, while the latter used paraphrasing
techniques. Miyato et al. [ 149] proposed applying perturbations to the word embeddings in
a recurrent neural network instead of the original input. The produced word embeddings
were shown to be of greater quality, while the resulting model was shown to be less prone
to over-ﬁtting. Ebrahimi et al. [ 150] considered replacing a single character in a sentence
in order to fool character-based text classiﬁers. Using gradient information, the method
identiﬁes the most inﬂuential letter to be replaced. A closely related work [ 151] by Liang
et al. creates adversaries by adding, removing, and altering words or phrases instead of
single characters. Such words or phrases are identiﬁed as more or less inﬂuential based on
the inﬂuence of their individual characters, similarly to [150].
In their study, Jia and Liang [ 152] investigated generating examples for reading
comprehension tasks: given a paragraph and a related question, the model has to generate
an answer. Focusing on models while using the Stanford Question Answering Dataset
(SQuAD), they devised two attacks, ADDSENT and ADDANY, which both try to create
adversarial examples by adding words from the original question. In addition, two variants
of the original attacks were developed: ADDONESENT, where a random human-approved
sentence is added to the original paragraph, and ADDCOMMON, which is identical to
ADDANY, except that common words are added instead. Alzantot et al. [ 153] proposed a
method to generate adversarial examples for text while using a population-based genetic
algorithm. The algorithm, operating by looping through every word in each sentence
applying perturbations based on swapping counter-ﬁtted word embeddings, yielded very