Entropy 2021 ,23, 18 18 of 45
and dependencies. Under the proposed approach, a GLM is re-ﬁt as rules are created, thus
allowing for existing rules to be re-weighted, ultimately producing a weighted combination
of rules.
Hind et al. [ 71] introduced TED, a framework for producing local explanations that
satisfy the complexity mental model of a domain. The goal of TED is not to dig into the
reasoning process of a model, but, instead, to mirror the reasoning process of a human
expert in a speciﬁc domain, who effectively creates an domain-speciﬁc explanation system.
In summary, not a lot of progress has been made in recent years towards developing
white-box models. This is most likely the result of the immense complexity modern
applications require, in combination with the inherent limitations of such models in terms
of predictive power—especially in computer vision and natural language processing, where
the difference in performance when compared to deep learning models is unbridgeable.
Furthermore, because models are increasingly expected to perform well on more than one
tasks and transfer of knowledge from one domain to another is becoming a common theme,
white-box models, currently being able to perform well only in a single task, are losing
traction within the literature and they are dropping further behind in terms of interest.
Table 3. Interpretability Methods to Create White-Box Models.
Ref Tool CategoryLocal vs.
GlobalModel Speciﬁc vs.
Model AgnosticData Type Citations/Year Year
[65] InterpretML W G Speciﬁc tab 129.5 2015
[64] Slim W G Speciﬁc tab 35.2 2016
[68] AIX360 W G Speciﬁc tab 12.3 2018
[71] AIX360 W L Speciﬁc tab 12 2019
[69] AIX360 W G Speciﬁc tab 5 2019
3.3. Interpretability Methods to Restrict Discrimination and Enhance Fairness in Machine
Learning Models
Because machine learning systems are increasingly adopted in real life applications,
any inequities or discrimination that are promoted by those systems have the potential
to directly affect human lives. Machine Learning Fairness is a sub-domain of machine
learning interpretability that focuses solely on the social and ethical impact of machine
learning algorithms by evaluating them in terms impartiality and discrimination. The study
of fairness in machine learning is becoming more broad and diverse, and it is progressing
rapidly. Traditionally, the fairness of a machine learning system has been evaluated by
checking the models’ predictions and errors across certain demographic segments, for
example, groups of a speciﬁc ethnicity or gender. In terms of dealing with a lack of fairness,
a number of techniques have been developed both to remove bias from training data and
from model predictions and to train models that learn to make fair predictions in the
ﬁrst place. In this section, the most widely-used machine learning fairness methods are
presented, discussed and ﬁnally summarised in Table 4.
Disparate impact testing [ 72] is a model agnostic method that is able to assess the
fairness of a model, but is not able to provide any insight or detail regarding the causes of
any discovered bias. The method conducts a series of simple experiments that highlight
any differences in terms of model predictions and errors across different demographic
groups. More speciﬁcally, it can detect biases regarding ethnicity, gender, disability status,
marital status, or any other demographic. While straightforward and efﬁcient when it
comes to selecting the most fair model, the method, due to the simplicity of its tests, might
fail to pick up on local occurrences of discrimination, especially in complex models.
A way to ensure fairness in machine learning models is to alter the model construc-
tion process. In [ 73], three different data preprocessing techniques to ensure fairness in