Entropy 2021 ,23, 18 8 of 45
Grad-CAM++ [ 36] is an extension of the Grad-CAM method that provides better
visual explanations of CNN model predictions. More speciﬁcally, object localization is
extended to multiple object instances in a single image while using a weighted combination
of the positive partial derivatives of the last convolutional layer feature maps with respect
to a speciﬁc class score as weights to generate a visual explanation for the corresponding
class label. This is especially helpful in multi-label classiﬁcation problems, while the
different weight assigned to each pixel makes it possible to capture the importance of each
pixel separately in the gradient feature map.
Layer-wise Relevance Propagation (LRP) [ 37] is a “decomposition of nonlinear classi-
ﬁers” technique that brings interpretability to highly complex deep neural networks by
propagating their predictions backwards. The proposed propagation procedure satisﬁes
a conservation property, whereby the magnitude of any output is remains intact, as it is
backpropagated through the lower-level layers of the network: Starting from the output
neurons going all the way back to the input-layer neurons, each neuron redistributes to
the lower layer the same amount of information as it received from the higher layer. The
method can be applied to various data types, such as images, text, and more, as well as
various neural network architectures.
By pointing out and exploiting the fact that the gradient of the loss function with
respect to the input can be interpreted as a sensitivity map, Smilkov et al. [ 38] created
SmoothGrad, a method that can be applied in order to reduce noise in order visually
sharpen such sensitivity maps. SmoothGrad can be combined with other sensitivity map
algorithms, such as the Integrated Gradients [ 27] and Guided BackPropagation [ 31], in
order to produce enhanced sensitivity maps—more speciﬁcally, two smoothing approaches
were explored and experimented with: The ﬁrst one, which had an excellent smoothing
impact, calculates the average of maps made from many small perturbations of a given
instance, while the second perturbs the data with random noise and then performs the
training step. The experiments showed that these two techniques can have an additive
effect, and combining them provides superior results to applying them separately. Upon
performing a series of experiments, the authors conclude that the estimated smoothed gra-
dient leads to sharper visualisations and more coherent sensitivity maps when compared
to the non-smoothed gradient.
In order to interpret the predictions of deep neural networks for images, the RISE
algorithm [ 39] creates a saliency map for any black-box model, indicating how important
each pixel of the image with respect to the network’s prediction. The method follows a
simple yet powerful approach: each input image is multiplied element-wise with random
masks and the resulting image is subsequently fed to the model for classiﬁcation. The
model produces a probability-like score for the masked images with respect to each of the
available classes and a saliency map for the original image is created as a linear combination
of the masks. The coefﬁcients of this linear combination are calculated while using the
score that was produced by the model for the corresponding masked inputs with respect
to target class.