118 R Dale
Tefula, which turns legalese into plain English:abthis sounds great in principle, but relying on the
output would seem to carry a level of risk. Even if used as a writing assistance tool by a lawyerwho’s in a position to knowledgably post-edit the results, there’s the risk of learned over-reliance
– a danger that, ultimately, none of these applications is immune to.
6. Should we be worried after all?
We started out by observing that, despite the teasing of mainstream press headlines to the con-trary, GPT-3 doesn’t signal the beginning of the end for humanity. But that doesn’t mean we
shouldn’t be concerned about the potential misuses of the technology. Helpfully, something of an‘ethics in AI’ industry has grown up in the last few years, so it’s unlikely that dubious uses of GPT-3
will avoid scrutiny. And, as we observed earlier, OpenAI itself is concerned about responsible use;
here’s a particularly relevant paragraph from their blog:
ac
One key factor we consider in approving uses of the API is the extent to which an applicationexhibits open-ended versus constrained behaviour with regard to the underlying generative
capabilities of the system. Open-ended applications of the API (i.e., ones that enable frictionless
generation of large amounts of customisable text via arbitrary prompts) are especially suscepti-ble to misuse. Constraints that can make generative use cases safer include systems design that
keeps a human in the loop, end user access restrictions, post-processing of outputs, content
ﬁltration, input/output length limitations, active monitoring and topicality limitations.
This, of course, is to be applauded, although it remains to be seen how workable these processes
will be as the number of applications of the technology ramps up, and the ethical issues aroundspeciﬁc cases get muddier; there are likely to be echoes here of the kinds of content moderation
dilemmas faced by Facebook and Twitter. I understand why OpenAI’s characterisation of what is
safe, and what is not, has to be couched in pretty general terms, but it seems to me that they couldgo further. From where I sit, one maxim is incontrovertible:
To the extent that a use case places importance on the truth of the outputs provided, it is not a
good ﬁt for GPT-3.
But that might not go down well with Marketing.
abSee the video at https://twitter.com/i/status/1287425989878915074 .
achttps://openai.com/blog/openai-api/
Cite this article: Dale R (2021). GPT-3: What’s it good for? Natural Language Engineering 27, 113–118.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1351324920000601
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1351324920000601  Published online by Cambridge University Press