Natural Language Engineering 115
3. GPT-3: A generator to trump all others
In June 2020, OpenAI announced GPT-3, a new language model more than 100 times larger than
GPT-2, with 175B parameters and 96 layers trained on a corpus of 499B tokens of web content,
making it by far the largest language model constructed to date. At the time of writing, the closest
contenders are considerably smaller, with Microsoft’s T-NLG and Google’s T5-11B both being lessthan a tenth of GPT-3’s size. And size, it seems, does matter: as it turned out, the texts created by
GPT-3 were much more likely to sound coherent than those of its predecessor.
l
Again, the model itself was not made available; instead, access was to be provided via an API,
thus giving the model’s creators more control over its use. At the time of writing, a beta version ofthe API is up and running, but you’ll have to get on the presumably rather long wait-list if you want
access. In the interim, some information on future pricing has leaked:
mvia a typical SaaS tiered
pricing model, there’s a free tier that gets you 100,000 generated tokens, a US$100-per-month tierthat gets you 2M tokens, and a US$400-per-month tier that gets you 10M.
These prices have been criticised as being on the high side; they’re certainly more than the sub-
US$50 per month price-point that’s typical of many other SaaS offerings and steep enough to lockout all but the keenest lone researchers. On the other hand, there are no obvious comparators on
the basis of which we might establish what counts as a reasonable price, and arguably it’s actually
pretty cheap for access to a language model that is estimated to have a compute cost of US$4.6Mper training run – and that’s only a fraction of the overall total development and running costs.
n
Meanwhile, back in March 2019, the non-proﬁt OpenAI had restructured as a ‘capped-proﬁt’
company, the stated reason being that this was necessary to be able to raise the kind of capitalrequired to fund the company’s high cost of research and maintain a pace of development compet-
itive with major industry players like Google. Following this change, in July 2019, Microsoft agreed
to invest US$1B in OpenAI over the next decade; and just over a year later, in September 2020,Microsoft obtained an exclusive licence to GPT-3. The consequences of this deal are unclear, but
it’s likely that the API access will be unaffected, whereas Microsoft’s customers might eventually
see the beneﬁts of GPT-3 in a range of applications effectively for free.
As we noted in the introduction, the predominant sentiment in the media coverage of GPT-3
that has appeared subsequent to its release has been one of awe, sometimes followed by an expres-
sion of concern for the future of humanity now that AGI appeared to be in sight, eventuallyresolving to a recognition that we’re still a long way from Skynet.
There’s been a lot of praise for the technology’s capabilities, especially in text generation. The
typical use of the API involves providing a prompt and some initial text to get the model going,along with some optional parameter ﬁddling. Some of the outputs produced are truly breathtaking
in their plausibility and believability as candidates for being human-authored text. The key word
in that previous sentence, though, is ‘some’; we’ll get back to that below. There’s insufﬁcient spaceto include examples here, but you’ve probably seen some already, and if not, you can easily ﬁnd
them all over the web via your favourite search engine.
o
Apart from the obvious application of text generation, the technology has also been lauded
for its results in a wide range of other areas, some quite surprising: so you’ll easily ﬁnd examplesand discussion of the model’s capability in generating poetry, playing chess, doing arithmetic and
writing web interface code on the basis of requirements expressed in natural language. It really is
hard not to be impressed.
But, as noted above, there is a ‘but’.
lGwern Branwen suggests that, for ﬁction generation, the number of samples he’d need to consider before ﬁnding one worth
showing off has fallen from 100 in the case of GPT-2 to ﬁve in the case of GPT-3: on that metric, at least, GPT-3 is 20 times
better. This does, however, appear to require careful prompt reﬁnement. See https://www.gwern.net/GPT-3.
mhttps://bdtechtalks.com/2020/09/21/gpt-3-economy-business-model/
nhttps://lambdalabs.com/blog/demystifying-gpt-3/
oA comprehensive set of examples is provided on Gwern Branwen’s website, along with extensive and detailed technical
discussion: see https://www.gwern.net/GPT-3.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1351324920000601  Published online by Cambridge University Press