Meta Learning via Learned Loss
Sarah Bechtle*1
sbechtle@tuebingen.mpg.de
Edward Grefenstette3
egrefen@fb.comArtem Molchanov*2
molchano@usc.edu
Ludovic Righetti1,4
ludovic.righetti@nyu.edu
Franziska Meier3
fmeier@fb.comYevgen Chebotar*2
yevgen.chebotar@gmail.com
Gaurav Sukhatme2
gaurav@usc.edu
Abstract —Typically, loss functions, regularization mechanisms
and other important aspects of training parametric models are
chosen heuristically from a limited set of options. In this paper,
we take the ﬁrst step towards automating this process, with
the view of producing models which train faster and more
robustly. Concretely, we present a meta-learning method for
learning parametric loss functions that can generalize across
different tasks and model architectures. We develop a pipeline for
“meta-training” such loss functions, targeted at maximizing the
performance of the model trained under them. The loss landscape
produced by our learned losses signiﬁcantly improves upon the
original task-speciﬁc losses in both supervised and reinforcement
learning tasks. Furthermore, we show that our meta-learning
framework is ﬂexible enough to incorporate additional informa-
tion at meta-train time. This information shapes the learned loss
function such that the environment does not need to provide this
information during meta-test time. We make our code available
at https://sites.google.com/view/mlthree
Index Terms —meta learning, reinforcement learning, optimiza-
tion, deep learning
I. I NTRODUCTION
Inspired by the remarkable capability of humans to quickly
learn and adapt to new tasks, the concept of learning to learn,
ormeta-learning , recently became popular within the machine
learning community [ 2,5,7]. We can classify learning to learn
methods into roughly two categories: approaches that learn
representations that can generalize and are easily adaptable
to new tasks [ 7], and approaches that learn how to optimize
models [2, 5].
In this paper we investigate the second type of approach.
We propose a learning framework that is able to learn any
parametric loss function—as long as its output is differentiable
with respect to its parameters. Such learned functions can be
used to efﬁciently optimize models for new tasks.
Speciﬁcally, the purpose of this work is to encode learning
strategies into a parametric loss function, or a meta-loss , which
*Equal contributions.
1The authors are with the Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems,
Tübingen, Germany
2The authors are with the Viterbi School of Engineering, University of
Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90089
3The authors are with Facebook AI Research
4The authors are with the Tandon School of Engineering, New York
University, Brooklyn, NY 11201
Meta-Loss Network OptimizeeOptimizeeinputs Task info (target, goal, reward, …)OptimizeeoutputsMeta-Loss
ForwardpassBackwardpassFig. 1: Framework overview: The learned meta-loss is used as a
learning signal to optimize the optimizee f, which can be a regressor,
a classiﬁer or a control policy.
generalizes across multiple training contexts or tasks. Inspired
byinverse reinforcement learning [21], our work combines the
learning to learn paradigm of meta-learning with the generality
of learning loss landscapes. We construct a uniﬁed, fully
differentiable framework that can learn optimizee-independent
loss functions to provide a strong learning signal for a variety
of learning problems, such as classiﬁcation, regression or
reinforcement learning. Our framework involves an inner and
an outer optimization loops. In the inner loop, a model or an
optimizee is trained with gradient descent using the loss coming
from our learned meta-loss function. Fig. 1 shows the pipeline
for updating the optimizee with the meta-loss. The outer loop
optimizes the meta-loss function by minimizing a task-loss ,
such as a standard regression or reinforcement-learning loss,
that is induced by the updated optimizee.
The contributions of this work are as follows: i) we
present a framework for learning adaptive, high-dimensional
loss functions through back-propagation that create the loss
landscapes for efﬁcient optimization with gradient descent.
We show that our learned meta-loss functions improve over
directly learning via the task-loss itself while maintaining the
generality of the task-loss. ii) We present several ways our
framework can incorporate extra information that helps shape
the loss landscapes at meta-train time. This extra information
can take on various forms, such as exploratory signals orarXiv:1906.05374v4  [cs.LG]  19 Jan 2021