(a) Meta-Train Tasks
 (b) Meta-Test Tasks
 (c) Meta-Train
 (d) Meta-Test
Fig. 2: Meta-learning for regression (top) and binary classiﬁcation (bottom) tasks. (a) meta-train task, (b) meta-test tasks, (c) performance of
the meta-network on the meta-train task as a function of (outer) meta-train iterations in blue, as compared to SGD using the task-loss directly
in orange, (d) average performance of meta-loss on meta-test tasks as a function of the number of gradient update steps
(a) train (blue), test (orange) tasks
 (b) Meta vs Task Loss Pointmass
 (c) Meta vs Task Loss Reacher
Fig. 3: ML3for MBRL: results are averaged across 10 runs. We can see in (a) that the ML3loss generalizes well, the loss was
trained on the blue trajectories and tested on the orange ones for the PointmassGoal task. ML3loss also signiﬁcantly speeds up
learning when compared to the task loss at meta-test time on the PointmassGoal (b) and the ReacherGoal (c) environments.
is the ﬁnal distance from the goal g, when rolling out newin
the dynamics model P. Taking the gradient rEnew;P[R()]
requires the differentiation through the learned model P(see
Appendix 3). The input to the meta-network is the state-
action trajectory of the current roll-out and the desired target
position. The meta-network outputs a loss signal together with
the learning rate to optimize the policy. Fig. 3a shows the
qualitative reaching performance of a policy optimized with
the meta loss during meta-test on PointmassGoal. The meta-loss
network was trained only on tasks in the right quadrant (blue
trajectories) and tested on the tasks in the left quadrant (orange
trajectories) of the x;y plane, showing the generalization
capability of the meta loss. Figure 3b and 3c show a comparison
in terms of ﬁnal distance to the target position at test time. The
performance of policies trained with the meta-loss is compared
to policies trained with the task loss, in this case ﬁnal distance
to the target. The curves show results for 10 different goal
positions (including goal positions where the meta-loss needs
to generalize). When optimizing with the task loss, we use the
dynamics model learned during the meta-train time, as in this
case the differentiation through the model is required duringtest time. As mentioned in Section III-B 1, this is not needed
when using the meta-loss.
3) Learning Reward functions for Model-free Reinforce-
ment Learning: In the following, we move to evaluating on
model-free RL tasks. Fig. 4 shows results when using two
continuous control tasks based on OpenAI Gym MuJoCo
environments [ 22]: ReacherGoal and AntGoal (see Appendix A
for details)3Fig. 4a and Fig. 4b show the results of the
meta-test time performance for the ReacherGoal and the
AntGoal environments respectively. We can see that ML3loss
signiﬁcantly improves optimization speed in both scenarios
compared to PPO. In our experiments, we observed that on
average ML3requires 5 times fewer samples to reach 80% of
task performance in terms of our metrics for the model-free
tasks.
To test the capability of the meta-loss to generalize across
different architectures, we ﬁrst meta-train Mon an archi-
tecture with two layers and meta-test the same meta-loss
3Our framework is implemented using open-source libraries Higher [9] for
convenient second-order derivative computations and Hydra [34] for simpliﬁed
handling of experiment conﬁgurations.