D. S. Watson 
1 328 Page 18 of 26
fact there is none. Some post-processing methods are designed to mitigate against 
this (Tibshirani et al., 2001), but heuristic alternatives are still common.
Similar concerns apply for abstraction algorithms and generative models, both 
of which require users to fix hyperparameters that govern network architecture, 
batch size, regularization penalties, split rules, stopping criteria, and various 
other components. There is no way to know how sensitive results are to these 
configurations without extensive trial and error. In practice, hyperparameters are 
often left at arbitrary defaults, or else chosen via grid search over some bounded 
set of candidates, which may themselves be arbitrary defaults. Interpretation is 
especially difficult for abstraction algorithms and generative models when the 
input space is relatively unstructured, as with generic tabular data. Whereas 
humans have a decent grasp of how to evaluate “right” and “wrong” patterns in 
text and images, the task becomes much harder in, say, chemometrics, where our 
understanding of the relevant laws is limited and intuition is a poor guide. This 
ties into more general concerns regarding model opacity, as the logic behind par -
ticular cluster assignments, abstractions, or generative sampling procedures may 
be too complex for users to understand or interrogate.
Another source of potential bias lies in the data itself. There is nothing “objec-
tive” about how datasets are collected, maintained, or disseminated. On the contrary, 
they are the product of individuals and groups with certain goals and beliefs oper -
ating in particular contexts. To borrow Leonelli’s (2016) memorable phrase, they 
take idiosyncratic “data journeys” through time and space, often under the aegis of 
large institutions working in their own interests. Whether the topic is economics, cli-
mate science, or particle physics, all datasets are selective in scope. When access is 
restricted, we cannot use the data without submitting to some external authority, fur -
ther obscuring claims of objectivity under a dense web of social relations and power 
dynamics. Matters are no better when datasets are simulated, for then the sufficient 
statistics that govern the generating distribution are either arbitrary, in which case 
the previous objections regarding algorithmic hyperparameters apply, or derived 
from some prior dataset(s), in which case the present concerns over provenance and 
access remain. In short, pragmatic exigencies and contingent social arrangements 
permeate every stage of the modeling pipeline.
An extreme takeaway from these observations would be to conclude that unsu-
pervised learning algorithms are simply inference engines for our own assumptions 
and biases. According to this view, these methods are basically vacuous, since they 
do little more than spell out the statistical consequences of our own choices—they 
do not, strictly speaking, add anything new. To this critique, three replies are in 
order. First, the speed and scalability of unsupervised learning algorithms are suffi-
ciently great that it would be a mistake to suggest that they merely amplify preexist-
ing beliefs. On the contrary, they represent a step change in our analytical capacity, 
enabling large-scale data mining procedures that can reveal unexpected patterns and 
generate novel hypotheses. To object that these conclusions could in principle have 
been deduced with pen and paper is akin to dismissing the printing press as essen-
tially redundant, since all those bibles might just as well have been handwritten.
Second, the claim that “anything goes” when it comes to unsupervised learning 
is either false (if we restrict attention to actual practice) or irrelevant (if we consider