D. S. Watson 
1 328 Page 8 of 26
realist every bit as much as it does the antirealist. Any grouping of elements into 
kinds is undertaken within some context and for some purpose. That is why cluster -
ing algorithms may succeed at varying levels of abstraction, e.g., grouping species 
together at k = 2 and breeds at k = 4. Each solution is the right answer to a different 
question. Of course, this does not mean that any context and purpose will do. For 
starters, the “natural” in “natural kinds” places a nontrivial constraint on candidate 
inputs (pianos and laptops do not form natural kinds). This goes back to the afore-
mentioned criterion that natural kinds should permit inductive inferences and par -
ticipate in natural laws. However, the granularity and scope of such inferences and 
laws is itself a function of context and purpose.4 It may be possible to describe, say, 
the migratory patterns of birds in terms of atoms and electrons, but such a Herculean 
feat would be profoundly unilluminating. The task of the statistician is to ensure that 
inputs align with analytical goals, giving the clustering algorithm the best chance 
to discover what it is we want to know. In this way, natural kinds and clustering 
algorithms may even be co-constitutive. This accords with a sort of Kantian meta-
physics, in which the world gains meaning only through mental (or computational) 
representation.
I will go to no great lengths defending this brand of pragmatism or debating the 
proper interpretation of transcendental idealism, matters which, despite their evident 
interest, are clearly exogenous to the present discussion. I merely raise them to illus-
trate how fluid the borders become between metaphysical and methodological mat-
ters once we begin to seriously reflect on the mechanics of unsupervised learning. 
No matter one’s position on these issues, there seems little question that cluster -
ing is a basic function of human thought and language. This is a claim not about 
how infants come to learn nouns—that is more accurately described by supervised 
or reinforcement learning—but about how language itself came into being in the 
first place. Dividing one’s perceptual field into a collection of things with names 
that persist under some range of conditions was a key step in the development of 
complex concepts for individuals and collaborative communication for groups. If 
we accept Chomsky’s contention that the subject-predicate structure is part of the 
so-called universal grammar (Cook & Newson, 2007), then some capacity for clus-
tering may be literally hardwired into human brains. For better or worse, clustering 
is inescapable.
3  Abstraction
I confess that my nomenclature in this section is somewhat unorthodox. Abstrac-
tion has a different meaning in the formal methods literature (Wang & Tepfen-
hart, 2019), while the algorithms I describe below go by various other names in 
ML (e.g., embedding, autoencoding, projection, coarsening). I refer to them col-
lectively as abstraction algorithms to avoid the specific assumptions and problem 
4 For more on granularity and explanatory depth, see Clarke (2017), Floridi (2012), Franklin-Hall 
(2014), Kinney (2018), Strevens (2008), Weslake (2010), and Woodward (2016).