1 3On the Philosophy of Unsupervised Learning  Page 7 of 26 28
OC does little to resolve substantive issues around natural kindhood without fur -
ther elaboration—the modal “ought” smuggles in all manner of normative baggage, 
while “ideal conditions” are underspecified and potentially question-begging—but 
the basic strategy is familiar. Much like how Turing (1950) famously replaced a met-
aphysical question (“Can machines think?”) with a methodological one (“How can 
we tell?”), clustering algorithms reduce murky debates about identity and essence 
to formal procedures for grouping elements together based on precise notions of 
similarity and difference. If two people disagree on whether some elements form a 
natural kind, it may well be that they are applying different clustering algorithms, or 
perhaps the same algorithm with different inputs. Computational methods can make 
underlying assumptions explicit, thereby promoting critical discussion and hopefully 
greater consensus.
This reductive move is tempting and often successful. However, OC fails in gen-
eral unless we impose some further ad hoc restrictions on natural kinds to guaran-
tee their effective computability.3 Perhaps the relevant notions of distance are hope-
lessly imprecise, or the complexity of the requisite clustering procedure is so great 
that it will not complete before the heat death of the universe. Even under a generous 
interpretation of “ideal conditions,” some natural kinds may remain unidentifiable 
due to their intrinsic ineffability, or perhaps some fundamental limitation that pre-
vents us from gathering and processing the evidence required to discover them. For 
this reason, I judge EC to be more convincing than OC. Clustering algorithms can 
help us find natural kinds, but the purported methodological reduction carries little 
or no ontological weight.
I will revisit issues concerning the reliability and testability of unsupervised 
learning algorithms in Section  5. For now, I will simply point out that this proposed 
reduction by no means entails some radical brand of constructivism. The claim is 
not that natural kinds come into being if and only if some agent happens to imple-
ment a particular computational process. Just as the mathematical realist insists that 
two plus two equaled four long before anyone was around to add numbers together, 
we may readily acknowledge that natural kinds, if they exist at all, surely predate any 
actual clustering method. But this is a mere historical coincidence. The algorithm 
itself is an abstraction, a sequence of steps which, when applied, produces some out-
put. OC merely suggests that learnability via clustering is a necessary condition for 
natural kindhood, regardless of whether such learning ever in fact takes place. Yet 
there is no a priori reason to believe that all natural kinds are effectively computable 
via clustering algorithms, even ones that have yet to be devised. In arguing against 
OC, I conclude that identifiability via clustering algorithms is not a necessary condi-
tion for natural kindhood.
But is it sufficient? Any affirmative answer must provide further details on the 
purported “ideal conditions” requirement of OC, which will no doubt strike skep-
tics as inherently subjective. Ideal for whom? Toward what end? A full treatment of 
these issues is beyond the scope of this article, but I can sketch one possible direc-
tion. I take a broadly pragmatic view of natural kinds that is liable to disappoint the 
3 I am grateful to an anonymous reviewer for raising this point.