D. S. Watson 
1 328 Page 6 of 26
of optimality, since it can be informative to know which samples are co-clustered 
at varying resolutions. Results for our pet example with k  = 2 and k = 4 are both 
“right” at different levels of granularity. While k -means can in principle also 
return these same clusters at k  = 2 and k = 4, there is no guarantee that its assign-
ments form a recursive partition since the algorithm starts anew at each value of 
k. Thus, hierarchical clustering automatically imposes a sort of consistency condi-
tion that is generally violated by k -means.
The question of how to divide the world into proper units—to “carve nature at 
the joints,” in Socrates’s immortal words—is an ancient philosophical problem, 
better known today as the problem of natural kinds. The literature on this topic is 
enormous and varied—for a good overview, see Bird and Tobin (2022)—but two 
clear strands have emerged. One is focused on the ontological question: What is a 
natural kind? The other seeks to answer the epistemological question: How can we 
learn to identify natural kinds? I shall argue that clustering algorithms offer practical 
answers to both, although the two are not equally convincing.
Take the epistemological question first, as the solution here is more direct. 
Consider the following reply:
EC: We learn to identify natural kinds via clustering algorithms, or something 
very much like them.
Whether such algorithms are implemented via computer chips or human brains is 
irrelevant, as functionalists have long argued.2 Both strategies described above—
clustering by prototypes or by recursive partitioning—are common and legitimate in 
different domains. For instance, grouping by prototypes is an example of case-based 
reasoning, in which we reduce a collection to an ideal type that represents the whole. 
This approach is widely used in areas including clinical medicine, law, and sociol-
ogy (Kolodner, 1993). Meanwhile, the method of recursive partitioning is familiar to 
anyone who has ever scanned a phylogenetic tree, where diverse evolutionary line-
ages are traced back to common ancestors. Creating and debating these taxonomies 
is an ancient tradition, going back at least as far as Plato’s method of collection and 
division. The practice was later popularized by Linnaeus as a strategy for sorting 
biological species, and served as an inspiration for Darwin’s theory of natural selec-
tion. These examples help delimit the scope of EC, as they remind us that natural 
kinds (if indeed anything corresponds to the name) should permit inductive infer -
ences and participate in natural laws. Of course, clustering algorithms on their own 
cannot guarantee this. However, they can offer data-driven strategies for forming 
hypotheses that can subsequently be tested through standard scientific methods.
This analysis suggests one plausible reply to the ontological question.
OC: Natural kinds are what clustering algorithms ought to find under ideal 
conditions.
2 Functionalism comes in many forms; for an introduction, see Bickle (2020) and Levin (2021). I have in 
mind here something like the classic multiple realizability thesis originally advanced by Putnam (1967) 
and later extended by Block and Fodor (1972) and Fodor (1974).