1 3On the Philosophy of Unsupervised Learning  Page 9 of 26 28
setups associated with those terms, as well as to highlight the connections between 
these techniques and related subjects in philosophy. This usage has roots in Floridi’s 
(2008) levels of abstraction. More recently, Buckner (2018) has studied how deep 
convolutional neural networks operationalize modes of transformational abstraction 
that were originally conceived (but never fully explained) by classical empiricists 
such as Locke and Hume. The operative notion of abstract is the following, from 
Merriam Webster’s: “to consider apart from application to or association with a 
particular instance.” Simply put, abstraction algorithms (as I shall use the term) are 
a family of methods for learning simplified representations of data. These may be 
latent variables defined via transformations of input features, or coarse-grained vari-
ables forged by some data-driven discretization process. In either case, the result is 
typically a dimensionality reduction of the input space.5 In classical statistics, this 
was achieved via parametric methods such as principal component analysis (Jolliffe, 
2002). More recently, the area has been dominated by adaptive alternatives, espe-
cially those based on deep neural networks (Goodfellow et al., 2016). 
The most straightforward introduction to abstraction comes from information the-
ory.6 Consider the images depicted in Fig.  3. Each is made by the same data generat-
ing process, with varying degrees of additive noise. In each case, the dataset consists 
of a 20×20 matrix of 1 ’s and 0’s, i.e., 400 bits. But more efficient encodings are 
possible. Rather than spell out the values of each cell in the matrix, we could exploit 
the evident checkerboard pattern to obtain a lossless compression of Fig.  3A with a 
suitably digitized version of “Alternating 5×5 patches of 1 ’s and 0’s,” resulting in 
a 16-bit compression. The result is an abstraction—a description of the high-level 
pattern, rather than the low-level details. The same high-level pattern can in prin-
ciple be used to describe Fig.  3B—but notice that if we use the same encoding in 
this case, the reconstruction is no longer lossless, for it fails to account for the noise. 
Thus, the deviations that distinguish Fig.  3A from Fig.  3B would be lost in such a 
compression. In some applications, we may not care about such errors. In fact, if we 
are more interested in patterns than pixels; then, we may prefer the abstraction to the 
original. In other settings, details matter a great deal. The tradeoff between compres-
sion efficiency and resulting error rates is unavoidable in information theory, and 
the optimal balance is inevitably context-dependent. A similar tradeoff is evident in 
supervised learning, where we must strike some balance between accuracy (mini-
mizing bias) and complexity (minimizing variance).7
One approach to abstraction in ML is based on coarsening. This is a con-
ceptually simple procedure in which we describe the data in larger units, e.g., 
molecules instead of atoms or cities instead of neighborhoods. Techniques for 
5 Strictly speaking, this is not a necessary condition for abstraction. For instance, kernel methods map 
inputs to an infinite-dimensional codomain. For simplicity, I will limit the discussion here to reductive 
abstractions.
6 This example is adapted from a similar one in Dennett (1991).
7 For more on the curve-fitting problem in philosophy of statistics, see Forster and Sober’s (1994) influ-
ential paper, as well as the numerous responses it inspired (Bandyopadhyay & Boik, 1999; DeVito, 1997; 
Kieseppä, 1997; Mulaik, 2001; Spanos, 2007).