1 3On the Philosophy of Unsupervised Learning  Page 13 of 26 28
In summary, abstraction algorithms raise much the same philosophical issues for 
essentialism that clustering algorithms raise for natural kinds.
4  Generative Models
Generative models create synthetic data that should, ideally, be indistinguishable 
from the real thing. Such methods can be used for data imputation or augmenta-
tion in supervised, reinforcement, or self-supervised learning tasks. They can also 
be used for deceptive purposes, as in adversarial attacks or  so-called deepfakes. 
The former occurs when samples are generated with the express intent of fooling 
another model, e.g., by adding noise to an image in order to trick a classifier into 
mislabeling samples. The latter refers to a class of models designed to output highly 
realistic image, audio, or video data of people saying and doing things they never in 
fact said or did. I defer a discussion of the ethical aspects of this technology to Sec-
tion 5. For now, the point to emphasize is that generative models are a powerful and 
relatively novel innovation in ML research. Though density estimation procedures 
have been in use for decades, methods were far too crude for realistic data synthesis 
in high dimensions until quite recently. Current models, by contrast, can make con-
vincing forgeries of landscapes in the style of Cezanne or photorealistic portraits of 
nonexistent people (see Fig.  4). I will focus in particular on generative adversarial 
networks (GANs) and tree-based approaches.
GANs are a popular class of deep learning algorithms originally proposed by 
Goodfellow et al. (2014). Many variations exist—for overviews, see Creswell et al. 
(2018) and Gui et al. (2021)—but the unifying idea behind them all is a zero-sum 
game between two networks, a generator f and a discriminator g. First, f samples 
some synthetic data, typically just noise to start. This fake data is then fed along 
with real data to g, whose job is to classify samples as genuine or synthetic. In the 
early rounds, f’s attempted forgeries are poor, and g has no trouble distinguishing 
between samples. However, network weights are updated after each round, resulting 
in improved performance for the generator f. Meanwhile, the discriminator g updates 
its weights to try and keep up with its opponent. With sufficient network capacity, 
the forgeries will continue improving until g can do no better than random guessing. 
Fig. 4  Synthetic portraits created by StyleGAN. From Karras et al. (2019)