D. S. Watson 
1 328 Page 4 of 26
simplicity that all features are continuous. The domain of Xj is denoted with cal-
ligraphic Xj , while the complete domain is X=X1×⋯×Xd . Data are distributed 
according to some distribution P with probability density function p. Though some 
unsupervised learning tasks (e.g., density ratio estimation) explicitly assume that 
data are generating according to several distinct processes, we will simplify matters 
by assuming that samples are independent and identically distributed.
2  Clustering
Clustering is a basic statistical task with a historical pedigree that long predates 
the latest AI hype cycle. However, just as supervised learning outgrew its ori-
gins in linear regression through advances in computing and statistics, clustering 
has undergone a revolution of sorts in the last 10–20 years. This is partly due to 
technological developments—it is possible now to efficiently cluster enormous 
datasets in high dimensions with massively parallel processing, as well as to resa-
mple data for greater cluster stability—but also to theoretical progress. Inferen-
tial techniques for data clustering have put the field on firmer footing (Tibshirani 
et al., 2001; John et al., 2020), while approximate solutions have led to dramatic 
speedups (Abboud et al., 2019; Cohen-Addad et al., 2019). Meanwhile, impossi-
bility results have strictly delimited what such algorithms can and cannot achieve 
(Kleinberg, 2002; Ben-David & Ackerman, 2008; Cohen-Addad et al., 2018).
The basic goal of any clustering algorithm is to identify meaningful subgroups 
in a collection of data. These may correspond to different hand-written digits, sub-
species of iris plant, or any other grouping of interest. As a running example, let 
us say that X is a large collection of photographs, each depicting either a cat or a 
dog. Unlike a supervised classifier, which learns to label new datapoints based on 
observed instances (“This is a cat, that is a dog”), clustering algorithms must learn 
the categories themselves (“There are two different animals here, let’s call them cat 
and dog.”). Though many variants exist, I will focus on two popular algorithms that 
hopefully convey the basic logic behind clustering analysis and give some sense of 
the diversity among such methods: k-means and hierarchical clustering.
The k-means algorithm takes as input the data matrix X and some target num-
ber of clusters k . The goal is to find k  representative d -length vectors called cent-
ers, where the j th coordinate is the mean value of the variable Xj among samples 
in the corresponding cluster. Each center can be thought of as a sort of proto-
type, exemplifying the traits we most associate with a given cluster. For exam-
ple, these may describe the most feline cat or the most canine dog. Note that, 
because each coordinate in the center is given by a groupwise mean, it is likely 
that the resulting prototype is not identical to any observed sample. Instead, the 
center describes a hypothetical datapoint, a sort of Platonic ideal against which 
all others are compared. These centers are computed so as to minimize the sum 
of squared distances from each sample to its nearest center, i.e., the within-
cluster variance. This problem is NP-hard and thus exact solutions are generally 
infeasible. However, iterative approximations work well in practice and tend to 
converge on local optima in reasonable time (Hartigan, 1975; Lloyd, 1982). See