D. S. Watson 
1 328 Page 14 of 26
At this point, we say that f has learned the true data distribution, and the competitors 
have converged on the game’s Nash equilibrium.
Another class of generative models is based on classification and regression trees. 
These are the so-called weak learners, which split the input data X at some value of 
a (potentially random) feature Xj according to an optimization objective, e.g., vari-
ance minimization. A sequence of such splits results in a partition of the input space 
into relatively small nodes called leaves. Though individual trees tend to be poor 
predictors for complex datasets, forest models—i.e., ensembles of trees—are among 
the most popular and effective of all ML algorithms. When trees are grown indepen-
dently on perturbed datasets, results may be aggregated via averaging to create a ran-
dom forest (Breiman, 2001). Alternatively, trees can be grown iteratively to improve 
upon the predictions of the previous tree, in a method known as boosting (Friedman, 
2001). These algorithms are widely used for supervised learning, although they also 
have applications to unsupervised tasks. Generative models based on random forests 
go back at least a decade (Criminisi et al., 2012), with several more recent propos-
als showing strong results (Correia et al., 2020; Watson et al., 2023). Conditional 
density estimation is especially common with trees, as shown by numerous popu-
lar methods for data imputation and related tasks (Lundberg et al., 2020; Stekhoven 
& Bühlmann, 2012; Tang & Ishwaran, 2017). Forests can be readily compiled into 
probabilistic circuits (Choi et al., 2020), a large and well-studied family of computa-
tional graphs for generative modeling and inference.
The logic behind GANs and forests is entirely different. The former effectively 
turns the problem into a reinforcement learning task, with the discriminator net-
work g providing a sort of inadvertent reward signal to the generator f .8 The more 
uncertain g is about the provenance of some sample, the better f  has done creating 
realistic data. This is akin to a forger honing his craft by seeing what does and does 
not evade detection by the authorities; or, to take a less criminal example, a child 
learning to play an instrument by mimicking a melody until a blindfolded listener 
cannot distinguish between their version and a professional recording. Confounding 
a would-be discriminator is a familiar method in computer science, with origins 
in the Turing test. Crucially, in that case, the discriminating agent is human. But 
for many purposes, artificial agents do just as well. The idea has applications in 
statistics as well, where a generic form of the classic two-sample test is achieved by 
evaluating whether a classifier can distinguish between the generating distributions 
(Kim et al., 2021).
Forests, by contrast, take a more impressionistic approach to data synthesis. 
They break the input space down into a collection of subregions, effectively solving 
many simple problems instead of one hard problem. By sampling from the fitted 
densities in each leaf of the tree, we may approximate distributions of arbitrary 
complexity. The visual effect is not unlike a pointillist painting, where structure 
gradually emerges from a plurality of tiny uniformities. However, whereas the 
works of Georges Seurat have a distinctive fuzziness owing to deliberate pixelation, 
8 Deep connections between GANs and classic reinforcement learning techniques such as actor-critic 
algorithms have been established. See Pfau and Vinyals (2016).