D. S. Watson 
1 328 Page 20 of 26
difficult to hold bad actors to account. These concerns have attracted considerable 
scholarly and media attention, and justifiably so.
By the same token, a myopic focus on ethical risks can blind us to ethical opportu-
nities. For example, generative modeling techniques offer a creative solution to thorny 
problems surrounding data privacy. Policies for handling sensitive data are notori-
ously (and understandably) onerous. For their landmark study on geographic factors 
of social mobility, a team from UC Berkeley had to practically join the Internal Rev -
enue Service in order to access the tax records of some 40 million Americans (Chetty 
et al., 2014). They submitted to fingerprinting and background checks while agreeing 
to conduct all data analysis on an air gapped machine at the Treasury Department 
headquarters in Washington, DC. Generative models can make such arrangements 
obsolete. With sufficient capacity, these algorithms can synthesize highly realistic 
data of a potentially sensitive nature for mass dissemination without infringing on 
the privacy of any real-world data subjects. Global properties would be preserved, 
allowing for legitimate research findings, while local details may vary unpredictably. 
Expanding access to sensitive data could accelerate important discoveries in medi-
cine, economics, and beyond. Generative models can in principle provide a secure 
way to manage such an expansion while respecting privacy rights. However, research 
has shown that synthetic data is not necessarily immune to membership inference 
attacks, so the privacy-utility tradeoff remains delicate (Stadler et al., 2022).
The issues raised in this section—hyperparameter optimality, data quality, model 
opacity, and opportunities for (mis)use—echo similar debates in supervised learn-
ing, where an unjustified confidence in results can also lead to grave harms. Existing 
frameworks for the ethical use of ML can and should therefore be expanded to cover 
unsupervised learning tasks, even if this is not always obvious. For example, con-
cerns over the reliability of inputs can be addressed with classical tools of statistical 
inference such as sensitivity analysis and hypothesis testing. Mayo’s (1996, 2018) 
emphasis on severity is especially instructive in this regard. According to Mayo, our 
belief in some hypothesis h is justified only to the extent that h has passed severe 
tests, i.e., tests that should detect flaws or discrepancies from h with high probabil-
ity. Practitioners rarely bother to subject unsupervised learning models to the same 
scrutiny as their supervised or reinforcement learning counterparts, as standards 
for such tests are not well developed. While familiar ML notions such as “loss” or 
“regret” may not apply in these settings, alternative desiderata such as stability and 
generalization do. More importantly, they are testable. Resampling procedures like 
bootstrapping and subsampling provide readymade tools for evaluating the robust-
ness of clusters and abstractions (Fisher et al., 2016; Monti et al., 2003). Supervised 
learning methods can also be of service. For example, stable clusters should general-
ize to unseen data, a hypothesis that can be evaluated with the aid of standard ML 
classifiers (Dudoit & Fridlyand, 2002; Tibshirani & Walther, 2005).
When generative models provide explicit densities, their performance can be eval-
uated via out-of-sample log-likelihoods. This is the case, for instance, with tree-based 
models. Systematic evaluation is more difficult for GANs, however, which do not 
provide densities by default. Once again, supervised learning methods can help. One 
standard pipeline for scoring GANs is to train one or several models to predict some 
outcome on the input data /u1D417 (picking some random Xj as the dependent variable),