1 3On the Philosophy of Unsupervised Learning  Page 15 of 26 28
forest algorithms aim instead for maximal realism in their outputs. In this sense, 
they are less Seurat and more Chuck Close, who created massive, high-resolution 
portraits by laying a fine grid over a photograph and painstakingly recreating every 
cell (see Fig.  5). Because trees are independent in a random forest, the entire pro-
cess can be efficiently computed with parallel processing. (Close, on the other 
hand, would routinely spend over a year on a single portrait.) It is worth noting that 
these visual analogies are merely illustrative. GANs and forests are by no means 
limited to image data.
Generative modeling is a uniquely creative task for AI. It pushes beyond the com-
mon goals of prediction and optimization into something more like imagination 
and fantasy. These are vital aspects of human cognitive development, as children 
learn to circumscribe the realm of the possible by recombining past experiences in 
novel ways. The gains do not end in childhood. Imagination is a key part of the 
methodological toolkit for physicists and philosophers, who often reason by way of 
thought experiment (Stuart et al., 2018). It can inspire artistic works of genius, or 
simply random doodles. Both styles of imagination described above—the top-down 
approach of GANs, which requires some abstraction as a basis, and the bottom-up 
approach of forests, which focuses instead on the particulars—are evident in human 
creativity. The former is clearest in dreaming or game play, where whole scenes 
unfold with few explicit rules but clear thematic unity. The latter is found not just in 
the visual arts, as described above, but also in literature, where an author may start 
with an outline that breaks the narrative down into a collection of scenes, working 
separately on each and only merging them into a single structure once the individual 
components are complete.
In one sense, it may seem that data synthesis is simpler than classical supervised 
learning. After all, there is a single right answer to the question of what output we 
should expect for a given input (subject to some irreducible uncertainty, itself pre-
cisely quantifiable), whereas many datasets could be plausible samples from a given 
distribution. Yet uniqueness is a poor heuristic for complexity, especially when there 
are so many more ways for the generative model to err. This should be apparent as 
Fig. 5  Georges Seurat’s “A Sunday on La Grande Jatte” (A) and Chuck Close’s “Big Self-Portrait” (B). 
Both artists implemented techniques similar to the tree-based generative modeling approach