1 3On the Philosophy of Unsupervised Learning  Page 3 of 26 28
short shrift. For instance, proponents of predictive processing have suggested that 
their framework may accommodate unsupervised learning under certain conditions 
(Clark, 2017; Hohwy, 2020). This claim is typically made in passing, with little or 
no evidence, followed by copious supervised and reinforcement learning examples.
It is unclear why unsupervised learning algorithms have been so philosophically 
neglected, especially given their widespread use and impressive performance. Such 
technologies underlie popular models for fraud detection, machine translation, can-
cer subtyping, image compression, and countless more applications across various 
domains. One possible reason for their silence is that philosophers are generally par -
tial to well-defined concepts and clear success criteria, neither of which are imme-
diately forthcoming in this subfield. By far the least cohesive branch of ML, unsu-
pervised learning is a heterogeneous mix of methods left over after we have defined 
away the neater areas of supervised and reinforcement learning. According to the 
authors of one famous ML textbook, the field is characterized by “learning with-
out a teacher….The goal is to directly infer the properties of [a] probability density 
without the help of a supervisor…providing correct answers or degree-of-error for 
each observation” (Hastie et al., 2009, p. 486). In other words, unsupervised learn-
ing algorithms seek to find structure in data without recourse to labels (as in super -
vised learning) or reward signals (as in reinforcement learning). Just what “struc-
ture” amounts to, and how we should determine better or worse structures without 
any external feedback, are problems that each unsupervised learning algorithm must 
resolve in its own way.
I shall argue that unsupervised learning poses profound philosophical questions 
that are distinct from those raised by alternative branches of ML. These questions 
pertain to how and whether we can identify natural kinds, infer essential and contin-
gent properties, and imagine unrealized possibilities—all in a fully adaptive, data-
driven manner that eschews supervision. I examine three canonical unsupervised 
learning tasks—clustering (Section  2), abstraction (Section  3), and generative mod-
eling (Section  4)—and show how each forms a metaphysical hypothesis about its 
training data, and by extension the target system. I submit that unsupervised learn-
ing is ontologically fundamental—more so, at any rate, than supervised or reinforce-
ment learning algorithms, which necessarily presume some a priori division of the 
world into endogenous inputs (features) and exogenous outputs (errors/rewards). 
Following this critical exegesis, I examine the ethical implications and epistemolog-
ical limits of unsupervised learning (Section  5). I argue that the risk of self-delusion 
is especially acute with these algorithms, since their “fully automated” nature may 
seduce us into believing strange, potentially dangerous conclusions. I close with a 
summary and proposals for future research (Section 6).
Before going any further, I must make a few brief comments on notation. Though 
I will strive to keep statistical jargon to a minimum, I am afraid some formalisms 
are unavoidable. Unsupervised learning generally begins with a matrix of training 
data X, consisting of n samples and d features. A single observation is represented 
by a vector xi,i∈{1,…,n} , which can be considered a point in d-dimensional 
space. Features Xj,j∈{ 1,…,d}, may in principle be continuous or discrete. Since 
mixed covariates pose challenges for the methods below—challenges that are far 
from insurmountable but frankly irrelevant for our purposes—we will assume for