1 3On the Philosophy of Unsupervised Learning  Page 21 of 26 28
then build another set of models for the same task on synthetic data /uni0303.s1/u1D417 (Ravuri & 
Vinyals, 2019). If sample sizes match, then performance on /u1D417 represents the upper 
bound of possible performance on /uni0303.s1/u1D417 (up to some sampling error). The best genera-
tive models should produce synthetic datasets that closely approximate the mutual 
information structure of the original data, as evaluated by the predictive performance 
of supervised learning algorithm(s). Error-statistical reasoning can therefore help to 
improve standards for unsupervised learning and ensure more reliable results, even in 
the face of legitimate concerns over hyperparameters and data quality.
Model opacity can be addressed through methods from explainable AI (XAI), 
a fast-evolving if somewhat controversial research area devoted to making the pre-
dictions of supervised learning models more intelligible for end users.9 Leading 
examples include feature attributions, which explain model predictions as a sum of 
input features, and rule lists, which do so through a sequence of if–then statements. 
The applicability of such methods is perhaps most obvious in the case of clustering, 
which is similar in principle to classification and therefore amenable to the same 
XAI techniques developed for that domain. However, recent work has extended the 
logic of feature attributions to more general abstraction tasks (Crabbé & van der 
Schaar, 2022), an approach that could in principle be applied to generative models 
with an explicit embedding step.
Issues surrounding potential misuse are more complicated, for they raise larger 
questions of algorithmic governance. How should policymakers respond to rapid 
improvements in generative AI, which can be used for beneficial or diabolical pur -
poses? This is a classic conundrum in the philosophy of technology, perhaps most 
salient in the debates on nuclear energy, which could either represent humanity’s sal-
vation (in the form of a sustainable alternative to fossil fuels) or devastation (through 
apocalyptic weaponry delivered via intercontinental ballistic missiles). History offers 
no simple solutions to such dilemmas. In the present case, it is hard to see how regu-
latory measures could limit the proliferation of generative models. However, punitive 
sanctions could be implemented to disincentivize the creation or knowing dissemina-
tion of malicious deepfakes or other forms of misinformation. Meanwhile, techni-
cal solutions designed for algorithmic content moderation could be extended to cover 
such material (Gorwa et  al., 2020). These are admittedly imperfect tools, but they 
may make potential violators think twice before deployment. Regulatory and enforce-
ment mechanisms will no doubt continue to evolve as generative models improve.
6  Conclusion
Unsupervised learning algorithms are widely used in practice but rarely discussed in 
philosophy. In an effort to stimulate more critical reflection on this neglected branch 
of ML, I examined three common classes of unsupervised learning algorithms: clus-
tering, abstraction, and generative models. I argued that these technologies raise 
9 For an overview of XAI methods, see Adadi and Berrada (2018), Guidotti et al. (2018), Murdoch et al. 
(2019), and Rudin et al. (2021). For a discussion of some philosophical challenges surrounding the field, 
see Krishnan (2020), Sullivan (2020), Watson (2022), Watson and Floridi (2021), and Zednik (2019).