1 3On the Philosophy of Unsupervised Learning  Page 11 of 26 28
input level. To cite a famous example, word embeddings—mathematical representa-
tions of text data—have been known to capture analogical relations (Mikolov et al., 
2013). This results in equations of the sort “king” − “man” + “woman” ≈ “queen,” 
where the words are replaced with their latent vector representations as learned by 
the autoencoder.
Though originally conceived for generic statistical tasks, autoencoders and other 
latent variable methods have been repurposed for causal discovery and inference. 
Early work in this area includes the LiNGAM algorithm, which uses a form of inde-
pendent component analysis to learn a graphical model over observed covariates 
(Shimizu et al., 2006). More recently, causal representation learning has become a 
major research area, with ML practitioners increasingly acknowledging the utility 
of causal tools for transfer and generalization (Schölkopf et al., 2021). The strategy 
here is very different to coarsening, where we simply chunk the space into larger 
buckets. Instead, causal disentanglement algorithms such as /u1D6FD-VAE aim to learn 
latent factors that correspond to independent axes of variation, e.g., the style and 
content of an image (Higgins et al., 2017; von Kügelgen et al., 2021). In scientific 
applications, such embeddings may help to design interventions or estimate treat-
ment effects when randomized control trials are impossible.
The success of autoencoders has sparked a great deal of discussion—and per -
haps a bit of wonderment—among researchers. How can they be so effective with 
no supervision? One suggestion is the manifold hypothesis, which states that even in 
seemingly complex, high-dimensional domains such as text and genomics, data typi-
cally lie on a low-dimensional manifold that is far simpler than the original observa-
tions suggest. This hypothesis has received theoretical and empirical support (Fef-
ferman et al., 2016). If true, it may go some way toward explaining the unreasonable 
effectiveness of autoencoders. By learning the most efficient and accurate compres-
sion, we essentially approximate the true target manifold. That is why, for example, 
two-dimensional projections of transcriptomic profiles (with typical input dimen-
sions of about 40,000) are often sufficient to linearly separate disease and healthy 
samples in cancer studies. With the proper encoding scheme, information loss is 
minimal even under such dense compression.
The nearest analog to the manifold hypothesis in the philosophical canon is Pla-
to’s cave. Just as the prisoners in that famous allegory are forced to stare at shadows, 
limiting their reality to a dark, confusing jumble, so we are deceived into believing 
that the world is far more complex and chaotic than it really is. In fact, our observa-
tions are little more than distorted reflections of a relatively parsimonious reality that 
lies just beyond our powers of perception. In this analogy, abstraction algorithms 
serve the function of philosophers, providing us with tools to access the luminous 
substrata that explain the vagaries of our phenomenal experience. (Fortunately, in 
this version, we are not compelled to murder anyone.) For Plato, the hidden light 
corresponds to the Forms, immaterial essences that animate the imperfect imitations 
we find in the material realm. We need not follow Plato quite so far out of the cave 
to acknowledge a categorical distinction between essential and contingent proper -
ties, i.e., those that an object must have and those it could do without, respectively. 
Modern essentialism comes in many forms—see Robertson and Atkins (2020) for a 
good overview—but realists about essences (e.g., Kripke (1980), Ellis (2001), and