1 3On the Philosophy of Unsupervised Learning  Page 17 of 26 28
rest being mere whimsy or idle speculation. This move appears ad hoc and circular. 
It also runs into certain hard physical limits, given that faithful simulations of suba-
tomic events require sophisticated quantum computing techniques that may prove 
intractable beyond relatively small-scale phenomena.
5  Discussion
In the preceding sections, I introduced a variety of unsupervised learning algo-
rithms. My aim was not only to give some sense of the diversity of the field, 
but also to underscore the philosophical significance of these approaches, which 
provide data-driven methods for discovering natural kinds, learning essences, and 
sampling contingencies. Deep connections with ancient debates, not to mention 
basic functions of human language and cognition, substantiate my contention 
that unsupervised learning is not just some hodgepodge of statistical methods left 
over after we have analyzed the more substantive domains of supervised and rein-
forcement learning. On the contrary, unsupervised methods are fundamental and 
important, if chronically overlooked.
However, we should not be too sanguine about what these algorithms can 
achieve. Along with their distinctive metaphysical implications, unsupervised 
learning methods raise unique epistemological and ethical risks that merit closer 
inspection. It can be tempting to assume that the results of an unsupervised learn-
ing analysis are somehow “objective,” since they are untainted by human biases. 
For instance, if a clustering algorithm trained on gene expression data separates 
treated from untreated subjects, then this is arguably better evidence that the 
treatment causes transcriptomic effects than a supervised analysis that explicitly 
aimed to distinguish between the two classes. The hypothesis of genomic stratifi-
cation is baked into the latter model, whereas the former has no such preconcep-
tions. The point is valid, as far as it goes. However, any claims the algorithm may 
have to “objectivity” are conditioned upon user-supplied inputs and mediated by 
user-interpreted outputs. There is nothing automatic about the model’s data or 
hyperparameters, which inevitably encode certain assumptions and biases. More-
over, the reasoning behind algorithmic outputs is often opaque and inscrutable, 
raising major issues of trust and reliability.
Take hyperparameters first. As discussed above, clustering algorithms do not 
generally estimate the optimal number of clusters k . Some (like k -means) require 
this value upfront; others (like hierarchical clustering) compute results for all pos-
sible k. In both cases, biases can enter in. For k -means, issues may arise ex ante, as 
users neglect to test a sufficient range of values for k ; for hierarchical clustering, the 
danger is primarily post hoc, as users more or less eyeball what they deem a rea-
sonable cut point for the resulting dendrogram. A range of other hyperparameters 
may also influence results (e.g., maximum iterations or preferred distance meas-
ure). Moreover, since clustering algorithms do not test against the null hypothesis 
(i.e., k = 1), they may produce false positives, indicating cluster structure when in