Vol.:(0123456789)Philosophy & Technology (2023) 36:28
https://doi.org/10.1007/s13347-023-00635-6
1 3
RESEARCH ARTICLE
On the Philosophy of Unsupervised Learning
David S. Watson1 
Received: 9 September 2022 / Accepted: 6 April 2023 / Published online: 21 April 2023 
© The Author(s) 2023
Abstract
Unsupervised learning algorithms are widely used for many important statistical 
tasks with numerous applications in science and industry. Yet despite their preva-
lence, they have attracted remarkably little philosophical scrutiny to date. This 
stands in stark contrast to supervised and reinforcement learning algorithms, which 
have been widely studied and critically evaluated, often with an emphasis on ethical 
concerns. In this article, I analyze three canonical unsupervised learning problems: 
clustering, abstraction, and generative modeling. I argue that these methods raise 
unique epistemological and ontological questions, providing data-driven tools for 
discovering natural kinds and distinguishing essence from contingency. This analy -
sis goes some way toward filling the lacuna in contemporary philosophical discourse 
on unsupervised learning, as well as bringing conceptual unity to a heterogeneous 
field more often described by what it is not  (i.e., supervised or reinforcement learn-
ing) than by what it is. I submit that unsupervised learning is not just a legitimate 
subject of philosophical inquiry but perhaps the most fundamental branch of all AI. 
However, an uncritical overreliance on unsupervised methods poses major epistemic 
and ethical risks. I conclude by advocating for a pragmatic, error-statistical approach 
that embraces the opportunities and mitigates the challenges posed by this powerful 
class of algorithms.
Keywords Machine learning · Metaphysics · Epistemology · Clustering · 
Abstraction · Generative modeling
1 Introduction
Machine learning (ML) algorithms are increasingly integrated into every aspect 
of our lives. Whether it is recommending movies, diagnosing diseases, or defend-
ing against cyberattacks, ML has emerged as one of the dominant technologies of 
our age, powering countless advances in diverse fields such as robotics, particle 
 * David S. Watson 
 david.watson@kcl.ac.uk
1 Department of Informatics, King’s College London, London, UK