D. S. Watson 
1 328 Page 16 of 26
soon as we consider the difference between (a) classifying images of cats and dogs, 
and (b) painting realistic images of cats and dogs. Small children can execute (a) 
with 100% accuracy; only devoted artists with years of training could possibly per -
form (b) with sufficient skill to convince viewers the result may be a photograph.
The difficulty goes back again to the subtle task of distinguishing essence 
from contingency. A properly trained generator network f  has not only learned an 
abstraction /u1D419 that approximates the target manifold; it has also learned how to 
project that low-dimensional representation back to the high-dimensional realm 
in novel, realistic ways. In other words, it has not just captured the essence of a 
domain, but additionally modeled its contingencies. To return to the allegory of 
the cave, generative algorithms must both capture the light and sample the shad-
ows. These are dual tasks, just as necessity and possibility are dual operators in 
modal logic. However, whereas logic deals in binary evaluations, generative mod-
els must learn a probability distribution over the space of features that make up 
a possible world. In so doing, they delimit a horizon of possibility that consti-
tutes a form of knowledge unto itself. This is what Williamson (2016) refers to as 
“knowing by imagining,” a capacity he argues serves clear evolutionary purpose 
as it helps agents to plan, empathize, and avoid unnecessary risks. If generative 
models can successfully imagine unrealized possibilities, then their achievement 
is both metaphysical, insomuch as the algorithm models probable contingencies 
in the world, and epistemological, insomuch as imagination is itself a form of 
knowledge.
These points can be spelled out in a pair of theses with a now familiar structure. 
First, consider the epistemic claim:
EG: We identify unrealized possibilities via generative models, or something 
very much like them.
It is difficult to imagine how the skeptic might rebut EG, short of taking a hard 
actualist line and simply denying that there are any such things as unrealized pos-
sibilities. If there are, however, then any method for reasoning about them, rightly 
or wrongly, must rely on some sort of mental representation of the relevant circum-
stances. On the functionalist philosophy of cognition that I have espoused through-
out, this mental act requires a generative model more or less by definition. Of course, 
some models will be better than others—people err in their assumptions about pos-
sibilia all the time, just as some GANs may overfit or underperform, producing 
unconvincing samples that are noticeably synthetic. But even false judgments about 
unrealized possibilities require some generative reasoning to get off the ground.
Next, consider the ontological thesis:
OG: Unrealized possibilities are what generative models ought to learn under 
ideal conditions.
The attentive reader will likely anticipate my skepticism about OG, which cannot 
be affirmed without making the vaguely fantastical assumption that all unrealized 
possibilities are effectively computable. However, the methodological reductionist 
may insist that only effectively computable possibilities are true possibilities, the