D. S. Watson 
1 328 Page 10 of 26
learning such partitions are typically based on clustering algorithms of the sort 
described in Section  2. Popular examples include superpixels (Stutz et al., 2018), 
which segment images into contiguous patches. The approach has special appeal 
in cases where macro-objects may be more meaningful or useful for practitioners 
than micro-objects. This is the case, for instance, in some causal modeling tasks, 
where our ability to measure complex systems in fine detail exceeds the precision 
of possible interventions. Just because we can observe RNA abundance at the sin-
gle-cell level does not mean we can reliably stimulate individual transcripts. On 
the contrary, drug therapies are often messy affairs, activating and deactivating 
regulatory pathways in a complex, unpredictable cascade. Causal feature learn-
ing is an unsupervised data coarsening technique aimed at recovering high-level 
variables more amenable to intervention than low-level data (Beckers et al., 2019; 
Chalupka et al., 2017; Kinney & Watson, 2020). Such abstractions have obvious 
appeal for planning and design. Indeed, the merits of abstraction are well-appre-
ciated in the sciences, where modeling complex systems always involves a degree 
of idealization (Potochnik, 2017).
Neural networks take an entirely different approach to the problem of abstrac-
tion, most famously through a family of unsupervised learning algorithms called 
autoencoders. First, an input layer of data /u1D417 is mapped to an internal layer with 
fewer nodes. In deep autoencoders, a sequence of such mappings compresses the 
data still further. The result is a dense matrix /u1D419∈ℝn×dz , with dz<d. This object is 
called an embedding or a representation. So far, this more or less tracks the archi-
tecture of a supervised network, where internal layers are optimized to predict some 
outcome variable. In autoencoders, by contrast, the goal is to reconstruct the original 
data. In other words, we have two functions: an encoder f∶X↦Z and a decoder 
g∶Z↦X , which together form a sort of hourglass structure. With linear activa-
tions and a fully connected architecture, autoencoders instantiate a form of classical 
principal component analysis; with nonlinear activations, autoencoders can capture 
a far richer set of complex interactions. When models are successful, simple geo-
metric or arithmetic operations in the latent space often have clear semantics at the 
Fig. 3  Binary grids implementing noiseless (A) and noisy (B) patterns, respectively