1 3On the Philosophy of Unsupervised Learning  Page 19 of 26 28
exotic algorithms as a speculative exercise). Take clustering, for instance. The skep-
tic is right to point out that users may design distance functions that guarantee any 
arbitrary partition of the data. But is this a serious concern? Baroque and overly 
convenient feature mappings are a sure sign of statistical malpractice, and any criti-
cal investigation of the procedure will reveal this. Perhaps that is why practitioners 
generally stick with a small handful of common, simple distance measures. This still 
permits a plurality of plausible clusterings for any given dataset, but far short of 
the combinatorial explosion we would expect in a fully unrestricted setting. Among 
these choices, rational agents may disagree on which best reflects the true structure 
of the data. The same is true of many scientific problems, where competing models 
provide comparable fit to the evidence. In such cases, we must either suspend judg-
ment, in true Popperian fashion, or rely on alternative criteria (e.g., parsimony or 
consistency with auxiliary facts).
This raises a third and final reply to the vacuity objection—unsupervised learning 
models do not generally work in isolation. Instead, they are used in conjunction with 
a range of other methods to build evidence for or against particular conclusions. 
For instance, in the cancer subtyping literature, the clusters output by algorithms 
like k-means are often validated by comparing survival curves for the hypothesized 
groups via a log-rank test (Kleinbaum & Klein, 2012). Significant differences are 
interpreted as evidence in favor of the purported subtypes; insignificant differences 
suggest the clusters may have overfit. In this way, the assumptions and biases that 
drive individual model results can be independently corroborated. By incorporating 
unsupervised learning into the discovery pipeline, along with supervised methods 
and classical inference procedures, we can protect against allegations of ostensible 
vacuity.
These epistemological concerns take on ethical significance when unsupervised 
learning algorithms are applied in socially sensitive contexts. Marginalized groups 
cannot benefit from the purported advantages of these technologies if they are not 
represented in the data. To take one prominent example, autoencoders are widely 
used for dimensionality reduction in genome-wide association studies (GWAS). 
If the resulting abstractions in fact capture some essential properties of the human 
genome, they could advance our biological understanding and pave the way for 
major medical breakthroughs. However, genome banks do not represent a random 
sample of humanity. Some 80% of all GWAS subjects are individuals of white Euro-
pean ancestry, even though this group represents just 16% of the global population 
(Martin et al., 2019). Such disparities raise legitimate concerns that the advances of 
precision medicine will only exacerbate existing health inequalities.
Unsupervised learning algorithms threaten to do more than just amplify exist-
ing problems, however. They may create new ones all their own. Insisting on the 
objectivity of these models is like claiming that the invention of the camera makes it 
impossible for journalism to mislead. On the contrary, photography creates entirely 
new risks that were inconceivable before the medium was invented, since doctored 
photographs can be far more convincing than a mere rumor. This danger arguably 
reaches its apotheosis in deepfakes, which could be used for slander, blackmail, sab-
otage, propaganda, or other nefarious purposes. In an extreme scenario, deepfakes 
could potentially erode trust in all visual and audio evidence, making it vastly more