D. S. Watson 
1 328 Page 2 of 26
physics, and personal finance. Practitioners typically distinguish between three main 
branches of ML: supervised, unsupervised, and reinforcement learning.1 The first 
pertains to prediction problems, e.g., labeling images. The third pertains to policy 
optimization, e.g., learning boardgames. The subject of this article is the second 
branch, for which pithy descriptions are not nearly so straightforward.
To the extent that contemporary philosophers have engaged with ML at all, the 
focus has overwhelmingly been on supervised and reinforcement learning. For 
instance, many ethicists have critically evaluated the social, economic, and political 
impact of automated decision systems, typically identified with supervised learn-
ing models for scoring, ranking, and classification (Gabriel, 2020; Mittelstadt et al., 
2016; Tsamados et al., 2021; Zimmermann & Lee-Stronach, 2021). Philosophers of 
science have exploited the mathematical guarantees of supervised and reinforcement 
learning to defend or refine favored theories of knowledge and complexity (Corfield 
et  al., 2009; Harman & Kulkarni, 2007; Schurz, 2019; Sterkenburg & Grünwald, 
2021). Reinforcement learning has become a popular tool in evolutionary game the-
ory, social epistemology, and other settings where interactions between agents and 
environments can lead to unexpected results (Barrett et  al., 2019; LaCroix, 2020; 
Mayo-Wilson & Zollman, 2021; Skyrms, 2010). This sampling is no doubt imper -
fect and incomplete, but it serves to capture general trends and highlight an obvious 
lacuna.
Unsupervised learning is simply not a mainstream subject of contemporary phil-
osophical discourse. Exceptions to the trend are notable primarily for their scarcity. 
Clustering algorithms have inspired some theoretical analyses (Ackerman & Ben-
David, 2009; Hennig, 2015), primarily among practicing statisticians and com-
puter scientists—more on this in Section  2. A class of generative models known as 
“deepfakes” has attracted understandable concern among ethicists (de Ruiter, 2021; 
Öhman, 2022), as well as reflections on the nature of synthetic media (Millière, 
2022)—more on this in Sections. 4 –5. The success of adversarial methods, which 
fool high-performance classifiers by adding strategic perturbations to input data, 
has led some to speculate that these tools can detect genuine features of our real-
ity that are beyond human understanding (Buckner, 2020), an intriguing but so far 
underdeveloped proposal. In a recent article by Pääkkönen and Ylikoski (2021), 
the authors argue that topic modeling—an unsupervised learning algorithm for text 
mining—can help ground hermeneutic interpretation in objective evidence. Their 
analysis is limited to text data, with a focus on social scientific applications. Sev -
eral recent bibliometric studies have used topic modeling to analyze large corpora 
of philosophical publications (Kinney, 2022; Malaterre et al., 2021; Noichl, 2021). 
Though unsupervised learning methods are used in these works, they are not them-
selves the subject of inquiry. Unsupervised learning has received some attention 
in cognitive science and philosophy of mind, but even here the subject tends to get 
1 These categories are not mutually exclusive. Semi-supervised and self-supervised methods fall some-
where between the first two, for example. The so-called foundation models that have attracted particular 
attention in recent years (e.g., ChatGPT and DALL-E2) are examples of self-supervised learning. Such 
hybrids are beyond the scope of this article. See Bommasani et al. (2022).