D. S. Watson 
1 328 Page 12 of 26
Williamson (2013)) are unified in their belief that some such distinction obtains. For 
instance, I could have long or short hair depending on my taste. I could not, how -
ever, fail to be human. This is because my hairstyle is contingent, while my human-
ity is not—a non-human version of me would simply not be me.
I submit that abstraction algorithms can and often do help to infer essential prop-
erties. Just as with the discussion of natural kinds in Section  2, this claim has both 
epistemological and ontological dimensions. Specifically, we have the following 
thesis:
EA: We learn to identify essential properties via abstraction algorithms, or some-
thing very much like them.
It is worth reiterating that I take a functionalist view of computation on which the 
details of physical implementation are basically irrelevant. A pragmatic interpreta-
tion of constituent terms once again avoids the Scylla of antirealism and the Cha-
rybdis of realism. That said, proponents of each camp may find something to like 
in these theses—the former by arguing that essential properties are co-constituted 
by certain methods of abstraction, the latter by arguing that essences not only exist 
but may be learned from data. If any object has essential properties, then there must 
be some simplified representation thereof—stripping away the details and focusing 
instead on form, e.g., by ignoring irrelevant distinctions (coarsening) or reducing 
the whole to some relatively small set of independent components (projection). This 
procedure, however it is carried out, amounts to an abstraction algorithm.
But does this license an ontological reduction? Consider the claim:
OA: Essential properties are what abstraction algorithms ought to find under 
ideal conditions.
This thesis may seem attractive to those eager to supplant metaphysics with methodol-
ogy. However, OA fails in general for the same reason that OC fails. Even if we could 
identify satisfactory, noncircular “ideal conditions” for this problem, there can be no 
guarantee that all essential properties are effectively computable. Just because there 
is light behind the shadows does not mean that we will always find it. On the con-
trary, some objects may defy all efforts to reduce them to their essential form. This is 
a claim not about the limits of our cognition or technology but about the limits of our 
world. Abstraction algorithms may be sufficient to identify some essential properties, 
but essential properties are not necessarily identifiable via abstraction algorithms.
Though nothing in the mechanics of thought or language commits us to any 
particular theory of essence and contingency, an ability to appreciate a plurality 
of grammatical moods—to understand that though the world is this way, it might 
have been some other way—is a hallmark of intelligent behavior. Planning and other 
forms of higher order cognition require predication within and across modalities, 
skills that are inconceivable without some capacity for abstraction. The question 
of whether efficient and accurate encodings can in fact be learned—i.e., whether 
the manifold hypothesis applies—is clearly an empirical matter that must be evalu-
ated on a case-by-case basis. It certainly appears to hold in many important areas 
of interest, though it would be naïve to assume that this entails some universal law.