APREPRINT - JULY 3, 2020
performance. Cross-stitch networks only determine the best way to leverage features of given tasks. Therefore, it is the
responsibility of the algorithm designer to choose tasks efﬁciently before passing them to this network. Furthermore, it
is not clear where these units need to be inserted for maximum performance [3].
Figure 3: Cross-stitch units learn a linear combination of the previous layer outputs and pass it to next layers of the network. This
linear combination is parameterized using .Dare different-task values and Sare similar-task values. Reprinted from [3].
Using Uncertainty to Weigh Losses for Scene Geometry and Semantics
This approach utilizes the homoscedastic uncertainty of tasks which is a task-dependent uncertainty that captures the
relative conﬁdence between tasks, as a basis to weighing losses and adjust their relative weights in the model’s cost
function as opposed to tuning the weights manually. In other words, instead of manipulating internal parameters of the
network, the cost function is dynamically aligned during the training phase. This allows the network to simultaneously
learn multiple objectives and allows weights to be dynamic during training. A uniﬁed network with this method is used
to simultaneously learn multiple objectives and efﬁciently weigh them for semantic segmentation, instance segmentation
and depth regression. Kendall et al. [18] developed a model using this method on CityScapes [19], a dataset for road
scene understanding. This model takes in an RGB image and simultaneously produces a pixel-wise classiﬁcation,
semantic segmentation and pixel-wise depth estimation. This model is shown in Figure 4 and consists of several
convolutional encoders to produce a shared representation, as well as multiple decoders for each task speciﬁcally [18].
Figure 4: High level summary of deep convolutional encoder-decoder network architecture that incorporates tasks uncertainties to
build multi-task loss on CityScapes dataset. Reprinted from [18].
Sluice Networks
The last network that we discuss in this review is Sluice network which generalizes some of the methods we reviewed
earlier such as hard parameter sharing and cross-stitch networks [20]. This architecture learns layers and subspaces to
be shared and is capable of using speciﬁc parts of layers for different tasks. Skip connections are implemented to control
which internal blocks feed the ultimate task-speciﬁc outputs (Figure 5). Sluice network has shown to outperform some
of previous networks as a result of a more comprehensive and general approach to dMTL. However, in this method,
features are shared with equal weights and unhelpful tasks are of the same importance as the useful ones. This may
increase the possibility of misleading predictions.
3