A B RIEF REVIEW OF DEEPMULTI -TASK LEARNING AND
AUXILIARY TASK LEARNING
A P REPRINT
Partoo Vafaeikia, Khashayar Namdar, Farzad Khalvati
Department of Medical Imaging
University of Toronto
Toronto, ON, Canada
partoo.vafaeikia@mail.utoronto.ca
ernest.namdar@utoronto.ca
farzad.khalvati@utoronto.ca
July 3, 2020
ABSTRACT
Multi-task learning (MTL) optimizes several learning tasks simultaneously and leverages their shared
information to improve generalization and the prediction of the model for each task. Auxiliary tasks
can be added to the main task to ultimately boost the performance. In this paper, we provide a brief
review on the recent deep multi-task learning (dMTL) approaches followed by methods on selecting
useful auxiliary tasks that can be used in dMTL to improve the performance of the model for the
main task.
Introduction
Multi-task learning (MTL) is broadly used across various applications of machine learning and has several advantages in
comparison with the single-task learning. Since layers are shared between different tasks and features are not repeatedly
calculated for each task, the amount of memory used is reduced and the inference speed is improved. In addition, if
tasks share complimentary information, they act as regularizers for each other which results in the improvement of the
prediction performance of each task [1]. This has been proven in various areas such as detection and classiﬁcation [2],
computer vision [3, 4], depth estimation [5], natural language processing [6 –8] and drug discovery [9]. The goal of this
review paper is to provide an overview of various deep multi-task learning (dMTL) solutions and possible improvements
in performance through efﬁcient auxiliary tasks selection. One of the main challenges in dMTL is to decide what to
share across tasks to achieve better results by avoiding negative transfer, which describes a situation where an improper
feature sharing scheme would negatively impact the overall performance of the predictions instead of improving it. In
earlier approaches, this has mostly been done through hand-designed architectures where the network is manually tuned
to achieve the best performance. However, there is a large number of parameters for alteration, specially in deep MTL,
that makes it impossible to ﬁnd the best architecture with this approach. Therefore, in the ﬁrst part of this review, we
discuss dMTL architectures that ﬁnd the most optimal setting to tackle this issue. In addition to the network architecture,
a successful utilization of auxiliary tasks is of great importance for improving the performance of the model for the
main task [10]. Therefore, in the second part of this review, we provide a few methods that could be used to decide
which auxiliary tasks should be trained along with the main task.
Multi-Task learning for deep learning
Classic approaches in dMTL are generally categorized into two main architectures: hard [11] and soft [12] parameter
sharing (Figure 1). In hard parameter sharing, hidden layers are generally shared among all tasks and there are onlyarXiv:2007.01126v1  [cs.LG]  2 Jul 2020