APREPRINT - JULY 3, 2020
Figure 5: Sluice network that consists of one shared input layer, three hidden layers for each task and two task speciﬁc output layers.
parameter decides which features to be shared between the two task-speciﬁc networks and controls which ﬁnal outputs layers to
be used for prediction. Reprinted from [20].
Recent Approaches on Auxiliary Task Selection
As discussed earlier, auxiliary tasks are inﬂuential in MTL as they help the model improve and generalize better for the
main task. However, if not selected properly, they can negatively impact MTL models [21]. Therefore, choosing the
right auxiliary tasks in multi-task learning is crucial. This topic has received signiﬁcant attention in machine learning in
recent years and various approaches have been proposed on how to select optimal auxiliary tasks for a given main task.
In all these approaches, the optimal auxiliary tasks are selected from a pool of predeﬁned tasks.
Gradient Similarity for Auxiliary Losses
Du et al. proposed that there should be a similarity between the main tasks and the auxiliary tasks for the MTL to
be successful and to be preferred over a single task learning approach [10]. Their proposed method measures the
similarities between the main and auxiliary tasks using cosine similarity. This gives a measure to understand which
auxiliary tasks are helpful in the training. The ultimate goal is to utilize the helpful auxiliary losses and block negative
transfer where they are nonconstructive. Training on an auxiliary task is chosen only if its gradient has non-negative
cosine similarity with that of the main task. This method is not domain speciﬁc and can be utilized in various areas.
However, cosine similarity does not guarantee the usefulness of tasks and only removes those that certainly have
negative impact on the learning process.
Auxiliary Modules in dMTL
This approach tries to combine the two original methods, hard and soft parameter sharing, into one model and integrate
the beneﬁts of the soft parameter sharing to assist the training of a hard sharing network. The main network and the
auxiliary modules are optimized together during training where the auxiliary modules serve as a regularization by
introducing inductive bias to create a balance between the shared and task-speciﬁc representations in hidden layers.
These additional modules are removed during testing phase to avoid adding extra computational burden on the network
(Figure 6) [22].
Gated Multi-task Network
This network proposed the gated sharing units which ﬁlter the ﬂow of features between different task-speciﬁc layers to
reduce interference [23]. These units act like a gate mechanism which only allows the helpful auxiliary tasks to share
features and evidence with the main task. While every task has its own network, the gated sharing units selectively
allow features to be exchanged across task-speciﬁc layers and get merged. This is done through inserting a scalar
weight between every two tasks. This weight is updated by back-propagation and shows the similarity between the two
tasks (Figure 7). The advantage of this method is that it selects and calculates appropriate weights for auxiliary tasks
simultaneously which not only prevents harmful tasks from exchanging features with the main task but also allows the
most useful tasks to be more impactful by allocating higher weights to them. However, in Li et al. experiments, this
method has shown unstable results on different models [24].
4