APREPRINT - JULY 3, 2020
Figure 6: A comparison between hard parameter sharing (a), soft parameter sharing (c), and the proposed network (b). The auxiliary
moduleAt
lacts as a regularization for inductive transfer in layer land taskt. This module mimics the characteristics of the soft
parameter sharing. Reprinted from [22].
Figure 7: Gated Multi-Task Network: When task jborrows the features from task k, gategis inserted to select the helpful features.
The gate is calculated using , the scalar weight between two tasks that reﬂects the degree of association between them. Reprinted
from [23].
AUTOSEM: Automatic Task Selection and Mixing in Multi-Task Learning
Selecting best auxiliary tasks can be done through hyper-parameter tuning over all possible combinations or manual
intuition. However, this approach is error prone and human bias might be a barrier. Autosem framework divides this
optimization into two parts. First stage is automatic task selection of auxiliary tasks from all possible options. A
non-stationary multi-armed bandit controller is utilized which dynamically alternates between auxiliary tasks choices
and returns an estimate on their usefulness with respect to the main task. The second stage automatically learns a training
mixing ratio of the selected auxiliary tasks using a Bayesian optimization framework (Figure 8). The performance of
each setup is modeled as a Gaussian Process to ﬁnd the optimal mixing ratio value [21]. In contrast to previous methods,
this approach has two stages that each addresses a different problem. They show that having both stages improve the
performance of the model compared to a case where one stage is excluded and that they are both crucial in the process.
Conclusion
In this paper, we have brieﬂy discussed the motivation for deep multi-task leaning (dMTL) and the beneﬁts of having
auxiliary tasks in dMTL. In addition, we discussed recent methods on dMTL as well as auxiliary task selection. A
combination of the two techniques creates a framework that maximizes model performance.
5