Challenging Common Assumptions in the Unsupervised Learning of Disentangled Representations
Figure 4.(left) FactorVAE score vs hyperparameters for each score on Cars3d. There seems to be no model dominating all the othersand for each model there does not seem to be a consistent strategy in choosing the regularization strength. (center) Unsupervised scoresvs disentanglement metrics on Shapes3D. Metrics are abbreviated ((A)=BetaVAE Score, (B)=FactorVAE Score, (C)=MIG , (D)=DCIDisentanglement, (E)=Modularity, (F)=SAP). The unsupervised scores we consider do not seem to be useful for model selection. (right)Rank-correlation of DCI disentanglement metric across different data sets. Good hyperparameters only seem to transfer between dSpritesand Color-dSprites but not in between the other data sets.are consistent with the complete set of plots provided inFigure14of AppendixI.4.Finally, we perform a variance analysis by trying to predictthe different disentanglement scores using ordinary leastsquares for each data set: If we allow the score to dependonly on the objective function (treated as a categorical vari-able), we are only able to explain37%of the variance of thescores on average (see Table5in AppendixI.4for furtherdetails). Similarly, if the score depends on the Cartesianproduct of objective function and regularization strength(again categorical), we are able to explain59%of the vari-ance while the rest is due to the random seed.Implication.The disentanglement scores of unsupervisedmodels are heavily inﬂuenced by randomness (in the formof the random seed) and the choice of the hyperparameter(in the form of the regularization strength). The objectivefunction appears to have less impact.5.4. Are there reliable recipes for model selection?In this section, we investigate how good hyperparameterscan be chosen and how we can distinguish between goodand bad training runs. In this paper, we advocate that thatmodel selectionshould notdepend on the considered dis-entanglement score for the following reasons: The point ofunsupervised learning of disentangled representation is thatthere is no access to the labels as otherwise we could incor-porate them and would have to compare to semi-supervisedand fully supervised methods. All the disentanglement met-rics considered in this paper require a substantial amountof ground-truth labels or the full generative model (for ex-ample for the BetaV AE and the FactorV AE metric). Hence,one may substantially bias the results of a study by tun-ing hyperparameters based on (supervised) disentanglementmetrics. Furthermore, we argue that it is not sufﬁcient to ﬁxa set of hyperparametersa prioriand then show that one ofthose hyperparameters and a speciﬁc random seed achievesa good disentanglement score as it amounts to showing theexistence of a good model, but does not guide the practi-tioner in ﬁnding it. Finally, in many practical settings, wemight not even have access to adequate labels as it maybe hard to identify the true underlying factor of variations,in particular, if we consider data modalities that are lesssuitable to human interpretation than images.In the remainder of this section, we hence investigate andassess different ways how hyperparameters and good modelruns could be chosen. In this study, we focus on choosingthe learning model and the regularization strength corre-sponding to that loss function. However, we note that inpractice this problem is likely even harder as a practitionermight also want to tune other modeling choices such archi-tecture or optimizer.General recipes for hyperparameter selection.We ﬁrstinvestigate whether we may ﬁnd generally applicable “rulesof thumb” for choosing the hyperparameters. For this, weplot in Figure4(left) the FactorV AE score against differentregularization strengths for each model on the Cars3D dataset whereas Figure16in AppendixI.5shows the same plotfor all data sets and disentanglement metrics. The valuescorrespond to the median obtained values across 50 randomseeds for each model, hyperparameter and data set. Overall,there seems to be no model consistently dominating allthe others and for each model there does not seem to be aconsistent strategy in choosing the regularization strength tomaximize disentanglement scores. Furthermore, even if wecould identify a good objective function and correspondinghyperparameter value, we still could not distinguish betweena good and a bad training run.Model selection based on unsupervised scores.Anotherapproach could be to select hyperparameters based on un-supervised scores such as the reconstruction error, the KLdivergence between the prior and the approximate posterior,the Evidence Lower BOund or the estimated total corre-lation of the sampled representation (mean representationgives similar results). This would have the advantage that