Challenging Common Assumptions in the Unsupervised Learning of Disentangled Representations
representation and the ground-truth factor of variations.
Disentanglement is then measured as a particular structural
property of these relations ( Higgins et al. ,2017a ;Kim &
Mnih ,2018 ;Eastwood & Williams ,2018 ;Kumar et al. ,
2017;Chen et al. ,2018;Ridgeway & Mozer ,2018).
State-of-the-art approaches for unsupervised disentangle-
ment learning are largely based on Variational Autoencoders
(VAEs) (Kingma & Welling ,2014): One assumes a speciﬁc
prior P(z)on the latent space and then uses a deep neural
network to parameterize the conditional probability P(x|z).
Similarly, the distribution P(z|x)is approximated using a
variational distribution Q(z|x), again parametrized using a
deep neural network. The model is then trained by minimiz-
ing a suitable approximation to the negative log-likelihood.
The representation for r(x)is usually taken to be the mean
of the approximate posterior distribution Q(z|x). Several
variations of V AEs were proposed with the motivation that
they lead to better disentanglement ( Higgins et al. ,2017a ;
Burgess et al. ,2017;Kim & Mnih ,2018;Chen et al. ,2018;
Kumar et al. ,2017 ;Rubenstein et al. ,2018 ). The common
theme behind all these approaches is that they try to enforce
a factorized aggregated posteriorR
xQ(z|x)P(x)dx, which
should encourage disentanglement.
Our contributions. In this paper, we challenge commonly
held assumptions in this ﬁeld in both theory and practice.
Our key contributions can be summarized as follows:
•We theoretically prove that (perhaps unsurprisingly) the
unsupervised learning of disentangled representations is
fundamentally impossible without inductive biases both
on the considered learning approaches and the data sets.
•We investigate current approaches and their inductive
biases in a reproducible large-scale experimental study1
with a sound experimental protocol for unsupervised dis-
entanglement learning. We implement six recent unsu-
pervised disentanglement learning methods as well as six
disentanglement measures from scratch and train more
than12 000 models on seven data sets.
•We release disentanglement_lib2, a new library
to train and evaluate disentangled representations. As re-
producing our results requires substantial computational
effort, we also release more than 10 000 trained models
which can be used as baselines for future research.
•We analyze our experimental results and challenge com-
mon beliefs in unsupervised disentanglement learning: (i)
While all considered methods prove effective at ensuring
that the individual dimensions of the aggregated posterior
(which is sampled) are not correlated, we observe that the
1Reproducing these experiments requires approximately 2.52
GPU years (NVIDIA P100).
2https://github.com/google-research/
disentanglement_libdimensions of the representation (which is taken to be the
mean) are correlated. (ii) We do not ﬁnd any evidence
that the considered models can be used to reliably learn
disentangled representations in an unsupervised manner
as random seeds and hyperparameters seem to matter
more than the model choice. Furthermore, good trained
models seemingly cannot be identiﬁed without access
to ground-truth labels even if we are allowed to transfer
good hyperparameter values across data sets. (iii) For
the considered models and data sets, we cannot validate
the assumption that disentanglement is useful for down-
stream tasks, for example through a decreased sample
complexity of learning.
•Based on these empirical evidence, we suggest three crit-
ical areas of further research: (i) The role of inductive bi-
ases and implicit and explicit supervision should be made
explicit: unsupervised model selection persists as a key
question. (ii) The concrete practical beneﬁts of enforcing
a speciﬁc notion of disentanglement of the learned rep-
resentations should be demonstrated. (iii) Experiments
should be conducted in a reproducible experimental setup
on data sets of varying degrees of difﬁculty.
2. Other related work
In a similar spirit to disentanglement, (non-)linear indepen-
dent component analysis ( Comon ,1994 ;Bach & Jordan ,
2002 ;Jutten & Karhunen ,2003 ;Hyvarinen & Morioka ,
2016 ) studies the problem of recovering independent com-
ponents of a signal. The underlying assumption is that there
is a generative model for the signal composed of the com-
bination of statistically independent non-Gaussian compo-
nents. While the identiﬁability result for linear ICA ( Comon ,
1994 ) proved to be a milestone for the classical theory of
factor analysis, similar results are in general not obtainable
for the nonlinear case and the underlying sources gener-
ating the data cannot be identiﬁed ( Hyvarinen & Pajunen ,
1999 ). The lack of almost any identiﬁability result in non-
linear ICA has been a main bottleneck for the utility of the
approach ( Hyvarinen et al. ,2018 ) and partially motivated
alternative machine learning approaches ( Desjardins et al. ,
2012;Schmidhuber ,1992;Cohen & Welling ,2015). Given
that unsupervised algorithms did not initially perform well
on realistic settings most of the other works have consid-
ered some more or less explicit form of supervision ( Reed
et al. ,2014 ;Zhu et al. ,2014 ;Yang et al. ,2015 ;Kulka-
rni et al. ,2015 ;Cheung et al. ,2015 ;Mathieu et al. ,2016 ;
Narayanaswamy et al. ,2017 ;Suter et al. ,2018 ). (Hinton
et al.,2011 ;Cohen & Welling ,2014 ) assume some knowl-
edge of the effect of the factors of variations even though
they are not observed. One can also exploit known relations
between factors in different samples ( Karaletsos et al. ,2015;
Goroshin et al. ,2015 ;Whitney et al. ,2016 ;Fraccaro et al. ,