Challenging Common Assumptions in the Unsupervised Learning of Disentangled Representations
ation the normalized gap in mutual information between the
highest and second highest coordinate in r(x). Instead, the
Modularity (Ridgeway & Mozer ,2018 ) measures if each
dimension of r(x)depends on at most a factor of variation
using their mutual information. The Disentanglement metric
ofEastwood & Williams (2018) (which we call DCI Disen-
tanglement for clarity) computes the entropy of the distribu-
tion obtained by normalizing the importance of each dimen-
sion of the learned representation for predicting the value of
a factor of variation. The SAP score (Kumar et al. ,2017) is
the average difference of the prediction error of the two most
predictive latent dimensions for each factor. Implementation
details and further descriptions can be found in Appendix C.
Data sets. We consider four data sets in which xis ob-
tained as a deterministic function of z:dSprites (Higgins
et al.,2017a ),Cars3D (Reed et al. ,2015),SmallNORB (Le-
Cun et al. ,2004 ),Shapes3D (Kim & Mnih ,2018 ). We
also introduce three data sets where the observations xare
stochastic given the factor of variations z:Color-dSprites ,
Noisy-dSprites andScream-dSprites . InColor-dSprites , the
shapes are colored with a random color. In Noisy-dSprites ,
we consider white-colored shapes on a noisy background.
Finally, in Scream-dSprites the background is replaced with
a random patch in a random color shade extracted from the
famous The Scream painting ( Munch ,1893 ). The dSprites
shape is embedded into the image by inverting the color of
its pixels. Further details on the preprocessing of the data
can be found in Appendix H.
Inductive biases. To fairly evaluate the different ap-
proaches, we separate the effect of regularization (in the
form of model choice and regularization strength) from the
other inductive biases (e.g., the choice of the neural architec-
ture). Each method uses the same convolutional architecture,
optimizer, hyperparameters of the optimizer and batch size.
All methods use a Gaussian encoder where the mean and the
log variance of each latent factor is parametrized by the deep
neural network, a Bernoulli decoder and latent dimension
ﬁxed to 10. We note that these are all standard choices in
prior work ( Higgins et al. ,2017a ;Kim & Mnih ,2018).
We choose six different regularization strengths, i.e., hy-
perparameter values, for each of the considered methods.
The key idea was to take a wide enough set to ensure that
there are useful hyperparameters for different settings for
each method and not to focus on speciﬁc values known to
work for speciﬁc data sets. However, the values are par-
tially based on the ranges that are prescribed in the literature
(including the hyperparameters suggested by the authors).
We ﬁx our experimental setup in advance and we run all the
considered methods on each data set for 50 different random
seeds and evaluate them on the considered metrics. The
full details on the experimental setup are provided in the
Appendix G. Our experimental setup, the limitations of thisstudy, and the differences with previous implementations
are extensively discussed in Appendices D-F.
5. Key experimental results
In this section, we highlight our key ﬁndings with plots
speciﬁcally picked to be representative of our main results.
In Appendix I, we provide the full experimental results with
a complete set of plots for different methods, data sets and
disentanglement metrics.
5.1. Can current methods enforce a uncorrelated
aggregated posterior and representation?
While many of the considered methods aim to enforce a
factorizing and thus uncorrelated aggregated posterior (e.g.,
regularizing the total correlation of the sampled representa-
tion), they use the mean vector of the Gaussian encoder as
the representation and not a sample from the Gaussian en-
coder. This may seem like a minor, irrelevant modiﬁcation;
however, it is not clear whether a factorizing aggregated
posterior also ensures that the dimensions of the mean rep-
resentation are uncorrelated. To test the impact of this, we
compute the total correlation of both the mean and the sam-
pled representation based on ﬁtting Gaussian distributions
for each data set, model and hyperparameter value (see
Appendix CandI.2for details).
Figure 1(left) shows the total correlation based on a ﬁtted
Gaussian of the sampled representation plotted against the
regularization strength for each method except Annealed-
V AE on Color-dSprites. We observe that the total correlation
of the sampled representation generally decreases with the
regularization strength. One the other hand, Figure 1(right)
shows the total correlation of the mean representation plot-
ted against the regularization strength. It is evident that the
total correlation of the mean representation generally in-
creases with the regularization strength. The only exception
is DIP-V AE-I for which we observe that the total correlation
Figure 1. Total correlation based on a ﬁtted Gaussian of the sam-
pled (left) and the mean representation (right) plotted against reg-
ularization strength for Color-dSprites and approaches (except
AnnealedV AE). The total correlation of the sampled representation
decreases while the total correlation of the mean representation
increases as the regularization strength is increased.