Challenging Common Assumptions in the Unsupervised Learning of Disentangled Representations
Table 1. Probability of outperforming random model selection on a
different random seed. A random disentanglement metric and data
set is sampled and used for model selection. That model is then
compared to a randomly selected model: (i) on the same metric
and data set, (ii) on the same metric and a random different data
set, (iii) on a random different metric and the same data set, and
(iv) on a random different metric and a random different data set.
The results are averaged across 10 000 random draws.
Random data set Same data set
Random metric 54.9% 62.6%
Same metric 59.3% 80.7%
we could select speciﬁc trained models and not just good
hyperparameter settings whose median trained model would
perform well. To test whether such an approach is fruitful,
we compute the rank correlation between these unsuper-
vised metrics and the disentanglement metrics and present
it in Figure 4(center) for Shapes3D and in Figure 16of
Appendix I.5for all the different data sets. While we do
observe some correlations, no clear pattern emerges which
leads us to conclude that this approach is unlikely to be
successful in practice.
Hyperparameter selection based on transfer. The ﬁnal
strategy for hyperparameter selection that we consider is
based on transferring good settings across data sets. The
key idea is that good hyperparameter settings may be in-
ferred on data sets where we have labels available (such as
dSprites) and then applied to novel data sets. Figure 4(right)
shows the rank correlations obtained between different data
sets for the DCI disentanglement (whereas Figure 17in Ap-
pendix I.5shows it for all data sets). We ﬁnd a strong and
consistent correlation between dSprites and Color-dSprites.
While these results suggest that some transfer of hyper-
parameters is possible, it does not allow us to distinguish
between good and bad random seeds on the target data set.
To illustrate this, we compare such a transfer based approach
to hyperparameter selection to random model selection as
follows: First, we sample one of our 50 random seeds, a
random disentanglement metric and a data set and use them
to select the hyperparameter setting with the highest attained
score. Then, we compare that selected hyperparameter set-
ting to a randomly selected model on either the same or
a random different data set, based on either the same or a
random different metric and for a randomly sampled seed.
Finally, we report the percentage of trials in which this
transfer strategy outperforms or performs equally well as
random model selection across 10 000 trials in Table 1. If
we choose the same metric and the same data set (but a dif-
ferent random seed), we obtain a score of 80.7%. If we aim
to transfer for the same metric across data sets, we achieve
around 59.3%. Finally, if we transfer both across metrics
and data sets, our performance drops to 54.9%.
Figure 5. Rank correlations between disentanglement metrics and
downstream performance (accuracy and efﬁciency) on dSprites.
Implications. Unsupervised model selection remains an un-
solved problem. Transfer of good hyperparameters between
metrics and data sets does not seem to work as there appears
to be no unsupervised way to distinguish between good and
bad random seeds on the target task.
5.5. Are these disentangled representations useful for
downstream tasks in terms of the sample
complexity of learning?
One of the key motivations behind disentangled rep-
resentations is that they are assumed to be useful for
later downstream tasks. In particular, it is argued that
disentanglement should lead to a better sample complexity
of learning ( Bengio et al. ,2013 ;Schölkopf et al. ,2012 ;
Peters et al. ,2017). In this section, we consider the simplest
downstream classiﬁcation task where the goal is to recover
the true factors of variations from the learned representation
using either multi-class logistic regression (LR) or gradient
boosted trees (GBT).
Figure 5shows the rank correlations between the disen-
tanglement metrics and the downstream performance on
dSprites. We observe that all metrics except Modularity
seem to be correlated with increased downstream perfor-
mance on the different variations of dSprites and to some
degree on Shapes3D but not on the other data sets. However,
it is not clear whether this is due to the fact that disentangled
representations perform better or whether some of these
scores actually also (partially) capture the informativeness
of the evaluated representation. Furthermore, the full results
in Figure 19of Appendix I.6indicate that the correlation is
weaker or inexistent on other data sets (e.g. Cars3D).
To assess the sample complexity argument we compute
for each trained model a statistical efﬁciency score which
we deﬁne as the average accuracy based on 100samples
divided by the average accuracy based on 10 000 samples.
Figure 6show the sample efﬁciency of learning (based on
GBT) versus the FactorV AE Score on dSprites. We do not
observe that higher disentanglement scores reliably lead to
a higher sample efﬁciency. This ﬁnding which appears to be
consistent with the results in Figures 20-23of Appendix I.6.