TextBlob V ADER
LSTM+randomLSTM+pretrainedBERT00.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.91
0.53
0.63
0.58
0.61
0.810.5
0.57
0.44
0.58
0.79AccuracyValidation set
Test set
Figure 1 : Validation and test set accuracy across regard
classiﬁer models
between 1) sentiment annotations and regard an-
notations, 2) V ADER predictions and sentiment
annotations, and 3) V ADER predictions and re-
gard annotations in Table 5. In general, the corre-
lations indicate that sentiment is a better proxy for
bias in respect contexts than in occupation con-
texts. Sentences that describe varying levels of
respect for a demographic tend to contain more
adjectives that are strongly indicative of the over-
all sentiment. In contrast, sentences describing
occupations are usually more neutrally worded,
though some occupations are socially perceived to
be more positive or negative than others.
Building an automatic regard classiﬁer Al-
though the correlations between sentiment and re-
gard are all at least moderately high, regard is,
by design, a direct measurement of prejudices to-
wards different demographics and thus a more ap-
propriate metric for bias. We evaluate the feasi-
bility of building an automatic regard classiﬁer.
For all experiments, we randomly partition the an-
notated samples into train (212 samples), devel-
opment (60 samples), and test (30 samples) sets.
Each accuracy score we report is averaged over 5
model runs. We compare simple 2-layer LSTM
classiﬁcation models, re-purposed sentiment ana-
lyzers, and transfer learning BERT models.8
We ﬁnd limited success with the LSTM mod-
els when using either random embeddings or pre-
trained and tunable word embeddings. In fact, a
re-purposed off-the-shelf sentiment analyzer (i.e.,
taking sentiment predictions as regard predic-
tions) does better than or is comparable with the
8Model details and hyperparameters in AppendixLSTM models. We attribute these results to our
limited dataset. As shown in Figure 1, the BERT
model outperforms all other models by more than
20%in test set accuracy9(and similarly for the dev
set). Although our dataset is not large, the promis-
ing results of transfer learning indicate the feasi-
bility of building a regard classiﬁer.
5 Biases in language generation systems
We use V ADER as the sentiment analyzer and our
BERT-based model as the regard classiﬁer to ana-
lyze biases in language generation systems. Row
(1) of Figure 2presents results on samples gener-
ated from GPT-2, where there are 500 samples for
each<bias context, demographic >pair.10Charts
(1a) and (1b) in Figure 2show regard and senti-
ment scores for samples generated with a respect
context. While the general positive versus nega-
tive score trends are preserved across demographic
pairs (e.g., Black vs.White ) across charts (1a) and
(1b), the negative regard score gaps across demo-
graphic pairs are more pronounced. Looking at
charts (1c) and (1d) in Figure 2, we see that the
regard classiﬁer labels more occupation samples
as neutral, and also increases the gap between the
negative scores and decreases the gap between the
positive scores. We see similar trends of the re-
gard scores increasing the gap in negative scores
across a corresponding demographic pair in both
the LM 1B-generated samples in row (2) and the
annotated samples in row (3).11
Overall, GPT-2 text generations exhibit differ-
ent levels of bias towards different demographics.
Speciﬁcally, when conditioning on context related
torespect , there are more negative associations of
black ,man, and gaydemographics. When condi-
tioning on context related to occupation , there are
more negative associations of black ,woman , and
gaydemographics.12Interestingly, we also ob-
serve that the LM 1B samples are overall less bi-
ased across demographic pairs compared to GPT-
2. These observations of bias in NLG are im-
portant for mitigating the perpetuation of social
9The accuracy scores are similar across bias types; BERT
has an averaged 78% for respect and 79% for occupation .
10500 samples for each bar in each chart
11Note that each chart in row (3) has 302 samples dis-
tributed among all demographics rather than 500 per demo-
graphic in the other rows. Accordingly, there are some trend s
that differ from those in rows (1) and (2), e.g., Black being
both more positive and more negative than White in Chart
(3c), which we leave for future analysis.
12The occupation of “prostitute” appears frequently.