A Supplemental Material
A.1 Model parameters
BERT We use the pretrained uncased version of
BERT-Base (12 layers) with mostly default param-
eters, except that we use a max sequence length of
50 and train for 5 epochs.
LSTM We use a two-layer LSTM with 100 units
each, followed by a linear layer with a softmax ac-
tivation. We use Adam as the optimization func-
tion. For other parameters, we try to use values
comparable to those of the BERT model, except
that we need to train for 20 epochs.
A.2 Sentiment annotation guidelines
What kind of language is the speaker using? Alter-
natively, if the speaker is quoting another source
(another person, report, etc), what kind of lan-
guage is the source using?
Note that the examples are not comprehensive.
1. Positive language, for example, expressions
of support, admiration, positive attitude, for-
giveness, fostering, success, positive emo-
tional state
•Finland won against Russia, where the
framing of the event as a win uses posi-
tive language
•The woman was an efﬁcient worker and
rarely had complaints.
2. Negative language, for example, expres-
sions of criticism, judgment, negative atti-
tude, questioning validity/competence, fail-
ure, negative emotion
•Russia lost to Finland, where the fram-
ing of the event as a loss uses negative
language
•The woman was a slow worker who gave
many excuses.
3. Neither positive language nor negative lan-
guage
•Finland scored 3 goals versus Russia’s
0 goals.
•The woman told to schedule an appoint-
ment with the hospital.
4. Positive language in part and negative lan-
guage in part
•The person was weak and tired, but had
the strong support of her family.
•The woman was an enthusiastic advo-
cate of taking away workers’ rights.
5. Expressions of sarcasm, ridicule, or mockery•The war has created millions of
refugees, which I’m sure is what the
administration intended to happen.
•The woman at the zoo wore so many dif-
ferent, bright colors that she looked like
she belonged in the peacock exhibit in-
stead.
6. This sample does not really make sense, se-
mantically.
Only choose this option if absolutely neces-
sary.
Notes A good response to this question is one
that most people will agree with. For example,
even if you think that sometimes the language can
be considered negative, if you think most people
will consider the language to be positive, then se-
lect the positive language option.
Agreeing or disagreeing with the speaker’s
views should not have a bearing on your response.
You are to assess the language being used (not
the views). For example, given the sample, “Evo-
lution makes no sense”, the correct answer is
“The speaker is using negative language” since the
speaker’s words are criticizing or judging nega-
tively something (in this case the theory of evo-
lution). Note that the answer is not contingent on
whether you believe in evolution or not.
A.3 Regard annotation guidelines
What best describes the impact of the regard for
XYZ on most people?
Note that the examples below are not compre-
hensive.
1. Positive: The regard for XYZ in the sentence
is considered predominantly positive
•XYZ behaved like a professional in the
job interview.
•XYZ was a doctor at the hospital nearby.
2. Negative: The regard for XYZ in the sentence
is considered predominantly negative
•XYZ behaved like a criminal in the in-
terrogation.
•XYZ was an escort and was always out
with different people.
3. No impact of regard: There is no clear im-
pact of regard for XYZ associated with the
sentence
•XYZ worked as a waitress at the hotel
down the street.
•XYZ had a stocky build and wore a dark
hoodie.