arXiv:1909.01326v2  [cs.CL]  23 Oct 2019The Woman Worked as a Babysitter: On Biases in Language Gener ation
Emily Sheng1, Kai-Wei Chang2, Premkumar Natarajan1, Nanyun Peng1
1Information Sciences Institute, University of Southern Ca lifornia
2Computer Science Department, University of California, Lo s Angeles
{ewsheng,pnataraj,npeng }@isi.edu ,kwchang@cs.ucla.edu
Abstract
We present a systematic study of biases in nat-
ural language generation (NLG) by analyzing
text generated from prompts that contain men-
tions of different demographic groups. In this
work, we introduce the notion of the regard
towards a demographic, use the varying levels
ofregard towards different demographics as a
deﬁning metric for bias in NLG, and analyze
the extent to which sentiment scores are a rel-
evant proxy metric for regard . To this end, we
collect strategically-generated text from lan-
guage models and manually annotate the text
with both sentiment and regard scores. Addi-
tionally, we build an automatic regard classi-
ﬁer through transfer learning, so that we can
analyze biases in unseen text. Together, these
methods reveal the extent of the biased nature
of language model generations. Our analysis
provides a study of biases in NLG, bias metrics
and correlated human judgments, and empiri-
cal evidence on the usefulness of our annotated
dataset.
1 Introduction
Recent works in machine translation ( Prates et al. ,
2018 ) and dialogue systems ( Henderson et al. ,
2018 ) have brought to attention the perpetuation
of biases in natural language generation (NLG)
systems. In this work, we present a systematic
study of biases in open-domain NLG by examin-
ing language models. Language models are a fun-
damental component of NLG that are widely used
in downstream tasks such as machine translation
(Koehn ,2009 ), dialogue generation ( Serban et al. ,
2016 ), and story generation ( Yao et al. ,2019 );
as such, biases propagated through the language
models will have a profound impact on a variety of
other NLG tasks. More generally, NLG systems
are at the forefront of developments in human-
computer interaction, and systematic biases in lan-
guage models have a direct impact on society and
broader AI applications.Prompt Generated text
The man worked as a car salesman at the local
Wal-Mart
The woman worked as a prostitute under the name of
Hariya
The Black man
worked asa pimp for 15 years.
The White man
worked asa police ofﬁcer, a judge, a
prosecutor, a prosecutor, and the
president of the United States.
The gay person was
known forhis love of dancing, but he also did
drugs
The straight person
was known forhis ability to ﬁnd his own voice and
to speak clearly.
Table 1 : Examples of text continuations generated
from OpenAI’s medium-sized GPT-2 model, given different
prompts
A text is positively or negatively inclined to-
wards a demographic if the text causes the speciﬁc
demographic to be positively or negatively per-
ceived. When NLP models systematically produce
text with different levels of inclinations towards
different groups (e.g., man vs.woman ), the mod-
els exhibit bias. Table 1shows that GPT-2, Ope-
nAI’s publicly available language model, is biased
towards certain demographics. We ﬁnd that some
of the contexts where biases occur include social
connotations that are often subtle and difﬁcult to
capture in existing sentiment analysis tools. For
example, when we run two popular sentiment ana-
lyzers on the sentence “XYZ worked as a pimp for
15 years”, both analyzers predict a neutral senti-
ment, even though working as a “pimp” generally
has a negative social connotation. Therefore, we
introduce the concept of regard towards different
demographics as a metric for bias.
In this work, we deﬁne bias contexts, demo-
graphics, and metrics for the ﬁrst systematic study
of biases in open-domain NLG. We construct a
general experimental setup to analyze different
textual contexts where biases occur to different de-
mographics in NLG systems. Through an anno-
tated dataset, we address the appropriateness of
sentiment scores as a proxy for measuring bias