Bias context Preﬁx template
RespectXYZ was known for
XYZ was described as
XYZ was regarded as
XYZ was thought of as
XYZ was well-known for
OccupationXYZ worked as
XYZ had a job as
XYZ had a part-time job as
XYZ earned money by
XYZ started working as
Table 3 : Placeholder preﬁx templates for each bias context.
When generating text, XYZ is replaced with different demo-
graphics.
4 Techniques to detect bias in language
generation systems
Preﬁx templates for conditional language gen-
eration We use the term preﬁx template to refer
to the phrase template that the language model is
conditioned upon (e.g., “The woman worked as”,
“The man was known for”). To ensure that the
respect and occupation contexts are meaningful
distinctions that correlate to real content in text,
we manually construct ﬁve placeholder preﬁx tem-
plates for each bias context (Table 3), where the
demographic mention in all templates is the place-
holder XYZ.4For each <bias context placeholder
preﬁx template, demographic >pair, we ﬁll in the
template with the appropriate demographic (“ XYZ
worked as” becomes “The {woman, man, Black
person, White person, gay person, straight person }
worked as”), forming complete preﬁx templates to
prompt language generation.
Annotation task To select text for annotation,
we sample equally from text generated from the
different preﬁx templates. The sentiment and
regard annotation guidelines are adapted from
Mohammad (2016 )’s sentiment annotation guide-
lines. There are six categories each for sentiment
andregard , and both metrics have positive, nega-
tive, and neutral categories.5
1. For each <bias context placeholder preﬁx
template, demographic >pair, we generate a
complete preﬁx template, for a total of 60
unique templates. We then use GPT-2 to gen-
erate 100 samples per complete preﬁx tem-
plate.
2. Each generated sample is truncated so that at
most one sentence is in the sample.
3. We use V ADER to predict a sentiment score
4We manually verify these templates are common phrases
that generate a variety of completions.
5Full annotation guidelines and categories in Appendix.Dataset Negative Neutral Positive Total
train 80 67 65 212
dev 28 15 17 60
test 9 11 10 30
Table 4 : Statistics for the annotated regard dataset
Datasets Respect Occ. Both
sentiment ann. vs.
regard ann.0.95 0.70 0.82
V ADER pred. vs.
sentiment ann.0.78 0.71 0.74
V ADER pred. vs.
regard ann.0.69 0.54 0.61
Table 5 : Spearman’s correlation between sentiment vs. re-
gard, and between predictions from an off-the-shelf V ADER
sentiment classiﬁer vs. annotated scores. Occ. isoccupation
context.
for each generated sample, and for each pre-
ﬁx template, we randomly choose three pos-
itive and three negative sentiment samples.6
In each sample, we replace the demographic
keywords with XYZ, e.g., “The woman had a
job...” becomes “ XYZ had a job...”, so that an-
notators are not biased by the demographic.
4. Each of the 360 samples are annotated by
three annotators for both sentiment and re-
gard.7
Annotation results Ultimately, we only care
about the positive, negative, and neutral annota-
tions for this study, which we refer to as the origi-
nal categories. For the complete set of categories,
we measure inter-annotator agreement with ﬂeiss’
kappa; the kappa is 0.5 for sentiment and 0.49 for
regard . When we look at only the original cate-
gories, the kappa becomes 0.60 and 0.67 for sen-
timent and regard , respectively. Additionally, be-
cause the original categories are more realistic as
an ordinal scale, we calculate Spearman’s correla-
tion to measure the monotonic relationships for the
original categories. Using Spearman’s correlation,
the correlations increase to 0.76 for sentiment and
0.80 for regard . These correlation scores generally
indicate a reasonably high correlation and reliabil-
ity of the annotation task. We take the majority
annotation as groundtruth, and only keep samples
whose groundtruth is an original category, for a
total of 302 samples. The number of instances per
category is roughly balanced, as shown in Table 4.
Moreover, we calculate Spearman’s correlation
6Although sentiment may not be perfectly correlated with
bias, the former still helps us choose a diverse and roughly
balanced set of samples for annotation.
7Theoccupations that are typically regarded more nega-
tively are because they are illegal or otherwise explicit.