Example sentiment regard for
XYZ
XYZ was a pimp and her
friend was happy.+ -
XYZ, known for his kindness,
had died alone.- +
XYZ was very bright and was
always helpful.+ +
XYZ was a major bully. - -
Table 2 : Examples showing cases where sentiment and re-
gard labels are the same and cases where they differ. XYZ
represents a demographic group.
across varying textual contexts. We then use the
annotations to build a classiﬁer for regard , and use
both sentiment and regard to present biases found
in NLG systems. We are making the annotations
public.1
2 Deﬁnitions
Bias contexts Biases can occur in different tex-
tual contexts, some biases manifesting more sub-
tly than others. In this work, we analyze bi-
ases that occur in two contexts: those that deal
with descriptive levels of respect towards a de-
mographic and those that deal with the different
occupations of a demographic. The ﬁrst four ex-
amples in Table 1are generated text with occu-
pation contexts, and the latter two are generated
text with respect contexts. We analyze these two
bias contexts because the occupation context has
been well-studied in other tasks ( Bolukbasi et al. ,
2016 ;Rudinger et al. ,2018 ;Zhao et al. ,2018 ;
Zhou et al. ,2019 ), and the more descriptive lan-
guage in respect contexts are a good contrast for
the more subtle occupation contexts. For each
context, we analyze generated sentences that have
been conditioned on content relating to the bias
context.
Demographics In the process of examining bi-
ases in language generation, we need to compare
the magnitude of biases across different demo-
graphics. Here, we use the term “demographic”
to refer to a group of people with the same gender,
race, or sexual orientation. Speciﬁcally, we exam-
ine the groups female andmale for gender, Black
andWhite for race, and gayandstraight for sexual
orientation.2
Regard Sentiment scores capture differences in
language polarity and has been used to quan-
1https://github.com/ewsheng/nlg-bias
2To constrain the scope of our analysis, we limit each de-
mographic type to two classes, which, while unrepresentati ve
of the real-world diversity, allows us to focus on more depth
in analysis.tify bias ( Kiritchenko and Mohammad ,2018 ), but
there has been little analysis on the correlation of
sentiment to human judgment of bias. Evaluating
biases requires a metric that is directed towards a
demographic and that relies on additional cues be-
yond language polarity. In this work, we deﬁne an
alternate metric for bias by introducing the con-
cept of the regard towards a demographic (e.g.,
positive, neutral, negative), and measuring the dif-
ferences in regard scores across gender, race, and
sexual orientation demographics. In other words,
we speciﬁcally design regard to measure bias. Al-
though both regard and sentiment scores are de-
ﬁned on a positive vs. neutral vs. negative scale,
regard measures language polarity towards and
social perceptions of a demographic, while senti-
ment only measures overall language polarity. In
Table 2, example sentences with sentiment and
regard labels are shown; the ﬁrst two examples
present cases where the sentiment and regard met-
rics differ. The intuition to understand regard is
that if language model-generated sentences cause
group Ato be more highly thought of than group B,
then the language model perpetuates bias towards
group B.
3 Models
Language models We analyze OpenAI’s GPT-2
(small) language model ( Radford et al. ,2019 ) and
Google’s language model trained on the One Bil-
lion Word Benchmark ( Jozefowicz et al. ,2016 ).
These language models are chosen because they
have been trained on a large amount of data, are
widely used, and are publicly available. GPT-2
is a unidirectional, transformer-based model that
was trained to predict the next word in a sen-
tence, given all the previous words in the sentence.
Google’s language model (henceforth referred to
asLM1B), combines a character-level convolu-
tional neural network (CNN) input with a long
short-term memory (LSTM) network.
Off-the-shelf sentiment analyzers In this work,
we use V ADER ( Hutto and Gilbert ,2014 ) as the
main sentiment analyzer to compare with regard
and analyze biases. V ADER is a rule-based sen-
timent analyzer that is more robust when applied
to our domain of generated text than other off-the-
shelf sentiment analyzers we explore. We also use
TextBlob,3another pattern-based sysem, as one
baseline for the regard classiﬁcation experiments.
3https://textblob.readthedocs.io/en/dev/