106 Cognitive Computation (2023) 15:103–120
1 3
neurons) that could have produced the observed data. During 
the generation phase, the visible neurons are not clamped to 
the data, and all neurons are activated in a top-down fashion 
in order to produce a plausible activation pattern, that is, to 
generate a sample from the internal model.
In the classical approach [ 2], the RBM constituting the 
bottom layer of the DBN is initially trained using the input 
data. Once this first layer has been fully trained, the weights 
of the first RBM are “frozen” and the input data set is pro-
jected into the activation space of the hidden neurons, thus 
creating a new training set that is used as input for the sec-
ond RBM (black arrows in Fig.  1a). Once training of the sec-
ond layer is completed, the data projection is made likewise 
to create the training set for the third layer; the procedure is 
repeated for all the layers constituting the DBN, as shown in 
Fig. 1a. Note that the data patterns projected into the deeper 
layers are created by computing the conditional probability 
distribution of the hidden neurons given the activation of the 
neurons observed in the layer below [41].
Iterative Joint Learning
In contrast to the greedy approach, the proposed iDBN 
learning algorithm attempts to update at once all the param-
eters of the hierarchical generative model, regardless of the 
depth of the respective layer (see Fig.  1b).
As noted before, in the greedy algorithm deeper layers 
are trained sequentially, using as input the projection of 
the data through the weights resulting from learning in the 
previous layers. In our novel iterative algorithm, instead, 
the training patterns for the deeper layers are immediately 
created following each sensory experience, by propagat -
ing the input across the entire processing hierarchy (green 
arrows in Fig.  1b). This process mimics the fast feed-forward 
sweep observed in cortical circuits, where neuronal activ -
ity is rapidly routed to a large number of visual areas after 
stimulus presentation [42, 43]. It should be noted that in 
our algorithm the complete feed-forward sweep occurs even 
during the initial learning phase, where all the connection 
weights are randomly initialized, which makes learning of 
the subsequent layers challenging since the data distribution 
(i.e., hidden unit activation) is non-stationary. Concurrently 
with the fast feed-forward sweep, top-down generative con-
nections are locally used to reconstruct the data representa-
tions at each level of the hierarchy (red arrows in Fig.  1b), 
mimicking the kind of processing supported by recurrent 
and horizontal connections within cortical areas [42, 44]1. A schematic pseudo-code that illustrates the implementation details of our iterative 
algorithm is reported below2.
Full‑Stack Joint Learning
An alternative way to jointly learn all weights of a DBN 
could be to first propagate the input across the entire pro-
cessing hierarchy (as in the first phase of iDBN) and then 
produce top-down reconstructions starting from the deepest 
layer back to the sensory layer (see Fig.  1c). This processing 
scheme is simpler to implement, but suffers from the vanish-
ing gradient problem encountered in standard deep learning 
settings [45]. We use this full-stack developmental scheme 
as a benchmark for our iterative developmental scheme.
Simulations
MNIST Data Set
The same DBN structure is used and held fixed during the 
simulations for both greedy and iterative learning. In order 
to allow for a fair comparison, we maintained the same 
architecture and hyper-parameters of the original model [2 ], 
which was composed of one visible layer with 784 neurons, 
two hidden layers with 500 neurons each and a final hidden 
layer with 2000 neurons (see Fig.  1a). Connection weights 
are initialized with random values sampled from a Normal 
distribution N(0, 0.01), while biases are intialized to zero. 
We also tested an alternative initialization scheme known 
as the Glorot initialization [ 47], in order to evaluate learn -
ing convergence under more advanced weight initialization 
strategies. The weights matrices initialized with the Glorot 
1 It should be noted that, following the initial feed-forward sweep, 
the generative phases at subsequent levels of the hierarchy still occur 
sequentially, because the model-driven activation of hidden neurons 
at layer t should not interfere with model-driven activation of the same neurons at layer t+1 . Other families of generative models, such 
as the Deep Boltzmann Machine [46], resolve this potential interfer -
ence by incorporating top-down influences during learning, but nev -
ertheless require a greedy training strategy.Footnote 1 (continued)