110 Cognitive Computation (2023) 15:103–120
1 3
visible layer dimension. The weights matrices are simply 
multiplied, thus producing a linear combination: we can sim-
ply plot some chosen rows of the product W2W1 to look at the 
receptive fields of the second layer neurons, W3W2W1 for the 
third layer, and so forth. As shown in Fig.  10 in Appendix A, 
the greedy and iterative learning schemes developed quali-
tatively similar receptive fields across the entire processing 
hierarchy.
Resilience to Catastrophic Interference
As clearly shown in Fig.  3, the sequential learning setup 
(dashed lines) is dramatically affected by catastrophic inter -
ference: while the readout accuracy on the new letter data 
set increases, the performance of the classifier trained on the 
previous digits data set steadily drops as learning proceeds. 
On the contrary, the interleaved learning setup (solid lines) 
allows to easily incorporate knowledge from the new letter 
data set, achieving the same accuracy of the sequential setup, 
at the same time allowing to maintain previously learned 
knowledge, as demonstrated by the preservation of the read-
out accuracy for the digit data set.
Emergence of Structural Properties During Learning
Typically, inspecting the degrees distribution of a given net-
work gives a first idea of the nature of the system, at least 
to determine whether the network is random or real. Here, 
our main focus is on how the structural properties (among 
the other, also the mean degree) are affected by the learning 
dynamics. The degree distribution itself is not informative 
about the structural evolution that the network experiences 
during training but still could give useful insights about the structural differences of each network. We chose to track 
other global properties, e.g., mean degree, mean geodesic 
distance and number of connected components. Figure  4 dis-
plays these quantities, while Appendix C  provides a broad 
explanation on the degrees distribution and how to approach 
its evaluation in this constrained-architecture setup.
Results suggest that the deep network undergoes a sub -
stantial transformation during unsupervised learning. A 
major difference lays in the mean degree evolution during 
training. Referring to Fig.  4a, non-trivial network properties 
tend to emerge in later stages of learning, especially for the 
greedy network. This suggests that the iterative implementa-
tion favors the development of complex circuits within the 
network connections and eventually the emergence of larger 
components. This applies both to the mean degree and to the 
number of connected components (recall that an isolated 
node itself is considered a component). The visualization of 
the mean geodesic distance shows that the evolution of this 
property is similar in both the greedy and iterative cases, in 
particular we can observe a phase transition between an ini-
tial state in which all nodes are isolated (indeed an isolated 
node is considered a component in which the geodesic dis-
tance is zero) to the emergence of some components. Once 
the different component connect to each other and the con-
nections strengthen, the mean geodesic distance decreases.
The second set of results, in Fig.  4b, displays the evolu-
tion of the same properties in the binomial replicas. The 
names “binomial greedy” and “binomial iterative” mean that 
the binomial counterparts are obtained using the probabili-
ties of edge existence derived from the real greedy and itera-
tive networks, in the epochs considered. The main difference 
is that both the greedy and iterative instances display the 
same overall behavior. Unsurprisingly, the visualizations of 
mean degree and connected components practically overlap. 
This expected results are given by the fact that there is no 
such thing as the effect of a learning dynamics that shapes 
the networks internal structure. In addition, the bottom 
panels (connected components) show that in random net-
works the formation of only one giant component is strongly 
encouraged. Note further that mean degree and mean geo-
desic distances attain larger values in binomial networks. 
This is indeed what one could expect: random networks do 
not have hubs, i.e., nodes with a larger degree with respect 
to the vast majority of the other nodes, which are instead a 
characteristic of real scale-free networks. The absence of 
few super-connected nodes implies a larger mean degree.
The results discussed above refer to the evolution of 
global network properties. As mentioned before, in net-
work science it is well known that real networks exhibit 
a power-law degree distribution. As a further comparison 
between the real networks and their binomial counter -
parts, we thus choose to also inspect the degree distribu-
tion in both the greedy and iterative cases. For this test, 
Fig. 3  Readout accuracy in the continual learning scenario. The 
sequential learning regimen is strongly affected by catastrophic for -
getting, while interleaved learning incorporates information from the 
new distribution (Letters) while preserving previous knowledge (Dig-
its). Classifiers are evaluated at 10 regularly spaced intervals during 
each unsupervised learning epoch