107 Cognitive Computation (2023) 15:103–120 
1 3
scheme are multiplied by a factor of 0.1 to make them com-
patible with the range observed in the Normal initialization. 
The learning rate is set to /u1D706=0.01 and the weight decay 
coefficient is set to /u1D6FC=0.0001  . The momentum parameter /u1D708 
is set to 0.5 in the initial learning stage and then updated to 
0.9 after 5 epochs of training. The loss is minimized using 
standard stochastic gradient descent, implemented through 
CD1 learning. The model is trained for 50 epochs. Further 
tests, using both Normal and Glorot initialization schemes, 
also included dropout regularization [48] with the probabil-
ity of unit presence set to p=0.1.
The first quantity inspected to evaluate the quality of the 
learned models is the accuracy of a linear readout at each 
hidden layer: since in DBNs the input patterns are non-line-
arly transformed from one layer to the next one, the internal 
representations are supposed to become more linearly sepa-
rable as we move up in the hierarchy [11]. The accuracy of a 
simple Ridge classifier is used as a measure of separability.
The performance of the trained models is then assessed 
in three image generation tasks: 1) reproduction of clean 
images, 2) completion of partially occluded images and 3) 
denoising of images corrupted by noise. In the second case, 
an arbitrary number of subsequent rows in the image matrix 
are set to zero (i.e., turned to black). In the latter case, all 
values {Xij}28
i,j=1 (being 28 the number of side-pixel of the 
images) are spoiled by adding Gaussian noise, that is 
Xij←Xij+/u1D716 , /u1D716∼N(0, 0.5)  . Images are fed to the visible 
layer of the DBN, propagated through all its hidden layers 
and then fed back to the visible layer through feedback con-
nections. In this way the noisy / corrupted samples can be 
adjusted according to the internal model learned by the 
DBN. Original samples and the corresponding reconstruc-
tions are quantitatively compared using mean squared error 
(hereafter MSE) between input patterns and reconstruction. 
For each case, the error is computed as ‖X0−Xr‖ , where the 
superscript 0 denotes the original sample and r  means that 
the image has been reconstructed (reproduced, recreated or 
denoised) and ‖⋅‖ denotes an L2 norm. Model performance 
is averaged over 10 model runs with different random ini-
tialization in order to assess the robustness of the analyses. 
We also visualize the receptive fields of neurons at different 
hidden layers to qualitatively assess the type of features (i.e., 
internal representations) learned by the DBNs.
Continual Learning
To further support the cognitive validity of our approach, we 
investigate whether the proposed developmental algorithm 
could effectively deal with a challenging continual learning 
scenario, where the DBN should learn a generative model of 
data distributions provided incrementally, without forgetting 
knowledge obtained during the preceding stages. In such scenario it is well known that neural networks suffer from 
catastrophic forgetting, whereby knowledge learned during 
the subsequent stages completely disrupts previously learned 
information (for review, see [37]). Several solutions have 
been proposed to mitigate this issue, and here we specifi-
cally consider one that can be readily implemented within 
our framework: interleaved learning [ 49]. We consider a 
somewhat simplified version of interleaved learning, where 
unsupervised learning during a second training phase takes 
advantage of both patterns from the new target distribu-
tion and patterns belonging to the previous data set. More 
advanced implementations could exploit deep generative 
replay [50] to directly sample previously learned patterns 
from the hierarchical generative model, allowing to build 
the mixed data set in a more data-efficient way.
Following the first stage of unsupervised learning on 
handwritten digits, the DBN is exposed to a subset of hand-
written letters from the EMNIST data set [51]. In one setup 
the DBN is trained sequentially, which means that only let-
ter patterns are used to train the network during the second 
stage. In the interleaved setup, instead, during the second 
stage the unsupervised training set includes both digits 
and letters. In order to balance the number of patterns and 
output classes, we randomly sample 20,000 digits from the 
MNIST data set and we evenly sample 20,000 uppercase 
letters from the first 10 EMNIST classes. Continual learning 
performance is probed by monitoring both digit recognition 
accuracy (using the readout classifier trained during the first 
learning stage) and letter recognition accuracy (training a 
new readout classifier on the EMNIST patterns).
Graph Analysis
Recent work has shown that graph theory can be success-
fully used to study deep learning models from a network 
science perspective [52, 53]. In order to investigate how 
topological properties of the graph derived from the DBN 
might emerge during the course of unsupervised learning, 
we thus performed a graph analysis on the structure of the 
deep network during learning over the MNIST data set.
From the trained DBN we extract the weights matrices 
and define a graph having the same architecture and con-
nections weights as the DBN. A methodological difficulty is 
posed by the continuity of the connection weights: in order 
to determine the nodes degrees, we thus prune the network 
by binarizing the connections according to a suitably chosen 
cutoff threshold. A sensible choice of the cutoff threshold 
is a value that allows to remove redundant connections and 
to keep those that contribute most to the signal propagation 
through the network. Note that the concept of “redundant” 
and “important” connections is largely arbitrary and not obvi-
ous to assess. For the sake of the structural analysis, how -
ever, this choice is based on the numerical magnitude of the