109 Cognitive Computation (2023) 15:103–120 
1 3
inclusion of dropout are negligible. The reader may refer 
to Appendix B for the complete results.
Figure  2a shows that the readout accuracy increases 
with depth, suggesting that during the course of unsuper -
vised learning the internal representations became more 
disentangled (i.e., linearly separable). The reconstruction 
errors (MSE at each hidden layer) keep decreasing mono-
tonically and eventually converge (Fig.  2b). Not surpris-
ingly, results related to the first layer are almost perfectly 
overlapping for the greedy and iterative learning schemes: 
the activation of the visible layer corresponds to the raw 
data in both cases, thus the learned weights do not depend 
on the training modality. For the second and third layers, 
instead, the greedy scheme achieves higher readout accu-
racy in fewer epochs: however, this effect is due to the 
fact that the previous layers have been already completely 
trained, thus providing a head-start for the upper layers. 
At the end of training, the final accuracy is indistinguish-
able. Notably, the alternative developmental variant based 
on full-stack propagation does not exhibit the same opti-
mal convergence, as highlighted by the poor reconstruc-
tion error measured in the first hidden layer (see Fig.  8 in 
Appendix A).Generative Capabilities
As shown in Fig.  2c, at the end of the learning phase the 
greedy and iterative DBNs achieve equivalent generative 
capabilities (samples of generated images are provided in 
Fig. 9 in Appendix A). The completion task appears as the 
more challenging, probably because when entire regions of 
the images are corrupted it is difficult to generate plausible 
completions. The full-stack developmental version does not 
converge to a satisfactory generative model, as highlighted 
by its poor capability in all generation tasks.
Emergent Internal Representations
Receptive fields are useful to qualitatively inspect what kind 
of features are learned by the different layers of the hierar -
chical model during training. Such inspection is done by 
visualizing the connection weights of a given neuron in the 
input space [11]. The first hidden layer is easy to inspect, 
since we just need to plot the weights matrix of the first layer 
W1 . When it comes to neurons of the second hidden layer it 
is necessary to compose the weights matrices, so that it is 
still possible to represent the visualization in terms of the Fig. 2  Performance of the 
greedy vs. iterative learning 
schemes during learning (top 
and middle panels) and at the 
end of the unsupervised learn-
ing phase (bottom panel). For 
the latter case we also report 
the generation capabilities of 
the alternative developmental 
scheme based on full-stack 
propagation(a)
(b)
(c)