113 Cognitive Computation (2023) 15:103–120 
1 3
and top-down learning phases led to poor convergence and 
unsatisfactory results. This reveals that, subsequently to the 
feed-forward propagation across the entire DBN hierarchy 
(which resembles the fast feed-forward sweep observed in 
cortical circuits [42, 43]), neurons’ activation at the deepest 
layer cannot be fed all the way back to the visible layer in 
a (symmetrical) fast feedback sweep but need to be locally 
processed at each layer to compute the learning signals (as 
implemented in the iDBN). Notably, the latter scheme is also 
consistent with local recurrent processing supported by recur -
rent and horizontal connections within cortical areas [ 42, 44].
To further support the cognitive plausibility of the 
proposed developmental scheme, we also implemented a 
straightforward interleaved training approach to tackle con-
tinual learning tasks, demonstrating that the iDBN can be 
also extended to challenging scenarios that require to incre-
mentally incorporate new knowledge in the deep network. 
This paves the way to the investigation of more plausible 
continual learning schemes that exploit the top-down gen-
erative properties of the DBN to sample the stimuli that are 
needed for interleaved training [ 57]. Moreover, we carried 
out an extensive analysis on the progressive development of structural properties in the DBN, by investigating the emer -
gence of a variety of graph theoretical properties, such as 
degree, geodesic distance and connected components. Our 
iterative learning approach allowed to emphasize the gradual 
refinement of these properties at the global level, thus open-
ing the possibility to more systematically study the topologi-
cal development of such complex hierarchical systems.
We finally evaluated our iterative approach on a data set 
that has been recently exploited in a variety of cognitive 
models to simulate the perception of visual numerosity. Also 
in this case, the iDBN achieved a final accuracy comparable 
to the greedy counterpart, at the same time allowing for a 
precise tracking of the progressive development of the inter -
nal representations of the model. Behavioral performance, 
supported by a linear readout from the internal represen -
tations, can also be continuously tracked to monitor skill 
acquisition. Indeed, the learning curves resulting from our 
approach closely resemble the learning curves reported in 
experimental studies with human children, and also overlap 
with those reported in a recent developmental model based 
on deep autoencoders.Fig. 6  Final number acuity and 
developmental trajectories of 
the DBN. Panel 6a reports the 
psychometric curve obtained 
from the numerosity dis-
crimination task at the end of 
unsupervised iDBN learning. 
The Weber fraction measures 
the steepness of the curve, here 
w=0.17 . Panel 6b reports the 
trend of decay of the Weber 
fraction during unsupervised 
learning. The solid curve 
represents the average w values 
obtained in different simula-
tion runs, while the shaded 
area represents the standard 
deviation. Panels 6c and 6d 
show the power-law fit accord-
ing to Eq. 2. The dashed lines 
represent reference values for 
the final w from [14] and [31] 
respectively(a) (b)
(c) (d)