Vol.:(0123456789)1 3Cognitive Computation (2023) 15:103–120 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12559-022-10085-5
A Developmental Approach for Training Deep Belief Networks
Matteo Zambra1,2 · Alberto Testolin1,3  · Marco Zorzi1,4
Received: 24 February 2021 / Accepted: 15 November 2022 / Published online: 22 December 2022 
© The Author(s) 2022
Abstract
Deep belief networks (DBNs) are stochastic neural networks that can extract rich internal representations of the environ -
ment from the sensory data. DBNs had a catalytic effect in triggering the deep learning revolution, demonstrating for the 
very first time the feasibility of unsupervised learning in networks with many layers of hidden neurons. These hierarchical 
architectures incorporate plausible biological and cognitive properties, making them particularly appealing as computa-
tional models of human perception and cognition. However, learning in DBNs is usually carried out in a greedy, layer-wise 
fashion, which does not allow to simulate the holistic maturation of cortical circuits and prevents from modeling cognitive 
development. Here we present iDBN, an iterative learning algorithm for DBNs that allows to jointly update the connection 
weights across all layers of the model. We evaluate the proposed iterative algorithm on two different sets of visual stimuli, 
measuring the generative capabilities of the learned model and its potential to support supervised downstream tasks. We 
also track network development in terms of graph theoretical properties and investigate the potential extension of iDBN to 
continual learning scenarios. DBNs trained using our iterative approach achieve a final performance comparable to that of 
the greedy counterparts, at the same time allowing to accurately analyze the gradual development of internal representations 
in the deep network and the progressive improvement in task performance. Our work paves the way to the use of iDBN for 
modeling neurocognitive development.
Keywords Unsupervised deep learning · Computational modeling · Cognitive development · Hierarchical generative 
models · Iterative learning
Introduction
Despite the fact that the most popular approach for training 
deep neural networks is based on supervised learning [1 ], the 
first demonstration of the potential of deep learning stemmed 
from the discovery of efficient unsupervised learning meth-
ods for stochastic neural networks known as Deep Belief Networks (DBNs) [2 , 3]. Since their introduction, DBNs 
have been successfully used in many challenging tasks, rang-
ing from computer vision [ 4] to acoustic modeling [ 5], traffic 
flow prediction [6 ] and breast cancer classification [7 ]. These 
energy-based models have some unique properties compared 
to other unsupervised deep learning approaches, such as the 
ability to represent compositional structure [8 , 9] and the 
possibility to be interpreted in terms of well-established 
theoretical principles rooted in statistical physics [10].
The capability of learning deep generative models using 
Hebbian-like mechanisms also makes DBNs particularly 
relevant for cognitive modeling research [11]. Indeed, this 
class of models offers a principled account for the func-
tional role of top-down processing supported by feedback 
loops, at the same time providing a bridge to higher-level 
descriptions of cognition in terms of Bayesian computa-
tions [12, 13]. Compared to shallow generative models, 
hierarchical generative networks allow to study the emer -
gence of increasingly more complex representations of the 
sensory signal, thus allowing to simulate a wide range  * Alberto Testolin 
 alberto.testolin@unipd.it
 * Marco Zorzi 
 marco.zorzi@unipd.it
1 Department of General Psychology and Padova 
Neuroscience Center, University of Padova, Via Venezia 8, 
Padua 35131, Italy
2 Department of Electric and Mathematical Engineering, IMT 
Atlantique, Brest, France
3 Department of Mathematics, University of Padova, Via 
Trieste, 63, 35121 Padua, Italy
4 IRCCS San Camillo Hospital, via Alberoni 70, Venice Lido, 
Italy