116 Cognitive Computation (2023) 15:103–120
1 3
Appendix B: Robustness of the Iterative 
Learning Scheme Results
Results discussed in the main text about the equivalence in 
terms of performance between greedy and iterative training 
were focused on the Normal initialization configuration, with 
no dropout. To assess the robustness of our analyses, here we 
show that the same results are found when the weights are sam-
pled Ã la Glorot and when dropout is added as a regularizer.
Glorot Initialization and Dropout
Figure  11 reports the readout and reconstruction profiles 
obtained with the Glorot initialization. The results show con-
sistency with those presented in the main text. As mentioned 
before, the weight matrices are down-scaled by a factor 0.1 
in such a way to bring these weights values in a range similar 
to the weights of Normal initialization.
We also evaluated the effect of dropout on our training 
scheme. Dropout is an effective regularization method that 
can be applied to RBMs [48]. The idea is to randomly silence 
some neurons during training, in such a way to prevent con-
nections to over-learn. This can yield improved generalization 
capability, though in some cases it might also hinder learning 
performance. Bottom panels in Fig.  11 shows that also in this 
setup the overall performance of the model is not affected.Appendix C: Graph Analysis in Depth
In “Graph analysis” we discussed the critical choice of 
the cut-off threshold and displayed aggregated data of the 
emerging global structural properties. Here the degrees 
distributions are discussed in finer-grained detail, since the 
graph structure extrapolated from a DBN poses some case-
specific problems. Indeed, it is not straightforward to choose 
a model distribution to fit the emergent weights configura -
tion, since during learning some connection strengths are 
significantly increased, leading to long-tail frequency distri-
butions. Rather than searching or producing an ad-hoc prob-
ability distribution for the learned weights and then pruning 
the network according to some distribution-specific values 
(e.g. quantiles), an heuristic choice is rather to prune the 
network based on a user-defined cut-off threshold. In “Graph 
analysis”, a set of such meta-parameters is used jointly with 
the reference epochs to draw mean degrees, distances and 
connected components maps. Here the focus is on the degree 
distribution for a given cut-off threshold, which has differ -
ent characteristics in random graphs and real networks [58 ].
Degrees Distribution
Real networks typically exhibit a degree distribution than 
follows a power-law, expressed by:
Fig. 11  a, b Performance of 
the greedy vs. iterative schemes 
during learning, for the Glorot 
weights initialization. c–e Gen-
erative accuracy of the greedy 
vs. iterative schemes at the end 
of learning, for combinations of 
Glorot initialization and dropout
(a)
(b)
(c) (d) (f)