105 Cognitive Computation (2023) 15:103–120 
1 3
be used to generate plausible activation patterns in the vis-
ible neurons. The lack of connections between neurons in 
the same layer makes it easy to compute the data-depend-
ent and model-dependent statistics used in the Constrastive 
Divergence (CD) algorithm [33], because units in the same 
layer are conditionally independent given the activation of 
the other layer. Deep belief networks are created by stack -
ing together several RBMs [2 ] (see Fig.  1a), thus allowing 
to exploit hierarchical composition of the features learned 
by the individual RBMs [40].Greedy Layer‑Wise Learning
For the sake of our argument, it is useful to make an explicit 
distinction between bottom-up recognition connections and 
top-down generative processing (represented by green and 
red arrows, respectively, in Fig.  1). During the recogni-
tion (also called “inference”) phase, the sensory pattern is 
clamped on the visible neurons, and the hidden neurons are 
activated in a bottom-up fashion in order to infer the most 
likely configuration (i.e., activation pattern over the hidden Fig. 1  Graphical representation 
of the architecture of a 3-layer 
Deep Belief Network and the 
learning schemes implemented 
in the present work. Green 
arrows represent bottom-up 
recognition connections, while 
red arrows represent top-down 
generative processing. Yellow 
boxes enclose local computa-
tions. We consider the case of 
CD1, CD-k can be recovered 
by repeating the sampling steps 
k times. v∼D identifies a data 
instance sampled from the 
training set and hi represents 
the hidden activities of layer i. 
In the greedy scheme a hidden 
layers are trained sequentially, 
from bottom to top, and input 
signals are never projected 
into layer l unless learning at 
layer l - 1 is completed. In the 
iterative scheme b input signals 
are immediately propagated 
through the entire deep network, 
and top-down processing is 
performed locally at each layer 
to jointly learn all connec-
tion weights. In the full-stack 
scheme c both feed-forward 
propagation and top-down 
processing occur over the entire 
deep network
(a)
(b) (c)