114 Cognitive Computation (2023) 15:103–120
1 3
of widespread learning disabilities such as dyscalculia, for 
which we are still lacking a computational characterization 
[30]. It would also be useful to explore whether the proposed 
iDBN approach could be applied in other cognitive domains 
involving unsupervised deep learning. This would be valu-
able not only from a machine learning standpoint, but also 
from a cognitive modeling perspective: Indeed, our iterative 
algorithm allows to create developmental models that can 
be quantitatively validated against empirical data collected 
on humans. Similarly, the proposed graph analysis could be 
applied in developmental physiology to better understand 
how structural and functional properties of self-organizing 
networks might gradually emerge from unsupervised learn-
ing dynamics.Conclusion
The scope of the present work was twofold. On the one hand, 
we presented a novel unsupervised learning algorithm for 
deep belief networks that allows to accurately track the 
progressive development of the internal representations of 
the model. We validated our algorithm on two prototypical 
benchmark domains, achieving results comparable to the 
state-of-the-art. On the other hand, we demonstrated that 
our iterative learning algorithm can be extended to more 
realistic learning scenarios, at the same time supporting the 
psychometric analysis of progressive changes in behavioral 
performance and the study of the gradual development of 
network properties from the point of view of network theory.
Future studies might take advantage of the proposed itera-
tive algorithm to investigate how the emergence of develop-
mental disorders can be related to impairments in both the 
initial conditions of the system and the subsequent learning 
phases. This would be particularly relevant for the study 
Fig. 7  Samples from the Numerosity data set, which contains 51200 
images featuring a variable number of white rectangles drawn on a 
black background. Numerosity ranges from 1 to 32 and objects have variable position and dimension (see  [14] for further details). The 
corresponding numerosity is reported on top of each image
Fig. 8  Reconstruction error trend of the first hidden layer for the iter -
ative (iDBN) vs. full-stack developmental schemes. We verified that 
convergence for the full-stack scheme did not improve even after pro-
longing learning for 100 epochsAppendix A: Supplementary Figures