112 Cognitive Computation (2023) 15:103–120
1 3
Numerosity Data Set
As shown in Fig.  6a the psychometric function observed at 
the end of the unsupervised learning phase is well aligned 
with the results obtained by Stoianov and Zorzi using the 
greedy training scheme [14]. The authors reported a Weber 
fraction value of 0.15, while we obtained a value of 0.17.
Concerning the developmental trajectory, as shown 
in Fig.  6b the Weber fraction trend displays a significant 
decrease during the learning period, especially at the early 
stages of development. This trend is similar to that observed 
during human development [55, 56]. Note that our curve has 
been obtained by averaging 20 model runs, training 5 dif-
ferent classifiers for each data point to collect more reliable 
statistics. Thus, the average values account for a population 
of 100 data points for each sample epoch. It is interesting to 
note that in the early stages the network might yield a wors -
ening of the performance, and hence highly varying values 
of w. The behavior stabilizes to an asymptotic value in more 
advanced learning stages.
Figure  6c and d display the same data points, along with 
a power-law fit obtained using the method proposed by Tes-
tolin et al. [31]. Due to the initial zero value of the epoch 
time stamp, the basic functional form is actually a modified 
power-law [21]:
The parameters a , b and s  are fitted to the data points 
describing the progressive development of the Weber fraction. 
The resulting parameters are reported in Table  1: the fit closely 
follows the trajectory of Weber fraction, hence describing sat-
isfactorily well the development of the number sense across 
the learning period of our networks.(2) y=a(1+sx)bDiscussion
Our simulations demonstrate that deep belief networks can be 
trained iteratively, by jointly adjusting all the weights of the 
model hierarchy following observation of each sensory pattern 
(or minibatch of patterns). This innovative learning algorithm 
can be used in place of the traditional greedy, layer-wise learn-
ing algorithm in order to accurately track the developmental 
trajectory of the model. This allows to study how global prop-
erties of the network can gradually emerge during the course 
of learning, at the same time enabling a systematic comparison 
with biological developmental trajectories observed in empiri-
cal studies.
The proposed algorithm was first evaluated on the popular 
MNIST benchmark, where DBNs trained using the greedy 
algorithm have traditionally achieved very good performance. 
We showed that the DBN trained using our iterative algorithm 
was able to achieve a performance comparable to the greedy 
counterpart, both in terms of readout accuracy from the inter -
nal representations and in terms of reconstruction capabilities. 
We also probed the final models on a variety of generative 
tasks, which assessed the DBN ability to reproduce, complete 
and denoise corrupted input images. Also in this case, we did 
not observe significant differences between the greedy and 
iterative versions of the learning algorithm. On the contrary, 
the attempt to implement joint training of all weights by simply 
propagating signals across the full stack both in the bottom-up Fig. 5  Degrees distributions 
with cutoff threshold set to 0.4. 
The networks analyzed for this 
figure have been initialized 
with the Normal distribution; 
the case of Glorot initialization 
does not display significant 
differences
(a) (b)
(c) (d)
Table 1  Fitted parameters as 
in Eq. 2 for both the w values 
scaled, respectively, according 
to the method of S & Z [14] and 
TZM [31]a b s R2
S & Z 0.61 0.59 0.13 0.9
TZM 0.86 0.59 0.13 0.9