108 Cognitive Computation (2023) 15:103–120
1 3
connections strengths. A range of such thresholds has been 
set to {0.2, 0.4, 0.6, 0.8, 1, 1.25, 1.5}  , and structural analysis 
has been performed for each of these values. A cutoff thresh-
old of c  discards the weights in the interval [−c, c] , while 
those outside the interval are kept for the network analysis.
As customary in network science, the structural proper -
ties of the “real” networks (DBNs) are compared with the 
same properties observed in a random counterpart. A ran-
dom “replica” of the network is generated according to its 
architectural characteristics (such an number of nodes) and 
its local properties (e.g., mean node degree or edge prob-
ability). The process is composed of two main steps: 1) gen-
erate a random replica of the real network and 2) perform 
the structural analyses on both the instances. In our case, 
the real network was compared with an analogous bino-
mial graph generated using the probability of edge exist-
ence, computed as the ratio between number of effective 
edges and the maximum number of potential edges (which 
depends of the number of node couples). This random rep-
lica is generated in such a way to have the same architecture 
of the DBN, in particular it is a stack of bipartite binomial 
graphs with the same number of nodes as the DBN layers. 
Due to this architecture, the node connectivity is constrained 
by the number of nearby layers. For example, one node of 
the first layer is not allowed to be connected with one node 
of the third layer or superior. Such graph structure poses a 
problem in the characterization of the nodes degree distribu-
tion, which is used in network science to evaluate whether 
a graph is random or derived from a real network. These 
latter (might them be natural, biological, technological or 
social networks) typically have a degree distribution well 
described by a power-law [54], while random graphs have 
a degree distribution that depends on the method they are 
generated with. For example, binomial random graphs have 
a degree distribution that follows, by design, the Binomial 
distribution. In our setup, the constrained nodes connectivity 
would lead the normalization of the degree distribution to 
have such architectural bias. To mitigate this effect, we chose 
to weight the degree of each node according to its potential 
maximum degree, as described in detail in Appendix C.
Numerosity Data Set
The “numerosity” data set was first introduced by Stoianov and 
Zorzi [14], who demonstrated that the approximate number 
of objects in a visual scene can be estimated by a hierarchical 
processing architecture that learns to extract increasingly more 
abstract representations from the sensory input in a completely 
unsupervised way (sample images are provided in Fig.  7 in 
Appendix A). Here we focus on the development of “number 
acuity” in the network, which has been recently investigated 
using a developmental approach based on deep autoencod-
ers [31]. Number acuity can be measured using a numerosity discrimination task, where the network is asked to classify any 
image in terms of containing a larger or smaller number of 
objects with respect to a given reference number. Also in this 
case, to ensure a fair comparison with the original model [14], 
we considered the same model architecture and task. The DBN 
is composed by a visible layer composed of 900 visible neu-
rons, while the first and the second hidden layers have 80 and 
400 neurons, respectively. We adopted a Normal initializa-
tion scheme, where weights are initialized with random values 
sampled from N (0, 0.1). The learning rate and weight decay 
are set to /u1D706=0.1 and /u1D6FC=0.0002  , respectively, and the initial 
and final momentum are set to /u1D708=0.5 and 0.9, again with a 
momentum switch at epoch 5. The model is trained for 100 
epochs.
To assess the number acuity of the network (also known 
as “internal Weber fraction”), a linear classifier is applied to 
the deepest layer of the model, with the goal of establishing 
whether the hidden neurons’ activation correspond to an input 
image containing a numerosity larger than a reference number 
(i.e., 8 or 16). This task becomes trivial in the limit of the 
difference between the given numerosity ni and the reference 
number Nref being large. For example, it is easier to tell which 
numerosity is smaller among 4 and 16, but it is harder for 
15 and 16. For this reason, each reference numerosity has an 
associated window of numerosities used for the comparison: 
{5,…, 12} for Nref=8 and {10,…, 24} for Nref=16 , so that 
the ratios ri=ni∕Nref yield the range [0.65, 1.25]. The percent-
age of correct classifications is analyzed as a function of these 
numerical ratios: each value ri has associated the percentage 
of correct classifications yi . This ensemble of points (r , y) is 
used to fit a psychometric function corresponding to a logistic 
curve, defined by
being Φ the cumulative distribution function of the Normal 
distribution and w the Weber fraction.
Our interest is to compare the progressive refinement of the 
Weber fraction during the unsupervised learning phase. The 
final performance can be directly compared with the Weber 
fraction achieved by a DBN trained using the greedy scheme 
[14], while the developmental trajectories can be compared to 
the learning curves recently reported for deep autoencoders [ 31].
Results
MNIST Data Set
Readout Accuracy and Reconstruction Error Trends
Results discussed in this section only refer to the DBN con-
figuration with Normal initialization and no dropout, since 
it turned out that differences with Glorot initialization and (1) y=1− Φ(/u1D707 =r,/u1D70E=√2w)