104 Cognitive Computation (2023) 15:103–120
1 3
of high-level perceptual and cognitive functions, such 
as numerosity perception [14– 16], letter perception [17, 
18], orthographic processing [ 19], development of object-
action associations [20] and the appearance of visual hal-
lucinations caused by damage in cortical areas [21]. Sparse 
variants of DBNs have also been used to simulate physio-
logical properties of neurons in the primary and secondary 
visual cortex [22]. Notably, inference algorithms for DBNs 
can be implemented using biologically realistic sampling 
schemes, which explain unique aspects of low-level brain 
dynamics [23] and can be efficiently reproduced in spiking 
models [24]. Finally, hierarchical generative models like 
the DBN offer important insights into the functional role 
of spontaneous brain activity, both in terms of top-down 
predictive signals during task execution and in terms of 
generative replays during rest [25].
However, learning in DBNs has traditionally relied on a 
greedy, layer-wise training approach: the connection weights 
of layer n  are changed only after the layer n−1 has been 
fully trained. Moreover, the trained weights are frozen and 
do not further change while learning takes place at higher 
layers. Although efficient from a computational perspec-
tive, this learning modality is clearly implausible from a 
biological standpoint. Indeed, the greedy approach implies 
that information is not passed to any higher-order network 
until learning at the lower level can be stopped because it 
has reached a (somewhat arbitrary) criterion. Though brain 
development shows variability across regions and may peak 
at different times, synaptogenesis begins at about the same 
time in distant regions such as the visual and the prefron-
tal cortex [26]. Moreover, a substantial degree of plastic-
ity is preserved in adulthood even in the visual cortex (see 
[27], for review). Finally, spontaneous brain activity, which 
is thought to be a manifestation of top-down dynamics of 
generative models [25], is already structured into distinct 
cortical networks at birth [28].
Besides these neurobiological considerations, another key 
limitation of the greedy training approach is that it makes the 
DBN unsuitable for modeling human development. Neural 
network models are particularly attractive for understand-
ing developmental phenomena [29] because the trajectories 
in task performance or in the emergence of internal repre-
sentations can be examined during learning and compared 
to human empirical data. Moreover, learning trajectories in 
neural network models can be analyzed as a function of ini-
tial starting conditions to study the emergence of develop-
mental disorders [30]. In the cognitive modeling literature, 
however, simulations based on DBNs have focused on adult 
performance (i.e., fully trained models) and developmental 
investigations based on unsupervised learning have adopted 
alternative learning paradigms based on deep autoencoders 
[31] trained with error backpropagation [32] to circumvent 
this problem.In this work we propose a novel learning scheme for tun-
ing the entire hierarchy of connections in a DBN iteratively 
(hereafter, iDBN), using a variant of the original Contrastive 
Divergence (CD) learning algorithm [33]. Through exten-
sive simulations on two different sets of visual stimuli, we 
demonstrate that the proposed approach can achieve the 
same final accuracy of the greedy counterpart, at the same 
time allowing for a precise tracking of the developmental 
trajectory of the models. We further show that an alterna -
tive developmental scheme based on full-stack propagation 
of top-down information does not converge to an optimal 
solution, suggesting that recurrent processing between adja-
cent layers is a key ingredient to successfully drive learning 
through local signals. In a first set of simulations we rely 
on the popular MNIST data set of handwritten digits [34], 
with the goal of validating the proposed iterative scheme 
on a well-known benchmark. In this setup, we also show 
that our developmental learning scheme can be extended to 
continual learning scenarios [35], where the model exploits 
interleaved learning to incorporate knowledge from another 
domain (in our case, handwritten letters) without incurring 
in catastrophic forgetting [36, 37]. Furthermore, we carry 
out graph theoretical analyses to investigate how structural 
properties of the network gradually emerge during learn-
ing. We finally consider a more recent data set consisting 
of images containing a variable number of items, which has 
been used to investigate the perception of visual numerosity 
in humans and machines [14, 16], to demonstrate how the 
iDBN can be used to simulate developmental trajectories in 
the acquisition of cognitive skills.
Methods
In this section we will briefly review the theoretical foun-
dations of deep belief networks and describe their classi -
cal, greedy learning algorithm. We will then introduce our 
iterative learning approach and describe the materials and 
methods used in our simulations.
Deep Belief Networks
The building block of a DBN is the Restricted Boltzmann 
Machine (RBM [ 38]; for a recent overview see [ 39]), 
which is a bipartite network composed by two separate sets 
of neurons: visible neurons, which constitute the interface 
with the sensory environment and are thus usually clamped 
to the input data, and hidden (equivalently called ‘latent’) 
neurons that allow to capture high-order correlations in the 
data distribution. Learning in RBMs consists in discover -
ing a set of latent features that can be used to compactly 
describe the statistical regularities in the data distribution, 
by creating an internal model of the environment that can