6
The proposed pruning scheme can induce a reduction of
Npar, too. As mentioned in Subsection II-E, Npar=256 for
Cambricon-X is large compared to Nmul=16. Npar=64 is
enough for the common pruning ratio of 75% in the con-
volutional layers. A large Nparmay be chosen to reduce
the number of padding zeros. However, the proposed scheme
makes the padding zeros unnecessary, implying that Npar=64
can be used. In this case, the width of the activation buffers
can be reduced to 64, enabling more square-like memory
components to be used. Square-like memory components are
more area-efﬁcient than wide memory components.
Furthermore, the indexing logic can be simpliﬁed. For the
indexing of the irregular non-zero weights, Deep Compression
and EIE use relative indexing [20], [34], where the number
of zero weights between two adjacent non-zero weights is
stored. The interval is encoded with four bits, and an interval
larger than the encoding bound requires ﬁller zero insertion.
A similar indexing scheme is used in Cambricon-X, known
as step indexing. The indexing can be simpliﬁed with the
proposed pruning scheme, where pruning is performed within
a pruning group of Ngroup . The small Ngroup enables direct
indexing, where an index indicates the position of the non-
zero weight within the pruning group. Given that Ngroup is
small, the indexing bit width is also small, dlog2Ngroupebits,
even with direct indexing. Direct indexing is much simpler
than relative indexing in EIE or step indexing in Cambricon-
X and does not require ﬁller zeros, removing the waste of the
weight storage.
C. Incremental Pruning
In the proposed scheme, Nprune weights are pruned in a
pruning group. The pruning can be processed in a few different
ways. At one extreme, the target number of weights with the
least magnitude are pruned at the same time in each group, and
the pruned network is retrained. This scheme is called one-time
pruning in this paper. At the other extreme, pruning begins
with only one weight with the least magnitude in each group.
Subsequently, a period of retraining is undertaken, followed by
the pruning of one more weight with the least retrained mag-
nitude. Retraining is performed again. The one weight pruning
and retraining processes are iterated until the target number is
reached. In the middle of the two extreme methods, we can
set the initial pruning number and the increment number. This
scheme is referred to here as incremental pruning.
Obviously, incremental pruning would be better than or
equal to the one-time pruning method. However, incremen-
tal pruning requires a long retraining time. Accordingly, in
this paper, it will be applied when one-time pruning is not
sufﬁcient.
D. Pruning for Various Architectures
In the proposed pruning scheme, pruning can be applied to
CNNs for various accelerator architectures. In the previous
subsections, pruning along the channel axis is shown for
architectures such as Cambricon-X. As an example of pruning
for another type of accelerator architecture, the proposed
pruning scheme can be adjusted to a weight-sparse version
Fig. 7. Sparse MWSA PE structure.
of Cnvlutin. Cnvlutin adopts the MWSA structure, and the
weights are fetched along the ﬁlter axis. In this architecture,
the dense MWSA structure can be modiﬁed to the sparse
MWSA structure shown in Fig. 7. For the sparse architecture,
the proposed pruning scheme can be applied to CNNs with
pruning groups set to the weights along the ﬁlter axis. Because
Cnvlutin already exploits activation sparsity, the structure in
Fig. 7 can exploit both activation sparsity and weight sparsity.
The architectures in [16], [17] adopt sparse MWMA struc-
ture PEs, where the activations and weights are fetched and
processed along the spatial axis. For these architectures, the
proposed pruning scheme can be applied with pruning groups
established along the spatial axis.
E. Application to Fully-Connected Layers
The proposed pruning scheme can be applied to fully-
connected layers as well. In a fully-connected layer, the
weights can be arranged in a matrix format. We can deﬁne two
axes: the column axis and the row axis. Along the row axis, the
weights are multiplied with different activations, while along
the column axis, the weights are multiplied with an activation.
An MWMA-structured PE processes the weights along the row
axis simultaneously, and an MWSA-structured PE processes
the weights along the column axis.
According to the PE structures, accelerator-aware pruning is
applied following different axes. If an MWMA-structured PE
is used, the weights are grouped along the row axis and pruned
so that each group has a ﬁxed number of non-zero weights
remaining. If an MWSA-structured PE is used, the weights
are grouped and pruned along the column axis. An example of
the proposed pruning scheme along the row axis is illustrated
in Fig. 8. In the ﬁgure, Npar=Ngroup =8 and Nprune =6.