1
Accelerator-Aware Pruning for Convolutional
Neural Networks
Hyeong-Ju Kang, Member, IEEE
Abstract —Convolutional neural networks have shown tremen-
dous performance capabilities in computer vision tasks, but their
excessive amounts of weight storage and arithmetic operations
prevent them from being adopted in embedded environments.
One of the solutions involves pruning, where certain unimportant
weights are forced to have a value of zero. Many pruning
schemes have been proposed, but these have mainly focused
on the number of pruned weights, scarcely considering ASIC
or FPGA accelerator architectures. When a pruned network is
run on an accelerator, the lack of the architecture consideration
causes some inefﬁciency problems, including internal buffer
misalignments and load imbalances. This paper proposes a
new pruning scheme that reﬂects accelerator architectures. In
the proposed scheme, pruning is performed so that the same
number of weights remain for each weight group corresponding
to activations fetched simultaneously. In this way, the pruning
scheme resolves the inefﬁciency problems, doubling the accelera-
tor performance. Even with this constraint, the proposed pruning
scheme reached a pruning ratio similar to that of previous
unconstrained pruning schemes, not only on AlexNet and VGG16
but also on state-of-the-art very deep networks such as ResNet.
Furthermore, the proposed scheme demonstrated a comparable
pruning ratio on compact networks such as MobileNet and on
slimmed networks that were already pruned in a channel-wise
manner. In addition to improving the efﬁciency of previous
sparse accelerators, it will be also shown that the proposed
pruning scheme can be used to reduce the logic complexity of
sparse accelerators. The pruned models are publicly available at
https://github.com/HyeongjuKang/accelerator-aware-pruning
Index Terms —Deep learning, convolutional neural networks,
neural network pruning, neural network accelerator
I. I NTRODUCTION
CONVOLUTIONAL neural networks (CNNs) are attract-
ing interest in the ﬁelds of image recognition [1]–
[5], object detection [6]–[10], and image segmentation [11].
Although they provide great performance for computer vision
tasks, there are certain obstacles that must be overcome
before they can be adopted in embedded environments. A
CNN usually requires excessive amounts of weight storage
and arithmetic operations. For fast processing and low power
consumption under these requirements, ASIC or FPGA ac-
celerators have been proposed [12]–[18], but the amounts of
weights and operations remain a major concern.
Manuscript received XXXXX, XX, XXXX; revised XXXXX XX, XXXX.
This work was supported by Basic Science Research Program through the
National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of
Education(2015R1D1A1A01058768). This work was also supported by IDEC
(EDA Tool).
H.-J. Kang is with the School of Computer Science and Engineering,
Korea University of Technology and Education, Cheonan, Chungnam, 31253
Republic of Korea e-mail: hjkang@koreatech.ac.kr.The weight amounts can be reduced by network pruning
[19]–[33], where some unimportant weights are forced to
have a value of zero. Multiplication with zero is meaningless,
implying that reductions in operation amounts can be expected
as well. Various pruning schemes have been proposed, some
of which prune the weights without constraints [19], [20]
while others prune the weights considering the neural network
structures. It is known that relatively more weights can be
pruned in fully-connected layers than in convolutional layers.
However, pruning convolutional layers can reduce more energy
and realize higher throughput [21]. Given that the operational
structure of convolutional layers is more complex than that
of fully-connected layers, convolutional layers have a greater
variety of pruning schemes [22]–[32].
Pruned networks can be executed on certain ASIC or FPGA
accelerators that can exploit the weight sparsity. The EIE
proposed in [34] used the sparsity of weights generated by the
pruning algorithm of [20], but the architecture only processes
fully-connected layers. The EIE architecture was modiﬁed
for a long short-term memory (LSTM) network to become
the ESE architecture [35]. Cambricon-X is an architecture
that can exploit weight sparsity in convolutional layers [36].
SCNN proposed in [37] exploits both weight sparsity and
activation sparsity for convolutional layers. In ZENA proposed
in [38], good operating efﬁciency was reached by skipping
zero weights and activations.
Despite the various pruning schemes and accelerators, it re-
mains challenging to utilize the performance of ASIC or FPGA
accelerators efﬁciently with pruned networks. The aforemen-
tioned pruning schemes were developed without considering
the concept of accelerator acceptability. They mainly focused
on the amount of weight that can be pruned away. Pruning
with no constraints creates irregular patterns in the remaining
non-zero weights. These irregular patterns cause some degree
of inefﬁciency when the pruned networks are performed
on accelerators. The misalignment of the fetched activations
and weights requires padding-zero insertions. The processing
elements (PEs) process different numbers of weights, meaning
that some PEs must wait for other PEs to complete, known as
the load-imbalance problem. To alleviate these problems, some
accelerators use complex structures. For example, Cambricon-
X uses very wide (256 16-bits width) memory and very wide
(256-to-1) multiplexers (MUXs).
This paper proposes a new approach, a pruning algorithm
which considers the accelerator architecture. There can be
various architecture consideration points, and this paper will
focus on the activation groups fetched and processed simulta-
neously in a PE and the number of remaining weights for eacharXiv:1804.09862v3  [cs.NE]  5 Sep 2020