3
(a)
 (b)
Fig. 2. Typical PE structures: (a) MWMA and (b) MWSA.
C. Neural Network Accelerators
Some ASIC or FPGA accelerator architectures have been
proposed for unpruned, dense CNNs, which will be called
dense architectures. An accelerator usually consists of several
processing elements (PEs), each of which has a single mul-
tiplier or many multipliers. In a PE with many multipliers,
the multipliers may multiply multiple weights and multiple
activations (MWMA), multiple weights and a single activa-
tion (MWSA), or a single weight and multiple activations
(SWMA). The MWMA and MWSA structures are shown in
Fig. 2, where NPEPEs operate in parallel. With the same
naming convention, a PE with a single multiplier can be called
a single weight and single activation (SWSA) structure.
If a PE has multiple multipliers, it is important to fetch
the operands of the multipliers simultaneously. In this paper,
a fetching group is deﬁned as activations or weights that are
fetched and processed simultaneously in a PE. If the size of
a fetching group is Nparand the number of multipliers in a
PE is Nmul,Nparis usually equal to Nmul. The weights and
activations are usually fetched from the internal buffers, but
the buffers are not drawn in the ﬁgures.
The PE structures can be further categorized by the axis
followed by the weight- and activation-fetching groups. For
example, DianNao[12] adopts the MWMA structure, where
some of the input activations along the channel axis are fetched
and multiplied with the corresponding kernel weights. The
multiplication results are summed and accumulated to be an
output activation. The MWSA structure is adopted in Cnvlutin
[13] to exploit the sparsity of the input activations. Multiple
weights are fetched along the ﬁlter axis. The outputs of the
multiplications in PEs are gathered into NparNPE-input
adder trees. The architectures proposed in [16], [17] consist of
MWMA-structured PEs and fetch the activations and weights
Fig. 3. Sparse MWMA PE structure.
along the spatial axis.
D. Sparse Accelerator Architectures
The architectures in Fig. 2 can be modiﬁed to exploit the
weight sparsity, which will be called sparse architectures. In
such architectures, only non-zero weights are stored in the
weight memories to reduce weight storage use. An example
of the sparse MWMA structure is shown in Fig. 3, where Npar
activations are fetched simultaneously. Nparis usually larger