Iwendi et al. COVID-19 Patient Health Prediction
wireless network application incompetence, and the velocity a t
which it is increasing. Thus, to increase the eﬃciency, accu racy,
and workﬂow healthcare industries need data analytics tools to
managesuchcomplexdata.
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is a virus of the
Corona virus family and the source of a respiratory illness
outbreakthroughouttheworldthatoriginatedinWuhan,Chi na.
Studies (1–3) show that Covid-19 has clinical characteristics
akin to the SARS-CoV. The dominant symptoms include fever
and cough, while gastrointestinal symptoms are uncommon.
In COVID-19 infected patients the absence of fever is more
frequent than in patients infected by similar viruses, i.e., MERS
Corona Virus (2%) and SARS Corona Virus (1%) ( 4); therefore,
there is a possibility of non-febrile patients being missed by
a surveillance mechanism with a primary focus on detecting
fever (5). The initial patients infected by COVID-19, reportedly
indicated an association with a large seafood and animal mar ket
in Wuhan that demonstrated an animal-to-person spread. Per
contra, a burgeoning number of patients have not displayed
any association with the animal markets, revealing the fact of
human-to-human transmission of COVID-19. This pandemic
has been declared a global health emergency and is spreading
at an alarming rate ( 6). The origin of the virus in Wuhan,
Chinahascaused175,694deathsgloballyandhas2,544,792a ctive
patients globally ( 7). With the stress on medical facilities, it is
essential for governments and healthcare facilities to iden tify
and treat cases that are most likely to survive, by so doing,
judiciously utilizing the limited stock of medical resourc es
andmedications.
Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) has emerged as the breakthroug h
technology of the twenty-ﬁrst century and has found multiple
applications in ﬁelds from weather prediction, astronomical
exploration, to autonomous systems ( 8). We note a few related
works where AI has been applied for detection, prevention, and
prediction to combat the COVID-19 pandemic. In Wang and
Wong(9)researchershaveimplementedaConvolutionalNeural
Network based model to detect COVID-19 patients using CXR
images.Theyusedapre-trainedImageNetandtrainedthemode l
on an open source dataset of Chest X-Ray images (CXR). While
Paletal.( 10)implementedaLSTMmodeltopredictthecountry-
speciﬁc risk of COVID-19, that relies on trends and weather
data of a particular country to predict the probable spread of
COVID-19inthatcountry.InLiuetal.( 11)theAIpractitioners
applied ML to process internet activity, news reports, health
organization reports, and media activity to predict the spread of
theoutbreakontheprovidencelevelinChina( 12).InBayesand
Valdivieso ( 13) the authors made use of the Bayesian approach
topredictthenumberofdeathsinPerufor70daysinthefuture ,
using the empirical data from China. The authors in Beck et al.
(14) applied Artiﬁcial intelligence to identify the commerciall y
available drugs that could be used to treat COVID-19 patients .
They used Bidirectional Encoder Representations from the
Transformers (BERT) framework at the core of their model.
In Tang et al. ( 15) the researchers implemented the random
forest algorithm for severity analysis of COVID-19 patients
using the Computed Tomography (CT) Scans. In Khalifa et al.
(16) the authors proposed a Generative Adversarial Networkbased ﬁne-tuned model for detecting pneumonia from Chest
X-Ray scans, which is one of the symptoms of COVID-
19 infection. In Sujatha et al. ( 17), authors proposed a
method which could be helpful in predicting the stretch
of COVID-2019, by performing linear regression, and the
Multilayer perceptron and Vector autoregression model
which could provide an expectation on the COVID-19
Kaggle information, to anticipate the epidemiological
pattern of the disease and rate of COVID-2019 cases
inIndia.
Kutia et al. ( 18) tried to break down client perspectives
to eHealth applications in China and the eHealth framework
in the Ukraine, which afterwards provided bits of knowledge
and proposals for the improvement of an eHealth application
(eZdorovya) for mainly health information beneﬁts. Sultan e t al.
(19) presented a hybrid method that generates and facilitates
Alzheimer patients to recall their memories. This egocentri c
video summary uses important people, objects, and medicines
as tools in the realization of their method. Furthermore, an
emerging tactile Internet-based nanonetwork that promises a
new range of e-health applications has been proposed by Feng
et al. (20). The authors use an information based transmit
network that goes to an operator via the terahertz band. Final ly,
the authors in Jain and Chatterjee ( 21) presented an assortment
of strategies intended to speak to, improve, and enable multi-
disciplinary and multi-institutional ML to explore in healthc are
informatics ( 22). Khamparia et al. ( 23) introduced a unique
way of an internet of health things (IoHT)-driven deep learn ing
structureforidentiﬁcationandarrangementofcervicalca ncerin
Pap smear pictures, utilizing ideas of transfer learning. Wa heed
et al. (24) suggested a technique to produce manufactured chest
X-ray (CXR) pictures by building up an Auxiliary Classiﬁer
GenerativeAdversarialNetwork(ACGAN)utilizedmodelcal led
CovidGAN. Sakarkar et al. ( 25) suggested a profound learning-
based mechanized discovery and characterization model for
fundusDRpictures.
This paper aims to ﬁll the void of the traditional
healthcare system, using machine learning (ML) algorithms
to simultaneously process healthcare and travel data along w ith
other parameters of COVID-19 positive patients, in Wuhan,
to predict the most likely outcome of a patient, based on
their symptoms, travel history, and the delay in reporting the
case by identifying patterns from previous patient data. Our
contributionincludes:
•Processing of healthcare and travel data using
machine learning algorithms in place of the
traditional healthcare system to identify COVID
infectedperson.
•This work compared multiple algorithms that are available
for processing patient data and identiﬁed the Boosted
Random Forest as the best method for processing data.
Further, it executed a grid search to ﬁne-tune the hyper
parameters of the Boosted Random Forest algorithm to
improveperformance.
•Our work obliterates the need to re-compare existing
algorithmsforprocessingCOVID-19patientdata.
Frontiers in Public Health | www.frontiersin.org 2 July 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 357