Iwendi et al. COVID-19 Patient Health Prediction
TABLE 1 | Dataset description.
Column Description Values (for
categorical
variables)Type
id Patient Id NA Numeric
location The location where the
patient belongs toMultiple cities
located
throughout the
worldString,
Categorical
country Patient’s native country Multiple
countriesString,
Categorical
gender Patient’s gender Male, Female String,
Categorical
age Patient’s age NA Numeric
sym_on The date patient started
noticing the symptomsNA Date
hosp_vis Date when the patient
visited the hospitalNA Date
vis_wuhan Whether the patient
visited Wuhan, ChinaYes (1), No (0) Numeric,
Categorical
from_wuhan Whether the patient
belonged to Wuhan,
ChinaYes (1), No (0) Numeric,
Categorical
death Whether the patient
passed away due to
COVID-19Yes (1), No (0) Numeric,
Categorical
Recov Whether the patient
recoveredYes (1), No (0) Numeric,
Categorical
symptom1.
symptom2,
symptom3,
symptom4,
symptom5,
symptom6Symptoms noticed by
the patientsMultiple
symptoms
noticed by the
patientsString,
Categorical
•This work will enable researchers to further work on
developing a solution that combines the processing of patient
demographics, travel, and subjective health data with image
data (scans) for better prediction of COVID-19 patient
healthoutcomes.
The rest of the article is organized as follows: section Mate rials
and Methods discusses the materials and methodology used in
detail, along with the dataset description, data pre-processi ng,
andthedataanalysisoftheclassiﬁcationalgorithmsused. Section
Resultsdiscussestheresultoftheexperimentfollowedbyfurt her
discussioninsectionDiscussion.SectionConclusionandF uture
Work discusses the results and provides a conclusion and the
futuredirectionofthecurrentwork.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
The dependencies for the project include the following packages
andlibraries:Datetime,Numpy,Pandas,SciPy,ScikitLearn ,and
Matplotlib. The project has been implemented on the Google
Colab platform using the CPU runtime. The CPU speciﬁcations
for Google Colab are; model: 79, CPU Family: 6, model name:
FIGURE 1 | Symptoms in patients.
Intel(R) Xeon(R) CPU @ 2.20 GHz and cache size: 56,320KB.
ThestorageusedisGoogleDrive.
Dataset
ThedatasetusedinthisstudywasaccessedfromKaggleas“Nov el
CoronaVirus2019Dataset”( 26).Thedatasethasbeencompiled
from various sources including the World Health Organizati on
and John Hopkins University. However, this dataset has been
pre-processed further by us to meet the needs of this study.
Table1presentsthefeaturesofthedata.
Data Analysis
Fever,cough,cold,fatigue,bodypain,andmalaisewerethemo st
common symptoms that were noticed in patients whose data is
availableinthisdatasetandareshownin Figure1.
Correlation between features of the dataset provides crucia l
information about the features and the degree of inﬂuence th ey
have over the target value. The heat map of Pearson Correlati on
between the features of the dataset is shown in Figure2, which
clearly reveals a relatively stronger positive correlation be tween
age of the patient, whether the patient was native to Wuhan,
gap between (in days) when they ﬁrst felt the symptoms and
visited the hospital, and death. However, the country of the
patienthasapositivecorrelationwithrecovery.Thisimplies that
foreign patients who visited China had a higher recovery rate .
Thereisalsoastrongpositivecorrelationbetweensymptom1a nd
symptom2,andalsobetweensymptom2andsymptom3.
Data Pre-processing
The dataset consists of columns with the data being the Date,
String, and Numeric type. We also have categorical variables i n
thedataset.SincetheMLmodelrequiresallthedatathatispas sed
asinputtobeinthenumericform,weperformedlabel-encoding
ofthecategoricalvariables.Thisassignsanumbertoevery unique
categoricalvalueinthecolumn.
The dataset consists of multiple missing values which cause
an error when passed directly as an input. Thus, we ﬁll the
Frontiers in Public Health | www.frontiersin.org 3 July 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 357