Bazdaric K, Sverko D, Salaric I, Martinović A, Lucijanic M . The ABC of linear regression analysis: What every author and editor should 
know. European Science Editing  2021;47. DOI: 10.3897/ese.2021.e63780
6 of 9
std = standardized
Figure 4:  Results of multiple regression using MedCalc. A) data as originally recorded and B) data  standardized to obtain 
standardized β coefficients. eGFR, estimated glomerular filtration rate; BMI, body mass index; LVEF, left ventricular ejection fraction; 
CAD, coronary artery disease. 
Some common areas of errors in presenting regression analysis
Adequate guidelines are available from the EQUATOR network for almost every type of article. These include guidelines for 
reporting statistics, for example the ‘SAMPL Guidelines for Biomedical Journals’ written by Tom Lang and Doug Altman, which 
also discuss the reporting of regression analysis in detail.15 We propose a quick checklist that can help authors and editors in 
evaluating multiple regression analyses. 
Table 2. A checklist for multiple regression analysis  
Question Answer
Does the title or main text use causal 
language appropriately?The title of an article in which simple or multiple regression is used contains words such 
as ‘correlation’ , ‘relation’ and ‘association’ but avoids words such as ‘influence’ or ‘cause’ .
Are statistical assumptions for multiple 
regression satisfied?See Table 1.
Are variable transformations used 
sensibly?Check whether the assumptions are met after carrying out a variable transformation: 
If the relationship between variables needs to be linear, a graph of the transformed 
variable should reflect that.
Is the analysis significant? If the analysis is not significant ( P<0.05), the regression cannot be interpreted.
Is the interpretation of regression cor -
rect?Depends on the R ² size where higher values indicate better model fit and prediction.
Area 1: Titles of the articles with multiple regression analysis and the use of causal language in the manuscripts
Titles are supposed to attract readers and clearly represent the paper’s content.16 Most of the clinical data obtained and analysed by 
common contributors are observational and not interventional. Such studies (either retrospective, cross-sectional, or prospective) 
cannot  prove  causality of the investigated relationships but only assess whether variables are related to each other. One should bear 
in mind that even if two variables have a statistically significant relationship, neither of the two variables needs to be the cause 
of the change in the other: a third variable that can affect both may be unrecognized and not measured in the study. One such 
example is the discovery of the mechanism behind the tendency to bleed seen in patients with myeloprofliferative neoplasms and 
high platelet counts that are a direct consequence of tumour production. Although this relationship seems to be counterintuitive,