Bazdaric K, Sverko D, Salaric I, Martinović A, Lucijanic M . The ABC of linear regression analysis: What every author and editor should 
know. European Science Editing  2021;47. DOI: 10.3897/ese.2021.e63780
7 of 9it is well described in the literature and it was not easy to understand before the discovery that secondary depletion of von 
Willebrand factor (glicoprotein crucial for platelet adhesion to damaged sites in the vasculature) occurs because of the high 
number of circulating platelets.17
Therefore, the title of an article in which simple or multiple regression is used should contain words such as ‘correlation’ , ‘relation’ , 
and ‘association’ but avoid words such as ‘influence’ or ‘cause’ because they imply, possibly incorrectly, a causal relationships 
between variables.18,19 Some authors consider the term ‘correlation’ more appropriate than the term ‘association’ because the latter 
is usually used for expressing the relationship between categorical variables.20 The distinction, however, is debatable. The terms 
‘multivariate’ and ‘multivariable’ are often used: a multivariable model refers to an analysis with one dependent and two or more 
(multiple) independent variables whereas a multivariate analysis refers to an analysis with more than one outcomes (for example 
repeated measures) and multiple independent variables.21
JAMA editors strongly suggest avoiding causal language except in randomized controlled trials (https://jamanetwork.com/
journals/jama/pages/instructions-for-authors#SecReportsofSurveyResearch). Furthermore, they also advise describing methods 
and results using the words ‘association’ and ‘correlation’ and to avoid avoiding words that imply a ‘cause-and-effect’ relationship. 
The same principle can be applied to studies where regression analysis is used as a statistical method. 
Area 2: Assumptions for calculating multiple regression
A long time ago, the medical editor and writer Tom Lang wrote that “every scientific article that includes statistical analysis 
should contain a sentence confirming that the assumptions on which the analysis is based were met. ”10 It is important to notice 
that violating the assumptions (or ignoring them) makes the estimates obtained by regression analysis  less reliable, possibly 
unreliable, or even false. Real-life clinical data rarely meet all the assumptions that multiple regression requires. However, if 
authors decide to use this method, it is fair to make attempts to limit the violations and to recognize the limitations of their work 
so that readers (and editors) can judge the work objectively. Furthermore, other statistical analyses may be chosen instead, if the 
main assumptions are not met. 
It should be noted that linearity cannot be checked for binary variables and that non-linearly correlated variables might be 
significant predictors of the criterion of interest, as described in our example. Authors should be guided by logic and scientific 
plausibility. If the relationship between the dependent and the independent variables is not linear, variables can be transformed,9 
and authors are advised to consider categorizing the predictors if they believe there is a non-linear relationship to overcome 
the breach of linearity. By transforming either the dependent or the independent variable we can obtain better coefficients of 
determination and better linearity. Possible transformation options include creating an exponential model (testing different 
logarithms of dependent variables), a quadratic model (taking the square root, the 3rd root, etc of an independent variable), a 
reciprocal model (1/dependent variable), a logarithmic model (different logarithms of the independent variable), or a combination 
of models (combining different types of transformations for both dependent and independent variables). We would like to point 
out that a simple one-time transformation of the dependent variable (using logarithmic transformation, for example), without 
assessing whether assumptions are improved by the process, does not make sense and does not suddenly make the regression 
unbiased and acceptable. However, this is a phenomenon often encountered in medical journals because many authors consider 
this to be a great move to checkmate the reviewers. If authors, editors, or reviewers realize that the assumptions have not been 
met and therefore ask for solutions, other methods of regression can be suggested or other statistical methods can be used. In 
such cases, a logistic regression (if authors wish to base their conclusions on the prediction that the dependent variable odds are 
higher or lower than something else) or a Poisson regression (in dealing with numerical data that are usually highly skewed) can 
be used for the same purpose and can yield similar conclusions. Authors can still insist on using a multiple regression and choose 
to ignore the above-mentioned points; however, in that case, they are concerned mainly with describing their data set and not in 
making inferential conclusions on the population in general.
The point is not to include all measured variables in the model but only those clinically meaningful that fit well.5 It is a common 
practice that it is appropriate to include variables in the multivariable model. It is recommended that recognized predictors 
described in the literature be used, as well as variables that show significant univariate associations or that have clinically 
meaningful biological relationships despite not being significantly related in the current data set. Furthermore, variables such as 
age and sex can be considered mandatory adjustments if the sample size permits it. It is possible that the number of variables that 
need to be considered is much higher than the possibilities afforded by sample size. In that case, the authors must consciously 
limit their analyses or perform automatic stepwise model building, letting the computer chose the best predictors. However, this 
does not absolve authors of the responsibility of interpreting how and why the variables in the final model were chosen.
Area 3: Significance of regression 
A common and frequent mistake is to interpret regression models that are not significant. The results of regression can be 
interpreted by the strength of the evidence: a small P value suggests stronger evidence for rejecting the null hypothesis. An 
arbitrary value of  P, namely 0.05, is very common in the literature, and  P<0.01 is considered as strong evidence and  P<0.001 very 
strong evidence whereas  P<0.1 can suggest only a possibility or weak evidence (check assumptions for the analysis).