Bazdaric K, Sverko D, Salaric I, Martinović A, Lucijanic M . The ABC of linear regression analysis: What every author and editor should 
know. European Science Editing  2021;47. DOI: 10.3897/ese.2021.e63780
5 of 9and thus obtain standardized variables with a mean of 0 and standard deviation of 1. To calculate the individual contribution of 
a variable as a percentage, we use squared semi-partial coefficients of correlation (sr ²), which are provided by MedCalc. Semi-
partial r ² provides information on what proportion of the criterion variable can be explained with this particular predictor while 
the rest of the correlations are excluded.
To continue with the example with regard to predicting renal function quality in the multivariable context. In addition to 
haemoglobin, we included in the model other clinical variables with potential associations with eGFR, such as body mass index, 
left ventricle ejection fraction, age, and presence of coronary artery disease. All these parameters can either reflect on renal 
function, be affected by it, or share some common risk factors and pathophysiologic mechanisms—we cannot judge  causal  
relationships between investigated variables; we can only assess whether  significant  relationships exist. The variable eGFR is the 
criterion, whereas the other variables are considered predictors and entered as independent variables into the statistical program. 
The program output is shown in Figure 4 and, as explained in the text below, two outputs are given: one with existing data set 
(Figure 4A) and one with standardized input data (Figure 4B). The non-standardized data allow us to calculate eGFR from raw 
data, whereas standardized data allow us to compare effect sizes.
The residuals in the above example were normally distributed, suggesting that the assumptions were met. Also, a correlation 
matrix between continuous variables is part of the program output (Figure  4) and helps us to understand the level of mutual 
correlations that exist between used predictors, that is to assess multicolinearity. We were unable to put all the variables into a linear 
correlation (presence of coronary artery disease (CAD = 1) is a binary variable and has to be coded in the program as ‘0’ if absent 
and ‘1’ if present) and some of the investigated variables had low coefficients of correlation, implying that a linear relationship 
actually does not exist (correlation coefficients between eGFR and body mass index and between eGFR and left ventricle ejection). 
However, there are scientifically plausible reasons to include those variables into the analysis, so we decided to keep them. 
As in simple linear regression, first you have to check if the model fits (number 1 in Figure 4). Because the overall  P value for the 
regression is significant, we can proceed with interpreting the results. The second step is to look at the coefficient of determination 
(R², number 2 in Figure 4). In our example, R² is 0.217, meaning that 21.7% of the eGFR is explained with this model. Because 
this coefficient increases with the number of variables included in the model, it is advisable to present the adjusted coefficient of 
multiple determination (adjusted for the number of variables included in the model). R²adjusted was 0.212, that is 21.2% of the eGFR 
is explained. 
We further considered which variables explain, or are associated with, eGFR. We can search for the answer to that question under 
number 3 in Figure 4. As can be observed, all of the included variables had statistically significant independent relationships with 
eGFR. We can speculate that these variables might have different independent biological mechanisms behind the mathematical 
relationship. Thereby, all variables should probably be considered separately if we wish to understand eGFR in patients with 
atrial fibrillation. Individual contributions of particular predictors differ in the standardized β coefficients (Figure 4B), and semi-
partial correlation coefficients (Figure 4A and 4B) provide the same output, because the data were not standardized for the first 
analyses but were standardized for the second one. Age and haemoglobin seem to explain the highest proportion of the eGFR. 
Furthermore, different directions of predictors with dependent variables are present, indicating that patients who experienced 
higher haemoglobin and left ventricle ejection fraction were more likely to have higher eGFR (positive B and β coefficients), 
whereas patients with higher body mass index, older patients, and those with coronary artery disease were more likely to have 
lower eGFR (negative B and β coefficients). The variable CAD = 1 beta coefficient is the adjusted mean difference in eGFR between 
the two groups, meaning that the group in which coronary artery disease was present had lower eGFR (−3.35 points, or 3.35%). 
From the data (number 3 in Figure 4A), we can construct a regression equation for predicting the eGFR from the given data. 
For example, if we have a 65-year-old patient with atrial fibrillation but without coronary artery disease, with a haemoglobin 
level of 130 g/L, a body mass index of 30, and left ventricle ejection fraction of 60%, the patient’s eGFR can be easily calculated as 
follows: eGFR = 63.3045 + 0.325 × 130 − 0.3499 × 30 + 0.1108 × 60 − 0.5431 × 65 − 3.3571 × 0 = 66.4.
One can consider the obtained adjusted R² to be modest, because our model explained only 21% of the eGFR variance. 
However, that small percentage does not invalidate the observations, which may have important clinical repercussions and can 
help in planning future studies on the topic. As shown, all the investigated variables seem to contribute independently to eGFR 
prediction. We did not recognize or could not measure major predictors of eGFR that would result in higher R² (we deliberately 
chose not to consider such parameters of renal excretion function as urea and creatinine, because that would have resulted in a 
‘self-fulfilling prophecy’ of little real interpretation value). It was also possible that some variables have no statistical significance 
if analysed in a multivariable context. Such variables either truly do not have independent predictive properties or our sample 
might have been too small for such analysis. Anyhow, such variable can yet be considered in a model if its inclusion increases 
the adjusted R² substantially. If the analysis is repeated with and without such additional predictor(s) and if the variable is not 
considered as a mandatory adjustment, then it should probably be excluded from the equation.
Further exploratory analyses investigating whether interactions between different independent variables and the dependent 
variable exist can be undertaken to better understand the given data set. Interaction is present when the degree of association 
between two variables changes depending on the value of the third one, that is when one variable moderates the relationship 
between two other variables. The present article does not deal with this issue in more detail because the complexity of the theme 
and the lack of space do not permit a more detailed discussion; however,  we plan to do so in future.