Bazdaric K, Sverko D, Salaric I, Martinović A, Lucijanic M . The ABC of linear regression analysis: What every author and editor should 
know. European Science Editing  2021;47. DOI: 10.3897/ese.2021.e63780
1 of 9Introduction
Linear regression analysis is a widely used statistical technique that can be applied in different fields, such as the natural sciences, 
biomedicine, engineering, and social sciences for building a model from a set of data on variables1 and is based on correlation, 
which estimates the linear relationship between continuous variables,2 most often by Pearson’s or Spearman’s coefficient, while 
the significance of the coefficient is expressed by P value. The coefficient of correlation shows the extent to which changes in the 
value of one variable correlate to changes in the value of the other. It is usually performed either to build a prediction equation, 
that is to predict the value of a variable, referred to as the dependent variable,  from the value(s) of other variables, referred to 
as the independent variable(s), or to estimate the contributions of different independent variables to predicting the dependent 
variable.1–5   
The first author of the present paper (KB) was recently asked to assist with statistics in an international medical project and to 
analyse a large sample of data. To better understand what was expected, the investigator sent several similar articles published in 
public-health journals, some of them highly rated. While reading these articles (especially the way the results had been presented 
and interpreted) several statistical errors in using regression analysis with large data sets were noticed—errors that could have 
been avoided if the authors, reviewers, and editors of those papers followed the existing guidelines on reporting statistical results.3 
This experience prompted us to write this article, which focuses solely on data analysis and does not discuss errors related to 
sampling and measuring, and seeks to guide researchers in using  simple and multiple linear regressions and in reporting the 
results by explaining the techniques with suitable examples. The ABC of linear regression analysis: What every author and editor should know
Ksenija Bazdaric 
Rijeka University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Informatics, Rijeka, Croatia; ksenija.bazdaric@medri.uniri.hr; 
ORCID: 0000-0002-2977-3686
Dina Sverko
Behavioral Health Home Rijeka; Rijeka, Croatia
Ivan Salaric
Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, University of Zagreb School of Dental Medicine, University Hospital Dubrava, 
Zagreb, Croatia; ORCID:0000-0001-8390-8185
Anna Martinović
Department of English, University of Zadar, Zadar, Croatia; amartino@unizd.hr
Marko Lucijanic
Hematology Department, University Hospital Dubrava, Av. Gojka Suska 6, 10000 Zagreb, Croatia  
and the  University of Zagreb School of Medicine, Salata 3, 10000 Zagreb, Croatia
DOI: 10.3897/ese.2021.e63780
Abstract
Regression analysis is a widely used statistical technique to build a model from a set of data on two or more variables. Linear 
regression is based on linear correlation, and assumes that change in one variable is accompanied by a proportional change in 
another variable. Simple linear regression, or bivariate regression, is used for predicting the value of one variable from another 
variable (predictor); however, multiple linear regression, which enables us to analyse more than one predictor or variable, is 
more commonly used. This paper explains both simple and multiple linear regressions illustrated with an example of analysis 
and also discusses some common errors in presenting the results of regression, including inappropriate titles, causal language, 
inappropriate conclusions, and misinterpretation.
Keywords:  Causal language, linear models, prediction, regression analysis, reporting, residuals,  statisticsORIGINAL ARTICLE