Bazdaric K, Sverko D, Salaric I, Martinović A, Lucijanic M . The ABC of linear regression analysis: What every author and editor should 
know. European Science Editing  2021;47. DOI: 10.3897/ese.2021.e63780
4 of 9Multiple regression analysis
Multiple linear regression is a statistical method similar to linear regression, the difference being that a multiple linear regression 
uses more than one predictor or variable.4,5 
When building a model, the investigator has to be aware of the assumptions behind multiple regression analysis. 
Assumptions in multiple regression analysis
Multiple regression analysis is a parametrical statistical method: it requires that the dependent variable be numerical (continuous) 
on an interval or ratio scale, that the relationship between variables be linear, and that some other assumptions also be satisfied 
(Table 1).9,10 The linearity is usually checked by correlating the variables using Pearson product moment correlation coefficient 
and looking at the scatter plot.11–13 However, the linearity  could be even better estimated by looking at the graph of residuals.10 
Normality and homoscedasticity presume identical and independent distribution of residuals with a zero mean and constant 
variance. The residual plot against the independent variable should show a random pattern (equally scattered and not forming 
a U-shaped curve) and the variability of residuals should be relatively constant across all values of the independent variable. 
Also, the residuals should be approximately normally distributed.11 Formal statistical testing of distribution normality is more 
likely to yield significant results implying non-normal distribution in a large data set (as all statistical tests in large data sets 
tend to do), automatically invalidating the assumptions behind the analysis. It is thus acceptable to check the histograms of 
distribution of independent variables and residuals visually to ascertain whether we are dealing with unimodal and not highly 
skewed distributions (especially if dealing with larger data sets comprising, for example, a few hundred or more cases). With 
large samples, the requirement for normal distribution of residuals is less stringent because of the central limit theorem. Also, 
assumptions for multiple regression are not met if any two variables are highly correlated, that is the condition of multicolinearity 
is not satisfied. 
Regarding the required sample size, when choosing a number of independent variables, keep in mind that a minimum of 10 
(or even up to 20) subjects are needed for each variable.11 Therefore, if a criterion is explained by three predictors, at least 30–60 
subjects should be included (a free A-priori sample size calculator for multiple regression available at https://www.danielsoper.
com/statcalc/calculator.aspx?id=1 ).11 
Table 1. Assumptions of multiple regression analysis
Assumption Assumption met if
Dependent variable (criterion) Dependent variable has to be on a continuous, interval, or ratio scale.
Independent variables (predictors) Multiple regression presumes including more than two independent variables as 
predictors. Predictors are mostly continuous, dichotomous, or binary variables (coded 
with ‘0’ and ‘1’). 
Linearity, normality, and homoscedasticity For checking linearity, normality, and homoscedascity, use a residuals plot. Residuals 
have to be distributed with a zero mean and constant variance.
Multicollinearity Only those predictors that are not highly correlated are to be included in the analysis.
Number of predictors The number of predictors included in the analysis is dependent on the sample size. 
Online tools are available to ascertain the minimum sample size required. 
Multiple linear regression
The formula for multiple regression is similar to that for simple linear regression; moreover, the value of the criterion is a linear 
combination of predictors. The formula for multiple linear regression is as follows: 
Y’ = B1X1 + B2X2 + ... + BnXn + A
where Y’ is the criterion, X1 to Xn are the predictor scores ( X1, score of the first variable; X2, score of the second; etc.), B1 to Bn are 
regression coefficients (similar to the slope in simple regression), and A is the intercept. 1 
Each predictor has its own weight that depends on the size of the regression coefficient (B) or standardized standardized beta 
(β) coefficients.4,14 The regression coefficient represents the amount of change in the dependent variable for each unit increase in 
the predictor variable.11,14 The result of a multiple regression is the optimal prediction of the criterion from two or more continuous 
(or dichotomous or binary) predictors. The coefficient of multiple correlation ‘R’ is the correlation of all predictors with the 
criterion, whereas the coefficient of multiple determination ‘R²’ describes the proportion of variance explained by predictors 
varying from 0 to 1 (0% to 100%). The closer the value to 1, the better the prediction. 1,5,14
Contributions of the independent variables to predict the criterion can be interpreted by using the multiple correlation 
coefficient and standardized beta ( β) coefficients. The contribution of a predictor (effect size of a variable) has to be presented with 
a standardized β coefficient to be comparable between variables. B coefficients that are routinely obtained by MedCalc are not 
standardized and are scale dependent and therefore unsuitable for this purpose. To obtain standardized β coefficients in MedCalc, 
you need to standardize input data first  in MS Excel. Despite the name, you do not standardize the coefficients after the analysis is 
done; you standardize input variables by subtracting the mean from every observation and dividing it by the standard deviation