Bazdaric K, Sverko D, Salaric I, Martinović A, Lucijanic M . The ABC of linear regression analysis: What every author and editor should 
know. European Science Editing  2021;47. DOI: 10.3897/ese.2021.e63780
2 of 9Simple linear regression 
A simple linear regression, or bivariate regression, is used for predicting the value of one variable from only one other variable. 
The equation for a simple linear regression is as follows:4 
Y’ = A + BX 
where Y’ is the outcome variable (often called the criterion, the value of which is to be predicted), A is a constant (intercept), 
and B is the slope (regression coefficient) of X, which is the independent variable (predictor). Because regression is a model and 
therefore only an approximation of values, the predicted value ( Y’) and the observed ( Y) data values differ, and the difference 
constitutes the errors of prediction, or residuals.4 The best-fitting regression line is the one in which the sum of squared errors of 
prediction ( differences between the observed and mean value -  residuals) is minimized. 1,4 The coefficient of determination (R²) is 
the proportion of the variation in Y explained by the regression equation.6  The proportion corresponds to the squared coefficient 
of correlation between the variables X and Y in simple linear regressions and to the squared coefficient of multiple correlation (R²) 
in multiple regression and describes the extent(proportion) of the explained variation in the outcome variable Y (Y’).5
To illustrate a simple linear regression, we use a published data set (n = 974), interpret the results, and present the data. The 
example involves predicting the quality of renal function in patients with atrial fibrillation. 6bleeding and mortality risks of mrEF 
in comparison to pEF and rEF in a cohort of 1000 non-valvular AF patients presenting in our institution during the period 
2013-2018. Patients with mrEF presented with older age (P < 0.001 Renal function is usually expressed in terms of the estimated 
glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) using either MDRD (short for modification of diet in renal disease) or other similar formulas.7but 
this concentration is affected by factors other than glomerular filtration rate (GFR (The analyses and figures presented here have 
not been  published before.) 
To calculate a simple linear regression, such multipurpose programs as MS Excel can be used. Unfortunately, although the 
programs can calculate a regression, they cannot carry out the following steps that are necessary to evaluate the appropriateness 
of the method. Therefore, we used the statistical program MedCalc (https://www.medcalc.org/, ver. 19.4.0; MedCalc Software Ltd, 
Ostend, Belgium), because it is adapted for biomedical sciences and has a very good manual (https://www.medcalc.org/manual/); 
however, other open-source software packages, such as JASP ( https://jasp-stats.org/ ), can also be helpful. 
We started by evaluating the relationship between eGFR and haemoglobin (Figure 1, data file available online as supplementary 
material). Several conditions had to be met to arrive at meaningful and precise conclusions using linear regression. Both variables 
needed to be numerical rather than categorical, recorded on an interval or ratio scale, and have a linear relationship.8 Linearity can 
be judged by observing the scatter plot of two variables. Figure 1 shows the linear relationship between eGFR and haemoglobin 
(correlation, or r=0.31,  P<0.001) as the values on the Y axis rise proportionally to the values on the X axis. The continuous straight 
line in Figure 1 is called the regression line  and is defined by the regression equation that goes through the means of X and Y and 
helps in visualizing this relationship, which may be difficult to perceive from the scatter plot alone. If the investigated relationship 
is linear, residuals should have a normal distribution and be randomly dispersed when evaluated on the scatter plot against 
the independent value. MedCalc software requires residuals to be saved as a new variable for them to be analysed further. By 
evaluating a histogram of the residual distribution (Figure 2A) and plotting the residuals against an independent variable (Figure 
2B), we observed that these assumptions were fulfilled. Although no linearity exists between the numerical and binary variable, 
categorical variable  is often included as independent variable into the analysis and usually is coded as either ‘1’ and ‘0’ if it has 
only two levels or as dummy variables if more than two. If coded as dummy variables, their differences from the reference level 
(usually the first subgroup in an alphanumerical order) are presented for each level of the variable. If a categorical variable with 
a large number of levels in ordinal order is used, the obtained results actually represent the trend of increase in the dependent 
variable over the levels of the independent variable used.
Figure 1.  Scatterplot of estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR, mL/min/1.73 m²) and haemoglobin (g/L) with regression line and 
corresponding 95% confidence intervals (r = 0.31; P<0.001).