Bazdaric K, Sverko D, Salaric I, Martinović A, Lucijanic M . The ABC of linear regression analysis: What every author and editor should 
know. European Science Editing  2021;47. DOI: 10.3897/ese.2021.e63780
8 of 9Area 4: Interpretation of regression: coefficient of determination ‘R2’ and beta coefficients
There are different models of regression and sometimes investigators or authors think that if they choose a bunch of variables, 
at least some of them will eventually prove significant. The same applies to choosing a different approach to model building 
(backward or forward stepwise regression), which can yield different results. This practice is called  P-hacking and it is definitely 
something to be avoided.22 The analysis could even be statistically significant because of the sample size or the number of variables 
without having a real interpretation value. 
When using multiple regression to derive the prediction equation, to ensure that the regression is not only significant ( P<0.05) 
but also interpretable, the coefficient of multiple regression ‘R’ and the coefficient of determination ‘R²’ (preferably adjusted 
for sample size) should be presented along with significance. If R² is 0.10, this means that 10% of the measured variance can 
be explained with the independent variables (predictors). Moreover, if there are 15 predictors and R² = 0.10, the individual 
contribution of the predictor could be around 0.1%–2%, which is probably not clinically significant. 
When using multiple regression to determine if specific predictors remain mutually independent contributors to the 
dependent variable, significance of particular predictors is assessed in the same manner as the regression model ( P<0.05) and 
only independent variables that remain statistically significant can be interpreted as mutually independent predictors. Often, 
only one variable remains statistically significant in the model. It is then erroneous to claim that this variable bears statistically 
independent predictive properties in comparison to others that were analysed: it is more likely that collinearity exists, and the 
predictive properties of other variables were nullified by the variable that remained significant in the model. It is possible that 
the model was controlled for variables that did not have predictive properties in the first place but were included in the model 
were included in the model to satisfy some standard requirements (for example age and sex). It is also possible that the sample 
was too small and there is not enough statistical power to demonstrate a truthful relationship that perhaps occurs in nature. If a 
model was created through automatic stepwise building, conclusions regarding independent contributions can be based only on 
variables that remained significant and remained in the final model. Thus, a commonly encountered claim, namely that a variable 
is independently associated in comparison to other variables that did not make it to the final model or did not remain statistically 
significant, is faulty. 
Conclusion
The purpose of multiple regression is to explore a set of predictors (independent variables) and either find their best combination 
to predict the value of a criterion (dependent variable) or to evaluate the independent contributions of each predictor. Although 
referred to as dependent and independent, these variables are in fact in relation, and explanations of causality should be avoided.5 
If and only if the analysis is significant ( P<0.05), squared multiple correlation coefficient and other coefficients can be explained. 
Journal editors should offer better guidance on statistical methods in their instructions to authors. We are aware that not every 
journal has a statistical editor, although this is advised. Statistical peer review should be part of the peer-review process to reduce 
waste in research23 and to enhance the quality of articles in biomedical publications.