PaISparseTrainingSparseSelection(StrongLTH):Deconstrust’19,Hidden’20, Proving’20, Logrithmic’20StaticMasksDynamicMasks:DeepR’18,SET’18,DSR’19,SNFS’19,RigL’20Post-selectedMasks(LTH’19)Pre-selectedMasks:SNIP’19,GraSP’20,AI’20,SynFlow’20,SupSup’20,DLTH’22ExtensionsSanity-checks:RandomTickets’20,MissMark’21,Correlation’21,ReallyWin?’21-Technical:OneTicket’19,LTH+’20,EB’20,RL&NLP’20,BERT’20,Lifelong’20,Pretraining’21,GNN’21, PrAC’21, E-LTH’21, Multi-Prize’21-Theoretical:EarlyPhase’20,GradFlow’20,Manifold’21Figure 1: Overview of pruning at initialization (PaI) approaches, classiﬁed into two general groups: sparse training andsparse selection .
For readability, references are omitted in this ﬁgure but the paper abbreviations (right beside the abbreviation is the year when the paper
appeared). Please see Sec. 3 for detailed introductions of them. Due to limited length, this paper only outlines the primary methods, see full
collection at https://github.com/mingsun-tse/awesome-pruning-at-initialization.
depth here. One point worth mention is that, the core idea un-
derpinning most pruning criteria now is to select the weights
whose absence induces the least loss change . This idea and
its variant have been followed for a long time in PaT [LeCun
et al. , 1990; Hassibi and Stork, 1993; Wang et al. , 2019a;
Molchanov et al. , 2017; Molchanov et al. , 2019 ], which con-
tinues to PaI, as we will see.
(4) Pruning schedule . After the three aspects determined
above, we ﬁnally need to specify the schedule of pruning.
There are three typical choices [Wang et al. , 2019b ].(i)One-
shot: network sparsity (deﬁned by the ratio of zeroed weights
in a network) goes from 0to a target number in a single step ,
then ﬁnetune. (ii)Progressive : network sparsity goes from
0to a target number gradually , typically along with network
training; then ﬁnetune. (iii)Iterative : network sparsity goes
from 0to an intermediate target number, then ﬁnetune; then
repeat the process until the target sparsity is achieved. Note,
both (ii) and (iii) are characterized by pruning interleaved
with network training . Therefore, there is nofundamental
boundary between the two. Some works thus use the two
terms interchangeably. One consensus is that, progressive and
iterative pruning outperform the one-shot counterpart when
pruning the same number of weights because they allow more
time for the network to adapt. In PaI, LTH employs itera-
tivepruning, which increases the training cost signiﬁcantly.
PaI works featured by pre-selected masks ( e.g.,[Wang et al. ,
2020 ]) are thereby motivated to resolve this problem.
3 Pruning at Initialization (PaI)
3.1 Overview: History Sketch
Debut: LTH and SNIP . The major motivation of PaI vs.PaT
is to achieve cheaper and simpler pruning – pruning a net-
work at initialization prior to training “ eliminates the need
for both pretraining and the complex pruning schedule ” (as
quoted from SNIP [Leeet al. , 2019 ]). Specially, two works
lead this surge, LTH [Frankle and Carbin, 2019 ]and SNIP.
Importantly, both make a similar claim: Non-trivially sparse
networks can be trained to full accuracy in isolation, which
was believed barely feasible before. Differently, LTH selects
masks from a pretrained model while SNIP selects masks
from the initialized model, i.e., post-selected vs.pre-selected
masks, as shown in Fig. 1.Follow-ups of LTH and SNIP .(1)There are two major lines
of LTH follow-ups. Acknowledging the efﬁcacy of LTH,
one line is to expand its universe, e.g., scaling LTH to larger
datasets and models ( e.g., ResNet50 on ImageNet), validating
it on non-vision domains ( e.g., natural language processing),
and proposing theoretical foundations. The other line takes a
decent grain of salt about the efﬁcacy of LTH, keeps sanity-
checking. (2)At the same time, for the direction led by SNIP,
more methods come out focusing on better pruning criteria.
Dynamic masks . The masks in both LTH and SNIP are
static , namely, they are ﬁxed during training. Some re-
searchers (such as [Evci et al. , 2020a ]) conjecture that dy-
namic and adaptive masks during training may be better,
thus introduce another group of methods featured by dynamic
masks . Together, the static-and dynamic-mask methods com-
plete the realm of sparse training .
Sparse selection . When some researchers attempt to under-
stand LTH through empirical studies, they discover an inter-
esting phenomenon. [Zhou et al. , 2019 ]surprisingly ﬁnd that
the random network selected by winning ticket in LTH actu-
ally has non-trivial accuracy without any training . This dis-
covery brings us strong LTH: Sparse subnet picked from a
dense network can achieve full accuracy even without further
training , and opens a new direction named sparse selection .
The current PaI universe is primarily made up of the
above two categories, sparse training and sparse selection. A
method tree overview of PaI is presented in Fig. 1. Next, we
elaborate the major approaches in each genre in length.
3.2 Sparse Training
Static masks: post-selected . Sparse training methods of this
group are pioneered by LTH[Frankle and Carbin, 2019 ]. The
pruning pipeline in LTH has three steps: First, a randomly
initialized network is trained to convergence; Second, em-
ploy magnitude pruning to obtain the masks, which deﬁnes
the topology of the subnet; Third, apply the masks to the ini-
tialnetwork to obtain a subnet and train the subnet to conver-
gence. This process can be repeated iteratively ( i.e., iterative
magnitude pruning, or IMP). The authors surprisingly ﬁnd the
subnet can achieve comparable (or even better occasionally)
accuracy to the dense network. The lottery ticket hypothesis
is thus proposed: “ dense, randomly-initialized, feed-forward
networks contain subnetworks (winning tickets) that—when