Recent Advances on Neural Network Pruning at Initialization
Huan Wang1,Can Qin1,Yue Bai1,Yulun Zhang2and Yun Fu1
1Northeastern University2ETH Zürich
{wang.huan, qin.ca, bai.yue}@northeastern.edu, yulun100@gmail.com, yunfu@ece.neu.edu
Abstract
Neural network pruning typically removes con-
nections or neurons from a pretrained converged
model; while a new pruning paradigm, pruning at
initialization (PaI), attempts to prune a randomly
initialized network. This paper offers the ﬁrst sur-
vey concentrated on this emerging pruning fashion.
We ﬁrst introduce a generic formulation of neu-
ral network pruning, followed by the major clas-
sic pruning topics. Then, as the main body of this
paper, a thorough and structured literature review
of PaI methods is presented, consisting of two ma-
jor tracks (sparse training and sparse selection). Fi-
nally, we summarize the surge of PaI compared to
PaT and discuss the open problems. Apart from the
dedicated literature review, this paper also offers a
code base for easy sanity-checking and benchmark-
ing of different PaI methods.
1 Introduction
Network architecture design is a central topic when develop-
ing neural networks for various artiﬁcial intelligence tasks,
especially in deep learning [LeCun et al. , 2015; Schmid-
huber, 2015 ]. The wisdom from learning theory suggests
that the best generalization comes from a good trade-off be-
tween sample size and model complexity [Kearns et al. , 1994;
Vapnik, 2013 ], which implies to use neural networks of
proper sizes. However, it is non-trivial to know in prac-
tice what size ﬁts properly. Over-parameterized networks
are thus preferred due to their abundant expressivity when
tackling complex real-world problems. In deep learning era,
this rule-of-thumb is even more pronounced not only be-
cause we are handling more complex problems, but also
over-parameterized networks are observed easier to optimize
(with proper regularization) [Simonyan and Zisserman, 2015;
Heet al. , 2016 ]and possibly lead to better generaliza-
tion [Soltanolkotabi et al. , 2018; Allen-Zhu et al. , 2019;
Zouet al. , 2020 ]than their compact counterparts.
However, over-parameterization brings cost in either test-
ing or training phase, such as excessive model footprint, slow
inference speed, extra model transportation and energy con-
sumption. As a remedy, neural network pruning is pro-
posed to remove unnecessary connections or neurons in aPruning paradigm Weight src Mask src Train sparse net?
Pruning after training Convg. net Convg. net 3(mostly)
Pruning at Initialization
Sparse training (LTH) Init. net Convg. net 3
Sparse training (SNIP) Init. net Init. net 3
Sparse selection (Hidden) Init. net Init. net 7
Table 1: Comparison between pruning at initialization (PaI)
andpruning after training (PaT). As seen, weight source is the axis
that differentiates PaI methods from their traditional counterparts:
PaI methods inherit weights from a randomly initialized ( Init.) net-
work instead of a converged ( Convg. ) network. PaI methods can be
further classiﬁed into two major categories: sparse training (picked
sparse network will be trained) and sparse selection (picked sparse
network will notbe trained). In the parentheses is the representative
method of each genre: LTH [Frankle and Carbin, 2019 ], SNIP [Lee
et al. , 2019 ], Hidden [Ramanujan et al. , 2020 ].
neural network without seriously compromising the perfor-
mance. A typical pruning pipeline comprises 3 steps [Reed,
1993 ]: (1) pretraining a (redundant) dense model )(2)
pruning the dense model to a sparse one )(3)ﬁnetun-
ingthe sparse model to regain performance. Namely, prun-
ing is considered as a post-processing solution to ﬁx the
side-effect brought by pretraining the dense model. This
post-processing paradigm of pruning has been practiced for
more than 30 years and well covered by many surveys, e.g.,
a relatively outdated survey [Reed, 1993 ], recent surveys
of pruning alone [Gale et al. , 2019; Blalock et al. , 2020;
Hoeﬂer et al. , 2021 ]or as a sub-topic under the umbrella
of model compression and acceleration [Sze et al. , 2017;
Cheng et al. , 2018a; Cheng et al. , 2018b; Deng et al. , 2020 ].
However, a newly surging pruning paradigm, pruning at
initialization (PaI), is absent from these surveys (we are
aware that PaI is discussed in one very recent survey [Hoe-
ﬂeret al. , 2021 ], yet merely with one subsection; our pa-
per aims to offer a more thorough and concentrated cover-
age). Unlike pruning after training (PaT) (see Tab. 1), PaI
prunes a randomly initialized dense network instead of a pre-
trained one. PaI aims to train (or purely select) a sparse net-
work out of a randomly initialized dense network to achieve
(close to) full accuracy (the accuracy reached by the dense
network). This had been believed unpromising as plenty of
prior works have observed training the sparse network from
scratch underperforms PaT, until recently, lottery ticket hy-
pothesis (LTH) [Frankle and Carbin, 2019 ]and SNIP [LeearXiv:2103.06460v3  [cs.LG]  23 May 2022