4 Summary and Open Problems
4.1 Summary of Pruning at Initialization
Easily seen, the biggest paradigm shift from PaT to PaI is to
use a randomly initialized model to inherit weights for the
sparse network, just as the PaI term (pruning at initialization )
suggested. The primary goal is to achieve efﬁcient training ,
in contrast to efﬁcient inference aimed by PaT. This section
answers what are the similarities and major differences be-
tween PaI vs.the traditional fashion in a big-picture level.
Sparse training: Much overlap between PaI and PaT . Not
surprisingly, there is considerable overlap between PaI and
PaT. (1)For LTH-like works, the adopted pruning scheme
is mainly (iterative) magnitude pruning, which has been de-
veloped for more than thirty years and widely considered as
the most simple pruning method. (2)For pre-selected-mask
methods, the proposed pruning criteria for PaI are reminis-
cent of those proposed in PaT (Tab. 2). Therefore, we may
continue seeing the wisdom in PaT being transferred to PaI.
In terms of the four primary aspects in pruning (Sec. 2.2),
PaI does not bring much change to the pruning ratio, crite-
rion, and schedule. However, for sparsity structure , it does
have a signiﬁcant impact. First, structured pruning (or ﬁlter
pruning) itself is not much interesting in the context of PaI be-
cause given the layer-wise sparsity ratios ﬁlter pruning at ini-
tialization reduces to training from scratch a dense network
(with a smaller width). Then the major technical problem is
how to initialize a slimmer network properly, which has been
well-explored. This is probably why most PaI works focus on
unstructured pruning rather than structured pruning. Second,
the well-known LTH is proposed for unstructured pruning.
As far as we know, to date, nowork has validated the hypoth-
esis with ﬁlter pruning. The reason behind is still elusive.
Sparse selection: Signiﬁcant advance of PaI vs.PaT. The
common belief behind PaT is that the remaining parameters
possess knowledge learned by the original redundant model.
Inheriting the knowledge is better than starting over, which
has been also empirically justiﬁed by many works and thus
become a common practice for more than thirty years. In
stark contrast, PaI inherits the parameter values right from
the beginning. It is tempting to ask: At such an early phase of
neural network training, do the weights really possess enough
knowledge (to provide base models for subsequent pruning) ?
Or more fundamentally, is neural network training essentially
to learn the knowledge from nothing or to reveal the knowl-
edge the model already has ? PaT implies the former, while
PaI (especially sparse selection [Ramanujan et al. , 2020;
Malach et al. , 2020 ]) suggests the latter. This, we believe, is
(arguably) the most profound advance PaI has brought about.
The understanding of this question will not only bestow us
practical beneﬁts, but also, more importantly, a deeper theo-
retical understanding of deep neural networks.
4.2 Open Problems
Same problems as pruning after training . Given the over-
lap between PaI and PaT, nearly all the open problems in PaT
will also apply to PaI, too, centering on the four classic topics
in pruning: how to ﬁnd better sparsity structure being hard-
ware friendly and meanwhile optimization friendly, how toﬁnd better pruning criteria, how to allocate the sparsity more
properly cross different layers, and how to schedule the spar-
siﬁcation process more wisely, in the hopes of higher perfor-
mance given the same sparsity budget. We do not reiterate
these topics here considering they have been well treated in
existing pruning surveys ( e.g.,[Hoeﬂer et al. , 2021 ]).
Under-performance of PaI . The idea of PaI is intriguing,
however, in terms of practical performance, PaI methods still
underperform PaT methods by an obvious margin. E.g.,
according to the experiments in [Wang et al. , 2020 ], with
VGG19 and ResNet32 networks on CIFAR-10/100, both
SNIP and GraSP are consistently outperformed across dif-
ferent sparsity levels by two traditional pruning methods
(OBD [LeCun et al. , 1990 ]and MLPrune [Zeng and Urta-
sun, 2019 ]), which are not even close to the state-of-the-art.
[Frankle et al. , 2021 ]also report similar observation. In this
sense, there is still a long road ahead before we can really
“save resources at training time” [Wang et al. , 2020 ].
Under-development of sparse libraries . Despite the
promising potential of sparse training, the practical accel-
eration beneﬁt to date has not been satisfactory. E.g.,
SNFS [Dettmers and Zettlemoyer, 2019 ]claims “up to 5.61x
faster training”, yet in practice, due to under-development of
sparse matrix multiplication libraries, this beneﬁt cannot be
materialized at present. To our best knowledge, fewworks
have reported wall-time speedup in sparse training. Develop-
ment of sparse training libraries thus can be a worthy future
cause. In this regard, notably, dynamic-mask methods pose
even more severe issues than static-mask methods as the con-
stantly changing masks will make it harder for the hardware
to gain acceleration. If the training is not really getting faster,
this may fundamentally undermine the motivation of sparse
training, which actually is the main force of PaI now.
To sum, the major challenges facing PaI is to deliver the
practical training speedup with no (serious) performance
compromised, as it promises. This hinges on a more profound
comprehension of the performance gap between sparse train-
ing and PaT, as well as the advance of sparse matrix libraries.
Code base . As discussed, PaI works (especially LTH-like)
severely hinge on empirical studies. However, it is non-trivial
in deep learning to tune hyper-parameters. In this paper, we
thereby also offer a code base1with systematic support of
popular networks, datasets, and logging tools, in the hopes of
aiding researchers and practitioner focus more on the insights
and core methods instead of the tedious engineering details.
5 Conclusion
This paper presents the ﬁrst survey concentrated on neu-
ral network pruning at initialization (PaI). The road map of
PaIvs.its pruning-after-training counterpart is studied with a
thorough and structured literature review. We close by out-
lining the open problems and offer a code base towards easy
sanity-checking and benchmarking of different PaI methods.
Acknowledgments . We thank Jonathan Frankle, Alex
Renda, and Michael Carbin from MIT for their very helpful
suggestions to our work.
1https://github.com/mingsun-tse/smile-pruning