et al. , 2019 ]successfully ﬁnd sparse networks which can be
trained from scratch to full accuracy. They open new doors to
efﬁcient sparse network training with possibly less cost.
This paper aims to present a comprehensive coverage of
this emerging pruning paradigm, discussing its historical ori-
gin, the status quo, and possible future directions. The rest of
this paper is organized as follows. First, Sec. 2 introduces the
background of network pruning, consisting of a generic for-
mulation of pruning and the classic topics in PaT. Next, Sec. 3
presents the thorough coverage of PaI methods. Then, Sec. 4
summarizes the PaI fashion and discusses the open problems.
Finally, Sec. 5 concludes this paper.
2 Background of Neural Network Pruning
2.1 A Generic Formulation of Pruning
The stochastic gradient descent (SGD) learner of a neural net-
work parameterized by wproduces a model sequence which
ﬁnally converges to a model with desired performance:

w(0);w(1);;w(k);;w(K)	
; (1)
where Kdenotes the total number of training iterations. In
PaT, we only need the lastmodel checkpoint ( k=K) as the
base model for pruning. However, the new pruning paradigm
asks for models at different iterations, e.g., LTH needs the
model at iteration 0[Frankle and Carbin, 2019 ](or an early
iteration [Frankle et al. , 2020a ], we consider this also as 0
for simplicity). To accommodate these new cases, we allow
a pruning algorithm to have access to the whole model se-
quence (which we can easily cache during the model train-
ing). Then, pruning can be deﬁned as a function , which takes
themodel sequence as input (along with the training dataset
D), and outputs a pruned model w.
We need two pieces of information to make a neural net-
work exact, its topology and the associated parameter val-
ues. (1)In the case of a sparse network, the sparse topology
is typically deﬁned by a mask tensor (denoted by m, with
the same shape as w), which can be obtained via a func-
tion, m=f1(w(k1);D), that is, f1can utilize the data avail-
able to help decide the masks ( e.g., in regularization-based
pruning methods, such as [Wang et al. , 2021 ]).(2)Mean-
while, the weights in the pruned model can be adjusted from
their original values to mitigate the incurred damage [Has-
sibi and Stork, 1993; Wang et al. , 2019a; Wang et al. , 2019c;
Wang et al. , 2021 ]. This step can be modeled as another func-
tionf2(w(k2);D). Together, pruning can be formulated as
w0=f1(w(k1);D)f2(w(k2);D);
w=f3(w0;D);(2)
whererepresents the Hadamard (element-wise) product; f3
models the ﬁnetuning process (which is omitted in the sparse
selection PaI methods). Note that, the input models for f1()
andf2()can be from different iterations. By this deﬁnition,
the pruning paradigms in Tab. 1 can be speciﬁed as follows,
• Pruning after training (PaT): k1=K; k 2=K;
• Sparse training: k1=K(LTH) or 0(SNIP), k2= 0,
andf2=I(identity function), f36=I;
• Sparse selection: k1=k2= 0, andf2=f3=I.2.2 Classic Topics in Pruning
There are mainly four critical questions we need to ask when
pruning a speciﬁc model: what to prune, how many (connec-
tions or neurons) to prune, which to prune exactly, and how
to schedule the pruning process, corresponding to four clas-
sic topics in pruning as follows. We only brieﬂy explain them
here as they are notour main focus. For a more comprehen-
sive coverage, we refer the readers to [Hoeﬂer et al. , 2021 ].
(1) Sparsity structure . Weights can be pruned in patterns.
The shape of the pattern, named sparsity structure , decides
the basic pruning element of a pruning algorithm. The small-
est structure, of course, is a single weight element, i.e., no
structure at all. This kind of pruning is called unstructured
pruning . The pruning pattern larger than a single weight el-
ement can be called structured pruning in general. Although
there are different levels of granularity when deﬁning struc-
tured pruning (see [Mao et al. , 2017 ]), structured pruning typ-
ically means ﬁlter or channel pruning in the literature.
Practically, unstructured pruning is mainly favored for
model size compression , structured pruning more favored for
acceleration due to the hardware-friendly sparsity structure.
Acceleration is more imperative than compression for mod-
ern deep networks, so most PaT works focus on structured
pruning currently. We will see that, differently, most PaI
methods focus on unstructured pruning instead.
(2) Pruning ratio . Pruning ratios indicate how many weights
to remove. In general, there are two ways to determine
pruning ratios. (i)The ﬁrst is to pre-deﬁne them. Namely,
we know exactly how many parameters will be pruned be-
fore the algorithm actually runs. This scheme can be fur-
ther speciﬁed into two sub-schemes. One is to set a global
pruning ratio ( i.e., how many weights will be pruned for the
whole network); the other is to set layer-wise pruning ra-
tios. (ii)The second is to decide the pruning ratio by other
means. This way mostly appears in the regularization-based
pruning methods, which remove weights by driving them to-
wards zero via penalty terms. A larger regularization fac-
tor typically leads to more sparsity, i.e., a larger pruning ra-
tio. However, how to set a proper factor to achieve the de-
sired sparsity usually demands heavy tuning. Several meth-
ods have been proposed to improve this [Wang et al. , 2019c;
Wang et al. , 2021 ]– the pruning ratios are usually pre-
speciﬁed. Recent years also have seen some works that auto-
matically search the optimal layer-wise pruning ratio [Heet
al., 2018 ]. No consensus has been reached on which is better.
(3) Pruning criterion . Pruning criterion decides which
weights to remove given a sparsity budget. It is considered
one of the most critical problems in network pruning, thus has
received the most research attention so far. The most simple
criterion is weight magnitude (or equivalently, L1-norm for
a tensor) [Han et al. , 2015; Li et al. , 2017 ]. Because of its
simplicity, it is the most prevailing criterion in PaT now. We
will see it also being widely used in PaI.
Albeit much exploration in this topic, there are no criteria
that prove to be signiﬁcantly better than the others (actually,
the simple magnitude pruning has been argued as (one of)
the SOTA [Gale et al. , 2019 ]). Since this topic is already
well discussed in prior surveys in PaT, we will not cover it in