common goal, but differ regarding approach and attack environ-
ment. Shusterman et al. launch their attack from JavaScript on Intel
CPUs, while we conduct our attack on Android and ARM. Yet, the
achieved classification rates for Google Chrome are comparable
for both environments. We believe this emphasizes that inference
attacks of this kind are a practical, cross-platform threat.
6.2 Cache Attacks on ARM
Most cache attacks known today either use dedicated flush instruc-
tions [ 16,18,49] or targeted thrashing of cache sets [ 9,17,24,45] to
observe cache activity. While many techniques have been proposed
for x86 processors, Lipp et al. [ 29] demonstrated the feasibility of
attacks also on ARM processors, which complicate attacks with
random replacement policies, exclusive and non-inclusive cache
hierarchies, and internal line locking mechanisms [ 12]. In this work,
we show that despite these challenges, simple LLC observations
are sufficient to infer user activity on ARM-based mobile devices.
Unlike previous work, we pair these simple observations with ad-
vanced machine learning techniques and thereby alleviate attack
difficulties on ARM processors.
Comparison with Lipp et al. [29]. Lipp et al. perform multiple
cache attacks on ARM devices, including Prime+Probe [ 45], the
attack technique employed in this work. For this reason, we com-
pare the Prime+Probe technique by Lipp et al. to ours. In particular,
we set up an experiment, in which we try to classify the first 20
websites from Table 4 in Appendix A. We obtain the Prime+Probe
code from the GitHub repository [ 30] by Lipp et al. and run the
eviction strategy evaluator on the ARM Cortex-A57. The strategy
22-1-6 yields the highest eviction rate of 98%. The code by Lipp
et al. uses pagemap entries to find eviction sets (thus requiring
root privileges), while we employ algorithms 1 and 2 that work
without elevated privileges. The profiling phase for the website
classification is 1.5 seconds. We collect 800 LLC profiles for each
website, and use 90% as training data and the rest as test data. We
then derive the ordered and FFT feature vectors, as described in
Section 3.3. We omit the unordered feature vector, as it yielded
lower accuracies than the other ones throughout our experiments.
While the approach by Lipp et al. achieves classification rates of
90% and 85% (ordered andFFT), our approach yields 93% and 94%.
Thus, our profiling technique achieves higher classification rates
while requiring no root privileges to find eviction sets.
6.3 Machine Learning and SCAs
Side-channel attacks (SCAs) typically rely on signal processing
and statistics to infer information from observations. Since 2011,
advanced machine learning approaches were introduced to side-
channel literature. Lerman et al. [ 28] use random forests (RFs),
SVMs, and self-organizing maps (SOMs) to compare the effective-
ness of machine learning techniques against template attacks. Later,
Gulmezoglu et al. [ 19] showed that SVM-based approaches can be
used to extract features from FFT components obtained from cache
traces. Martinasek et al. [ 33,34] showed that basic neural network
techniques can recover AES keys with a 96% success rate. With the
increasing popularity of deep learning, corresponding techniques
were also studied for SCAs. In 2016, Maghrebi et al. [ 32] compared
four deep learning techniques with template attacks while attack-
ing an unprotected AES implementation using power consumption.In 2017, Schuster et al. [ 39] showed that encrypted streams can be
used to classify videos with CNNs. Gulmezoglu et al. [ 20] used hard-
ware performance events to classify websites visited on a personal
computer using SVM and CNN.
Comparison with Prouff et al. [38]. It is important to follow a
systematic approach when choosing parameters of CNNs. Prouff
et al. studied the parameter selection of MLP and CNN in the con-
text of side-channel attacks. There are in total 4 rules to follow
according to their work. The first one states that consecutive con-
volution layers should have the same parameters. The second rule
is that pooling layers should have a dimension of 2. The third rule
is that the number of filters in a convolution layer should be higher
than the one of the previous layer. The fourth rule states that all
convolution layers should have the same kernel size. While we
implement rules 1, 2 and 4, rule number 3 does not apply to our
experiments. Instead, the number of filters decreases for each con-
volution layer. In addition, we do not exhaustively explore batch
sizes and optimization methods, since they do not significantly
affect the validation loss in our case.
7 CONCLUSION
Inference attacks undermine our privacy by revealing our most
secret interests, preferences, and attitudes. Unfortunately, modern
processors, which constitute the core of our digital infrastructure,
are particularly vulnerable to these attacks. Footprints in the pro-
cessor cache allow the inference of running applications, visited
websites, and streaming videos. Above all, the advances in machine
learning, especially the concepts behind deep learning, significantly
lower the bar of successfully implementing inference attacks. Our
work demonstrates that it is possible to execute an inference attack
without privileges, permissions, or access to special programming
interfaces and peripherals. The simple nature of the attack code
makes a comprehensive defense extremely difficult. This simplicity
is paired with the careful application of deep learning. Interferences
such as measurement noise, misalignment, or unfavorable processor
features are thereby conveniently compensated. The comparison
with concurrent work furthermore indicates that inference attacks
of this kind are ubiquitous and succeed across runtime environ-
ments and processing hardware. For applications that value the
privacy of their users, protection against inference attacks is there-
fore of utmost importance. A comprehensive solution, however,
seems to require a closer collaboration between hardware manu-
facturers, operating system designers, and application developers.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank our shepherd Martina Lindorfer as well as
the anonymous reviewers for their valuable feedback. This work is
supported by the National Science Foundation, under grants CNS-
1618837 and CNS-1814406. Berk Gulmezoglu is also supported by
the WPI PhD Global Research Award 2017.
REFERENCES
[1]Martín Abadi, Paul Barham, Jianmin Chen, Zhifeng Chen, Andy Davis, Jeffrey
Dean, Matthieu Devin, Sanjay Ghemawat, Geoffrey Irving, Michael Isard, Manju-
nath Kudlur, Josh Levenberg, Rajat Monga, Sherry Moore, Derek Gordon Murray,
Benoit Steiner, Paul A. Tucker, Vijay Vasudevan, Pete Warden, Martin Wicke,
Yuan Yu, and Xiaoqiang Zheng. 2016. TensorFlow: A System for Large-Scale
Machine Learning. In 12th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and
Implementation, OSDI 2016, Savannah, GA, USA, November 2-4, 2016. 265–283.
11
Session 3B: Learning and Authentication
AsiaCCS ’19, July 9–12, 2019, Auckland, New Zealand
224