Algorithm 1 Finding eviction sets.
1:T={}
2:told=0
3:forifrom 1tondo
4: add (T,i)
5: tT=access (T,r)
6: if(tT−told )>τjump then
7:E←{}
8: for all pinTdo
9: tp=access (T\{p},r)
10: if
tT−tp
>τjump then
11: add (E,p)
12: end if
13: end for
14: report (E)
15: remove(T,E)
16: told=access (T,r)
17: else
18: told=tT
19: end if
20:end for
set, they can be run entirely from user space. In literature, the study
by Vila et al. [ 48] investigates this type of search algorithms. The
authors give a comprehensive overview of previous approaches, but
limit their evaluation to Intel processors. We discuss approaches
relevant to this work in the following paragraph and refer the
interested reader to this study for further information.
Lipp et al. [ 29] compile eviction sets from physical addresses
which they obtain from the pagemap file that is present on many
Linux systems. After their work was published, Android restricted
the access to pagemap entries from user space.1Irazoqui et al. [ 24]
and Gruss et al. [ 15] rely on huge pages, i.e. pages with typical sizes
of > 1 MiB. Huge pages increase the page offset and thereby reveal
the missing bits that determine the cache set. Oren et al. [ 36] and
Bosman et al. [ 4] rely on special page allocation mechanisms in
web browsers and operating systems that simplify the eviction set
search. Genkin et al. [ 9] build eviction sets from sandboxed code
within a web browser, while only relying on virtual addresses. Yet,
they still require a precise and low-noise timing source to distin-
guish cache hit and miss. In contrast to these previous works, we
propose a search algorithm that neither relies on physical addresses
(whether obtained from pagemap, huge pages, or elsewhere), nor
on certain features of memory allocators, nor on a precise timing
source. Our approach for finding eviction sets is purely based on
virtual addresses and robust against imprecise and noisy timing
sources. In addition, we found our approach to be resilient against
the random line replacement policy implemented in many ARM
application processors.
Algorithm 1 outlines our approach for finding eviction sets. Prior
to execution, we assume that nmemory pages have been requested
and are available as a memory pool. Note that we do not pose any
requirements on the memory pages, thus, our algorithm works with
any page size, including, but not limited to, 4 KiB. Since we want to
1https://source.android.com/security/bulletin/2016-03-01
0 100 200 300 400
Page Number025005000Access Time (ns)(a) Average page access time, tT, for an increasing number of pages in T.
0 50 100 150 200
Page Number380044005000Access Time (ns)
(b) Average page access time, tp, used to filter an eviction set from T.
Figure 3: Plots of (a) tTand (b) tp, as used in Algorithm 1.
evict the entire LLC, we need to choose nsuch that the requested
memory area is large enough to fill it. In our experiments, we
request a memory area that is twice as large as the LLC. This turned
out to be sufficient for deriving all eviction sets. Algorithm 1 iterates
over the allocated memory pages in sequential order. Each unused
page is first added to a temporary eviction set T(line 4). Next, the
first byte of each page in Tis accessed and the average time tT
of this access cycle is measured. The parameter rdetermines how
often the access cycle is repeated. In each cycle, all pages in Tare
accessed once. The overall timing is then divided by rto obtain the
average. This is useful to account for imprecise timing sources and
different replacement policies. A detailed discussion of ris given
later in this section. The access time tTis then compared with the
time from the previous loop cycle (line 6), where Twas one page
smaller. If the time difference is higher than a threshold τjump , then
there is a systematic contention in a cache set. In other words, the
pages inTentirely fill one cache set and cause a line replacement
in the process. This is illustrated in Figure 3(a), which shows the
average access time tTover an increasing number of pages in T.
As long as no set contention occurs, the average timings increase
steadily. Once a contention happens, the timing peaks. Each peak
in the plot indicates that one cache set is completely filled.
After a set contention is detected, Algorithm 1 iterates over all
pages inT, temporarily excludes one of them from T, accesses this
reduced set, and stores the average access time in tp(line 9). If the
time difference between tTandtpis again bigger than τjump , then
the excluded page pbelongs to the eviction set. This is illustrated in
Figure 3(b), which shows the average access time tpfor all candidate
pages pinT. As soon as a candidate is part of the eviction set, the
systematic set contention vanishes and the access time tpdrops.
Each drop in the plot therefore indicates a member of the eviction
set. Those pages are then added to the final eviction set E, which
is reported on line 14. The entries in Eare subsequently removed
fromT, before the outer loop continues to add unused pages to
4
Session 3B: Learning and Authentication
AsiaCCS ’19, July 9–12, 2019, Auckland, New Zealand
217