100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900
Number of LLC Profiles20406080100Accuracy (%)Ordered
Unordered
FFTFigure 9: Video classification with our CNN for ordered
(solid), unordered (dotted), and FFT(dashed) feature vectors.
4.3.3 Video Inference .Similar to website inference, our mali-
cious app also tries to detect videos that are being streamed in the
Netflix and YouTube applications. We therefore target a total of
20 videos, which are given in Table 2 in Appendix A. In contrast
to previous evaluations, we increase the profiling phase to 6 sec-
onds. This is because the LLC footprint of videos is significantly
less distinct compared to applications and websites. Within the
extended profiling phase, we collect nT=6,000samples per cache
set. For the FFT computation, the number of bins, nF, is increased
to 60. Due to the high number of feature values, the size of the first
convolution layer in our CNN is increased to 1024. The rest of the
feature vectors are constructed in the same way as for application
and website inference.
Figure 9 shows the CNN classification results for all three feature
vectors over an increasing number of LLC profiles. The FFTresults
again match the comparison attack, but eventually fall behind by
10%. With a classification rate of 80%, our inference attack is able
to infer streaming videos with moderate success. We believe that
the LLC profiles do not contain enough information to distinguish
multiple videos, as video processing is a rather homogeneous task.
In addition, parts of the video decoding are typically outsourced
to the GPU, which further reduces the cache footprint. Regarding
the ROC curves, which are shown in Figure 10, the CNN again
outperforms SVM and SAE. Due to the reduced success rate for
video classification, we skipped the evaluation of unknown videos.
Yet, we expect it to follow the same trend as for application and
website inference.
5 DISCUSSION
The previous section shows that modern machine learning tech-
niques enable successful inference attacks even when simple cache
profiling methods are employed. Throughout our experiments,
frequency-domain transforms of LLC profiles yield high success
rates when being classified by a CNN. The FFT thereby reduces
the noise in the measurements, while the CNN distills consistent
features despite the lacking order with which the cache sets are
profiled. The resulting classification closely matches the compari-
son attack that is based on precisely ordered LLC profiles obtained
with the help of additional attack steps. Clearly, an adversary can
omit these steps when using our inference attack. The limit of our
attack becomes apparent when the LLC activity is less distinct or
faints. While applications and websites can reliably be inferred, the
accuracy drops for video classification. This could be improved by
increasing the profiling time or including other side-channels such
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8
False Positive Rate0.20.40.60.81True Positive RateCNN, AUC=0.9876
SVM, AUC=0.9748
SAE, AUC=0.9371Figure 10: Average receiver operating characteristic (ROC)
curves for SVM, SAE, CNN during video inference.
as GPU activity. Nevertheless, the results clearly indicate that a
carefully crafted and well-trained CNN enables inference attacks
that are robust, easy to implement, and therefore practical.
Attack in Numbers. The pre-trained CNN model is approximately
24 MiB large. Together with the attack code, this yields a total app
size of 25 MiB. The other ML models are significantly smaller. If the
number of target classes increases, the size of the models grows
linearly. When the app is launched, it first creates the eviction sets
required for LLC profiling. As stated in Section 3.2, this takes 20
seconds on average. Recording one LLC profile takes at most 6
seconds. The subsequent classification is also a matter of seconds.
The work by Ignatov et al. [ 22] is a useful reference to assess the
performance of CNN classification on Android phones. On the
Nexus 5X, all CNN classification benchmarks finish in under 13
seconds, yielding a total attack time of well under a minute.
Attack Portability. Our inference attack is not limited to the de-
vice and scenario presented in this work. The attack components
are flexible and can be ported easily. The eviction set algorithms
presented in Section 3.2 are generic and can be adapted to other
environments with appropriate choices of randτjump . The algo-
rithms are robust against changes in cache size, number of sets,
associativity, and replacement policy. They will therefore find evic-
tion sets not only on ARM-based mobile devices but also on x86
systems. With the unordered andFFTfeature vectors introduced in
Section 3.3, the exact mapping of eviction sets to cache sets is not re-
quired for an attack. This has multiple advantages. First, the attack
does not require physical addresses and can be launched entirely
from user space. Second, it is agnostic to the page size of the system
and works with pages from less than 4 KiB to multiple MiB. Third,
the attack can be launched without additional and complex attack
steps (e.g. [ 14]) that would increase the attack effort and lower the
practicality. The designed convolutional neural network is a suitable
fit for the resulting cache observations. It allows to distill the cache
footprint of virtually any activity occurring on the target system.
Future research may study detecting exact versions of applications
or input events such as swipes, touches, or the like. The CNN pre-
sented in this work is a good starting point for any new attack
scenario. Since a fine-tuning of the parameters may be necessary,
Table 5 can be consulted for sensible parameter ranges. In summary,
our inference attack is versatile and constitutes a threat not only to
mobile applications, but also to virtual machines and containers on
servers and any desktop software. We consider the exploration of
other attack scenarios as future work.
9
Session 3B: Learning and Authentication
AsiaCCS ’19, July 9–12, 2019, Auckland, New Zealand
222