In contrast to previous work, we compile these address sets with a
novel algorithm that succeeds even for imprecise timing sources,
random line replacement policies, and without access to physical
memory addresses. This introduces a certain amount of noise in
the cache observations. We counter this effect by applying machine
learning, and in particular deep learning, to the observations. We
also compare the performance of the employed machine learning
techniques. While support vector machines (SVMs) and stacked
autoencoders (SAEs) struggle during classification, convolution
neural networks (CNNs) succeed in efficiently extracting distinct
features and, thus, surpass the other techniques. As CNNs have
recently gained attention in the field of side-channel analysis, we
explain our parameter selection and compare it to related work.
For the implementation of our attack, we neither require the target
phone to be rooted nor the malicious application to have certain
privileges or permissions. On our test device, a Nexus 5X, the An-
droid OS is up-to-date and all security patches are installed. The
malicious code runs in the background, requires no human contri-
bution during the attack, and draws little attention due to the short
profiling phase.
Our Contribution. In summary, we
•propose an inference attack on mobile devices that works
without privileges, permissions, or special OS interfaces.
•find eviction sets with a novel dynamic timing test that works
even with imprecise timing sources, random line replace-
ment policies, and virtual addresses only.
•classify cache observations using machine learning (SVM,
SAE, CNN) and thereby infer running applications, opened
websites, and streaming videos.
•achieve classification rates of up to 98% with a profiling
phase of at most 6 seconds and an overall attack time of well
under a minute.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 provides a
brief background on cache profiling and machine learning. Section 3
explains the proposed inference attack in detail. Section 4 presents
the results of our experiments followed by a discussion in Section 5.
Section 6 gives an overview of previous work and compares our
results with other techniques. Section 7 concludes our work.
2 BACKGROUND
This section provides a brief introduction to the employed cache
profiling and machine learning techniques.
2.1 Cache Profiling
The cache of modern processors consists of multiple levels. Higher
levels are small and often private to processor cores, while lower
levels are larger and shared among cores. The last-level cache (LLC)
is the last stage before external memory (e.g. RAM). Among gen-
eral purpose processors, set-associative caches are common. These
caches are split into a number of cache sets, each of which contains
a number of cache lines (equal to the associativity). While every
address is deterministically mapped to a cache set, the exact line
the corresponding data will be stored on is chosen by a replacement
policy. ARM-based application processors mostly employ randomselection policies, while Intel x86 processors often implement vari-
ants of least-recently used (LRU). Throughout the cache, data is
stored on fixed-size cache lines of typically 64 bytes.
Prime+Probe. The cache is a resource that is competitively shared
between executing threads. This means that the cache activity of
each thread influences the runtime of all other threads. A malicious
application can alter its cache footprint and time its execution
such that it learns what other applications are executing. This is
the basis for cache attacks and often referred to as cache profiling.
Tromer et al. [ 45] proposed a prominent profiling technique called
Prime+Probe. In the prime step, the adversary fills one or more cache
sets with own data. This is done by accessing a set of addresses that
all map to the same cache set. This set of addresses is called eviction
set. After a short waiting period, the adversary measures how long
it takes to re-accesses all addresses in the eviction set. If no other
thread placed data in the monitored cache set, this re-access cycle
will be fast. In contrast, if one or more cache lines got replaced in
the meantime, the re-access cycle will trigger line replacements
and, thus, will be slower. As a result, the timing measurements of
the adversary reflect the activity in the cache.
2.2 Machine Learning
The following paragraphs introduce support vector machines, stacked
autoencoders, and convolutional neural networks.
Support Vector Machines (SVMs). SVMs construct a classifier
by mapping training data into a higher dimensional space, where
distinct features can efficiently be separated. This separation is
achieved with a hyperplane that maximizes the margin between
the classes. A regularization parameter allows a tunable degree of
misclassification while finding the hyperplane.
Stacked Autoencoders (SAEs). An autoencoder (AE) is a type of
neural network that can be trained to reconstruct an input. The
network consists of an encoder function h=f(x)that extracts dis-
tinct features from the input xand a decoder unit that reconstructs
the original data r=д(h). The network is trained such that the
error between randxis minimized. Stacked AEs are constructed
by combining multiple AEs sequentially. The idea behind SAEs is
to learn only useful input features instead of learning an exact copy
of the input. With a softmax layer at the end, SAEs can be used as
classifiers for supervised learning.
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs). CNNs consist of neu-
rons that are interconnected and grouped into layers. Each neuron
computes a weighted sum of its inputs using a (non-) linear activa-
tion function. Those inputs either stem from the actual inputs to the
network or from previous layers. A typical CNN comprises multiple
layers of neurons. Convolution layers are the core of the CNN. They
consist of filters that are slid over the width and height of the input
to learn any two-dimensional patterns. The activation functions
in the neurons thereby extract distinct features from each input.
For efficiency, the neurons are connected only to a local region of
the input. The depth of the convolution layer defines the number
of filters and the stride controls how fast they are moved over the
input. Pooling layers apply a filter to the input and forward only
the maximum coefficient from every subregion. This reduces the
size of the input and avoids over-fitting, as only the most dominant
features from the convolution layer are passed to the rest of the
2
Session 3B: Learning and Authentication
AsiaCCS ’19, July 9–12, 2019, Auckland, New Zealand
215