0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8
False Positive Rate0.20.40.60.81True Positive RateCNN, AUC=0.998
SVM, AUC=0.975
SAE,  AUC=0.986Figure 5: Average receiver operating characteristic (ROC)
curves for SVM, SAE, CNN during application inference.
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8
False Positive Rate0.20.40.60.81True Positive RateCNN, AUC=0.98
SVM, AUC=0.89
SAE,  AUC=0.94
Figure 6: Average receiver operating characteristic (ROC)
curves for SVM, SAE, CNN during website inference.
average over all computed ROC curves. Figure 5 also provides the
area under the curve (AUC) values in the plot legend. The higher
the AUC, the less the machine learning technique suffers from
false positives. While all three classifiers produce low false positive
rates, CNN outperforms SVM and SAE. Based on the results of
the application detection, we conclude that the CNN is the most
suitable classifier for our inference attack. For website and video
inference, we will therefore only present the results of the CNN.
Unknown Applications. The inherent nature of supervised learn-
ing is to recognize events that are similar to those used in the
training phase. In practice, however, events may occur that the
model has never been trained with. This also applies to our infer-
ence attack. Naturally, we cannot train our models with all existing
applications on the app store. In fact, we want to focus only on
apps that are of interest. Hence, we need a way to recognize and
filter apps we have not trained yet. We achieve this by monitoring
the probability estimates obtained from the softmax layer. Recall
that we train only 70 apps out of the 100 that are given in Table 3.
When we classify all 100 apps on our target device, we obtain the
probability estimates shown in Figure 7. All known apps yield a
high probability estimate close to 1, whereas unknown apps yield
estimates that are significantly lower. We thus label each classifi-
cation that yields a probability estimate below a threshold to be
unknown. This threshold can be tuned according to attack require-
ments. A low value ensures that no application is missed during
the attack. However, this leads to the detection of apps that have
not been executed (false positives). A high threshold increases the
confidence that all detected apps have actually been running. How-
ever, this comes at the cost of misclassifying known apps to be
unknown (false negatives). As a general rule, we recommend to
set the threshold at the intersection of the probability distributions
0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
Probability Estimate00.51Distribution unknown
 knownFigure 7: Probability estimates from the CNN softmax layer
while classifying known and unknown apps.
100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800
Number of LLC Profiles20406080100Accuracy (%)Ordered
Unordered
FFT
Figure 8: Website classification with our CNN for ordered
(solid), unordered (dotted), and FFT(dashed) feature vectors.
obtained from the softmax layer. In our experiments, we chose a
threshold of 0.84, which is illustrated as a dashed line in Figure 7.
With this approach, our inference attack works reliably even in the
presence of unknown applications on the target device.
4.3.2 Website Inference .The results in the previous section il-
lustrate that our malicious app can reliably detect running appli-
cations with high confidence. Once a browser is detected, the app
tries to infer websites that are currently viewed. For this attack, we
target 100 different websites that are visited in Google Chrome. The
list of websites is given in Table 4 in Appendix A. To emphasize
that browsing histories are sensitive information, the list includes
news, social media, political, and dating websites. For each website,
we profile the LLC for 1.5 seconds and again obtain nT=1,500
samples per cache set. The features vectors are constructed in the
same way as for application detection. Figure 8 shows the CNN
classification results for all three feature vectors over an increasing
number of LLC profiles. Similar to application inference, the FFT
results match and slightly overshoot the results of the comparison
attack. With a classification rate of 86%, the CNN is able to infer
viewed websites with satisfactory confidence. The classification
rate is lower compared to application inference, because loading
and rendering websites leaves a weaker footprint in the last-level
cache than opening apps. The ROC curves for the FFTfeature vec-
tor are shown in Figure 6. The AUC values in the plot legend again
illustrate that our CNN yields the lowest number of false positives.
The CNN classifier and the FFT feature vector are therefore the
best choices for website inference.
Unknown Websites. As previously, we train the CNN with only
70 websites and subsequently classify all 100 websites from Table 4.
The probability estimates of the softmax layer are similar to the
application inference and are thus not shown for the sake of brevity.
8
Session 3B: Learning and Authentication
AsiaCCS ’19, July 9–12, 2019, Auckland, New Zealand
221