Undermining User Privacy on Mobile Devices Using AI
Berk Gulmezoglu
Worcester Polytechnic Institute
bgulmezoglu@wpi.eduAndreas Zankl
Fraunhofer AISEC
andreas.zankl@aisec.fraunhofer.deM. Caner Tol
Middle East Technical University
caner.tol@metu.edu.tr
Saad Islam
Worcester Polytechnic Institute
sislam@wpi.eduThomas Eisenbarth
University of Lübeck
thomas.eisenbarth@uni-luebeck.deBerk Sunar
Worcester Polytechnic Institute
sunar@wpi.edu
ABSTRACT
Over the past years, literature has shown that attacks exploiting
the microarchitecture of modern processors pose a serious threat to
user privacy. This is because applications leave distinct footprints in
the processor, which malware can use to infer user activities. In this
work, we show that these inference attacks can greatly be enhanced
with advanced AI techniques. In particular, we focus on profiling
the activity in the last-level cache (LLC) of ARM processors. We
employ a simple Prime+Probe based monitoring technique to ob-
tain cache traces, which we classify with deep learning methods
including convolutional neural networks. We demonstrate our ap-
proach on an off-the-shelf Android phone by launching a successful
attack from an unprivileged, zero-permission app in well under
a minute. The app detects running applications, opened websites,
and streaming videos with up to 98% accuracy and a profiling phase
of at most 6 seconds. This is possible, as deep learning compensates
measurement disturbances stemming from the inherently noisy
LLC monitoring and unfavorable cache characteristics. In summary,
our results show that thanks to advanced AI techniques, inference
attacks are becoming alarmingly easy to execute in practice. This
once more calls for countermeasures that confine microarchitec-
tural leakage and protect mobile phone applications, especially
those valuing the privacy of their users.
CCS CONCEPTS
•Security and privacy →Mobile platform security ;Software
and application security ;Side-channel analysis and counter-
measures ;•Computing methodologies →Machine learning .
KEYWORDS
Artificial Intelligence; Machine Learning; User Privacy; Activity
Inference; Cache Attack; Microarchitecture; ARM; Mobile Device
ACM Reference Format:
Berk Gulmezoglu, Andreas Zankl, M. Caner Tol, Saad Islam, Thomas Eisen-
barth, and Berk Sunar. 2019. Undermining User Privacy on Mobile Devices
Using AI. In ACM Asia Conference on Computer and Communications Secu-
rity (AsiaCCS ’19), July 9–12, 2019, Auckland, New Zealand. ACM, New York,
NY, USA, 14 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3321705.3329804
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
AsiaCCS ’19, July 9–12, 2019, Auckland, New Zealand
©2019 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-6752-3/19/07. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3321705.33298041 INTRODUCTION
In 2017, more than 2 billion Android devices were used monthly [ 44].
The security and privacy of the applications deployed on these de-
vices are therefore of great relevance. The Android operating system
consequently employs a variety of protection mechanisms. Apps
run in sandboxes, inter-process communication is regulated, and
users have some degree of control via the permission system. The
majority of these features protects against software-based attacks
and logical side-channel attacks. The processor hardware, however,
also constitutes an attack surface. In particular, the shared processor
cache heavily speeds up the execution of applications. As a side
effect, each application leaves a footprint in the cache that can be
profiled by others. These footprints, in turn, contain sensitive infor-
mation about the application activity. Jana et al. [ 26] showed that
browsing activity yields unique memory footprints that allow the
inference of accessed websites. Oren et al. [ 36] demonstrated that
these footprints can be observed in the cache even from JavaScript
code distributed by a malicious website. While these attacks have
succeeded based on a solid amount of engineering, the increasing
complexity of applications, operating systems (OS), and proces-
sors make their implementation laborious and cumbersome. Yet,
studying side-channel attacks is important to protect security and
privacy critical applications in the long term. We believe that ma-
chine learning (ML), especially deep learning (DL) techniques such
as convolutional neural networks, assist in making side-channel
analysis significantly more scalable. Deep learning reduces the hu-
man effort by efficiently extracting relevant information from noisy
and complex observations. At the same time, it introduces a new
risk as attacks become more potent and easier to implement in
practice. We demonstrate this risk and compile a malicious Android
application, which, despite having no privileges or permissions, can
infer user activities across application and OS boundaries. With the
app, we are able to detect other running applications with up to
98% confidence. With this information, we focus on activities that
happen within an application. We detect visited websites in Google
Chrome and identify videos that are streamed in the Netflix and
YouTube applications. Those inferences are possible by analyzing
simple last-level cache (LLC) observations of at most 6 seconds
with machine learning algorithms. The entire attack succeeds in
well under a minute and reveals sensitive information about the
mobile phone user. None of the currently employed protection
mechanisms prevent our attack, as the LLC is shared between dif-
ferent processes and can be monitored from user space. Our cache
profiling technique is based on the Prime+Probe attack [ 45], which
relies on cache eviction to monitor the LLC. Cache eviction, in turn,
requires sets of memory addresses that map to a single cache set.
Session 3B: Learning and Authentication
AsiaCCS ’19, July 9–12, 2019, Auckland, New Zealand
214