Algorithm 2 Removing duplicates.
1:F={}
2:B={1..m}
3:while notempty(B)do
4: f=pop (B)
5: forsinBdo
6: tE=accessf
onepaдe
Ef
,Esg
,r
7: if
tE>τjump
then
8: remove(B,s)
9: end if
10: end for
11: add (F,f)
12:end while
T. Once the outer loop reaches n, the reported eviction sets are
expanded. This procedure is outlined in the following paragraph.
Eviction Set Expansion and Duplicates. Each of the meviction
sets reported by Algorithm 1 contains a list of memory pages. Since
one page fits more than one cache line, we can derive multiple
evictions sets from one E. This is indicated in Figure 1. With 4 KiB
pages and 64-byte cache lines, there are 64 lines on one page. As
memory pages are contiguous physical memory, we know that
those 64 lines belong to 64 consecutive cache sets. Hence, we can
derive 64 adjacent eviction sets from one E(the first beingEitself)
by simply adding multiples of 64 to the start address of the pages.
Depending on how large we chose n, it can happen that Algorithm 1
reports more than one eviction set for each cache set. We therefore
need to check all reported eviction sets for duplicates and remove
them. This procedure is outlined in Algorithm 2. It starts by storing
the indices of all mreported eviction sets from Algorithm 1 in the
listBfor bookkeeping (line 2). As long as Bis not empty, the first
index is removed and assigned to f(line 4). The algorithm then
iterates over all remaining indices sand accesses the corresponding
eviction setsEfandEs. In particular, one page in Efand all pages
inEsare accessed consecutively, and the whole process is repeated
rtimes. If the average timing tEof these access cycles is larger than
a threshold τjump , thenEfandEsmap to the same cache set. If
this happens, the affected index sis removed fromB(line 8), and
the iteration continues. After all eviction sets have been tested, the
index in fis added to the final list F(line 11). With each loop, Bis
shrinking as duplicate eviction sets are removed. Once Bis empty,
Fcontains the list of unique eviction set indices.
Timer Precision and Noise. Both algorithms 1 and 2 are designed
to compensate imprecise and noisy timing sources. Although previ-
ous works [ 9,40] suggest that accurate timers can be crafted even in
environments that restrict access to high-precision timing sources,
this engineering effort can be saved here. We believe this adds to
the practicality of our attack. The precision and noise compensation
in our algorithms is done by tuning the parameter r, as well as the
thresholdτjump .rdefines the number of access cycles, i.e., how
often a selection of memory pages is accessed. τjump defines how
the timings of these access cycles are evaluated. In Algorithm 1, the
accesses on line 5 will typically cause cache hits until the gathered
pages trigger a systematic set contention. The difference between
tTandtoldwill therefore be in the order of tmiss, where tmissis the duration of a cache miss. Similarly, the accesses on line 9
will cause cache hits, if the candidate page pis part of the eviction
set. In this case, the difference between tTandtpwill again be
around tmiss . Therefore, τjump can initially be set slightly smaller
than tmiss. Adjustments can be made subsequently based on ex-
perimental data. The choice of rdepends on the precision of the
timer and the measurement quality. In general, rshould be set
such that r·tmiss is larger than the precision of the timer. It can
be increased further, if high levels of noise are encountered, e.g.,
due to high system load. The choices for τjump andralso hold
for Algorithm 2, where the accesses on line 6 will typically cause
cache hits untilEfandEsare duplicates. When this happens, a
systematic set contention will occur, as the chosen page from Ef
will be evicted by Es. In our experiments, we set rbetween 900
and 1000, and τjump to 500. The timer available on our test device,
a Nexus 5X, provides a precision of 52 ns. This corresponds to ap-
proximately 100 clock cycles. In many related attacks (e.g. [ 49]),
where timers typically have clock cycle accuracy, this rather low
resolution would already introduce difficulties. In our approach, we
simply tune rto compensate the low resolution.
Line Replacement Policies. We can also use rto compensate the
effects of replacement policies. This is because the parameter r
causes repetitive accesses to cache lines, which signals the cache
controller that the accessed lines are of heightened interest and
should not be replaced. For least-recently-used (LRU) policies, this
is obviously beneficial, as unrelated cache activity will less likely
interfere with the eviction set finding. But also random replacement
policies benefit, because averaging over raccess cycles attenuates
the effect of unintended line replacements that happen due to ran-
dom line selection. Our experiments outlined in Section 4 show
that the choice of ras stated above is sufficient to compensate the
effects of the random line replacement found on our test device.
Implementation and Limitations. Only few requirements have
to be satisfied to find eviction sets with our approach. Memory
must be allocated and accessed, and the accesses must be timed.
Memory pages can be of arbitrary size and the timing source can
be coarse-grained. This allows our algorithm to be implemented in
user space and, thus, in a plethora of environments beyond mobile
devices, e.g., desktop computers and cloud servers. Even sandboxes
and virtual machines are typically no obstacle, enabling remote
attacks, e.g., from JavaScript. The limitation of our approach is that
the exact mapping of eviction sets to cache sets remains unknown.
However, this is not a deficiency but a direct consequence of not
knowing physical addresses. This choice makes our approach more
practical and, thanks to the application of machine learning, still
allows successful inference attacks.
Performance. We evaluated algorithms 1 and 2 on our test device
with the parameters stated previously. The targeted last-level cache
is 16-way set-associative and contains 1024 cache sets. It imple-
ments a random replacement policy and features 64-byte cache
lines. Requested memory pages have a standard size of 4 KiB. Based
on 1000 evaluation runs, algorithms 1 and 2 successfully yield all
eviction sets with an average runtime of 20 seconds. Note that dur-
ing our inference attack, eviction sets must be found only once and
remain unchanged until the malicious app is restarted.
5
Session 3B: Learning and Authentication
AsiaCCS ’19, July 9–12, 2019, Auckland, New Zealand
218