allocated virtual memory8192 B
page 0 page 14096 B
64 B
line 0 line 1 ... line 63 line 0 line 1 ... line 63
last level-cache
set 0 1 ... 512 513 ...
Figure 1: Mapping of virtual memory to cache sets.
network. Dense or fully-connected layers learn additional relations
between the activations of the previous layers. The final layer of the
network is a losslayer with a size of 1×L, where Lis the number
of labels or classes. A back-propagation algorithm decreases the
loss value by updating the weights in the network. For each classi-
fication, the network provides a probability estimate that indicates
the confidence of the model for a predicted class. The sum of all
estimates equals to 1.
3 INFERENCE ATTACK
The threat model of our proposed inference attack assumes that
a mobile device user installs a malicious application from an app
store on Android. This happens regularly, as malicious apps offer
benign functionality to disguise malicious background activities
(e.g. hidden crypto currency mining). The malicious code needed
for our attack operates from user space and does not need any app
permissions. This means that we neither require a rooted phone, nor
ask the user for certain permissions, nor rely on any exploits, e.g.,
to escalate privileges or to break out of sandboxes. Furthermore, we
do not rely on features or programming interfaces that might not
be available on all Android versions. The sole task of our malicious
code is to profile the LLC and classify victim activities with pre-
trained ML/DL models. Once the LLC profiles have been gathered,
the models are queried to infer sensitive information.
3.1 Attack Outline
The proposed inference attack consists of two main phases. In the
training phase , the attacker creates ML/DL models on a training
device that is similar to the target device. Ideally, the processor
and operating system are identical on both devices. The models
are created by recording raw LLC profiles of target applications,
websites, and videos, followed by preparing the feature vectors, and
training the ML/DL algorithms with them. The trained models are
then directly integrated into the malicious application, which is
subsequently published in the app store. In the attack phase , the
malicious app prepares eviction sets for profiling the LLC on the tar-
get device. Subsequently, the LLC sets are profiled in a Prime+Probe
manner and the feature vectors are extracted. Finally, the feature
vectors are classified with the pre-trained models to infer opened
applications, visited websites, and streamed videos. All steps of the
attack phase are lightweight and can be executed in the background
without drawing notable attention.0 5 6 11 12 15 16 . .
. 63
cache line cache set
page offset page table
index /
page frame
number
Figure
2: Virtual/physical address and its interpretation.
3.2 Finding Eviction Sets
Once deployed, the first task of the malicious app is to find eviction
sets on the target device. An eviction set is a group of memory
addresses that map to the same cache set. These addresses are
called set-congruent. Figure 1 illustrates the problem of finding set-
congruent addresses and forming eviction sets. The graphic shows
a block of virtual memory that is backed by two fixed-size memory
pages. In the figure, we assume a common page size of 4 KiB. As
soon as an address within the block is accessed, the corresponding
memory content is brought into the processor cache. Since the
cache manages data on fixed-size cache lines, one access will cache
multiple bytes. We assume a common cache line size of 64 bytes.
The illustrated cache is set-associative and holds multiple lines per
cache set. Memory that is brought into the cache is deterministically
assigned to a cache set. For last-level caches, this assignment is
commonly derived from physical addresses that are unavailable to
most user space applications. Figure 2 illustrates the link between
virtual and physical addresses, and how they are interpreted by the
cache. The most significant bits of each virtual address are the page
table index, while the least significant bits are the page offset. A
page size of 4 KiB yields loд2(4096 )=12offset bits. The page table
index is used to lookup an entry in the page tables that contains the
page frame number. The page frame number and the page offset
form the physical address. The page offset bits are thereby identical
in both virtual and physical address. The least significant bits of
the physical address are then used by the cache controller for basic
indexing. The lowest bits are used to address a byte on a cache
line, while the subsequent bits determine the cache set in which the
address will be placed. For 1024 cache sets, 10 bits are used as cache
set index. As shown in Figure 2, these bits do not fit entirely within
the page offset (highlighted in gray). Therefore, the exact cache
set cannot be determined from the virtual address, as the most
significant index bits are unknown. This complicates the mapping
of virtual addresses to cache sets and may cause consecutive pages
to map to completely different parts of the cache, as indicated
in Figure 1. Finding eviction sets from user space is therefore a
non-trivial problem. To fully solve it, one must (a)group virtual
addresses according to cache sets, and (b)obtain the correct order
such that group 0 maps to cache set 0 and so on. We refer to this
as an ordered mapping between virtual addresses and cache sets.
In practice, one must obtain physical address bits to derive this
mapping, e.g., by gaining elevated privileges [ 29] or by exploiting
additional vulnerabilities [ 14]. Alternatively, it is possible to find an
unordered mapping that only fulfills (a). This can be achieved with
search algorithms that perform simple timing measurements and
thereby find groups of set-congruent virtual addresses. While the
algorithms do not reveal which group corresponds to which cache
3
Session 3B: Learning and Authentication
AsiaCCS ’19, July 9–12, 2019, Auckland, New Zealand
216