3.3 Post-processing and Feature Vectors
With the eviction sets obtained from algorithms 1 and 2, the last-
level cache can be profiled in a traditional Prime+Probe [ 45] manner.
This is done by filling each cache set with the corresponding evic-
tion set (prime), before re-filling it immediately afterwards (probe).
High levels of activity in the cache set will increase the probing
time, whereas low levels will keep it low. Each probing time consti-
tutes a measurement sample of the cache set. In our experiments, we
measure nTsamples per cache set. The overall activity profile of the
last-level cache, in short LLC profile, consists of the samples of all
cache sets. Before these samples are classified by the machine learn-
ing algorithms, they are post-processed and converted to feature
vectors. The following list outlines the post-processing steps.
(1)Elimination of timing outliers with a threshold τO. All out-
liers are replaced with the sample median. In our experi-
ments,τOis set to 5µs .
(2)Conversion of timing samples to binary representation. A
thresholdτHdecides whether a sample value is loworhigh.
In our experiments, τHis set to 750 ns.
(3)Sample compression by grouping high samples. Bursts of
consecutive high samples are reduced to a single high value.
The removal of outliers reduces noise in the measurements. The
binary representation simplifies interfacing with the machine learn-
ing algorithms and distills cache activity to two categories: high and
low. Sample compression reduces data complexity while keeping
the essential information of whether there was high or low activity.
It also alleviates the effect of random replacement policies, as it
compensates self-eviction during the probe step. From the post-
processed measurement samples we derive three different feature
vectors that are outlined in the following paragraphs.
Unordered Feature Vector. This feature vector is called unordered,
because the exact mapping of eviction sets to cache sets is unknown,
as explained in Section 3.2. This means that it is unclear which
region of the cache a given sample stems from. However, it is
possible to determine which region of the memory page a sample
belongs to, because the addresses in a given eviction set share
a common page offset. We leverage this observation to further
compress the feature vector and reduce training complexity. In
particular, we sum up the high samples of all cache sets that belong
to the same page offset. With 4 KiB pages and 64-byte cache lines
there are 64 distinct page offsets. Thus, the final feature vector
contains 64 values.
FFT Feature Vector. For this feature vector, the post-processed
measurement samples are converted with a fast Fourier transforma-
tion (FFT). The purpose of the FFT is to further reduce measurement
noise, which has been pointed out by previous work [ 19,36]. The
FFT turns the nTtime-domain samples per cache set intonT
2fre-
quency components (excluding the DC component). The employed
sampling rate nSis derived by dividing 1 second by the duration of
one Prime+Probe cycle. We reduce the complexity of thenT
2fre-
quency components by compressing them to nFfinal components
with a sliding window. These final components are again summed
up over all cache sets that belong to the same page offset. Thus, the
final feature vector contains nF·64values.Ordered Feature Vector. This feature vector is different from the
previous two. It is called ordered, because the exact mapping of evic-
tion sets to cache sets is assumed to be known (e.g. from pagemap
entries). This implies that additional attack steps have been per-
formed (e.g. privilege escalation). Having the exact mapping, the
cache sets are profiled in ascending order. But instead of group-
ing samples per page offset, the feature vector is constructed by
concatenating the sum of high samples for each cache set. Thus,
the final feature vector contains as many values as there are sets
in the cache. The purpose of the ordered vector is to evaluate the
performance of the previous two feature vectors. In the following
Section 4, it is used to mount a comparison attack that captures
cache activities with high resolution, but at the cost of additional
attack steps.
4 EXPERIMENT SETUP AND RESULTS
In total, we conduct three experiments in which our malicious app
detects running applications, visited websites, and streamed videos.
The attack targets are given in Appendix A. For each machine learn-
ing algorithm, we build a multi-class classifier. 90% of the measured
LLC profiles are thereby selected randomly for the training phase,
while the rest of the data is chosen to evaluate the efficiency of the
trained classifier. This 10% holdout approach yields the classifica-
tion rates that are presented in this section. The rates are thereby
based on the most likely label. Throughout the experiments, we
observed that 10-fold cross-validation results are consistent with
a 10% holdout approach. We also evaluated our classifiers against
unknown inputs accounting for activity the models have not been
trained with. In total, we collected more than 800 GB of cache
profiling data to evaluate our inference attack.
4.1 Target Device
We use a Google Nexus 5X with Android v8.0.0 for our experiments.
It features four ARM Cortex-A53 and two ARM Cortex-A57 pro-
cessor cores. The malicious code runs on one of the A57 cores and
profiles the LLC in the background. The LLC on the A57 core cluster
contains 1024 cache sets. The target applications are launched and
transition automatically to the A57 processor cluster. This is be-
cause the scheduler assigns resource-hungry processes (e.g. browser
or multimedia applications) to the A57 cores to leverage their high
performance. During all experiments, the system was connected
to the campus wireless network and background processes from
the Android OS and other apps were running. The timing source in
our malicious app is the POSIX clock_gettime system call, which is
available on all Android versions as part of the Bionic standard C
library [ 3]. For website inference, we run Google Chrome and for
video inference, we run the Netflix and YouTube apps.2
4.2 ML/DL Configuration
The following paragraphs discuss the parameter selection of the
machine learning algorithms and provide further details about their
usage. SVM and SAE classification is implemented with the help
of LibSVM [ 5], whereas CNN classification is done using custom
Keras [ 7] scripts together with the Tensorflow [ 1] GPU backend.
2Chrome v64.0.3282.137, Netflix v6.16.0, YouTube v13.36.50 .
6
Session 3B: Learning and Authentication
AsiaCCS ’19, July 9–12, 2019, Auckland, New Zealand
219