Agriculture 2021 ,11, 707 3 of 18
Professional database [ 23]: The datasets they applied contained plant images that
were difﬁcult to obtain in actual life. In the case of PlantVillage, the dataset was taken in an
ideal laboratory environment, such that a single image contains only one plant leaf and the
shot is not inﬂuenced by the external environment (e.g., light, rain).
Rarely used [ 24,25]: They often need to manually design and extract features, which
require research staff to possess professional capabilities.
Requiring the use of segmented operation [ 26]: The plants must be separated from
their roots to gain research datasets. Obviously, this operation is not good for real-
time applications.
Most of the traditional machine learning algorithms were based on laboratory con-
ditions, and the robustness of the algorithms is insufﬁcient to meet the needs of practical
agricultural applications. Nowadays, deep learning (DL) methods, especially those based
on convolutional neural networks (CNNs), are gaining widespread application in the
agricultural ﬁeld for detection and classiﬁcation tasks, such as weed detection [ 27], crop
pest classiﬁcation, and plant disease identiﬁcation [ 28]. DL is a research direction of ma-
chine learning. It has solved or partially solved the problems of low performance [ 22],
lack of actual images [ 23], and segmented operation [ 26] of traditional machine learning
methods. The important advantage of DL models are that they can extract features without
applying segmented operation while obtaining satisfactory performance. Features of an
object are automatically extracted from the original data. Kunihiko Fukushima introduced
the Neocognitron in 1980, which inspired CNNs [ 29]. The emergence of CNNs has made
the technology of plant disease classiﬁcation increasingly efﬁcient and automatic.
The main works of this study are given as follows: (1) we reviewed the latest CNN
networks pertinent to plant leaf disease classiﬁcation; (2) we summarized DL principles
involved in plant disease classiﬁcation; (3) we summarized the main problems and corre-
sponding solutions of CNN used for plant disease classiﬁcation, and (4) we discussed the
direction of future developments in plant disease classiﬁcation.
2. Deep Learning
DL is a branch of machine learning [ 30] and is mainly used for image classiﬁcation,
object detection [31–34], and natural language processing [35–37].
DL is an algorithm based on a neural network for automatic feature selection of data. It
does not need a lot of artificial feature engineering. It combines low-level features to form
abstract high-level features for discovering distributed features and attributes of sample
data. Its accuracy and generalization ability are improved compared to those of traditional
methods in image recognition and target detection. Currently, the main types of networks
are multilayer perceptron, CNN, and recurrent neural network (RNN). CNN is the most
widely used for plant leaf disease classification. As for other DL networks, such as fully
convolutional networks (FCNs) and deconvolutional networks, they are usually used for
image segmentation [ 38–41] or medical diagnosis [ 42,43] but are not used for plant leaf
disease classification. CNN usually consists of convolutional, pooling, and fully connected
layers. The convolutional layer uses the local correlation of the information in the image to
extract features. The process of convolution operation is shown in Figure 2 . A kernel is placed
in the top-left corner of the image. The pixel values covered by the kernel are multiplied
with the corresponding kernel values, and then the products are summated, and the bias is
added at the end. The kernel is moved over by one pixel, and the process is repeated until all
possible locations in the image are filtered, which is shown in Figure 2. The pooling layer
selects features from the upper layer feature map by sampling and simultaneously makes the
model invariant to translation, rotation, and scaling. The commonly used one is maximum
or average pooling. The process of the pooling operation is shown in Figure 3 . Maximum
pooling is to divide the input image into several rectangular regions based on the size of the
filter and output the maximum value for each region. As for average pooling, the output
is the average of each region. Convolutional and pooling layers often appear alternately in
applications. Each neuron in the fully connected layer is connected to the upper neuron, and