Agriculture 2021 ,11, 707 6 of 18
2.1. Data Preparation and Preprocessing
Data are important for DL models. The results are bound to be inaccurate no matter
how complex and perfect our model is as long as the quality of the input data is poor. The
typical percentages of the original dataset intended for training, validation, and test are
70:20:10, 80:10:10, and 60:20:20.
A DL dataset is usually composed of a training set, a validation set, and a test set. The
training set is used to make the model learn, and the validation set is usually used to adjust
hyperparameters during training. The test set is the sample of data that the model has not
seen before, and it is used to evaluate the performance of the DL model. We collected some
public plant datasets from the two websites Kaggle (https://www.kaggle.com/datasets,
accessed on 12 February 2021) and BIFROST (https://datasets.bifrost.ai/, accessed on
15 February 2021 ), which can be used for detection or classiﬁcation tasks, as shown in
Table 2 . In the literature of DL techniques applied to plant disease classiﬁcation, the most
used public datasets are PlantVillage [ 53–55] and Kaggle [ 56]; notably, many authors also
collect their own datasets [57–60].
Table 2. Some public plant datasets from Kaggle and BIFROST.
Name Number of Images Classes Task Type of View Source
New Plant Diseases Dataset 87,000 38 Image classiﬁcation Field data Kaggle
PlantVillage Dataset 162,916 38 Image classiﬁcation Uniform background Kaggle
Flowers Recognition 4242 4 Image classiﬁcation Field data Kaggle
Plant Seedings Dataset 5539 12 Target detection Field data BIFROST
Weed Detection in Soybean Crops 15,336 4 Target detection Uniform background Kaggle
For snake gourd leaf disease classiﬁcation, we need a large number of leaf images
of different disease categories. Meanwhile, the disease image data of each category were
roughly balanced. If one disease with a particularly large number of image data is consid-
ered, then the neural network will be biased toward this disease. Apart from sufﬁcient data
on category balance, it also needs data to preprocess including image resize, random crop,
and normalization. The shape of the data varies according to the framework used. Figure 5
shows the tensor shape of the input for the neural network, where H and W represent the
height and width of the preprocessed image, C represents the number of image channels
(gray or RGB), and N represents the number of images input to the neural network in a
training session.
Agriculture 2021 , 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW 7 of 19 
 
  
Figure 5. The tensor shape of the input neural network in PyTorch. 
2.2. Building Model Architecture, Tr aining, and Evaluating the Model 
Before training, a suitable DL model archit ecture is needed. A good model architec-
ture can result in more accurate classificati on results and more ra pid classification speed. 
Currently, the main network types of DL ar e CNN, RNN, and generative adversarial net-
works (GAN). Among various works, CNN is the most widely used feature extraction 
network for the task of plant disease detection and classification [55,61–65]. 
After the model architecture is establish ed, different hyperparameters are set for 
training and evaluation. We can set some parameter combinations and use the grid search 
method to iterate through them to find the be st one. When training the neural network, 
training data are placed into the first layer of the network, and each neuron updates the 
weight of the neuron through back-propagation according to whether the output is equal to the label. This process is repeated until new capability is learned from existing data. 
However, whether the trained model has learned new capabilities is unknown. The per-
formance of the model was evaluated by criter ia, such as accuracy, precision, recall, and 
F1 score. The concept of a confusion matrix must be introduced first prior to introducing 
these indexes specifically. The confusion matr ix shows the predicted correct or incorrect 
results in binary classification. It consists of four elements: true positive ( TP, correctly pre-
dicted positive values ), false positive ( FP, incorrectly predicted positive values), true neg-
ative ( TN, correctly predicted negative values), and false negative ( FN, incorrectly pre-
dicted negative values). Then, the a ccuracy can be calc ulated as follows: 
TP +TNAccuracy =TP + FP +TN + FN  (1) 
Among all the positives predicted by the model, precision  predicts the proportion of 
correct predictions. 
TPPrecision =TP + FP  (2) 
Among all real positives,  recall predicts the correct pr oportion of positives [66]. 
TPRecall =TP + FN  (3) 
The F1 value considers precision ( P) and recall ( R) rates. 
Figure 5. The tensor shape of the input neural network in PyTorch.