Agriculture 2021 ,11, 707 11 of 18
for example through using different geographical locations and cultivation conditions. It is
not a simple task, and social work and cooperation are particularly important.
3.3. Symptom Variations
When detecting plant diseases, we usually assume that the symptoms of the disease
will not change. The symptoms of plant diseases are the results of the interaction of
diseases, plants, and the environment [ 88]. Changes in any one of the three may lead to
changes in disease symptoms, as discussed below.
In general, plant disease has the following three variations: (1) at different devel-
opment stages of the disease, the symptoms shown may be different [ 73,88]; (2) in the
same period, multiple diseases may be observed on the same plant leaves. If multiple
diseases are clustered together, then the symptoms may change drastically, which brings
difﬁculty in identifying the types of diseases [ 88]; (3) similar symptoms may appear among
different diseases, which increases the difﬁculty of disease classiﬁcation. Meanwhile, the
age [ 89], genotype [ 90], and healthy tissue color variation (and consequent contrast alter-
ations) [ 88,91] of the plant itself may cause difﬁculty in recognizing plant diseases. Other
factors, such as temperature, humidity, wind, soil condition, and sunlight, may also alter
the symptoms of a speciﬁc disease.
The interaction of diseases, plants, and the environment may lead to all kinds of
symptom variations, which bring great challenges to image capture and annotation. Two
methods can be used to solve this problem:
1. collecting images of speciﬁc diseases that contain the entire range of variation [ 88]; and
2. gradually enriching the diversity of the database in practical applications [73].
The ﬁrst method is unrealistic because collecting images of the entire range of variation
is a very labor-intensive and ﬁnancially demanding task, and whether researchers have
collected variations completely is unclear. The other method is much more realistic, and
this method is currently extensively used by researchers to effectively increase the diversity
of data.
3.4. Image Background
The inﬂuence of the picture background on the ﬁnal classiﬁcation is unclear. Two
situations should be considered. One is that a regularization process is used when collecting
images, which generates relatively homogeneous backgrounds. In this case, the background
is usually retained. It will not reduce the classiﬁcation effect and may also improve
the classiﬁcation accuracy. Mohanty et al. used three different versions of the whole
PlantVillage dataset (color, grayscaled, and segmented) to identify plant diseases and
assess the inﬂuence of image background on classiﬁcation results. The results showed that
the performance of the DCNN model using colored images was slightly higher than that of
the model using the segmented version of the images [ 53]. The other situation occurs when
images are collected in real-time conditions with a busy background, and some features
of the background are similar to the region of interest. Under these circumstances, leaf
segmentation technology is needed. Otherwise, the model will also learn the features of
the background during training, which will lead to erroneous classiﬁcation results.
In general, there are ﬁve methods that can be used for leaf segmentation. The threshold
segmentation technique, which segments the foreground by setting a speciﬁc threshold,
has a serious disadvantage. Usually, the same threshold is used for all pixels, which may
produce incorrect holes or even divide the object into several pieces. This disadvantage will
lead to the subsequent process, such as image classiﬁcation, being harmed [ 92]. Meanwhile,
obtaining a reasonable threshold, which is usually selected by manual work, is difﬁcult. K-
means clustering is automatic and works well in most circumstances but is time consuming
and unsuitable for high-speed scenes [ 93]. Otsu, which is an effective and adaptive
thresholding method, has been widely used for image segmentation [ 94]. Although the
Otsu method works well with regard to time consumption and is threshold adaptive, it
will not produce an appropriate threshold when the gray-level histogram approximates