Agriculture 2021 ,11, 707 7 of 18
2.2. Building Model Architecture, Training, and Evaluating the Model
Before training, a suitable DL model architecture is needed. A good model architecture
can result in more accurate classiﬁcation results and more rapid classiﬁcation speed. Cur-
rently, the main network types of DL are CNN, RNN, and generative adversarial networks
(GAN). Among various works, CNN is the most widely used feature extraction network
for the task of plant disease detection and classiﬁcation [55,61–65].
After the model architecture is established, different hyperparameters are set for
training and evaluation. We can set some parameter combinations and use the grid search
method to iterate through them to ﬁnd the best one. When training the neural network,
training data are placed into the ﬁrst layer of the network, and each neuron updates
the weight of the neuron through back-propagation according to whether the output is
equal to the label. This process is repeated until new capability is learned from existing
data. However, whether the trained model has learned new capabilities is unknown. The
performance of the model was evaluated by criteria, such as accuracy, precision, recall, and
F1 score. The concept of a confusion matrix must be introduced ﬁrst prior to introducing
these indexes speciﬁcally. The confusion matrix shows the predicted correct or incorrect
results in binary classiﬁcation. It consists of four elements: true positive ( TP, correctly
predicted positive values), false positive ( FP, incorrectly predicted positive values), true
negative ( TN, correctly predicted negative values), and false negative ( FN, incorrectly
predicted negative values). Then, the accuracy can be calculated as follows:
Accuracy =TP+TN
TP+FP+TN+FN(1)
Among all the positives predicted by the model, precision predicts the proportion of
correct predictions.
Precision =TP
TP+FP(2)
Among all real positives, recall predicts the correct proportion of positives [66].
Recall =TP
TP+FN(3)
The F1 value considers precision ( P) and recall ( R) rates.
F1=2
1
P+1
R=2PR
P+R(4)
In the studies on plant disease classiﬁcation, accuracy is the most common evaluation
index [ 53,60,64,67,68]. Larger values of accuracy, precision, and recall are better. Within
a certain range, when the value of the F1 score is smaller, the better the generalization
performance of the trained model is. When the training and evaluation are complete, the
trained model has a new capability; then, this capability is applied to new data.
2.3. Inference and Deployment
The inference is the capability of the DL model to quickly apply the learning capability
by the trained model to new data and quickly provide the correct answer based on data that
it has never seen [ 69]. After the training process is completed, the networks are deployed
into the ﬁeld for inferring a result for the provided data, which they have never seen
before. Only then can the trained deep learning models be applied in real agricultural
environments. We can deploy the trained model to the mobile terminal, cloud, or edge
devices, such as by using an application on the mobile phone to take photos of plant leaves
and judge diseases [ 70]. In addition, in order to use the trained model better in the ﬁeld,
the generalization ability of the model needs to be improved, and we can continuously
update the models with the new labeled datasets to improve the generalization ability [ 71].