Agriculture 2021 ,11, 707 5 of 18
deep networks, because simple models, such as AlexNet and VGG16, can meet the actual
accuracy requirements.
The DL model can be realized using programming languages, such as Python, C/C++.
The open-source DL framework provides a series of application programming interfaces,
supports model design, assists in network deployment, and avoids code duplication [ 52].
At present, DL frameworks, such as PyTorch (https://pytorch.org/, accessed on 5 March
2021), Tensorﬂow (https://www.tensorﬂow.org/, accessed on 7 March 2021), Cafe (https:
//caffe.berkeleyvision.org/, accessed on 8 March 2021), and Keras (https://keras.io/,
accessed on 10 March 2021) are widely used.
The rapid increase of DL is inseparable from the widespread development of GPU.
The implementation of deep CNN requires GPUs to provide computing power support,
otherwise it will cause the training process to be quite slow or make it impossible to train
CNN models at all. At present, the most used is CUDA. When NVIDIA launched CUDA
(Computing Uniﬁed Device Architecture) and AMD launched Stream, GPU computing
started [46], and now, CUDA is widely used in DL.
Image classiﬁcation is a basic task in computer vision. It is also the basis of object
detection, image segmentation, image retrieval, and other technologies. The basic process
of DL is shown in Figure 4, taking the task of classiﬁcation of diseases on the surface of
snake gourd leaves as an example. In Figure 4, we use a CNN-based architecture to extract
features, which mainly include convolutional, max-pooling, and full connection layers.
The convolutional layer is mainly used to extract features of snake gourd plant leaf images.
The shallow convolutional layer is used to extract some edge and texture information, the
middle layer is used to extract complex texture and part of semantic information, and
the deep layer is used to extract high-level semantic features. The convolutional layer is
followed by a max-pooling layer, which is used to retain the important information in
the image. At the end of the architecture is a classiﬁer, which consists of full connection
layers. This classiﬁer is used to classify the high-level semantic features extracted by the
feature extractor.
Agriculture 2021 , 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW 5 of 19 
 
 [51]. This network uses a simple yet highly efficient compound coefficient to uniformly 
scale all dimensions of depth/ width/resolution, which will not arbitrarily scale the dimen-
sions of the network as in traditional methods. As for plant disease classification tasks, it 
is not necessary to use deep networks, because simple models, such as AlexNet and 
VGG16, can meet the actual  accuracy requirements. 
The DL model can be realized using programming languages, such as Python, C/C++. 
The open-source DL framework provides a seri es of application pr ogramming interfaces, 
supports model design, assists in network depl oyment, and avoids code duplication [52]. 
At present, DL frameworks, such as PyTorc h (https://pytorch.org/, accessed on 5 March 
2021), Tensorflow (https:// www.tensorflow.org/, accesse d on 7 March 2021), Cafe 
(https://caffe.berkeleyvision.org/, accessed on 8 March 2021), and Keras (https://keras.io/, accessed on 10 March 2021) are widely used. 
The rapid increase of DL is inseparable from the widespread development of GPU. 
The implementation of deep CNN requires GPUs to provide computing power support, 
otherwise it will cause the training process to be quite slow or make it impossible to train 
CNN models at all. At present, the most used is CUDA. When NVIDIA launched CUDA (Computing Unified Device Architecture) and AMD launched Stream, GPU computing 
started [46], and now, CUDA is widely used in DL. 
Image classification is a basic task in computer vision. It is also the basis of object 
detection, image segmentation, image retrieval, and other technologies. The basic process 
of DL is shown in Figure 4, taking the task of classification of diseases on the surface of snake gourd leaves as an example. In Figure 4, we use a CNN-based architecture to extract 
features, which mainly include convolutional, max-pooling, and full connection layers. 
The convolutional layer is mainly used to ex tract features of snake gourd plant leaf im-
ages. The shallow convolutional layer is used to extract some edge and texture infor-
mation, the middle layer is used to extract complex texture and part of semantic infor-mation, and the deep layer is used to extrac t high-level semantic features. The convolu-
tional layer is followed by a max-pooling layer, which is used to retain the important in-
formation in the image. At the en d of the architecture is a classifier, which consists of full 
connection layers. This classifier is used to classify the high-level semantic features ex-
tracted by the feature extractor. 
 
Figure 4. Convolutional neural networks for snak e gourd leaf disease classification. 
In Figure 4, we input a batch of images into the feature extraction network to extract 
the features and then flatten the feature map into the classifier for disease classification. 
This process can be roughly divided into the following three steps. 
1. Step 1. Preparing the Data and Preprocessing 
2. Step 2. Building, Training, and Evaluating the Model 
Figure 4. Convolutional neural networks for snake gourd leaf disease classiﬁcation.
In Figure 4, we input a batch of images into the feature extraction network to extract
the features and then ﬂatten the feature map into the classiﬁer for disease classiﬁcation.
This process can be roughly divided into the following three steps.
1. Step 1. Preparing the Data and Preprocessing
2. Step 2. Building, Training, and Evaluating the Model
3. Step 3. Inference and Deployment