Agriculture 2021 ,11, 707 13 of 18
As for the unique challenge, insufﬁcient datasets or tedious labeling work, besides the
methods discussed in Section 3.1, unsupervised and semi-supervised model methods may
be a good choice. In the unsupervised models, such as generative adversarial networks
(GANs) [ 97] and variational autoencoders (VAEs) [ 98], only normal samples are used
for training, which solves the problem of difﬁculty in obtaining disease datasets. The
existing few-shot classiﬁcation studies are mainly based on supervised learning schemes,
ignoring the helpful information of unlabeled samples [ 99]. However, the semi-supervised
algorithms use both a few annotated samples and many unannotated samples to train a
model and can use unlabeled samples to solve the difﬁculty of network training in the case
of a few labeled samples. Therefore, the use of unsupervised and semi-supervised model
methods may be a good research direction in the future.
As for the network design, the models proposed between 2017 and 2021 are slightly
different from the earlier ones. They are specially focused on reducing the number of
networks parameters [ 94], designing the networks to be trained with a small database [ 88],
and designing the networks to be trained with ﬁeld images [ 100]. Undoubtedly, the trend
of designing computationally efﬁcient classiﬁcation networks will continue to develop in
the future [101].
Today, the quick development of intelligent devices, such as smartphones, personal
computers, ﬁxed cameras, and UAV , is making image classiﬁcation projects more conve-
nient and intelligent. He et al. proposed a scheme based on the combination of android
clients and servers, which are ubiquitous in our daily lives. The scheme consists of two
parts: (1) mobile phone client, through which users can upload the collected images to the
server; (2) server-side program, which processes the images and returns the classiﬁcation
results to the user. Meanwhile, the server also needs to store the relevant results in the
database to facilitate the query of users [ 102]. Turui (Beijing, China) Information Technol-
ogy Co., LTD. (https://www.mapsharp.com/wzsy, accessed on 22 July 2021) developed
the “Insect Prophet” pest monitoring product. Using the cloud platform, it can easily
realize the functions of taking photos to identity pests and counting insects. With the
quick development of intelligent devices, the application of deep learning in daily life will
become more and more extensive. However, agricultural areas are sometimes far from
well-connected regions. Under this circumstance, edge devices and mobile clients, which
do not need to send data to the server and can be deployed ofﬂine, could be great measures.
Meanwhile, some research shows [ 103,104] that the electrical signal response pro-
duced within plants can be used for real-time detection of plant diseases. Plants perceive
the environment by generating electrical signals that essentially represent changes in un-
derlying physiological processes [ 105]. Under the inﬂuence of stress (such as disease), the
metabolic activities of various cells and tissues of plants are unstable, which is bound to
be reﬂected in physiological electrical properties. Therefore, the extraction of meaningful
features from the generating electrical signals (such as the varying capacitance, conduc-
tivity, impedance) and the use of such extracted features [ 106] would be a good research
direction for the classiﬁcation of plant diseases. For example, Najdenovska et al. used plant
electrophysiological signals recorded from 12 tomato plants contaminated with spider
mites for an automated classiﬁcation of the plant’s abnormal state caused by spider mites,
and this study got an accuracy of 80% [104].
5. Conclusions
DL methods have gained widespread application in plant disease detection and
classiﬁcation. It has solved or partially solved the problems of traditional machine learning
methods. DL, which is a branch of machine learning, is mainly used for image classiﬁcation,
target detection, and image segmentation. In this paper, we reviewed the latest CNN
networks pertinent to plant leaf disease classiﬁcation. We introduce the process of CNN
methods applied to plant disease classiﬁcation and summarize DL principles involved
in plant disease classiﬁcation. We also summarize some problems and corresponding
solutions of DL used for plant disease classiﬁcation with extrinsic and intrinsic factors as