Agriculture 2021 ,11, 707 8 of 18
3. Problems and Solutions
Before 2015, no notable breakthrough was obtained in plant disease classiﬁcation.
With the fast development of DL since 2015, DL has been widely used in plant disease
detection and classiﬁcation and represents state-of-the-art technology in this ﬁeld. For
plant leaf disease classiﬁcation, CNN-based models are the most used. In this section, we
introduce and summarize the problems and solutions existing in the development of CNN-
based DL methods applied to plant disease detection and classiﬁcation. The problems are
caused by extrinsic and intrinsic factors. Sections 3.1 and 3.2 discuss extrinsic factors, and
Sections 3.3 and 3.4 describe intrinsic factors.
3.1. Insufﬁcient Datasets
The most important problem of CNN-based DL’s application of plant disease classiﬁ-
cation is insufﬁcient datasets in size and diversity. All the other introduced problems are
also partially due to this condition.
Mohanty et al. tested the classic network models AlexNet and GoogLeNet with a
public database of 54,306 images collected under controlled conditions to identify 14 crop
species and 26 diseases. They obtained a top accuracy of 99.35%, which demonstrates the
feasibility of this method. However, the accuracy of the model was greatly reduced when
it was tested on a set of images taken under conditions different from the images used for
training because of the insufﬁcient diversity of the training set. In addition, plant disease
identiﬁcation in this experiment was realized under ideal conditions, such as single leaves,
facing up, in a homogeneous background; thus, the accuracy rate would be much lower in
practical applications [ 53]. Fuentes et al. aimed to introduce a robust DL-based detector for
real-time tomato disease and pest recognition. All images of plant diseases and pests were
taken in-place, including background variations, different illumination conditions, and
multiple sizes of objects. The precision would be lower in practical application due to the
insufﬁcient number of samples [ 72]. Sufﬁcient datasets have an important inﬂuence on the
practical application. However, collecting data is easily affected by environmental factors,
such as season and climate, and image labeling is also a time-consuming and laborious
task. These factors make producing an effective dataset extremely difﬁcult. Currently, ﬁve
ways, namely, transfer learning, data augmentation techniques, few-shot learning, citizen
science, and data sharing, can be used to resolve dataset problems.
Transfer learning is a machine learning technique, where the attained capability from
the previous task is transferred to later tasks [ 36]. Only a few layers of pretrained networks
are retrained with the new databases, which is good for reducing the need for masses of
datasets [ 73]. Mukti et al. utilized a transfer learning model based on ResNet50 to recognize
plant diseases. Their dataset contains 87,867 images. A total of 80% of the dataset was used
for training and 20% for validating. The highest accuracy they attained was 99.80% [ 1].
Coulibaly et al. proposed an approach using transfer learning to recognize mildew diseases
in pearl millet. This approach was based on a classical CNN model VGG16 and pretrained
on public dataset ImageNet. The experiment resulted in a satisfactory performance with
an accuracy of 95% and a recall of 94.5% [ 74]. Abdalla et al. used three transfer learning
methods for semantic segmentation of oilseed rape images; the experiment resulted in an
accuracy of 96% and demonstrated that transfer learning gained high performance in this
segmentation task [ 75]. Chen et al. proposed a DL architecture named INC-VGGN, which
utilized the transfer learning by modifying the pretrained VGGNet for the identiﬁcation
task of plant leaf diseases. The proposed model achieved an accuracy of 91.83% on the
public dataset PlantVillage and 92.00% on their own dataset [ 60]. Table 3 summarizes some
studies that used transfer learning technology for classiﬁcation or detection tasks.