In the supplement materials, we first elaborate on the
implementation details of DriveDreamer , including model
architecture and synthetic data training details. Then, we
present additional visualization results.
6. Implementation Details
Condition encoders. InDriveDreamer , diverse encoders
are employed to embed different condition inputs, includ-
ing the reference image, HDMap, 3D box, and action. The
detailed architectures of these encoders are listed in Table 4.
For spatially aligned conditions, such as the reference im-
ageI∈ RH×W×3and HDMap H∈ RH×W×3, a stack
of 2D convolution layers is utilized to perform downsam-
pling, ensuring the final output dimensions align with those
of the diffusion noise. For unstructured conditions like the
3D box B∈ RN×NB×16and action A∈ RN×2, Multi-
layer Perceptron (MLP) layers are employed for encoding
features.
Conditions Layer Description Output Size
Ref. Img. (Step A) Conv2D, 4×4, S4 H/4×W/4×4
Ref. Img. (Step B) Conv2D, 4×4, S4 H/16×W/16×4
Ref. Img. (Step C) Conv2D, 4×4, S4 H/64×W/64×8
HDMap (Step A) Conv2D, 4×4, S4 H/4×W/4×4
HDMap (Step B) Conv2D, 4×4, S4 H/16×W/16×4
HDMap (Step C) Conv2D, 4×4, S4 H/64×W/64×8
3D Box (Step A) FourierEmbedder [47] N×NB×256
3D Box (Step B) MLP N×NB×512
3D Box (Step C) MLP N×NB×768
Action (Step A) MLP N×32
Action (Step B) MLP N×128
Table 4. Encoder architecture details, where S denotes stride, and
each convolution layer and MLP layer are followed by Sigmoid
Linear Units [10].
Multi-view generation. The framework of DriveDreamer
can be easily extended to multi-view image/video genera-
tion. The model architecture comparison between video
generation, multi-view image generation and multi-view
video generation are shown in Fig. 7. For multi-view im-
age generation, the model framework is the same as that of
video generation, except that the frame-vise attention lay-
ers are replaced with view-wise attention layers. Besides,
the view-wise attention layers construct associations solely
between adjacent views. For multi-view video generation,
view-wise attention layers and frame-wise attention layers
are stacked to process diffusion latent features, which re-
sults in view-consistent and frame-consistent videos (see
Fig. 8).
Action prediction architecture. For action prediction, the
multi-modal features are first concatenated:
CONCAT (Fp(U0),Fp(U1),Fp(U2),Fp(U3), Af),(11)
steps
 Denoising
View-wise-attention Cross-attention Gated Self-attentionsteps
 Denoising
Frame-wise-attention
steps
 DenoisingVideo Generation
Multi-view Image Generation
Multi-view V ideo GenerationFigure 7. Model architecture comparison between video genera-
tion, multi-view image generation and multi-view video genera-
tion.
where Fpis the average pooling operation, Ui(i=
0,1,2,3)are multi-scale UNet features, and Afis the en-
coded driving action (i.e., velocity and yaw angle) features.
Then we use MLP layers [75] to learn future driving ac-
tions. For trajectory prediction evaluation, following [75],
Afis additionally extracted from high-level command, ac-
celerate and past trajectories, and we use the same action
feature encoder of [75].
Synthetic data training. We leverage data generated
byDriveDreamer to augment the training of 3D detec-
tion tasks. Specifically, DriveDreamer is fine-tuned with
higher-resolution images, where the training data is from
nuScenes [3]. Consequently, DriveDreamer can generate
high-fidelity images with a resolution of 768×448. Then
the generated images are resized to the original resolution
of1600×900, which can be utilized to train various off-
the-shelf 3D detectors. During the training process, we ran-
domly select 4000 samples (3D boxes and HDMap) from
the nuScenes training set, which are employed to generate
multi-view images. These synthetic data are mixed with
the original training set to train 3D detectors. In the ex-
12