Considering updating hidden states p(ht|ht−1,st−1)is
a deterministic process (Eq. 6), only latent variables stare
needed to be inferred to maximize the marginal likelihood
of observation p(I1:T, AT:T+N). Therefore, variational dis-
tribution qvdis introduced to conduct variational inference:
qvd≜q(h1:T,s1:T|I0:T, A0:T+N)
=TY
t=1q(ht|ht−1,st−1)q(st|I≤t, A<t),(9)
where q(ht|ht−1,st−1) = p(ht|ht−1,st−1). Similar
to [29], the variational lower bound can be derived as:
logp(I1:T, AT:T+N)≥
Eq(h1:T,s1:T|I0:T,A0:T+N)[logp(I1:T|h0:T,s0:T−1, A0:T−1, I0)| {z }
video prediction
+ log p(AT:T+N|h0:T,s0:T−1, A0:T−1, I0)| {z }
action predcition].
(10)
Note that the posterior and prior matching [29] is not in-
cluded, as we empirically find the simplified variational
lower bound produces similar plausible results. In Eq. 10,
the video prediction and action prediction parts can be mod-
eled by Gaussian distributions N(G(h0:T, A0:T−1, I0),I)
and Laplace distribution Laplace (π(h0:T, A0:T−1, I0),1).
Therefore, we employ mean-squared error and L1loss to
optimize the video prediction training. G,πare learnable
layers involved in ActionFormer ,Auto-DM , video decoder
(i.e., V AE decoder) and action decoder. For action predic-
tion details, we first pool multi-scale UNet features from
Auto-DM . The pooled features are concatenated with histor-
ical action features, which are then decoded by MLP layers
to generate future driving actions.
Based on the two-stage training, DriveDreamer has ac-
quired a comprehensive understanding of the driving world,
encompassing the structural constraints of traffic, predic-
tions of future driving states, and interaction with the es-
tablished world model.
4. Experiment
4.1. Experiment Details
Dataset. The training data is sourced from the real-world
driving dataset nuScenes [3], comprising a total of 700
training videos and 150 validation videos. Each video in-
cludes ∼20 seconds of footage captured by six surround-
view cameras. The videos have a frame rate of 12Hz, re-
sulting in ∼1M video frames available for training. During
the first-stage training, we utilize the nuScenes-devkit [51]
to acquire HDMap annotations (lane boundary, lane divider,
and pedestrian crossing) corresponding to 12Hz frames,
which are then projected onto the image plane. Consider-
ing the nuScenes dataset only provides 2Hz 3D bounding
box annotations, we supplement this with 12Hz boundingbox annotations from [68]. In the second-stage training, we
employ the yaw angle and velocity of the ego-car as the
driving action inputs. Besides, we extract scene description
information ( e.g., weather and time) from the nuScenes an-
notation, which serves as text conditions.
Training. The proposed Auto-DM is built upon Stable Dif-
fusion v1.4 [57], whose original parameters are frozen. In
step 1 of first-stage training, our model is trained for 40
epochs with a batch size of 16. In step 2, Auto-DM is trained
for 10 epochs with a batch size of 1, with video frame length
N= 32 , and spatial size of 448×256. During second-stage
video prediction training, our model predicts 16 frame driv-
ing videos I1:16and 16 future driving actions I17:32, and the
model is trained for 10 epochs on a batch size of 1. All the
experiments are conducted on A800 GPUs, and we use the
AdamW optimizer [38] with a learning rate 5×10−5.
Evaluation. We conducted a comprehensive evaluation
of the proposed DriveDreamer , employing both qualita-
tive and quantitative assessments. We utilized frame-wise
Fr´echet Inception Distance (FID) [22] and Fr ´echet Video
Distance (FVD) [63] to evaluate the generation quality,
where the evaluated image is resized to 448×256. Be-
sides, to verify the generated images enhance the training
of driving perception methods, DriveDreamer is evaluated
through 3D object detection, with FCOS3D [66] and BEV-
Fusion [45] as baseline methods. Furthermore, we test the
performance of driving policy generation. Following the
settings in [30], we evaluate output driving trajectories for
future 3 seconds.
4.2. Controllable Driving Video Generation
The proposed DriveDreamer exhibits a profound com-
prehension of driving scenarios, capable of controllably
generating diverse driving videos. In this subsection, we
first demonstrate that, based on first-stage training, Drive-
Dreamer can generate diverse driving videos under struc-
tured traffic conditions. Besides, we verify that the gener-
ated images can enhance the training of driving perception
methods. Furthermore, DriveDreamer showcases its versa-
tility by responding to different input actions, allowing for
the control of the vehicle’s trajectory and consequently gen-
erating diverse driving videos.
As shown in Fig. 1 and Fig 6, DriveDreamer exhibits
proficiency in producing images and videos that adhere
meticulously to structured traffic conditions (more visual-
izations are in supplement). Significantly, we can also ma-
nipulate the text prompt to induce variations in the gener-
ated videos, encompassing changes in weather and time of
day. To further validate the generation quality, we extract
4K traffic conditions (from the nuScenes training set) to
generate driving images. The generated images are com-
bined with real images for training the 3D detection task.
Results in Tab. 1 indicate that training with our synthetic
7