Text"A realiVWic driYingVcene, da\Wime"HDMaps
3D BoxesGT Video
Enc
Enc
CLIPSpatiall\ AlignedConditionsVWepV
TemSRUal-aWWenWiRnCURVV-aWWenWiRnGaWed Self-aWWenWiRn
Enc
DecGenerated VideoCRQdiWiRQVDiffXViRQ SWeSV
LoVVDenoiVingPosition Embedding
CLIP EmbeddingPUedNRiVeGaXVVianNRiVe
"Car /¬PedeVWUian/..."CLIPFigure 4. Overall structure of the Auto-DM .Auto-DM takes three types of control conditions as inputs. Spatially aligned conditions
(i.e., HDMap HN−1
i=0), are concatenated with noise images and fed into the diffusion steps. Position conditions, represented by 3D boxes
BN−1
i=0and their labels, are flattened and utilized in the gated self-attention. Text prompts are incorporated into diffusion steps using cross-
attention, influencing the style of the generated driving video. Temporal attention layers are employed to ensure the consistency of the
generated video frames. The diffusion steps estimate noise and generate loss with the input noise to optimize Auto-DM .
facilitates the frame-wise self-attention layers Fsto learn
inter-frame dynamics. Tposedenotes temporal position em-
beddings that are encoded by sinusoidal function [2]. Fi-
nally, we restore the visual signal to its original dimensions,
thus ensuring the feature integrity. Notably, the same archi-
tecture can be extended to generate multi-view images (see
Fig. 6), where the Fssolely attends to neighbor views. Ad-
ditionally, a stack of frame-wise attention and view-wise at-
tention contributes to multi-view video generation (see sup-
plement for more details).
Furthermore, cross-attention layers [57] are utilized to
facilitate feature interactions between text inputs and visual
signals, empowering text descriptions to influence driving
scene attributes such as weather and time of day. In the
next, we will elaborate on the first-stage training pipeline,
which involves two steps.
Step 1 training. The Auto-DM incorporates input solely
from a single frame of structured traffic conditions, coupled
with supervision from a single-frame image. For structured
traffic conditions, HDMaps and 3D boxes are obtained ei-
ther from human annotations or pertained perception meth-
ods ( e.g., LA V [4], BEVerse [77], UniAD [31]). Then three-
channel HDMaps (lane boundary, lane divider, and pedes-
trian crossing) and eight-corner 3D boxes are projected onto
the image plane to generate corresponding conditions. No-
tably, during step 1 training, temporal attention layers are
omitted, which enables the network to focus exclusively
on learning the traffic structural constraints, expediting the
convergence of the training process.
Step 2 training. The Auto-DM incorporates input frommultiple frames of structured traffic conditions and is su-
pervised using driving videos. In contrast to step 1, learning
from videos allows Auto-DM to gain a deeper understand-
ing of the intricate motion transitions in driving scenarios.
Building upon the pretrained models established in step 1,
step 2 incorporates temporal attention layers into the model
architecture. These additional parameters enable the Auto-
DMto focus on the temporal dynamics present in the input
data, further enhancing its ability to capture and interpret
the nuanced temporal aspects of driving scenes.
In step 1 and step 2 training, the proposed Auto-DM is
trained using the same noise schedule as the underlying im-
age model [57]. Specifically, the forward process gradually
adds noise ϵto the latent feature Z0, resulting in the noisy
latent feature ZT. Then we train ϵϕto predict the noise we
added, and the trainable parameters ϕare optimized via:
min
ϕL=EZ0,ϵ∼N (0,I),t,ch
∥ϵ−ϵϕ(Zt, t, c)∥2
2i
,(4)
where ϕdenotes the trainable parameters involved in the
gated self-attention, temporal attention, and cross-attention
layers, and time step tis uniformly sampled from [1, T].
3.2. Second-stage Training
Based on the first-stage training, DriveDreamer has ob-
tained comprehension of the structured traffic information.
However, the desired world model should also be predictive
of the future and can interact with the environment. There-
fore, we embark on the second phase of our approach. In
this phase, we leverage the video prediction task to establish
5