The damped time window assigns a weight to each
micro-cluster based on the number of observations
assigned to it. In each iteration, the weight is faded by a
factor such as 2/C0k, where decay factor kinﬂuences the rate
of decay. Since fading the weight in every iteration is
computationally costly, the weight can either be updated in
ﬁxed time intervals (Cao et al. 2006 ) or whenever a cluster
is updated (Chen and Tu 2007 ). In this case, the fading can
be performed with respect to the elapsed time
xðDtÞ¼2/C0kDt(Cao et al. 2006 ), where Dtdenotes the
time since the cluster was last updated. In Fig. 1,w e
applied the same fading function to reduce the size and
opacity of older data. In some cases, clusters are implicitlydecayed over time by considering their weight relative to
the total number of observations (Gao et al. 2005 ; Amini
et al. 2012 ).
An alternative is the sliding time window which only
considers the most recent observations or micro-clusters in
the stream. This is usually based on a First-In-First-Out(FIFO) principle, where the oldest data point in the window
is removed once a new data point becomes available. The
size of this window can be of ﬁxed or variable length.While a small window size can adapt quickly to concept
drift, a larger window size considers more observations and
can be more accurate for stable streams.
In addition, a landmark time window is a very simple
approach which separates the data stream into disjunct
chunks based on events. Landmarks can either be deﬁnedbased on the passed time or other occurrences. The land-
mark time window summarizes all data points that arrive
after the landmark. Whenever a new landmark occurs, allthe data in the window is removed and new data is cap-
tured. This category also includes algorithms that do not
speciﬁcally consider changes over time and thereforerequire the user to regularly restart the clustering.
Finally, the pyramidal time model (Aggarwal et al.
2003 )o r tilted time window (Nguyen et al. 2015 ) uses
different granularity levels based on the recency of data.
This approach summarizes recent data more accuratelywhereas older data is gradually aggregated.3 Related Work
Due to the increasing relevance of stream clustering, a
number of survey papers began to summarize and structurethe ﬁeld. Most notably Amini et al. ( 2014b ) provide an
overview of the two largest research threads, namely dis-
tance-based and grid-based algorithms. In total, the authorsdiscuss ten distance-based approaches, mostly extensions
ofDenStream (Cao et al. 2006 ), and nine grid-based
approaches, mostly extensions of D-Stream (Chen and
Tu2007 ; Tu and Chen 2009 ). The authors describe the
algorithms, name input parameters and also empirically
evaluate some of the algorithms. In addition, the authorshighlight interrelations between the algorithms in a time-
line. We utilize this timeline and extend it with more
algorithms and additional categories. However, their paperfocusses only on distance and grid-based algorithms while
we have taken more categories and more algorithms into
account.
Additionally, Silva et al. ( 2013 ) introduced a taxonomy
that allows to categorize stream clustering algorithms, e.g.,
regarding the reclustering algorithm or used time windowmodel. The authors describe a total of 13 stream clustering
algorithms and categorize them according to their taxon-
omy. In addition, application scenarios, data sources andavailable toolsets are presented. However, a drawback is
that many of the discussed algorithms are one-pass clus-
tering algorithms that need extensions to suit the streaming
case.
In Ghesmoune et al. ( 2016 ) the authors discuss 19
algorithms and are among the ﬁrst to highlight the research
area of Neural Gas (NG) for stream clustering. However,
only a single grid-based algorithm is discussed and otherpopular algorithms are missing. Further, the authors in
Nguyen et al. ( 2015 ) focus on stream clustering and stream
classiﬁcation and present a total of 17 algorithms. Con-siderably shorter overviews are also provided in Mousavi
et al. ( 2015 ), Ma ( 2014 ), Amini and Wah ( 2011 ,2012 ) and
Amini et al. ( 2011 ).
In this survey, we cover a total of 51 different stream
clustering algorithms. This makes our survey much more
exhaustive than all comparable studies. In addition, ourpaper identiﬁes four common work streams and how they(a) (b) (c) (d)Fig. 4 Overview of time
window models (Zhu andShasha 2002 ; Silva et al. 2013 )
123280 M. Carnein, H. Trautmann: Optimizing Data Stream Representation, Bus Inf Syst Eng 61(3):277–297 (2019)