removed. Macro-clusters are formed by grouping neigh-
boring dense cells into the same cluster.
Fractal Clustering (Barbara ´ and Chen
2000 ,2003 ) follows an usual grid-based approach. It uses
the concept of fractal dimensions (Theiler 1990 )a sa
measure of size for a set of points. A common way to
calculate the fractal dimension is by dividing the space intogrid-cells of size /C15and counting the number of cells that are
occupied by points in the data N(r). Then, the fractal
dimension can be calculated as:
D¼lim
/C15!0logNð/C15Þ
log1
/C15: ð1Þ
Fractal Clustering is ﬁrst initialized with a sample
by recursively placing close points into the same cluster
(similar to DBSCAN ). For a new observation, the algorithm
then evaluates which inﬂuence in fractal dimension the
addition of the point would have for each cluster. It then
inserts the point into the cluster whose fractal dimensionchanges the least. However, if the change in fractal
dimension is too large, the observation is considered noise
instead.
5.2 Recursive Partitioning
Stats-Grid (Park and Lee 2004 ) is an early algorithm
which recursively partitions grid-cells. The algorithm
begins by splitting the data into grid-cells of ﬁxed size.Each cell maintains its density, mean and standard devia-
tion. The algorithm then recursively partitions grid-cells
until cells become sufﬁciently small unit cells . The aim is
to ﬁnd adjacent unit cells with large density which can be
used to form macro-clusters. The algorithm splits a cell in
two subcells whenever it has reached sufﬁcient density.The size of the subcells is dynamically adapted based on
the distribution of data within the cell. The authors propose
three separate splitting strategies, for example choosing thedimension where the cell’s standard deviation is the largest
and splitting at the mean. Since the weight of cells is cal-
culated relative to the total number of observations, out-dated cells can be removed and their statistics returned to
the parent cell.
Cell-Tree (Park and Lee 2007a ) is an extension of
Stats-Grid which also tries to ﬁnd adjacent unit cells
of sufﬁcient density. In contrast to Stats-Grid , subcells
are not dynamically sized based on the distribution of thecell. Instead, they are split into a pre-deﬁned number of
evenly sized subcells. The summary statistics of the sub-
cells are initialized by distributing the statistics of theparent cell following the normal distribution. To efﬁciently
maintain the cells, the authors propose a siblings list. The
siblings list is a linear list where each node contains anumber of grid-cells along one dimension as well as a link
to the next node. Whenever a cell is split, the created
subcells replace their parent cell in its node. To maintain a
siblings list over multiple dimensions, a ﬁrst-child/next-sibling tree can be used where subsequent dimensions are
added as children of the list-nodes.
The splitting strategy of MR-Stream (Wan et al. 2009 )
is similar but splits each dimension in half, effectively
creating a tree of cells as shown in Fig. 9. New observa-
tions start at the root cell and are recursively assigned to
the appropriate child-cell. If a child does not exist yet, it is
created until a maximum depth is reached. If the insertioncauses a parent to only contain children of high density, the
children are discarded since the parent node is able to
represent this information already. Additionally, the tree isregularly pruned by removing leafs with insufﬁcient weight
and removing children of nodes that only contain dense or
only sparse children. To generate the macro-clusters, theuser can choose a desired height of the tree. For every
unclustered cell, the algorithm initializes a new macro-
cluster and adds all neighboring dense cells. If the size andweight of the cluster is too low, it is considered noise.
PKSStream (Ren et al. 2011 ) is similar to MR-
Stream but does not require a subcell on all heights of the
tree. It only maintains intermediate nodes when there are
more than K/C01 non-empty children. Each observation is
iteratively descended down the tree until either a leaf isreached or the child does not exist. In the latter case a new
cell is initialized. In regular intervals, the algorithm eval-
uates all leaf nodes and removes those with insufﬁcientweight. The ofﬂine component is the same as in MR-
Stream for the leafs of the tree.
5.3 Hybrid Grid-Approaches
HDCStream (Amini et al. 2014a ) (hybrid density-based
clustering for data stream) ﬁrst combined grid-based
algorithms with the concept of distance-based algorithms.
In particular, it maintains a grid where dense cells can bepromoted to become micro-clusters as known from dis-
tanced-based algorithms (see Sect. 4). Each observation in
Fig. 9 Tree structure in MR-Stream
123M. Carnein, H. Trautmann: Optimizing Data Stream Representation, Bus Inf Syst Eng 61(3):277–297 (2019) 289