Stream) can choose multiple representatives per cluster to
increase accuracy when clusters are not uniformly dis-
tributed. To do so, the algorithm maintains two different
granularity levels. First, Micro Leader Clusters (MLC)correspond to the concept of traditional micro-clusters.
However, they maintain a list of more ﬁne granular
information in the form of Mini Micro Leader Clusters(MMLC). These mini micro-clusters contain more detailed
information and are represented by a time-faded CF. For
new observations, the algorithm ﬁnds the closest MLC
using the Mahalanobis distance. If the distance is within a
threshold, the closest MMLC within the MLC is identiﬁed.If it is also within a distance threshold, the point is added to
the MMLC. If one of the thresholds is violated, a new MLC
or MMLC is created respectively. For reclustering allselected leaders are used to run DBSCAN .
4.4 MedoidsAn alternative to storing Clustering Features is to maintain
medoids of clusters, i.e., representatives. RepStream
(Lu¨hr and Lazarescu 2008 ,2009 ), for example, incre-
mentally updates a graph of nearest neighbors to identify
suitable cluster representatives. New observations areinserted as a new node in the graph and edges are inserted
between the node and its nearest-neighbors. The point is
assigned to an existing cluster if it is mutually connected toa representative of that cluster. Otherwise it is used as a
representative to initialize a new cluster. Representatives
are also inserted in a separate representative graph whichmaintains the nearest neighbors only between representa-
tives. To split and merge existing clusters, the distance
between them is compared to the average distance to theirnearest neighbors in the representative graph. In order to
reduce space requirements, non-representative points are
discarded using a sliding time window. In addition, if anew representative is found but space limitations prevent it
from being added to the representative graph, it can replace
an existing representative depending on its age and numberof nearest neighbors.
streamKM ?? (Ackermann et al. 2012 ) is a variant of
k-means ?? (Arthur and Vassilvitskii 2007 ) which com-
putes a small weighted sample that represents the data
called coreset . The coreset is constructed in a binary tree
by using a divisive clustering approach. The tree is ini-tialized by selecting a random representative point from the
data. To split an existing cluster, the algorithm starts at the
root node and iteratively chooses a child node relative totheir weights until a leaf is reached. From the selected leaf,
a data point is chosen as a second centre based on its
distance to the initial centre of the cluster. Finally, thecluster is split by assigning each data point to the closest of
the two centers.To handle data streams, the algorithm uses a similar
approach as SWClustering (see Sect. 4.2). First, new
observations are inserted into a coreset tree. Once the tree
is full, all its points are moved to the next tree. If the nexttree already contains points, the coreset between the points
in both trees is computed. This cascades further until an
empty tree is found. For reclustering, the union of all pointsis used to compute a coreset and the representatives are
used to apply the k-means ?? algorithm (Arthur and
Vassilvitskii 2007 ).
BICO (Fichtenberger et al. 2013 ) combines the data
structure of BIRCH (see Sect. 4.1) with the coreset of
streamKM ??.BICO maintains the coreset in a tree
structure where each node represents one CF. The algo-
rithm is initialized by using the ﬁrst data point in the streamto open a CF on the ﬁrst level of the empty tree and the data
point is kept as a representative for the CF. For every
consecutive point, the algorithm attempts to insert it into anexisting CF, starting on the ﬁrst level. The insertion fails if
the distance of the new point to the representative of its
closest CF is larger than a threshold. In this case, a new CFis opened on the same level, using the new point as the
reference point. Additionally, the insertion fails if the
cluster’s deviation from the mean would grow beyond athreshold. In this case the algorithm attempts to insert the
point into the children of the closest CF. The ﬁnal clus-
tering is generated by applying k-means
?? to the repre-
sentatives of the leafs.
4.5 CentroidsA simpler approach to maintain clusters is to store their
centroids directly. However, this makes it generally moredifﬁcult to update clusters over time. As an example,
STREAM (O’Callaghan et al. 2002 ; Guha et al. 2003 ) only
stores the centroids of kclusters. Its core idea is to treat the
k-Median clustering problem as a facility planning prob-
lem. To do so, distances from data points to their closest
cluster have associated costs. This reduces the clusteringtask to a cost minimization problem in order to ﬁnd the
number and position of facilities that yield the lowest costs.
In order to generate a certain number of clusters, thealgorithm adjusts the facility costs in each iteration by
using a binary search for the costs that yield the desired
number of centers k.
To deal with streaming data, the algorithm processes the
stream in chunks and solves the k-Median problem for each
chunk individually. Assuming ndifferent chunks, a total of
nkclusters are created. To generate the ﬁnal clustering or if
available storage is exceeded, these intermediate clusters
are again clustered using the same approach.
OLINDDA (Spinosa et al. 2007 ) (Online Novelty and
Drift Detection Algorithm) relies on cluster centroids to
123M. Carnein, H. Trautmann: Optimizing Data Stream Representation, Bus Inf Syst Eng 61(3):277–297 (2019) 285