STATE OF THE ART
Optimizing Data Stream Representation: An Extensive Survey
on Stream Clustering Algorithms
Matthias Carnein •Heike Trautmann
Received: 20 June 2018 / Accepted: 13 November 2018 / Published online: 21 January 2019
/C211Springer Fachmedien Wiesbaden GmbH, ein Teil von Springer Nature 2019
Abstract Analyzing data streams has received consider-
able attention over the past decades due to the widespread
usage of sensors, social media and other streaming data
sources. A core research area in this ﬁeld is stream clus-
tering which aims to recognize patterns in an unordered,
inﬁnite and evolving stream of observations. Clustering can
be a crucial support in decision making, since it aims for an
optimized aggregated representation of a continuous data
stream over time and allows to identify patterns in large
and high-dimensional data. A multitude of algorithms and
approaches has been developed that are able to ﬁnd and
maintain clusters over time in the challenging streaming
scenario. This survey explores, summarizes and categorizes
a total of 51 stream clustering algorithms and identiﬁes
core research threads over the past decades. In particular, it
identiﬁes categories of algorithms based on distance
thresholds, density grids and statistical models as well as
algorithms for high dimensional data. Furthermore, it dis-
cusses applications scenarios, available software and how
to conﬁgure stream clustering algorithms. This survey is
considerably more extensive than comparable studies,
more up-to-date and highlights how concepts are interre-
lated and have been developed over time.
Keywords Stream clustering /C1Data streams /C1Online
clustering /C1Pattern recognition /C1Decision support /C1Data
representation1 Introduction
Cluster analysis is an unsupervised learning technique
which aims to ﬁnd groups of similar objects. It is a com-
mon tool to support decision makers by structuring the
large and high-dimensional data into manageable groups
and thus generating an optimized data representation.
Common application scenarios include identifying prof-
itable market segments, anomaly and fraud detection or
sensor analysis. Most clustering algorithms require a ﬁxed
set of data and evaluate each point multiple times to gen-
erate the clusters. In practice, however, many systems are
continuously generating new observations. As an example,
sensors generate thousands of observations each second
and countless of interactions happen every day in social
networks. In order to account for new data points and the
possible shift in cluster structures, classical clustering
algorithms need to be run periodically. This is computa-
tionally expensive and requires that all relevant data is
stored for periodic re-evaluation. A more suitable approach
is to update existing clusters and integrate new observa-
tions into the existing model by identifying emerging
structures and removing outdated structures incrementally.
This is the goal of stream clustering where data points are
assumed to arrive as a continuous stream of new obser-
vations where the order cannot be inﬂuenced. This stream
is possibly unbounded which makes unlimited storage and
re-evaluation of data points infeasible (Silva et al. 2013 ).
In this scenario, the main task is to optimize the number
and location of clusters in order to represent the underlying
data best and to extract the relevant information from a
stream without storing and re-evaluating all observations.
The underlying optimization task of these algorithms is
to ﬁnd clusters such that the within-cluster similarity is
high. At the same time, similarity between-clusterAccepted after one revision by the editors of the special issue.
M. Carnein ( &)/C1H. Trautmann
Information Systems and Statistics, University of Mu ¨nster,
Leonardo-Campus 3, 48149 Mu ¨nster, Germany
e-mail: matthias.carnein@uni-muenster.de
123Bus Inf Syst Eng 61(3):277–297 (2019)
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12599-019-00576-5