the stream is assigned to its closest micro-cluster if it lies
within a radius threshold. Otherwise, it is inserted into the
grid instead. Once a grid-cell has accumulated sufﬁcient
density, its points are used to initialize a new micro-cluster.Finally, the cell is no longer maintained, as its information
has been transferred to the micro-cluster. In regular inter-
vals, all micro-clusters and cells are evaluated and removedif their density decayed below a respective threshold.
Whenever a clustering request arrives, the micro-clusters
are considered virtual points in order to apply DBSCAN .
Mudi-Stream (Amini et al. 2016 ) (Multi Density
Data Stream) is an extension of HDCStream that can
handle varying degrees of density within the same data
stream. It uses the same insertion strategy as HDCStream
with both, grid-cells and micro-clusters. However, theofﬂine component applies a variant of DBSCAN (Ester
et al. 1996 ) called M-DBSCAN to all micro-clusters. M-
DBSCAN only requires a MinPts parameter and then esti-
mates the /C15parameter from the mean and standard devia-
tion around the centre.
5.4 Summary
Grid-based approaches are a popular alternative to density-
based algorithms due to their simple design and support for
arbitrarily shaped clusters. While many distance-based
algorithms are only able to detect spherical clusters, almostall grid-based algorithms can identify cluster of arbitrary
shape. This is mostly because the grid-structure allows an
easy design of an ofﬂine-component where dense cells withcommon faces form clusters. The majority of grid-based
algorithms partition the data space once into cells of ﬁxed
size. However, some algorithms do this recursively tocreate a more adaptive grid. Less common are algorithms
where the size of cells is determined dynamically, mostly
because of the increased computational costs. Lastly, somealgorithms employ a hybrid strategy where a grid is used to
establish distance-based approaches. Generally, the grid
structure is less efﬁcient than distance-based approachesdue to its inﬂexible structure. For this reason, grid-based
approaches often have higher memory requirements and
need more micro-clusters to achieve the same quality asdistance-based approaches. Empirical evidence (Carnein
et al. 2017a ) has also shown this to be true for the most
popular grid-based algorithm D-Stream .
6 Model-Based Approaches
A different approach to stream clustering is to summarize
the data stream as a statistical model. Common areas ofresearch are based on the Expectation Maximization (EM)
algorithm. Table 4gives an overview of 6 model-basedalgorithms. This class of algorithms is highly diverse and
few interdependencies exist between the presented
algorithms.
CluDistream (Zhou et al. 2007b ) uses the EM
algorithm to process distributed data streams. At each
location, it maintains a number of Gaussian mixture dis-tributions and a coordinator node is used to combine the
distributions. For each location, the stream is processed in
chunks and the ﬁrst chunk is used to initialize a newclustering using EM. For subsequent chunks, the algorithm
checks whether the current models can represent the chunk
sufﬁciently well. This is done by calculating the differencebetween the average log-likelihood of the existing model
and the average log-likelihood of the chunk under the
existing model. If the difference is less than a threshold, theweight of the model is incremented. Else, the current model
is stored and a new model is initialized by applying EM to
the current chunk. Whenever the weight of a model isupdated or a new model is initialized, the coordinator
receives the update and incorporates the new information
into a global model by merging or splitting the Gaussiandistributions.
SWEM (Dang et al. 2009a ,b) (Sliding Window with
Expectation Maximization) applies the EM to chunks ofdata. Starting with random initial parameters, a set of
mdistributions is calculated for the ﬁrst chunk and points
are assigned to their most likely cluster. Each cluster isthen summarized using a CF and kmacro-cluster are
generated by applying EM again. For a new chunk, the
algorithm sets the initial values to the converged values ofthe previous chunk and incrementally applies EM to gen-
erate mnew distributions. If a cluster grows too large or too
small during this phase, the corresponding distributions can
be split or merged. Finally the mnew clusters are sum-
marized in CFs and used with the existing kclusters to
apply EM again.
COBWEB (Fisher 1987 ) maintains a classiﬁcation tree
where each node describes a cluster. The tree is built
incrementally by descending a new entry xfrom the root to
a leaf. On each level the algorithm makes one of four
clustering decisions that yields the highest clusteringTable 4 Overview of model-based stream clustering algorithms
Algorithm Year Time window model
COBWEB (Fisher 1987 ) 1987 Landmark
ICFR (Motoyoshi et al. 2004 ) 2004 Damped
WStream (Tasoulis et al. 2006 ) 2006 Damped
CluDistream (Zhou et al. 2007b ) 2007 Landmark
SWEM (Dang et al. 2009a ) 2009 Sliding
SVStream (Wang et al. 2013 ) 2013 Damped
123290 M. Carnein, H. Trautmann: Optimizing Data Stream Representation, Bus Inf Syst Eng 61(3):277–297 (2019)