in this category is to summarize and maintain clusters over
time without storing each individual observation. Common
strategies include the use of a synopsis data structure which
allows to calculate location and radius. Alternatively, thecentroids or representatives of clusters can be maintained
directly. More recently also competitive learning strategies
became popular which can update the centers of clustersover time. Table 2gives an overview of 28 popular dis-
tance-based stream clustering algorithms. In the following,
each algorithm and its clustering strategy is discussed inmore detail. In addition, Fig. 5highlights the relationship
between the algorithms and shows how concepts have been
reﬁned and improved over time. It becomes obvious that
the vast majority of algorithms use concepts introduced by
BIRCH ,CluStream orDenStream .
4.1 Clustering Feature
BIRCH (Balanced Iterative Reducing and Clustering using
Hierarchies) (Zhang et al. 1996 ,1997 ) is one of the earliest
algorithms applicable to stream clustering. It reduces the
information maintained about a cluster to only a few
summary statistics stored in a so called Clustering Feature(CF). The CF consists of three components: ðn;LS;SSÞ,where nis the number of data points in the cluster, LSis a
d-dimensional vector that contains the linear sum of all
data points for each dimension and SSis a scalar that
contains the sum of squares for all data points over alldimensions. Some variations of this concept also store the
sum of squares per dimension, i.e., as a vector SS.AC F
provides sufﬁcient information to calculate the centroidLS=nand also a radius, i.e., a measure of deviation from
the centroid. In addition, a CF can be easily updated and
merged with another CF by summing the individualcomponents.
To maintain the CFs, BIRCH incrementally builds a
balanced-tree as illustrated in Fig. 6, where each node can
contain a ﬁxed number of CFs. Each new observation
descends the tree by following the child of its closest CFFig. 5 Development of
distance-based stream clusteringalgorithms
Fig. 6 Structure of a CF tree with at most 2 Clustering Features per
node
123282 M. Carnein, H. Trautmann: Optimizing Data Stream Representation, Bus Inf Syst Eng 61(3):277–297 (2019)