quality: (1) Insert xinto most ﬁtting child, (2) Create a new
cluster for x, (3) Combine the two nodes that can best
absorb xand add existing nodes as children of the new
node, (4) Split the two nodes that can best absorb xand
move its children up one level. The quality of each decision
is evaluated using a measure called Category Utility (CU)
which deﬁnes a trade-off between intra-class similarity andinter-class distance.
ICFR (Motoyoshi et al. 2004 ) (Incremental Clustering
using F-value by Regression analysis) uses concepts from
linear regression in order to cluster data streams. The
algorithm assigns points to existing clusters based on theircosine similarity. To merge clusters the algorithm ﬁnds the
two closest clusters based on the Mahalanobis distance. If
the merged clusters yield a greater F-value than the sum of
individual F-values, the clusters are merged. The F-value is
a measure of model validity in linear regressions. If the
clusters cannot be merged, the next closest two clusters areevaluated until the closest pair exceeds a distance
threshold.
WStream (Tasoulis et al. 2006 ) uses multivariate ker-
nel density estimates to maintain a number of rectangular
windows in the data space. The idea is to use local maxima
of a density estimate as cluster centers and the local min-ima as cluster boundaries. WStream transfers this
approach to data streams. New data points are either
assigned to an existing window and their centre is movedtowards the new point or it is used to initialize a new
window of default size. Windows can enlarge or contract
depending on the ratio of points close to their centre andclose to their border.
SVStream (Wang et al. 2013 ) (Support Vector based
Stream Clustering) is based on Support Vector Cluster-ing(SVC) (Ben-Hur et al. 2001 ). SVC transforms the data
into a higher dimensional space and identiﬁes the smallest
sphere that encloses most points. When mapping the sphereback to the input space, the sphere forms a number of
contour lines that represent clusters. SVStream iteratively
maintains a number of spheres. The stream is processed inchunks and the ﬁrst chunk is used to run SVC. For each
subsequent chunk, the algorithm evaluates what portion of
the chunk does not fall into the radius of existing spheres.If too many do not ﬁt the current spheres, these values areused to initialize a new sphere. The remaining values are
used to update the existing spheres.
6.1 SummaryModel-based stream clustering algorithms are far less
common than distance-based and grid-based approaches.Typically strategies try to ﬁnd a mixture of distributions
that ﬁts the data stream, e.g. CluDiStream orSWEM .
Unfortunately, no implementation of model-based algo-
rithms is readily available which limits their usefulness in
practice. In addition, they are often more computationallycomplex than comparable algorithms from the other
categories.
7 Projected Approaches
A special category of stream clustering algorithms deals
with high dimensional data streams. These types of algo-
rithms address the curse of dimensionality (Beyer et al.1999 ), i.e., the problem that almost all points have an equal
distance in very high dimensional space. In such scenarios,
clusters are deﬁned according to a subset of dimensionswhere each cluster has an associated set of dimensions in
which it exists. Even though these algorithms often use
concepts from distance and grid-based algorithms theirapplication scenarios and strategies are unique and deserve
their own category. Table 5summarizes 4 projected clus-
tering algorithms and Fig. 10shows the relationship
between the algorithms. Despite their similarity,
HDDStream andPreDeConStream have been devel-
oped independently.
HPStream (Aggarwal et al. 2004 ) (High-dimensional
Projected Stream clustering) is an extension of
Clu-
Stream (see Sect. 4.2) for high dimensional data. The
algorithm uses a time-faded CF with an additional bit
vector that denotes the associated dimensions of a cluster.
The algorithm normalizes each dimension by regularlysampling the current standard deviation and adjusting the
existing clusters accordingly. The algorithm initializes with
k-means and associates each cluster with the ldimensions
in which it has the smallest radius. The cluster assignment
Table 5 Overview of projected stream clustering algorithms
Algorithm Year Time window model Ofﬂine clustering
HPStream (Aggarwal et al. 2004 ) 2004 Damped k-means
SiblingTree (Park and Lee 2007b ) 2007 Damped –
HDDStream (Ntoutsi et al. 2012 ) 2012 Damped PreDeCon (Bohm et al. 2004 )
PreDeConStream (Hassani et al. 2012 ) 2012 Damped PreDeCon (Bohm et al. 2004 )
123M. Carnein, H. Trautmann: Optimizing Data Stream Representation, Bus Inf Syst Eng 61(3):277–297 (2019) 291