transitional grids or are merged with the clusters of
neighboring dense cells. In regular intervals, the clustering
evaluates the weight of each cell and incorporates the
changes in cell types into the clustering.
In Tu and Chen ( 2009 ), the authors extended their
concept by a measure of attraction that incorporates posi-
tional information of data within a grid-cell. This variantonly merges neighboring cells if they share many points at
the cell border.
DD-Stream (Jia et al. 2008 ) is a small extension on
how to handle points that lie exactly on the grid bound-
aries. For such a point, the distance to adjacent cell centers
is computed and the point is assigned to its closest cell. Ifthe observation has the same distance to multiple cells, it is
assigned to the one with higher density. If this also does not
break the tie, it is inserted into cell that has been updatedmore recently.
ExCC (Bhatnagar and Kaur 2007 ; Bhatnagar et al.
2014 ) (Exclusive and Complete Clustering) constructs a
grid where the number of cells and grid boundaries are
chosen by the user. This allows to handle categorical data,
where the number of cells is chosen to be equal to thenumber of attribute levels. Clusters are identiﬁed as
neighboring dense cells. Cells of numeric variables are
considered neighbors if they share a common vertex. Cellsof categorical variables employ a threshold on a similarity
function between the attribute levels. To form macro-clusters, the algorithm iteratively chooses an unvisited
dense cell and initializes a new cluster. Each neighboring
grid-cell is then placed in the same cluster. This is repeated
until all cells have been visited.
DCUStream (Yang et al. 2012 ) (Density-based Clus-
tering algorithm of Uncertain data Stream) aims to handle
uncertain data streams, similar to HUE-Stream (see
Sect. 4.3), where each observation is assumed to have an
existence probability. The algorithm is initialized by col-
lecting a batch of data and mapping it to a grid of ﬁxedsize. The density of a cell is deﬁned as the sum of all
existence probabilities faded over time. A grid is consid-
ered dense when its density is above a dynamic threshold.To generate a clustering, the algorithm selects the dense-
cell with highest density and assigns all its neighboring
cells to the same cluster. neighboring sparse-cells areconsidered the boundary of a cluster. This is repeated for
all dense cells.
DENGRIS-Stream (Amini et al. 2012 ) (Density Grid-
based algorithm for clustering data streams over Sliding
window) is a grid-based algorithm that uses a sliding
window model. New observations are mapped into a ﬁxedsize grid and the cell’s densities are maintained. Densities
are implicitly decayed by considering them relative to the
total number of observations in the stream. In regularintervals, cells whose density decayed below a threshold or
cells that are no longer inside the sliding window areFig. 8 Development of density-
based stream clusteringalgorithms
123288 M. Carnein, H. Trautmann: Optimizing Data Stream Representation, Bus Inf Syst Eng 61(3):277–297 (2019)