similarity should be low. In the stream clustering scenario,
these two optimization tasks are subject to restrictions with
regard to the availability, order, speed and volume of the
data as well as limitation regarding available memory andcomputational power. In the following we discuss algo-
rithms which are able to deal with these restrictions. The
main contribution of our survey is as follows: We providean overview of available algorithms for stream clustering.
Our survey is much more extensive and up-to-date than
comparable studies and includes all algorithms applicable
to numerical data that we are aware of. The only category
which we consider out of scope for this paper are streamclustering algorithms for textual data since they usually
rely on considerably different approaches. In addition, we
identify different research threads and highlight interrela-tions between algorithms making it easier to understand
how the ﬁeld developed and what kind of trends exist.
Furthermore, we discuss problems when applying streamclustering in practice. In particular, we see that most
algorithms require numerous parameters which are unin-
tuitive and difﬁcult to choose appropriately. We discussautomatic algorithm conﬁguration as one approach on how
to tackle this problem. As an accompanying document to
this paper we also provide a website
1which compiles
relevant information about stream clustering such as
common datasets, available implementations and a curated
list of algorithms and corresponding publications in theﬁeld.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows:
Sect. 2introduces the basic concepts of stream clustering.
Then, Sect. 3gives an overview of related work and
introduces a number of related surveys. Next, four different
categories of algorithms are identiﬁed and a total of 51algorithms presented. First, Sect. 4introduces algorithms
that use a distance threshold to build clusters. Next, Sect. 5
presents algorithms that utilize density-grids to mapobservations into a discrete space. Then, Sect. 6presents
algorithms that rely on statistical models and Sect. 7dis-
cusses algorithms that deal with high dimensional datastreams. Section 8presents available software tools and
implementations of the algorithms and also discusses
common problems during application and how to over-come them. Finally, Sect. 9concludes with a summary of
the ﬁndings.
2 Methodological Background
In this section, we introduce the basics of stream clustering.
Most importantly, we describe how data streams are typi-
cally aggregated and how algorithms adapt to changes overtime. For a consistent notation, we denote vectors by
boldface symbols and formally deﬁne a data stream as an
inﬁnite sequence X¼ðx
1;x1;...;xNÞwhere xtis a single
observation with ddimensions at time t. To calculate the
distance between clusters, an appropriate distance measure
needs to be used. For numerical data, the Euclidean dis-
tance between the centroids of the clusters is common.However, for binary, ordinal, nominal or text data, appro-
priate distance measures such as the Jaccard index, simple
matching coefﬁcient or Cosine similarity could be used.
In general, ﬁnding a good clustering solution is deﬁned
as an optimization task. The underlying goal is to maxi-mize intra-cluster homogeneity while simultaneously
maximizing inter-cluster heterogeneity. This ensures that
objects within the same cluster are similar but differentclusters are well separated. There are various strategies that
aim to achieve this task. Popular strategies include mini-
mizing intra-cluster distances, minimizing radii of clustersor ﬁnding maximum likelihood estimates. A popular
example is the k-means algorithm which minimizes the
within-cluster sum of squares, i.e., the distance from datapoints to their cluster centroids.
In a streaming scenario, these optimization objectives
are subject to several restrictions regarding availability andorder of the data as well as resource and time limitations.
For example, the large volume of data makes it undesirable
or infeasible to store all observations of the stream. Typi-cally, observations can only evaluated once and are dis-
carded afterwards. This requires to extract sufﬁcient
information from observations before discarding them.Similarly, the order of observations cannot be inﬂuenced.
As an illustrative example, let us consider the case of eye
tracking which is typically used in order to analyze howpeople perceive content such as websites or advertise-
ments. It records the movement of the eye and detects
where a person is looking. An example of a stream of eyetracking data is visualized in Fig. 1, showing the pupil
positions at three different points in times (grey points) (-
Steil et al. 2018 ). In this context, stream clustering can be
applied in order to ﬁnd the areas of interest or subjects that
the person is looking at.
Throughout this paper, we discuss common strategies
that can be used to identify clusters under the streaming
restrictions. For example, we could use similarity thresh-
olds in order to decide whether an observation ﬁts into anexisting cluster (Fig. 2a). Alternatively, we could split the
data space into a grid and only store the location of densely
populated cells (Fig. 2b). Other approaches include ﬁtting
a model to represent the observed data (Fig. 2c) or pro-
jecting high-dimensional data to a lower dimensional space
(Fig. 2d).
Generally, these strategies allow to capture the location
of dense areas in the data space. These regions can be
1http://www.matthias-carnein.de/streamClustering .
123278 M. Carnein, H. Trautmann: Optimizing Data Stream Representation, Bus Inf Syst Eng 61(3):277–297 (2019)