suit the majority of stream clustering scenarios well.
However, they often rely on many parameters such as
distance and weight thresholds, radii or cleanup intervals.
This makes it more difﬁcult to apply them in practice andrequires either expert knowledge or extensive parameter
conﬁguration. Another common issue is that distance-
based algorithms can often only ﬁnd spherical clusters.However, this is usually due to the choice of ofﬂine com-
ponent which can be easily replaced by other approaches
that can detect arbitrary clusters such as DBSCAN or hier-
archical clustering with single linkage. While the popular
algorithms BIRCH ,CluStream andDenStream face
many problems, either due to lack of fading or complicated
maintenance steps, we ﬁnd newer algorithms such as
DBSTREAM particularly interesting due to their simpler
design.
5 Grid-Based Approaches
An alternative to distance-based approaches is to capture
the density of observations in a grid. A grid separates the
data space along all dimensions into intervals to create a
number of grid-cells. By mapping data points to the cells, adensity estimate can be maintained. Macro-clusters are
typically found by grouping adjacent dense cells. The main
challenge for algorithms of this category is how to con-struct the grid-cells, i.e., how often cells are partitioned and
how to choose the size of cells. Table 3gives an overview
of the 13 approaches that are discussed in the following. Inaddition, Fig. 8shows how density-based algorithms
developed over time. By far the most popular andinﬂuential algorithm of this category has been D-
Stream (Chen and Tu 2007 ).
5.1 One-Time Partitioning
DUCstream (Gao et al. 2005 ) (Dense Units Clustering for
data streams) is one of the earliest grid-based algorithms. It
partitions the data space once into grid-cells of ﬁxed size.
To initialize the clustering, the algorithm processes a ﬁrst
chunk of data and maintains all cells with sufﬁcient den-
sity. The density of cells is calculated relative to the totalnumber of observations. All dense cells that are connected
by common faces are placed in the same macro-cluster.
This initial result is then updated incrementally as morechunks are processed and new dense cells arise while
others fade. Each new dense cell is absorbed by a macro-
cluster if it shares a face with a cell in that cluster. Addi-tionally, if it shares faces with cells in different clusters,
those clusters are merged. Finally, if it does not share any
faces, it is used to create a new cluster. Each removeddense cell is also removed from its corresponding cluster. If
this leaves the cluster empty, the cluster is deleted. Alter-
natively, if this disconnects two cells in the same cluster,the cluster is split.
D-Stream (Chen and Tu 2007 ) is among the most
popular stream clustering algorithms and uses a ﬁxed gridstructure. The algorithm distinguishes between three types
of cells: dense cells, sparse cells and transitional cells
whose weight lies between the other two types. The algo-rithm maps new data points to its respective cell and is
initialized by assigning all dense cells to individual clus-
ters. These clusters are extended with all neighboring
Table 3 Overview of density-based stream clustering algorithms. Macro-clusters are typically generated from neighboring dense cells
Algorithm Year Time window model Partitioning Grid size
Fractal Clustering (Barbara ´and Chen 2000 ) 2000 Landmark One-time Fixed
Stats-Grid (Park and Lee 2004 ) 2004 Landmark Recursive Dynamic
DUCstream (Gao et al. 2005 ) 2005 Damped One-time Fixed
D-Stream (Chen and Tu 2007 ) 2007 Damped One-time Fixed
Cell-Tree (Park and Lee 2007a ) 2007 Damped Recursive Fixed
ExCC (Bhatnagar and Kaur 2007 ) 2007 Landmark One-time Fixed
DDStream (Jia et al. 2008 ) 2008 Damped One-time Fixed
MR-Stream (Wan et al. 2009 ) 2009 Damped Recursive Fixed
PKSStream (Ren et al. 2011 ) 2011 Damped Recursive Fixed
DCUStream (Yang et al. 2012 ) 2012 Damped One-time Fixed
DENGRIS-Stream (Amini et al. 2012 ) 2012 Sliding One-time Fixed
HDCStream (Amini et al. 2014a ) 2014 Damped One-time Fixed
MuDi-Stream (Amini et al. 2016 ) 2016 Damped One-time Fixed
123M. Carnein, H. Trautmann: Optimizing Data Stream Representation, Bus Inf Syst Eng 61(3):277–297 (2019) 287