identify new and drifting clusters in a data stream. Initially,
k-means is used to generate a set of clusters. For each
cluster the distance from its centre to its furthest observa-
tion is considered a boundary. Points that do not fall intothe boundary of any cluster are considered as an unknown
concept and kept in a buffer. This buffer is regularly
scanned for emerging structures using k-means. If an
emerging cluster is of similar variance as the existing
cluster, it is considered valid. To distinguish a new cluster
from a drifting cluster, the algorithm assumes that drifts
occur close to the existing clusters whereas new clusters
form further away from the existing model.
4.6 Competitive Learning
More recently, algorithms also use competitive learning
strategies in order to adapt the centroids of clusters over
time. This is inspired by Self-Organizing Maps(SOMs) (Kohonen 1982 ) where clusters compete to rep-
resent an observation, typically by moving cluster centers
towards new observations based on their proximity.SOStream (Isaksson et al. 2012 ) (Self Organizing density
based clustering over data Stream) combines DBSCA-
N(Ester et al. 1996 ) with Self-Organizing Maps
(SOMs) (Kohonen 1982 ) for stream clustering. It stores a
time-faded weight, radius and centre for the cluster
directly. A new observation is merged into its closestcluster if it lies within its radius. Following the idea of
competitive learning, the algorithm also moves the k-
nearest neighbors of the absorbing cluster in its direction. Ifclusters move into close proximity during this step, they
are also merged.
DBSTREAM (Hahsler and Bolan ˜os2016 ) (Density-based
Stream Clustering) is based on SOStream (see Sect. 4.6)
but uses the shared density between two micro-clusters in
order to decide whether micro-clusters belong to the samemacro-cluster. A new observation xis merged into micro-
clusters if it falls within the radius from their centre.
Subsequently, the centers of all clusters that absorb theobservation are updated by moving the centre towards x.I f
no cluster absorbs the point, it is used to initialize a new
micro-cluster. Additionally, the algorithm maintains theshared density between two micro-clusters as the density of
points in the intersection of their radii, relative to the size
of the intersection area. In regular intervals it removesmicro-clusters and shared densities whose weight decayed
below a respective threshold. In the ofﬂine component,
micro-clusters with high shared density are merged into thesame cluster.
evoStream (Carnein and Trautmann 2018 ) (Evolu-
tionary Stream Clustering) makes use of an evolutionaryalgorithm in order to bridge the gap between the online and
ofﬂine component. Evolutionary algorithms are inspired bynatural evolution where promising solutions are combined
and slightly modiﬁed to create offsprings which can yield
an improved solution. By iteratively selecting the best
solutions, an evolutionary pressure is created whichimproves the result over time. evoStream uses this
concept in order to iteratively improve the macro-clusters
through recombinations and small variations. Since macro-clusters are created incrementally, the evolutionary steps
can be performed while the online components waits for
new observations, i.e., when the algorithm would usually
idle. As a result, the computational overhead of the ofﬂine
component is removed and clusters are available at anytime. The online component is similar to DBSTREAM but
does not maintain a shared-density since it is not necessary
for reclustering.
G-Stream (Ghesmoune et al. 2014 ,2015 ) (Growing
Neural Gas over Data Streams) utilizes the concept of
Neural Gas (Martinetz et al. 1991 ) for data streams. The
algorithm maintains a graph where each node represents a
cluster. Nodes that share similar data points are connected
by edges. Each edge has an associated age and nodes
maintain an error term denoting the cluster’s deviation. For
a new observation xthe two nearest clusters C1andC2are
identiﬁed. If xdoes not ﬁt into the radius of its closest
cluster C1, it is temporarily stored away and later re-in-
serted. Otherwise, it is inserted into C1. Additionally, the
centre of C1and all its connected neighbors are moved in
the direction of x. Next, the age of all outgoing edges of C1
are incremented and an edge from C1toC2is either
inserted or its weight is reset to zero. The age of edgesserves a similar purpose as a fading function. Edges who
have grown too old, are removed as they contain outdated
information. In regular intervals, the algorithm inserts newnodes between the node with the largest deviation and its
neighbor with the largest deviation.
4.7 Summary
Distance-based algorithms are by far the most common and
popular approaches in stream clustering. They allow to
create accurate summaries of the entire stream with rather
simple insertion rules. Since it is infeasible to store allobservations within the clusters, distance-based algorithms
usually summarize the observations associated with a
cluster. A popular example of this are Clustering Featureswhich only store the information required to calculate the
location and radius of a cluster. Alternatively, some algo-
rithms maintain medoids, i.e., representatives of clusters orstore the cluster centroids directly. In order to update
cluster centroids over time, some algorithms also make use
of competitive learning strategies, similar to Self-Orga-nizing Maps (SOM) (Kohonen 1982 ). Generally, distance-
based algorithms are computationally inexpensive and will
123286 M. Carnein, H. Trautmann: Optimizing Data Stream Representation, Bus Inf Syst Eng 61(3):277–297 (2019)