component applies DBSCAN to the centers of the potential
core-micro clusters.
4.3 Time-Faded Clustering FeatureDenStream (Cao et al. 2006 ) presents a temporal
extension of the CFs from BIRCH . It maintains two types
of clusters: Potential core micro-clusters are stable struc-
tures that are denoted using a time-faded CF
LS
ðxÞ;SSðxÞ;nðxÞ/C0/C1
. The superscript ðxÞdenotes that each
entry of the CF is decayed over time using a decay function
xðDtÞ¼b/C0kDt. In addition, their weight nðxÞis required to
be greater than a threshold value. Outlier micro-clusters are
unstable structures whose weight is less than the thresholdand they additionally maintain their creation time.
At ﬁrst, DBSCAN (Ester et al. 1996 ) is used to initialize
a set of potential core micro-clusters. Similar to BIRCH ,a
new observation is assigned to its closest potential core
micro-cluster if the addition does not increase the radius
beyond a threshold. If it does, the same attempt is made forthe closest outlier-cluster and the outlier-cluster is pro-
moted to a potential core if it satisﬁes the weight threshold.
If both cannot absorb the point, a new outlier-cluster isinitialized. In regular intervals, the weight of all micro-
clusters is evaluated. Potential core-micro clusters that no
longer have enough weight are degraded to outlier micro-clusters and outlier micro-clusters that decayed below a
threshold based on their creation time are removed. Macro-
clusters are generated by applying a variant of DBSCA-
N(Ester et al. 1996 ) to potential core micro-clusters.
C-DenStream (Ruiz et al. 2009 ) is an extension of
DenStream which allows to include domain knowledge
in the form of instance-level constraints into the clustering
process. Instance-level constraints describe observations
that must or cannot belong to the same cluster.
Another extension is rDenStream (Liu et al. 2009 ).
Instead of discarding outlier micro-clusters which cannot
be converted into potential core micro-clusters, the algo-rithm temporarily stores them away in an outlier buffer.
After the ofﬂine component, the algorithm attempts to
relearn the data points that have been cached in the bufferin order to reﬁne the clustering.
HDenStream (Lin and Lin 2009 ) combines D-
Stream with the categorical distance measure of
HCluStream to make it applicable to categorical
features.
E-Stream (Udommanetanakit et al. 2007 ) uses the
time-faded CF from DenStream in combination with a
histogram which bins the data points. New observations are
either added to their closest cluster or used to initialize anew one. Existing clusters are split if one of the dimensions
shows a signiﬁcant valley in their histogram. When acluster is split along a dimension, the other dimensions are
weighted by the size of the split. Additionally, clusters can
be merged if they move into close proximity.
HUE-Stream (Meesuksabai et al. 2011 ) is an exten-
sion of E-Stream which also supports categorical data
and can also handle uncertain data streams. To model
uncertainty, each observation is assumed to follow aprobability distribution. In this case, the vectors of linear
and squared sum become the sum of expectation, faded
over time.
ClusTree (Kranen et al. 2009 ,2011a ) uses the time-
faded CF and applies it to the tree structure of BIRCH .
Additionally, it allows to handle data streams where entries
arrive faster than they can be processed. A new entry
descends into its closest leaf where it is inserted as a newCF. Whenever a node is full, it is split and its entries
combined in two groups such that the intra-cluster distance
is minimized. However, if a new observation arrives beforea node could be split, the new entry is merged with its
closest CFs instead. If a new observation arrives while an
entry descends the tree, that entry is temporarily stored in abuffer at its current location. It remains there until another
entry descends into the same branch and is then carried
further down the tree as a ‘hitchhiker’. Again, the leafs canbe used as an input to a traditional algorithm to generate
the macro-clusters.
LiarTree (Kranen et al. 2011b ; Hassani et al. 2011
)
is an extension of ClusTree with better noise and nov-
elty handling. It does so by adding a time-weighted CF to
each node of the tree which serves as a buffer for noise.Data points are considered noise with respect to a node
based on a threshold on their distance to the node’s mean,
relative to the node’s standard deviation. The noise bufferis promoted to a regular cluster when its density is com-
parable to other CFs in the node.
FlockStream (Forestiero et al. 2013 ) employs a
ﬂocking behavior inspired by nature to identify emerging
ﬂocks and swarms of objects. Similar to DenStream , the
algorithm distinguishes between potential core and outliermicro-clusters and uses a time-faded CF. It projects a batch
of data onto a two-dimensional grid where each data point
is represented by a basic agent . Each agent then makes
movement decisions solely based on other agents in close
proximity. The movement of agents is similar to the
behavior of a ﬂock of birds in ﬂight: (1) Agents steer in thesame direction as their neighbors; (2) Agents steer towards
the location of their neighbors; (3) Agents avoid collisions
with neighbors. When agents meet, they can be mergeddepending on a distance or radius threshold. After a num-
ber of ﬂocking steps, the next batch of data is used to ﬁll
the grid with new agents in order to repeat the process.
LeaDen-Stream (Amini and Wah 2013 ) (Leader
Density-based clustering algorithm over evolving data
123284 M. Carnein, H. Trautmann: Optimizing Data Stream Representation, Bus Inf Syst Eng 61(3):277–297 (2019)