is then updated by only considering the associated
dimensions for each cluster. Finally, the process is repeated
until the cluster and dimensions converge. A new data
point is tentatively added to each cluster to update thedimension association and added to its closest cluster if it
does not increase the cluster radius above a threshold.
SiblingTree (Park and Lee 2007b ) is an extension
ofCellTree (Park and Lee 2007a ) (see Sect. 5.2). It
uses the same tree-structure but allows for subspace clus-
ters. To do so, the algorithm creates a siblings list for eachdimension as children of the root. New data points are
recursively assigned to the grid-cells using a depth ﬁrst
approach. If a cell’s density increases beyond a threshold, itis split as in CellTree . If a unit cell’s density increases
beyond a threshold, new sibling lists for each remaining
dimension are created as children of the cell. Additionally,if a cell’s density decays below a density threshold, its
children are removed and it is merged with consecutive
sparse cells. Clusters in the tree are deﬁned as adjacentunit-grid-cells with enough density.
HDDStream (Ntoutsi et al. 2012 ) (Density-based Pro-
jected Clustering over High Dimensional Data Streams) isinitialized by collecting a batch of observations and
applying PreDeCon (Bohm et al. 2004 ).PreDeCon can
be considered a subspace version of DBSCAN . The update
procedure is similar to DenStream (see Sect. 4.3): A new
observation is assigned to its closest potential core micro-
cluster if its projected radius does not increase beyond athreshold. Else, the same attempt is made for the closest
outlier-cluster. If both cannot absorb the observation, a new
cluster is initialized. Periodically, the algorithm down-grades potential core micro clusters if their weight is too
low or if the number of associated dimensions is too large.
Outlier-clusters are removed as in DenStream . To gen-
erate the macro-clusters a variant of PreDeCon (Bohm
et al. 2004 ) is used.
PreDeConStream (Hassani et al. 2012 ) (Subspace
Preference weighted Density Connected clustering of
Streaming data) was developed simultaneously to
HDDStream (see Sect. 7) and both share many concepts.
The algorithm is also initialized using thePreDeCon (Bohm et al. 2004 ) algorithm and the insertion
strategy is the same as in DenStream (see Sect. 4.3).
Additionally, the algorithm adjusts the clustering in regular
intervals using a modiﬁed part of the PreDeCon algo-
rithm on the micro-clusters that were changed during the
online phase.
7.1 Summary
Projected stream clustering algorithms serve a niche for
high dimensional data streams where it is not possible to
perform prior feature selection in order to reduce thedimensionality. In general, these algorithms have added
complexity associated with the selection of subspaces for
each cluster. In return, they can identify clusters in veryhigh dimensional space and can gracefully handle the curse
of dimensionality (Beyer et al. 1999 ). The most inﬂuential
and popular algorithm of this category has beenHPStream .
8 Application and Software
An increasing number of physical devices these days is
interconnected. This trend is generally described as the
Internet of Things (IoT) where every-day devices are col-
lecting and exchanging data. Popular examples of this areSmart Refrigerators that remind you to restock or Smart
Home devices such as thermostats, locks or speakers which
can remote control your home. Due to this, many modernapplications produce large and fast amounts of data as a
continuous stream. Stream Clustering is a way to analyze
this data and extract relevant information from it. Theresulting clusters can help decision makers to understand
the different groups. For example, IoT enables Predictive
Maintenance where necessary maintenance tasks are pre-dicted from the sensors of the devices. Clustering can help
to ﬁnd a cluster of devices that are likely to fail next. This
can help to prevent machine failures but also reduceunnecessary maintenance tasks. Additionally, stream clus-
tering could be applied for market or customer segmenta-
tion where customers that have similar preference orbehavior are identiﬁed from a stream of transactions. These
segments can be engaged differently using appropriate
marketing strategies. Stream clustering has also been suc-cessfully applied to mine conversational topics from chat
data (Carnein et al. 2017b ) or analyze user behavior based
on web click-streams (Wang et al. 2016 ). In addition, it
was used to analyze transactional data in order to detect
fraudulent plastic card transactions (Tasoulis et al. 2008 )
and to detect malicious network connections from com-puter network data (Hahsler and Bolan ˜os2016 ; Acker-
mann et al. 2012 ; Amini et al. 2016 ; Guha et al. 2003 ).Fig. 10 Development of projected stream clustering algorithms
123292 M. Carnein, H. Trautmann: Optimizing Data Stream Representation, Bus Inf Syst Eng 61(3):277–297 (2019)