considered clusters and they can even be merged when they
become too similar over time. However, it is not possible to
ever split a clusters again since the underlying data was
discarded and only the centre of the dense region wasstored (Aggarwal 2007 ). To avoid this problem, many
stream clustering algorithms divide the process in two
phases: an online and an ofﬂine component (Aggarwalet al. 2003 ).
2.1 Two-Phase ClusteringIn the two-phase clustering approach, an online component
evaluates arriving data points in real time and captures
relevant summary statistics as outlined above. The result is
a number of micro-clusters that represent a large number of
preliminary clusters in the stream (Circles in Fig. 1). The
number of micro-clusters is much smaller than the number
of data points in the stream but larger than the ﬁnal numberof clusters. This gives sufﬁcient ﬂexibility to merge or split
clusters, without the need to store all observations. Note
that some publications refrain from using the term micro-clusters for grid-based approaches to highlight the different
type of information that is maintained.
Upon request, an ofﬂine component then ‘reclusters’ the
micro-clusters to derive a ﬁnal set of macro-clusters
(Crosses in Fig. 1). This process is usually not considered
time-critical which allows to use variants of existingclustering algorithms. While most algorithms explicitlyspecify an ofﬂine component, the online and ofﬂine steps
can usually be combined arbitrarily. The two-phase clus-
tering approach is visualized in Fig. 3by summarizing the
data in a grid-structure. While the vast majority of algo-rithms apply such a two-phase process, some rely on
incremental approaches where macro-clusters are gener-
ated incrementally without an intermediate step.
2.2 Time Window ModelsAs shown in our eye tracking example, the underlying
distribution of the stream will often change over time. Thisis also known as drift or concept-shift. To handle this,
algorithms can employ time window models. This
approach aims to ‘forget’ older data to avoid that historicdata is biasing the analysis to outdated patterns. There exist
four main types of time window models (Fig. 4) (Silva
et al. 2013 ; Nguyen et al. 2015 ).(a) (b) (c)Fig. 1 Stream of eye tracking
data (Steil et al. 2018 ) at three
different points in time. Grey
points denote the normalized
pupil centers and their opacityand size is relative to their
recency. Circles mark the
centers of micro-clusters andcrosses the centers of macro-clusters. Both are scaled relative
to the number of observations
assigned to them
(a) (b) (c) (d)Fig. 2 Categories of stream
clustering algorithms
Fig. 3 Exemplary two-phase stream clustering using a grid-based
approach (Carnein et al. 2017a )
123M. Carnein, H. Trautmann: Optimizing Data Stream Representation, Bus Inf Syst Eng 61(3):277–297 (2019) 279