Further, it was used to analyze sensor readings (Hahsler
and Bolan ˜os2016 ), social network data (Gao et al. 2015 ),
weather monitoring (Motoyoshi et al. 2004 ), telecommu-
nication data (Ali et al. 2011 ), stock prices (Kontaki et al.
2008 ) or the monitoring of automated grid computing, e.g.
for anomaly detection (Zhang et al. 2010 ; Zhang and
Wang 2010 ). Other application scenarios include social
media analysis or the analysis of eye tracking data as in our
initial example.
Unfortunately, there is not a single solutions that can ﬁt
all application scenarios and problems. For this reason, the
choice of algorithm depends on the characteristics andrequirements of the stream. An important characteristic is
the speed of the stream. For very fast streams, more efﬁ-
cient algorithms are required. In particular, anytime algo-rithms such as ClusTree (Kranen et al. 2009 )o r
evoStream (Carnein and Trautmann 2018 ) are able to
output a clustering result at anytime during the stream andhandle faster streams better. On the other hand, some
algorithms store additional positional information along-
side micro-clusters. While this often helps to achieve betterclustering results, it makes algorithms such as LeaDen-
Stream (Amini and Wah 2013 ),D-Stream with
attraction (Tu and Chen 2009 ) and DBSTREAM less suit-
able for faster streams.
Another important characteristic is the desired or
expected shape of clusters. For example, many algorithmscan only recognize compact clusters, as shown in Fig. 11a.
This type of clusters often corresponds to our natural
understanding of a cluster and is usually well recognised bydistance-based approaches such as BICO (Fichtenberger
et al. 2013 )o r ClusTree (Kranen et al. 2009 ). Some
streams, however, consists of mostly long and stragglyclusters as shown in Fig. 11b. These clusters are generally
easier to detect for grid-based approaches where clusters of
arbitrary shape are formed by dense neighboring cells.Nevertheless, distance-based approaches can also detect
these clusters when using a reclustering algorithm that can
identify arbitrary shapes, e.g., as used byDBSTREAM (Hahsler and Bolan ˜os2016 ). In addition,
clusters may be of different density as as shown in
Fig. 11c. This is a niche problem and only MuDi-
Stream (Amini et al. 2016 ) currently addresses it.Furthermore, the dimensionality of the problem plays an
important role. Generally, faster algorithms are desirable as
the dimensionality increases. However, for very high-di-
mensional data, projected approaches such asHPStream (Aggarwal et al. 2004 ) are necessary in order
to ﬁnd meaningful clusters.
Finally, the expected amount of concept-shift of the
stream is important. If the structure of clusters changes
regularly, an algorithm that applies a damped time-window
model should be used. This includes algorithms such as
DenStream (Cao et al. 2006 ),D-Stream (Chen and Tu
2007 ),ClusTree (Kranen et al. 2009 ) and many more.
For streams without concept-shift, most algorithms are
applicable. For example, algorithms using a damped time
window model can set the fading factor k¼0. Note,
however, that algorithms such as DenStream rely on the
fading mechanism in order to remove noise (Bolan ˜os et al.
2014 ).
8.1 Software
An important aspect to apply stream clustering in practice
is available software and tools. In general, availability of
stream clustering implementations is rather scarce and onlythe most prominent algorithms are available. Only few
authors provide reference implementations for their algo-
rithms. As an example, C,C?? orRimplementations are
available for BIRCH (Zhang et al. 1997 ),STREAM (Guha
et al. 2003 ; Ackermann et al. 2012 ),
streamKM ?? (Ackermann et al. 2012 ),BICO (Fichten-
berger et al. 2013 ) and evoStream (Carnein and Traut-
mann 2018 ). Previously, also an implementation of
RepStream (Lu¨hr and Lazarescu 2009 ) was available.
More recently, several projects aim to create uniﬁed
frameworks for stream data mining, including implemen-
tations for stream clustering. The most popular frameworkfor data stream mining is the Massive Online Analysis
(MOA) (Bifet et al. 2010 ) framework. It is implemented in
Java and provides the stream clustering algorithms Cob-
Web,D-Stream ,DenStream ,ClusTree ,Clu-
Stream ,streamKM ?? andBICO .
For faster prototyping there also exists the stream
package (Hahsler et al. 2018 ) for the statistical program-
ming language R. It contains general methods for working
with data streams and also implements the D-Stream ,
DBSTREAM ,BICO ,BIRCH andevoStream algorithm.
There is also an extension package streamMOA (Hahsler
et al. 2015 ) which interfaces the MOA implementations of
DenStream ,ClusTree andCluStream .
For working with data in high-dimensional space, the
Subspace MOA framework (Hassani et al. 2013 ) provides
Java implementations for HDDStream andPreDeCon-
Stream . Again, the R-package subspaceMOA (Hassani(a) (b) (c)
Fig. 11 Visualisation of different cluster types
123M. Carnein, H. Trautmann: Optimizing Data Stream Representation, Bus Inf Syst Eng 61(3):277–297 (2019) 293