until a leaf node is reached. The observation is either
merged with its closest leaf-CF or used to create a new
leaf-CF. For reclustering, all leaf-CF can be used as an
input to a traditional algorithm such as k-means or hierar-
chical clustering.
Improved BIRCH (Ismael et al. 2014 ) is an extension
which uses different distance thresholds per CF which areincreased based on entries close to the radius boundary.
Similarly, A-BIRCH (Lorbeer et al. 2017 ) estimates the
threshold parameters by using the Gap Statistics (Tibshi-
rani et al. 2001 ) on a sample of the stream.
ScaleKM (Bradley et al. 1998 ) is an incremental
algorithm to cluster large databases which uses the concept
of CFs. The algorithm ﬁlls a buffer with initial points and
initializes kclusters as with standard k-means. The algo-
rithm then decides for every point whether to discard,
summarize or retain it. First, based on a distance threshold
to the cluster centers and by creating a worst case pertur-bation of cluster centers, the algorithm identiﬁes points that
are unlikely to ever change their cluster assignments. These
points are summarised in a CF per cluster and then dis-carded. Second, the remaining points are used to identify a
larger number of micro-clusters by applying k-means and
merging clusters using agglomerative hierarchical cluster-ing. Each cluster is again summarised using a CF. All
remaining points are kept as individual points. The freed
space in the buffer is then ﬁlled with new points to repeatthe process.
Single pass k-means (Farnstrom et al. 2000 )i sa
simpliﬁed version of scaleKM where the algorithm dis-
cards all data points with every iteration and only the kCFs
are maintained.
4.2 Extended Clustering Feature
CluStream (Aggarwal et al. 2003 ) extends the CF from
BIRCH which allows to perform clustering over different
time-horizons rather than the entire data stream. The
extended CF is deﬁned as ðLS;SS;LS
ðtÞ;SSðtÞ;nÞ, where
LSðtÞand SSðtÞare the linear and squared sum of all
timestamps of a cluster. The online algorithm is initialized
by collecting a chunk of data and using the k-means
algorithm to create qclusters. When a new data point
arrives, it is absorbed by its closest micro-cluster if it lieswithin an adaptive radius threshold. Otherwise, it is used to
create a new cluster. In order to keep the number of micro-
clusters constant, outdated clusters are removed based on a
threshold on their average time stamp. If this is not pos-sible, the two closest micro-clusters are merged.
To support different time-horizons, the algorithm regu-
larly stores snapshots of the current CFs following apyramidal scheme. While some snapshots are regularly
updated, others are less frequently updated to maintain
information about historic data. A desired portion of the
stream can be approximated by subtracting the current CFs
from a stored snapshot of previous CFs. The extractedmicro-clusters are then used to run a variant of k-means to
generate the macro-clusters.
HCluStream (Yang and Zhou 2006 ) extends Clu-
Stream for categorical data by storing the frequency of
attribute-levels for all categorical features. Based on this, it
deﬁnes a separate categorical distance measure which iscombined with the traditional distance measure for con-
tinuous attributes.
SWClustering (Zhou et al. 2007a ) uses the extended
CF and pyramidal time window from CluStream . The
algorithm maintains CFs in an Exponential Histogram of
Cluster Features (EHCF) which stores data in differentlevels of granularity, depending on their recency. While the
most recent observation is always stored individually, older
observations are grouped and summarized. In particular,this step is organized in granularity levels. Once more than
1=/C15þ1 CFs of a granularity level exist, the next CF con-
tains twice as many entries (cf. Fig. 7). A new observation
is either inserted into its closest CF or used to initialize a
new one based on a radius threshold, similar to BIRCH .I f
the initialization creates too many individual CFs, theoldest two individual CFs are merged and this process
cascades down the different granularity levels. An old CF
is removed if its time-stamp is older than the last Nob-
served time stamps. To generate the ﬁnal clustering all CFs
are used for reclustering, similar to BIRCH .
SDStream (Ren and Ma 2009 ) combines the EHCF
from SWClustering to represent the potential core and
outlier micro-clusters from DenStream . The algorithm
also enforces an upper limit on the number of micro-clusters by either merging the two most similar micro-
clusters or deleting outlier micro-clusters. The ofﬂine
x1 x2 x3 x4 x5 x6 x7 x8 x9 x10
CF 1 CF 2 CF 3 CF 4 CF 5
Fig. 7 Granularity levels in an EHCF with /C15¼1. Recent observations are stored individually, whereas older data points are iteratively
summarized
123M. Carnein, H. Trautmann: Optimizing Data Stream Representation, Bus Inf Syst Eng 61(3):277–297 (2019) 283