et al. 2016 ) interfaces both methods to make them acces-
sible with the stream package.
Alternatively, the streamDM (Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
2015 ) project provides methods for data mining with Spark
Streaming which is an extension for the Spark engine.
Currently it implements the CluStream and
streamKM ??algorithms with plans to extend the project
with more stream clustering algorithms.
8.2 Algorithm ConﬁgurationStreaming data in general (Bifet et al. 2018 ) pose consid-
erable challenges for respective algorithms, especially due
to the requirement of real-time capability, the high proba-
bility of non-stationary data and the lack of availability ofthe original data over time. Moreover, many clustering
approaches in general require standardized data. In order to
standardize a data stream which evolves over time, onecould either estimate the values for centering and scaling
from an initial portion of the stream (Hahsler et al. 2018 ).
Alternatively, in a more sophisticated manner, CF basedapproaches can also incrementally adapt the values for
scaling and update the existing micro-clusters accord-
ingly (Aggarwal et al. 2004 ).
Speciﬁcally, as we have seen throughout the discussion
of available stream clustering algorithms, most of them
require a multitude of parameters to be set by the usera-priori. These settings control the behavior and perfor-
mance of the algorithm over time. Usually, density-based
algorithms require at least a distance or radius thresholdand grid-based algorithms need the grid’s size. The same
applies to their extensions for projected stream clustering
and model-based algorithms mostly make use of a simi-larity-threshold. In practice, such parameters are often
unintuitive to choose appropriately even with expert
knowledge. As an example, it might be possible to ﬁndappropriate distance thresholds for a given scenario but
choosing appropriate weight thresholds or cleanup intervals
tends to be very difﬁcult for a users, especially consideringpossible drift of the stream. A notable exception from this
problem is the ClusTree (see Sect. 4.3) algorithm which
at least makes an effort to be parameter-free.
Therefore, a systematic online approach for automated
parameter conﬁguration is required. However, state-of-the
art automated parameter conﬁguration approaches such asirace (Lo´pez-Iba ´n˜ez et al. 2016 ),ParamILS (Hutter
et al. 2007 ,2009 )o rSMAC (Hutter et al. 2011 ) are not
perfectly suited for the streaming data scenario. First of all,they are mostly set-based, thus not focussed on online
learning on single, speciﬁc data. Moreover, they require
static and stationary data so that they can only be applied ina prequential manner, i.e. in regular intervals or on an
initial sample of the stream in order to determine and adjustappropriate settings over time which does not really meet
the efﬁciency requirement of the real-time capability.
However, an initial approach on conﬁguring and
benchmarking stream clustering approaches based onirace (Lo´pez-Iba ´n˜ez et al. 2016 ) has been presented
by Carnein et al. ( 2017a ). Very promising are ensemble-
based approaches, both for algorithm selection and con-ﬁguration on data streams, which have successfully been
applied in the context of classiﬁcation algorithms
already (van Rijn et al. 2014 ,2018
).
9 Conclusion
Analyzing data streams is becoming extremely important
as most applications today create a continuous ﬂow of new
observations. An interesting aspect of analyzing streaming
data is clustering, where homogeneous groups are identi-ﬁed. It supports decision making in large and possibly
unstructured data by identifying manageable groups of
similar observations. Possible application scenarios includethe analysis of sensor data, click stream data, network data
or identifying market segments in customer relationship
management applications (Wedel and Kamakura 2000 ).
Stream clustering aims to ﬁnd clusters within an evolving
data stream without the need to revisit or store all obser-
vations. It has been a very active research topic over thepast decades and has produced a multitude of algorithms
following different approaches. Most algorithms rely on a
two-phase approach where an online component extractsrelevant information from the stream. An ofﬂine compo-
nent then uses this information to derive a ﬁnal set of
clusters. The underlying optimization task needs to build asuitable summary of the stream. The interplay between the
online and ofﬂine component is then crucial for decision
making since it helps to reveal hidden structures anddependencies within the data streams. In this paper we
summarized and reviewed a total of 51 available algo-
rithms. To the best of our knowledge our survey is the mostextensive and thorough study of its kind, discussing almost
every available stream clustering algorithm. This paper is
supported by our website
2which serves as a repository for
algorithms, literature and data sets in the ﬁeld of data
stream clustering.
In addition, we identiﬁed categories of algorithms and
research threads. First, we identify algorithms that used
density-threshold and either assign new observations to the
closest cluster or use it to initialize a new cluster. Amilestone algorithm in this area is BIRCH which proposed
to store summary statistics of a cluster. These can be
incrementally updated and allow to calculate location and
2http://www.matthias-carnein.de/streamClustering .
123294 M. Carnein, H. Trautmann: Optimizing Data Stream Representation, Bus Inf Syst Eng 61(3):277–297 (2019)