Submitted to the book on "Applications Handbook of Genetic Algorithms:New Frontiers"
1Vehicle Routing with Time Windows using Genetic 
Algorithms
Sam R. Thangiah
Artificial Intelligence and Robotics Laboratory
Computer Science Department
Slippery Rock University
Slippery Rock
PA 16057
U.S.A.
Abstract - In vehicle routing problems with time windows (VRPTW), a set of vehicles with limits on capacity and 
travel time are available to service a set of customers with demands and earliest and latest time for servicing. The 
objective is to minimize the cost of servicing the set of customers without being tardy or exceeding the capacity or 
travel time of the vehicles. As finding a feasible solution to the problem is NP-complete, search methods based upon 
heuristics are most promising for problems of practical size. In this paper we describe GIDEON, a genetic algorithm 
heuristic for solving the VRPTW. GIDEON consists of a global customer clustering method and a local 
post-optimization method. The global customer clustering method uses an adaptive search strategy based upon 
population genetics, to assign vehicles to customers. The best solution obtained from the clustering method is 
improved by a local post-optimization method. The synergy a between global adaptive clustering method and a local 
route optimization method produce better results than those obtained by competing heuristic search methods. On a 
standard set of 56 VRPTW problems obtained from the literature the   GIDEON system obtained 41 new best known 
solutions.
Key words: Genetic Algorithms, Vehicle routing, Time Windows, Multi-Objective.
? . 1  Introduction
The problem we address is the Vehicle Routing Problem with Time Windows (VRPTW). The 
VRPTW involves routing a fleet of vehicles, with limited capacities and travel times, from a central 
depot to a set of geographically dispersed customers with known demands within specified time 
windows. The time windows are two-sided, meaning that a customer must be serviced at or after 
its earliest time and before its latest time. If a vehicle reaches a customer before the earliest time it 
results in idle or waiting time. A vehicle that reaches a customer after the latest time is tardy. A 
service time is also associated with servicing each customer. The route cost of a vehicle is the total 
of the traveling time (proportional to the distance), waiting time and service time taken to visit
a set of customers.