Submitted to the book on "Applications Handbook of Genetic Algorithms:New Frontiers"
6simulated over a number of generations. The population members are referred to as chromosomes. 
The chromosomes are fixed length strings with a finite number of binary values. Each chromosome 
has a fitness value assigned to it based upon a fitness function. The fitness value determines the 
relative ability of the chromosome to survive over the generations. Chromosomes with high fit 
values have a higher probability of surviving into the next generation compared to chromosomes 
with low fit values. At each generation, chromosomes are subjected to selection, crossover and 
mutation. Selection allows chromosomes with high fit values to survive into the next generation. 
Crossover splices chromosomes at random points and exchanges it with other spliced 
chromosomes. Mutation changes the bit value of a chromosome to its complementary value. 
Selection and crossover search a problem space exploiting information present in the 
chromosomes by selecting and recombining primarily those offspring that have high fitness values. 
These two processes eventually produce a population of chromosomes with high performance 
characteristics. The mutate operator is a secondary operator that prevents premature loss of 
information by randomly mutating bits in a chromosome. For a detailed description of this process 
refer to [11].
The local post-optimization procedure in GIDEON improves a solution by using a λ-interchange 
local optimization method. The  λ-interchange local optimization method is based on the 
interchange of customers between sets of routes.   The λ-interchange generation mechanism can 
be described as follows. Given a solution to the problem represented by a set of routes S = 
{R1,...,Rp,...,Rq,...,Rk}, where each route is the set of customers serviced on this route, a λ-
interchange between a pair of routes Rp and Rq is a replacement of a subset of customers  S1 ⊆ Rp 
of size |S1|λ by another subset S2 ⊆ Rq of size |S2|λ to get two new routes R′p= (Rp - S1) ∪ S2, 
R′q= (Rq - S2) ∪ S1 and a new neighboring solution S′ = {R1,...,R′p,...,R′q,...,Rk}. The neighborhood 
Nλ(S) of a given solution S is the set of all neighbors S ′ generated in this way for a given value of λ.≤ ≤