Submitted to the book on "Applications Handbook of Genetic Algorithms:New Frontiers"
17angles before assigning the customers the pseudo polar coordinate angles. The second method 
assigned pseudo polar coordinate angles to the customers in a random manner. The solutions 
obtained by GIDEON using the two methods are tabulated in Tables 1 and 2. The best of the 
solutions obtained from these two methods were compared against the best solutions obtained 
Solomon’s and Thompson’s heuristics.
The comparison between the solutions obtained by GIDEON and other heuristic algorithms were 
done in the following form. As Solomon[28] and Thompson [30] report the results for each of the 
problems in the literature, the solutions obtained by GIDEON were compared with each of their 
solutions. In addition the average number of vehicles and distance obtained by the GIDEON 
system are compared against the solutions obtained by Potvin’s Tabu search heuristic[23].
The best solutions obtained by GIDEON did better than both Heuristic 1 and Heuristic 2 on 41 of 
the 56 problems as indicated in Tables 3 and 4 in bold. In comparison to the best solutions obtained 
by Heuristic 1 and Heuristic 2, the solutions obtained by GIDEON resulted in an average reduction 
of 3.9% in fleet size and 4.4% in distance traveled by the vehicles. Table 5 is a summary of the 
average improvement in vehicle fleet size and distance obtained by GIDEON with respect to 
Heuristic 1 and Heuristic 2 for the six different data sets. The GIDEON system was written in C 
language and the experiments were conducted on a SOLBOURNE 5/802 system. The solution to 
the VRPTW using the GIDEON system required an average of 127 CPU seconds to be solved on 
a SOLBOURNE 5/802 computer. The SOLBOURNE 5/802 computer is about 10 times faster than 
a personal computer. On the average, the Genetic Sectoring process took about 27 seconds to form 
the sectors and the local post-optimization process took 100 seconds to improve the solution.