Submitted to the book on "Applications Handbook of Genetic Algorithms:New Frontiers"
2The VRPTW arises in a wide array of practical decision making problems. Instances of the 
VRPTW occur in retail distribution, school bus routing, mail and newspaper delivery, municipal 
waste collection, fuel oil delivery, dial-a-ride service and airline and railway fleet routing and 
scheduling. Efficient routing and scheduling of vehicles can save government and industry 
millions of dollars a year. The current survey of vehicle routing methodologies are available in [2] 
and [12]. Solomon and Desrosiers[26] provide an excellent survey on vehicle routing with time 
windows. 
In this paper we describe GIDEON, a genetic algorithm heuristic for solving the VRPTW. 
GIDEON is a cluster-first route-second method that assigns customers to vehicles by a process we 
call Genetic Sectoring and improves on the routes using a local post-optimization procedure. The 
Genetic Sectoring method uses a genetic algorithm to adaptively search for sector rays that 
partition the customers into sectors or clusters served by each vehicle. It ensures that each vehicle 
route begins and ends at the depot and that every customer is serviced by one vehicle. The solutions 
obtained by the Genetic Sectoring method are not always feasible and are improved using local 
post-optimization methods by moving customers between clusters.
The paper is arranged in the following form. Section 2 gives a mathematical formulation of the 
VRPTW. Section 3 gives a description of the GIDEON system. Section 4 describes the results of 
computational testing on a standard set of VRPTW problems obtained from the literature. Section 
5 is the computational analysis of the solutions obtained from the GIDEON system and with 
respect to competing heuristics. Section 6 contains the summary and concluding remarks.
? . 2  Mathematical Formulation for the VRPTW
The notation and expressions used in the model are useful in explaining the genetic search. We 
present a mixed -integer formulation of the vehicle routing problem with time window constraints.   
Our formulation is based upon the model defined by Solomon[28].   The following notations will