Submitted to the book on "Applications Handbook of Genetic Algorithms:New Frontiers"
9the customers within each sector are routed using the cheapest insertion method [13]. The
clustering of customers using a GA is referred to as Genetic Sectoring. Genetic Sectoring has
been successfully used to solve vehicle routing and scheduling problems with varying constraints
[28][29]. The GIDEON system allows exploration and exploitation of the search space to find
good feasible solutions with the exploration being done by the GA and the exploitation by the
local post-optimization procedure.
The GENESIS [14] genetic algorithm software was used in the implementation of the GIDEON
system. The chromosomes in GENESIS are represented as bit strings. The sectors(clusters) for
the VRPTW are obtained from a chromosome by subdividing it into K divisions of size B bits.
Each subdivision is used to compute the size of a sector. The ﬁtness value for the chromosome is
the cost function (2.12) for of serving all the customers computed with respect to the sector
divisions derived from it.
In an N customer problem with the origin at the depot, the GIDEON system replaces the customer
angles p1,...,pN with pseudo polar coordinate angles  s1,...,sN. The pseudo polar coordinate angles
are obtained by normalizing the angles between the customers so that the angular difference
between any two adjacent customers is equal. This allows sector boundaries to fall freely between
any pair of customers that have adjacent angles, whether the separation is small or large. The
customers are divided into  K sectors, where K is the number of vehicles, by planting a set of
“seed” angles, S0,...,SK, in the search space and drawing a ray from the origin to each seed angle.
The initial number of vehicles, K, required to service the customers is obtained using Solomon’s
insertion heuristic[28].   The initial seed angle S0 is assumed to be 0o. The first sector will lie
between seed angles S0 and S1, the second sector will lie between seed angles S1 and S2, and so on.