Submitted to the book on "Applications Handbook of Genetic Algorithms:New Frontiers"
13into a location of a different route that has the lowest cost. The worst case running time bounds for
the local post-optimization process is  as there is on the average  customers for each
route and on the average    edges have to be checked.
The local post-optimization process is carried out until no more improvements can be made to the
solution obtained from the GA. At the termination of the local post-optimization procedure, the
customers are ranked in order of the sectors, and within the sectors in the sequence in which they
are visited by the vehicles. The customer angles , p1,..., pN, are replaced with pseudo polar
coordinate angles  s1,..., sN in order of the customer rank. The assignment of pseudo polar
coordinate angles, using route and customer sequence, clusters together customers with
geographical and temporal characteristics that can be serviced by a single vehicle. 
The customers with the new pseudo polar coordinate angles are once again used to form new
sectors using the GA. The best set of sectors obtained from the GA using the new customer polar
coordinate angles are improved using the local post-optimization procedure. This iteration
between Genetic Sectoring process and local post-optimization procedure is carried out a
predetermined number of times and was set at 5. The ﬂow of the GIDEON system is as follows: 
Step 1: Set the number of cluster-route iterations: itermax = 3.
Set the current iteration number: iter=0.
Set the bit string size for the offset: Bsize=5.
Step 2: Sort the customers in order of their polar coordinate angles, and
assign pseudo polar coordinate angles to the customers.
Set the lowest global route cost to inﬁnity: g=∞.
Set the lowest local route cost to inﬁnity: l=∞.
Step 3: Increment the number of iterations: iter=iter+1.
If iter > itermax, go to Step 7.
Step 4: If GA has terminated, go to Step 5.
For each chromosome in the population:
For each bit string of size BSize,
calculate the seed angle,
sector the customers, and 
route the customers within the sectors using the cheapest insertion method.
If the cost of the current set of sectors is lower than l,
 set l to the current route cost, andON
K ( ) 2 
( ) N
K N
K