Submitted to the book on "Applications Handbook of Genetic Algorithms:New Frontiers"
8The search space used by GIDEON is a relaxation of the feasible region of the mathematical model 
proposed in (2.1). The mathematical model (2.1) is approximated by the GIDEON system by a 
relaxation of the capacity, route time and time window constraints in a Lagrangian Relaxation 
fashion. The cost function used by the GIDEON system drives the search for a good feasible 
solution by penalizing violation of capacity, route or time window constraints.    The objective 
function used by the GIDEON system is stated as:
(VRPTW) Min  (2.12)
where,
cijk = α × t ij + β □· ×( t i + fi +t ij) + η ×· max {0, (q ik - vk)} + κ ·× max {0, ( r ik - li)}+  γ ·× max {0, (t i + fi + tij - T)} 
The cost function includes components weighted by coefficients α  for distance, β  for route time 
and penalty weighting factors η  for vehicle overload, γ  for travel time in excess of the allocated 
route time for the vehicle and κ  for tardiness. The GIDEON system explores for feasible solutions 
to the VRPTW with weights that drive the model towards feasibility in the VRPTW problem. The 
weights for GIDEON were derived empirically and set at α = 0.5, β = 0.05, η = 50,  κ = 25 and γ = 
50.   The weights are biased towards finding a feasible solution in comparison to reducing the total 
distance and route time. The main priority of the cost function (2.12) is to obtain a feasible solution. 
Therefore the coefficients of the cost function (2.12) gives higher priority to reducing tardy and 
overloading vehicles, followed by vehicles that exceed the maximum allotted route time for a 
vehicle. If there are no violation of the capacity, time feasibility and route time constraints, then 
the coefficients of the cost function (2.12) is to reduce the total distance followed by the total route 
time. The weights for the coefficients of the cost function were chosen to first obtain a feasible 
solution and then minimize the total distance and route time. The cost function (2.12) was 
experimented with other weight values, values that gave higher weights to the cost coefficients  α 
and β and lower weights to η, α and γ but these resulted in infeasible or solutions of poor quality.
The GIDEON system uses a the cluster-first route-second method to solve a VRPTW. That is,
given a set of customers and a central depot, the system clusters the customers using the GA, andc ijk x ijk
ijk ∑