Submitted to the book on "Applications Handbook of Genetic Algorithms:New Frontiers"
16of vehicle routing with two-sided time windows. The problems vary in fleet size, vehicle capacity, 
travel time of vehicles, spatial and temporal distribution of customers, time window density (the 
number of demands with time windows), time window width, percentage of time constrained 
customers and customer service times.
Solutions to each of the 56 VRPTW were obtained by Solomon [28] and Thompson [30]. Solomon 
tested a number of algorithms and heuristics and reported that the overall best performance were 
obtained using a sequential insertion procedure that used a weighted combination of time and 
distance in its cost function. The best solutions using the heuristic insertion procedure were 
obtained using eight different combinations of parameters and three different initialization criteria.
Thompson's solutions use local post-optimization procedures, based on cyclical transfers, to obtain 
feasible solutions. The solutions reported are the best of eight different combinations of parameters 
and two different initialization criteria.   For comparison purposes the heuristic used to obtain the 
best solution by Solomon will be referred to as Heuristic 1 and by Thompson as Heuristic 2.
Koskosidis et al. [17] used a "soft" time approach based on the Generalized Assignment Heuristic 
for solving the VRPTW.   This approach allowed time windows to be violated at a cost which 
results in final solution that could infeasible. This method was used to solve only some Solomon’s 
time window problems name some problems from the R1 and RC1 data set and all of the problems 
in the C1 data set.
In GIDEON the solution quality is based on minimizing the number of routes followed by the 
distance and route time. That is, a solution with M number of routes is better than M+1 routes, even 
if the distance and route time for the M routes is greater than M+1 routes. In VRPTW it is possible 
to get distance and route time for M+1 routes, that is less than the distance and route time for M+1 
routes. The GIDEON system was used to solve the 56 VRPTW problems using two types of initial 
placement of customers. The first method initially sorted the customers by the polar coordinate