Submitted to the book on "Applications Handbook of Genetic Algorithms:New Frontiers"
12In the GIDEON system each chromosome represents a set of offsets for a VRPTW. Therefore, a
population of P chromosomes usually has P different solutions for a VRPTW. That is, there may
be some chromosomes in the population that are not unique. At each generation, P chromosomes
are evaluated for ﬁtness. The chromosomes that have the least cost will have a high probability of
surviving into the next generation through the selection process. As the crossover operator
exchanges a randomly selected portion of the bit string between the chromosomes, partial
information about sector divisions for the VRPTW is exchanged between the chromosomes. New
information is generated within the chromosomes by the mutation operator. 
The GIDEON system uses selection, crossover and mutation to adaptively explore the search
space for the set of sectors that will minimize the total cost of the routes over the simulated
generations for the VRPTW. The GIDEON system would utilize more computer time than
traditional heuristic algorithms because every time the Genetic Sectoring process is invoked it has
to evaluate P⋅G vehicle routes, where P is the population size and G is number of generations to
be simulated. The worst case running time bounds for the Genetic Sectoring process is  as
there is on the average  customers for each route and   edges have to be checked for each of
the v routes.
The parameter values for the number of generations, population size, crossover and mutation rates
for the Genetic Sectoring process were set at 1000, 50, 0.8 and 0.001. During the simulation of the
generations, the GIDEON system keeps track of the set of sectors obtained from the genetic
search that has the lowest total route cost. The genetic search terminates either when it reaches the
number of generations to be simulated or if all the chromosomes have the same fitness value. The
best set of sectors obtained after the termination of the genetic search does not always result in a
feasible solution. The solution obtained from the GA is improved using the local
post-optimization procedure that shifts and exchanges customers between the vehicle routes. The
post-optimization procedure is similar to the 2-opt procedure, as it deletes two arcs and inserts itON
K 2 
( ) 
N
K N
K