Submitted to the book on "Applications Handbook of Genetic Algorithms:New Frontiers"
10The Genetic Sectoring process assigns a customer, Ci, to a sector or vehicle route, Vk, based on
the following equation:
Ci is assigned to Vk   if  Sk < si <= Sk+1, where k= 0,...,K-1
Customer Ci is assigned to vehicle Vk if the pseudo polar coordinate angle si is greater than seed
angle Sk but is less than or equal to seed angle Sk+1. Each seed angle is computed using a fixed
angle and an offset from the fixed angle. The fixed angle, F, is the minimum angular value for a
sector and assures that each sector gets represented in the Genetic Sectoring process. The fixed
angle is computed by taking the maximum polar coordinate angle within the set of customers and
dividing it by 2 K. The offset is the extra region from the fixed angle that allows the sector to
encompass a larger or a smaller sector area. The GA is used to search for the set of offsets that
will result in the minimization of the total cost of routing the vehicles. If a fixed angle and its
offset exceeds 360o, then that seed angle is set to 360o thereby allowing the Genetic Sectoring
process to consider vehicles less than K to service all its customers. Therefore  K, the initial
number of vehicles with which the GIDEON system is invoked, serves as the upper bound on the
number of vehicles that can be used for servicing all the customers.
The bit size representation of an offset in a chromosome B was set at 3 bits. Bit size
representations larger than 3 were experimented with and resulted in poor quality solutions. The
decimal conversion of 3 bits results in a range of integer values between 0 and 7. The decimal
values retrieved from the subset of a chromosome are multiplied by a constant I that increases the
range of the offset. The value derived from the decimal conversion of the bit values times the
constant value I are proportionately mapped to the offsets with the value 0 as a 0o offset and the
bit value 10.5 and 10.5o as the maximum offset. Figure ?.1 describes the chromosome mapping
used to obtain the offsets.