Submitted to the book on "Applications Handbook of Genetic Algorithms:New Frontiers"
14save the set of sectors in lr.
If the cost of the current set of sectors is lower than g,
 set g to the current route cost, and
save the set of sectors in gr.
Do Selection, Crossover and Mutation on the chromosomes.
Go to Step 4.
Step 5: Do local post-optimization using the route lr.
If no improvements can be made to route lr,
 go to Step 6.
If the current improved route has lower cost than l,
 set l to the current cost, and 
save the set of sectors in  lr.
If the current improved route has lower cost than g,
 set g to the current cost, and
save the set of sectors in gr.
Go to step 5.
Step 6: Rank the customers of route lr in order of the sectors, and within the sectors in order
of the sequence in which they are visited.
Sort the customers by the rank.
Assign pseudo polar coordinates to the customers in order of the sorted rank.
Go to Step 3.
Step 7: Stop the Genetic Sectoring Heuristic with a local post-optimization solution.
The Genetic Sectoring and local post-optimization procedures are symbiotic as the Genetic
Sectoring is a meta-search strategy that forms the sectors and the local post-optimization procedure
gives adjacency information about the customers back to the Genetic Sectoring process. These two
procedures derive information from each other in order to obtain a good feasible solution. 
? . 4  Computational Results
GIDEON was run on a set of 56 VRPTW problems in six data sets denoted R1, C1, RC1, R2, C2, 
and RC2, developed by Solomon [28]. Solomon generated vehicle routing problems with two time 
windows using the standard set of vehicle routing test problems from Christofides et al. [3].The 
vehicle routing problems with two time windows were generated by assigning earliest and latest 
time windows to each of the customers in addition to the service time required by each of the 
customers. In terms of time window density (the percentage of customers with time windows), the