Method COCO-Animals FFHQ
BigGAN [ 5] 16.55 12 .42
U-Net based discriminator 15.86 10 .86
+ CutMix augmentation 14.95 10 .30
+ Consistency regularization 13.87 7 .63
Table 2: Ablation study of U-Net GAN on FFHQ and
COCO-Animals. Shown are the median FID scores. The
proposed components lead to better performance, on aver-
age improving the median FID by 3.7points over BigGAN.
Method FID ↓IS↑
PG-GAN [ 19] 7.30 –
COCO-GAN [ 27] 5.74 –
BigGAN [ 5] 4.54 3.23
U-Net GAN 2.95 3.43
Table 3: Comparison with the state-of-the-art models on
CelebA (128×128). See Section 4.2for discussion.
GAN model (see Section 3for details) to the baseline ar-
chitecture of BigGAN on the FFHQ and COCO-Animals
datasets, comparing the median FID scores. Note that each
of these individual components builds on each other. As
shown in Table 2, employing the U-Net architecture for the
discriminator alone improves the median FID score from
12.42to10.86for FFHQ and 16.55to15.86for COCO-
Animals. Adding the CutMix augmentation improves upon
these scores even further, achieving FID of 10.30for FFHQ
and14.95for COCO-Animals. Employing the proposed
consistency regularization in the segmenter DU
decoutput
space on the CutMix images enables us to get the most out
of the CutMix augmentation and to leverage better the per-
pixel feedback of the U-Net discriminator, without impos-
ing much computational or memory costs. In effect, the me-
dian FID drops to 7.63for FFHQ and to 13.87for COCO-
Animals. Overall, we observe that the proposed compo-
nents of U-Net GAN improve performance in terms of FID.
Comparison with the state of the art. Table 3shows
that U-Net GAN compares favourably with the state of the
art on CelebA. The BigGAN baseline already outperforms
COCO-GAN, the best result reported in the literature to the
best of our knowledge, lowering FID from 5.74to4.54,
whereas U-Net GAN further improves FID to 2.954. Note
that BigGAN belongs to just one of the two state-of-the-art
GAN families, led by BigGAN and StyleGAN, and their
respective further improvements [ 51,53,21]. While in this
paper we base our model on BigGAN, it would be interest-
ing to also apply the U-Net discriminator to StyleGAN.
Discriminator response visualization. Experimentally
we observe that DU
encandDU
decoften assign different real/-
4FID scores for CelebA were computed with the standard TensorFlow
Inception network for comparability. The PyTorch and TensorFlow FIDs
for all datasets are presented in the supplementary material in Table S1.
DU
decFigure 7: Predictions of the encoder DU
encand decoder
DU
decduring training, in a batch of 50generated samples.
For visualization, the DU
decscore is averaged over all pixels.
Note that quite often decisions of DU
encandDU
decare not
coherent. As judged by the U-Net discriminator, samples
in the upper left are locally plausible but not globally co-
herent (in orange), whereas samples in the lower right look
globally coherent but have local inconsistencies (example in
purple: giraffe with too many legs and vague background).
fake scores per sample. Figure 7visualizes the per-sample
predictions for a complete training batch. Here, the decoder
score is computed as the average per-pixel prediction. The
scores correlate with each other but have a high variance.
Points in the upper left quadrant correspond to samples that
are assigned a high probability of being real by the decoder,
but a low probability by the encoder. This implies realism
on a local level, but not necessarily on a global one. Sim-
ilarly, the lower right quadrant represents samples that are
identiﬁed as realistic by the encoder, but contain unrealistic
patches which cause a low decoder score. The fact that the
encoder and decoder predictions are not tightly coupled fur-
ther implies that these two components are complementary.
In other words, the generator receives more pronounced
feedback by the proposed U-Net discriminator than it would
get from a standard GAN discriminator.
5. Conclusion
In this paper, we propose an alternative U-Net based ar-
chitecture for the discriminator, which allows to provide
both global and local feedback to the generator. In addition,
we introduce a consistency regularization technique for the
U-Net discriminator based on the CutMix data augmenta-
tion. The proposed changes result in a stronger discrimina-
tor, enabling the generator to synthesize images with vary-
ing levels of detail, maintaining global and local realism.
We demonstrate the improvement in FID over the state-of-
the-art BigGAN model [ 5] on three different datasets.
8214