A U-Net Based Discriminator for Generative Adversarial Networks
Edgar Sch ¨onfeld
Bosch Center for Artiﬁcial Intelligence
edgar.schoenfeld@bosch.comBernt Schiele
Max Planck Institute for Informatics
schiele@mpi-inf.mpg.com
Anna Khoreva
Bosch Center for Artiﬁcial Intelligence
anna.khoreva@bosch.com
Abstract
Among the major remaining challenges for generative
adversarial networks (GANs) is the capacity to synthesize
globally and locally coherent images with object shapes and
textures indistinguishable from real images. To target this
issue we propose an alternative U-Net based discrimina-
tor architecture, borrowing the insights from the segmenta-
tion literature. The proposed U-Net based architecture al-
lows to provide detailed per-pixel feedback to the generator
while maintaining the global coherence of synthesized im-
ages, by providing the global image feedback as well. Em-
powered by the per-pixel response of the discriminator, we
further propose a per-pixel consistency regularization tech-
nique based on the CutMix data augmentation, encourag-
ing the U-Net discriminator to focus more on semantic and
structural changes between real and fake images. This im-
proves the U-Net discriminator training, further enhancing
the quality of generated samples. The novel discriminator
improves over the state of the art in terms of the standard
distribution and image quality metrics, enabling the genera-
tor to synthesize images with varying structure, appearance
and levels of detail, maintaining global and local realism.
Compared to the BigGAN baseline, we achieve an average
improvement of 2.7FID points across FFHQ, CelebA, and
the proposed COCO-Animals dataset.
1. Introduction
The quality of synthetic images produced by genera-
tive adversarial networks (GANs) has seen tremendous im-
provement recently [ 5,20]. The progress is attributed
to large-scale training [ 32,5], architectural modiﬁcations
[50,19,20,27], and improved training stability via the use
of different regularization techniques [ 34,51]. However,
despite the recent advances, learning to synthesize images
with global semantic coherence, long-range structure and
the exactness of detail remains challenging.
One source of the problem lies potentially in the discrim-Progression during training
real
fake
Figure 1: Images produced throughout the training by our
U-Net GAN model (top row) and their corresponding per-
pixel feedback of the U-Net discriminator (bottom row).
The synthetic image samples are obtained from a ﬁxed noise
vector at different training iterations. Brighter colors corre-
spond to the discriminator conﬁdence of pixel being real
(and darker of being fake). Note that the U-Net discrimina-
tor provides very detailed and spatially coherent response
to the generator, enabling it to further improve the image
quality, e.g. the unnaturally large man’s forehead is recog-
nized as fake by the discriminator and is corrected by the
generator throughout the training.
inator network. The discriminator aims to model the data
distribution, acting as a loss function to provide the gener-
ator a learning signal to synthesize realistic image samples.
The stronger the discriminator is, the better the generator
has to become. In the current state-of-the-art GAN models,
the discriminator being a classiﬁcation network learns only
a representation that allows to efﬁciently penalize the gen-
erator based on the most discriminative difference between
real and synthetic images. Thus, it often focuses either on
the global structure or local details. The problem ampliﬁes
as the discriminator has to learn in a non-stationary envi-
8207