sampling pathways and through the encoder-decoder skip
connections, without trading off local over global realism.
Mix&Cut regularizations. Recently, a few simple yet
effective regularization techniques have been proposed,
which are based on augmenting the training data by cre-
ating synthetic images via mixing or/and cutting samples
from different classes. In MixUp [ 49] the input images and
their target labels are interpolated using the same randomly
chosen factor. [ 43] extends [ 49] by performing interpola-
tion not only in the input layer but also in the intermedi-
ate layers. CutOut [ 9] augments an image by masking a
rectangular region to zero. Differently, CutMix [ 47] aug-
ments training data by creating synthetic images via cut-
ting and pasting patches from image samples of different
classes, marrying the best aspects of MixUp and CutOut.
Other works employ the Mix&Cut approaches for consis-
tency regularization [ 44,4,51], i.e. penalizing the classiﬁ-
cation network sensitivity to samples generated via MixUp
or CutOut [ 49,9]. In our work, we propose the consistency
regularization under the CutMix transformation in the pixel
output space of our U-Net discriminator. This helps to im-
prove its localization quality and induce it to attend to non-
discriminative differences between real and fake regions.
3. U-Net GAN Model
A ”vanilla” GAN consists of two networks: a generator
Gand a discriminator D, trained by minimizing the follow-
ing competing objectives in an alternating manner:
LD=−Ex[logD(x)]−Ez[log(1−D(G(z)))],
LG=−Ez[logD(G(z))]1.(1)
Gaims to map a latent variable z∼p(z)sampled from
a prior distribution to a realistic-looking image, while D
aims to distinguish between real xand generated G(z)im-
ages. Ordinarily, GandDare modeled as a decoder and an
encoder convolutional network, respectively.
While there are many variations of the GAN objective
function and its network architectures [ 23,30], in this paper
we focus on improving the discriminator network. In Sec-
tion3.1, we propose to alter the Darchitecture from a stan-
dard classiﬁcation network to an encoder-decoder network
– U-Net [ 39], leaving the underlying basic architecture of D
– the encoder part – untouched. The proposed discriminator
allows to maintain both global and local data representation,
providing more informative feedback to the generator. Em-
powered by local per-pixel feedback of the U-Net decoder
module, in Section 3.2we further propose a consistency
regularization technique, penalizing per-pixel inconsistent
predictions of the discriminator under the CutMix transfor-
mations [ 47] of real and fake images. This helps to improve
1This formulation is originally proposed as non-saturating (NS) GAN
in [14].
G
G(z)zx
real/fakereal/fake
DU
encDU
decFigure 2: U-Net GAN. The proposed U-Net discriminator
classiﬁes the input images on a global and local per-pixel
level. Due to the skip-connections between the encoder and
the decoder (dashed line), the channels in the output layer
contain both high- and low-level information. Brighter col-
ors in the decoder output correspond to the discriminator
conﬁdence of pixel being real (and darker of being fake).
the localization quality of the U-Net discriminator and in-
duce it to attend more to semantic and structural changes
between real and fake samples. We call our model U-Net
GAN . Note that our method is compatible with most GAN
models as it does not modify the generator in any way and
leaves the original GAN objective intact.
3.1. U­Net Based Discriminator
Encoder-decoder networks [ 2,39] constitute a power-
ful method for dense prediction. U-Nets [ 39] in particular
have demonstrated state-of-art performance in many com-
plex image segmentation tasks. In these methods, similarly
to image classiﬁcation networks, the encoder progressively
downsamples the input, capturing the global image context.
The decoder performs progressive upsampling, matching
the output resolution to the input one and thus enabling pre-
cise localization. Skip connections route data between the
matching resolutions of the two modules, improving further
the ability of the network to accurately segment ﬁne details.
Analogously, in this work, we propose to extend a dis-
criminator to form a U-Net, by reusing building blocks of
the original discriminator classiﬁcation network as an en-
coder part and building blocks of the generator network as
the decoder part. In other words, the discriminator now con-
sists of the original downsampling network and a new up-
sampling network. The two modules are connected via a
bottleneck, as well as skip-connections that copy and con-
catenate feature maps from the encoder and the decoder
modules, following [ 39]. We will refer to this discriminator
asDU. While the original D(x)classiﬁes the input image
xinto being real and fake, the U-Net discriminator DU(x)
additionally performs this classiﬁcation on a per-pixel ba-
sis, segmenting image xinto real and fake regions, along
with the original image classiﬁcation of xfrom the encoder,
8209