ronment: the distribution of synthetic samples shifts as the
generator constantly changes through training, and is prone
to forgetting previous tasks [ 7] (in the context of the dis-
criminator training, learning semantics, structures, and tex-
tures can be considered different tasks). This discriminator
is not incentivized to maintain a more powerful data repre-
sentation, learning both global and local image differences.
This often results in the generated images with discontinued
and mottled local structures [ 27] or images with incoherent
geometric and structural patterns (e.g. asymmetric faces or
animals with missing legs) [ 50].
To mitigate this problem, we propose an alternative dis-
criminator architecture, which outputs simultaneously both
global (over the whole image) and local (per-pixel) deci-
sion of the image belonging to either the real or fake class,
see Figure 1. Motivated by the ideas from the segmentation
literature, we re-design the discriminator to take a role of
both a classiﬁer and segmenter. We change the architecture
of the discriminator network to a U-Net [ 39], where the en-
coder module performs per-image classiﬁcation, as in the
standard GAN setting, and the decoder module outputs per-
pixel class decision, providing spatially coherent feedback
to the generator, see Figure 2. This architectural change
leads to a stronger discriminator, which is encouraged to
maintain a more powerful data representation, making the
generator task of fooling the discriminator more challeng-
ing and thus improving the quality of generated samples
(as also reﬂected in the generator and discriminator loss
behavior in Figure S1). Note that we do not modify the
generator in any way, and our work is orthogonal to the
ongoing research on architectural changes of the generator
[20,27], divergence measures [ 25,1,37], and regulariza-
tions [ 40,15,34].
The proposed U-Net based discriminator allows to em-
ploy the recently introduced CutMix [ 47] augmentation,
which is shown to be effective for classiﬁcation networks,
for consistency regularization in the two-dimensional out-
put space of the decoder. Inspired by [ 47], we cut and mix
the patches from real and synthetic images together, where
the ground truth label maps are spatially combined with
respect to the real and fake patch class for the segmenter
(U-Net decoder) and the class labels are set to fake for the
classiﬁer (U-Net encoder), as globally the CutMix image
should be recognized as fake, see Figure 3. Empowered
by per-pixel feedback of the U-Net discriminator, we fur-
ther employ these CutMix images for consistency regular-
ization, penalizing per-pixel inconsistent predictions of the
discriminator under the CutMix transformations. This fos-
ters the discriminator to focus more on semantic and struc-
tural changes between real and fake images and to attend
less to domain-preserving perturbations. Moreover, it also
helps to improve the localization ability of the decoder. Em-
ploying the proposed consistency regularization leads to astronger generator, which pays more attention to local and
global image realism. We call our model U-Net GAN.
We evaluate the proposed U-Net GAN model across sev-
eral datasets using the state-of-the-art BigGAN model [ 5]
as a baseline and observe an improved quality of the gen-
erated samples in terms of the FID and IS metrics. For
unconditional image synthesis on FFHQ [ 20] at resolu-
tion256×256, our U-Net GAN model improves 4FID
points over the BigGAN model, synthesizing high quality
human faces (see Figure 4). On CelebA [ 29] at resolution
128×128we achieve 1.6point FID gain, yielding to the best
of our knowledge the lowest known FID score of 2.95. For
class-conditional image synthesis on the introduced COCO-
Animals dataset [ 28,24] at resolution 128×128we observe
an improvement in FID from 16.37to13.73, synthesizing
diverse images of different animal classes (see Figure 5).
2. Related work
Generative adversarial networks. GAN [ 14] and its con-
ditional variant [ 33] have recently demonstrated impres-
sive results on different computer vision tasks, including
image synthesis [ 38,50,19,5,20,27,10]. Plenty of
efforts have been made to improve the training and per-
formance of GANs, from reformulation of the objective
function [ 31,1,26,37], integration of different regulariza-
tion techniques [ 51,34,40,48] and architectural changes
[38,19,13,27]. To enhance the quality of generated sam-
ples, [ 38] introduced the DCGAN architecture that employs
strided and transposed convolutions. In SAGAN [ 50] the
self-attention block was added to improve the network abil-
ity to model global structure. PG-GAN [ 19] proposed to
grow both the generator and discriminator networks to in-
crease the resolution of generated images. Other lines of
work focused mainly on improving the discriminator by ex-
ploiting multiple [ 36,13,11] and multi-resolution [ 45,42]
discriminators, using spatial feedback of the discriminator
[17], an auto-encoder architecture with the reconstruction-
based feedback to the generator [ 52] or self-supervision to
avoid catastrophic forgetting [ 7]. Most recently, the atten-
tion has been switched back to the generator network. Style-
GAN [ 20] proposed to alter the generator architecture by
injecting latent codes to each convolution layer, thus allow-
ing more control over the image synthesis process. COCO-
GAN [ 27] integrated the conditional coordination mecha-
nism into the generator, making image synthesis highly par-
allelizable. In this paper, we propose to alter the discrimina-
tor network to a U-Net based architecture, empowering the
discriminator to capture better both global and local struc-
tures, enabled by per-pixel discriminator feedback. Local
discriminator feedback is also commonly applied through
PatchGAN discriminators [ 18]. Our U-Net GAN extends
this idea to dense prediction over the whole image plane,
with visual information being integrated over up- and down-
8208