Figure 4: Images generated with U-Net GAN on FFHQ with resolution 256×256when interpolating in the latent space (left
to right). Note the high quality of synthetic samples and very smooth interpolations, maintaining global andlocal realism.
4. Experiments
4.1. Experimental Setup
Datasets. We consider three datasets: FFHQ [ 20],
CelebA [ 29] and the subset of the COCO [ 28] and Open-
Images [ 24] images containing animal classes, which we
will further on refer to as COCO-Animals. We use FFHQ
and CelebA for unconditional image synthesis and COCO-
Animals for class-conditional image synthesis, where the
class label is used. We experiment with 256×256resolution
for FFHQ and 128×128for CelebA and COCO-Animals.
CelebA is a human face dataset of 200k images, featur-
ing∼10k different celebrities with a variety of facial poses
and expressions. Similarly, FFHQ is a more recent dataset
of human faces, consisting of 70k high-quality images with
higher variation in terms of age, ethnicity, accessories, and
viewpoints. The proposed COCO-Animals dataset consists
of∼38k training images belonging to 10animal classes,
where we choose COCO and OpenImages (using the hu-
man veriﬁed subset with mask annotations) samples in the
categories bird, cat, dog, horse, cow, sheep, giraffe, zebra,
elephant , and monkey . With its relatively small size and im-
balanced number of images per class as well as due to its
variation in poses, shapes, number of objects, and back-
grounds, COCO-Animals presents a challenging task for
class-conditional image synthesis. We choose to compose
this dataset in order to perform conditional image genera-tion in the mid- to high-resolution regime, with a reason-
able computational budget and feasible training time. Other
datasets in this order of size either have too few examples
per class (e.g. AwA [ 46]) or too little inter- and intra-class
variability. In contrast, the intra-class variability of COCO-
Animals is very high for certain classes, e.g. bird and mon-
key, which span many subspecies. For more details we refer
to Section DandEin the supplementary material.
Evaluation metrics. For quantitative evaluation we use the
Fr´echet Inception distance (FID) [ 16] as the main metric,
and additionally consider the Inception score (IS) [ 41]. Be-
tween the two, FID is a more comprehensive metric, which
has been shown to be more consistent with human evalua-
tion in assessing the realism and variation of the generated
images [ 16], while IS is limited by what the Inception clas-
siﬁer can recognise, which is directly linked to its training
data [ 3]. If one learns to generate something not present in
the classiﬁer’s training data (e.g. human faces) then IS can
still be low despite generating high quality images since that
image does not get classiﬁed as a distinct class.
In all our experiments, FID and IS are computed using
50k synthetic images, following [ 19]. By default all re-
ported numbers correspond to the best or median FID of ﬁve
independent runs achieved with 400k training iterations for
FFHQ and COCO-Animals, and 800k training iterations for
CelebA. For evaluation, we employ moving averages of the
generator weights following [ 5,19], with a decay of 0.9999 .
8212