1 3
and has many variants, e.g. Denoising Autoencoder [ 76], 
Sparse Autoencoder [ 78], Variational Autoencoder [ 79], 
and Contractive Autoencoder [ 80].
Generative Adversarial Network (GAN)
GAN [ 81] is an effective generative model. Generative 
models perform an unsupervised learning task, where they 
automatically discover and learn existing patterns in data 
and then use that knowledge to generate new examples of 
the learnt pattern as if they were drawn from the original 
dataset. Using GAN, the problem is seen as a supervised 
learning problem with two strands: (i) the generator, which 
generates new examples as trained, and (ii) the discrimi -
nator, which classifies generated examples to two classes 
(real or fake). These generator and discriminator models 
are trained together in a zero-sum game (i.e. in an adver -
sarial fashion) such that the examples generated by the 
generator model maximize the loss of the discriminator 
model [ 82, 83].
Recurrent Neural Network (RNN)
The RNN architecture [ 84] is designed to detect spatio-
temporal alignments in streams of data [ 85]. Unlike feed -
forward NN which performs computations unidirectionally 
from input to output, an RNN computes the current state’s 
output depending on the outputs of the previous states. Due 
to this ‘memory’-like property, despite learning problems 
related to vanishing and exploding gradients, RNN has 
gained popularity in many fields involving streaming data 
(e.g. text mining, time series, genomes, financial, etc.). In 
recent years, two main variants, bidirectional RNN (BRNN) 
[86] and Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) [ 87], have also 
been applied [ 48, 88, 89].Convolutional Neural Network (CNN)
CNN [ 90] is a multilayer NN model [ 91] which has gained 
popularity in analysing image-based data. Inspired by the 
neurobiology of the visual cortex, the CNN consists of con -
volutional layer(s) containing a set of learnable filter banks 
and followed by fully connected layer(s). These filter banks 
convolve with the input data and pass the results to activa -
tion functions (e.g. ReLU, Sigmoid, and Tanh). There also 
exist subsampling steps in between these layers. The CNN 
outperforms DNNs, which as they do not scale well with 
multidimensional locally correlated input data. To address 
the scaling problem of DNNs, the CNN approach has been 
quite successful in analysing datasets with a high number 
of nodes and parameters (e.g. images). As the images are 
‘stationary,’ convolution filters (CF) can easily learn data-
driven kernels. Applying such CF along with a suitable 
pooling function reduces the features that are supplied to 
the fully connected network to classify. However, in case of 
large datasets even this can be daunting and can be solved 
using sparsely connected networks. Some of the popular 
CNN configurations include AlexNet [ 92], VGGNet [ 93] 
GoogLeNet [ 94], etc. (see Table  2 for a complete list of 
CNN’s variations with relevant details).
Deep Learning and Biological Data
Many studies have been reported in the literature which 
employ diverse DL architectures with related and varied 
parameter sets (see section  2) to analyse patterns in bio -
logical data. For most of the DL architectures, as shown in 
Fig. 3, the number of publications is increasing steadily over 
the years. A set of randomly selected representative studies 
from the large amount of reported literature are described 
below and summarized in Table  3. These studies belong to Table  1  (continued)
Architecture Pros. Cons.
Convolution and Pooling Fully connecte d
Output
HiddenInput
Conv/Pool KernelCNN - CNN can capture hierarchical infor -
mation.
- CNN can share pretrained weight 
which is required for transfer learn-
ing.
- Requires less connection compared 
to DNN.- Large labelled dataset is required for 
training.
- The working mechanism of CNN is 
not clear.
Legend: DA Deep Autoencoder,  DBN  Deep Belief Network,  RNN  Recurrent Neural Network,  DNN  Deep Neural Network,  DBM  Deep Boltz -
mann Machine,  CNN  Convolutional Neural Network.Cognitive Computation (2021) 13:1–33 6