Vol.:(0123456789)1 3https://doi.org/10.1007/s12559-020-09773-x
Deep Learning in Mining Biological Data
Mufti Mahmud1,5  · M. Shamim Kaiser2 · T. Martin McGinnity1,3 · Amir Hussain4
Received: 1 May 2020 / Accepted: 28 September 2020 
© The Author(s) 2020
Abstract
Recent technological advancements in data acquisition tools allowed life scientists to acquire multimodal data from differ -
ent biological application domains. Categorized in three broad types (i.e. images, signals, and sequences), these data are 
huge in amount and complex in nature. Mining such enormous amount of data for pattern recognition is a big challenge and 
requires sophisticated data-intensive machine learning techniques. Artificial neural network-based learning systems are well 
known for their pattern recognition capabilities, and lately their deep architectures—known as deep learning (DL)—have 
been successfully applied to solve many complex pattern recognition problems. To investigate how DL—especially its dif -
ferent architectures—has contributed and been utilized in the mining of biological data pertaining to those three types, a 
meta-analysis has been performed and the resulting resources have been critically analysed. Focusing on the use of DL to 
analyse patterns in data from diverse biological domains, this work investigates different DL architectures’ applications to 
these data. This is followed by an exploration of available open access data sources pertaining to the three data types along 
with popular open-source DL tools applicable to these data. Also, comparative investigations of these tools from qualita -
tive, quantitative, and benchmarking perspectives are provided. Finally, some open research challenges in using DL to mine 
biological data are outlined and a number of possible future perspectives are put forward.
Keywords  Brain–Machine Interfaces · Bioimaging · Deep learning performance comparison · Medical imaging · Omics · 
Open access data sources · Open-source tools
Introduction
The pursuit of understanding human behaviours, along with 
the various pathologies, their early diagnosis and finding 
cures, has driven the life sciences research in the last two centuries [ 1]. This accelerated the development of cutting 
edge tools and technologies that allow scientists to study 
holistically the biological systems as well as dig down, in an 
unprecedented manner, to the molecular details of the living 
organisms [ 2, 3]. Increasing technological sophistication has 
presented scientists with novel tools for DNA sequencing 
[4], gene expression [ 5], bioimaging [ 6], neuroimaging [ 7], 
and body/brain–machine interfaces [ 8].
These innovative approaches to study living organisms 
produce huge amount of data [ 9] and create a situation 
often referred as ‘Data Deluge’ [ 10]. Depending on the tar -
get application and experimentation, these biological big 
data can be characterized by their inherent characteristics 
of being hierarchical  (i.e. data coming from different levels 
of a biological system—from molecules to cells to tissues 
to systems), heterogeneous  (i.e. data acquired by different 
acquisition methods—from genetics to physiology to pathol -
ogy to imaging), dynamic  (i.e. data changes as a function of 
time), and complex  (i.e. data describing nonlinear biological 
processes) [ 11]. These intrinsic characteristics of biologi -
cal big data posed an enormous challenge to data scientists 
to identify patterns and analyse them to infer meaningful M. Mahmud and M.S. Kaiser are joint first authors.
 * Mufti Mahmud 
 mufti.mahmud@ntu.ac.uk; muftimahmud@gmail.com
 * M. Shamim Kaiser 
 mskaiser@juniv.edu
1 Department of Computer Science, Nottingham Trent 
University, Clifton, NG11 8NS Nottingham, UK
2 Institute of Information Technology, Jahangirnagar 
University, Savar 1342 Dhaka, Bangladesh
3 Intelligent Systems Research Centre, Ulster University, 
Northern Ireland BT48 7JL Derry, UK
4 School of Computing , Edinburgh, EH11 4BN Edinburgh, 
UK
5 Medical Technology Innovation Facility, Nottingham Trent 
University, NG11 8NS Clifton, Nottingham, UKCognitive Computation (2021) 13:1–33
/ Published online: 5 January 2021