1 3data of proteins, nucleic acids, and complex assemblies. 
These can be used to understand all aspects of biomedicine 
and agriculture.
Structural classification of proteins (SCOP) is a reposi -
tory which hosts manually classified protein structure 
datasets. The classification was done based on amino acid 
sequences and their structural similarity. The main objec -
tive is to find the evolutionary relationship between the 
proteins. Currently two versions of SCOP are maintained. 
The SCOP Version 2 (SCOP2) [ 239] is the up-to-date SCOP 
database released at the first quarter of 2020. In contrast, 
the SCOP-extended (SCOPe) [ 240] is an extended version 
of the original SCOP maintained by UC Berkeley. SCOPe 
includes many new classified protein structures via a fusion 
of manual and automation curation.
Molecular Biology Databases at the UCI (UCI MB) contain 
three individual databases: i) Secondary Protein Structure [ 241], 
which is a bench repository that classifies secondary structure of 
certain globular proteins; ii) Splice–Junction Gene Sequences 
[250], which contain primate splice–junction gene sequences 
(DNA) with associated imperfect domain theory; and iii) Pro -
moter Gene Sequences [ 251], which contain E. coli promoter 
gene sequences (DNA) with partial domain theory. Objectives 
include i) sequencing and predicting the secondary structure 
of certain proteins; ii) studying primate splice–junction gene 
sequences (DNA) with associated imperfect domain theory; iii) 
studying E. Coli promoter gene sequences (DNA) with partial 
domain theory.
Signal Transduction Pathway Study
The NCI–Nature Pathway Interaction Database [ 242] hosts 
cellular signalling (molecular interactions/reactions) pathways 
in humans. The database can be employed for cancer research. 
The database was created by the U.S. National Cancer Institute, 
NIH, with the collaboration of Nature Publishing Group and 
published in the last quarter of 2006. Another database, NetPath 
[243], also contains signal transduction pathways in humans. 
Created jointly by Johns Hopkins University and the Institute 
of Bioinformatics (IOB) in India; it includes 45 signalling path -
way ranging from protein–protein interactions to enzyme–pro -
tein substrate reactions including 10 major pathway of immune 
system and 10 pathway relevant to cancer regulation. The other 
one, Reactome [ 244], is an open access database hosting biologi -
cal pathways of metabolic processes to hormonal signalling in 
humans. Created through a collaboration between North Amer -
ica and Europe, it can be used for cancer research and treatment.
Single‑cell Omics
The miRBoost dataset [ 245] contains the genomes of eukar -
yotes containing at least 100 miRNAs. This dataset is used 
for studying post-transcriptional gene regulation (PTGeR) and miRNA-related pathology. Saccharomyces Genome 
Database (SGD) [ 246] also provides complete biological 
information for the budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevi -
siae. They also give an open-source tool for searching and 
analysing these data and thereby enable the discovery of 
functional relationships between sequence and gene products 
in fungi and higher organisms. The study of genome expres -
sion, transcriptome, and computational biology is the main 
function of the SGD.
Open‑Source Deep Learning Tools
Due to surging interest and concurrent multidiscipli -
nary efforts towards DL in the recent years, several 
open-source libraries, frameworks, and platforms have 
been made available to the community. However, for 
a new user of these tools to mine biological data, it is 
not always straightforward to know their characteris -
tics, advantages, and disadvantages. In this process, one 
of the main hurdles for a new analyst is to select the 
appropriate DL architecture/model and relevant library 
providing suitable implementations of the selected archi -
tecture. Towards introducing a beginner to the field of 
biological data analysis using these open-source tools, 
this section describes the tools in a tutorial style indi -
cating their characteristics, pros, and cons. The focus 
of the section has been to review and summarize the 
most popular open-source tools, which aim to facilitate 
the technological developments for the community. This 
comprehensive collection contains tools (also developed 
by individuals) which are well maintained with a rea -
sonable amount of implemented algorithms (i.e., deep 
learning architectures). For the sake of brevity, the indi -
vidual publication references of the tools are omitted and 
interested readers may consult them at their respective 
websites from the provided URLs.
Table  7 summarizes the main features and differences of 
the various tools. To measure the impact and acceptability of 
a tool in the community, we provide GitHub-based measures 
such as numbers of Stars, Forks, and Contributors. These 
numbers are indicative of the popularity, maturity, and dif -
fusion of a tool in the community.
Caffe
Caffe ( http://caffe  .berke  leyvi  sion.org/ ) is scalable, written in 
C++ and provides bindings for Python as well as MATLAB. 
Dedicated for experiment, training, and deploying gen -
eral purpose DL models, this framework allows switching 
between development and deployment platforms. Targeting 
computer vision applications, it is considered as the fastest 
implementation of the CNN.Cognitive Computation (2021) 13:1–33 17