1 3Motor Imagery Classification
Motor imagery (MI) is yet another very active area of 
research. As an outcome of a large number of community 
contributors, many datasets have been developed from 
which the popular ones are described below.
The electroencephalographic brain–computer interface 
mental imagery (EEG-BCI-MI) [ 207] dataset contains 60 
hours of EEG recording from 13 subjects and 75 experi -
ments. This contains around 60,000 mental imagery exam -
ples which is approximately 4.8 hours of EEG recordings 
(with 4600 MI examples) per participant. The datasets can 
be used for the rehabilitation of patients having move -
ment disorders. Another EEG dataset for MI brain–com -
puter interface (EEG-MI-BCI) [ 208] contains EEG signals 
with 3-D electrode location and EEG for non-task-related 
states as well. The dataset was recorded from 52 partici -
pants which also contains [physio/psyco]logical data and 
EMG signals in addition to the EEG. The dataset can be 
employed to find the human factors which influence MI 
BCI performances. Yet another EEG signal centric data -
set is called EEG motor movement/imagery (EEG-MMI) 
dataset [ 209] and incorporates 1500 (1–2 minutes) EEG 
recordings taken from 109 volunteers. The dataset can be 
used in designing BCI systems for rehabilitation purposes.
Neurological Condition Evaluation
A number of visual P300-based datasets are available with 
open-access attributes to perform a range of neurological 
condition evaluation. These datasets, V-P300 BCI, are com -
posed of data recorded using dry or wet electrode with 16 
or 32 channels while the subjects were playing the Brain 
Invaders game [ 219]. These datasets were recorded using 
different playing modalities such as single player (16 dry 
electrodes [ 210] from 71 subjects and 32 wet electrodes 
[211] from 50 subjects), multiplayer in collaborative mode 
(32 wet electrodes from 38 subjects [ 212]), and multiplayer 
cooperation and competition mode (32 wet electrodes from 
44 subjects [ 213]).
Signal Processing and Classification
To solve various signal processing and classification prob -
lems, a number of datasets have been made available under 
open-access. Most of these problems are released to the 
community in the form of challenges with relevant datasets 
to solve them. The competitions during the BCI meetings 
have served this purpose for several years and have released 
datasets (the BCI competition datasets [ 214]) which are still 
available with relevant problem statements and sample codes 
for others to use. The challenge dataset provided by the IEEE 
Neural Engineering Conference (NER2015) is known as BCI-NER dataset [ 215]. This dataset was mainly intended 
for methodological development of an error detection algo -
rithm suitable for the P300-based BCI systems. The BCI 
competition datasets include EEG datasets (e.g., cortical 
negativity or positivity, feedback test trials, self-paced key 
typing, P300 speller paradigm, motor/mental imagery data, 
continuous EEG, EEG with eye movement), ECoG datasets 
(e.g., finger movement, motor/mental imagery signals in the 
form of EEG/ECoG), and MEG dataset (e.g., wrist move -
ment). These datasets can be used for signal processing and 
classification methods for BMI. Similarly, the BCI-NER 
Challenge [ 215] dataset provides 56-channel EEG signals 
from 26 subjects using a P300 speller.
In addition to the datasets released for challenges and 
competitions, there are repositories which provide rich data -
sets for this application area. The DRYAD [ 216] is a versa -
tile repository which has been recently unveiled. It contains 
a range of EEG recorded datasets when 19 subjects listen to 
natural speech time-reversed speech, cocktail party atten -
tion, and noisy audiovisual speech. The PhysioNet reposi -
tory [ 217] contains a large number of neuroelectric and 
myoelectric datasets. As the name suggests, it is mainly for 
physiological data. These datasets mainly pertain to signals 
such as EEG, ECoG, EMG, and ECG and are acquired from 
many diverse experimental settings. The UCI ML repository 
[218] contains a large number of diverse datasets with direct 
application to machine learning methods. Some relevant 
biosignal datasets include ECG, EEG, and (s)EMG signals 
from diverse experimental and physiological conditions.
Sequences
Table  6 lists the leading popular open access data sources 
pertaining to the various omics-related researches which 
include genomics, proteomics, and metabolomics. Grouped 
to six broad application areas, namely, bioassay analysis and 
drug design, genetic disorder analysis, nucleic acid research, 
protein structure analysis, signal transduction pathway study, 
and single-cell omics, the following subsections provide 
brief discussions about the leading open access omics data 
sources.
Bioassay Analysis and Drug Design
Since December 2019, the world has experienced a pan -
demic caused by the SARS-CoV-2 (COVID-19) virus. Trig -
gered by the necessity to facilitate the ongoing researches, 
the SARS-CoV-2 [ 220] dataset provides gene sequence, pro -
teins, pathway, and bioassay for SARS-CoV-2 along with 
compounds used in clinical trials. This dataset can be used 
for studying biological/chemical process and drug design.Cognitive Computation (2021) 13:1–33 15