1 3
data repositories; Section  5 presents the popular open-source 
DL tools; and Sections  6 and 7 compare the most popular 
tools from relative and performance perspectives. Section  8 
presents the reader with some of the open issues and hints on 
the future perspectives, and finally, the article is concluded 
in Section  9.
Overview of Deep Learning
In DL the data representations are learned with increasing 
abstraction levels, i.e., at each level more abstract represen -
tations are learned by defining them in terms of less abstract 
representations at lower levels [ 62]. Through this hierarchi -
cal learning process, a system can learn complex representa -
tions directly from the raw data [ 63].
Though many DL architectures have been proposed in 
the literature for various applications, there has been a con -
sistent preference to use particular variants for biological 
data. As shown in Fig.  2, the most popular models have been 
identified as—Deep Neural Network (DNN), Deep Boltz -
mann Machine (DBM) and Deep Belief Network (DBN), 
Deep Autoencoder (DA), Generative Adversarial Network 
(GAN), Recurrent Neural Network (RNN, including LSTM), 
and Convolutional Neural Network (CNN). Each of these 
models’ architectures and their respective pros and cons are 
listed in Table  1. The following subsections introduce each 
of these most frequently used DL architectures in mining 
biological data.
Deep Neural Network (DNN)
A DNN [ 64] is inspired by the brain’s multilevel visual 
processing mechanism starting with the cortical area ‘V1’ 
and then to area ‘V2’, and so on [ 65]. Mimicking this, the 
traditional artificial neural network or NN is extended with 
additional hidden layers containing nonlinear computational 
units in each of these hidden layers to learn a subset of the 
given representations. Despite its successful usage in a range 
of different applications, the main drawback has been the 
slow and cumbersome training process [ 66].
[Restricted] Boltzmann Machines ([R]BM)
[R]BM represents specific probability distributions through 
a undirected probabilistic generative model [ 67]. Considered 
as a nonlinear feature detector, [R]BM is trained based on 
optimizing its parameters for a set of given observations 
to obtain the best possible fit of the probability distribu -
tion through a Markov chain Monte Carlo method known 
as Gibbs sampling [ 68, 69]. With symmetrical connections 
among subsequent units in multiple hidden layers, BM has 
only one visible layer. The main drawback of the standard BM is that, the learning process is computationally expen -
sive and quite slow. Due to this, a BM requires a long period 
to reach equilibrium statistics [ 62]. However, this learning 
inefficiency can be solved by forming a bipartite graph (i.e. 
restricting to have one hidden layer and one visible layer) 
[67]. To extend this shallow architecture to a deep one, mul -
tiple RBMs as unitary learning elements are stacked together 
and this yields the following two DL architectures.
Deep Boltzmann Machine (DBM)
DBM [ 70] is a stack of undirected RBMs which supports 
a feedback mechanism among the layers to facilitate infer -
ence from higher-level units to propagate to lower-level 
units. This allows an input to be alternatively interpreted 
through concurrent competition at all levels of the model. 
Despite this powerful inference mechanism, estimating 
model parameters from data remains a challenge and can -
not be solved using traditional gradient-based methods 
(e.g., persistent contrastive divergence [ 71]) [70]. Though 
this learning problem is overcome by pretraining each RBM 
in a layerwise greedy fashion, with outputs of the hidden 
variables from lower layers as input to upper layers [ 67], the 
time complexity remains high and the approach may not be 
suitable for large training datasets [ 72].
Deep Belief Network (DBN)
DBN [ 73], in contrast to the DBM, is formed by stacking 
several RBMs together in a way that one RBM’s latent layer 
is linked to the next RBM’s visible layer. As the top two 
layers of DBN are undirected, the connections are down -
ward directed to its immediate lower layer [ 73, 74]. Thus, the 
DBN is a hybrid model with the first two layers as a undi -
rected graphical model and the rest being directed generative 
model. The different layers are learned in a layerwise greedy 
fashion and fine-tuned based on required output [ 75]; how -
ever, the training procedure is computationally demanding.
Deep Autoencoder (DA)
DA is a DL architecture [ 76] obtained by stacking a num -
ber of data-driven Autoencoders which are unsupervised 
elements. DA is also known as DAE and is designed to 
reduce data dimension by automatically projecting incom -
ing representations to a lower-dimensional space than that 
of the input. In an Autoencoder, equal amounts of units 
are used in the input/output layers and less units in the 
hidden layers. (Non)linear transformations are embodied 
in the hidden layer units to encode the given input into 
smaller dimensions [ 77]. Despite the fact that it requires 
a pretraining stage and suffers from a vanishing error, this 
architecture is popular for its data compression capability Cognitive Computation (2021) 13:1–33 4