1 3
evaluation, and signal processing and classification—which 
are described in the following subsections.
Anomaly Detection
Anomaly detection is one of the major application areas in 
which scientists have devoted much efforts. In this process, a 
number of open access data sources, largely containing EEG 
and ECG data, have been frequently used.
Starting with the EEG signals, the SAD mc-EEG [ 193] 
dataset contains 32 channel EEG signals from 27 subjects 
recorded while they were test-driving. That is, signals were 
acquired when each subject attended two 90-minute virtual 
reality session for sustained-attention driving.
The TUH EEG corpus [ 194] is also an open-source clin -
ical EEG data repository for clinical EEG data, tool and 
documentation. The major datasets include seizure detec -
tion, abnormal EEG, EEG with artifacts (introduced by eye 
movement, chewing, shivering, electrode pop, electrode 
static, and lead artifacts, and muscle artifacts), EEG for epi -
lepsy, etc.
Regarding the ECG signals, the MIT-BIH arrhythmia 
[195] arrhythmia database includes 2-channel ambulatory 
ECG recording taken from 47 subjects for studying arrhyth -
mia. There are 48 complete ECG recordings and about 24 
recordings are freely available. The PTB diagnostic ECG 
database [ 196] comprises 549 ECG recordings taken from 
290 subjects of age ranged from 17 to 87 years using con -
ventional 12 leads and 3 Frank lead ECG recorder. Each 
recording includes 15 signals coming from these leads and 
each subject was represented in 1 to 5 records. Both the data -
sets can be used for anomaly detection. Another ECG data -
set, the TELE-ECG dataset [ 197] includes 250 ECG records 
with annotated QRS and artifact masks. It also includes QRS 
and artifact detection algorithms to study QRS and detect 
artifacts from ECG signals.
Human–Machine Interfacing
The application area of Human–Machine Interfacing focuses 
on [body and brain]–machine interfacing and rehabilitation. 
This is done largely through Electromyography (EMG) and 
sometimes with EEG signals.
The BNCI Horizon 2020 database contains more than 25 
datasets such as stimulated EEG datasets, Electrocorticog -
raphy (ECoG)-based BCI datasets, Event Related Potential 
(ERP)-based BCI datasets, mental arithmetic, motor imagery 
(extracted from EEG, EOG, fNIRS, EMG) datasets, EEG/
EOG datasets of neuroprosthetic control, speller datasets. 
Modelling and designing of BMI devices are the key appli -
cation of this database. While the BNCI contains a variety of 
signals, the EMG Datasets Repository [ 199] includes single/multifinger movements datasets of 2 channels, 10 classes 
and 8 channels, 15 classes; single-/multifinger pressure on a 
steering wheel; EMG controlled multifunctional upper-limb 
prostheses and EMG pattern recognition datasets.
For surface EMG (sEMG), the facial sEMG dataset 
contains facial sEMG signals from the muscles corrugator 
supercilii, zygomaticus major, orbicularis oris, orbicularis 
oculi, and masseter. Archived data are from 15 participants 
(8 females and 7 males) aged between 26 and 57 years (mean 
age 40.7±9.6 years). These data can be used for rehabilita -
tion research. Also, the NinaPro database includes kinematic 
as well as sEMG data of 27 subjects, while these subjects 
were moving finger, hand, and wrist. These data can be 
employed to study biorobotics and activity detection.
Emotion/Affective State Detection
Emotion and affective state detection has been a very active 
research field over the years. A combination of different 
signals has been utilized in detecting emotion and affective 
states, and a number of data sources providing these signals 
are described below.
A Database for Emotion Analysis using Physiological 
Signals (DEAP) provides various datasets for analysing the 
human affective states. It provides EEG and sEMG signals 
of 32 volunteers, while they were watching music videos 
to analyse the affective states. These volunteers also rated 
the video, and the front face was also recorded for 22 vol -
unteers. DECAF is a multimodal dataset for decoding user 
physiological responses to affective multimedia content. It 
contains magnetoencephalogram (MEG), horizontal elec -
trooculogram (hEOG), ECG, trapezius muscle EMG, and 
near-infrared face video data to study physiological and 
mental states. Another multimodal dataset is the MAH -
NOB-HCI [ 205] dataset which includes ECG, respiration, 
and skin temperature data in addition to 32-channel EEG 
signals from 30 subjects, while they were watching movie 
clips and photos. The different sensors were synchronized 
to record a synchronized multimodal dataset. The subjects 
were asked to label their own emotion state.
On the other hand, the Imagined Emotion [ 204] dataset 
provides EEG signals recorded when subjects were listen -
ing to voice recording. The SJTU Emotion EEG Dataset 
[206] contains three individual datasets (SEED, SEED-IV 
and SEED-VIG) of EEG signals. In the SEED dataset EEG 
signals were recorded, while the subjects were watching 
movie clips and annotated their emotional state as positive, 
negative and neural. In case of SEED-IV, four emotional 
states such as happy, sad, fear, and neutral were anno -
tated, whereas the SEED-VIG dataset contains EEG sig -
nals related to vigilance when the subjects were driving.Cognitive Computation (2021) 13:1–33 14