1 3
[268]. Moreover, like many other ML techniques, DL is also 
susceptible to misclassification [ 269] and overclassification 
[270].
Additionally, the ability to exploit the full benefits offered 
by open access data repositories, in terms of data sharing 
and reuse, is often hampered by the lack of unified reporting 
data standards and non-uniformity of reported information 
[271]. Data provenance, curation, and annotation of these 
biological big data are huge challenges too [ 272].
Furthermore, except for very few large enterprises, the 
power of distributed and parallel computation through 
cloud computing remains largely unexplored for the DL 
techniques. Due to the fact that the DL techniques require 
retraining for different datasets, repeated training becomes 
a bottleneck for cloud computing environments. Also, in 
such distributed environments, data privacy and security 
concerns are still prevailing [ 273], and real-time process -
ing capability of experimental data is underdeveloped 
[274].
To mitigate the shortcomings and address the open issues, 
the existing theoretical foundations of the DL methods need 
to be improved. The DL models are required not only to be 
able to describe specific data but also generalize them on 
the basis of experimental data which is crucial to quantify 
the performances of individual NN models [ 275]. These 
improvements should take place in several directions and 
address issues like quantitative assessment of individual 
model’s learning efficiency and associated computational 
complexity in relation to well-defined parameter tuning 
strategies, the ability to generalize and topologically self-
organize based on data-driven properties. Also, to facilitate 
intuitive and less cumbersome interpretation of the analysis 
results, novel tools for data visualization should be incorpo -
rated in the DL frameworks.
Recent developments in combined methods pertaining 
to deep reinforcement learning (deep RL) have been popu -
larly applied to many application domains (for a review on 
deep RL, see [ 276]). However, deep RL methods have not 
yet been applied to biological pattern recognition problems. 
For example, analysing and aggregating dynamically chang -
ing patterns in biological data coming from multiple levels 
could help to remove data redundancy and discover novel 
biomarkers for disease detection and prevention. Also, novel 
deep RL methods are needed to reduce the currently required 
large set of labelled training data.
Renewing efforts are required for standardization, anno -
tation, curation, and provenance of data and their sources 
along with ensuring uniformity of information among the 
different repositories. Additionally, to keep up with the rap -
idly growing big data, powerful and secure computational 
infrastructures in terms of distributed, cloud, and parallel 
computing tailored to such well-understood learning mecha -
nisms are badly needed. Lastly, there are many other popular DL tools (e.g., Keras, Chainer, Lasagne) and architectures 
(e.g., DBN) which need to be benchmarked providing the 
users with a more comprehensive list to choose. Also, the 
currently available benchmarks are mostly performed on 
non-biological data, and their scalability to biological data 
is poor; thus, specialized benchmarking on biological data 
are needed.
In order to derive insights from an image, a sequence or 
a signal analysis problem, a selected DL algorithm using a 
library or a tool (e.g., TensorFlow, Keras, PyTorch, etc.) may 
need to integrate with a big data framework (e.g., Hadoop, 
Spark, etc.). In such cases, troubleshooting in the model and 
debugging the code may be very challenging for the system 
designer due to the parallel execution of multiple threads 
which may not always execute in an orderly fashion. The 
lack of documentation and model transparency of these 
libraries may make it impossible for the project manager 
to estimate efforts required in successful completion of a 
project.
Conclusion
The diverse biological data coming from different applica -
tion domains are multimodal, multidimensional, and com -
plex in nature. At present, a huge amount of such data is 
publicly available. The affordable access to these data came 
with a huge challenge to analyse and recognize patterns in 
them which require sophisticated ML tools to do the job. As 
a result, many ML-based analytical tools have been devel -
oped and reported over the last decades and this process has 
been facilitated greatly by the decrease of computational 
costs, increase of computing power, and availability of 
cheap storage. With the help of these learning techniques, 
machines have been trained to understand and decipher 
complex patterns and interactions of variables in biological 
data. To facilitate a wider dissemination of DL techniques 
applied to biological data and serve as a reference point, 
this article provides a comprehensive survey of the literature 
on those techniques’ application on biological data and the 
relevant open-access data repositories. It also lists existing 
open-source tools and frameworks implementing various 
DL methods and compares these tools for their popularity 
and performance. Finally, it concludes by pointing out some 
open issues and proposing some future perspectives.
Acknowledgements  The authors would like to thank the members of 
the acslab ( http://www.acsla  b.info/ ) for valuable discussions.
Author Contributions  This work was carried out in close collaboration 
among all authors. M.M. and M.S.K. conceived the idea, developed 
the method and experiments, analysed the obtained data, and wrote the 
manuscript. T.M.M and A.H. edited the manuscript. All authors have 
contributed to, seen, and approved the paper.Cognitive Computation (2021) 13:1–33 26