1 3
The PubChem database [ 221] contains millions of com -
pound structures and descriptive datasets of chemical mol -
ecules and their activities against biological assays. Main -
tained by the National Center for Biotechnology Information 
of the United States National Institutes of Health, it can be 
freely accessed through a web user interface and down -
loaded via FTP. It also contains software services (such as 
plotting and clustering). It can be used for [gen/prote]-omics 
study and drug design.
Genetic Disorder Analysis
The cancer gene expression (GE) [ 222] serves as a small 
repository containing several cancer GE datasets which can 
be employed for designing tool/algorithm for cancer detec -
tion. The cancer genome atlas (TCGA) [ 224] repository 
contains more than 2.5 petabytes of genomic, epigenomic, 
transcriptomic, and proteomic data. It contains data about 
33 different cancer types and over 20,000 samples. These 
data are generated by the National Cancer Institute and the 
National Human Genome Research Institute. This reposi -
tory is used in facilitating genomic study for improving the 
prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of cancer. To analyse 
region-specific diseases, the Indian Genetic Disease Data -
base (IGDD) [ 223] tracks mutations in the normal genes for 
genetic diseases reported in India.
Nucleic Acid Research
The Berkeley Drosophila Transcription Network Project 
(BDTNP) [ 225] database contains datasets pertaining to 3D 
Gene expression data, in vivo and in vitro DNA-binding data 
as well as Chromatin Accessibility data (ChAcD). Research 
on GE and anomaly detection is the key application of the 
datasets provided by this database.
The Encyclopedia of DNA Elements (ENCODE) [ 226] 
is a whole-genome database curated by the ENCODE Con -
sortium. It contains a large number of datasets pertaining 
to functional genomics and characterization data including 
meta-data of human, worm, mouse, and fly. Another data -
base, called the Exome Sequencing Project (ESP) [ 227], 
includes genome datasets which can be used to find lung and 
blood disorders and their management and treatment. The 
Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) [ 228] is an open-access 
functional genomics (microarray and sequence) data reposi -
tory. This database can be used for functional genomic and 
epigenomic studies such as genome methylation, chromatin 
structure, and genome–protein interactions. It is supported 
by the National Center for Biotechnology Information at 
the National Library of Medicine of the USA [ 228]. The 
Genome Aggregation Database (gnomAD) [ 229] database 
contains large-scale exome and genome sequencing data from different sequencing projects. The dataset can be used 
for disease diagnosis and genetic studies. The Genotype-
Tissue Expression (GTEx) [ 230] database contains GE data -
sets of 54 healthy tissue sites collected from 1000 subjects 
and histology images. It also includes samples from GTEx 
biobank.
The Harmonizome [ 231] database provides details about 
genes and proteins from 114 datasets provided by 66 online 
resources with 71927784 associations between 295496 
attributes and 56720 genes. The International Nucleotide 
Sequence Database [ 232], popularly known as INSDC, cor -
roborates biological data from three major sources: i) DNA 
Databank of Japan [ 247], ii) European Nucleotide Archive 
[248], and iii) GenBank [ 249]. These sources provide the 
spectrum of data raw reads, though alignments, and assem -
blies to functional annotation, enriched with contextual 
information relating to samples and experimental configu -
rations. Similar to this, the International Genome Sample 
Resource (IGSR) [ 233] includes genome sequencing data 
from 1000 genomes project. The genome data was taken 
from people of various ethnicities, age, and sex with the final 
dataset contains gene sequencing data from 2,504 individu -
als from 26 populations. These data can be used for disease 
diagnosis and genetic studies. Also, the SysGenSim [ 237] 
database includes bioinformatics tool, and Pula-Magdeburg 
single-gene knockout, StatSeq, and DREAM 5 benchmark 
datasets for studying Gene Sequence.
JASPAR [ 234] is a database for transcription factor 
DNA-binding profile. The data spans through six different 
taxonomic groups covering Vertebrata, Nematoda, Insecta, 
Plantae, Fungi, and Urochordata. The database can be used 
for translational genomics research.
The NIH Roadmap Epigenomics Mapping repository 
(NIHREM) [ 235] includes 2,804 datasets, i.e., 1,821 his -
tone modification, 360 DNase, 277 DNA methylation, 
and 166 RNA-Seq datasets. The repository provides 
3,174-fold 150.21 billion mapped sequencing the human 
and tools for analysing these datasets. It can be used 
for stem cell mapping and selection of tissues that are 
responsible for human disease. Also, the database known 
as Nature scientific data (NSD) [ 236] includes datasets 
pertaining to omics, taxonomy and species diversity, 
mathematical and modelling resources, cytometry, organ -
ism-focused resources, and health science data. This can 
be used for studying and modelling different aspects of 
genomics.
Protein Structure Analysis
The Protein Data Bank (PDB) [ 238] contains 3D structural 
data proteins and nucleic acids. These data are obtained tools 
such as X-ray crystallography, NMR spectroscopy, and cryo-
electron microscopy. It includes more than 135 thousand Cognitive Computation (2021) 13:1–33 16