M. Tanveer et al. 15
algorithm, authors presented a hybrid re-sampling technique which utilizes the
one side selection (OSS) algorithm and synthetic minority oversampling tech-
nique (SMOTE) algorithm to balance the training data. This is combined with
TWSVM for classication purpose. However, SMOTE algorithm based on K-
nearest neighbors can often result in over-tting. Robust rescaled hinge loss
TWSVM [117] and density weighted TWSVM [118] for imbalanced datasets
resulted in improved performance.
Encouraged by the performance of -TWSVM [56] and U-TWSVM [112],
Xu et al. [119] in 2016 proposed -TWSVM for universum data classication
(U-TWSVM). It is more 
exible in using the prior knowledge from universum
data to improve the generalization ability. It uses two hinge loss functions
so that data can remain in a nonparallel insensitive loss tube. Experimental
results have shown that U-TWSVM has better accuracy and also costs lower
running time than other baseline algorithms.
In 2017, Xu [120] proposed maximum margin twin spheres SVM algorithm
(MMTSSVM) to overcome many limitations of TWSVM while dealing with
imbalanced data. This algorithm seeks to determine two homocentric spheres
so that smaller one captures as many positive class samples and the larger
one repel negative samples simultaneously increases the margin between the
spheres.
In 2018, Richhariya et al. [121] added a regularization term into the opti-
mization problem of universum TWSVM to make matrices non-singular and
improve the generalization performance. The proposed algorithm is called
improved universum TWSVM. It has better generalization and training time
than USVM and UTWSVM. In 2019, Richhariya and Tanveer [122] proposed
a fuzzy universum SVM (FUSVM) based on information entropy. Universum
support vector machines are more ecient than other SVM methods as it
includes prior information of samples. But, it is not eective in case of noise-
corrupted datasets. FUSVM introduces weights such that it gives fewer weights
to the outlier universum points. Further, the authors proposed a fuzzy univer-
sum TWSVM (FUTWSVM). Both the algorithms have better generalization
performance than SVM, USVM, TWSVM, and UTWSVM. Recently, Rich-
hariya and Tanveer [123] proposed a reduced universum twin support vector
machine for class imbalance learning (RUTWSVM-CIL) with the idea of prior
information about the data distribution. RUTWSVM-CIL used reduced kernel
matrix, and thus applicable for the large sized imbalanced datasets. Numerical
experiments on several imbalanced benchmark datasets showed the applicabil-
ity of RUTWSVM-CIL. In 2020, Richhariya and Tanveer [124] also proposed
a novel parametric model for universum based twin support vector machine
and extended its application for the classication of Alzheimer's disease data.
Fuzzy universum least squares TWSVM [125, 126] and fuzzy least squares
TWSVM [127, 128] solved a linear system of equations instead of solving the
QPPs, hence, the model is fast and requires no external toolbox for solving the
optimization problems. Robust TBSVM [129] is proposed to make the model
more robust to noise in imbalance datasets.