M. Tanveer et al. 31
Although taking motivation from TWSVM formulation, Peng [36]
attempted to propose TSVR where the regressor is obtained via solving a pair
of quadratic programming problems (QPPs). However, later authors in [37]
argued that TSVR formulation is not in the true spirit of TWSVM. Further,
taking the motivation from Bi and Bennett [271], they proposed an alterna-
tive approach to nd a formulation for TSVR which is in the true spirit of
TWSVM. They have shown that their proposed TSVR formulation can be
derived from TWSVM for an appropriately constructed classication problem.
6 Research progress on Twin Support Vector
Regression
In this section, we discuss the progress of twin SVM based models for the
regression problems.
6.1 Weighted Twin Support Vector Regression
Xu and Wang [272] introduced weighted TSVR which gives dierent weights
to samples and have dierent in
uence over bound functions. Computational
results have demonstrated that this algorithm avoids over-tting and also
yields good generalization ability. The authors [196] also proposed Knearest
neighbor based weighted TSVR (KNNWTSVR) which gives dierent penal-
ties to the samples based on their local information on number of K-nearest
neighbors. The weights are assigns based on number of K-nearest neigh-
bors. KNNWTSVR has better accuracy but similar computational complexity
as its optimization is similar to TSVR. However, the above algorithm only
implements empirical risk minimization and suer from the inverse of posi-
tive semi-denite matrices. To overcome these limitations, Tanveer et al. [273]
introduced an ecient regularized KNNWTSVR (RKNNWTSVR) algorithm
to make it strongly convex. RKNNWTSVR leads to better generalization
and robust solution. Computational cost is also reduced as it only deals with
linear equations. To overcome noise sensitivity in TSVR, Ye et al. [274] intro-
duced weighted matrix in Lagrangian twin support vector regression. It uses
quadratic loss functions and provides dierent weights to samples through
weighted matrix. It obtains better generalization and also has less training
time than TSVR and -TSVR models.
6.2 Projection Twin Support Vector Regression
TSVR [36] and twin parametric insensitive SVR [275] have obtained better
generalization performance than classical SVR but both these algorithms only
implement empirical risk minimization and do not include any prior informa-
tion about the data samples which can lead to noise sensitivity. Thus, Peng et
al. [276] proposed an ecient twin projection SVR (TPSVR) algorithm which
exploits the prior structural information of data into the learning process. It
seeks two projection axes such that projected points have as small as possible