M. Tanveer et al. 13
two classes. This leads to noise insensitivity and as well as re-sampling sta-
bility. Pin-TWSVM has excellent capability to handle noise which makes the
model a more robust classier but little attention is given on sparsity due
to which the testing time is high and there is instability in re-sampling. Xu
et al. [100] also formulated a maximum margin and minimum volume hyper-
spheres with pinball loss (Pin- M3HM). Authors proposed this algorithm to
enhance the generalization of twin hypersphere SVM (TH-SVM) for noise
present in datasets. The algorithm classies samples of two classes by a pair
of hyper-spheres, each containing either majority or the minority class sam-
ples simultaneously maintaining maximum margin between the hyperplanes.
Pin-M3HM is fast and has better accuracy than TWSVM. In 2018, Sharma
and Rastogi [101] proposed two models called -Pin-TWSVM and Flex-Pin-
TWSVM.-Pin-TWSVM introduces parameter to reduce the impact of noise
and to attain a sparse solution while Flex-Pin-TWSVM uses a self-optimized
framework which makes this algorithm 
exible to estimate the size of insen-
sitive zone. It adapts to the structure of data. Pin-TPMSVM has impressive
ability to handle noise but to reduce parameter tuning time, Yang et al. [102]
in 2018 introduced a new solution approach for the TPMSVM in which one
instance is considered at a time and it is solved analytically without solving
optimization problem. It is fast, simple and 
exible. Since pinball loss func-
tion is not dierentiable at zero, hence, smooth pinball loss TWSVM [103]
used smooth approximation function and solved the objective functions via
Newton-Armijo method.
For imbalanced data classication in 2018, Xu et al. [104] proposed a
maximum margin twin spheres which uses pinball loss. This algorithm nds
homocentric spheres so that the smaller one captures positive class samples
and the larger one repel negative samples. It requires to solve a QPP and a
Linear programming (LP) problem. This algorithm has good generalization
performance and noise insensitivity, however, suers due to large complexity.
To reduce the complexity, bound estimation-based safe acceleration for maxi-
mum margin of twin spheres machine with pinball loss [105] was proposed. In
2019, Sharma et al. [106] proposed a Stochastic Quasi-Netwon method based
TPSVM using Pinball Loss Function (SQN-PTWSVM) which can scale the
training process to handle millions of data points while simultaneously deals
with noise and re-sampling data issues. Twin neural networks [107] uses fea-
ture maps which allows better discrimination among classes. The twin neural
network is also extended to multiclass problems wherein the number of neural
networks trained is proportional to number of classes.
The aforementioned pinball loss TWSVM algorithms are based on
TPMSVM and not on the original TWSVM algorithms. In 2019, Tanveer
et al. [108] introduced pinball loss to the original TWSVM, termed as gen-
eral TWSVM with pinball loss (Pin-GTSVM). Pin-GTSVM [108, 109] is less
sensitive to the outliers and more stable algorithm for re-sampling as com-
pared to the original TWSVM. To retain the sparsity of original TWSVM
and Pin-GTSVM, Tanveer et al. [94] proposed a novel sparse pinball TWSVM