14 M. Tanveer et al.
(SP-TWSVM) which uses -insensitive zone pinball loss function. SP-TWSVM
has better classication accuracy than TWSVM and Sparse Pin SVM and
it is insensitive to outliers, retains sparseness and suitable for re-sampling.
Recently, Tanveer et al. [110] proposed improved sparse pinball TWSVM
(ISPTWSVM) by adding a regularization term to the objective function of
SP-TWSVM. ISPTWSVM implements SRM principle and also the matrices
appear in the dual formulation are positive denite which makes the proposed
algorithm computationally less complex and it also achieves better accuracy
than other baseline algorithms. Most of the twin SVM based models involve
matrix inversion operations which limits their applicability to large scale data.
Hence, large scale pinball TWSVM [111] uses pinball loss function to reduce
the issues of feature noise and reformulated the Lagrangian in a manner that
matrix inversions are no longer involved in the optimization problems. This
scaled the model to large scale data.
3.6 Twin Support Vector Machine for Universum Data
and Imbalanced Datasets
In 2012, Qi et al. [112] formulated TWSVM for universum data classica-
tion (U-TWSVM). Universum data is dened as the data samples which does
not belong to any given class. This algorithm utilizes the universum data to
enhance TWSVM classication accuracy. U-TWSVM employs new data points
to the either class based on its proximity to the hyperplanes. Experimental
results have shown that U-TWSVM has better accuracy than TWSVM. In
order to construct a robust classier by including the prior information embed-
ded in the universum samples in 2014, Qi et al. [113] formulated nonparallel
SVM (U-NSVM) which maximizes the two margins related to the two nearest
adjacent classes.
As many real life problems consists of datasets which are imbalanced in
nature i.e. classes do not contain same number of data samples, due to which
many machine learning algorithms cannot be implemented. Thus, to enhance
the performance of TWSVM while dealing with imbalanced datasets, in 2014
Shao et al. [114] proposed weighted Lagrangian TWSVM for imbalanced data
classication. Authors introduced a quadratic loss function to the formula-
tion of TWSVM which enabled faster training of data points. Also, this is
more robust to outliers and has better computational speed and accuracy
than TWSVM. In 2014, Tomar et al. [52] proposed weighted LS-TWSVM for
imbalanced datasets by adjusting the classier and assigning distinct weight
to training samples. The results of the experiment shows that its accuracy is
more than SVM, TWSVM, and LS-TWSVM. Furthermore, in 2015, Xu et al.
[115] formulated least squares TWSVM (ULS-TWSVM) which exploits the
universum data. It introduces a regularization term thus implements SRM
principle and is computationally less complex as it requires to solve linear
equations in place of QPPs in TWSVM. Cao and Shen [116] proposed com-
bining re-sampling with TWSVM for imbalanced data classication. In this