6 M. Tanveer et al.
squares TWSVM (LS-TWSVM) algorithm. The major advantage of LS-
TWSVM over TWSVM is that it only deals with linear equations in place
of QPPs in TWSVM which reduces the computational complexity of the
model. LS-TWSVM has comparable accuracy but low computational time
than TWSVM. Although the computational time of LS-TWSVM is less than
TWSVM, its generalization performance is poor as same penalties are allotted
to the samples either being positive or negative. LS-TWSVM apply the empir-
ical risk minimization (ERM) principle which aects accuracy and also causes
over-tting problem. Also, it doesn't take into account the eects of samples
having dierent locations. To avoid this limitation, weighted LS-TWSVM [40]
gives dierent weights to the samples depending upon their locations. Exper-
imental results have shown that weighted LS-TWSVM yields better testing
accuracy than TWSVM and LS-TWSVM but its computationally time is more
than these algorithms.
To incorporate expert's knowledge in LS-TWSVM classier, knowledge-
based LS-TWSVM (KBLS-TWSVM) [41] included polyhedral knowledge sets
in the formulation of LS-TWSVM. Experimental results have shown that
KBLS-TWSVM is simple and more apt classier compared to LS-TWSVM. In
order to improve accuracy of LS-TWSVM, Wang et al. [42] incorporated the
manifold geometric structure of data of each class. It requires to solve a set of
linear equations.
Although, LS-TWSVM performed well with large datasets compared to
TWSVM, Gao et al. [43] designed l1-norm LS-TWSVM (NLS-TWSVM) to
automatically select the relevant features in order to strengthen the algo-
rithm in dealing with high-dimensional datasets. NLS-TWSVM is based on
LS-TWSVM and includes a Tikhonov regularization term. To outdo LS-
TWSVM in accuracy and avoid over-tting problem, Improved LS-TWSVM
(ILS-TWSVM) [44] improved the classication accuracy by implementing
structural risk minimization principle. ILS-TWSVM is faster and yields com-
parable generalization and computational time to LS-TWSVM. Since L2norm
magnies the outlier eect in least squares TWSVM models, hence, capped
L2;pnorm based least squares TWSVM [45] was formulated to reduce the
eect of outliers and noise.
To take advantage of the correlation between some data points and reduce
the eect of noise, Ye et al. [46] used density of the sample to allot weights for
each sample (DWLSC). Experimental results demonstrate better classication
accuracy of the DWLSC than TWSVM and LS-TWSVM.
There are several real-life problems which are essentially multicategory
problems. The extensions of TWSVM to multicategory is also an active
research domain where several research papers have evolved addressing the
same. However, class imbalance problem is common in multicategory classi-
cation as all binary SVMs are trained with all patterns. To deal with these
issues Nasiri et al. [47] formulated energy-based LS-TWSVM (ELS-TWSVM)
in which the constraints of LS-TWSVM are converted to an energy model to