32 M. Tanveer et al.
empirical variance values on the down-and up-bound functions. This algorithm
has better generalization and requires small number of support vectors. The
aforementioned models, use uniform weighting approach and assumes that all
the samples are equally important. However, this assumption may be wrong
due to outliers and noise. Hence, wavelet weighted projection TWSVM for
regression [277, 278] used wavelet based weights to reduce the eect of outliers.
6.3 Robust and Sparse Twin Support Vector Regression
Although TSVR has proven to be an eective classier with good generaliza-
tion ability, it is less robust due to the square of the 2-norm in the QPP of
TSVR. In 2012, Zhong et al. [279] improved TSVR by using 1-norm rather
than 2-norm distance in TSVR's QPP. It has less training time and better
generalization. Chen et al. [280] formulated smooth TSVR (STSVR) using
smooth function in order to make the QPP of TSVR positive denite to obtain
a unique global solution. Authors converted the QPPs to unconstrained mini-
mization problems (UMPs) and applied Newton method to solve it eectively.
All these algorithms still have high computational time due to quadratic or lin-
ear programming problems. To avoid this shortcoming, a least squares version
of TSVR (TLSSVR) was formulated by Zhao et al. [281] which leads to faster
computational speed as it only deals with set of linear equations. Authors also
proposed sparse TLSSVR.
In 2014, Chen et al. [282] introduced the regularization into the formula-
tion of TSVR and implemented l1-norm loss function to make it robust and
sparse simultaneously. Huang et al. [283] formulated a sparse version of least
square TSVR by introducing a regularization term to make it strongly convex
and also converted the primal problems to linear programming problems. This
leads to a sparse solution with signicantly less computational time. In 2017,
Tanveer [284] formulated 1-norm TSVR to improve robustness and sparsity
in original TSVR. 1-norm TSVR has better accuracy, generalization, and less
computational time than TSVR. In 2020, Singla et al. [285] proposed a novel
TSVR (Res-TSVR) which is robust and not sensitive to noise in data. The
optimization problem is non-convex with smooth l2regularizer and thus, to
solve it eciently, the authors converted it to a convex optimization problem.
Res-TSVR performed best as compared to other robust TSVR algorithms in
terms of robustness to noise and better generalization. Gu et al. [286] also
proposed a TSVR variant suitable to handle noise called fast clustering-based
weighted TSVR (FCWTSVR) which classify the samples into dierent cat-
egories based on their similarities and provides dierent weights to samples
located at dierent positions. The proposed algorithm performed better than
TSVR,"-TSVR, KNNWTSVR and WL- "-TSVR.-non parallel support vec-
tor regression [287] uses two -tubes for better alignment of hyperplanes and
to get the more robust upbound and down bound regressor. Robust huber
loss based twin SVR [288] which penalizes the large deviation samples linearly
and small error samples are squared. This results in robustness to noise and
outliers.