18 M. Tanveer et al.
limitations of constraints being over-restricted in TWSVM and thus reduces
the number of support vectors. But, it gives the same penalties to each misclas-
sied sample and results in over-tting. Thus, Xu et al. [149] in 2012 introduced
the rough set theory into -TWSVM to remediate this limitation. This algo-
rithm is more eective in avoiding over-tting as it gives dierent penalties
to dierent points depending upon location. It also has better generalization
than-TWSVM.
Although rough -TWSVM [149] performs better than -TWSVM, it
provides dierent weights to negative samples and same weights to all the
positive samples. Thus, Xu et al. [150] formulated K nearest neighbor (KNN)
weighted rough -TWSVM which gives dierent penalties to the samples of
both the classes. It has better accuracy and lower computational cost than -
TWSVM and Rough -TWSVM. In another attempt to enhance the results of
-TWSVM, Khemchandani et al. [151] formulated two models for binary classi-
cation:ITWSVM and ITWSVM Fast. Both the algorithms are faster than
-TWSVM as ITWSVM solves one small QPP and an unconstrained mini-
mization problem (UMP) while ITWSVM Fast solves one unimodal function
and one UMP. To overcome the disadvantage of TWSVM being sensitive to
outliers, Xie and Sun [152] implemented class centroid and proposed multitask
centroid TWSVM for multitask problems.
For handling large scale datasets, Shao et al. [84] introduce weighted linear
loss in TWSVM and proposed weighted linear loss TWSVM (WL-TWSVM)
to classify large scale datasets. The proposed algorithm only deals with linear
equations which increases the training speed and also has better generaliza-
tion than TWSVM. To further fasten up the training process, Sharma et al.
[153] and Wang et al. [154], recently proposed stochastic conjugate gradient
method based twin support vector machine (SCH-TWSVM). The resulting
model showed eective performance on binary activity classication problem.
Shao et al. [61] in 2011 introduced the regularization term in TWSVM to
embody SRM principle and formulated a new algorithm called twin bounded
support vector machines (TBSVM). To further speed up training, SOR tech-
nique is used. Numerical results on various datasets show that TBSVM is
faster and has better generalization ability than TWSVM. In 2010, Ye et al.
[155] formulated localized TWSVM via convex minimization (LC-TWSVM)
which eectively constructed two nearest-neighbor graphs in the original input
space to reduce the space complexity of TWSVM. Shao and Deng [156] in
2012 considered the unity norm constraints and added a regularization term
to minimize structural risk in TWSVM and proposed margin-based TWSVM
with unity norm hyperplanes (UNHMTWSVM). The proposed algorithm is
fast, has better generalization and accurate compared to TWSVM. Lagrangian
TBSVM with L2norm [157] replaced L1norm of the slack variables with L2
norm to improve the performance.
To include statistical data information in TWSVM, Peng and Xu [158]
formulated twin Mahalanobis distance-based SVM (TMSVM) that uses each
classes covariance to determine hyperplanes. It has better training speed and