M. Tanveer et al. 11
to consider prior structural data information, Peng et al. [79] in 2013 proposed
structural twin parametric-margin SVM (STPMSVM). Based on cluster gran-
ularity, the class data structures are included in the problem. STPMSVM not
only obtained good generalization ability but also showed fast learning speed,
and better performance than TPMSVM. TPMSVM is an ecient classier but
it losses the sparsity due to the weight vectors of the hyperplanes. To solve
this issue, centroid-based TPSVM (CTPSVM) [80] was introduced which uses
the projection of the centroid points and leads to a sparse optimal hyperplane
by optimizing the centroid projection values.
To incorporate structural information present in data, in 2017, Rastogi et
al. [81] proposed robust parametric TWSVM for pattern classication (RP-
TWSVM) which seek to nd two parametric margin hyperplanes that has the
capability to adjust margin to capture heteroscedastic noise data information.
Rastogi et al. [82], formulated angle-based TPSVM (ATPSVM) is proposed,
which can eciently handle heteroscedastic noise. Other improvements which
maximizes angle between the twin hyperplanes are proposed by Rastogi et
al. in [83]. Taking motivation from TPMSVM, ATPSVM determines a pair of
hyperplanes so that the angle between their normals is maximized. Recently,
Richhariya and Tanveer proposed a novel angle based universum LS-TWSVM
(AULSTWSVM) for pattern classication. In contrast to ATPSVM [83], the
AULSTWSVM minimizes the angle between universum hyperplane and classi-
fying hyperplane. To incorporate the prior information about the distribution
of the data using the universum, AULSTWSVM used linear loss [84] in the
formulation. Numerical experiments show the promising generalization per-
formance with very less computational time. Further, the application in the
diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease is explored.
Moreover, the proposed AULSTWSVM includes linear loss [84] in the
optimization problem, while incorporating prior information about data distri-
bution using the universum. Moreover, the solution of AULSTWSVM involves
system of linear equations leading to less computation time [39]
3.4 Robust and Sparse Twin Support Vector Machine
TWSVM achieves better accuracy and is faster when compared to conventional
SVM but it loses sparsity as it considers l2norm of distances in the objective
function. Thus, in order to make TWSVM sparse, Peng [85] in 2011 proposed
TWSVM in primal space which provides a sparse hyperplane with better gen-
eralization ability. To improve the robustness, a regularization term is also
added. It has comparable generalization and a rapid learning speed to TWSVM
and LS-TWSVM but the computational cost is high. In 2013, Peng and Xu [86]
proposed robust minimum class variance TWSVM (RMCV-TWSVM) classi-
er to enhance generalization and robustness of TWSVM. This algorithm has
an extra regularization term which makes its learning speed comparable to
TWSVM but obtains better generalization ability than TWSVM.