20 M. Tanveer et al.
hyperplane Universum support vector machine (U-NHSVM) for classication
problems. U-NHSVM is 
exible to exploit the prior information in universum.
Tanveer [92] proposed unconstrained minimization problem (UMP) formu-
lation of Linear programming TWSVM to enhance robustness and sparsity in
TWSVM. Tanveer [169] also proposed an implicit Lagrangian TWSVM which
is solved by using nite Newton method. Tanveer and Shubham [170] in 2017
proposed smooth TWSVM via UMP which increases the generalization ability
and training speed of TWSVM.
Multi-label learning deals with data having multiple labels and has gained
a lot of attention recently. Chen et al. [171] in 2016 proposed multi-label
TWSVM (MLTWSVM) that exploits multi-label information from instances.
In 2020, Azad{Manjiri et al. [172] proposed structural twin support vec-
tor machine for multi-label learning (ML-STWSVM) which embeds the prior
structural information of data into the optimization function of MLTWSVM
based on the same clustering technology of S-TWSVM. This algorithm
achieved better performance compared to other baseline multi-label learning
algorithms.
In 2018, Rastogi et al. [173] proposed a new loss function termed as
(1;2)-insensitive zone pinball loss function which generalizes other existing
loss functions e.g. pinball loss, hinge loss. The resulting model takes care of
noise insensitivity, instability of re-sampling and scatterdness present in the
datasets. In 2019, Tanveer et. al [49] presented rigorous comparison of 187
classiers which includes 8 variants of TWSVM and exhaustive evaluation of
these classiers was performed on 90 UCI benchmark datasets. Results have
shown that RELS-TSVM achieved highest performance than all other classi-
ers for binary classication task. Thus, RELS-TSVM is the best TWSVM
classier. For more details, one can refer to [49]. In 2020, Ganaie and Tan-
veer [174] proposed a novel classication approach using pre-trained functional
link to enhance the feature space. Authors performed the classication task
by LSTWSVM on the enhanced features and validated the performance on
various datasets. Some other recent research on TWSVM include [175] where
authors proposed a novel way for generating oblique decision trees. The classi-
cation of training samples is done based on the Bhattachrayya distance with
randomly selected feature subset and then hyperplanes are generated using
TBSVM. The major advantage of the proposed model is that there is no need
for any extra regularization as matrices are positive denite. The ensemble
[176] based models of twin SVM based models was proposed in [177].
3.9 Twin Support Vector Machine for Multi-class
Classication
Earlier, TWSVM was only implemented to solve binary class problems,
however, the majority of problems in the real-world applications are gener-
ally based on multicategory classication. Thus, Xu et al. [178] formulated
Twin-KSVC. It implements \1-versus-1-rest" form to provide ternary output