24 M. Tanveer et al.
3.11 Twin Support Vector Machine for Clustering
Wang et al. [206] formulated twin support vector clustering algorithm (TSVC)
build upon TWSVM. It divides the data samples into kclusters such that the
data samples are around kcluster center points. It exploits the information
from clusters (both between and within clusters) and the center planes are
determined by solving a series of QPP. Authors in [206] also proposed a nearest
neighbor graph (NNG)-based initialization to make the model more stable and
ecient. Improved TSVC [207] decomposed the multiclass clustering problem
into multiple two cluster problems.
In 2018, Khemchandani et al. [133] formulated fuzzy least squares version
of TSVC in which each data point has a fuzzy membership value and is allotted
to dierent clusters. The proposed algorithm solves primal problems instead
of dual problems in TSVC. Experimental results shown that the proposed
algorithm obtains comparable clustering accuracy to that of TSVC but has
less training time.
Khemchandani and Pal [208] replaced the hinge loss function of TSVC
with weighted linear loss and introduced a regularization term in TSVC which
needs to solve linear equations and also implements the structural risk com-
ponent. The proposed algorithm called weighted linear loss TSVC achieves
higher accuracy than TSVC. The loss function proposed in [208] is not contin-
uous and therefore, authors in [209] modied the weighted linear loss function
to form a continuous loss function and implemented TSVC and WLL-TSVC
in semi-supervised framework and also introduced a fuzzy extension of semi-
supervised WLL-TSVC to make a robust algorithm which is less sensitive to
noise. Experimental results have demonstrated that the proposed algorithm
achieved better clustering accuracy and less computational time than TSVC
and WLL-TSVC. Tree-based localized fuzzy twin support vector clustering
(Tree-TSVC) was proposed by [210]. Tree-TSVC is a novel clustering algo-
rithm that builds the cluster that represents a node on a binary tree, where
each node comprises of proposed TWSVM based classier. Due to the tree
structure and the formulation that leads to solving a series of systems of linear
equations, Tree-TSVC model is ecient in terms of training time and accuracy.
TSVC uses squared L2-norm distance which leads to noise sensitivity. Also,
each cluster plane learning iteration requires to solve a QPP which makes it
computationally complex. To address these issues in TSVC, Ye et al. [211] in
2018 usedL1norm distance and proposed L1-norm distance minimization-
based robust TSVC which only deals with linear equations instead of series of
QPPs. Authors in [211] further proposed RTSVC and Fast RTSVC to speed
up the computation of TSVC in nonlinear case. Numerical experiments shown
that this model has higher accuracy as compared to other k-clustering meth-
ods and has less computational time than TSVC. Wang et al. [212] proposed
ramp-based TSVC by introducing the ramp cost function in TSVC. The solu-
tion of the proposed algorithm is obtained by solving non-convex programming
problem using an alternating iteration algorithm. In 2019, Bai et al. [213] intro-
duced regularization in clustering and proposed large margin TSVC. Authors