16 M. Tanveer et al.
3.7 Fuzzy Twin Support Vector Machines
In 2017, Chen and Wu [130] proposed a novel fuzzy TWSVM (NFTWSVM)
which takes care of the problem of dealing with one class playing major
role in classication, by assigning fuzzy membership to dierent samples.
The proposed NFTWSVM includes fuzzy neural networks and provides more
generalized results. In 2019, Richhariya and Tanveer [122] proposed a fuzzy
universum SVM (FUSVM) based on information entropy. This algorithm is
also discussed in Section 3.6. Richhariya and Tanveer [131] also proposed a
robust fuzzy LS-TWSVM (RFLS-TWSVM-CIL) to boost the performance of
TWSVM on imbalanced datasets. The optimization problem in this algorithm
is strictly convex as it uses 2-norm of the slack variables. Authors further
proposed a fuzzy membership function to deal with imbalanced problems as
it provides weights to samples and includes data imbalanced ratio. RFLS-
TWSVM-CIL obtains better generalization and is computationally more
ecient as it requires to solve two linear equations. However, RFLSTWSVM-
CIL algorithm implements empirical risk minimization principle which requires
inverse of matrices to be positive semi-denite. In order to improvise, Ganaie
et al. [132] introduced a regularization term to the primal formulation of
RFLSTWSVM-CIL. The proposed algorithm is regularized robust fuzzy least
squares (RRFLSTWSVM) which doesn't require the extra assumption of
inverse of matrices to be positive semi-denite and performs better than
RFLSTWSVM-CIL.
In 2018, Khemchandani et al. [133] formulated fuzzy LS version of TSVC
in which each data point has a fuzzy membership value and is allotted to dif-
ferent clusters. This algorithm is also discussed in Section 3.11. In 2020, Chen
et al. [134] proposed entropy-based fuzzy least squares TWSVM which con-
siders the fuzzy membership for each data point basis entropy. Rezvani and
Wang [135] formulated intuitionistic fuzzy TWSVM (IFTWSVM) which is
modied version of fuzzy TWSVM as it considers the position of input data in
the feature space and calculate adequate fuzzy membership and also reduces
the eect of noise. Zhang and Li [136] proposed fuzzy TWSVM which assigns
fuzzy membership based on intra-class hyperplane and sample anity. Exper-
imental results showed that this algorithm has better accuracy than TWSVM
and classic fuzzy TWSVM. In 2019, Gupta et al. [137] proposed entropy-based
fuzzy twin support vector machine (EFTWSVM-CIL) which is an ecient
algorithm for imbalanced datasets as it assigns fuzzy membership values based
on entropy of the samples. In 2020, Chen at el. [134] proposed entropy-based
fuzzy least squares twin support vector machine (EFLSTWSVM) which is
an improvised version of EFTWSVM-CIL by formulating the QPPs in least
squares sense and retains the superior characteristics of LSTWSVM. Experi-
mental results shown that this algorithm performed better than other baseline
fuzzy TWSVM algorithms.