M. Tanveer et al. 37
•An interesting aspect can be coupling other machine learning algorithms
with the TWSVM. For example, a deep convolutional neural network can
extract features which can be classied using TWSVM with better accuracy.
•There is limited research on TWSVM applications for large-scale classica-
tion. Thus, how to develop TWSVM algorithms for big data classication
problems eectively is worthwhile.
•For non-linear classication problems, TWSVM performance highly depends
upon kernel function selection and there is not enough research on this to
guide researchers to choose kernels as per dierent applications to get desired
accuracy and performance of the TWSVM algorithm. Thus, kernel selection
and optimal parameters selection need further study and improvement.
•Currently, only few TWSVM algorithms have been implemented for multi-
class classication but it leads to class imbalance problem and often losses
sparsity. Thus, further study is required for TWSVM implementation for
multi-class classication.
•The main concept of GEPSVM/TWSVM is based on linear discriminant
analysis (LDA). A well cross study on TWSVM and LDA is worthy of future
work.
•TWSVM applications to health care is currently limited. Thus, how to
implement TWSVM eectively for early diagnosis of human diseases like
Alzheimer, Epilepsy, Breast cancer etc is worthy of study.
•Clustering, which aims at dividing the data samples into dierent clusters,
is major fundamental problem in classication. Clustering based TWSVM
approach is less studied currently and needs further study and development.
•There is limited research on TWSVM applications for remote-sensing. Thus,
how to build ecient classiers for remote-sensing can be explored.
TSVR is much faster than conventional SVR and also has better gener-
alization ability. But, it suers from a lack of model complexity control and
results in over-tting. It also losses sparsity similar to TWSVM and is sensitive
to outliers. Further research on TSVR can be on the following:
•A signicant limitation of TSVR is high computational time as it loses the
sparsity. More work is required to nd an ecient sparse TSVR algorithm.
•Data cleaning, transforming and pre-processing is an important issue for
every machine learning technique and can tremendously improve results
and even help in identifying novel interactions within data. As TSVR is
a relatively new technique, various data handling, cleaning, pre-processing
techniques like missing value imputation can be explored for improving the
performance of TSVR.
•TSVR is evaluated only on few types of continuous variable problems. Appli-
cation of TSVR can be explored on a wide range of problems in dierent
domains.
•The current TSVR requires o-setting of multiple hyperparameters and
hence optimal parameter selection is an issue. Thus, further research in the
direction of identifying and choosing parameters should be done.