2 M. Tanveer et al.
Keywords: Machine learning, Twin support vector machines (SVM), twin
SVM, survey of twin SVM, review of twin SVM, Classication, Regression,
Clustering.
1 Introduction
SVM [1] is a prominent classication technique widely used since its inception.
It was rst introduced by Cortes and Vapnik [1] in 1995 for binary classi-
cation problems. SVM seeks to nd decision hyperplanes that determine the
decision boundary which can classify the data points into two classes. These
decision planes are called support hyperplanes and the distance between them
is maximized by solving a quadratic programming problem (QPP). SVM is
computationally powerful even in non-linearly separable cases by using kernel
trick [2]. SVM has remarkable advantages as it utilizes the idea of structural
risk minimization (SRM) principle which provides better generalization as well
as reduces error in the training phase. As a result of its superior performance
even in non-linear classication problems, it has been implemented in a diverse
spectrum of research elds, ranging from text classication, face recognition,
nancial application, brain-computer interface, bio-medicine, human action
recognition, horse race odds prediction and multiple instance learning [3{16].
SVM has also been used in feature selection methods [17]. Robust SVM penal-
ized all the samples via a new loss function for better generalization in presence
of noise [18]. Although SVM has outperformed most other systems, it still has
many limitations in dealing with complex data due to its high computational
cost of solving QPPs and its performance highly depends upon the choice of
kernel functions and its parameters. Many improvements have been made in
the last decade to enhance the accuracy of SVM [19, 20]. One such critical
enhancement was generalized eigenvalue proximal SVM (GEPSVM) [21{23]
that led the foundation of TWSVM [24, 25]. The idea behind GEPSVM is to
determine two nonparallel hyperplanes via solving two generalized eigenvalue
problems. TWSVM [24, 25] enhanced the generalization ability of GEPSVM.
TWSVM also determines two nonparallel hyperplanes and needs to solve a pair
of small QPPs in lieu of solving one complex QPP in SVM. Computational cost
of TWSVM is approximately one-fourth of the SVM. TWSVM is faster and
has better generalization performance than SVM and GEPSVM. Authors also
extended TWSVM for nonlinear classication problems by introducing kernel.
But, in nonlinear cases when a kernel is used, the formulation requires to solve
inverse of matrices. Also, its performance highly depends upon the selection
of kernel functions and its parameters for nonlinear classication. Although
TWSVM is still in its rudimentary stage, many improvements and variants
have been proposed by researchers due to its favorable performance especially
in-case of handling large datasets which is not possible with the conventional
SVM. Huang et al. [26] reviewed the research progress of TWSVM until 2017
for classication problems.