12 M. Tanveer et al.
Qi et al. [87] in 2013 proposed robust TWSVM using second-order cone pro-
gramming formulation. It is eective with noise-corrupted data. This algorithm
overcomes the limitation of TWSVM and computes the inverse of matrices
which are not suitable for large datasets, it takes only the inner products
about samples by which kernel trick can be applied directly and does not
need to solve the extra inverse of matrices. It is superior in computational
time and accuracy than other TWSVMs. In 2014, Tian et al. [88] proposed
sparse nonparallel support vector machine (SN-SVM). While TWSVM losses
the sparseness, SN-SVM has the inherent sparseness as it uses the two loss
functions instead of one in existing TWSVM. Only the empirical risk is consid-
ered in TWSVM, SN-SVM introduces the regularization term by maximizing
the margin. TWSVM minimizes the loss function based on l1orl2-norm. Thus,
Zhang et al. [89] proposed lp-norm-LS-TWSVM which is an adaptive as pcan
be automatically chosen by data. Robust non-parallel SVM via second order
cone programming [90] is robust to outliers and noise, and constructs the two
separating hyperplanes via maximisation of probabilistic framework.
In order to intensify the robustness and sparsity in the original formulation
of TWSVM, Tanveer [91] in 2015, incorporated regularization technique and
formulated a linear programming l1-norm TWSVM (NLP-TWSVM) which
needs to solve linear equations rather than solving QPPs in TWSVM which
makes it fast, robust, sparse and a simple algorithm. Experimental results
demonstrate that NLP-TWSVM's generalization ability is better and compu-
tational time is less than GEPSVM, SVM, and TWSVM. Tanveer [92, 93]
proposed smoothing approaches for 1-norm linear programming TWSVM
(SLPTWSVM). The solution of SLPTWSVM reduces to solving two systems
of linear equations which makes the algorithm extremely simple and com-
putationally ecient. Tanveer et al. [94] proposed sparse pinball TWSVM
(SP-TWSVM) by introducing insensitive zone pinball loss function in the
orginal TWSVM formulation. SP-TWSVM is noise insensitive, retain spar-
sity and more stable for re-sampling. Robust capped l1norm TWSVM [95]
reduced the eect of outliers which resulted in better performance. To reduce
the overtting issues, capped l1norm twin bounded support vector machines
[96] was proposed. Ecient and robust l1norm TWSVM [97] used l1norm
to maximise the ratio of interclass scatter to intraclass scatter. The authors
used iterative procedure to get the optimal separating hyperplanes. Adaptive
cappedL;-loss based TWSVM [98] is a generalized TWSVM model wherein
andparameters are optimized to meet the objectives of robust to noise and
outliers.
3.5 Pinball Loss Twin Support Vector Machine
In 2016, Xu et al. [99] proposed a novel TPMSVM with the pinball loss (Pin-
TPMSVM). The authors introduced pinball loss function that is based on
maximizing quantile distances between the two classes instead of hinge loss
function which maximizes the distance between the closest samples of the