M. Tanveer et al. 19
generalization than TWSVM. Shao et al. [159] in 2012 introduced a probability
based TWSVM model (P-TWSVM) which is more accurate than TWSVM.
In 2012, Shao and Deng [160] formulated a coordinate descent based TWSVM
to increase the eciency of TWSVM by introducing a regularization term.
Further, to solve the dual problems, the authors proposed a coordinate descent
method which reduces the training time even in case of large datasets as it
deals with single data point at once.
To include the underlying correlation information between data points in
TWSVM, in 2012, Ye et al. [73] formulated a novel nonparallel plane classier,
called Weighted TWSVM with Local Information (WL-TWSVM). A major
limitation of this algorithm is that it doesn't work for large-scale problems as it
nds theK-nearest neighbors for all the samples. Based on TWSVM, in 2013,
Peng and Xu [59] formulated a twin-hypersphere SVM (TH-SVM). Unlike
TWSVM, it determines two hyperspheres and avoids the matrix inversions in
its dual formulations.
To incorporate the structural data information in TWSVM, Qi et al. [57]
formulated structural-TWSVM which is superior in training time as well as
accuracy to that of TWSVM. However, it still ignores the importance of dif-
ferent samples within each cluster. To overcome this drawback, in 2015, Pan
et al. [161] uses K-nearest neighbor based structural TWSVM which provides
dierent penalties to the samples of dierent classes. However, it suers from
overtting due to empirical risk minimisation. To reduce the overtting issues,
ecient KNN weighted TWSVM [162] introduced the regularisation term to
avoid the issues of overtting. This also ensured the minimization of structural
risk which results in better generalization.
In 2014, Shao et al. [163] formulated a dierent nonparallel hyperplane
SVM in which hyperplanes are determined by clustering the samples based on
similarity between the two classes. This algorithm has better or comparable
accuracy with low computational time. To optimally select the parameters in
TWSVM, in 2016 Ding et al. [164] proposed TWSVM build on Fruit Fly Opti-
mization Algorithm (FOA-TWSVM). It can optimally select the parameters
in less time and with better accuracy. In 2017, Pan et al. [165] proposed safe
screening rules to make TWSVM ecient for large-scale classication prob-
lems. The safe screening rules reduce the scale by eliminating training samples
and giving same solution as the original problem. Experimental results show
that safe screening rules can greatly reduce the computational time while giv-
ing the same solutions as original ones. Yang and Xu [166] proposed safe sample
screening rule (SSSR) for Laplacian twin parametric-margin SVM (LTPSVM)
to address the problems while handling large-scale problems. In 2018, Pang
and Xu [167] proposed safe screening rule for Weighted TWSVM with local
information (WLTWSVM) to implement the algorithm for large-scale datasets.
Experimental results demonstrate the eectiveness of SSSR for WLTWSVM
as it performes better than SVM and TWSVM with signicantly less com-
putational time. Recently, Zhao et al. [168] proposed an ecient non-parallel