overθ,W thecost function
J(X,Y;θ,W) :=n/summationdisplay
i=1ℓ(fθ,W(xi),yi). (8)
Given a new task with support data ( X′,Y′) over novel
classesC′(stage 2), class prototypes Pare computed on N′
according to ( 1) and they are imprinted in the classiﬁer, that
is,Wis replaced by W′:= (W,P). The network can now
make predictions on n+n′base and novel classes. The
network is then ﬁne-tuned based on ( 8), which aligns the
class weights Wwith the prototypes Pat the cost of having
to store and re-train on the entire training data (X,Y).
Few-shot learning without forgetting. Gidaris and Ko-
modakis [ 6], concurrently with [ 31], develop a similar
model that is able to classify examples of both base and
novel classes. The main difference to [ 31] is that only the
weight parameters of the base classes are stored and not the
entire training data. They use the same parametric linear
classiﬁer as [ 31] in both stages, and they also use episode-
style training like [ 41] in stage 2.
3. Method
Given training data of base classes (stage 1), we use a
parametric classiﬁer like [ 31,6], which however applies at
all spatial locations rather than following ﬂattening or pool-
ing; a very simple idea that we call dense classiﬁcation and
discuss in §3.1. Given support data of novel classes (stage
2), we learn in episodes as in prototypical networks [ 41],
but on the true task. As discussed in §3.2, the embedding
network learned in stage 1 remains ﬁxed but new layers
called implants are trained to learn task-speciﬁc features.
Finally,§3.3discusses inference of novel class queries.
3.1. Dense classiﬁcation
As discussed in §2, the embedding network φθ:X →
Rr×dmaps the input to an embedding that is a tensor. There
are two common ways of handling this high-dimensional
representation, as illustrated in Figure 1.
The ﬁrst is to apply one or more fully connected layers,
for instance in networks C64F, C128F in few-shot learn-
ing [43,41,6]. This can be seen as ﬂattening the activation
into a long vector and multiplying with a weight vector of
the same length per class; alternatively, the weight param-
eter is a tensor of the same dimension as the embedding.
This representation is discriminative, but not invariant.
The second way is to apply global pooling and reduce the
embedding into a smaller vector of length d, for instance in
small ResNet architectures used more recently in few-shot
learning [ 27,6,30]. This reduces dimensionality signiﬁ-
cantly, so it makes sense if dis large enough. It is an invari-
ant representation, but less discriminative.φ(x) w1 w2 w3feature (d)
spatial (r)
sclass weights
σℓ
(a)
φ(x)
w1 w2 w3feature (d)
spatial (r)
s Σclass weights
a σℓ
(b)
Figure 1. Flattening and pooling . Horizontal (vertical) axis repre-
sents feature (spatial) dimensions. Tensors w1,w2,w3represent
class weights, and φ(x)the embedding of example x. An embed-
ding is compared to class weights by similarity ( s) and then soft-
max (σ) and cross-entropy ( ℓ) follow. (a) Flattening is equivalent
to class weights having the same r×dshape asφ(x). (b) Global
pooling . Embedding φ(x)is pooled ( Σ) into vector a∈Rdbefore
being compared to class weights, which are in Rdtoo.
In this work we follow a different approach that we
call dense classiﬁcation and is illustrated in Figure 2.
We view the embedding φθ(x)as a collection of vectors
[φ(k)(x)]r
k=1, whereφ(k)(x)∈Rdfork∈[r]4. For a 2d
image input and a convolutional network, φθ(x)consists of
the activations of the last convolutional layer, that is a tensor
inRw×h×dwherer=w×his its spatial resolution. Then,
φ(k)(x)is an embedding in Rdthat represents a single spa-
tial location kon the tensor.
When learning from the training data (X,Y)over base
classesC(stage 1), we adopt the simple approach of train-
ing a parametric linear classiﬁer on top of the embedding
functionφθ, like [ 31] and the initial training of [ 6]. The
main difference in our case is that the weight parameters
donothave the same dimensions as φθ(x); they are rather
vectors in Rdand they are shared over all spatial locations.
More formally, let wj∈Rdbe the weight parameter of
classjforj∈C. Then, similarly to ( 6), the classiﬁer map-
pingfθ,W:X →Rr×cis deﬁned by
4Given tensor a∈Rm×n, denote by a(k)thek-thn-dimensional
slice along the ﬁrst group of dimensions for k∈[m].
9260