φ(x) +feature (d)
spatial (r)
φ(1)(x)
 w1
 w2
 w3 s
 σℓ
φ(2)(x)
 w1
 w2
 w3 s
 σℓ
φ(3)(x)
 w1
 w2
 w3 s
 σℓclass weights
Figure 2. Dense classiﬁcation . Notation is the same as in Figure 1. The embedding a:=φ(x)∈Rr×dis seen as a collection of vectors
(a(1),...,a(r))inRd(herer= 3) with each being a vector in Rdand representing a region of the input image. Each vector is compared
independently to the same class weights and the losses are added, encouraging all regions to be correctly classiﬁed.
pooling dense pooling dense
Figure 3. Examples overlaid with correct class activation
maps [53] (red is high activation for ground truth) on Resnet-12
(cf.§5) trained with global average pooling or dense classiﬁcation
(cf. (9)). From top to bottom: base classes, classiﬁed correctly by
both (walker hound, tile roof); novel classes, classiﬁed correctly
by both (king crab, ant); novel classes, dense classiﬁcation is bet-
ter (ferret, electric guitar); novel classes, pooling is better (mixing
bowl, ant). In all cases, dense classiﬁcation results in smoother
activation maps that are more aligned with objects.
fθ,W(x) :=/bracketleftBig
σ/parenleftBig
[sτ(φ(k)
θ(x),wj)]c
j=1/parenrightBig/bracketrightBigr
k=1(9)
forx∈ X, whereW:= (w1,...,wc)is the collection of
class weights and sτis the scaled cosine similarity deﬁned
by (7), withτbeing a learnable parameter as in [ 31,6]5.
Herefθ,W(x)is ar×ctensor: index kranges over spatial
resolution [r]andjover classes [c].
This operation is a 1×1convolution followed by depth-
wise softmax . Then,f(k)
θ,W(x)at spatial location kis a vec-
5Temperature scaling is frequently encountered in various formats in
several works to enable soft-labeling [ 12] or to improve cosine similarity
in the ﬁnal layer [ 45,30,6,31,14].tor inRcrepresenting conﬁdence over the cclasses. On the
other hand, f(:,j)
θ,W(x)is a vector in Rrrepresenting conﬁ-
dence of class jforj∈[c]as a function of spatial location.6
For a 2d image input, f(:,j)
θ,W(x)is like a class activation map
(CAM) [ 53] for class j, that is a 2d map roughly localizing
the response to class j, but differs in that softmax suppresses
all but the strongest responses at each location.
Given the deﬁnition ( 9) offθ,W, training amounts to
minimizing over θ,W thecost function
J(X,Y;θ,W) :=n/summationdisplay
i=1r/summationdisplay
k=1ℓ(f(k)
θ,W(xi),yi), (10)
whereℓis cross-entropy ( 5).The loss function applies to all
spatial locations and therefore the classiﬁer is encouraged
to make correct predictions everywhere .
Learning a new task with support data (X′,Y′)over
novel classes C′(stage 2) and inference are discussed
in§3.2.2 and§3.3respectively.
Discussion. The same situation arises in semantic segmen-
tation [23,29], where given per-pixel labels, the loss func-
tion applies per pixel and the network learns to make local-
ized predictions on upsampled feature maps rather than just
classify. In our case there is just one image-level label and
the low resolution, e.g.5×5, of few-shot learning settings
allows us to assume that the label applies to all locations
due to large receptive ﬁeld.
Dense classiﬁcation improves the spatial distribution of
class activations, as shown in Figure 3. By encouraging all
spatial locations to be classiﬁed correctly, we are encourag-
ing the embedding network to identify all parts of the object
of interest rather than just the most discriminative details.
Since each location on a feature map corresponds to a re-
gion in the image where only part of the object may be vis-
ible, our model behaves like implicit data augmentation of
exhaustive shifts and crops over a dense grid with a single
forward pass of each example in the network.
3.2. Implanting
From the learning on the training data (X,Y)of base
classesC(stage 1) we only keep the embedding network
6Given tensor a∈Rm×n, denote by a(:,j)thej-thm-dimensional
slice along the second group of dimensions for j∈[n].
9261