Figure 8: Visual result on test set images of different scenarios
but are now available for download. Furthermore we plan
to deﬁne benchmarks and challenges to allow researchers to
easily and fairly compare their algorithms. To this end, we
have labeled a test set of 10K images with semantic seg-
mentation annotations, and are currently exploring how best
to allow the community to benchmark against this ground
truth.
6. Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Josua Schuberth, Sirinivas Reddy
Mudem, Kevin Michael Bondzio, Yunlei Tang, Ajinkya
Khoche, Christopher Schmidt, Sumanth Venugopal and Sah
Surendra for their help in checking the quality of the dataset.
In addition, we would like to thank E.S.R. Labs AG for their
help in developing this dataset.
References
[1]Andreas Geiger, Philip Lenz, Christoph Stiller, and
Raquel Urtasun. Vision meets robotics: The KITTI
dataset. The International Journal of Robotics Re-
search , 32(11), 2013.
[2]Peng Wang, Xinyu Huang, Xinjing Cheng, Dingfu
Zhou, Qichuan Geng, and Ruigang Yang. The apol-
loscape open dataset for autonomous driving and its
application. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis
and Machine Intelligence , 2019.
[3]Holger Caesar, Varun Bankiti, Alex H Lang, Sourabh
V ora, Venice Erin Liong, Qiang Xu, Anush Krish-
nan, Yu Pan, Giancarlo Baldan, and Oscar Beijbom.
nuScenes: A multimodal dataset for autonomous driv-
ing. arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.11027 , 2019.
[4]Pei Sun, Henrik Kretzschmar, Xerxes Dotiwalla, Aure-
lien Chouard, Vijaysai Patnaik, Paul Tsui, James Guo,Yin Zhou, Yuning Chai, Benjamin Caine, et al. Scal-
ability in perception for autonomous driving: Waymo
open dataset. arXiv , 2019.
[5]Andreas Geiger. Are we ready for autonomous driving?
The KITTI vision benchmark suite. In Proceedings of
the 2012 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , CVPR, 2012.
[6]Marius Cordts, Mohamed Omran, Sebastian Ramos,
Timo Rehfeld, Markus Enzweiler, Rodrigo Benenson,
Uwe Franke, Stefan Roth, and Bernt Schiele. The
cityscapes dataset for semantic urban scene understand-
ing. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on com-
puter vision and pattern recognition , 2016.
[7]Gerhard Neuhold, Tobias Ollmann, Samuel Rota Bul `o,
and Peter Kontschieder. The Mapillary Vistas dataset
for semantic understanding of street scenes. In ICCV ,
2017.
[8]Fisher Yu, Wenqi Xian, Yingying Chen, Fangchen
Liu, Mike Liao, Vashisht Madhavan, and Trevor Dar-
rell. BDD100K: A diverse driving video database
with scalable annotation tooling. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1805.04687 , 2018.
[9]Daniel Munoz, J. Andrew Bagnell, Nicolas Vandapel,
and Martial Hebert. Contextual classiﬁcation with func-
tional max-margin markov networks. 2009 IEEE Con-
ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition ,
2009.
[10] Bastian Steder, Michael Ruhnke, Slawomir Grzonka,
and Wolfram Burgard. Place recognition in 3D scans
using a combination of bag of words and point feature
9