(a) Audi Q7 e-tron
 (b) Global reference frame
(c) LiDAR blind spots (shaded). Sensor placement is shown
in yellow (camera) and green (LiDAR)
Figure 2
SF3225-100 SF3224-100
Horizontal FOV 60120
Vertical FOV 3873
Diagonal FOV 70146
Sensor Onsemi AR0231 Onsemi AR0231
Resolution 1928 x 1208 (2MP) 1928 x 1208 (2MP)
Colour Filter Array RCCB RCCB
Table 3: Camera speciﬁcations
VLP-16
Azimuthal FOV 360
Vertical FOV 30(+15to -15)
Channels 16
Vertical resolution 2
Frequency 5-20Hz (10Hz used for A2D2)
Range up to 100m
Rate up to 300,000 points/second
Table 4: LiDAR speciﬁcations [22]
of sensors was limited by data recording bandwidth. Three
ﬁsheye (120horizontal FOV) cameras provide views to the
left, right, and rear of the vehicle. More emphasis was put on
the front view which was covered with three cameras: a pair
of ﬁsheye cameras mounted on the front-left and front-right
of the roof, and a rectilinear (60horizontal FOV) camera
mounted between them to provide a more detailed and less
distorted view. LiDAR sensors were placed at each corner
of the setup and above the front center camera. Figure 2(c)
shows the described sensor placement.
After ﬁxing the sensor locations, the camera and LiDAR
sensor orientations were optimized manually by visualizing
the covered 3D region in CAD software. The goal of this
process was to minimize the blind spot around the vehicle
while maximizing camera and LiDAR ﬁeld of view overlap.
Figure 2(c) depicts the blind spot of the LiDAR sensors,
evaluated at the ground plane. Outside the LiDAR blind
spot, the ﬁelds of view of the cameras and the LiDAR sensors
largely overlap (over 90 %). This is demonstrated visually
in the upper panel of Figure 3.3.1.2 Sensor Calibration/Registration
The sensors were mounted on the vehicle as detailed in
Section 3.1.1 and measurements were made of their poses.
In-situ calibration was still required, especially to account
for error in measuring sensor angles.
Firstly, the measured pose of the front-center LiDAR
sensor with respect to the reference frame was assumed to
be accurate. Using it as a reference, all remaining sensor
poses were determined relative to this LiDAR.
Secondly, we performed LiDAR to LiDAR mapping. To
do so, LiDAR data was recorded in a static environment,
with no dynamic objects. During data collection the vehicle
was also stationary. An ICP-based registration [ 23] was
performed for determining the relative pose of the LiDAR
sensors with respect to each other.
Thirdly, intrinsic camera calibration was performed for
all cameras using 2D patterns (checkerboards).
Finally, the LiDAR to camera mapping was determined as
follows: Using a recording with our data recording vehicle
in motion (see Section 3.3), a large combined LiDAR point
cloud was computed using ego-motion correction based on
the bus data and then an ICP-based open-loop SLAM [ 24]
(see lower panel of Figure 3). Given extrinsic camera pa-
rameters and using interpolation, a depth image as seen
by the respective camera can be computed. Keeping the
measured camera positions ﬁxed, the camera angles were
determined by optimizing for edge correspondence in the
depth and RGB camera images. The top panel of Figure 3
shows LiDAR points projected onto camera images using
the resulting mappings.
The result of the calibration is given in a conﬁguration
ﬁle containing:
a view, v, for each sensor as well as the global frame of
reference of the vehicle. Each view describes the pose
of a sensor with respect to the reference frame, and is
given by a tuple of three vectors so that v= (o;x;y).
The vector o2R3speciﬁes the Cartesian coordinates
4