pecially research related to autonomous driving
b)provide a public dataset from a realistic autonomous
driving sensor suite
c) engage with the wider research community
d)contribute to startups and other commercial entities by
freely releasing data which is expensive to generate.
In summary, we release A2D2 to foster research, in keep-
ing with our ethos of promoting innovation and actively
participating in the research community.
Our main contributions are as follows:
The setup and calibration of our Audi Q7 e-tron data
collection platform is discussed in Section 3. We con-
sider this platform to be broadly comparable to many
autonomous driving development platforms currently
in use by commercial entities.
We provide the community with a commercial grade
driving dataset, suitable for many perception tasks. It
includes extensive vehicle bus data, which has hitherto
been lacking in public datasets.
We evaluate the performance of a semantic segmenta-
tion convolutional network on A2D2 in Section 4.
We release A2D2 under the commercial-friendly CC
BY-ND 4.0 license.
2. Related Work
This section provides a brief survey of datasets relevant
to the development of autonomous driving systems. We
focus on the most comparable recent datasets, which strongly
emphasize multimodal sensor data. We present them in
chronological order.
2.1. Datasets
The KITTI [ 1] dataset was a pioneer in the ﬁeld which,
together with its associated benchmarks [ 5], has been highly
inﬂuential. The data collection vehicle was equipped with
with four video cameras (two color, two grayscale), a 3D
laser scanner, and a GPS/IMU inertial navigation system.
Several challenges were published on tasks such as 2D and
3D object detection, SLAM, depth prediction, tracking, and
optical ﬂow.
As the viability of image semantic segmentation solutions
for autonomous driving increased, so too did the need for
relevant semantically labeled images. The Cityscapes dataset
[6] sought to address this. The data were collected in 50
cities in Germany, and recorded in dense urban trafﬁc. The
scenes were captured using stereo-pair color cameras and
were annotated semantically on both instance and pixel level.Cityscapes contains 5000 ﬁne labeled images spanning over
30 classes.
The Mapillary Vistas dataset [ 7] also provides semantic
segmentation labels for urban, rural, and off-road scenes.
The dataset contains 25,000 densely annotated street-level
images from locations around the world. The dataset is het-
erogeneous in that the capture devices span mobile phones,
tablets, and assorted cameras.
ApolloScape [ 2] is a large dataset consisting of over
140,000 video frames from various locations in China under
varying weather conditions. Pixel-wise semantic annota-
tion of the recorded data is provided in 2D, with point-wise
semantic annotation in 3D for 28 classes. In addition, the
dataset contains lane marking annotations in 2D. To our
knowledge, ApolloScape is the largest publicly available
semantic segmentation dataset for autonomous driving ap-
plications.
The Berkeley Deep Drive dataset (BDD-100k) [ 8] has
a stronger emphasis on 2D bounding boxes but also con-
tains pixel-wise segmentation annotations for 10,000 im-
ages. BDD-100K contains 100,000 images with 2D bound-
ing boxes as well as street lanes, markings, and trafﬁc light
color identiﬁcation.
Several semantic point cloud datasets have also been
made available, e.g. [9,10,11,12,13]. However, Se-
manticKITTI [ 14] is signiﬁcantly larger than its predeces-
sors. It also has the advantage of being based on the already
widely-used KITTI dataset, providing point-wise semantic
annotations of all 22 pointclouds of the KITTI Vision Odom-
etry Benchmark. This corresponds to 43,000 separately
annotated scans.
KITTI highlighted the importance of multi-modal sensor
setups for autonomous driving, and the latest datasets have
put a strong emphasis on this aspect. nuScenes [ 3] is a
recently released dataset which is particularly notable for its
sensor multimodality. It consists of camera images, LiDAR
point clouds, and radar data, together with 3D bounding box
annotations. It was collected during the day and night under
clear weather conditions.
The Lyft Level 5 A V Dataset [ 15] has camera and LiDAR
data in the nuScene data format. It has a strong emphasis on
3D bounding box detection and tracking.
Most recently, the Waymo Open Dataset [ 4] was released
with 12 million 3D bounding box annotations on LiDAR
point clouds and 1.2 million 2D bounding box annotations
on camera frames. In total it consists of 1000 20-second
sequences in urban and suburban scenarios, under various
weather and lighting conditions.
2.2. Comparison
We compare A2D2 to the other multimodal datasets listed
in Table 1. All contain LiDAR point clouds and images
from several cameras. Most focus on object detection for
2