A2D2: Audi Autonomous Driving Dataset
Jakob Geyer Yohannes Kassahun Mentar Mahmudi Xavier Ricou Rupesh Durgesh
Andrew S. Chung Lorenz Hauswald Viet Hoang Pham Maximilian M ¨uhlegg Sebastian Dorn
Tiffany Fernandez*Martin J ¨anicke Sudesh Mirashi*Chiragkumar Savani Martin Sturm
Oleksandr V orobiov*Martin Oelker Sebastian Garreis Peter Schuberth
Audi AG
fjakob.geyer, yohannes.kassahun, mentar.mahmudi g@audi.de
Figure 1: Visualizations of A2D2 data. From left: semantic segmentation, 3D bounding boxes, dense point cloud from SLAM,
single frame point cloud overlaid on corresponding camera image.
Abstract
Research in machine learning, mobile robotics, and au-
tonomous driving is accelerated by the availability of high
quality annotated data. To this end, we release the Audi
Autonomous Driving Dataset ( A2D2 ). Our dataset con-
sists of simultaneously recorded images and 3D point clouds,
together with 3D bounding boxes, semantic segmentation, in-
stance segmentation, and data extracted from the automotive
bus. Our sensor suite consists of six cameras and ﬁve Li-
DAR units, providing full 360coverage. The recorded data
is time synchronized and mutually registered. Annotations
are for non-sequential frames: 41,277 frames with semantic
segmentation image and point cloud labels, of which 12,497
frames also have 3D bounding box annotations for objects
within the ﬁeld of view of the front camera. In addition, we
provide 392,556 sequential frames of unannotated sensor
data for recordings in three cities in the south of Germany.
These sequences contain several loops. Faces and vehicle
number plates are blurred due to GDPR legislation and to
preserve anonymity. A2D2 is made available under the CC
BY-ND 4.0 license, permitting commercial use subject to
the terms of the license. Data and further information are
available at http://www.a2d2.audi .
Work done while at Audi AG1. Introduction
Access to high quality data has proven crucial to the de-
velopment of autonomous driving systems. In this paper
we present the Audi Autonomous Driving Dataset ( A2D2 )
which provides camera, LiDAR, and vehicle bus data, allow-
ing developers and researchers to explore multimodal sensor
fusion approaches.
While some datasets such as KITTI [ 1] and ApolloScape
[2] also provide both LiDAR and camera data, more re-
cent datasets [ 3,4] have put an emphasis on providing
full surround sensor coverage. We believe this is impor-
tant for further advances in autonomous driving, and there-
fore have released A2D2 with full surround camera and
LiDAR data. We also include vehicle bus data, which pro-
vides additional information about car state ( e.g. transla-
tional/rotational speed and acceleration, steering wheel an-
gle, throttle, brake, etc.).
Vast majority of publicly available datasets are released
under licenses permitting research-only use. Whilst we un-
derstand the reasons for this, we want to push progress in
the ﬁeld by publishing A2D2 under the less restrictive CC
BY-ND 4.0 license, which allows commercial use (subject to
the terms of the license). We hope this will help researchers,
particularly those working within commercial enterprises.
By releasing A2D2, we seek to
a)catalyse research in machine learning and robotics, es-
1arXiv:2004.06320v1  [cs.CV]  14 Apr 2020