(a) GPS coordinates
 (b) Degree of latitude/longitude
 (c) Steering angle and z angular velocity
Figure 4: Three vehicle bus signals are depicted over time. In (a), the GPS signal values are projected onto a map. A
roundabout is visible in the lower right corner. This roundabout corresponds to the oscillating part of the longitude and latitude
plot (b) as well as the nearly constant part in the plot of steering angle and z angular velocity (c).
Figure 5: Multiple adjacent car instances. Starting from
the right of the above ﬁgure, cars 1, 2, and 3 must all have
different semantic classes because they share a boundary.
The next car to the left can be assigned ‘Car 1’ because it
does not share a boundary with any other ‘Car 1’ instance.
they are differentiated using subclasses such as car1, car2,
etc. As shown in Figure 5 this only applies to adjacent in-
stances. Therefore the fact that our semantic segmentation
taxonomy has classes car[1-4] does not imply that there is a
maximum of 4 cars per image.
In total, there are 38 classes in our semantic segmentation
schema. The lower panel of Figure 7 shows these classes
along with the distribution of pixels in our dataset. The
number of instances of trafﬁc participants annotated with
semantic labels in our dataset are depicted in the upper-right
panel of Figure 7. Predictably, the trafﬁc participant instance
counts are dominated by cars, trucks, and pedestrians.
We also provide LiDAR point clouds for 38,481 semanti-
cally labelled images. The 3D semantic labels are obtained
by mapping the 3D points to the semantic segmentation
images using the LiDAR to camera mapping described in
Section 3.1.2.3.4.2 Instance Segmentation Annotations
We generated instance segmentation annotations from all
semantic segmentation annotations. These instance anno-
tations are available for all classes which represent trafﬁc
participants such as pedestrians, cars, etc.
3.4.3 3D Bounding Boxes
For 12,497 of the front-camera frames with semantic
annotation, we also provide 3D bounding boxes for a variety
of vehicles, pedestrians, and other relevant objects. Figure
7 (top left) shows the full list of annotated classes, along
with the number of instances of each class in A2D2 . Where
objects are partially occluded, human annotators estimated
the bounding box to the best of their ability. Examples of
this can be seen in the second panel of Figure 1.
3D bounding boxes were annotated in LiDAR space. To
do so, we ﬁrst combined the point clouds from all LiDARs,
then culled them to the view frustrum of the front-center
camera. Therefore, we provide 3D bounding boxes for the
points within the ﬁeld of view of the front-center camera.
LiDAR point clouds are sparse relative to images. As a
result, distant or small objects may not be represented by
(m)any points. Since the 3D bounding boxes are derived
from LiDAR point clouds, objects may be visible in images
but lack corresponding 3D bounding boxes.
Figure 6 (left) shows the distributions of the radial dis-
tances to the ego vehicle of the 3D bounding boxes in our
dataset for three classes: pedestrians, cars, and trucks. As
one may expect, trucks, being physically larger than cars and
pedestrians, have a higher optical cross section, and are thus
seen and annotated in the LiDAR point clouds to a farther
distance.
Although cars are metallic and larger than pedestrians,
Figure 6 (left) shows that the distribution of annotated cars
drops off quicker with distance than the distribution of an-
notated pedestrians. A possible explanation for this would
6