TinyBERT: Distilling BERT for Natural Language Understanding
Xiaoqi Jiao1y, Yichun Yin2z, Lifeng Shang2z, Xin Jiang2
Xiao Chen2, Linlin Li3, Fang Wang1zand Qun Liu2
1Key Laboratory of Information Storage System, Huazhong University of
Science and Technology, Wuhan National Laboratory for Optoelectronics
2Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
3Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd.
fjiaoxiaoqi,wangfang g@hust.edu.cn
fyinyichun,shang.lifeng,jiang.xin g@huawei.com
fchen.xiao2,lynn.lilinlin,qun.liu g@huawei.com
Abstract
Language model pre-training, such as BERT,
has signiﬁcantly improved the performances
of many natural language processing tasks.
However, pre-trained language models are usu-
ally computationally expensive, so it is difﬁ-
cult to efﬁciently execute them on resource-
restricted devices. To accelerate inference
and reduce model size while maintaining
accuracy, we ﬁrst propose a novel Trans-
former distillation method that is specially de-
signed for knowledge distillation (KD) of the
Transformer-based models. By leveraging this
new KD method, the plenty of knowledge en-
coded in a large “teacher” BERT can be ef-
fectively transferred to a small “student” Tiny-
BERT. Then, we introduce a new two-stage
learning framework for TinyBERT, which per-
forms Transformer distillation at both the pre-
training and task-speciﬁc learning stages. This
framework ensures that TinyBERT can capture
the general-domain as well as the task-speciﬁc
knowledge in BERT.
TinyBERT 41with 4 layers is empirically ef-
fective and achieves more than 96.8% the per-
formance of its teacher BERT BASE on GLUE
benchmark, while being 7.5x smaller and9.4x
faster on inference. TinyBERT 4is also signiﬁ-
cantly better than 4-layer state-of-the-art base-
lines on BERT distillation, with only 28%
parameters and31% inference time of them.
Moreover, TinyBERT 6with 6 layers performs
on-par with its teacher BERT BASE .
1 Introduction
Pre-training language models then ﬁne-tuning on
downstream tasks has become a new paradigm for
Authors contribute equally.
yThis work is done when Xiaoqi Jiao is an intern at
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab.
zCorresponding authors.
1The code and models are publicly available at https:
//github.com/huawei-noah/Pretrained-Language-Model/tree/
master/TinyBERTnatural language processing (NLP). Pre-trained lan-
guage models (PLMs), such as BERT (Devlin et al.,
2019), XLNet (Yang et al., 2019), RoBERTa (Liu
et al., 2019), ALBERT (Lan et al., 2020), T5 (Raf-
fel et al., 2019) and ELECTRA (Clark et al., 2020),
have achieved great success in many NLP tasks
(e.g., the GLUE benchmark (Wang et al., 2018)
and the challenging multi-hop reasoning task (Ding
et al., 2019)). However, PLMs usually have a
large number of parameters and take long infer-
ence time, which are difﬁcult to be deployed on
edge devices such as mobile phones. Recent stud-
ies (Kovaleva et al., 2019; Michel et al., 2019; V oita
et al., 2019) demonstrate that there is redundancy
in PLMs. Therefore, it is crucial and feasible to
reduce the computational overhead and model stor-
age of PLMs while retaining their performances.
There have been many model compression tech-
niques (Han et al., 2016) proposed to accelerate
deep model inference and reduce model size while
maintaining accuracy. The most commonly used
techniques include quantization (Gong et al., 2014),
weights pruning (Han et al., 2015), and knowl-
edge distillation (KD) (Romero et al., 2014). In
this paper, we focus on knowledge distillation, an
idea originated from Hinton et al. (2015), in a
teacher-student framework. KD aims to transfer
the knowledge embedded in a large teacher net-
work to a small student network where the student
network is trained to reproduce the behaviors of the
teacher network. Based on the framework, we pro-
pose a novel distillation method speciﬁcally for the
Transformer-based models (Vaswani et al., 2017),
and use BERT as an example to investigate the
method for large-scale PLMs.
KD has been extensively studied in NLP (Kim
and Rush, 2016; Hu et al., 2018) as well as for
pre-trained language models (Sanh et al., 2019;
Sun et al., 2019, 2020; Wang et al., 2020). The
pre-training-then-ﬁne-tuning paradigm ﬁrstly pre-arXiv:1909.10351v5  [cs.CL]  16 Oct 2020