Large -scale 
Text CorpusGeneral
TinyBERTFine -tuned 
TinyBERTGeneral 
Distillation
Task DatasetAugmented 
Task D atasetData AugmentationTask -specific
DistillationFigure 1: The illustration of TinyBERT learning.
trains BERT on a large-scale unsupervised text
corpus, then ﬁne-tunes it on task-speciﬁc dataset,
which greatly increases the difﬁculty of BERT dis-
tillation. Therefore, it is required to design an ef-
fective KD strategy for both training stages.
To build a competitive TinyBERT, we ﬁrstly
propose a new Transformer distillation method to
distill the knowledge embedded in teacher BERT.
Speciﬁcally, we design three types of loss func-
tions to ﬁt different representations from BERT
layers: 1) the output of the embedding layer; 2) the
hidden states and attention matrices derived from
the Transformer layer; 3) the logits output by the
prediction layer. The attention based ﬁtting is in-
spired by the recent ﬁndings (Clark et al., 2019)
that the attention weights learned by BERT can cap-
ture substantial linguistic knowledge, and it thus
encourages the linguistic knowledge can be well
transferred from teacher BERT to student Tiny-
BERT. Then, we propose a novel two-stage learn-
ingframework including the general distillation
and the task-speciﬁc distillation , as illustrated in
Figure 1. At general distillation stage, the original
BERT without ﬁne-tuning acts as the teacher model.
The student TinyBERT mimics the teacher’s behav-
ior through the proposed Transformer distillation
on general-domain corpus. After that, we obtain
a general TinyBERT that is used as the initializa-
tion of student model for the further distillation.
At the task-speciﬁc distillation stage, we ﬁrst do
the data augmentation, then perform the distilla-
tion on the augmented dataset using the ﬁne-tuned
BERT as the teacher model. It should be pointed
out that both the two stages are essential to improve
the performance and generalization capability of
TinyBERT.
The main contributions of this work are as fol-
lows: 1) We propose a new Transformer distilla-
tion method to encourage that the linguistic knowl-
edge encoded in teacher BERT can be adequately
transferred to TinyBERT; 2) We propose a novel
two-stage learning framework with performing the
proposed Transformer distillation at both the pre-
training and ﬁne-tuning stages, which ensures thatTinyBERT can absorb both the general-domain and
task-speciﬁc knowledge of the teacher BERT. 3)
We show in the experiments that our TinyBERT 4
can achieve more than 96.8% the performance of
teacher BERT BASE on GLUE tasks, while having
much fewer parameters ( 13.3%) and less infer-
ence time (10.6%), and signiﬁcantly outperforms
other state-of-the-art baselines with 4 layers on
BERT distillation; 4) We also show that a 6-layer
TinyBERT 6can perform on-par with the teacher
BERT BASE on GLUE.
2 Preliminaries
In this section, we describe the formulation of
Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017) and Knowledge
Distillation (Hinton et al., 2015). Our proposed
Transformer distillation is a specially designed KD
method for Transformer-based models.
2.1 Transformer Layer
Most of the recent pre-trained language mod-
els (e.g., BERT, XLNet and RoBERTa) are built
with Transformer layers, which can capture long-
term dependencies between input tokens by self-
attention mechanism. Speciﬁcally, a standard
Transformer layer includes two main sub-layers:
multi-head attention (MHA) and fully connected
feed-forward network (FFN).
Multi-Head Attention (MHA) . The calculation of
attention function depends on the three components
of queries, keys and values, denoted as matrices Q,
KandVrespectively. The attention function can
be formulated as follows:
A=QKT
pdk; (1)
Attention (Q;K;V)=softmax (A)V;(2)
wheredkis the dimension of keys and acts as a
scaling factor, Ais the attention matrix calculated
from the compatibility of QandKby dot-product
operation. The ﬁnal function output is calculated
as a weighted sum of values V, and the weight is
computed by applying softmax() operation on
the each column of matrix A. According to Clark
et al. (2019), the attention matrices in BERT can
capture substantial linguistic knowledge, and thus
play an essential role in our proposed distillation
method.
Multi-head attention is deﬁned by concatenating
the attention heads from different representation