even worse than BERT TINY on MRPC and CoLA
tasks. We conjecture that if without imitating the
BERT BASE ’s behaviors at the pre-training stage,
BERT TINY will derive mismatched distributions in
intermediate representations (e.g., attention matri-
ces and hidden states) with the BERT BASE model.
The following task-speciﬁc distillation under the
supervision of ﬁne-tuned BERT BASE will fur-
ther disturb the learned distribution/knowledge of
BERT TINY , ﬁnally leading to poor performances
on some less-data tasks. For the intensive-data
task (e.g. MNLI), TD has enough training data to
make BERT TINY acquire the task-speciﬁc knowl-
edge very well, although the pre-trained distribu-
tions have already been disturbed.
From the results of Table 7, we ﬁnd that GD can
effectively transfer the knowledge from the teacher
BERT to the student TinyBERT and achieve compa-
rable results with BERT TINY (61.1 vs. 63.9), even
without performing the MLM and NSP tasks. Fur-
thermore, the task-speciﬁc distillation boosts the
performances of TinyBERT by continuing on learn-
ing the task-speciﬁc knowledge from ﬁne-tuned
teacher BERT BASE .
D GLUE Details
The GLUE datasets are described as follows:
MNLI. Multi-Genre Natural Language Inference
is a large-scale, crowd-sourced entailment classi-
ﬁcation task (Williams et al., 2018). Given a pair
ofhpremise;hypothesis i, the goal is to predict
whether the hypothesis is an entailment, contra-
diction, or neutral with respect to the premise .
QQP. Quora Question Pairs is a collection of ques-
tion pairs from the website Quora. The task is to
determine whether two questions are semantically
equivalent (Chen et al., 2018).
QNLI. Question Natural Language Inference is
a version of the Stanford Question Answering
Dataset which has been converted to a binary sen-
tence pair classiﬁcation task by Wang et al. (2018).
Given a pairhquestion;context i. The task is to
determine whether the context contains the answer
to thequestion .
SST-2. The Stanford Sentiment Treebank is a
binary single-sentence classiﬁcation task, where
the goal is to predict the sentiment of movie re-
views (Socher et al., 2013).
CoLA. The Corpus of Linguistic Acceptability is
a task to predict whether an English sentence is a
grammatically correct one (Warstadt et al., 2019).STS-B. The Semantic Textual Similarity Bench-
mark is a collection of sentence pairs drawn from
news headlines and many other domains (Cer et al.,
2017). The task aims to evaluate how similar two
pieces of texts are by a score from 1 to 5.
MRPC. Microsoft Research Paraphrase Corpus is
a paraphrase identiﬁcation dataset where systems
aim to identify if two sentences are paraphrases of
each other (Dolan and Brockett, 2005).
RTE. Recognizing Textual Entailment is a binary
entailment task with a small training dataset (Ben-
tivogli et al., 2009).