Algorithm 1 Data Augmentation Procedure for
Task-speciﬁc Distillation
Input :xis a sequence of words
Params :pt: the threshold probability
Na: the number of samples augmented per example
K: the size of candidate set
Output :D0: the augmented data
1:n 0 ;D0 [ ]
2:while n < N ado
3: xm x
4: fori 1 to len (x)do
5: ifx[i]is a single-piece word then
6: Replace xm[i]with[MASK]
7: C Kmost probable words of BERT (xm)[i]
8: else
9: C Kmost similar words of x[i]from GloVe
10: end if
11: Sample pUniform(0, 1)
12: ifpptthen
13: Replace xm[i]with a word in Crandomly
14: end if
15: end for
16: Append xmtoD0
17: n n+ 1
18:end while
19:return D0
domain, we obtain a general TinyBERT that can be
ﬁne-tuned for downstream tasks. However, due to
the signiﬁcant reductions of the hidden/embedding
size and the layer number, general TinyBERT per-
forms generally worse than BERT.
Task-speciﬁc Distillation . Previous studies
show that the complex models, such as ﬁne-
tuned BERTs, suffer from over-parametrization for
domain-speciﬁc tasks (Kovaleva et al., 2019). Thus,
it is possible for smaller models to achieve com-
parable performances to the BERTs. To this end,
we propose to produce competitive ﬁne-tuned Tiny-
BERTs through the task-speciﬁc distillation. In
the task-speciﬁc distillation, we re-perform the pro-
posed Transformer distillation on an augmented
task-speciﬁc dataset. Speciﬁcally, the ﬁne-tuned
BERT is used as the teacher and a data augmenta-
tion method is proposed to expand the task-speciﬁc
training set. Training with more task-related exam-
ples, the generalization ability of the student model
can be further improved.
Data Augmentation . We combine a pre-trained
language model BERT and GloVe (Pennington
et al., 2014) word embeddings to do word-level
the TinyBERT primarily learn the intermediate structures of
BERT at pre-training stage. From our preliminary experi-
ments, we also found that conducting prediction-layer distilla-
tion at pre-training stage does not bring extra improvements
on downstream tasks, when the Transformer-layer distillation
(Attn and Hidn distillation) and Embedding-layer distillation
have already been performed.replacement for data augmentation. Speciﬁcally,
we use the language model to predict word replace-
ments for single-piece words (Wu et al., 2019), and
use the word embeddings to retrieve the most simi-
lar words as word replacements for multiple-pieces
words3. Some hyper-parameters are deﬁned to con-
trol the replacement ratio of a sentence and the
amount of augmented dataset. More details of the
data augmentation procedure are shown in Algo-
rithm 1. We set pt= 0.4,Na= 20,K= 15 for all
our experiments.
The above two learning stages are complemen-
tary to each other: the general distillation provides
a good initialization for the task-speciﬁc distilla-
tion, while the task-speciﬁc distillation on the aug-
mented data further improves TinyBERT by focus-
ing on learning the task-speciﬁc knowledge. Al-
though there is a signiﬁcant reduction of model size,
with the data augmentation and by performing the
proposed Transformer distillation method at both
the pre-training and ﬁne-tuning stages, TinyBERT
can achieve competitive performances in various
NLP tasks.
4 Experiments
In this section, we evaluate the effectiveness and
efﬁciency of TinyBERT on a variety of tasks with
different model settings.
4.1 Datasets
We evaluate TinyBERT on the General Language
Understanding Evaluation (GLUE) (Wang et al.,
2018) benchmark, which consists of 2 single-
sentence tasks: CoLA (Warstadt et al., 2019), SST-
2 (Socher et al., 2013), 3 sentence similarity tasks:
MRPC (Dolan and Brockett, 2005), STS-B (Cer
et al., 2017), QQP (Chen et al., 2018), and 4 natural
language inference tasks: MNLI (Williams et al.,
2018), QNLI (Rajpurkar et al., 2016), RTE (Ben-
tivogli et al., 2009) and WNLI (Levesque et al.,
2012). The metrics for these tasks can be found in
the GLUE paper (Wang et al., 2018).
4.2 TinyBERT Settings
We instantiate a tiny student model (the number
of layersM=4, the hidden size d0=312, the feed-
forward/ﬁlter size d0
i=1200 and the head number
h=12) that has a total of 14.5M parameters. This
model is referred to as TinyBERT 4. The original
3A word is tokenized into multiple word-pieces by the
tokenizer of BERT.