parameter that represents the importance of the
m-th layer’s distillation.
Transformer-layer Distillation . The proposed
Transformer-layer distillation includes the atten-
tion based distillation andhidden states based dis-
tillation , which is shown in Figure 2. The atten-
tion based distillation is motivated by the recent
ﬁndings that attention weights learned by BERT
can capture rich linguistic knowledge (Clark et al.,
2019). This kind of linguistic knowledge includes
the syntax and coreference information, which is
essential for natural language understanding. Thus
we propose the attention based distillation to en-
courage that the linguistic knowledge can be trans-
ferred from teacher (BERT) to student (TinyBERT).
Speciﬁcally, the student learns to ﬁt the matrices
of multi-head attention in the teacher network, and
the objective is deﬁned as:
Lattn=1
hXh
i=1MSE(AS
i;AT
i); (7)
wherehis the number of attention heads, Ai2
Rllrefers to the attention matrix corresponding
to thei-th head of teacher or student, lis the input
text length, and MSE() means the mean squared
error loss function. In this work, the (unnormal-
ized) attention matrix Aiis used as the ﬁtting target
instead of its softmax output softmax (Ai), since
our experiments show that the former setting has a
faster convergence rate and better performances.
In addition to the attention based distillation,
we also distill the knowledge from the output of
Transformer layer, and the objective is as follows:
Lhidn=MSE(HSWh;HT); (8)
where the matrices HS2Rld0andHT2Rld
refer to the hidden states of student and teacher net-
works respectively, which are calculated by Equa-
tion 4. The scalar values dandd0denote the hidden
sizes of teacher and student models, and d0is often
smaller than dto obtain a smaller student network.
The matrix Wh2Rd0dis a learnable linear trans-
formation, which transforms the hidden states of
student network into the same space as the teacher
network’s states.
Embedding-layer Distillation . Similar to the
hidden states based distillation, we also perform
embedding-layer distillation and the objective is:
Lembd=MSE(ESWe;ET); (9)where the matrices ESandHTrefer to the em-
beddings of student and teacher networks, respec-
tively. In this paper, they have the same shape as
the hidden state matrices. The matrix Weis a linear
transformation playing a similar role as Wh.
Prediction-layer Distillation . In addition to im-
itating the behaviors of intermediate layers, we
also use the knowledge distillation to ﬁt the predic-
tions of teacher model as in Hinton et al. (2015).
Speciﬁcally, we penalize the soft cross-entropy loss
between the student network’s logits against the
teacher’s logits:
Lpred=CE(zT=t;zS=t); (10)
where zSandzTare the logits vectors predicted
by the student and teacher respectively, CEmeans
thecross entropy loss, andtmeans the tempera-
ture value. In our experiment, we ﬁnd that t= 1
performs well.
Using the above distillation objectives (i.e. Equa-
tions 7, 8, 9 and 10), we can unify the distilla-
tion loss of the corresponding layers between the
teacher and the student network:
Llayer=8
><
>:Lembd; m =0
Lhidn+Lattn;Mm>0
Lpred; m =M+ 1(11)
3.2 TinyBERT Learning
The application of BERT usually consists of two
learning stages: the pre-training and ﬁne-tuning.
The plenty of knowledge learned by BERT in the
pre-training stage is of great importance and should
be transferred to the compressed model. There-
fore, we propose a novel two-stage learning frame-
work including the general distillation and the
task-speciﬁc distillation , as illustrated in Figure 1.
General distillation helps TinyBERT learn the rich
knowledge embedded in pre-trained BERT, which
plays an important role in improving the general-
ization capability of TinyBERT. The task-speciﬁc
distillation further teaches TinyBERT the knowl-
edge from the ﬁne-tuned BERT. With the two-step
distillation, we can substantially reduce the gap
between teacher and student models.
General Distillation . We use the original BERT
without ﬁne-tuning as the teacher and a large-scale
text corpus as the training data. By performing the
Transformer distillation2on the text from general
2In the general distillation, we do not perform prediction-
layer distillation as Equation 10. Our motivation is to make