nuScenes: A multimodal dataset for autonomous driving
Holger Caesar, Varun Bankiti, Alex H. Lang, Sourabh V ora, Venice Erin Liong, Qiang Xu,
Anush Krishnan, Yu Pan, Giancarlo Baldan, Oscar Beijbom
nuTonomy: an APTIV company
nuscenes@nutonomy.com
Abstract
Robust detection and tracking of objects is crucial for
the deployment of autonomous vehicle technology. Image
based benchmark datasets have driven development in com-
puter vision tasks such as object detection, tracking and seg-
mentation of agents in the environment. Most autonomous
vehicles, however, carry a combination of cameras and
range sensors such as lidar and radar. As machine learn-
ing based methods for detection and tracking become more
prevalent, there is a need to train and evaluate such meth-
ods on datasets containing range sensor data along with im-
ages. In this work we present nuTonomy scenes (nuScenes),
theﬁrst dataset to carry the full autonomous vehicle sensor
suite: 6 cameras, 5 radars and 1 lidar, all with full 360 de-
gree ﬁeld of view. nuScenes comprises 1000 scenes, each
20s long and fully annotated with 3D bounding boxes for
23 classes and 8 attributes. It has 7x as many annotations
and 100x as many images as the pioneering KITTI dataset.
We de ﬁne novel 3D detection and tracking metrics. We also
provide careful dataset analysis as well as baselines for li-
dar and image based detection and tracking. Data, devel-
opment kit and more information are available online1.
1. Introduction
Autonomous driving has the potential to radically
change the cityscape and save many human lives [ 78]. A
crucial part of safe navigation is the detection and track-
ing of agents in the environment surrounding the vehicle.
To achieve this, a modern self-driving vehicle deploys sev-
eral sensors along with sophisticated detection and tracking
algorithms. Such algorithms rely increasingly on machine
learning, which drives the need for benchmark datasets.
While there is a plethora of image datasets for this pur-
pose (Table 1), there is a lack of multimodal datasets that
exhibit the full set of challenges associated with building
an autonomous driving perception system. We released the
nuScenes dataset to address this gap2.
1nuScenes.org
2nuScenes teaser set released Sep. 2018, full release in March 2019.
Figure 1. An example from the nuScenes dataset. We see 6 dif-
ferent camera views, lidar and radar data, as well as the human
annotated semantic map. At the bottom we show the human writ-
ten scene description.
Multimodal datasets are of particular importance as no
single type of sensor is suf ﬁcient and the sensor types are
complementary. Cameras allow accurate measurements of
edges, color and lighting enabling classi ﬁcation and local-
ization on the image plane. However, 3D localization from
images is challenging [ 13,12,57,80,69,66,73]. Lidar
pointclouds, on the other hand, contain less semantic infor-
mation but highly accurate localization in 3D [ 51]. Further-
more the re ﬂectance of lidar is an important feature [ 40,51].
However, lidar data is sparse and the range is typically lim-
ited to 50-150m. Radar sensors achieve a range of 200-
300m and measure the object velocity through the Doppler
effect. However, the returns are even sparser than lidar and
less precise in terms of localization. While radar has been
used for decades [ 1,3], we are not aware of any autonomous
driving datasets that provide radar data.
Since the three sensor types have different failure modes
during dif ﬁcult conditions, the joint treatment of sensor
data is essential for agent detection and tracking. Liter-
ature [ 46] even suggests that multimodal sensor con ﬁg-
urations are not just complementary, but provide redun-
dancy in the face of sabotage, failure, adverse conditions
11621