Figure 2. Front camera images collected from clear weather (col 1), nighttime (col 2), rain (col 3) and construction zones (col 4).
and blind spots. And while there are several works that
have proposed fusion methods based on cameras and li-
dar [ 48,14,64,52,81,75,29], PointPillars [ 51] showed
a lidar-only method that performed on par with existing fu-
sion based methods. This suggests more work is required to
combine multimodal measurements in a principled manner.
In order to train deep learning methods, quality data an-
notations are required. Most datasets provide 2D semantic
annotations as boxes or masks (class or instance) [ 8,19,33,
85,55]. At the time of the initial nuScenes release, only a
few datasets annotated objects using 3D boxes [ 32,41,61],
and they did not provide the full sensor suite. Following
the nuScenes release, there are now several sets which con-
tain the full sensor suite (Table 1). Still, to the best of our
knowledge, no other 3D dataset provides attribute annota-
tions, such as pedestrian pose or vehicle state.
Existing A V datasets and vehicles are focused on partic-
ular operational design domains. More research is required
on generalizing to “complex, cluttered and unseen environ-
ments” [ 36]. Hence there is a need to study how detection
methods generalize to different countries, lighting (daytime
vs. nighttime), driving directions, road markings, vegeta-
tion, precipitation and previously unseen object types.
Contextual knowledge using semantic maps is also an
important prior for scene understanding [ 82,2,35]. For ex-
ample, one would expect to ﬁnd cars on the road, but not on
the sidewalk or inside buildings. With the notable exception
of [45,10], most A V datasets do not provide semantic maps.
1.1. Contributions
From the complexities of the multimodal 3D detection
challenge, and the limitations of current A V datasets, a
large-scale multimodal dataset with 360◦coverage across
all vision and range sensors collected from diverse situa-
tions alongside map information would boost A V scene-
understanding research further. nuScenes does just that, and
it is the main contribution of this work.
nuScenes represents a large leap forward in terms of
data volumes and complexities (Table 1), and is the ﬁrstdataset to provide 360◦sensor coverage from the entire sen-
sor suite . It is also the ﬁrst A V dataset to include radar data
and captured using an A V approved for public roads . It is
further the ﬁrst multimodal dataset that contains data from
nighttime andrainy conditions, and with object attributes
and scene descriptions in addition to object class and loca-
tion. Similar to [ 84], nuScenes is a holistic scene under-
standing benchmark for A Vs. It enables research on mul-
tiple tasks such as object detection, tracking and behavior
modeling in a range of conditions.
Our second contribution is new detection and tracking
metrics aimed at the A V application. We train 3D object
detectors and trackers as a baseline, including a novel ap-
proach of using multiple lidar sweeps to enhance object
detection. We also present and analyze the results of the
nuScenes object detection and tracking challenges.
Third, we publish the devkit, evaluation code, taxonomy,
annotator instructions, and database schema for industry-
wide standardization. Recently, the Lyft L5 [ 45] dataset
adopted this format to achieve compatibility between the
different datasets. The nuScenes data is published under
CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license, which means that anyone can
use this dataset for non-commercial research purposes. All
data, code, and information is made available online3.
Since the release, nuScenes has received strong interest
from the A V community [ 90,70,50,91,9,5,68,28,49,86,
89]. Some works extended our dataset to introduce new an-
notations for natural language object referral [ 22] and high-
level scene understanding [ 74]. The detection challenge en-
abled lidar based and camera based detection works such
as [90,70], that improved over the state-of-the-art at the
time of initial release [ 51,69] by40% and81% (Table 4).
nuScenes has been used for 3D object detection [ 83,60],
multi-agent forecasting [ 9,68], pedestrian localization [ 5],
weather augmentation [ 37], and moving pointcloud predic-
tion [ 27]. Being still the only annotated A V dataset to pro-
vide radar data, nuScenes encourages researchers to explore
radar and sensor fusion for object detection [ 27,42,72].
3github.com/nutonomy/nuscenes-devkit
11622