Sensor Details
6x Camera RGB,12Hz capture frequency, 1/1.8”CMOS sensor,
1600×900 resolution, auto exposure, JPEG com-
pressed
1x Lidar Spinning, 32beams,20Hz capture frequency, 360◦
horizontal FOV , −30◦to10◦vertical FOV , ≤70m
range,±2cm accuracy, up to 1.4Mpoints per second.
5x Radar ≤250mrange,77GHz, FMCW, 13Hz capture fre-
quency,±0.1km/h vel. accuracy
GPS & IMU GPS, IMU, AHRS. 0.2◦heading, 0.1◦roll/pitch,
20mm RTK positioning, 1000Hz update rate
Table 2. Sensor data in nuScenes.
erage of 16km/h). Driving routes are carefully chosen to
capture a diverse set of locations (urban, residential, nature
and industrial), times (day and night) and weather condi-
tions (sun, rain and clouds).
Car setup. We use two Renault Zoe supermini electric
cars with an identical sensor layout to drive in Boston and
Singapore. See Figure 4for sensor placements and Table 2
for sensor details. Front and side cameras have a 70◦FOV
and are offset by 55◦. The rear camera has a FOV of 110◦.
Sensor synchronization. To achieve good cross-modality
data alignment between the lidar and the cameras, the ex-
posure of a camera is triggered when the top lidar sweeps
across the center of the camera’s FOV . The timestamp of the
image is the exposure trigger time; and the timestamp of the
lidar scan is the time when the full rotation of the current li-
dar frame is achieved. Given that the camera’s exposure
time is nearly instantaneous, this method generally yields
good data alignment5. We perform motion compensation
using the localization algorithm described below.
Localization. Most existing datasets provide the vehicle
location based on GPS and IMU [ 32,41,19,61]. Such lo-
calization systems are vulnerable to GPS outages, as seen
on the KITTI dataset [ 32,7]. As we operate in dense ur-
ban areas, this problem is even more pronounced. To accu-
rately localize our vehicle, we create a detailed HD map
of lidar points in an of ﬂine step. While collecting data,
we use a Monte Carlo Localization scheme from lidar and
odometry information [ 18]. This method is very robust
and we achieve localization errors of ≤10cm. To encour-
age robotics research, we also provide the raw CAN bus
data (e.g. velocities, accelerations, torque, steering angles,
wheel speeds) similar to [ 65].
Maps. We provide highly accurate human-annotated se-
mantic maps of the relevant areas. The original rasterized
map includes only roads and sidewalks with a resolution of
10px/m. The vectorized map expansion provides informa-
tion on 11 semantic classes as shown in Figure 3, making
it richer than the semantic maps of other datasets published
since the original release [ 10,45]. We encourage the use of
localization and semantic maps as strong priors for all tasks.
5The cameras run at 12Hz while the lidar runs at 20Hz. The12camera
exposures are spread as evenly as possible across the 20lidar scans, so not
all lidar scans have a corresponding camera frame.
Figure 3. Semantic map of nuScenes with 11 semantic layers in
different colors. To show the path of the ego vehicle we plot each
keyframe ego pose from scene-0121 with black spheres.
Finally, we provide the baseline routes - the idealized path
an A V should take, assuming there are no obstacles. This
route may assist trajectory prediction [ 68], as it simpli ﬁes
the problem by reducing the search space of viable routes.
Scene selection. After collecting the raw sensor data, we
manually select 1000 interesting scenes of 20sduration
each. Such scenes include high traf ﬁc density (e.g. inter-
sections, construction sites), rare classes (e.g. ambulances,
animals), potentially dangerous traf ﬁc situations (e.g. jay-
walkers, incorrect behavior), maneuvers (e.g. lane change,
turning, stopping) and situations that may be dif ﬁcult for
an A V . We also select some scenes to encourage diversity
in terms of spatial coverage, different scene types, as well
as different weather and lighting conditions. Expert anno-
tators write textual descriptions or captions for each scene
(e.g.: “Wait at intersection, peds on sidewalk, bicycle cross-
ing, jaywalker, turn right, parked cars, rain”).
Data annotation. Having selected the scenes, we sample
keyframes (image, lidar, radar) at 2Hz. We annotate each of
the 23 object classes in every keyframe with a semantic cat-
egory, attributes (visibility, activity, and pose) and a cuboid
modeled as x, y, z, width, length, height and yaw angle.
We annotate objects continuously throughout each scene if
they are covered by at least one lidar or radar point. Using
expert annotators and multiple validation steps, we achieve
highly accurate annotations. We also release intermediate
sensor frames, which are important for tracking, prediction
and object detection as shown in Section 4.2. At capture
frequencies of 12Hz,13Hz and20Hz for camera, radar and
lidar, this makes our dataset unique. Only the Waymo Open
dataset provides a similarly high capture frequency of 10Hz.
Figure 4. Sensor setup for our data collection platform.
11624