KDD ’19, August 4–8, 2019, Anchorage, AK, USA H. Jin et al.
Bayesian optimization to generate the next architecture to observe.
However, in the context of network morphism, it is not to maximize
a function in Euclidean space, but finding a node in a tree-structured
search space, where each node represents a neural architecture and
each edge is a morph operation. Thus traditional gradient-based
methods cannot be simply applied. Third, the changes caused by a
network morphism operation is complicated. A network morphism
operation on one layer may change the shapes of some intermediate
output tensors, which no longer match input shape requirements of
the layers taking them as input. How to maintain such consistency
is a challenging problem.
In this paper, an efficient neural architecture search with network
morphism is proposed, which utilizes Bayesian optimization to
guide through the search space by selecting the most promising
operations each time. To tackle the aforementioned challenges, an
edit-distance neural network kernel is constructed. Being consistent
with the key idea of network morphism, it measures how many
operations are needed to change one neural network to another.
Besides, a novel acquisition function optimizer, which is capable
of balancing between the exploration and exploitation, is designed
specially for the tree-structure search space to enable Bayesian
optimization to select from the operations. In addition, a graph-level
network morphism is defined to address the changes in the neural
architectures based on layer-level network morphism. The proposed
approach is compared with the state-of-the-art NAS methods [ 13,
22] on benchmark datasets of MNIST, CIFAR10, and FASHION-
MNIST. Within a limited search time, the architectures found by
our method achieves the lowest error rates on all of the datasets.
In addition, we have developed a widely adopted open-source
AutoML system based on our proposed method, namely Auto-Keras.
It is an open-source AutoML system, which can be download and
installed locally. The system is carefully designed with a concise
interface for people not specialized in computer programming and
data science to use. To speed up the search, the workload on CPU
and GPU can run in parallel. To address the issue of different GPU
memory, which limits the size of the neural architectures, a memory
adaption strategy is designed for deployment.
The main contributions of the paper are as follows:
•Propose an algorithm for efficient neural architecture search
based on network morphism guided by Bayesian optimization.
•Conduct intensive experiments on benchmark datasets to demon-
strate the superior performance of the proposed method over the
baseline methods.
•Develop an open-source system, namely Auto-Keras, which is
one of the most widely used AutoML systems.
2 PROBLEM STATEMENT
The general neural architecture search problem we studied in this
paper is defined as: Given a neural architecture search space F, the
input data Ddivided into Dtrain andDval, and the cost function
Cost(·), we aim at finding an optimal neural network f∗∈ F ,
which could achieve the lowest cost on dataset D. The definition is
equivalent to finding f∗satisfying:
f∗=argmin
f∈FCost(f(θ∗),Dval), (1)θ∗=argmin
θL(f(θ),Dtrain). (2)
where Cost(·,·)is the evaluation metric function, e.g., accuracy,
mean sqaured error, θ∗is the learned parameter of f.
The search spaceFcovers all the neural architectures, which
can be morphed from the initial architectures. The details of the
morph operations are introduced in 3.3. Notably, the operations
can change the number of filters in a convolutional layer, which
makesFlarger than methods with fixed layer width [31].
3 NETWORK MORPHISM GUIDED BY
BAYESIAN OPTIMIZATION
The key idea of the proposed method is to explore the search space
via morphing the neural architectures guided by Bayesian optimiza-
tion (BO) algorithm. Traditional Bayesian optimization consists
of a loop of three steps: update, generation, and observation. In
the context of NAS, our proposed Bayesian optimization algorithm
iteratively conducts: (1) Update : train the underlying Gaussian pro-
cess model with the existing architectures and their performances;
(2)Generation : generate the next architecture to observe by opti-
mizing a delicately defined acquisition function; (3) Observation:
obtain the actual performance by training the generated neural ar-
chitecture. There are three main challenges in designing a method
for morphing the neural architectures with Bayesian optimization.
We introduce three key components separately in the subsequent
sections coping with the three challenges.
3.1 Edit-Distance Neural Network Kernel for
Gaussian Process
The first challenge we need to address is that the NAS space is
not a Euclidean space, which does not satisfy the assumption of
traditional Gaussian process (GP). Directly vectorizing the neural
architecture is impractical due to the uncertain number of layers
and parameters it may contain. Since the Gaussian process is a
kernel method, instead of vectorizing a neural architecture, we
propose to tackle the challenge by designing a neural network
kernel function. The intuition behind the kernel function is the edit-
distance for morphing one neural architecture to another. More
edits needed from one architecture to another means the further
distance between them, thus less similar they are. The proof of the
validity of the kernel function is presented in Appendix E.
Kernel Definition : Suppose faandfbare two neural networks.
Inspired by Deep Graph Kernels [ 48], we propose an edit-distance
kernel for neural networks. Edit-distance here means how many
operations are needed to morph one neural network to another.
The concrete kernel function is defined as:
κ(fa,fb)=e−ρ2(d(fa,fb)), (3)
where function d(·,·)denotes the edit-distance of two neural net-
works, whose range is [0,+∞),ρis a mapping function, which
maps the distance in the original metric space to the corresponding
distance in the new space. The new space is constructed by em-
bedding the original metric space into a new one using Bourgain
Theorem [4], which ensures the validity of the kernel.
Calculating the edit-distance of two neural networks can be
mapped to calculating the edit-distance of two graphs, which is
Applied Data Science Track Paper
KDD ’19, August 4–8, 2019, Anchorage, AK, USA
1947