Auto-Keras: An Efficient Neural Architecture Search System KDD ’19, August 4–8, 2019, Anchorage, AK, USA
layer. The third is adding an additive connection from node uto
nodevdenoted as add(G,u,v). The fourth is adding an concatena-
tive connection from node uto nodevdenoted as concat(G,u,v).
Fordeep(G,u), no other operation is needed except for initializing
the weights of the newly added layer. However, for all other three
operations, more changes are required to G.
First, we define an effective area of wide(G,u0)asγto better
describe where to change in the network. The effective area is a
set of nodes in the computational graph, which can be recursively
defined by the following rules: 1. u0∈γ. 2.v∈γ, if∃eu→v<Ls,
u∈γ. 3.v∈γ, if∃ev→u<Ls,u∈γ.Lsis the set of fully-connected
layers and convolutional layers. Operation wide(G,u0)needs to
change two set of layers, the previous layer set Lp={eu→v∈
Ls|v∈γ}, which needs to output a wider tensor, and next layer
setLn={eu→v∈Ls|u∈γ}, which needs to input a wider tensor.
Second, for operator add(G,u0,v0), additional pooling layers may
be needed on the skip-connection. u0andv0have the same number
of channels, but their shape may differ because of the pooling layers
between them. So we need a set of pooling layers whose effect is
the same as the combination of all the pooling layers between
u0andv0, which is defined as Lo={e∈Lpool|e∈pu0→v0}.
where pu0→v0could be any path between u0andv0,Lpool is the
pooling layer set. Another layer Lcis used after to pooling layers
to process u0to the same width as v0. Third, in concat(G,u0,v0),
the concatenated tensor is wider than the original tensor v0. The
concatenated tensor is input to a new layer Lcto reduce the width
back to the same width as v0. Additional pooling layers are also
needed for the concatenative connection.
3.4 Time Complexity Analysis
As described at the start of Section 3, Bayesian optimization can
be roughly divided into three steps: update, generation, and obser-
vation. The bottleneck of the algorithm efficiency is observation,
which involves the training of the generated neural architecture.
Letnbe the number of architectures in the search history. The time
complexity of the update is O(n2log2n). In each generation, the ker-
nel is computed between the new architectures during optimizing
acquisition function and the ones in the search history, the number
of values in which is O(nm), where mis the number of architectures
computed during the optimization of the acquisition function. The
time complexity for computing d(·,·)once is O(l2+s3), where l
andsare the number of layers and skip-connections. So the overall
time complexity is O(nm(l2+s3)+n2log2n). The magnitude of
these factors is within the scope of tens. So the time consumption
of update and generation is trivial comparing to the observation.
4 AUTO-KERAS
Based on the proposed neural architecture search method, we de-
veloped an open-source AutoML system, namely Auto-Keras. It
is named after Keras [ 11], which is known for its simplicity in
creating neural networks. Similar to SMAC [ 21], TPOT [ 35], Auto-
WEKA [ 44], and Auto-Sklearn [ 15], the goal is to enable domain
experts who are not familiar with machine learning technologies
to use machine learning techniques easily. However, Auto-Keras
is focusing on the deep learning tasks, which is different from the
systems focusing on the shallow models mentioned above.
Figure 2: Auto-Keras System Overview. (1) The user calls the
API. (2) The Searcher generates neural architectures on CPU.
(3) Graph builds real neural networks with parameters on
RAM from the neural architectures. (4) The neural network
is copied to GPU for training. (5) Trained neural networks
are saved on storage devices. The Searcher is updated based
on the training results. Step (2) to (5) will repeat until it
reaches the time limit.
Although, there are several AutoML services available on large
cloud computing platforms, three things are prohibiting the users
from using them. First, cloud services are not free to use, which
may not be affordable for everyone who wants to use AutoML
techniques. Second, the cloud-based AutoML usually requires com-
plicated configurations of Docker containers and Kubernetes, which
is not easy for people without a rich computer science background.
Third, the AutoML service providers are honest-but-curious [ 9],
which cannot guarantee the security and privacy of the data. An
open-source software, which is easily downloadable and runs lo-
cally, would solve these problems and make the AutoML accessible
to everyone. To bridge the gap, we developed Auto-Keras.
It is challenging, to design an easy-to-use and locally deploy-
able system. First, we need a concise and configurable application
programming interface (API). For the users who don’t have rich
experience in programming, they could easily learn how to use the
API. For the advanced users, they can still configure the details of
the system to meet their requirements. Second, local computation
resources may be limited. We need to make full use of the local
computation resources to speed up the search. Third, the available
GPU memory may be of different sizes in different environments.
We need to adapt the neural architecture sizes to the GPU memory
during the search.
4.1 System Overview
The system architecture of Auto-Keras is shown in Figure 2. We
design this architecture to fully make use of the computational
resource of both CPU and GPU, and utilize the memory efficiently
by only placing the currently useful information on the RAM, and
save the rest on the storage devices, e.g., hard drives. The top part
Applied Data Science Track Paper
KDD ’19, August 4–8, 2019, Anchorage, AK, USA
1950