KDD ’19, August 4–8, 2019, Anchorage, AK, USA H. Jin et al.
is the API, which is directly called by the users. It is responsible
for calling corresponding middle-level modules to complete certain
functionalities. The Searcher is the module of the neural architec-
ture search algorithm containing Bayesian Optimizer and Gaussian
Process. These search algorithms run on CPU. The Model Trainer is
a module responsible for the computation on GPUs. It trains given
neural networks with the training data in a separate process for
parallelism. The Graph is the module processing the computational
graphs of neural networks, which is controlled by the Searcher for
the network morphism operations. The current neural architecture
in the Graph is placed on RAM for faster access. The Model Storage
is a pool of trained models. Since the size of the neural networks
are large and cannot be stored all in memory, the model storage
saves all the trained models on the storage devices.
A typical workflow for the Auto-Keras system is as follows. The
user initiated a search for the best neural architecture for the dataset.
The API received the call, preprocess the dataset, and pass it to the
Searcher to start the search. The Bayesian Optimizer in the Searcher
would generate a new architecture using CPU. It calls the Graph
module to build the generated neural architecture into a real neural
network in the RAM. The new neural architecture is copied the
GPU for the Model Trainer to train with the dataset. The trained
model is saved in the Model Storage. The performance of the model
is feedback to the Searcher to update the Gaussian Process.
4.2 Application Programming Interface
The design of the API follows the classic design of the Scikit-Learn
API [ 6,36], which is concise and configurable. The training of a
neural network requires as few as three lines of code calling the
constructor, the fit and predict function respectively. To accommo-
date the needs of different users, we designed two levels of APIs.
The first level is named as task-level. The users only need to know
their task, e.g., Image Classification, Text Regression, to use the API.
The second level is named search-level, which is for advanced users.
The user can search for a specific type of neural network architec-
tures, e.g., multi-layer perceptron, convolutional neural network.
To use this API, they need to preprocess the dataset by themselves
and know which type of neural network, e.g., CNN or MLP, is the
best for their task.
Several accommodations have been implemented to enhance the
user experience with the Auto-Keras package. First, the user can
restore and continue a previous search which might be accidentally
killed. From the users’ perspective, the main difference of using
Auto-Keras comparing with the AutoML systems aiming at shallow
models is the much longer time consumption, since a number of
deep neural networks are trained during the neural architecture
search. It is possible for some accident to happen to kill the pro-
cess before the search finishes. Therefore, the search outputs all
the searched neural network architectures with their trained pa-
rameters into a specific directory on the disk. As long as the path
to the directory is provided, the previous search can be restored.
Second, the user can export the search results, which are neural
architectures, as saved Keras models for other usages. Third, for
advanced users, they can specify all kinds of hyperparameters of
the search process and neural network optimization process by the
default parameters in the interface.
Searcher Queue GPU CPU
Pop Graph
Train Model
Update GPGenerate 
Graph
Generated 
Graph
Push GraphFigure 3: CPU and GPU Parallelism. The Searcher obtains
the next neural architecture to be trained and starts the
training on GPU in a separate process. Then, instead of wait-
ing for the training to finish, it directly starts to generate the
next neural architecture on CPU.
4.3 CPU and GPU Parallelism
To make full use of the limited local computation resources, the pro-
gram can run in parallel on the GPU and the CPU at the same time.
If we do the observation (training of the current neural network),
update, and generation of Bayesian optimization in sequential or-
der. The GPUs will be idle during the update and generation. The
CPUs will be idle during the observation. To improve efficiency,
the observation is run in parallel with the generation in separated
processes. A training queue is maintained as a buffer for the Model
Trainer. Figure 3 shows the Sequence diagram of the parallelism
between the CPU and the GPU. First, the Searcher requests the
queue to pop out a new graph and pass it to GPU to start training.
Second, while the GPU is busy, the searcher requests the CPU to
generate a new graph. At this time period, the GPU and the CPU
work in parallel. Third, the CPU returns the generated graph to the
searcher, who pushes the graph into the queue. Finally, the Model
Trainer finished training the graph on the GPU and returns it to the
Searcher to update the Gaussian process. In this way, the idle time
of GPU and CPU are dramatically reduced to improve the efficiency
of the search process.
4.4 GPU Memory Adaption
The size of the neural networks needs to be limited according to
the GPU memory. Otherwise, the system would crash because of
running out of GPU memory. Many approaches have been taken
to search for memory-efficient neural architectures [ 42]. In Auto-
Keras, we implement a memory estimation function on our own
data structure for the neural architectures. An integer value is
used to mark the upper bound of the neural architecture size. Any
new computational graph whose estimated size exceeds the upper
bound is discarded. However, the system may still crash because
the management of the GPU memory is very complicated, which
cannot be precisely estimated. So whenever it runs out of GPU
memory, the upper bound is lowered down to further limit the size
of the generated neural networks.
Applied Data Science Track Paper
KDD ’19, August 4–8, 2019, Anchorage, AK, USA
1951