KDD ’19, August 4–8, 2019, Anchorage, AK, USA H. Jin et al.
APPENDIX: REPRODUCIBILITY
In this section, we provide the details of our implementation and
proofs for reproducibility.
•The default architectures used to initialized are introduced.
•The details of the implementation of the four network mor-
phism operations are provided.
•The details of preprocessing the datasets are shown.
•The details of the training process are described.
•The proof of the validity of the kernel function is provided.
•The process of using ρ(·)to distort the approximated edit-
distance of the neural architectures d(·,·)is introduced.
Notably, the code and detailed documentation are available at Auto-
Keras official website (https://autokeras.com).
A DEFAULT ARCHITECTURES
As we introduced in the experiment section, for all other methods
except AK-DP, are using the same three-layer convolutional neural
network as the default architecture. The AK-DP is initialized with
ResNet, DenseNet and the three-layer CNN. In the current imple-
mentation, ResNet18 and DenseNet121 specifically are chosen as
the among all the ResNet and DenseNet architectures.
The three-layer CNN is constructed as follows. Each convolu-
tional layer is actually a convolutional block of a ReLU layer, a
batch-normalization layer, the convolutional layer, and a pooling
layer. All the convolutional layers are with kernel size equal to
three, stride equal to one, and number of filters equal to 64.
All the default architectures share the same fully-connected
layers design. After all the convolutional layers, the output tensor
passes through a global average pooling layer followed by a dropout
layer, a fully-connected layer of 64 neurons, a ReLU layer, another
fully-connected layer, and a softmax layer.
B NETWORK MORPHISM IMPLEMENTATION
The implementation of the network morphism is introduced from
two aspects. First, we describe how the new weights are initial-
ized. Second, we introduce a pool of possible operations which the
Bayesian optimizer can select from, e.g.the possible start and end
points of a skip connection.
The four network morphism operations all involve adding new
weights during inserting new layers and expanding existing lay-
ers. We initialize the newly added weights with zeros. However,
it would create a symmetry prohibiting the newly added weights
to learn different values during backpropagation. We follow the
Net2Net [ 10] to add noise to break the symmetry. The amount of
noise added is the largest noise possible not changing the output.
There are a large amount of possible network morphism op-
erations we can choose. Although there are only four types of
operations we can choose, a parameter of the operation can be set
to a large number of different values. For example, when we use the
deep(G,u)operation, we need to choose the location uto insert the
layer. In the tree-structured search, we actually cannot exhaust all
the operations to get all the children. We will keep sampling from
the possible operations until we reach eight children for a node.
For the sampling, we randomly sample an operation from deep ,
wide and skip ( addandconcat ), with equally likely probability. Theparameters of the corresponding operation are sampled accord-
ingly. If it is the deep operation, we need to decide the location to
insert the layer. In our implementation, any location except right
after a skip-connection. Moreover, we support inserting not only
convolutional layers, but activation layers, batch-normalization
layers, dropout layer, and fully-connected layers as well. They are
randomly sampled with equally likely probability. If it is the wide
operation, we need to choose the layer to be widened. It can be any
convolutional layer or fully-connected layer, which are randomly
sampled with equally likely probability. If it is the skip operations,
we need to decide if it is addorconcat . The start point and end
point of a skip-connection can be the output of any layer except
the already-exist skip-connection layers. So all the possible skip-
connections are generated in the form of tuples of the start point,
end point and type ( addorconcat ), among which we randomly
sample a skip-connection with equally likely probability.
C PREPROCESSING THE DATASETS
The benchmark datasets, e.g., MNIST, CIFAR10, FASHION, are pre-
processed before the neural architecture search. It involves nor-
malization and data augmentation. We normalize the data to the
standard normal distribution. For each channel, a mean and a stan-
dard deviation are calculated since the values in different channels
may have different distributions. The mean and standard deviation
are calculated using the training and validation set together. The
testing set is normalized using the same values. The data augmen-
tation includes random crop, random horizontal flip, and cutout,
which can improve the robustness of the trained model.
D PERFORMANCE ESTIMATION
During the observation phase, we need to estimate the perfor-
mance of a neural architecture to update the Gaussian process
model in Bayesian optimization. Since the quality of the observed
performances of the neural architectures is essential to the neural
architecture search algorithm, we propose to train the neural ar-
chitectures instead of using the performance estimation strategies
used in literatures [ 5,14,37]. The quality of the observations is
essential to the neural architecture search algorithm. So the neural
architectures are trained during the search in our proposed method.
There two important requirements for the training process. First,
it needs to be adaptive to different architectures. Different neu-
ral networks require different numbers of epochs in training to
converge. Second, it should not be affected by the noise in the
performance curve. The final metric value, e.g., mean squared er-
ror or accuracy, on the validation set is not the best performance
estimation since there is random noise in it.
To be adaptive to architectures of different sizes, we use the same
strategy as the early stop criterion in the multi-layer perceptron
algorithm in Scikit-Learn [ 36]. It sets a maximum threshold τ. If the
loss of the validation set does not decrease in τepochs, the training
stops. Comparing with the methods using a fixed number of training
epochs, it is more adaptive to different neural architectures.
To avoid being affected by the noise in the performance, the
mean of metric values of the last τepochs on the validation set is
used as the estimated performance for the given neural architecture.
It is more accurate than the final metric value on the validation set.
Applied Data Science Track Paper
KDD ’19, August 4–8, 2019, Anchorage, AK, USA
1955