Auto-Keras: An Efficient Neural Architecture Search System KDD ’19, August 4–8, 2019, Anchorage, AK, USA
5 EXPERIMENTS
In the experiments, we aim at answering the following questions.
1) How effective is the search algorithm with limited running time?
2) How much efficiency is gained from Bayesian optimization and
network morphism? 3) Does the proposed kernel function correctly
measure the similarity among neural networks in terms of their
actual performance?
Datasets Three benchmark datasets, MNIST [ 27], CIFAR10 [ 25],
and FASHION [ 46] are used in the experiments to evaluate our
method. They prefer very different neural architectures to achieve
good performance.
Baselines Four categories of baseline methods are used for com-
parison, which are elaborated as follows:
•Straightforward Methods: random search (RAND) and grid search
(GRID). They search the number of convolutional layers and the
width of those layers.
•Conventional Methods: SPMT [ 40] and SMAC [ 21]. Both SPMT
and SMAC are designed for general hyperparameters tuning
tasks of machine learning models instead of focusing on the deep
neural networks. They tune the 16 hyperparameters of a three-
layer convolutional neural network, including the width, dropout
rate, and regularization rate of each layer.
•State-of-the-art Methods: SEAS [ 13], NASBOT [ 22]. We carefully
implemented the SEAS as described in their paper. For NAS-
BOT, since the experimental settings are very similar, we directly
trained their searched neural architecture in the paper. They did
not search architectures for MNIST and FASHION dataset, so the
results are omitted in our experiments.
•Variants of the proposed method: BFS and BO. Our proposed
method is denoted as AK. BFS replaces the Bayesian optimization
in AK with the breadth-first search. BO is another variant, which
does not employ network morphism to speed up the training. For
AK,βis set to 2.5, while λis set to 1 according to the parameter
sensitivity analysis.
In addition, the performance of the deployed system of Auto-Keras
(AK-DP) is also evaluated in the experiments. The difference from
the AK above is that AK-DP uses various advanced techniques
to improve the performance including learning rate scheduling,
multiple manually defined initial architectures.
Experimental Setting The general experimental setting for
evaluation is described as follows: First, the original training data
of each dataset is further divided into training and validation sets
by 80-20. Second, the testing data of each dataset is used as the
testing set. Third, the initial architecture for SEAS, BO, BFS, and
AK is a three-layer convolutional neural network with 64 filters in
each layer. Fourth, each method is run for 12 hours on a single GPU
(NVIDIA GeForce GTX 1080 Ti) on the training and validation set
with batch size of 64. Fifth, the output architecture is trained with
both the training and validation set. Sixth, the testing set is used
to evaluate the trained architecture. Error rate is selected as the
evaluation metric since all the datasets are for classification. For a
fair comparison, the same data processing and training procedures
are used for all the methods. The neural networks are trained for 200
epochs in all the experiments. Notably, AK-DP uses a real deployed
system setting, whose result is not directly comparable with theTable 1: Classification Error Rate
Methods MNIST CIFAR10 FASHION
RANDOM 1.79% 16 .86% 11 .36%
GRID 1.68% 17 .17% 10 .28%
SPMT 1.36% 14 .68% 9 .62%
SMAC 1.43% 15 .04% 10 .87%
SEAS 1.07% 12 .43% 8 .05%
NASBOT NA 12.30% NA
BFS 1.56% 13 .84% 9 .13%
BO 1.83% 12 .90% 7 .99%
AK 0.55% 11 .44% 7 .42%
AK-DP 0.60% 3 .60% 6 .72%
rest of the methods. Except for AK-DP, all other methods are fairly
compared using the same initial architecture to start the search.
5.1 Evaluation of Effectiveness
We first evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed method. The
results are shown in Table 1. The following conclusions can be
drawn based on the results.
(1) AK-DP is evaluated to show the final performance of our
system, which shows the deployed system (AK-DP) achieved state-
of-the-art performance on all three datasets.
(2) The proposed method AK achieves the lowest error rate on
all the three datasets, which demonstrates that AK is able to find
simple but effective architectures on small datasets (MNIST) and can
explore more complicated structures on larger datasets (CIFAR10).
(3) The straightforward approaches and traditional approaches
perform well on the MNIST dataset, but poorly on the CIFAR10
dataset. This may come from the fact that: naive approaches like
random search and grid search only try a limited number of archi-
tectures blindly while the two conventional approaches are unable
to change the depth and skip-connections of the architectures.
(4) Though the two state-of-the-art approaches achieve accept-
able performance, SEAS could not beat our proposed model due
to its subpar search strategy. The hill-climbing strategy it adopts
only takes one step at each time in morphing the current best archi-
tecture, and the search tree structure is constrained to be unidirec-
tionally extending. Comparatively speaking, NASBOT possesses
stronger search expandability and also uses Bayesian optimization
as our proposed method. However, the low efficiency in training the
neural architectures constrains its power in achieving comparable
performance within a short time period. By contrast, the network
morphism scheme along with the novel searching strategy ensures
our model to achieve desirable performance with limited hardware
resources and time budges.
(5) For the two variants of AK, BFS preferentially considers
searching a vast number of neighbors surrounding the initial archi-
tecture, which constrains its power in reaching the better architec-
tures away from the initialization. By comparison, BO can jump
far from the initial architecture. But without network morphism, it
needs to train each neural architecture with a much longer time,
which limits the number of architectures it can search within a
given time.
Applied Data Science Track Paper
KDD ’19, August 4–8, 2019, Anchorage, AK, USA
1952