KDD ’19, August 4–8, 2019, Anchorage, AK, USA H. Jin et al.
Figure 4: Evaluation of Efficiency. The two figures plot the
same result with different X-axis. BFS uses network mor-
phism. BO uses Bayesian optimization. AK uses both.
5.2 Evaluation of Efficiency
In this experiment, we try to evaluate the efficiency gain of the pro-
posed method in two aspects. First, we evaluate whether Bayesian
optimization can really find better solutions with a limited number
of observations. Second, we evaluated whether network morphism
can enhance training efficiency.
We compare the proposed method AK with its two variants, BFS
and BO, to show the efficiency gains from Bayesian optimization
and network morphism, respectively. BFS does not adopt Bayesian
optimization but only network morphism, and use breadth-first
search to select the network morphism operations. BO does not
employ network morphism but only Bayesian optimization. Each
of the three methods is run on CIFAR10 for twelve hours. The two
figures in Figure 4 shows the same results but with different X-axes.
The Y-axis is the lowest error rate achieved. The X-axes are the
number of neural networks searched and the searching time.
Two conclusions can be drawn by comparing BFS and AK. First,
Bayesian optimization can efficiently find better architectures with
a limited number of observations. When searched the same num-
ber of neural architectures, AK could achieve a much lower error
rate than BFS. It demonstrates that Bayesian optimization could
effectively guide the search in the right direction, which is much
more efficient in finding good architectures than the naive BFS
approach. Second, the overhead created by Bayesian optimization
during the search is low. In the left part of Figure 4, it shows BFS and
AK searched similar numbers of neural networks within twelve
hours. BFS is a naive search strategy, which does not consume
much time during the search besides training the neural networks.
AK searched slightly less neural architectures than BFS because of
higher time complexity.
Two conclusions can be drawn by comparing BO and AK. First,
network morphism does not negatively impact search performance.
In the left part of Figure 4, when BO and AK search a similar
number of neural architectures, they achieve similar lowest error
rates. Second, network morphism increases training efficiency, thus
improve the performance. As shown in the left part of Figure 4,
AK could search much more architectures than BO within the
same amount of time due to the adoption of network morphism.
Since network morphism does not degrade the search performance,
searching more architectures results in finding better architectures.
This could also be confirmed in the right part of Figure 4. At the
end of the searching time, AK achieves lower error rate than BO.
(a) Kernel Matrix
 (b) Performance Similarity
Figure 5: Kernel and Performance Matrix Visualization. (a)
shows the proposed kernel matrix. (b) is a matrix of similar-
ity in the performance of the neural architectures.
To show the quality of the edit-distance neural network kernel,
we investigate the difference between the two matrices KandP.
K∈Rn×nis the kernel matrix, where Ki,j=κ(f(i),f(j)).P∈
Rn×ndescribes the similarity of the actual performance between
neural networks, where Pi,j=−|c(i)−c(j)|, where c(i)is the cost
function value in the search history Hdescribed in Section 3. We
use CIFAR10 as an example here, and adopt error rate as the cost
metric. Since the values in KandPare in different scales, both
matrices are normalized to the range [−1,1]. The difference between
KandPare measured quantitatively with mean square error, which
is1.12×10−1.
KandPare visualized in Figure 5a and 5b. Lighter color means
larger values. There are two patterns can be observed in the figures.
First, the white diagonal of Figure 5a and 5b. According to the
definiteness property of the kernel, κ(fx,fx)=1,∀fx∈F, thus
the diagonal of Kis always 1. It is the same for Psince no difference
exists in the performance of the same neural network. Second,
there is a small light square area on the upper left of Figure 5a.
These are the initial neural architectures to train the Bayesian
optimizer, which are neighbors to each other in terms of network
morphism operations. A similar pattern is reflected in Figure 5b,
which indicates that when the kernel measures two architectures
as similar, they tend to have similar performance.
6 CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, a novel method for efficient neural architecture search
with network morphism is proposed. It enables Bayesian optimiza-
tion to guide the search by designing a neural network kernel, and
an algorithm for optimizing acquisition function in tree-structured
space. The proposed method is wrapped into an open-source Au-
toML system, namely Auto-Keras, which can be easily downloaded
and used with an extremely simple interface. The method has shown
good performance in the experiments and outperformed several
traditional hyperparameter-tuning methods and state-of-the-art
neural architecture search methods. The following open questions
may be studied in future work. (1) Tune the neural architecture
and the hyperparameters of the training process jointly. (2) Design
task-oriented NAS to solve specific machine learning problems,
e.g., image segmentation [ 28], object detection [ 16,32], network
analysis [20, 43].
Applied Data Science Track Paper
KDD ’19, August 4–8, 2019, Anchorage, AK, USA
1953