KDD ’19, August 4–8, 2019, Anchorage, AK, USA H. Jin et al.
traditional acquisition functions are defined in Euclidean space.
The optimization methods are not applicable to the tree-structured
search via network morphism. To optimize our acquisition func-
tion, we need a method to efficiently optimize the acquisition func-
tion in the tree-structured space. To deal with this problem, we
propose a novel method to optimize the acquisition function on
tree-structured space.
Upper-confidence bound (UCB) [ 1] is selected as our acquisition
function, which is defined as:
α(f)=µ(yf)−βσ(yf), (10)
whereyf=Cost(f,D),βis the balancing factor, µ(yf)andσ(yf)
are the posterior mean and standard deviation of variable yfpre-
dicted by the Gaussian process. It has two important properties,
which fit our problem. First, it has an explicit balance factor βfor ex-
ploration and exploitation. Second, α(f)is directly comparable with
the cost function value c(i)in search historyH={(f(i),θ(i),c(i))}.
The UCB estimates the lowest possible cost given the neural net-
work f.ˆf=arдminfα(f)is the generated neural architecture for
next observation.
The tree-structured space is defined as follows. During the op-
timization of α(f),ˆfshould be obtained from f(i)andO, where
f(i)is an observed architecture in the search history H,Ois a
sequence of operations to morph the architecture into a new one.
Morph ftoˆfwith Ois denoted as ˆf←M( f,O), whereM(·,·)is
the function to morph fwith the operations in O. Therefore, the
search can be viewed as a tree-structured search, where each node
is a neural architecture, whose children are morphed from it by
network morphism operations.
The most common defect of network morphism is it only grows
the size of the architecture instead of shrinking them. Using network
morphism for NAS may end up with a very large architecture
without enough exploration on the smaller architectures. However,
in our tree-structure search, we not only expand the leaves but also
the inner nodes, which means the smaller architectures found in
the early stage can be selected multiple times to morph to more
comparatively small architectures.
Inspired by various heuristic search algorithms for exploring
the tree-structured search space and optimization methods balanc-
ing between exploration and exploitation, a new method based
on A* search [ 19] and simulated annealing [ 23] is proposed. A*
algorithm is widely used for tree-structure search. It maintains a
priority queue of nodes and keeps expanding the best node in the
queue. Since A* always exploits the best node, simulated annealing
is introduced to balance the exploration and exploitation by not
selecting the estimated best architecture with a probability.
As shown in Algorithm 1, the algorithm takes minimum temper-
ature Tlow, temperature decreasing rate rfor simulated annealing,
and search historyHdescribed in Section 2 as the input. It outputs
a neural architecture f∈H and a sequence of operations Oto
morph finto the new architecture. From line 2 to 6, the searched
architectures are pushed into the priority queue, which sorts the
elements according to the cost function value or the acquisition
function value. Since UCB is chosen as the acquisiton function,
α(f)is directly comparable with the history observation values c(i).
From line 7 to 18, it is the loop optimizing the acquisition function.Algorithm 1 Optimize Acquisition Function
1:Input:H,r,Tlow
2:T←1,Q←PriorityQueue()
3:cmin←lowest cinH
4:for(f,θf,c)∈H do
5: Q.Push(f)
6:end for
7:while Q,∅andT>Tlowdo
8: T←T×r,f←Q.Pop()
9:foro∈Ω(f)do
10: f′←M( f,{o})
11: ifecmin−α(f′)
T >Rand()then
12: Q.Push( f′)
13: end if
14: ifcmin >α(f′)then
15: cmin←α(f′),fmin←f′
16: end if
17: end for
18:end while
19:Return The nearest ancestor of fmininH, the operation se-
quence to reach fmin
Following the setting in A* search, in each iteration, the architec-
ture with the lowest acquisition function value is popped out to be
expanded on line 8 to 10, where Ω(f)is all the possible operations
to morph the architecture f,M(f,o)is the function to morph the
architecture fwith the operation sequence o. However, not all the
children are pushed into the priority queue for exploration purpose.
The decision of whether it is pushed into the queue is made by
simulated annealing on line 11, where ecmin−α(f′)
T is a typical accep-
tance function in simulated annealing. cminandfminare updated
from line 14 to 16, which record the minimum acquisition function
value and the corresponding architecture.
3.3 Graph-Level Network Morphism
The third challenge is to maintain the intermediate output tensor
shape consistency when morphing the architectures. Previous work
showed how to preserve the functionality of the layers the operators
applied on, namely layer-level morphism. However, from a graph-
level view, any change of a single layer could have a butterfly effect
on the entire network. Otherwise, it would break the input and
output tensor shape consistency. To tackle the challenge, a graph-
level morphism is proposed to find and morph the layers influenced
by a layer-level operation in the entire network.
Follow the four network morphism operations on a neural net-
work f∈F defined in [ 13], which can all be reflected in the change
of the computational graph G. The first operation is inserting a
layer to fto make it deeper denoted as deep(G,u), where uis
the node marking the place to insert the layer. The second one is
widening a node in fdenoted as wide(G,u), where uis the node
representing the intermediate output tensor to be widened. Widen
here could be either making the output vector of the previous fully-
connected layer of ulonger, or adding more filters to the previous
convolutional layer of u, depending on the type of the previous
Applied Data Science Track Paper
KDD ’19, August 4–8, 2019, Anchorage, AK, USA
1949