Auto-Keras: An Efficient Neural Architecture Search System
Haifeng Jin, Qingquan Song, Xia Hu
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Texas A&M University
{jin,song_3134,xiahu}@tamu.edu
ABSTRACT
Neural architecture search (NAS) has been proposed to automat-
ically tune deep neural networks, but existing search algorithms,
e.g., NASNet [ 51], PNAS [ 29], usually suffer from expensive com-
putational cost. Network morphism, which keeps the functional-
ity of a neural network while changing its neural architecture,
could be helpful for NAS by enabling more efficient training during
the search. In this paper, we propose a novel framework enabling
Bayesian optimization to guide the network morphism for effi-
cient neural architecture search. The framework develops a neural
network kernel and a tree-structured acquisition function optimiza-
tion algorithm to efficiently explores the search space. Extensive
experiments on real-world benchmark datasets have been done to
demonstrate the superior performance of the developed framework
over the state-of-the-art methods. Moreover, we build an open-
source AutoML system based on our method, namely Auto-Keras.
The code and documentation are available at https://autokeras.com.
The system runs in parallel on CPU and GPU, with an adaptive
search strategy for different GPU memory limits.
CCS CONCEPTS
•Computing methodologies →Neural networks ;Supervised
learning ;Discrete space search .
KEYWORDS
Automated Machine Learning, AutoML, Neural Architecture Search,
Bayesian Optimization, Network Morphism
ACM Reference Format:
Haifeng Jin, Qingquan Song, Xia Hu. 2019. Auto-Keras: An Efficient Neural
Architecture Search System. In The 25th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowl-
edge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD ’19), August 4–8, 2019, Anchorage, AK,
USA. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 11 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3292500.
3330648
1 INTRODUCTION
Automated Machine Learning (AutoML) has become a very im-
portant research topic with wide applications of machine learning
techniques. The goal of AutoML is to enable people with limited
machine learning background knowledge to use machine learning
models easily. Work has been done on automated model selection,
automated hyperparameter tunning, and etc. In the context of deep
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
KDD ’19, August 4–8, 2019, Anchorage, AK, USA
©2019 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-6201-6/19/08. . .$15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3292500.3330648learning, neural architecture search (NAS), which aims to search
for the best neural network architecture for the given learning task
and dataset, has become an effective computational tool in AutoML.
Unfortunately, existing NAS algorithms are usually computation-
ally expensive. The time complexity of NAS is O(n¯t), where nis the
number of neural architectures evaluated during the search, and ¯t
is the average time consumption for evaluating each of the nneu-
ral networks. Many NAS approaches, such as deep reinforcement
learning [ 2,37,47,50,51], gradient-based methods [ 8,31,33] and
evolutionary algorithms [ 12,17,30,38,39,41], require a large nto
reach a good performance. Moreover, many of them train each of
thenneural networks from scratch, which is very slow.
Initial efforts have been devoted to making use of network mor-
phism in neural architecture search [ 7,13]. It is a technique to
morph the architecture of a neural network but keep its function-
ality [ 10,45]. Therefore, we are able to modify a trained neural
network into a new architecture using the network morphism op-
erations, e.g., inserting a layer or adding a skip-connection. Only a
few more epochs are required to further train the new architecture
towards better performance. Using network morphism would re-
duce the average training time ¯tin neural architecture search. The
most important problem to solve for network morphism-based NAS
methods is the selection of operations, which is to select an opera-
tion from the network morphism operation set to morph an existing
architecture to a new one. The network morphism-based NAS meth-
ods are not efficient enough. They either require a large number of
training examples [ 7], or inefficient in exploring the large search
space [ 13]. How to perform efficient neural architecture search with
network morphism remains a challenging problem.
As we know, Bayesian optimization [ 40] has been widely adopted
to efficiently explore black-box functions for global optimization,
whose observations are expensive to obtain. For example, it has
been used in hyperparameter tuning for machine learning mod-
els [3,15,21,24,40,44], in which Bayesian optimization searches
among different combinations of hyperparameters. During the
search, each evaluation of a combination of hyperparameters in-
volves an expensive process of training and testing the machine
learning model, which is very similar to the NAS problem. The
unique properties of Bayesian optimization motivate us to explore
its capability in guiding the network morphism to reduce the num-
ber of trained neural networks nto make the search more efficient.
It is non-trivial to design a Bayesian optimization method for
network morphism-based NAS due to the following challenges.
First, the underlying Gaussian process (GP) is traditionally used for
learning probability distribution of functions in Euclidean space.
To update the Bayesian optimization model with observations, the
underlying GP is to be trained with the searched architectures and
their performances. However, the neural network architectures are
not in Euclidean space and hard to parameterize into a fixed-length
vector. Second, an acquisition function needs to be optimized for
Applied Data Science Track Paper
KDD ’19, August 4–8, 2019, Anchorage, AK, USA
1946