15
TABLE VI
SUMMARY OF EXISTING /POTENTIAL SECURITY COUNTERMEASURES TODATA MANAGEMENT INMETAVERSE
Ref.Security
Threat?Purpose
Advantages
LimitationsUtilized
Technology
[77]Threats to
digital twin?Reliable state replication method for digital twin synchronization
Low computational cost and synchronization latency
Lack trustworthiness guarantee of data gathered from disparate data silosCloud computing,
digital twin
[72]Trustworthiness
of digital twin?Trustworthy data dissemination for digital twins on customized DTaaS
High reliability of data sources in digital twin creation
Lack accurate representation of digital footprintsBlockchain
[83]Synchronization
of digital twin?Dynamic and optimized DT synchronization strategies of VSPs
Higher accumulated revenue for VSP
Interoperability issues among VSPsHierarchical game
[84]Insecure AR
content sharing?Content sharing control module in multi-user AR apps
Feasibility via prototype validation on Microsoft HoloLens
Lack location privacy protection in AR applicationsMulti-user AR
[85]Cursor-jacking attack,
blind spot attack?Allow behavior speciﬁcation and enforcement of TTP’s ad code
High defense success rate with low page loading time and frame-per-second drop
Lack visibility reportingWebVR,
Sandbox
[86] Low data quality?Quality-aware vehicular service access with mobility support
High average service quality and network success rate
Lack impact analysis on trust management and security issuesGeneration tree,
bi-direction buffering
processing information is often stored in disparate data silos (e.g.,
distinct blockchains), making it difﬁcult to monitor and track in
real time. Existing works on IoT data provenance can offer some
lessons for UGC provenance design in the metaverse.
Satchidanandan et al . [87] design a dynamic watermarking
techniques which exploits indelible patterns imprinted in the
medium to detect misbehaviors (e.g., signal tampering) of ma-
licious sensors or actuators. Besides, advanced watermarking
technique can be utilized for intellectual property protection and
ownership authentication in the metaverse. Liang et al . [69]
present a blockchain-based cloud ﬁle provenance architecture
named ProvChain with three stages, i.e., collection, storage, and
veriﬁcation of provenance information. ProvChain ensures source
tamper resistance, user privacy, and reliability of cloud storage.
For multi-hop IoT, Mohsin et al . [88] design a lightweight
protocol to enable data provenance in wireless communications,
where the RSS indicator of the communicating IoT node is
exploited to produce the unique link ﬁngerprint.
In the metaverse, the life-cycle of UGCs involves the ternary
worlds and multiple sub-metaverses, which can be more complex
than that in traditional IoT. Moreover, smart contracts are antic-
ipated to play an important role in enforcing UGC provenance
across various metaverse platforms, and more research efforts on
its functionality, efﬁciency, and security are required. Besides,
the scalability, trust, and efﬁciency (e.g., response delay) are still
challenging issues in the provenance of massive UGCs in the
large-scale metaverse.
C. Summary and Lessons Learned
For data management in the metaverse, we have learned that
the integration of various cutting-edge technologies in the meta-
verse results in more attack surfaces on UGC, physical inputs,
and metaverse outputs. Besides, blockchain offers a potential
solution to ensure data reliability in digital twin creation and
mitigation. With the ﬂourishing and expanding scale of future
metaverse systems, brand new threats emerged speciﬁcally under
a metaverse setting can breed, where new defenses for them need
to be designed. Essentially, as various emerging technologies are
incorporated by the metaverse as its foundation, their intrinsicﬂaws and vulnerabilities may also be inherited by the metaverse.
In addition, the effects of existing threats can be ampliﬁed and
become more severe in the metaverse, driven by the interweaving
of various technologies. A comparison of existing/potential secu-
rity countermeasures to metaverse data management is presented
in Table VI.
V. P RIVACY THREATS AND COUNTERMEASURES IN
METAVERSE
A. Privacy Threats in Metaverse
When enjoying digital lives in the metaverse, user privacy
including location privacy, habit, living styles, and so on may
be offended during the life-cycle of data services including data
perception, transmission, processing, governance, and storage.
1) Pervasive Data Collection . To immersively interact with an
avatar, it requires pervasive user proﬁling activities at an unrea-
sonably granular level [12] including facial expressions, eye/hand
movements, speech and biometric features, and even brain wave
patterns. Besides, via advanced XR and HCI technologies, it can
facilitate the analysis of physical movements and user attributes
and even enable user tracking [13]. For example, the motion
sensors and four built-in cameras in the Oculus helmet help
track the head direction and movement, draw our rooms, as
well as monitor our positions and environment in real time with
submillimeter accuracy, when we browse the Roblox and interact
with other avatars. If this device is hacked by attackers, severe
crimes can be committed on the basis of these large-volume of
sensitive data.
Another example is the attractive virtual ofﬁce (e.g., Horizon
Workroom and Microsoft Mesh), which may arise signiﬁcant
security and privacy risks to employees. On one hand, employee
conversations, the emails they send, the URLs they visit, their
behaviors, and even the tones of their voices may be monitored by
the managers. On the other hand, the immersive workplace may
be prone to other security and privacy issues such as intrusions,
snooping, and impostors.
2) Privacy Leakage in Data Transmission . In metaverse sys-
tems, abundant personally identiﬁable information collected from