17
the player, and real-world experiments on 12 volunteers validate
that the proposed attack model attains ﬁne-grained geolocation of
any player with high accuracy. Besides, three possible mitigation
approaches are presented in [13] to alleviate attack effects.
To prevent potential privacy issues in metaverse games,
Laakkonen et al . [99] introduce privacy-by-design principles in
digital games from both qualitative and quantitative perspectives,
where nineteen privacy attributes divided into three levels are
accounted for privacy evaluation. In [100], Corcoran et al . dis-
tinguish the individual privacy and group privacy in privacy-
preserving interactive metaverse game design. The former refers
to the purchasing patterns, behavioral traits, communication,
image/video data, and location/space related to an individual,
while the latter refers to the privacy associated with a group of
individuals (e.g., a social group, an organization, and a nation).
2) Privacy-Preserving UGC Sharing and Processing: Exist-
ing privacy-preserving schemes for data sharing and processing
mainly focus on four ﬁelds: differential privacy (DP), federated
learning (FL), cryptographic approaches (e.g., secure multi-party
computation (SMC), homomorphic encryption (HE), and zero-
knowledge proof (ZKP)), and trusted computing. The following
works [89], [101]–[103] discuss privacy-preserving UGC sharing
in the metaverse. To offer privacy-preserving trending topic rec-
ommendation services in the metaverse, Wei et al. [89] propose a
graph-based local DP mechanism, where a compressive sensing
indistinguishability method is devised to produce noisy social
topics to prevent user-linkage association and protect keyword
correlation privacy with high efﬁciency. To enable smart health
sensing without violating users’ private data in the metaverse,
Zhang et al. [101] present a FL-based secure data collaboration
framework where wearable sensors periodically send local model
updates trained on their private sensory data to the server which
synthesizes a global abnormal health detection model. To resolve
class imbalance concerns of participants under FL, the authors in
[101] further design a novel local update method based on rein-
forcement learning (RL) and an adaptive global update method
via online regret minimization. To enhance privacy protection in
the blockchain-based metaverse, Guan et al . [102] utilize ZKP
to empower current account-model blockchains (e.g., Ethereum)
with privacy preservation functions in terms of hiding sender-
recipient linkage, account balances, and transaction amounts.
Xuet al . [103] identify the co-photo privacy threat in social
metaverse that a shared photo may contain not only the indi-
vidual privacy but also the privacy of others in photos. Besides,
by utilizing SMC and SVM techniques, the authors design a
personalized facial recognition method to differentiate photo co-
owners without disclosing their privacy in users’ private photos.
Privacy-preserving UGC processing in the metaverse has also
attracted various attention. Based on Okamoto-Uchiyama HE,
Liet al. [91] present a veriﬁable privacy-preserving method for
data processing result prediction in edge-enabled CPSSs. Besides,
batch veriﬁcation is supported for multiple prediction results at
one time to reduce communication burdens. Wang et al . [64]
leverage the trusted computing technique to design a privacy-
preserving off-chain data processing mechanism, where private
UGC datasets are processed in an off-chain trusted enclave and
the exchange of processed results and payment are securely
executed via the designed fair exchange smart contract.3) Conﬁdentiality Protection of UGC and Physical Input:
The conﬁdentiality of UGCs (inside the metaverse) along with
physical inputs (to the metaverse) should be ensured to prevent
private data leakage and sensitive data exposure. The authenti-
cation &access control (in Sect. III-C) and privacy computing
technologies (in Sect. V-B2) are enablers to maintain UGC conﬁ-
dentiality in the metaverse. For conﬁdentiality of physical inputs,
Raguram et al. [104] propose a novel threat named compromising
reﬂections , which can automatically reconstruct user typing on
virtual keyboards, thereby compromising data conﬁdentiality and
user privacy. Experiment results show that compromising reﬂec-
tions of a device’s screen (e.g., sunglass reﬂections) are sufﬁcient
for automatic and accurate reconstruction with no limitation on
the motion of handheld cameras even in challenging scenarios
such as a bus and even at long distances (e.g., 12m for sunglass
reﬂections).
4) Digital Footprints Protection: In the metaverse, privacy
inside avatars’ digital footprints can be classiﬁed into three types
[12]: (i) personal information (e.g., avatar proﬁling), (ii) vir-
tual behaviors, and (iii) interactions or communications between
avatars or between avatar and NPC. Avatars’ digital footprints can
be tracked via virtual stalking/spying attacks in the metaverse
to disclose user’s real identity and other private information,
e.g., shopping preferences, location, and even banking details.
A potential solution is avatar clone [4], which creates multiple
virtual clones of the avatar which appear identical to confuse the
attackers. Nevertheless, it brings other challenging issues such
as managing multiple representations of each user and managing
millions of clones roaming around the metaverse.
Another potential solution is to disguise by periodically chang-
ing avatar’s appearance to confuse attackers, or mannequin by
replacing the avatar with a single clone (e.g., bot) which imitates
user’s behavior and teleport user’s true avatar to another location
when being tracked. Other privacy preservation mechanisms [12]
include invisibility, private enclave, lockout. Invisibility indicates
the avatar is made to be temporarily invisible in case of suspected
stalking. Private enclaves allow certain locations inside the
metaverse to be occupied by individuals, which are unobserved
by others. In private enclaves, owners have control over who can
enter into the enclave by teleporting, thereby offering a maximum
level of privacy. Lockout means certain areas inside the metaverse
are temporarily locked out for private use. After the lock expires,
the restriction is lifted and other users are allowed to enter the
area.
5) Personalized Privacy-Preserving Metaverse: As
users/avatars are featured with personalized privacy demands
and service preferences, existing privacy computing technologies
(in Sect. V-B2) should also take their customized privacy/service
proﬁles into account in designing privacy-enhanced metaverse.
Existing works on personalized privacy computing are mainly
based on similarity [96], randomized response [95], personalized
FL [105], and so on. With the growth of metaverse, more
research on new personalized privacy preservation methods is
required to serve new applications and the new ecology in the
metaverse.
6) Privacy-Enhancing Advances in Industry: In the metaverse,
there have been incidents such as VR groping and VR sexual
harassments in Horizon Worlds [106]. In the real world, people
potentially keep an appropriate distance from others to maintain