11
distribution to other sensors on the same body. Simulations prove
that it can pass both the NIST and Dieharder statistical tests.
To further reduce system overheads and reduce response delay
for resource-limited wearable devices, Chen et al. [53] introduce
a lightweight and real-time key establishment model with gait
regularity hiding functions for wearables by analyzing gestures
and motions through the integrated accelerometer. In their work,
the shared key is established in real time based on user’s motion
(e.g., shaking and walking), and a lightweight bit-extraction
method is devised based on the value difference of neighboring
samples. Simulation results show that the generation rate of
shake-to-generate key is 2.027 bit/sec and the matching rate can
reach 91%.
To protect patients from fatal cyber attacks, Zheng et al .
[54] propose an electrocardiogram (ECG) signal based key
distribution mechanism for wearable and implantable medical
devices (WIMDs). In their work, two widely used cryptographic
primitives, i.e., fuzzy commitment and fuzzy vault, are compared.
Experimental results show that the solution built on fuzzy vault
achieves a lower acceptable false reject rate (i.e., 5%) and
less energy cost of WIMDs, while the solution built on fuzzy
commitment attains a higher false acceptance rate.
2) Identity Authentication for Wearable Devices: Identity au-
thentication for wearable devices to guarantee device/user au-
thenticity is also a promising topic in the metaverse. To adapt to
wearable devices with extremely low computing/storage capacity,
Srinivas et al . [55] present a cloud-based mutual authentication
model with low system cost for wearable medical devices to
prevent device impersonation in healthcare monitoring systems
with password change and smart card revocation functions.
Rigorous security analysis and formal security veriﬁcation prove
the security of created session key in defense against active
and passive attacks. However, the one-time authentication in
[55] may cause friction such as unauthorized privileges. To
resolve this issue, Zhao et al . [56] propose a novel continuous
authentication model to support seamless device authentication at
a low cost. In [56], unique cardiac biometrics are extracted from
photoplethysmography (PPG) sensors (embedded in wrist-worn
wearables) for user authentication. Experimental results show
that their proposed system obtains a high average continuous
authentication accuracy rate of 90.73 %. Jan et al . [57] design
a privacy-aware mutual authentication mechanism for wearable
devices, where a hidden Markov model (HMM) is devised to
predict privacy risks of patient data leakage. Besides, the security
of [57] is analyzed using Burrows–Abadi–Needham (BAN) logic.
In the metaverse, Bluetooth may play an important role in
short-range communications for wearables. Aksu et al. [58] study
the wearable device identiﬁcation issue using the Bluetooth proto-
col. In their work, a smart wearable ﬁngerprinting method tailored
to Bluetooth is devised using a series of AI algorithms, and real
tests on wearables validate its functionality and feasibility. By
using two representatives (i.e., Google Nest Learning Thermostat
and Nike+ Fuelband Fitness Tracker) as test devices, Arias et
al. [59] present a real attack using a hardware with particular
attack vectors to bypass software authentications and compromise
the two devices. Lessons show that it is necessary to secure
all update channels and disable the microcontroller’s external
reprogrammability and any debug interface for wearable devices.3) Cross-Domain Identity Authentication: The metaverse typi-
cally contains various administrative security domains created by
distinct operators/standards. Identity authentication across distinct
administrative domains (e.g., VR/AR services run by distinct
VSPs) in the metaverse is critical to deliver seamless metaverse
services for users/avatars. Traditional cross-domain authentication
mechanisms mainly rely on a trusted intermediary and bring
heavy overhead in key management. To address this issue, Shen et
al. [60] employ blockchain technology to design a decentralized
and transparent cross-domain authentication scheme for industrial
IoT devices in different domains (e.g., factories). In their work,
a consortium blockchain is employed to establish trust among
distinct domains, and identity-based encryption (IBE) is used
for device authentication. Besides, an anonymous authentication
protocol with identity revocation capability is proposed to remedy
the drawback of IBE in terms of identity revocation. In addition,
real domain-speciﬁc information are moved to off-chain storage
to reduce storage burdens in the blockchain system.
In the PKI system, it only identiﬁes certiﬁcates in its domain.
In accessing services in other domains such as Kerberos, users’
identities usually could not be recognized or it involves extremely
complex operations for cross-domain authentication. By leverag-
ing the distributed consensus of the blockchain, Chen et al. [61]
propose an efﬁcient cross-domain authentication scheme named
XAuth. In their work, to improve the response speed arising
from the low throughput of blockchains as well as protect user
privacy, the authors design an optimized blockchain approach and
privacy preservation functions in cross-domain authentication.
An anonymous authentication protocol based on zero-knowledge
proof is also devised to ensure privacy protection. An imple-
mented proof-of-concept (PoC) prototype proves its functionality
and feasibility.
4) Fine-grained Access Control and Usage Audit for Wear-
ables and UGCs: The massive personally identiﬁable information
(PII) handled by wearables can pose a huge risk of unauthorized
exposure. To address this issue, Ometov et al . [65] propose a
novel delegation-of-use mode for wearable devices with privacy
guarantees, where owners can lend their personal devices to
others for temporary use. However, the associated attacks along
with scalability and efﬁciency issues still need more investigations
in real-world implementation.
The native content creation (e.g., UGCs) produced by avatars
is essential to maintain the creativity and sustainability of the
metaverse. As UGCs inevitably contain sensitive and private
user information, efﬁcient UGC access control and usage audit
schemes should be designed. The following works [62], [63],
[66] discuss the UGC access control. Different from conventional
access control schemes which enforce a single access policy
for a speciﬁc content, Ma et al . [66] design a scalable access
control scheme to allow multiple levels of access privileges for
sharing user-generated media contents (UGMCs) in the cloud.
The detailed construction based on scalable CP-ABE mecha-
nism is also presented with formal security proof. However,
the above scheme cannot support time-domain UGMC access
control. To address this issue, Yang et al . [62] propose a time-
domain attribute-based access control mechanism with provable
security for sharing user-generated video contents (UGVCs) in
the cloud. In their mechanism, the allowed time slots for access
are embedded into both ciphertexts and keys in CP-ABE, thereby