13
Adversaries may modify, forge, replace, and remove the raw data
throughout the life-cycle of metaverse data services to interfere
with the normal activities of users, avatars, or physical entities
[67]. Besides, adversaries may remain undetected by falsifying
corresponding log ﬁles or message-digest results to hide their
criminal traces in the virtual space.
2) False Data Injection Attack . Attackers can inject falsiﬁed
information such as false messages and wrong instructions to
mislead metaverse systems [68]. For example, AI-aided content
creation can help improve user immersiveness in the early stage
of the metaverse, and adversaries can inject adversary training
samples or poisoned gradients during centralized or distributed AI
training, respectively, to generate biased AI models. The returned
wrong feedbacks or instructions may also threaten the safety
of physical equipment and even personal safety. For example,
falsiﬁed feedbacks such as excessive voltage can cause damage
and malfunction of wearable XR devices. Another example is
that the tampered hundredfold magniﬁcations of bodily pain in
being shot in Fortnite (a metaverse game) may cause the death
of human user.
3) Issues in Managing New Types of Metaverse Data . Com-
pared with the current Internet, the metaverse requires new
hardware and devices to gather various new types of data (e.g.,
eye movement, facial expression, and head movement), which is
previously uncollected, to make fully immersive user experiences
[28]. Besides, end-devices in the metaverse (e.g., VR glasses
and haptic gloves) can be capable of capturing iris biometrics,
ﬁngerprints, or other user-sensitive biometric information. Con-
sequently, it raises new challenges in collecting, managing, and
storing these enormous user-sensitive metaverse data, as well as
the cyber/physical security of metaverse devices.
For each virtual world (e.g., Horizon and Fortnite), the cor-
porations (e.g., Meta and Epic Games) that create and manage
it can monetize these private data to streamline and tailor their
services or products towards users’ expectations, thereby facili-
tating precision marketing for beneﬁts. Other relevant issues to
be addressed include who will be the subject of responsibility for
collecting, handling, storing, securing, and destroying these data.
4) Threats to Data Quality of UGC and Physical Input .
In metaverse, selﬁsh users/avatars may contribute low-quality
contents under the UGC mode to save their costs, thereby
undermining user experience such as unreal experience in the
synthesized environment. For example, they may share unaligned
and severe non-IID data during the collaborative training process
of the content recommendation model in the metaverse, causing
inaccurate content recommendation. Another example is that
uncalibrated wearable sensors can generate inaccurate and even
erroneous sensory data to mislead the creation of digital twins in
the metaverse, causing poor user experience.
5) Threats to UGC Ownership and Provenance . Different from
the asset registration procedure supervised by the government in
the real world, the metaverse is an open and fully autonomous
space and there exists no centralized authority. Due to the lack
of authority, it is hard to trace the ownership and provenance of
various UGCs produced by massive avatars under different virtual
worlds in the metaverse, as well as turn UGCs into protected
assets [69]. Besides, UGCs can be shared in real time within the
virtual world or across various virtual worlds and unlimitedly
replicated due to the digital attributes, making it harder for
UAV User
Data transmission
Satellite network
Air network
Ground 
network
Blockchain
Attacker 
Satellite 
Wireless link
DT of satellite 
 DT of UAV 
 DT of user 
DT of vehicle Coverage area
Physical ITS system Digital twin ITS modelDigital Twin (DT) 
TechnologyDT control
Massive 
ITS data
DT transactions
•  DT Service Time
•  DT Service Attributes
•  DT Service Type
•  DT Service Price
•  DT Control
•  Blockchain - secured ITS Service
DT transactions
DT: Digital Twin
Fig. 11. Illustration of blockchain-enabled digital twin (DT)-as-a-service (DTaaS)
in intelligent transportation systems (ITS) [72].
efﬁcient provenance and ownership tracing.
6) Threats to Intellectual Property Protection . Different from
the actual world, the deﬁnition of intellectual property in the
metaverse should be adapted to enforce licensing boundaries and
usage rights for the owners with the evolvement and expand-
ing scale of the metaverse [70]. Moreover, severe challenges
may arise in deﬁning and protecting intellectual property (e.g.,
avatars, UGCs, and AIGCs) in the new metaverse ecology, as
the geographic boundaries of countries are broken down in the
metaverse. For example, there have already been disputes owing
to the use of celebrity lookalikes in video games [71]. Given the
commercial value created by avatars, such kinds of disputes may
spike exponentially in the future metaverse.
B. Security Countermeasures to Metaverse Data Management
The metaverse is a digital world built on digital copies of the
physical environment and avatars’ digital creations. Analogy to
the value created by human activities in the real world, digital
twins and UGCs as well as avatars’ behaviors (e.g., chat records
and browsing records) will produce certain value in the metaverse
[8]. Information security is an important prerequisite for the
development and prosperity of the metaverse. In the following, we
discuss the data security in metaverse in terms of data reliability,
data quality, and provenance.
1) Data Reliability of AIGC, Digital Twin, and Physical Input:
In the metaverse, AI such as generative adversarial network
(GAN) can help generate high-quality dynamic game scenarios
and context images, but also poses security threats such as adver-
sarial and poisoned samples which is hard to detect for humans.
In the literature, by taking adversarial samples as part of training
data, various efforts have been done to resist adversarial samples
via virtual adversarial learning [73], adversarial representation
learning [74], adversarial reinforcement learning [75], adversarial
transfer learning [76], and so on, which can be beneﬁcial to resist
adversarial threats in the construction of the metaverse.
The works [72], [77] discuss the data reliability of digital twins
in the metaverse. Gehrmann et al . [77] propose a reliable state
replication method for digital twin synchronization in industrial