10
information, daily routine, and user habits). To deliver seamless
personalized services (e.g., customized avatar appearance) in the
metaverse, different VSPs in distinct sub-metaverses need to
access real-time user/avatar proﬁling activities [46]. Malicious
VSPs may carry out attacks for unauthorized data access to earn
beneﬁts. An example is that malicious VSPs may illegally elevate
their rights in data access via attacks such as buffer overﬂow
and tampering access control lists [47]. Besides, as such massive
personal information is produced and transmitted in real time, it
is complicated to decide exactly what personal information to be
shared, with whom, under what condition, for what purpose, and
when it is destroyed.
2) Misuse of User/Avatar Data . In the life-cycle of data ser-
vices in the metaverse, user/avatar-related data can be disclosed
intentionally by attackers or unintentionally by VSPs to facilitate
user proﬁling and targeted advertising activities. Besides, due
to the potential non-interoperability of certain sub-metaverses,
it is hard to trace the data misuse activities in the large-scale
metaverse.
C. Security Countermeasures to Metaverse Authentication &
Access Control
For the metaverse, secure and efﬁcient identity management
is the basis for user/avatar interaction and service provisioning.
Generally, digital identities can be classiﬁed into the following
three kinds.
Centralized identity . Centralized identity refers to the digital
identity authenticated and managed by a single institution,
such as the Gmail account.
Federated identity [48] . Federated identity refers to the
digital identity managed by multiple institutions or feder-
ations. It can reduce the administrative cost in identity au-
thentication for cross-platform and cross-domain operations,
and alleviate the cumbersome process of typing personal
information repeatedly for users.
Self-sovereign identity (SSI) [49] . SSI refers to the digital
identity which is fully controlled by individual users. It
allows users to autonomously share and associate different
personal information (e.g., username, education information,
and career information) in performing cross-domain opera-
tions to enable identity interoperability with users’ consent.
In the metaverse, centralized identity systems can be prone to
SPoF risks and suffer potential leakage risks. Federated identity
systems are semi-centralized and the management of identities is
controlled by a few institutions or federations, which may also
suffer potential centralization risks. The identity systems built
on SSIs will be dominant in future metaverse construction [5].
According to [50], identity management schemes in the metaverse
should follow the following design principles: (i) scalability to
massive users/avatars, (ii) resilience to node damage, and (iii) in-
teroperability across various sub-metaverse during authentication.
Fig. 10 compares the hardware terminals for entering the web,
mobile Internet, the metaverse. As shown in Fig. 10, in the
metaverse, empowered by XR and HCI technologies, wearable
devices such as HMD and BCI enable user/avatar interactions
and are expected as the major terminal to enter the metaverse [6].
Besides, the metaverse usually includes various administrative
domains and the sub-metaverses can be implemented on distinct
Mobile Internet
PC
Web
Smartphone
/Tablet PC
MetaverseXR 
glasses
BCI
Smart 
headset
Smart 
watch esHaptic 
glovesHMDWearable device
...Fig. 10. Comparison of hardware terminals for entering the web, mobile Internet,
and the metaverse.
blockchain platforms [16]. In the following, we ﬁrst review
existing works on the metaverse in terms of key management
and identity authentication for wearable devices. Then, we give
the literature review in cross-domain identity authentication in
the metaverse.
1) Key Management for Wearable Devices: Wearable devices
such as Oculus helmets and HoloLen headsets are anticipated
to be the major terminal to enter the metaverse. Key man-
agement (including generation, negotiation, distribution, update,
revocation, and recovery) is essential for wearable devices to
establish secure communication, deliver sensory data, receive
immersive service, etc. Conventional key management mech-
anisms are mainly built upon cryptographic systems such as
Difﬁe-Hellman cryptosystem and public key infrastructure (PKI).
These mechanisms usually require strict constraints on available
resources (e.g., computation power, memory size, bandwidth,
and transmit power) for sensor node operations, which are not
applicable for battery-powered wearable devices with compact
battery size and limited computational capacity. In the literature,
works [51]–[54] take the intrinsic features of distinct wearable
devices (e.g., wireless channel and gait signal) into account
in designing efﬁcient key management schemes, which can be
beneﬁcial for future metaverse construction.
Aimed to bridge the contactless secret key establishment
among tiny wearable devices under wireless communication en-
vironments, Li et al. [51] design an innovative key establishment
approach by utilizing unique wireless channel characteristics
based on the positioning of wearable devices. The authors
leverage the received signal strength (RSS) trajectories of two
moving wearables to construct the secret key by moving or
shaking the wearable devices. Rigorous security analysis proves
the defense of eavesdropping and experimental results validate
its practicability for wearables with short-range communications
and frequent movements. Apart from the RSS, the channel
impulse response (CIR) is another typical unique physical-layer
characteristic between communication parties.
To secure communications between wearable devices inte-
grated with accelerometers, Sun et al. [52] exploit the gait-based
biometric cryptography to design a group key generation and
distribution scheme for wearable devices based on signed sliding
window coding and fuzzy vault. The proposed acceleration-based
key generation mechanism takes advantage of the randomness of
noise signals imposed on the raw acceleration signals to produce
a group key. Besides, it utilizes the common characteristic of gait
signals sampled from distinct parts of the human body for key