18
intimate area50 cm50-125 cm125-350 cm
personal
areasocial  
areapublic  
area350-750 cm
4 feet
(a) (b)
Fig. 13. Illustration of personal space in real and virtual worlds. (a) Four types
of personal spaces: public area (350-750 cm), social area (125-350 cm), personal
area (50-125 cm), and intimate area (within 50 cm). (b) Meta’s personal boundary
function for avatars with default private border of 2-foot.
personal spaces when socializing. According to the interpersonal
intimacy, psychologist Stanley Hall quantiﬁed and divided four
types of personal spaces: public area (350-750 cm), social area
(125-350 cm), personal area (50-125 cm), and intimate area
(within 50 cm), as shown in Fig. 13 (a). It means that for less
familiar people, the more personal space we require. Similarly,
each avatar also requires personal space even in the virtual world.
Recently, Meta announced the private boundary function in its
metaverse platforms Horizon Venues and Horizon Worlds to avoid
groping and harassments, where the default personal border for
every avatar is a 2-foot circle [107]. As shown in Fig. 13 (b),
avatars need to keep at least 4 feet (about 1.2 m) away from
others to maintain private space.
Google has built a Privacy Sandbox on Android apps in 2022
to promote private advertising solutions by curbing the sharing
of private information with third parties and removing cross-
app identiﬁers (including advertising ID) [108]. Besides, Google
debuts its open-source DP tool named PipelineDP with Python
library in 2022 by creating pipelines which aggregate personal
data to derive valuable insights in a differentially private manner.
Apple also utilizes local DP to gather individual data from end
devices running on macOS or iOS for privacy-preserving ser-
vices [109] such as lookup hints, Emoji suggestions, QuickType
suggestions, and Safari autoplay intent detection.
C. Summary and Lessons Learned
In traditional Internet services, the platform operators (e.g.,
enterprises) control the user data for commercial purposes. Such
a centralized management pattern has intrinsic principal-agent
risks, and is more prone to privacy leakage and data abuse. In the
metaverse, users (as privacy subjects) need to take back control
of their private data. Notably, the PII (including user proﬁling
and biometric data) collected and processed in the metaverse
can be more granular and unprecedentedly pervasive to make
fully immersive experiences, where the device for acquisition
massive user-sensitive data, as well as the transmission, storage,
processing, access control, and destruction process should be
well-protected in the life cycle of private data. For privacy in
the metaverse, we have learned that existing privacy threats can
be ampliﬁed, and new threats related to digital footprints can
emerge. Therefore, users may suffer more privacy exposure and
higher leakage impact, and require stricter privacy protection
Repeated 
connections
HackingCompromised avatars
 Legal avatar
Fail to obtain 
service 
 Metaverse 
serviceDDoS attackSybil attack
Generating Sybil 
avatars
Compromised  
metaverse serviceSybil avatars
Malicious 
votingLegal user
Legal avatar
Metaverse
 ...digital governance
reputation service
blockchain consensusFig. 14. An illustrative example of Sybil attack and DDoS attack in metaverse.
in the metaverse. A comparison of existing/potential security
countermeasures to metaverse privacy issues is presented in
Table VII.
VI. N ETWORK -RELATED THREATS AND COUNTERMEASURES
INMETAVERSE
A. Threats to Metaverse Network
In the metaverse, traditional threats (e.g., physical-layer secu-
rity) to the communication networks can also be effective, as
the metaverse evolves from the current Internet and incorporates
existing wireless communication technologies. Here, we list some
typical threats as below.
1) SPoF . In the construction of metaverse systems, the central-
ized architecture (e.g., cloud-based system) brings convenience
for user/avatar management and cost saving in operations. Nev-
ertheless, it can be prone to the SPoF caused by the damage
of physical root servers and DDoS attacks [35]. Besides, it raises
trust and transparency challenges in trust-free exchange of virtual
goods, virtual currencies, and digital assets across various virtual
worlds in the metaverse.
2) DDoS . As the metaverse includes massive tiny wearable de-
vices, adversaries may compromise these metaverse end-devices
and make them part of a botnet [93] (e.g., Mirai) to conduct
DDoS attacks to make network outage and service unavailability
by overwhelming the centralized server with giant trafﬁc within
short time periods, as depicted in the upper part of Fig. 14.
Besides, owing to the constrained communication pressure and
storage space on the blockchain, part of NFT functions may be
performed on off-chain systems in practical applications [110],
where adversaries may launch DDoS attacks to cause service
unavailability of the NFT system.
3) Sybil Attacks . Sybil adversaries may manipulate multiple
faked/stolen identities to gain disproportionately large inﬂuence
on metaverse services (e.g., reputation service, blockchain con-
sensus, and voting-based service in digital governance) and