26
TABLE XI
SUMMARY OF EXISTING /POTENTIAL SECURITY COUNTERMEASURES TOMETAVERSE GOVERNANCE
Ref.Security
Threat?Purpose
Advantages
LimitationsUtilized
Technology
[168]Abnormal social
accounts?Dynamically reveal suspicious signals of malicious accounts in online dating
High F1-score and AUC on a real-world dataset gathered from Momo
Challenging to be applied to dating services atop the blockchainAttention-based
LSTM
[164]Centralized governance
risks?Decentralized digital city governance with incentives for user engagement/witness
High user utility and time efﬁciency in decentralized governance
Scalability and security issues in practical system deploymentBlockchain,
Stackelberg game
[171]Opportunistic attacks
for price manipulation?Detect compromised local agents in decentralized power systems using reputation
Fast aggressive attacker detection using the PowerWorld simulator
Lack credibility analysis for historical operations in reputation evaluationDirichlet-based
probabilistic model
[172] Image authenticity?General camera image forensic via post-camera ﬁngerprints
High efﬁciency in non-intrusive digital image forensics
Absense of anti-forensics defenseImage ﬁngerprints
[173]Anti-forensics
attack?Automatic video frame addition or deletion forensics with anti-forensics detection
Able to automatically detect video tampering/forgeries with high accuracy
Lack trusted whole-process video forensicsAnti-forensic,
game theory
[174] Privacy violation?Privacy leakage forensics to ensure accountability of privacy violations
High detection efﬁciency of privacy leakage paths on real malware samples
Only consider limited detection attributes and privacy leakage pathsCloud forensics
C. Summary and Lessons Learned
For digital governance in the metaverse, we have learned
that AI-enabled governance and decentralized governance are
two trends for future metaverse regulation. Moreover, trusted
digital forensics offers a promising tool to regulate the metaverse.
Besides, it is important to leverage AI and blockchain technolo-
gies to promote the self-governance capabilities of metaverse
communities, where each community forms an autonomous code
of conduct and users can report the violation behavior according
to the terms. More research efforts are required from both
technological and sociological perspectives. Due to the intrinsic
characteristics (e.g., interoperability, decentralization, scalability,
and heterogeneity) of the metaverse, a series of critical challenges
may arise in directly applying existing security countermeasures
into the metaverse. Advanced security solutions tailored to the
metaverse setting are needed. A comparison of existing/potential
security countermeasures to metaverse governance is presented
in Table XI.
X. F UTURE RESEARCH DIRECTIONS
In this section, we discuss several future research directions in
the metaverse from the following aspects.
A. Endogenous Security Empowered Metaverse
Existing commercial metaverse systems mainly depend on the
brought-in security such as frequent security patch upgrades after
the system deployment. Although security upgrades can enhance
system security to an extent, the passive defense mechanisms
built on security patching strategies inevitably result in the curse
of being continuously broken. With the continuity of ubiquitous
cyber-physical attack surfaces in the metaverse, current bring-
in security defenses can be fragile and costly in practical use,
like the sword of Damocles hanging overhead. Endogenous
security theory offers a promising solution for provisioning built-
in security or called secure by design mechanisms with self-
protection, self-evolution, and autoimmunity capabilities [175],
which takes security and privacy factors into account before the
system design. Thereby, the future metaverse can resist the ever-
increasing known/unknown security vulnerabilities and privacy
Cloud  
Edge
End User
Metaverse
Edge -Cloud 
Cooperation
User 
inputData exchange
User 
input ServiceServiceService
User 
inputUser 
inputService
Edge -Edge CooperationEdge -Cloud 
Cooperation
End-End 
CooperationEnd-End 
Cooperation
Fig. 16. Illustration of cloud-edge-end computing in metaverse service offering.
threats. An example of endogenous security is the quantum key
distribution (QKD) [176], which utilizes channel-based secret
keys to resolve information disclosure in wireless transmissions
via quantum entanglement properties. Besides, quantum-resistant
cryptography (QRC) for quantum secure metaverse applications
is another promising research direction.
B. Cloud-Edge-End Orchestrated Secure Metaverse
Unlike the conventional 2D Internet, the metaverse gathers
massive multi-sensory multimodal information from the real
world to provide users with fully immersive 3D experiences.
In the metaverse, different users/services have distinct QoE/QoS
requirements, which incurs huge difﬁculty for the metaverse
network to simultaneously offer these holographic services for
massive users/avatars. For instance, VR usually requires downlink
transmission and caching capabilities, AR mainly focuses on
uplink transmission and computing capabilities, while the tactile
Internet generally requires ultra-reliable low-latency communica-
tions [19]. The orchestration of cloud-edge-end computing offers
a potential solution by collaboratively and dynamically sharing
computation, communication, and storage resources among vari-