1
A Survey on Metaverse: Fundamentals, Security,
and Privacy
Yuntao Wangy, Zhou Suy, Ning Zhangz, Rui Xingy, Dongxiao Liux, Tom H. Luany, and Xuemin Shenx
ySchool of Cyber Science and Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China
zDepartment of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Windsor, Windsor, ON, Canada
xDepartment of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada
Corresponding author: Zhou Su (zhousu@ieee.org)
Abstract —Metaverse, as an evolving paradigm of the next-
generation Internet, aims to build a fully immersive, hyper spa-
tiotemporal, and self-sustaining virtual shared space for humans to
play, work, and socialize. Driven by recent advances in emerging
technologies such as extended reality, artiﬁcial intelligence, and
blockchain, metaverse is stepping from science ﬁction to an upcom-
ing reality. However, severe privacy invasions and security breaches
(inherited from underlying technologies or emerged in the new
digital ecology) of metaverse can impede its wide deployment. At the
same time, a series of fundamental challenges (e.g., scalability and
interoperability) can arise in metaverse security provisioning owing
to the intrinsic characteristics of metaverse, such as immersive re-
alism, hyper spatiotemporality, sustainability, and heterogeneity. In
this paper, we present a comprehensive survey of the fundamentals,
security, and privacy of metaverse. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst investigate a
novel distributed metaverse architecture and its key characteristics
with ternary-world interactions. Then, we discuss the security and
privacy threats, present the critical challenges of metaverse systems,
and review the state-of-the-art countermeasures. Finally, we draw
open research directions for building future metaverse systems.
Index Terms —Metaverse, security, privacy, distributed virtual
worlds, extended reality, artiﬁcial intelligence, and blockchain.
I. I NTRODUCTION
The metaverse, literally a combination of the preﬁx “meta”
(meaning transcendence) and the sufﬁx “verse” (shorthand for
universe), is a computer-generated world with a consistent value
system and an independent economic system linked to the physi-
cal world. The term metaverse was created by Neal Stephenson in
his science ﬁction novel named Snow Crash in 1992. In this novel,
humans in the physical world enter and live in the metaverse (a
parallel virtual world) through digital avatars (in analogy to user’s
physical self) via virtual reality (VR) equipment. Since its ﬁrst
appearance, the concept of metaverse is still evolving with various
descriptions, such as a second life [1], 3D virtual worlds [2],
and life-logging [3]. Commonly, the metaverse is regarded as a
fully immersive, hyper spatiotemporal, and self-sustaining virtual
shared space blending the ternary physical, human, and digital
worlds [4]. Metaverse is recognized as an evolving paradigm
of the next-generation Internet after the web and the mobile
Internet revolutions [5], where users can live as digital natives
and experience an alternative life in virtuality.
The metaverse integrates a variety of emerging technologies
[6]–[8]. In particular, digital twin produces a mirror image of the
real world, VR and augmented reality (AR) provide immersive
3D experience, 5G and beyond offer ultra-high reliable and ultra-
low latency connections for massive metaverse devices, wearable
Physical world Virtual worldPhysical 
worldVirtual 
world Physical worldVirtual worldPhase 1 Phase 2 Phase 3
Digital twins Digital  natives  SurrealityFig. 1. Three phases of the development of the metaverse.
sensors and brain-computer interface (BCI) enable user/avatar
interaction in the metaverse, artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) enables the
large-scale metaverse creation and rendering, and blockchain and
non-fungible token (NFT) play an important role in determining
authentic rights for metaverse assets [9]. Currently, with the popu-
larity of smart devices and the maturity of enabling technologies,
the metaverse is stepping out of its infancy into an upcoming
reality in the near future. Furthermore, signiﬁcant innovations and
advances in the above emerging technologies are giving birth to
a new information ecology and new demands for applications,
as well as the metaverse for becoming a platform of the new
ecology and applications [8]. Driven by realistic demands and
the prospect of feasibility of metaverse construction, metaverse
recently has attracted increasing attention from around the world
and many tech giants such as Facebook, Microsoft, Tencent,
and NVIDIA have announced their ventures into Metaverse.
Particularly, Facebook rebranded itself as “Meta” to dedicate
itself to building the future metaverse [10].
Generally, the development of metaverse consists of three
successive phases from a macro perspective [6]: (i) digital twins ,
(ii)digital natives , and eventually (iii) surreality , as depicted in
Fig. 1. The ﬁrst phase produces a mirror world consisting of
large-scale and high-ﬁdelity digital twins of humans and things
in virtual environments, aimed for a vivid digital representation of
the physical reality. In this phase, virtual activities and properties
such as user emotion and movement are imitations of their
physical counterparts, where reality and virtuality are two parallel
spaces. The second phase mainly focuses on the native content
creation, where digital natives represented by avatars can produce
innovations and insights inside the digital worlds and these digital
creations may only exist in the virtual spaces. In this phase, the
massively created contents in the digital world become equal with
their physical counterparts, and the digital world has the ability
to transform and innovate the production process of the physical
world, thereby creating more intersections between these two
worlds. The metaverse grows to its maturity in the last phase andarXiv:2203.02662v4  [cs.CR]  9 Sep 2022