16
wearables (e.g., HMDs) are transferred via wired and wireless
communications, the conﬁdentiality of which should be pro-
hibited from unauthorized individuals/services [65]. Although
communications are encrypted and information is conﬁdentially
transmitted, adversaries may still access the raw data by eaves-
dropping on the speciﬁc channel and even track users’ locations
via differential attacks [89] and advanced inference attacks [90].
3) Privacy Leakage in Data Processing . In metaverse services,
the aggregation and processing of massive data collected from
human bodies and their surrounding environments are essential
for the creation and rendering of avatars and virtual environments,
in which users’ sensitive information may be leaked [91]. For
example, the aggregation of private data (belonging to different
users) to a central storage for training personalized avatar appear-
ance models may offend user privacy and violate existing real-
world regulations such as General Data Protection Regulation
(GDPR) [92]. Besides, adversaries may infer users’ privacy (e.g.,
preferences) by analyzing and linking the published processing
results (e.g., synthetic avatars) in various virtual spaces such as
Roblox and Fortnite.
4) Privacy Leakage in Cloud/Edge Storage . The storage of
the private and sensitive information (e.g., user proﬁling) of
massive users in cloud servers or edge devices may also raise
privacy disclosure issues. For example, hackers may deduce
users’ privacy information by frequent queries via differential
attacks [89] and even compromise the cloud/edge storage via
distributed denial-of-service (DDoS) attacks [93]. In 2006, a
customer database of the Second Life (a metaverse game) was
hacked and the user data was breached including unencrypted
usernames and addresses, as well as encrypted payment details
and passwords [94].
5) Rogue or Compromised End Devices . In the metaverse,
more wearable sensors will be placed on human bodies and their
surroundings to allow avatars to make natural eye contact, capture
hand gesture, reﬂect facial expression, and so on in real time. A
signiﬁcant risk is that these wearable devices can have a com-
pletely authentic sense of who you are, how you talk, behave, feel,
and express yourself. The use of rogue or compromised wearable
end devices (e.g., VR glasses) in the metaverse is becoming
an entryway for data breaches and malware invasions, and the
problem may be more severe with the popularity of wearable
devices for entering the metaverse [13]. Under the manipulation
of rogue or compromised end devices, the avatars in the metaverse
may turn into a source of data collection, thereby infringing
user privacy. For example, as advanced wearable devices such
as Oculus helmets and haptic gloves can track eye movements
and hand gestures, hackers can recreate user actions and even
sensitive passwords for personal accounts by following the eye
and ﬁnger movements in tapping in codes on a virtual keypad.
6) Threats to Digital Footprints . As the behavior pattern,
preferences, habits, and activities of avatars in the metaverse
can reﬂect the real statuses of their physical counterparts, at-
tackers can collect the digital footprints of avatars and exploit
the similarity linked to real users to facilitate accurate user
proﬁling and even illegal activities [4]. Besides, metaverse usually
offers the third person view with a wider viewing angle of their
avatar’s surroundings than that in the real world [11], which may
infringe on other players’ behavior privacy without awareness.
For example, an avatar may conduct the virtual stalking/spyingattack in Roblox by following your avatar and recording all your
digital footprints, e.g., purchasing behaviors, to facilitate social
engineering attacks.
7) Identity Linkability in Ternary Worlds . As the metaverse
assimilates the reality into itself, the human, physical, and virtual
worlds are seamlessly integrated into the metaverse, causing
identity linkability concerns across the ternary worlds [70]. For
example, a malicious player Ain Roblox can track another player
Bby the name appeared above the corresponding avatar of player
Band infer his/her position in the real world. Another example
is that hackers may track the position of users via compromised
VR headsets or glasses [13].
8) Threats to Accountability . XR and HCI devices intrinsically
gather more sensitive data such as locations, behavior patterns,
and surroundings of users than traditional smart devices. For
example, in Pok ´emon Go (a location-based AR game), players
can discover, capture, and battle Pok ´emon using mobile devices
with GPS. The accountability in the metaverse is important to
ensure users’ sensitive data are handled with privacy compliance.
For metaverse service providers, the audit process of the com-
pliance of privacy regulations (e.g., GDPR) for accountability
can be clumpy and time-consuming under the centralized service
offering architecture. Besides, it is hard for VSPs to ensure the
transparency of regulation compliance during the life-cycle of
data management [64], especially in the new digital ecology of
metaverse.
9) Threats to Customized Privacy . Similar to existing Internet
service platforms, distinct users generally exhibit customized pri-
vacy preferences for different services or interaction objects [95]
under distinct sub-metaverses. For example, a user in Roblox may
be more sensitive to monetary trading activities than social activ-
ities. Besides, users/avatars may be more sensitive in interacting
with strangers than acquaintances, friends, or relatives. However,
challenges exist in developing customized privacy preservation
policies for personal data management while considering avatars
in the metaverse as individual information subjects [96], as well
as the characteristics of users and sub-metaverses.
B. Privacy Countermeasures in Metaverse
1) Privacy in Metaverse Games: AR/VR games are the current
most popular metaverse application for users. AR/VR games
usually contain three steps: the game platform (i) collects sensory
data from users and their surroundings, (ii) identiﬁes objects
according to these contexts, and lastly (iii) performs rendering
on game senses for immersiveness.
Existing works have demonstrated the security and safety
concerns related to metaverse games using case studies [97] and
qualitative studies [13], [98]. Bono et al . [97] offer two case
studies (i.e., Second Life and Anarchy Online ) and show that
a hacker can exploit the features and vulnerabilities of MMO
metaverse games to fully compromise and take over players’
devices (e.g., laptops). Lebeck et al. [98] carry out a qualitative
lab study using Microsoft HoloLen (an AR headset), whose result
shows that players can easily be immersed in AR experiences and
treat virtual objects as real, as well as various security, privacy,
and safety issues are uncovered. Shang et al . [13] identify a
novel user location tracking attack in location-based AR games
(e.g., Pok ´emon Go) by solely exploiting the network trafﬁc of