5
1) Human Society: The metaverse is regarded as human-
centric [25]. Human users along with their inner psychologies
and social interactions constitute the human world. Equipped
with smart wearable devices (e.g., VR/AR helmets), humans can
interact and control their digital avatars to play, work, socialize,
and interact with other avatars or virtual entities in the metaverse
via human-computer interaction (HCI) and extended reality (XR)
technologies [26] (as depicted in the ﬁlm Ready Player One ).
2) Physical Infrastructures: The physical world offers sup-
porting infrastructures (including sensing/control, communica-
tion, computation, and storage infrastructures) to the metaverse to
support multi-sensory data perception, transmission, processing,
and caching, as well as physical control, thereby enabling efﬁcient
interactions with both the digital and human worlds. Speciﬁcally,
pervasive smart objects, sensors, and actuators constitute the
sensing/control infrastructure to enable all-around and multi-
modal data perception from the environment and human bodies
and high-accuracy device control. Networking is provided via
the communication infrastructure consisting of various heteroge-
neous wireless or wired networks (e.g., cellular communications,
unmanned aerial vehicle (UA V) communications, and satellite
communications). Besides, powerful computation and storage
capacities are provisioned via the computation and storage infras-
tructure assisted by cloud-edge-end computing [27]. For instance,
a virtual world runs at a minimum rate of 30 frames per second
[28], posing huge computational demands and latency constraints
(e.g., within 1/30th of a second at most) in rendering high-quality
graphics for each avatar.
3) Interconnected Virtual Worlds: According to ISO/IEC
23005 and IEEE 2888 standards [23], [24], the digital world
can be composed of a series of interconnected distributed virtual
worlds (i.e., sub-metaverses), and each sub-metaverse can offer
certain kinds of virtual goods/services (e.g., gaming, social dating,
online museum, and online concert) and virtual environments
(e.g., game scenes and virtual cities) to users represented as
digital avatars.
Digital avatars . Avatars refer to the digital representation
of human users in the metaverse. A user can create various
avatars in different metaverse applications, and the produced
avatars can be like a human shape, animals, imaginary
creatures, etc.
Virtual environments . Virtual environments refer to the sim-
ulated real or imaginary environments (consisting of 3D
digital things and their attributes) in the metaverse. Besides,
the virtual environments in the metaverse can have distinct
spatiotemporal dimensions (e.g., in ancient times or future
worlds) for users to experience an alternate life.
Virtual goods/services . Virtual goods refer to the tradeable
commodities (e.g., skins, digital arts, and land parcels)
produced by virtual service providers (VSPs) or the users
in the metaverse. Virtual services in the metaverse have a
broad of scopes including digital market, digital currency,
digital regulation, social service, etc.
There are two main sources of information in the metaverse: one
is the input of the real world (i.e., the captured information and
obtained knowledge from the real space digitally displayed in
the virtual space), and the other is the output of virtual worlds
(i.e., the information generated by avatars, digital objects, and
Sub 
Metaverse
Sub 
Metaverse
Real world
... Metaverse
Virtual world
Infrastructure (sensing/control , network, computation, storage)
Avatar
User
 Scalability
 Immersiveness
Hyper 
Spatiotemporality
Sustainability
 Interoperability
 Scalability
HeterogeneityKey c haracteristics 
of metaverseFig. 6. General network architecture and key characteristics of the metaverse.
metaverse services in the virtual space). For the massive ﬁne-
grained metaverse data collected/generated in real time, efﬁcient
authentication and access control should be enforced, as well as
the data reliability, traceability, and privacy protection in the life-
cycle of metaverse services.
4) Metaverse Engine: The metaverse engine [19] uses the big
data from the real world as inputs to generate, maintain, and
update the virtual world via the interactivity, AI, digital twin,
and blockchain technologies. Particularly, with the assistance
of XR and HCI (especially brain-computer interaction (BCI))
techniques, users situated in physical environments are able
to immersively control their digital avatars in the metaverse
via their senses and bodies for diverse collective and social
activities such as car racing, dating, and virtual item trading.
The virtual economy as a spontaneous derivative of such digital
creation activities of avatars can be built in the metaverse. AI
algorithms perform personalized avatar/content creation, large-
scale metaverse rending, and intelligent service offering to enrich
the metaverse ecology. Besides, the knowledge derived via AI-
based big data analytics can be beneﬁcial to perform simulating,
digitalizing, and mirroring the real world via digital twin technol-
ogy to produce vivid virtual environments for users to experience.
Finally, the created digital twins, as well as native contents created
by avatars, can be transparently managed, uniquely tokenized,
and monetized by the blockchain technology to enable trust-
free trading and service offering, towards building the economic
system and value system in the metaverse. More details of these
enabling technologies are elaborated at Sect. II-D.
In summary, information is the core resource of the metaverse
and the free data ﬂow in the ternary world makes the digital
ecology, which eventually promotes the integration of virtual and
actual worlds. Next, we discuss the information ﬂow in a single
world and across different worlds, respectively.
5) In-World Information Flow: The human society or human
world is interconnected by social networks and formed based on
common activities and mutual interactions among human beings.
In the physical world, the IoT-enabled sensing/control in-
frastructure plays an important role in digitalizing/transforming
the physical world via pervasive sensors and actuators, and the
generated IoT big data is transmitted and processed via network
and computation infrastructures.
In the digital world, the produced digital information of phys-
ical and human worlds are processed and managed via the meta-
verse engine to support large-scale metaverse creation/rendering
and various metaverse services. Besides, users, represented as