25
entity-behavior association, identiﬁcation, and tracing among
anonymous users/avatars with diverse behavior patterns in the
metaverse. In addition, due to the blurred boundary between
real and virtual worlds, the metaverse can make us confused
to distinguish between the true and false. For example, bad
actors may produce fake news, faces, audios, and videos via AI
algorithms to mislead the public, just like the recent Deepfake
event.
B. Digital Governance in Metaverse
Apart from the laws or regulations (i.e., “hard law”), the “soft
law” is also signiﬁcant to adjust social relations and regulate
user’s behaviors in public metaverse governance. The soft law
refers to legal norms including autonomy and self-discipline
norms and advocacy rules created by various organizations.
Almeida et al . [163] highlight three principles in the digital
governance of content moderation ecosystems: (i) open, trans-
parent, and consensus-driven, (ii) respect human rights, and (iii)
publicly accountable. Here, we review existing potential solutions
to metaverse governance from the following three ﬁelds.
1) AI Governance: With the pervasive fusion of perception,
computing, and actuation, AI will play a leading role to allow
digital self-governance of individuals and society in the metaverse
in a fully automatic manner. AI approaches can be employed for
detecting misbehaving entities and abnormal or Sybil accounts
in the metaverse. He et al. [168] exploit a multi-factor attention-
enhanced LSTM model to dynamically reveal suspicious signals
of malicious accounts in online dating applications by mining the
user-generated textual information and the interplay of accounts’
temporal-spatial activities. Experiments performed on the real-
world dataset demonstrate its effectiveness in detection accuracy.
However, as the work [168] mainly focuses on AI-based
malicious account detection, the association of massive avatar-
activity-cluster needs further investigations. Besides, the out-
comes of AI governance algorithms can be biased and unfair (e.g.,
race bias), thereby arising ethical concerns. Gasser et al . [169]
propose a three-layer AI governance model from the sociological
perspective, where the bottom technical layer allows the data
governance and algorithm accountability; the middle ethical layer
guides decision-making and data processing via ethical criteria
and norms; and the top social and legal layer addresses the
allocation of responsibilities in regulation. Zambonelli et al .
[170] investigate the potential risks including interpretability,
trust, autocracy, and ethic issues in delegating the governance
of human activities and society to the algorithmic engines in the
metaverse. Nevertheless, the concrete governance protocols and
algorithms with ethic-compliance (e.g., how to deﬁne a malicious
behavior/avatar) require more research efforts. To summarize,
both technological and sociological insights are required to build
an AI-governed future metaverse.
2) Decentralized Governance: For governance in the large-
scale metaverse maintenance, centralized regulatory can face
multiple technical and standard obstacles and difﬁculty in the
compatibility of transnational regulations. Collaborative gover-
nance can avoid concentration of regulation rights and promote
democracy for avatars. Blockchain technologies offer potential
decentralized solutions for collaborative governance in the meta-
verse, where smart contracts offer a straightforward approachfor decentralized governance in an automatic manner. Febrero
et al. [164] present a blockchain-based decentralized framework
in digital city governance to encourage users’ active engagement
and witness in all administrative processes. In their approach, a
veriﬁer group is dynamically selected from digital citizens for
transaction veriﬁcation in the hybrid blockchain. A private-prior
peer prediction mechanism is devised for collusion prevention
among veriﬁers, and a Stackelberg game theoretical approach is
designed to motivate citizens’ participation.
Based on SDN, Bai et al . [166] design a decentralized data
lifecycle governance architecture, where UGC owners can im-
plement customized governance rules for data usage to VSPs,
aiming to promote an open environment to satisfy users’ diverse
requirements. To further defend against opportunistic attackers
in market manipulation, Li et al . [171] study a Dirichlet-based
probabilistic detection model to detect compromised local agents
in decentralized power grid control systems by evaluating their
reputation levels using historical operating observations. The im-
plementation of AI governance under decentralized architectures
is a future trend for metaverse governance. Besides, tailored
blockchain solutions to metaverse governance are required includ-
ing metaverse-speciﬁc consensus protocols, new on/off-chain data
storage mechanisms, law-compliant regulated blockchain, etc.
3) Trusted Digital Forensics: Digital forensics is an enabler
for accountability in the metaverse under disputes, which has
been widely investigated in images and videos. For example,
Swaminathan et al. [172] develop a general forensic mechanism
for digital camera images, according to the observation that
in-camera and post-camera image processing leaves a series
of distinct ﬁngerprint traces on the digital camera image. The
estimated post-camera ﬁngerprints can be employed to validate
image authenticity (i.e., whether a speciﬁc digital image is
from a speciﬁc scanner, camera, or computer graphics program).
However, the use of anti-forensics makes trusted digital forensics
challenging. To address this issue, Stamm et al . [173] propose
an automatic video frame addition or deletion forensics method
with anti-forensics detection, according to the observation that a
modiﬁed video’s motion vectors (i.e., ﬁngerprint) can be imposed
in the anti-forensics process.
An obstacle of digital forensics in the metaverse lies in
trustworthiness and labor cost especially for cross-platform oper-
ations. Blockchain can offer a decentralized solution to establish
trust and enhance automation in multi-party cross-platform digital
forensics. For example, Li et al. [167] utilize blockchain to design
a decentralized forensics method, where customized cryptography
enables ﬁne-grained forensics data access control and smart
contracts enforce auditable forensics execution. In the metaverse,
smart contracts can enforce automated forensics procedure among
multiple entities and platforms with improved convenience and
mitigated cost, which still require more research efforts.
Digital forensics can also be utilized for accountability of
privacy violations. Zou et al . [174] propose a privacy leakage
forensics scheme with taint analysis and RAM mirroring to
obtain digital evidences without touching user’s privacy data
in a simulated virtual environment. More research efforts are
required in terms of resilience, collaboration, QoS enhancement,
and privacy preservation in the implementation of digital forensics
for metaverse applications.