3
TABLE I
A C OMPARISON OF CONTRIBUTION BETWEEN OURSURVEY AND RELEVANT
SURVEYS
Year. Refs. Contribution
2008 [11]Discussions on privacy risks in the game Second Life
from both social and legal perspectives.
2009 [20] Survey on metaverse applications in terms of retailing.
2013 [2]Discussions on key features of metaverse and ongoing
improvements of the underlying virtual world technology.
2018 [12]Survey on privacy issues and countermeasures related to
digital footprints in social metaverse games.
2020 [21] Survey on metaverse applications in terms of education.
2021 [8] Survey on metaverse applications in terms of social goods.
2021 [6]Review on eight fundamental technologies to build up the
metaverse and its opportunities from six user-centric factors.
2021 [4]Overview of metaverse development in terms of national
policies, industrial projects, infrastructures, supporting
technologies, VR, and social metaverse.
2021 [22] Survey on metaverse applications in terms of digital arts.
2022 [7]Discuss the potential of AI and blockchain technologies
in future metaverse construction.
2022 [17]Discuss the role of AI from six technical aspects
in the development of the metaverse.
2022 [18]Discuss the hardware, software, and content components
of metaverse and review user interaction, implementation,
and representative applications in the metaverse.
2022 [19]An in-depth survey on the edge-enabled metaverse in terms
of communication, networking, and computation.
Now OursComprehensive survey of the fundamentals, security, and
privacy of metaverse, discussions on the general architecture,
characteristics, and security/privacy threats of the metaverse,
discussions on critical challenges, state-of-the-art solutions,
and future research directions in building secure metaverse.
We investigate the security and privacy threats in the
metaverse from seven aspects (i.e., authentication & access
control, data management, privacy, network, economy, gov-
ernance, and physical/social effects) and discuss the critical
challenges to address them.
We survey the state-of-the-art security and privacy counter-
measures in both academic and industry and discuss their
feasibility toward building the secure and privacy-preserving
metaverse paradigm.
We outline open future research directions in building the
secure, privacy-preserving, and efﬁcient metaverse realm.
Table I summarizes the contribution of our work in comparison
to previous relevant surveys in the metaverse.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Sec-
tion II presents the standards, architecture, characteristics, sup-
porting technologies, and current prototypes of the metaverse.
Sections III–IX present the taxonomy of security and privacy
threats in the metaverse and discuss critical challenges and exist-
ing/potential solutions to resolve them from seven aspects. Then,
we discuss open research issues in Section X. Finally, we draw
the conclusions in Section XI. Fig. 2 illustrates the organization
of this survey. The key acronyms are listed in Table II.
II. A NOVERVIEW OF METAVERSE
In this section, we introduce the metaverse from the fol-
lowing aspects: existing standards, the general architecture, key
characteristics, enabling technologies, potential applications, and
existing prototypes.
A. Existing Metaverse-Related Standards
In what follows, we brieﬂy introduce two existing metaverse-
related standards: ISO/IEC 23005 [23] and IEEE 2888 [24].
Section II:  An Overview of Metaverse
Existing Metaverse -related Standards
Metaverse Architecture
Section III:  Threats and Countermeasures to Authentication & 
Access Control in Metaverse
Section IV:  Threats and Countermeasures to Data Management 
in MetaverseThreats to Authentication in Metaverse
Threats to Access Control in Metaverse
Security Countermeasures to Metaverse Authentication 
& Access Control
Summary and Lessons Learned
Threats to Data Management in Metaverse
Security Countermeasures to Metaverse Data Management
Section X:  Future research directions
Endogenous Security Empowered Metaverse
Cloud -Edge -End Orchestrated Metaverse
Energy -Efficient and Green Metaverse
Content -Centric and Human -Centric Metaverse
Section XI:  ConclusionKey Characteristics of Metaverse
Enabling Technologies of Metaverse
Existing Modern Prototypes of Metaverse Applications
Summary and Lessons Learned
Section V:  Privacy Threats and Countermeasures in Metaverse
Privacy Threats in Metaverse
Privacy Countermeasures in Metaverse
Summary and Lessons Learned
Section VI:  Network -related Threats and Countermeasures in 
Metaverse
Threats to Metaverse Network
Situational Awareness in Metaverse
Summary and Lessons Learned
Section VII:  Economy -related Threats and Countermeasures in 
Metaverse
Threats to Metaverse Economy
Open and Decentralized Creator Economy
Summary and Lessons Learned
Section IX:  Governance -related Threats and Countermeasures 
in Metaverse
Threats to Metaverse Governance
Digital Governance in Metaverse
Summary and Lessons LearnedSection VIII:  Threats to Physical World and Human Society and 
Countermeasures in Metaverse
Threats to Physical World and Human Society
Physical Safety
Society Management
Summary and Lessons LearnedFig. 2. Organization structure of this paper.
1)As the ﬁrst standardized framework for networked virtual
environments (NVEs) in the metaverse, ISO/IEC 23005 (MPEG-
V) aims to standardize the interfaces between the real world and
the virtual world, and among virtual worlds, to realize seamless
information exchange, simultaneous reactions, and interoperabil-
ity [23]. Its ﬁrst version was published in 2011, and the latest
4th edition was released in 2020. ISO/IEC 23005 standards are
applicable for a variety of metaverse-related business services,
where the association of audiovisual information, rendered sen-
sory effects, and characteristics of virtual objects (e.g., avatars
and virtual items) can beneﬁt the interactions between virtual and
real worlds. Fig. 3 illustrates the general architecture of ISO/IEC