14
applications and identify seven key requirements in security archi-
tecture design. Besides, the authors formally deﬁne the synchro-
nization consistency as a metric of the robustness of digital twin
synchronization. A PoC implementation using programmable
logic controllers (PLCs) validates its effectiveness. However, the
trustworthiness of data collected from disparate data silos is not
studied in [77]. To address this issue in the metaverse, as shown
in Fig. 11, Liao et al . [72] leverage permissioned blockchain
technology for trusted digital twin (DT) service transactions
between VSPs and service requesters in intelligent transportation
systems (ITS). A DT-DPoS (delegated proof of stake) consensus
protocol is devised to improve consensus efﬁciency by using
distributed DT servers to form the validator committee. Besides,
to facilitate users’ customized DT services, an on-demand DT-
as-a-service (DTaaS) architecture is presented for fast response
to meet diverse DT requirements in ITS.
The works [78], [79] investigate parametric audio rendering to
match and improve the visual experience in 3D virtual worlds.
Zimmermann et al . [78] present an interactive audio streaming
mechanism with high scalability based on peer-to-peer (P2P)
topology for immersive interaction in NVEs. Their mechanism
combines two concepts: area of interest (AoI) andaural sound-
scape to make proximal and spatialized audio interactions. Specif-
ically, AoI limits the distribution area of audio streams as avatars
are more likely to interact with others in proximity (the distance
is measured by virtual coordinates), and aural soundscape allows
distributively audio rendering from different sources to match the
visual landscape. Jot et al. [79] design an interactive audio engine
based on 6-degree-of-freedom (6DoF) object for parametric audio
scene programming (i.e., controllable acoustic orientation, size,
orientation, and other properties) in audiovisual metaverse experi-
ences. Fig. 12 illustrates the difference of 6DoF with conventional
3DoF in using VR devices. Simulation results in [78], [79] show
the feasibility of their design.
2) Data Quality of UGC and Physical Input: Low-quality data
input from physical sensors and the UGCs produced by avatars
can deteriorate the quality-of-service (QoS) of metaverse services
and the QoE of users. Effective quality control mechanisms
are important to offer efﬁcient metaverse services and maintain
sustainability of the creator economy. Dickinson et al. [80] give a
user study on 68 participants in a VR environment and show that
user perception of character believability is inﬂuenced positively
by behavioral features while negatively by visual elements.
In the literature, game theory and AI methods have been
widely utilized to motivate users’ high-quality data contribution
or service offering, which can offer some lessons in the metaverse
design. For example, Xu et al. [81] propose a dynamic Stackel-
berg game to model the interactions between the content provider
and edge caching devices (ECDs), where content provider is
the game-leader which makes its payment strategy of caching
service while each ECD serves as the game-follower to decide
its strategy on quality of caching service. A two-tier Q-learning
based mechanism is devised in [81] to dynamically derive the
optimal strategies for each side. In [82], Su et al . propose a
deep RL (DRL)-based incentive mechanism to encourage users’
high-quality model contribution in distributed AI paradigms with
consideration of both non-IID effects and collaboration between
edge/cloud servers.
The works [34], [83] study the data availability in metaverse in
.
(a) 3DoF (b) 6DoFFig. 12. Illustration of (a) 3DoF and (b) 6DoF. 3DoF means an object can
rotationally move around the 3D space (i.e., x, y, and z axes), while 6DoF has ad-
ditional translational movement along those axes (i.e., moving forward/backward,
up/down, and left/right).
terms of data synchronization and QoS, respectively. For accurate
DT synchronization with its physical counterpart, Han et al. [83]
propose a hierarchical game for dynamic DT synchronization
in the metaverse, where end devices collectively gather the
status information of physical objects and VSPs decide proper
synchronization intensities. In their work, every user selects the
optimal VSP in the lower-level evolutionary game, and every
VSP makes the optimal synchronization strategy in the upper-
level differential game based on users’ strategies and value of
DT. Simulation results demonstrate that the proposed mechanism
attains a higher accumulated revenue for VSP. By leveraging
covert communication methods, Du et al . [34] propose an op-
timal targeted advertising strategy for the VSP to maximize its
payoff in offering high-quality access services for end-users while
attaining close-to-one detection error for attackers. In their work,
the Vidale-Wolfe advertising model is exploited, and a novel
metric meta-immersion is introduced to measure users’ feelings
in metaverse experience. Simulation results show that the VSP
can boost its payoff in comparison with that without advertising.
For dynamic metaverse applications, the information freshness
(e.g., age of information) can be further considered in data/service
offering.
3) Secure Data Sharing in XR Environment: Metaverse ap-
plications are usually multi-user such as multi-player gaming
and remote collaboration. Aimed for secure content sharing
under multi-user AR applications, Ruth et al. [84] study an AR
content sharing control mechanism and implement a prototype
on HoloLens to allow AR content sharing among remote or co-
located users with inbound and outbound control. By rigorously
exploring user’s design space on various AR apps, the authors
also deﬁne various mapping manners of AR contents into the
real world. In WebVR (a VR-based 3D virtual world on HTML
canvases), Lee et al . [85] identify three new ad fraud threats
(i.e., blind spot tracking, gaze and controller cursor-jacking, and
abuse of an auxiliary display) in content sharing. User studies
on 82 participants show the success rates range from 88.23% to
100%. Besides, a defense mechanism named AdCube is presented
in [85] via visual conﬁnement of 3D ad entities and sandboxing
technique. Experimental results show the defense effectiveness of
AdCube with a small system cost for 9 WebVR demo sites.
4) Provenance of UGC: Data provenance can realize the
traceability of historical archives of a piece of UGC, which is
essential to evaluate data quality, trace data source, reproduce
data generation process, and conduct audit trail to quickly identify
data responsible subjects. In the metaverse, UGC provenance
information such as the source, circulation, and intermediate