7
connected to the metaverse. Besides, negative experiences such as
dizziness in wearing XR helmets can be resolved by low-latency
edge computing systems and AI-empowered real-time rendering.
2) Digital Twin: Digital twin represents the digital clone of
objects and systems in the real world with high ﬁdelity and
consciousness [33]. It enables the mirroring of physical entities,
as well as prediction and optimization of their virtual bodies, by
analyzing real-time streams of sensory data, physical models, and
historical information. In digital twin, data fed back from physical
entities can be used for self-learning and self-adaption in the mir-
rored space. Moreover, digital twins can provide precise digital
models of the expected objects with intended attributes in the
metaverse with high accuracy through the simulation of complex
physical processes and the assistance of AI technologies, which
is beneﬁcial for large-scale metaverse creation and rendering.
Besides, digital twin enables predictive maintenance and accident
traceability for physical safety, due to the bidirectional connection
between physical entities and their virtual counterparts, thereby
improving efﬁciency and reducing risks in the physical world.
3) Networking: In the metaverse, networking technologies
such as 6G, software-deﬁned network (SDN), and IoT empower
the ubiquitous network access and real-time massive data trans-
mission between real and virtual worlds, as well as between
sub-metaverses. Beyond 5G (B5G) and 6G offer possibilities
for ubiquitous, real-time, and ultra-reliable communications for
massive metaverse devices with enhanced mobility support [34].
In 6G, space-air-ground integrated network (SAGIN) [35] is a
promising trend for seamless and ubiquitous network access
to metaverse services. SDN enables the ﬂexible and scalable
management of large-scale metaverse networks via the separation
of the control plane and data plane. In SDN-based metaverse,
the physical devices and resources are managed by a logically
centralized controller using a standardized interface such as
OpenFlow, thereby virtualized computation, storage, and band-
width resources can be dynamically allocated according to real-
time demands of various sub-metaverses [36]. Besides, IoT is
a network of numerous physical objects that are embedded
with sensors, softwares, communication components, and other
technologies with the aim to connect, exchange, and process data
between things, systems, clouds, and users over the Internet. In
the metaverse, IoT sensors are extensions of human senses.
4) Ubiquitous Computing: Ubiquitous computing, or ubicomp
aims to create an environment where computing appears anytime
and everywhere for users [37]. Through pervasive (often mobile)
smart objects embedded in the environment or carried on the
human body, ubiquitous computing enables smooth adaptation to
the interactions between human users and the physical space.
With ubicomp, instead of using speciﬁc equipment (e.g., lap-
top), human users can freely interact with their avatars and
experience real-time immersive metaverse services via ubiquitous
smart objects and network access in the environment. For im-
proved users’ quality-of-experience (QoE) in ubicomp, the cloud-
edge-end computing [27] orchestrates the highly scalable cloud
infrastructures (with powerful computation and storage capac-
ity) and heterogeneous edge computing infrastructures (closer
to end users/devices) via complex inner/inter-layer cooperation
paradigms. As such, it allows ﬂexible and on-demand resource
allocation to satisfy various requirements of end users/devices in
different metaverse applications.
Real world
Virtual world 
(Metaverse)Blockchain 
technology
Real -world 
EntityReal -world 
CurrencyReal -world 
EntityReal -world 
Transaction
Digital 
IdentityVirtual 
CurrencyVirtual 
AssetMetaverse 
TransactionHash & 
Timestamp 
TechnologyDistributed 
LedgersSmart 
Contract
Stock 
Exchange
Metaverse  
Finance
Virtual Creator Economy
Manufacturing
Digital 
CreationReal -world Economy
De-Fi
Non-Fungible 
Token  (NFT)
Fig. 8. The role of blockchain technologies in bridging the conventional economy
and metaverse economy.
5) AI: AI technology acts as the “brain” of metaverse which
empowers personalized metaverse services (e.g., vivid and cus-
tomized avatar creation), massive metaverse scene creation and
rendering, multilingual support in the metaverse by learning from
massive multimodal input via big data inference [17]. Moreover,
AI enables smart interactions (e.g., smart shopping guide and user
movement prediction) between user and avatar/NPC (non-player
character) via intelligent decision-making. For example, by con-
tinuously learning users’ facial expressions, emotions, hairstyles,
and so on, AI algorithms can create vivid and personalized avatars
and intelligently recommend interested goods or information to
users in the metaverse. More details of AI in the metaverse can
refer to the survey [17].
6) Blockchain: To be persistent, the metaverse should be
constructed on a decentralized architecture to avoid centralization
risks such as SPoF, low transparency, and control by a few entities
[16]. Besides, the virtual economy and value system provided
by the blockchain are essential components of the metaverse.
As shown in Fig. 8, blockchain technologies offer an open and
decentralized solution for building the sustainable virtual econ-
omy, as well as constructing the value system in the metaverse.
Blockchain is a distributed ledger, in which data is structured
into hash-chained blocks and featured with decentralization,
immutability, transparency, and auditability [35]. The blockchain
can be classiﬁed into three categories, i.e., public, consortium, and
private, based on the decentralization degree [35]. The consensus
protocols are the key component of blockchain, which determines
the ledger consistency and system scalability. Besides, smart
contracts can be deployed atop the blockchain to allow automatic
function execution among distrustful parties in a prescribed
fashion. NFT represents irreplaceable and indivisible tokens [38],
which can help asset identiﬁcation and ownership provenance
in the blockchain. De-Fi stands for decentralized ﬁnance, which
aims to deliver secure, transparent, and complex ﬁnancial services
(e.g., stock/currency exchange) in the metaverse.
E. Existing Modern Prototypes of Metaverse Applications
In this subsection, we introduce existing representative proto-
types in the following metaverse applications.
1) Game: Game is the current hottest metaverse application.
Considering the technological maturity, user matching, and con-
tent adaptability, games are an excellent way to explore the
metaverse. We list some representative examples of metaverse