9
TABLE IV
SUMMARY OF EXISTING METAVERSE PROTOTYPES INDIFFERENT APPLICATIONS
Prototype Application Immersive Hyper SpatiotemporalSustainableInteroperable Scalable HeterogeneousOpen Decentralized
Second Life MMO Game Partly X Partly  X N/A
Roblox MMO Game X X X  Partly X N/A
Fortnite MMO Game X X Partly Partly X N/A
Digital Palace Museum Travelling X     Partly N/A
Horizon Workroom Working X     Partly N/A
Omniverse Simulation X X X  Partly X X
Decentraland Game X X X X  X Partly
Cryptovoxels Game X X X X  X Partly
Authentication & 
Access control
(Sects. III -A&B)Data  Management
(Sect. IV -A)Privacy -related
(Sect. V -A)Network -related
(Sect. VI -A)Governance -related
(Sect. IX -A)
 Data Tampering Attack
 False Data Injection  SPoF  Attacks
 DDoS  Attacks
 Sybil AttacksMisbehaving Regulators
Threats to Collaborative 
GovernanceEconomy -related
(Sect. VII -A)
Service Trust in UGC & 
Virtual Object Trading
Threats to Digital Asset 
OwnershipPhysical /Social Effects
(Sect. VIII -A)
 Threats to Personal 
Safety
 Threats to Infrastructure 
Safety
 Social EffectsIdentity Theft
Impersonation 
Trusted & Interoperable 
Authentication
Unauthorized Data 
Access Threats to Data Quality of 
UGC and Physical Input
 Threats to UGC 
Ownership & ProvenancePervasive Data 
Collection
 Privacy Leakage in 
Data Transmission
 Privacy Leakage in 
Data Processing
Privacy Leakage in 
Cloud/Edge StorageIdentity Linkability 
in Ternary Worlds
 Threats to  
Accountability
Threats to 
Customized PrivacyThreats to Economic 
Fairness 
Strategic  
users/avatars
Free-riding 
users/avatars
Collusive 
users/avatarsThreats to Digital 
Forensics
Authentication &  Access 
control
(Sect. III -C) Data  Management
(Sect. IV -B)Privacy Enhancement
(Sect. V -B)Situational Awareness
(Sect. VI -B)Creator Economy
(Sect. VII -B)Physical Safety  & Social 
Management
(Sects. VIII -B, VIII -C)Digital Governance
(Sect. IX -B) Threats to  Digital 
FootprintsSecurity Threats to  Metaverse
Avatar AuthenticationManaging New Types of 
Metaverse Data
Threats to Intellectual 
Property ProtectionRogue /Compromised  
End DevicesNew Laws & 
Regulations for Virtual 
Crimes
Misuse of User/Avatar 
Data
Fig. 9. The taxonomy of security threats and corresponding security countermeasures in the metaverse.
III. T HREATS AND COUNTERMEASURES TO
AUTHENTICATION & A CCESS CONTROL IN METAVERSE
In metaverse, identity authentication and access control play a
vital role for massive users/avatars in metaverse service offering.
A. Threats to Authentication in Metaverse
The identities of users/avatars in the metaverse can be illegally
stolen, impersonated, and interoperability issues can be encoun-
tered in authentication across virtual worlds.
1) Identity Theft . If the identity of a user is stolen in the
metaverse, his/her avatars, digital assets, social relationships, and
even the digital life can be leaked and lost, which can be more
severe than that in traditional information systems. For example,
hackers can steal users’ personal information (e.g., full names,
secret keys of digital assets, and banking details) in Roblox
through hacked personal VR glasses, phishing email scams, and
authentication loopholes to commit fraud and crimes (e.g., steal
the victim’s avatar and digital assets) in Roblox. For example, in
2022, the accounts of 17 users in the Opensea NFT marketplace
are hacked due to smart contract ﬂaws and phishing attacks,
causing a lost of $1.7 million [44].
2) Impersonation Attack . An attacker can carry out the im-
personation attack by pretending to be another authorized entity
to gain access to a service or system in the metaverse [14].
For example, hackers can invade the Oculus helmet and exploit
the stolen behavioral and biological data gathered by the in-
built motion-tracking system to create digital replicas of the
user and impersonate the victim to facilitate social engineering
attacks. The hackers can also create a fake avatar using digitalreplicas of the victim to deceive, fraud, and even commit a crime
against the victim’s friends in the metaverse. Another example
is that attackers can exploit Bluetooth impersonation threats [45]
to impersonate trusted endpoints and illegally access metaverse
services by inserting rogue wearable devices into the established
Bluetooth pairing.
3) Avatar Authentication Issue . Compared with real-world
identity authentication, the authentication of avatars (e.g., the
veriﬁcation of their friends’ avatars) for users in the metaverse
can be more challenging through verifying facial features, voice,
video footage, and so on. Besides, adversaries can create multiple
AI bots (i.e., digital humans), which appear, hear, and behave
identical to user’s real avatar, in the virtual world (e.g., Roblox)
by imitating user’s appearance, voice, and behaviors [12]. As
a consequence, more additional personal information might be
required as evidence to ensure secure avatar authentication, which
may also open new privacy breach issues.
4) Trusted and Interoperable Authentication . For users/avatars
in the metaverse, it is fundamental to ensure fast, efﬁcient, and
trusted cross-platform and cross-domain identity authentication,
i.e., across various service domains and virtual worlds (built on
distinct platforms such as blockchains) [2]. For example, the trust-
free and interoperable asset exchange and avatar transfer between
Roblox and Fortnite, as well as among distinct administrative
domains for offering different services in Roblox.
B. Threats to Access Control in Metaverse
1) Unauthorized Data Access . Complex metaverse services will
generate new types of personal proﬁling data (e.g., biometric