23
TABLE IX
SUMMARY OF EXISTING /POTENTIAL SECURITY COUNTERMEASURES TOMETAVERSE ECONOMY
Ref.Security
Threat?Purpose
Advantages
LimitationsUtilized
Technology
[131]Low cooperation
in creator economy?Swarm economy model for cooperative and dynamic digital resource sharing
Real-world implementation of blockchain in such economy model
Non-supervisability in transaction settlement and high computational overheadBlockchain
[132]Lack supervisability
on criminal transaction?Three-layer sharding blockchain for scalable and automatic transaction
Enhanced system scalability and traceability of criminal transactions
Lack vulnerability analysis and large-scale real-world simulationsBlockchain
sharding
[133]Fraud in
DT construction?Trusted and on-demand DT services in DT edge networks
Transparent DT model training and resource trading
Lack efﬁciency and scalability analysis of their DAG blockchainFL, DT, DAG
[29]Compromised
nodes/services?Intelligent trust model to quantitatively evaluate user/service trustworthiness
Aggregate multi-dimensional trust attributes for high-accuracy trust computing
Lack complexity and scalability analysis, as well as cold start issuesMachine learning
[139]Economic fairness,
strategic users?Strategy-proof and privacy-preserving auction for heterogeneous spectrum
Privacy protection, strategy-proofness, and high social welfare
Vulnerable to collusive bidders in auctionHE,
auction
[129]Economic fairness,
free-riding attack?Mitigate free-riding effects in BitTorrent by optimizing seed bandwidth allocation
Effective free-rider penalization and cooperation promotion
Lack real-world tests on robustness and lack analysis of heterogeneous peersFluid model
[141]Economic fairness,
free-riding attack?Blockchain-based fair ad delivery among connected vehicles
Enable anonymity and conditional linkability
Not support batch veriﬁcation of aggregated dissemination proofsSmart contracts,
ZKP
[128]Economic fairness,
collusion attack?Collusion-resistant auction design in cooperative communications
Truthfulness, collusion-resistance, and budget-balance
Only apply to wireless cooperative communicationsGame theory
invade critical national infrastructures (e.g., power grid systems
and high-speed rail systems) via APT attacks [14].
3) Social Effects . Although metaverse offers an exciting digital
society, severe side effects can also raise in human society such as
user addiction [155], rumor prevention [156], child pornography,
biased outcomes, extortion, cyberbullying, cyberstalkers [11], and
even simulated terrorist camps [157]. For example, the immersive
metaverse can provide future potentials for extremists and terror-
ists by making it easier to recruit and meet up, offering new ways
for training and coordination, and lowering costs for ﬁnding new
targets [157]. Essentially, the immersive training in digital clones
of actual buildings can assist terrorists to plan attacks and escape
routes. Another example is that the metaverse, in its ultimate
form, is fully controlled by AI algorithms (as depicted in the
ﬁlm Matrix ), in which the code can be the law to rule everything
and severe ethical issues such as race/gender bias may arise.
B. Physical Safety
In this subsection, we review existing potential solutions to
the physical safety in the metaverse from the cyber insurance
and cyber-physical interaction aspects.
1) Cyber Insurance-based Solutions: Cyber insurance offers a
ﬁnancial instrument for risk mitigation of critical infrastructures
in cyberthreats. To resolve the high premium stipulation in
traditional insurance offered by insurance companies, Lau et
al. [158] propose the coalitional insurance in power systems
where the coalitional premium is computed by considering loss
distributions, vulnerabilities, and budget compliance in an insur-
ance coalition. Feng et al . [159] integrate cyber insurance into
blockchain services to prevent potential damages under attacks,
where a sequential game theoretical framework is developed
to model the interactions among users, blockchain platform,
and cyber-insurer. The user’s optimal demand of blockchain
service, blockchain platform’s optimal pricing strategy, and cyber-
insurer’s optimal investment strategy are analytically derived bysolving the joint market equilibrium problem. However, when
applying to the metaverse, the scalable and dynamic insurance
coalition formation along with fair premium design under diverse
cyber threats (e.g., anti-forensics) require further investigation.
2) CPSS-based Solutions: Apart from the single cyber per-
spective, existing CPSS-based solutions afford lessons for cy-
berthreat defense and physical safety protection in the metaverse
from the perspective of interactions between cyber and physical
worlds. Vellaithurai et al. [154] introduce cyber-physical security
indices for security measurement of power grid infrastructures.
The cyber probes (e.g., IDS) are deployed on host systems to
proﬁle system activities, where the generated logs along with
the topology information are to build stochastic Bayesian models
using belief propagation algorithms. To resolve the issues (e.g.,
low-level abstraction) in task-based programming paradigm, Tariq
et al. [160] propose a service-oriented paradigm with QoS-aware
operation and resource-aware deployment for better support of
disruption-free incremental system implementation and reconﬁg-
uration. Different from CPSSs, metaverse is an immersive and
hyper spatiotemporal virtual space with a sustainable economy
ecosystem, which adds extra challenges in solution migration.
C. Society Management
In this subsection, we review existing works on society man-
agement in the metaverse from the following two perspectives.
1) Misinformation Spreading Mitigation: The extremely rapid
information spreading (e.g., gossip) in the metaverse makes the
so-called “butterﬂy effect” more challenging in social governance
and public safety in the real world. As an attempt to address this
issue, Zhu et al . [156] propose to minimize the misinformation
inﬂuence in online social networks (OSNs) by dynamically
selecting a series of nodes to be blocked from the OSN. However,
it only works in traditional static OSNs and it is challenging to
be applied in the fully interactive metaverse with a huge and
time-varying social graph structure.