27
ous entities [27], thereby enhancing the QoE for users/avatars and
QoS for metaverse services, as shown in Fig. 16. Besides, cloud-
edge-end computing can assist edge intelligence and user privacy
protection by aggregating and processing users’ private data at
edge devices (e.g., home gateways) via federated edge learning
[82]. In addition, by analyzing the metaverse system as a whole,
the cooperation among various sub-metaverses is essential to
facilitate seamless security provision and privacy protection and
requires further investigation. An attractive case is to dynamically
allocate spatiotemporal security resources (e.g., ﬁrewall, IDS, and
IPS) among heterogeneous sub-metaverses (consisting of various
edge/cloud servers) in an on-demand manner. Future works to be
investigated include the design of speciﬁc edge-edge, edge-cloud,
and edge-end collaboration mechanisms in the metaverse.
C. Cross-Chain Interoperable and Regulatory Metaverse
By getting rid of trusted third parties, blockchain is recog-
nized as the underlying technology to build the future trust-free
economy ecosystem in the metaverse. However, distinct sub-
metaverses may deploy services on heterogeneous blockchains
(e.g., using different transaction formats, block structures, and
consensus protocols) to meet QoS requirements, resulting in
severe interoperability concerns. As shown in Fig. 17, efﬁcient
cross-chain authentication and governance are essential to en-
sure the security and legitimacy of digital asset-related activ-
ities (e.g., asset trading) across different sub-metaverses built
on heterogeneous blockchains. Current cross-chain mechanisms
mainly focus on digital asset transfer and rely on the notary
scheme, hash-locking, relay chain, and sidechain (details can
refer to [35]), and few of them consider cross-chain authenti-
cation and governance in the metaverse. The implementation,
efﬁciency, and security of identity authentication across various
domains and blockchains in the metaverse need to be further
investigated. Moreover, novel decentralized, hierarchical, and
penetrating cross-chain governance mechanisms need further
research efforts in the metaverse. Besides, efﬁcient metaverse-
speciﬁc consensus mechanisms, redesigned block structures, as
well as well-designed user incentives are required for distinct
metaverse applications. To summarize, open challenges include
application-speciﬁc governance rule design, programmable and
scalable cross-chain governance architecture design, on-chain en-
tity identiﬁcation and risk assessment, dynamic and collaborative
cross-chain governance, etc.
D. Energy-Efﬁcient and Green Metaverse
In the metaverse, on one hand, the wearable XR devices may
be resource-constrained and their communication/computation
capacities can be highly heterogeneous. On the other hand, the
metaverse can be always resource hungry and the computational
power demanded in the metaverse will continue to rise, causing
increasing environmental concerns (e.g., greenhouse gas emis-
sion). The future metaverse design should be energy-efﬁcient and
green to attain sustainability. Users/avatars’ cooperation can offer
a possible solution for green metaverse in terms of UGC/AIGC
dissemination, cooperative networking, and cooperative compu-
tation. For example, users’ social/locational cooperation can be
beneﬁcial to create and distribute high-quality UGC games via
the formation of cooperative social groups. Besides, the collab-
oration among heterogeneous metaverse devices with temporal
Blockchain A
Cross -chain 
transactionBlockchain B
Blockchain CCross -chain 
transactionRelay chainMetaverse
Sub-metaverse Sub-metaverse 
Cross -chain 
transaction
user
Fig. 17. Illustration of cross-chain services among three sub-metaverses which
are built on three different blockchains. A relay chain is established to support
cross-chain transactions [177], where the relay chain synchronizes the information
of source blockchain Ato allow destination blockchains BandCto verify the
correctness of transactions on source blockchain A.
and spatial correlations can be leveraged to design energy-
efﬁcient consensus protocols [35] tailored to resource-limited
metaverse environments. Apart from user cooperation and new
green technology design, other possible solutions include new
architecture design, new green edge-cloud computing design, new
energy-efﬁcient consensus protocol design, etc., to support green
networking and computing in the metaverse.
E. Content-Centric and Human-Centric Metaverse
In the future metaverse, a surge of UGC is expected to be
created, requested, and delivered across various sub-metaverses.
Existing IP-based content transmissions can face critical chal-
lenges in securing UGC dissemination to massive heterogeneous
end devices over the large-scale metaverse across virtual worlds.
Content-centric networking (CCN) stands for a paradigm shift
of current Internet architecture. In contrast to current IP-based
and host-oriented Internet architecture, contents are addressed and
routed directly by their naming information in CCN instead of
IP addresses. In CCN-based metaverse, the UGC consumer can
request the desired UGC object by sending an interest message
to any CCN node that hosts the matched UGC. Besides, CCN
embodies a security model which explicitly ensures the security
of individual content pieces instead of securing the “pipe” or the
connection. Therefore, the deployment of CCN can offer a more
ﬂexible, scalable, and secure network in the metaverse. However,
CCN also brings new security concerns in the metaverse and one
of them is content poisoning, in which adversaries can contam-
inate the cache space of metaverse nodes by injecting poisoned
UGCs and further cause the delay and even failure in retrieving
valid UGCs via ﬂooding attacks. In addition, the design of
metaverse should be human-centric. For example, users/avatars’
personalized privacy preferences should be ensured in developing
privacy-preserving approaches in metaverse environments.
XI. C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we have presented an in-depth survey of the
fundamentals, security, and privacy of metaverse. Speciﬁcally,
we have introduced a novel distributed metaverse architecture
and discussed its key characteristics, enabling technologies, and
modern prototypes. Afterward, the security and privacy threats,
as well as the critical challenges in security defenses and pri-
vacy preservation, have been investigated under the distributed