4
TABLE II
SUMMARY OF IMPORTANT ABBREVIATIONS IN ALPHABETICAL ORDER
Abbr. Deﬁnition Abbr. Deﬁnition Abbr. Deﬁnition
ABE Attribute-Based Encryption AR Augmented Reality AI Artiﬁcial Intelligence
APT Advanced Persistent Threat BCI Brain-Computer Interface B5G Beyond 5G
CA Certiﬁcate Authority CPSS Cyber-Physical-Social System DL Deep Learning
DP Differential Privacy ECG Electrocardiogram FL Federated Learning
GDPR General Data Protection Regulation HCI Human-Computer Interaction HE Homomorphic Encryption
IoT Internet of Things MMO Massive Multi-player Online MR Mixed Reality
NFT Non-Fungible Token NPC Non-Player Character OSN Online Social Network
PUGC Professional- and User-Generated Content PGC Professional-Generated Content PKI Public Key Infrastructure
PPG Photoplethysmography SDN Software-Deﬁned Network SSI Self-Sovereign Identity
SMC Secure Multi-party Computation SPoF Single Point of Failure SVM Support Vector Machine
QoE Quality-of-Experience QoS Quality-of-Service UGC User-Generated Content
VR Virtual Reality XR Extended Reality ZKP Zero-Knowledge Proof
Real  worldSensors Actuators UsersR→V 
AdaptationV→R 
Adaptation
sensory 
datasensor 
capacitysensing/ 
actuat ion 
preferenceactuator
commandactuator 
capacitysensory 
datasensory 
effectsvirtual world
object
characteristicsVirtual  world
Virtual 
world #1Virtual 
world #2...V→V 
Adaptation
Fig. 3. The architecture of ISO/IEC 23005 (MPEG-V) standards [23]. R!V
adaptation means the conversion of sensory data from the real world (RW) to
virtual world (VW) object characteristics. V!Radaptation means the conversion
of sensory effects from VW into actuator commands to RW. V!Vadaptation
means the conversion of native representations of information in a VW to the
standard format.
Real  worldSensors Actuatorsactuator
command
actuator 
capacityVirtual  worldVirtual 
world #1Virtual 
world #2...
actuator 
APIsensory 
data
sensor  
capacity
sensor  
APIDigital Things 
Definition, 
Synchronization  & 
Mission ControlIEEE 2888.1
IEEE 2888. 2
IEEE 2888. 3
Fig. 4. The architecture of IEEE 2888 standards [24]. IEEE 2888.1, IEEE 2888.2,
and IEEE 2888.3 specify the standards on sensor interface, actuator interface, and
orchestration of digital synchronization, respectively.
23005 standards.
2)ISO/IEC 23005 standards mainly focus on the sensory
effects and lack capability in offering general-purpose interfaces
between virtual and real worlds. As a supplement to ISO/IEC
23005 standards, IEEE 2888 project launched in 2019 aims to
deﬁne standardized interfaces for synchronization of cyber and
physical worlds [24]. By specifying information formats and
application program interfaces (APIs) to control actuators and
obtain sensory information, IEEE 2888 standards offer founda-
tions for building metaverse systems, where both virtual and real
worlds can affect each other. Fig. 4 illustrates the general architec-
ture of IEEE 2888 standards. In Fig. 4, the sensory information
and actuator-related information are exchanged between virtual
and real worlds via IEEE 2888.1 and IEEE 2888.2 standards,
respectively. Besides, the deﬁnition, synchronization, and mission
control data are deﬁned by the IEEE 2888.3 standard for digital
things (i.e., virtual objects).
Human world
 Physical worldDigital world
Human 
society
Digital avatars
Digital 
life
AI Blockchain 
 Digital twinservice content
Interaction feedback big data...
Metaverse
virtual world #1 ... virtual world #2 virtual world #3Interconnected 
virtual worlds
Sensor & 
ActuatorCommunicationComputationStorage
cloud -edge -end 
computing
Cloud 
caching
Local 
cachingEdge 
caching
Infrastructure
Virtual 
environmentsVirtual 
goods/services
Consensus 
Smart contract
NFT
De-Fi3D modeling
Interactivity3D simulation
Data fusionScene  rending
TranslationScene creation
Recommendation AR
BCIVR
MRMetaverse 
Engine
XRservice content
Fig. 5. The architecture of metaverse in integration of the human, physical, and
digital worlds.
B. Metaverse Architecture
Metaverse is a self-sustaining, hyper spatiotemporal, and 3D
immersive virtual shared space, created by the convergence of
physically persistent virtual space and virtually enhanced physical
reality. In other words, the metaverse is a synthesized world which
is composed of user-controlled avatars, digital things, virtual envi-
ronments, and other computer-generated elements, where humans
(represented by avatars) can use their virtual identity through any
smart device to communicate, collaborate, and socialize with each
other. The construction of metaverse blends the ternary physical,
human, and digital worlds. Fig. 5 shows the general architecture
of the metaverse with consideration of its intrinsic ternicity. In
the following, we elaborate on the relationships between the three
worlds, the components in the metaverse, and the information
ﬂow of the metaverse in detail.