8
games. The sandbox game Second Life1offers a modiﬁable 3D
virtual world where players can join in as avatars and create their
virtual architectures and sell them, as well as participate in social
activities such as art shows and even political gatherings and
visiting embassy. Roblox2is a global user-created game platform,
in which players can create games and design items such as skins
and clothes. It proposes eight key features of the metaverse:
identity, friends, immersion, anywhere, diversity, low latency,
economy, and civilization [39]. Fortnite3is a massive multi-player
online (MMO) shooter game designed by Epic Games, where
players can build buildings and bunkers as well as construct
islands, while the in-game items such as skins can only be
designed by the platform.
2) Social Experience: Metaverse can revolutionize our society
and enable a series of immersive social applications such as
virtual lives, virtual shopping, virtual dating, virtual chatting,
global travel, and even space/time travel. For example, Lil Nas
X held a virtual concert on Roblox in 2020, with over 30 million
fans participating. Players can unlock special Lil Nas X goods in
the digital store, e.g., commemorative items and emotions. Due
to the COVID-19 situation, UC Berkeley celebrated graduation
festivities virtually in Minecraft in 2020 by digitally copying the
campus scenery. Besides, Tencent developed a Digital Palace
Museum4in 2018 which allows tourists to freely visit the palace
museum and its exhibitions with a panoramic and immersive view
by wearing VR helmets in their homes.
3) Online Collaboration: Metaverse also opens new possibili-
ties for immersive virtual collaboration in terms of telecommuting
in virtual workplaces, studying and learning in virtual classrooms,
and panel discussion and meeting in virtual conference rooms. For
example, Horizon Workroom5is an ofﬁce collaboration software
(run in Oculus Quest 2 helmet) released by Meta (parent company
of Facebook), which allows people in any physical location to
work and meet together in the same virtual room. Microsoft
Mesh6is an MR platform supported by Azure, which enables
users working from multiple sites to cooperate virtually via
holographic presence and shared experience from anywhere in
a digital copy of their ofﬁce.
4) Simulation & Design: Another promising application is 3D
simulation, modeling, and architectural design on metaverse. For
example, NVIDIA has built its open platform named Omniverse7
to support multi-user real-time 3D simulation and visualization
of physical objects and attributes in a shared virtual space for in-
dustrial applications, e.g., automotive design. Besides, Omniverse
can be compatible with Disney Pixart’s open-source platform
Universal Scene Description (USD).
5) Creator Economy: The metaverse mainly includes four
modes of content creation: professional-generated content (PGC),
professional- and user-generated content (PUGC), user-generated
content (UGC), and AI-generated content (AIGC), as illustrated
in Table III. In PGC mode, contents (e.g., games) are created
1https://secondlife.com/
2https://developer.roblox.com/en-us/
3https://www.epicgames.com/fortnite/en-US/home
4https://en.dpm.org.cn/about/news/2019-09-18/3089.html
5https://www.theverge.com/2021/8/19/22629942/facebook-workrooms-
horizon-oculus-vr
6https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/mesh
7https://www.nvidia.com/en-us/omniverse/TABLE III
A S UMMARY OF CONTENT CREATION MODES IN THEMETAVERSE
Mode Description Feature Instance
PGCContents are produced
by professionalsCentralization,
low diversiﬁcation,
high quality & costGTA,
Unity
PUGCContents are produced by
professionals and usersSemi-centralization,
medium diversiﬁcation,
medium costSecond Life,
Minecraft,
Fortnite
UGCContents are produced
and traded among usersDecentralization,
high diversiﬁcation,
uneven quality & low costRoblox,
Decentraland,
Cryptovoxels
AIGCContents are produced or
partially produced by AIHigh efﬁciency,
low cost & fastMetaHuman
by professional content producers on the platform, and ordinary
users are just participants and content viewers/experiencers. In
UGC mode, all users produce contents and trade them freely in
the marketplace provided by the platform, which is featured with
high freedom degree, low cost, high diversiﬁcation, and decentral-
ization [40]. Users are dominant in the content production process
under the UGC mode. For example, creators of game scenes,
skins, and items in Roblox can earn a certain percentage of Robux
(i.e., virtual tokens exchangeable with real-world currency) paid
by their experiencers, leading to a virtuous cycle. The PUGC
mode is the combination of PGC and UGC modes, in which
contents are jointly produced by professionals and ordinary users.
In the metaverse, as the number of content consumers can be far
greater than the number of content producers, the AIGC mode can
help VSPs to create massive qualiﬁed and personalized contents
with much-improved efﬁciency and much-reduced cost. In AIGC,
there exist two types of content creation: (i) AI fully replaces
users for content production; and (ii) AI assists users to produce
contents. An example is that in the MetaHuman project [41], Epic
Games leverages AI algorithms to quickly create life-like virtual
characters such as conversational virtual assistants.
There are existing decentralized virtual worlds with a built-
in creator economy supported by the Ethereum blockchain such
as Decentraland8and Cryptovoxels9. InDecentraland , users can
trade the land parcel and equipments in the marketplace and build
their own buildings as well as social games by calling the builder
function, where the trading details are immutably recorded in
Ethereum for auditablility. In Cryptovoxels , players can trade the
lands and build virtual stores and art galleries in the virtual world
“Origin City”. Besides, users can display and trade their digital
assets such as artwork inside buildings.
Table IV summarizes existing modern prototypes in different
metaverse applications in terms of the six key characteristics of
the metaverse.
In the next sections (i.e., from Sect. III to Sect. IX), based on
existing surveys [42], [43], we classify a broad scope of security
threats in the metaverse from the following seven dimensions:
authentication & access control, data management, privacy, net-
work, economy, physical/social effects, and governance. More-
over, we review existing/potential defense mechanisms for the
above security and privacy threats in the metaverse. Fig. 9 depicts
the proposed taxonomy of security threats and the corresponding
security countermeasures in the metaverse.
8https://decentraland.org/
9https://www.cryptovoxels.com/