6
avatars, can produce and distribute digital creations across various
sub-metaverses to promote the creativity of metaverse.
6) Information Flow Across Worlds: As depicted in Fig. 5,
the subjective consciousness, the Internet, and the IoT are the
main media among the three worlds. (i) Humans can interact
with physical objects via HCI technology and experience virtually
augmented reality (e.g., holographic telepresence) via XR tech-
nology. (ii) The human world and the digital world are connected
through the Internet, i.e., the largest computer network in the
world. Users can interact with the digital world via smart devices
such as smartphones, wearable sensors, and VR helmets, for the
creation, sharing, and acquisition of knowledge. (iii) The IoT
infrastructure bridges the physical world and the digital world
by using inter-connected smart devices for digitalization, and
thereby information can ﬂow freely between the two worlds [29].
Besides, the feedback information from the digital world (e.g.,
processed results of big data and intelligent decisions) can guide
the transformation (e.g., manufacturing process) of the physical
world. As the metaverse blends physical systems, human society,
and cyber worlds, threats in virtual worlds can be ampliﬁed and
severely affect physical infrastructures and personal safety, which
also raises huge governance demands and challenges.
C. Key Characteristics of Metaverse
In web 1.0, Internet users are just content consumers, where
contents are provided by the websites. In web 2.0 (i.e., mobile
Internet), users are both content producers and consumers, and
the websites turn into platforms for service offering. Typical such
platforms include Wikipedia, WeChat, and TikTok. Metaverse is
recognized as the evolving paradigm of web 3.0. In metaverse,
as shown in Fig. 6, users represented as digital avatars can seam-
lessly shuttle across various virtual worlds (i.e., sub-metaverses)
to experience a digital life, as well as make digital creations
and economic interactions, supported by physical infrastructures
and the metaverse engine. Speciﬁcally, metaverse exhibits unique
features from the following perspectives.
1) Immersiveness: The immersiveness means that the
computer-generated virtual space is sufﬁciently realistic to allow
users to feel psychologically and emotionally immersed [30]. It
can be also called immersive realism [2]. According to the per-
spective of realism, human beings interact with the environment
through their senses and their bodies. The immersive realism can
be approached through the structure of sensory perception (e.g.,
sight, sound, touch, temperature, and balance) and expression
(e.g., gestures).
2) Hyper Spatiotemporality: The real world is restricted by the
ﬁniteness of space and the irreversibility of time. As metaverse
is a virtual space-time continuum parallel to the real one, the
hyper spatiotemporality refers to the break of limitations of time
and space [4]. As such, users can freely shuttle across various
worlds with different spatiotemporal dimensions to experience
an alternate life with seamless scene transformation.
3) Sustainability: The sustainability indicates that the meta-
verse maintains a closed economic loop and a consistent value
system with a high level of independence. On the one hand, it
should be open , i.e., continuously arousing users’ enthusiasm in
digital content creation as well as open innovations. On the other
hand, to remain persistent, it should be built on a decentralized
Metaverse BlockchainAI
Digital twin InteractivityNetworkingUbiquitous 
computingFig. 7. The illustration of six underlying technologies including its roles and key
components in the metaverse.
architecture to get rid of SPoF risks and prevent from being
controlled by a few powerful entities.
4) Interoperability: The interoperability in the metaverse rep-
resents that (i) users can seamlessly move across virtual worlds
(i.e., sub-metaverses) without interruption of the immersive expe-
rience [6]; and (ii) digital assets for rendering or reconstruction of
virtual worlds are interchangeable across distinct platforms [2].
5) Scalability: The scalability refers to the capacity of
metaverse to remain efﬁcient with the number of concurrent
users/avatars, the level of scene complexity, and the mode of
user/avatar interactions (in terms of type, scope, and range) [2].
6) Heterogeneity: The heterogeneity of metaverse includes
heterogeneous virtual spaces (e.g., with distinct implementations),
heterogeneous physical devices (e.g., with distinct interfaces),
heterogeneous data types (e.g., unstructured and structured),
heterogeneous communication modes (e.g., cellular and satellite
communications), as well as the diversity of human psychology.
It also entails the poor interoperability of metaverse systems.
D. Enabling Technologies of Metaverse
As shown in Fig. 7, there are the following six enabling
technologies underlying the metaverse.
1) Interactivity: With the maturity of miniaturized sensors,
embedded technology, and XR technology, XR devices such as
helmet-mounted displays (HMDs) are expected to be the main
terminal for entering the metaverse [31]. The XR deeply incorpo-
rates virtual reality/augmented reality/mixed reality (VR/AR/MR)
technologies to offer multi-sensory immersiveness, augmented
experience, and real-time user/avatar/environment interaction via
front-projected holographic display, HCI (especially BCI), and
large-scale 3D modeling [32]. Particularly, VR provides immer-
sive experiences in a virtual world, AR delivers true presence
experiences of virtual holograms, graphics, and videos in the
real world, and MR offers a transition experience between VR
and AR. The wearable XR devices perform ﬁne-grained human-
speciﬁc information perception, as well as ubiquitous sensing
for objects and surroundings, with the assistance of indoor
smart devices (e.g., cameras). In this manner, the user/avatar
interactivity will no longer be limited to mobile inputs (e.g.,
hand-held phones and laptops), but all kinds of interactive devices