2
turns into a persistent and self-sustaining surreality world which
assimilates the reality into itself. The seamless integration and
mutual symbiosis of physical and virtual worlds will be realized
in this phase, where the scope of the virtual world will be larger
than that of the real world and more scenes and lives that do not
exist in reality can exist in virtual realms.
A. Challenges for Securing Metaverse
In spite of the promising sign of metaverse, security and
privacy issues are the prime concerns that hinder its further devel-
opment. A wide range of security breaches and privacy invasions
may arise in the metaverse from the management of massive
data streams, pervasive user proﬁling activities, unfair outcomes
of AI algorithms, to the safety of physical infrastructures and
human bodies. Firstly, since metaverse integrates a variety of
latest technologies and systems built on them as its basis, their
vulnerabilities and intrinsic ﬂaws may also be inherited by the
metaverse. There have been incidents of emerging technologies,
such as hijacking of wearable devices or cloud storage, theft of
virtual currencies, and the misconduct of AI to produce fake news.
Secondly, driven by the interweaving of various technologies,
the effects of existing threats can be ampliﬁed and become
more severe in virtual worlds, while new threats nonexistent in
physical and cyber spaces can breed such as virtual stalking
and virtual spying [11]. Particularly, the personal data involved
in the metaverse can be more granular and unprecedentedly
ubiquitous to build a digital copy of the real world, which
opens new horizons for crimes on private big data [12]. For
example, to build a virtual scene using AI algorithms, users will
inevitably wear wearable AR/VR devices with built-in sensors to
comprehensively collect brain wave patterns, facial expressions,
eye movements, hand movements, speech and biometric features,
as well as the surrounding environment. Besides, as users need
to be uniquely identiﬁed in the metaverse, it means that headsets,
VR glasses, or other devices can be used for tracking users’
real locations illegally [13]. Lastly, hackers can exploit system
vulnerabilities and compromise devices as entry points to invade
real-world equipments such as household appliances to threaten
personal safety, and even threaten critical infrastructures such as
power grid systems, high-speed rail systems, and water supply
systems via advanced persistent threat (APT) attacks [14].
Nevertheless, existing security countermeasures can still be
ineffective and lack adaptability for metaverse applications. Par-
ticularly, the intrinsic characteristics of metaverse including im-
mersiveness ,hyper spatiotemporality ,sustainability ,interoper-
ability ,scalability , and heterogeneity may bring about a series of
challenges for efﬁcient security provision. 1) The real-time fully
immersive experience in the metaverse brings not only sensual
pleasures of the ﬂawless virtual environment, but also challenges
in the secure fusion of massive multimodal user-sensitive big
data for interactions between users and avatars/environments. 2)
The integration of the ternary world contributes to the hyper
spatiotemporality in the metaverse [15], which greatly increases
the complexity and difﬁculty of trust management. Due to the
deepening blurring of the boundary between the real and the vir-
tual, the metaverse will make the fact and ﬁction more confusing
such as Deepfake events, especially for regulations and digital
forensics. 3) To avoid the single point of failure (SPoF) and thecontrol by a few powerful entities, the metaverse should be built
on a decentralized architecture to be self-sustaining and persistent
[16], which raises severe challenges in reaching unambiguous
consensus among massive entities in the time-varying metaverse.
4) The interoperability and scalability in the metaverse indicate
users can freely shuttle across various sub-metaverses concur-
rently under different scenes and interaction modes, which also
poses challenges to ensure fast service authorization, compliance
auditing, and accountability enforcement in seamless service
mitigation and multi-source data fusion. 5) The virtual worlds
in the large-scale metaverse can be highly heterogeneous in
terms of hardware implementation, communication interfaces,
and softwares, which poses huge interoperability difﬁculties.
B. Related Works
The topic of metaverse has attracted various research attention.
Until now, there have been several survey papers from different
aspects of the metaverse. For example, Dionisio et al. [2] specify
four characteristics of viable 3D virtual worlds (or metaverse)
including ubiquity, realism, scalability, and interoperability, and
discuss ongoing improvements of the underlying virtual world
technology. Lee et al. [6] review and examine eight fundamental
technologies to build up the metaverse as well as its opportunities
from six user-centric factors. Huynh-The et al . [17] study the
role of AI approaches in the foundation and development of
the metaverse. Yang et al . [7] investigate the potential of AI
and blockchain technologies for future metaverse construction.
Ning et al . [4] present a survey of the development status of
metaverse in terms of national policies, industrial projects, in-
frastructures, supporting technologies, VR, and social metaverse.
Park et al . [18] discuss three components (i.e., hardware, soft-
ware, and content) of metaverse and review the user interaction,
implementation, and representative applications in the metaverse.
Xuet al . [19] present an in-depth survey on the edge-enabled
metaverse from communication, networking, computation, and
blockchain perspectives. Leenes [11] investigate potential privacy
risks in the online game Second Life from both social and legal
perspectives. Different from the above existing surveys on the
general metaverse [2], [4], [6], [11], [18], AI-empowered meta-
verse [7], [17], edge-enabled metaverse [19], or the potential in
service provisioning in social VR/AR games [12], retailing [20],
education [21], social goods [8], and computational arts [22],
we focus on the perspective of metaverse security and privacy
such as potential security/privacy threats, critical security/privacy
challenges, and state-of-the-art defenses, etc.
In this paper, we present a comprehensive survey on the
fundamentals of metaverse, as well as the key challenges and
solutions to build the secure and privacy-preserving metaverse. By
discussing existing/potential solutions for the challenges facing
the metaverse, our survey offers critical insights and useful guide-
lines for readers to better understand how these security/privacy
threats could arise and be prevented in the metaverse. The
contributions of this survey are four-fold.
We discuss the fundamentals of metaverse including the
general architecture, key characteristics, and enabling tech-
nologies, as well as existing modern prototypes of metaverse
applications.