19
TABLE VII
SUMMARY OF EXISTING /POTENTIAL PRIVACY COUNTERMEASURES INMETAVERSE
Ref.Security
Threat?Purpose
Advantages
LimitationsUtilized
Technology
[13]Location tracking
in AR games?Attack model construction and possible mitigation design
Fine-grained and high-accuracy location tracking attack modeling
Lack complete defense analysis under real-world testCloud, AR,
access control
[89]Privacy exposure
in UGC sharing?Graph-based local DP for privacy-preserving topic recommendation
High-level privacy and high efﬁciency in user-linkage unassociation
Lack image indistinguishability mechanism in practical useLocal DP
[101]Privacy exposure
in UGC sharing?Secure data collaboration with class imbalance scenarios
High accuracy in abnormal health detection
Lack Byzantine robustness in FLFL
[103] Co-photo privacy?Personalized facial recognition with privacy protection in photo sharing
High recognition ratio and efﬁciency in OSNs
Lack implementation and test on personal clouds (e.g., Dropbox)Facial recognition
[104]Compromising
reﬂections?Automatically reconstruct user typing on virtual keyboards
Effective attack execution with high robustness and accuracy
Lack effective defense designFeature extraction
and matching
[12]Threats to
digital footprints?Privacy preservation tools for digital footprints in social metaverse
Offer complete confusion and private copy tools for avatars
Lack user experience analysis and practical deployment of such toolsAvatar confusion,
private copy
even take over the metaverse network, thereby compromising
system effectiveness, as shown in the lower part of Fig. 14. For
example, adversaries may be able to out-vote genuine nodes by
producing sufﬁcient Sybil identities to refuse to deliver or receive
some blocks, thereby effectively blocking other nodes from a
blockchain network in the metaverse.
B. Situational Awareness in Metaverse
Situational awareness is an effective tool for security moni-
toring and threat early-warning in large-scale complex systems
such as the metaverse [111]. In the metaverse, local situational
awareness is essential for monitoring a single security domain
and global situational awareness can assist early-warning of large-
scale distributed threats targeted at multiple sub-metaverses.
1) Local Situational Awareness: Situational awareness for de-
vices and systems built on XR technology has received increasing
attention in the metaverse [111]–[113]. Woodward et al . [111]
review the presentation of information in AR headsets, and
discuss the potential in applying AR technologies to enhance
users’ situational awareness in perception and understanding the
surroundings. Apart from AR technology, VR technology can
enhance situational awareness capacities in various applications.
Juet al . [112] carry out realistic and immersive driving simu-
lations, whose ﬁndings validate that acoustic cues can help VR
drivers remain alert in emergencies (e.g., accidents) under VR
car-driving scenarios. Lv et al . [113] present a smart intrusion
detection model to detect attack behaviors on 3D VR-based in-
dustrial control systems based on support vector machine (SVM).
Experimental results on a simulated VR industrial scenario show
that its average accuracy can keep above 90%. However, the
proposed model cannot resist unknown/new attack types.
To effectively detect unknown/new threats, Vu et al . [114]
design a representation learning approach for better prediction
of unknown attacks, where three regularized autoencoders (AEs)
are deployed to learn the latent representation. The effective-
ness of their work is evaluated on nine recent IoT datasets.
To be further adaptive to wearable devices with extreme size
and energy constraints, Heartﬁeld et al . [115] propose a multi-
layered lightweight anomaly detection method by exploiting
Honeypot 
server
IPS
IDS..
.Control 
plane
Data 
planeSecurity 
commandAPP APP APP APP
SDN 
Controller...
Virtual 
resource pool
Situation Awareness
IPSIDS
 vIDS
vIDS
vIPSvIPS
vIPS
vIDS
vIDS
vIDSvIDS
vIDS
 vIPS
vIPS
vIPS
vIPS
Data Warehouse
Openflow policy
Honeynet 
Captured attack 
behaviors
Data
Communication
SDN switch
Traditional switchVirtual IDS
Virtual IPSIntrusion Detection System  (IDS)
Intrusion Protection  System  (IPS)Fig. 15. Illustration of SDN-enabled virtual honeynet services for collaborative
situational awareness [119].
radio-frequency wireless communications to/from them to iden-
tify potentially malicious transactions. In [116], RL methods are
employed for intrusion detection in small-scale applications such
as smart homes. In practical applications, it is usually hard and
costly to label massive attack samples. To deal with the challenges
of few labeled data and the corresponding over-ﬁtting issues,
Zhou et al. [117] combine few-shot learning and Siamese neural
network to mitigate over-ﬁtting and intelligently detect diverse
attack types in industrial systems.
To summarize, existing security measures can be categorized
into two groups: reactive approaches (aim to counter past known
attacks) and proactive approaches (aim to mitigate future un-
known attacks). In general cases, reactive defenses built on timely
attack trapping, frequent retraining, and decision veriﬁcation can
be more convenient and effective than pure proactive defenses.
Besides, proactive defenses can be classiﬁed into two paradigms
[118]: security by design defenses (against white-box attacks)
and security by obscurity defenses (against black-box attacks).
The above defense approaches can provide some lessons to resist
unknown/new threats in the metaverse.
2) Global Situational Awareness: The above works mainly
focus on situational awareness in a local security domain. Global
situational awareness can facilitate understanding global security
statuses in defending large-scale attacks in the metaverse. Both
works [120], [123] utilize data-driven approaches for global