22
to capture and mitigate free-riding effects by designing optimal
seed bandwidth allocation strategies. Theoretical analysis shows
the existence of Nash equilibrium (NE) in their strategy, and sim-
ulation results show its effectiveness in free-riding penalization
and cooperation promotion.
As the economic fairness may conﬂict with other vital metrics
(such as economic efﬁciency and QoE) to some extent, Shin
et al . [140] introduce two principles in incentive design: (i)
strict economic fairness to forbid free-riders; and (ii) adaptive
but non-exploitable newcomer bootstrapping for economic efﬁ-
ciency. Based on symmetric key cryptography and pay-it-forward
strategy, the authors in [140] design a lightweight and easy-to-
implement fairness algorithm named T-Chain to prevent free-
riders and enforce reciprocity under fully distributed coopera-
tive scenarios such as BitTorrent-like ﬁle sharing. Experiments
on BitTorrent validate the efﬁciency of T-Chain in free-riding
prevention, fast newcomer bootstrapping, and low efﬁciency loss
(e.g., only 1% additional overhead on bandwidth and storage).
To mitigate free-riding attacks, Li et al. [141] utilize smart con-
tracts and ZKP to generate proof-of-ad-receiving commitments
in blockchain systems with anonymity and conditional linkability
guarantees.
To avoid tragedy of the commons in P2P networks, Ma
et al . [142] propose a service differentiation framework with
free-rider forbidden capabilities, where differentiated services
are offered to peers based on their prior contribution levels
in service offering. In their work, peers’ competing resource
request/distribution interactions are formulated as a dynamic
competition game. Theoretical analysis proves its efﬁciency in
reaching NE, and numerical examples illustrate its functionality in
service differentiation and free-rider prevention. As users/avatars
in the metaverse may also exhibit free-riding behaviors, the above
works can provide lessons for free-rider modeling, detection, and
prevention in metaverse services.
Multi-user/avatar collusion prevention is also important for
fairness in the creator economy. Existing collusion-resistant
mechanisms mainly focus on AI-based collusion behavior detec-
tion [143], cryptographic approaches [144], game theory [128],
and optimization theory [145], which can be beneﬁcial for
collusion defense in metaverse services. Besides, future research
efforts are required in designing fair mechanisms with the
combination of strategy-proofness, collusion-resistance, free-rider
prevention, along with privacy preservation in the metaverse.
In the literature, various works leverage game theory and
learning-based methods to improve economic efﬁciency for meta-
verse services, including iterative double auction for resource
pricing in DT construction [72], [133], DRL-based double Dutch
auction for VR service trading [46], two-tier Q-learning for secure
edge caching services [81], optimization theory for resource
allocation in virtual education [146], and hierarchical game for
coded distributed computing services in metaverse [147].
3) Ownership Traceability of Digital Assets: In the metaverse,
blockchain provides a promising solution to manage the complex
asset provenance and ownership tracing in the life-cycle of digital
assets by recording the evidence of content/asset originality and
involved operations on the public ledgers. As the recorded histori-
cal activities on blockchain ledgers are maintained by the majority
of entities in the metaverse, it is ensured to be democratic,
immutable, transparent, auditable, and non-repudiable. Besides,smart contracts offer an intelligent traceability solution by coding
the ownership management logic into scripts which are run
atop the blockchain. Existing works have utilized blockchain
technologies for food supply [148], cloud storage [69], charging
pile sharing [149], and ride sharing [150]. In addition to private
ownership, there can exist multiple types of ownership forms in
the metaverse such as collective ownership and shared ownership
[125], which raise extra challenges in ownership management
of virtual objects and metaverse assets. In current metaverse
projects, there have been increasing interest in utilizing NFT for
asset identiﬁcation and ownership provenance [38]. Nevertheless,
NFTs also face vulnerabilities such as cross-chain fraud, inﬂation
attack, phishing, and ransomware. An example is that bad actors
may concurrently mint the same NFT on multiple blockchains.
C. Summary and Lessons Learned
For creator economy in the metaverse, we have learned that
blockchain technology is the key to build the decentralized
virtual economy ecosystem from virtual currency creation and
trusted UGC/asset/resource trading to economic fairness and
ownership traceability. Moreover, the interoperability, resilience,
and efﬁciency issues are prime concerns to construct a sustainable
creator economy. A comparison of existing/potential security
countermeasures to metaverse economy is presented in Table IX.
VIII. T HREATS TO PHYSICAL WORLD AND HUMAN SOCIETY
AND COUNTERMEASURES IN METAVERSE
The threats occurring in the metaverse may also affect the
physical world and threaten human society.
A. Threats to Physical World and Human Society
The metaverse is an extended form of the cyber-physical-
social system (CPSS) [151], in which physical systems, human
society, and cyber systems are interconnected with complex
interactions. The threats in virtual worlds also severely affect
physical infrastructures, personal safety, and human society.
1) Threats to Personal Safety . In the metaverse, hackers can
attack wearable devices, XR helmets, and other indoor sensors
(e.g., cameras) to obtain the life routine and track the real-time
position of users to facilitate burglary, which may threaten their
safety [152]. A report released by the XR Security Initiative
(XRSI) shows that an adversary can manipulate a VR device to
reset the hardware’s physical boundaries [153]. Thereby, a user
in metaverse can be potentially pushed toward a ﬂight of stairs
or misdirected into dangerous physical situations (e.g., a street).
Besides, the metaverse can open up new opportunities for
misconducts and crimes. In the metaverse, risks of physical
trauma may be limited, but users could be mentally scarred. For
example, due to the immersive realism of metaverse, hackers can
suddenly display harmful and scary content (e.g., ghost pictures)
in the virtual environment in front of the avatar, which may lead
to the death of fright of the corresponding user. Moreover, the
lack of laws and regulations can further increase the possibility
of criminal or abusive actions.
2) Threats to Infrastructure Safety . By snifﬁng the software or
system vulnerabilities in the highly integrated metaverse, hackers
may exploit the compromised devices as entry points [154] to