24
TABLE X
SUMMARY OF EXISTING /POTENTIAL SECURITY COUNTERMEASURES TOPHYSICAL AND SOCIAL THREATS INMETAVERSE
Ref.Security
Threat?Purpose
Advantages
LimitationsUtilized
Technology
[159]Threats to cyber
insurance?Game theoretical modeling among users, blockchain platform, and cyber-insurer
Analytically derive the market equilibrium with all participants’ optimal strategies
Lack scalable and dynamic insurance coalition formation and fair premium designSequential game
[154]Stochastic risk
on power system?Cyber-physical security indices for security measurement of power systems
Efﬁcient indices computing under actual attacks in real-world test-bed
Lack merging other cutting-edge technologies into this frameworkGraph theory
[158]High premium
stipulation?Coalitional insurance with budget compliance for risk control in power grids
High defense level with long-term reduced premiums
Lack dynamic insurance design and dependence analysis of cyberthreatsCyber-insurance
[156]Butterﬂy effect in
information spreading?Minimize misinformation inﬂuence via dynamic node blocking in OSNs
Low misinformation spreading value and misinformation interactions
Challenging to be applied to the dynamic and time-varying metaverseHeuristic greedy
[152]Human joystick
attack?Construct human joystick attack model in immersive VR systems
Deceive and move immersed players to intended physical locations unconsciously
Lack effective defense designHCI, VR
2) Human Safety and Cyber syndromes: The full immer-
siveness in metaverse can also raise immersion concerns, e.g.,
occlusion and chaperone attack, as well as cybersickness [161].
Casey et al. [152] investigate a new attack named human joystick
attack in immersive VR systems such as Oculus Rift and HTC
Vive. In their work, adversaries can modify VR environmental
factors to deceive, disorient, and control immersed human players
and move them to other physical locations without consciousness.
Valluripally et al. [155] present a novel cybersickness mitigation
method and several design principles in social VR learning
scenarios via threat quantiﬁcation and attack-fault tree model
construction. However, the ethical issues and adaptations to dif-
ferent attack-defense strategies are not considered in their work,
which is an important factor for future metaverse construction.
Besides, more research efforts are required on the mitigation of
other immersion risks to human body and human society.
3) Society Acceptance Advances in Industry: To enforce age-
appropriate interactions within its platforms, Meta has enhanced
its age certiﬁcation mechanism with GDPR-compliance, where
a tool named Transfer Your Information (TYI) is developed in
2021 [162]. In TYI, users are allowed to retract their personal
information from Meta whenever they intend.
D. Summary and Lessons Learned
For physical safety and social effect in the metaverse, we have
learned that existing cyber-insurance and CPSS based approaches
can offer some insights for protecting physical devices. More
related technological and sociological efforts in this ﬁeld consid-
ering the characteristics of metaverse are required. A comparison
of existing/potential security countermeasures to physical safety
and social effect in the metaverse is presented in Table X.
IX. G OVERNANCE -RELATED THREATS AND
COUNTERMEASURES IN METAVERSE
Driven by the above threats, it raises huge governance demands
and poses huge regulation challenges to metaverse lawmakers and
regulators.
A. Threats to Metaverse Governance
In analogy to the social norms and regulations in the real world,
the interactions among avatars (e.g., content creation, socialactivities, and virtual economy) in the metaverse should align
with the digital norms and regulations to ensure compliance [163].
In the supervision and governance process of metaverse, the
following threats may deteriorate system efﬁciency and security.
1) New Laws & Regulations for Virtual Crimes . Essentially,
it is difﬁcult to decide whether a virtual crime is the same
as a real one. Thereby, it is hard to directly apply the laws
and regulations in real life to enforce penalization for criminal
actions [70] such as abusive language, virtual harassment, virtual
stalking/spying, and so on. For example, if an avatar is verbally
abusive in the metaverse, it can be easily regarded as verbal abuse
either in virtual or real worlds. However, if an avatar attempts to
virtually stalk or harass another user’s avatar in the metaverse,
the deﬁnitions of these crimes may be adapted from the real
ones, as well as the appropriate punishments, which should be
reconsidered for metaverse lawmakers and regulators.
2) Misbehaving Regulators . Regulators may misbehave and
cause system paralysis, and their authorities also need super-
vision. Dynamic and effective punishment/reward mechanisms
should be enforced for misbehaving/honest regulators, respec-
tively. To ensure sustainability, punishment and reward rules
should be maintained by the majority of avatars in a decen-
tralized and democratic manner [164]. Automatic regulations
implemented by smart contracts without reliance on trusted
intermediaries may be a promising solution. However, it also
raises new issues such as information disclosure, mishandled ex-
ceptions, and susceptibility to short address attacks and reentrancy
attacks [165].
3) Threats to Collaborative Governance . To avoid the con-
centration of regulation rights, collaborative governance under
hierarchical or ﬂat mode is more suitable for large-scale meta-
verse maintenance [166]. Nevertheless, collusive regulators may
undermine the metaverse system even under collaborative gover-
nance scenarios. For example, they can collude to make a certain
regulator partitioned from the network via wormhole attacks.
4) Threats to Digital Forensics . Digital forensics in the meta-
verse means the virtual reconstruction of cybercrimes by identi-
fying, extracting, fusing, and analyzing evidences obtained from
both real and virtual worlds [167]. Nevertheless, due to the high
dynamics and interoperability issues of various virtual worlds,
it is challenging for efﬁcient forensics investigation including