20
TABLE VIII
SUMMARY OF EXISTING /POTENTIAL SECURITY COUNTERMEASURES TONETWORK -RELATED THREATS INMETAVERSE
Ref.Security
Threat?Purpose
Advantages
LimitationsUtilized
Technology
[113]Intrusion of VR
control system?Smart intrusion detection to detect attacks in 3D VR environments
High classiﬁcation and detection accuracy
Cannot resist unknown/new attack typesSVM
[120]Malicious events
in distribution grid?Data-driven situational awareness in large-scale distributed power grids
High accuracy in malicious event labeling
Rely on additional expert knowledge for costly event labelingMulti-class SVM
[121]Intrusion of industrial
control system?Monitoring and proﬁling of potential attack behaviors
High detection/prediction accuracy and low response time
Lack merging other cutting-edge technologies into this frameworkSDN,
digital twin
[122]Large-scale
network intrusion?Honeynet-based situational awareness to deceive attackers
Rapid honeynet deployment with adaptability to unknown threats
Low scalability and programmability in large-scale deploymentHoneynet
[119]Large-scale
network intrusion?SDN-enabled virtual honeynet with high scalability and ﬂexibility
Successful implementation and test in real-world EU project
Lack resilience of compromised domain operatorsSDN,
honeynet
situational awareness in large-scale distributed power grids. In
[120], Shahsavari et al . propose a multi-class SVM classiﬁer
to extract malicious events from collected raw metering data.
However, their approach relies on additional expert knowledge
for costly event labeling. To resolve this issue, Wu et al . [123]
further model legitimate users and attackers as an evolutionary
game and devise a two-phase RL algorithm to solve the game.
Proﬁling of potential attack behaviors is another challenge in the
metaverse. Krishnan et al. [121] combine digital twin and SDN to
build a behavioral monitoring and proﬁling system where security
strategies are evaluated on digital twins before being deployed in
the real network.
Honeynets consisting of collaborative honeypots offer an al-
ternative solution for building a secure metaverse to defend
against large-scale distributed attacks. Zhang et al. [122] propose
a honeynet-based situational awareness system where each hon-
eypot built on the Docker environment traps attackers, monitors
their attack behaviors, and exchanges these information with each
other coordinated by the honeynet controller. However, the work
[122] has a drawback in terms of scalability and programmability
in large-scale deployment. Zarca et al . [119] further propose
SDN-enabled virtual honeynet services with higher degree of
scalability and ﬂexibility, and the efﬁciency of the proposed
approach is validated using real implementations and tests. As
shown in Fig. 15, based on speciﬁc security policies, security
virtual network functions (VNFs) (e.g., virtual honeynet, IDS,
IPS, and ﬁrewall) can be conﬁgured and instanced on demand
reactively or proactively, coordinated by the SDN controller.
Thereby, appropriate defense mechanisms (including situation
monitoring, attack trapping, and security resource allocation) can
be provisioned quickly and feasibly to enable self-protection, self-
repair, and self-healing. However, the trust issues and resilience
of compromised domain operators in aggregating local situational
awareness into the global one require further investigation.
C. Summary and Lessons Learned
For situational awareness in the metaverse, we have learned
that AR, AI, honeypot, and SDN technologies can help build
situational awareness systems in the metaverse. Besides, global
situational awareness can assist monitoring and early-warning of
large-scale distributed threats targeted at multiple sub-metaverses.A comparison of existing/potential security countermeasures to
network-related threats in the metaverse is presented in Ta-
ble VIII.
VII. E CONOMY -RELATED THREATS AND
COUNTERMEASURES IN METAVERSE
A. Threats to Metaverse Economy
Various attacks may threaten the creator economy in the
metaverse from the service trust, digital asset ownership, and
economic fairness aspects.
1) Service Trust Issues in UGC & Virtual Object Trading . In the
open metaverse marketplace, avatars may be distrustful entities
without historical interactions. There exist inherent fraud risks
(e.g., repudiation and refusal-to-pay) during UGC and virtual
object trading among different stakeholders in the metaverse.
Besides, in the construction of virtual objects via digital twin
technologies, the metaverse has to guarantee that the produced
and deployed digital copies are authentic and trustworthy [72].
For example, malicious users/avatars may buy UGCs or virtual
objects in Roblox and illegally sell the digital duplicates of
them to others to earn proﬁts. In addition, adversaries may
exploit vulnerabilities in metaverse systems to commit fraud and
undermine service trust. An example is that the metaverse project
Paraluni based on Binance Smart Chain (BSC) lost over $1.7
million in 2022 due to the reentrancy ﬂaw in smart contracts
[124].
2) Threats to Digital Asset Ownership . Due to the lack of
central authority and the complex circulation and ownership
forms (e.g., collective ownership and shared ownership [125]) in
the distributed metaverse system, it poses huge challenges for the
generation, pricing, trusted trading, and ownership traceability in
the life-cycle of digital assets in the creator economy. Empowered
by blockchain technology, the indivisible, tamper-proof, and irre-
placeable NFT offers a promising solution for asset identiﬁcation
and ownership provenance in the metaverse [38]. However, NFTs
also face threats such as ransomware, scams, and phishing attacks.
For example, adversaries may mint the same NFT on multiple
blockchains at the same time. Besides, evil actors may cash out
their shares after inﬂating the value of NFTs, or they may sell
NFTs to gain beneﬁts before minting anything, where these De-Fi
scams cause $129 million lost in 2020 [126].