12
TABLE V
SUMMARY OF EXISTING /POTENTIAL SECURITY COUNTERMEASURES TO IDENTITY AUTHENTICATION ANDACCESS CONTROL INMETAVERSE
Ref.Security
Threat?Purpose
Advantages
LimitationsUtilized
Technology
[51]Eavesdropping, RSS
trajectory prediction?RSS trajectoriy based secret key establishment for wearables
Defense of eavesdropping and high efﬁciency in indoor/outdoor scene
Only work for wearables with short-range communicationsRSS trajectory
[52]Robust key sequence
generation?Gait-based biometric group key management for wearable devices
Pass both Dieharder and NIST tests with high efﬁciency
Lack real-world thorough testFuzzy vault
[53] Gait predictability?Real-time and lightweight key establishment for wearable devices
High matching rate of shake-to-generate secret keys
Lack complete and thorough evaluation (e.g., NIST tests)HCI
[54] Hijack of WIMDs?Efﬁcient ECG-based key distribution for WIMDs
High false acceptance rate
Relatively low precision in ECG signal processingFuzzy commitment,
fuzzy vault
[55] Dolev-Yao threat?Low-cost mutual authentication for wearable medical devices
Efﬁcient authentication with low communication cost
Without consideration of the immersiveness of usersReal-or-Random
model
[56]Random attack,
synthesis attack?Low-cost PPG-based continuous authentication for wearables
Low communication overhead and computation cost
Unscalable to large-scale networksMotion artifacts,
gradient boosting tree
[60]Eavesdropping,
impersonation,
man-in-the-middle?Decentralized cross-domain authentication in industrial IoT
Anonymous identity authentication and low overhead
Low response speed due to the low throughput of blockchainsBlockchain
[61] Impersonation?Efﬁcient cross-domain authentication in optimized blockchain
Fast response, anonymous authentication, and low overhead
Lack large-scale real-world testBlockchain,
multiple Merkle tree
[62]Unauthorized UGVC
access?Time-domain access control with provable security for UGVC sharing
Support time-domain UGVC access control
Lack consideration of illegal UGC redistributionCP-ABE
[63]Illegal UGC
redistribution?Secure encrypted UGMC sharing scheme with fair traitor tracing
High traitor tracing accuracy and perceptual quality
Ignore UGMC usage controlProxy re-encryption,
fair watermarking
[64]Unintended UGC
usage?Fine-grained and transparent UGC usage/processing audit
Low computational overheads in UGC usage/processing audit
Lack large-scale and real-world performance testSmart contract,
trusted computing
only authorized users in speciﬁc time slots can decrypt the
UGVCs. Moreover, queries on UGVCs created in previous time
slots along with efﬁcient attribute updating and revoking are
supported. Nevertheless, the above works overlook that autho-
rized entities may become traitors to illegally redistribute UGCs
to the public, i.e., illegal UGC redistribution . To address this
realistic threat, Zhang et al. [63] propose a novel secure encrypted
UGMC sharing scheme with traitor tracing in the cloud via the
proxy re-encryption mechanism (for secure UGMC sharing) and
watermarking mechanism (for traitor tracing).
The above works mainly focus on the access control of UGCs,
while the usage control (i.e., shared UGCs can be only used
for intended purposes) is ignored. To bridge this gap, Wang et
al. [64] propose a novel data processing-as-a-service (DPaaS)
mode to complement the current data sharing ecosystem and
exploit blockchain technologies for ﬁne-grained data usage policy
making on the user’s side, policy execution atop smart contracts,
and policy audit on transparent ledgers. Yu et al . [47] combine
both sensitiveness of UGMC (to be shared) and trustworthiness
of user (being granted) to train a tree classiﬁer for ﬁne-grained
privacy setting conﬁgurations. In their scheme, a deep network
is utilized to extract discriminative features and identify privacy-
sensitive object classes/events, and users are clustered into social
groups for trustworthiness characterization.
D. Summary and Lessons Learned
The metaverse requires users to autonomously control their
identity and behavioral data, where users can independentlymanage the UGCs, assets and behavior data generated in different
sub-metaverses, avoiding the risk of private data being abused.
Moreover, under the premise of autonomous authorization, users
can provide data to other subjects to share the beneﬁts generated
by these data. For identity authentication and access control
in the metaverse, we have learned that apart from traditional
cryptography system design, the fusion of sensory signals (e.g.,
ECG and PPG) of wearable devices and biometrics (e.g., face and
gait) of users can be beneﬁcial for efﬁcient key generation and
identity authentication in the metaverse. Besides, blockchain can
build trust-free digital identities for metaverse users. Moreover,
continuous-time dynamic authentication, as well as cross-chain
and cross-domain authentication need further investigation under
the metaverse environment. A comparison of existing/potential
security countermeasures to identity authentication and access
control in the metaverse is presented in Table V.
IV. T HREATS AND COUNTERMEASURES TO DATA
MANAGEMENT IN METAVERSE
A. Threats to Data Management in Metaverse
The data collected or generated by wearable devices and
users/avatars may suffer from threats in terms of data tampering,
false data injection, low-quality UGC, ownership/provenance
tracing, and intellectual property violation in the metaverse.
1) Data Tampering Attack . Integrity features ensure effective
checking and detection of any modiﬁcation during data commu-
nication among the ternary worlds and various sub-metaverses.