not localized the the ﬁeld of computer vision. For example, increased performance on ImageNet is
often explicitly referenced as an indication that the ﬁeld is progressing towards general-purpose AI
[Sutskever, 2018].
3.2 GLUE and SuperGLUE
The creators of GLUE (General Language Understanding Evaluation) [Wang et al., 2019a] and
SuperGLUE [Wang et al., 2019b] present these resources as “evaluation framework[s] for research
towards general-purpose language understanding technologies” [Wang et al., 2019b, p.1], noting
that, unlike human language understanding, most computer natural language understanding (NLU)
systems are task or domain-speciﬁc [Wang et al., 2019a]. When a human knows a language, they can
use that knowledge across any task that involves that language. Thus, a benchmark that tests whether
linguistic knowledge acquired through training on one task can be applied to other tasks, in principle,
tests for a speciﬁc and potentially well-deﬁned kind of generalizability.
Authors for GLUE and SuperGLUE describe both datasets as being “designed to provide a general-
purpose evaluation of language understanding that covers a range of training data volumes, task
genres, and task formulations” [Wang et al., 2019b, p.2]. In framing these benchmarks as general
language understanding evaluation benchmarks made up of a diverse set of language understanding
tasks, the authors suggest the notion that success on the particular tasks included demonstrates at least
progress towards a full-scale solution to language understanding, and explicitly describe such a set up
as being well positioned for “exhibiting the transfer-learning potential of approaches” [Wang et al.,
2019b, p.2]. As a comprehensive setup for a wide range of tests in a popular language (English),
this benchmark has been elevated to its current status as a general marker of progress for the NLP
community, and speciﬁcally the accepted evaluation platform for “general-purpose sentence encoders”
[Wang et al., 2019a].
4 Limits of Benchmarking General Capabilities
The imagined artifact of the “general” benchmark does not actually exist. Real data is designed,
subjective and limited in ways that necessitate a different framing from that of any claim to general
knowledge or general-purpose capabilities. In fact, presenting any single dataset in this way is
ultimately dangerous and deceptive, resulting in misguidance on task design and focus, under-
reporting of the many biases and subjective interpretations inherent in the data as well as enabling,
through false presentations of performance, potential model misuse. In this section, we walk through
the key arguments for how benchmarking is a limited approach to assess general model capabilities
and, in particular, discuss the risk of making this claim to generality in the context of the limited task
design ,de-contextualized data and performance reporting as well as inappropriate community use
common to such benchmarks in the ML context. For each of these limitations, we break down the
shortcoming and discuss the cited evidence and reasoning for our observations.
4.1 Limited Task Design
There is nothing systematic or organized about the deﬁnition and arrangement of the rooms in the
museum that Grover visits. He walks through arbitrary rooms of “Things That Make So Much Noise
You Can’t Hear Yourself Think”, “The Small Hall”, “The Carrot Room” and the like.
Similarly, the task formation for these benchmarks seems to happen independently of the intended
and declared problem space. Schlangen [2021] deﬁnes a task as a mapping from an input space to
an output space, deﬁned both intensionally (via a description of the task) and extensionally (via a
particular dataset, i.e. pairs of inputs and outputs matching the description). In machine learning,
the tendency is towards the latter scenario, where the benchmark task is deﬁned by a dataset, often
collected with such a task in mind [Scheuerman et al., 2021]. If the so-called “general” benchmarks
were legitimate tests of progress towards general artiﬁcial cognitive abilities, we would expect the
tasks they embody to be chosen systematically, or with reference to speciﬁc theories of the cognitive
abilities they model. Instead, what we observe looks more like samples of convenience: tasks
and collections of tasks arbitrarily built out of what is easily available to the team developing these
benchmarks, even if such constructions are theoretically unsound. Unlike with software benchmarking
[Lewis and Crews, 1985], the subtasks we see in machine learning “general” benchmarks are not
5