Figure 1: Photo of a bench-
mark in Edinburgh, by Jeremy
Atherton, used without mod-
iﬁcation according to license
CC-BY-SA-2.5The etymology for the term “benchmark” refers to a mark that was
added to buildings to indicate the position of a surveyor’s bench (see
Fig. 1), itself a tool for creating a level surface on which to put a
leveling rod, used in the process of surveying. This etymological
source contrasts with the use of benchmarks for charting the state of
the art: surveyors are not in the business of measuring the furthest
anyone has gone along some particular trail but rather in understand-
ing the shape of the landscape and how it has changed over time
[Kahmen and Faig, 1988].
We can take further inspiration from the ﬁeld of surveying, as we
think about how the measurements we take relate to the terrain we
wish to understand: “A surveyor is not only charged with providing
results derived from [their] measurements, but also has to give an
indication of the quality and reliability of these. This requires a clear
understanding of the functional and stochastic relationships between
measured quantities and derived results, as well as a solid under-
standing of the external factors that inﬂuence the measurements.”
[Kahmen and Faig, 1988, p.1].
We describe in this appendix other methodologies that can move us towards the perhaps more
worthy goal of ﬁlling in our picture of the landscape. In turn, we provide an overview of alternative,
underexplored evaluation techniques including testsuites, audits and adversarial testing; system output
analysis; ablation testing; and analysis of model properties.
A.1 Testsuites, Audits and Adversarial Testing
Typical benchmark evaluation datasets are sampled from some larger dataset (e.g. via a train/test
split) such that the frequency distribution of test item types in the test data is inﬂuenced by their
distribution in that underlying dataset. In contrast, testsuites and audits speciﬁcally design their test
sets to map out some space of test item types and evaluate systems in terms of the extent to which
they can handle them.4The testsuite-based approach has a long history in NLP, with notable early
publications including Lehmann et al. [1996] and recent work such as Ribeiro et al. [2020].
There are various approaches to the design of such test suites. A more audit-like methodology,
exempliﬁed by Buolamwini and Gebru [2018], creates test sets balanced for sensitive categories
so as to be able to test for differential performance across those categories. On the other hand,
explicit adversarial testing seeks to explore the edges of a system’s competence by ﬁnding minimally
contrasting pairs of examples where the system being tested succeeds on one member of the pair
and fails on the other [Ettinger et al., 2017].5Importantly, these evaluation approaches are designed
around diagnosing particular areas of system failure: the point of the tests isn’t to show which systems
can “solve” them but to understand which aspects of the problem space remain challenging and
represent the operational limits in deployment.
A.2 System Output Analysis
System output analysis is another way to explore the system output in detail. This can take the form
of error analysis, disaggregated analysis, and counterfactual analysis.
Error analysis Error analysis involves the detailed analysis of system errors, by either mechanically
or manually inspecting system inputs. Mechanical analysis can include simple techniques such as
developing a confusion matrix in labeling tasks. A confusion matrix compares expected labels to
system output labels and provides a summary of which categories are most reliably labeled and which
are most frequently confused for each other. (This is an old technique, initially used in the study of
human phonetic perception [Miller and Nicely, 1955] and related to even earlier work comparing
4A notable exception to the trend of benchmarks to not include test suites is GLUE, which includes among
its component tests a testsuite mapping out various linguistic constructions in English [Wang et al., 2019a].
5Adversarial testing also includes work like Niven and Kao [2019] that discovers what kind of spurious cues
systems are leveraging to effectively “cheat” on a particular benchmark and creates alternate versions of the
testsets that neutralize those cues.
18