AI and the Everything in the Whole Wide World
Benchmark
Inioluwa Deborah Raji
Mozilla Foundation, UC Berkeley
rajiinio@berkeley.eduEmily M. Bender
Department of Linguistics
University of WashingtonAmandalynne Paullada
Department of Linguistics
University of Washington
Emily Denton
Google ResearchAlex Hanna
Google Research
Abstract
There is a tendency across different subﬁelds in AI to valorize a small collection
of inﬂuential benchmarks. These benchmarks operate as stand-ins for a range
of anointed common problems that are frequently framed as foundational mile-
stones on the path towards ﬂexible and generalizable AI systems. State-of-the-art
performance on these benchmarks is widely understood as indicative of progress
towards these long-term goals. In this position paper, we explore the limits of such
benchmarks in order to reveal the construct validity issues in their framing as the
functionally “general” broad measures of progress they are set up to be.
1 Introduction
In the 1974 Sesame Street children’s storybook Grover and the Everything in the Whole Wide World
Museum [Stiles and Wilcox, 1974], the Muppet monster Grover visits a museum claiming to showcase
“everything in the whole wide world”. Example objects representing certain categories ﬁll each room.
Several categories are arbitrary and subjective, including showrooms for “Things You Find On a Wall”
and “The Things that Can Tickle You Room”. Some are oddly speciﬁc, such as “The Carrot Room”,
while others unhelpfully vague like “The Tall Hall”. When he thinks that he has seen all that is there,
Grover comes to a door that is labeled “Everything Else”. He opens the door, only to ﬁnd himself in
the outside world.
As a children’s story, Grover’s described situation is meant to be absurd. However, in this paper, we
discuss how a similar faulty logic is inherent to recent trends in artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) — and
speciﬁcally machine learning (ML) — evaluation, where many popular benchmarks rely on the same
false assumptions inherent to the ridiculous “Everything in the Whole Wide World Museum” that
Grover visits. In particular, we argue that benchmarks presented as measurements of progress towards
general ability within vague tasks such as “visual understanding” or “language understanding” are
as ineffective as the ﬁnite museum is at representing “everything in the whole wide world,” and for
similar reasons — being inherently speciﬁc, ﬁnite and contextual.
Benchmarks like GLUE [Wang et al., 2019a] or ImageNet [Deng et al., 2009] are often elevated to
become deﬁnitions of the essential common tasks to validate the performance of any given model. As a
result, often the claims that are justiﬁed through these benchmark datasets extend far beyond the tasks
they are initially designed for, and reach beyond even the initial ambitions for development. Despite
a presentation and acceptance as markers of progress towards general-purpose capabilities, there are
clear limitations of these benchmarks. In fact, the reality of their development, use and adoption
indicates a construct validity issue, where the involved benchmarks — due to their instantiation in
particular data, metrics and practice — cannot possibly capture anything representative of the claims
to general applicability being made about them. In this paper, we illuminate the over-reliance on the
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.arXiv:2111.15366v1  [cs.LG]  26 Nov 2021