evaluation, represents a task [O’Leary-Kelly and V okurka, 1998]. It concerns how well designed — or
rather, how well constructed — the experimental setting is in relation to the research claim. Validity
issues have long been acknowledged broadly by the machine learning community as a particularly
difﬁcult task in benchmark design and development [Mitchell, 2021, Jacobs and Wallach, 2021, Malik,
2020] — however as Bowman and Dahl note, it remains a generally neglected issue as “[t]his criterion
is difﬁcult to fully formalize, and we know of no simple test that would allow one to determine if a
benchmark presents a valid measure of model ability” [Bowman and Dahl, 2021, p. 3].
3 Attempting to Benchmark General Capabilities
We now examine a particular style of benchmark dataset — and the accompanying practices of use —
that has gained in popularity in recent years. These benchmarks have been claimed to embed notions
of generality, both in their presentation by the creators and the manner in which they are adopted
and used by the machine learning community. Even when the creators of such benchmarks do not
explicitly purport to be establishing benchmarks for “general intelligence”, community practices
and overall hype have dramatized what it means for a model to perform well on these benchmarks.
The inspiration for the setup of these benchmarks is often explicitly linked to the general-purpose
capabilities and breadth of knowledge humans possess. In doing so, the ethos that surrounds these
datasets often extends beyond a reasonable scope of interpretation and inﬂuence, especially given the
limitations inherent in their construction.
In this paper, we argue that the aim of measuring general-purpose capabilities (i.e. goals such
as general-purpose object recognition, general language understanding or domain-independent
reasoning) cannot be adequately embodied in data-deﬁned benchmarks. We observe that current
trends inappropriately extend the Common Task Framework (CTF) paradigm to apply to the “task” of
performance in the abstract, distinct from real world objectives or context. Historically, the CTF was
developed precisely to introduce practically-oriented and tightly-scoped AI tasks — namely, automatic
speech recognition (ASR) or machine translation (MT) — where the required validation is whether the
benchmark accurately reﬂects the practical task being asked of the computer in its real-world context
[Donoho, 2017]. This new wave of poorly deﬁned “general” objectives completely subverts the
intention of its introduction and actually enables its use to promote — rather than counteract — claims
to “glamour and deceit” over substantial, meaningful progress.
3.1 Case Studies
We focus our analysis on two common benchmarks geared towards the assessment of general
capabilities — ImageNet and GLUE, described below. The discussion is scoped to dataset -based
benchmarks, and will not include much discussion of the role of gameplay demos in AI development.
3.1.1 ImageNet
We characterize ImageNet as a “general” benchmark due to several related observations. First, at
the time of development, the creators described ImageNet as representing “the most comprehensive
and diverse coverage of the image world” [Deng et al., 2009, p.1] and, retrospectively, Li described
the project as an “attempt to map the entire world of objects” [Gershgorn, 2017]. With general-
purpose visual object recognition framed as the ability to recognize a sizable breadth of objects in a
manner that rivals human capabilities [Liu et al., 2020], we observe ImageNet’s sheer size — both in
terms of number of categories and number of images per category — further informs its perception
as representing a general formulation of visual object recognition. At the time of its creation, it
offered 20 times the number of categories, and 100 times the number of total images as the most
popular training and evaluation benchmarks at the time, such as Caltech 101/256 [Kamarudin et al.,
2015, Grifﬁn et al., 2007], MSRC [Shotton et al., 2006] and PASCAL VOC [Everingham et al.,
2010]. Second, we observe community consensus that the task formalized in the ImageNet dataset
represents a meaningful milestone towards longer-term goals of artiﬁcial visual intelligence. Indeed,
Li has explicitly characterized large scale visual object recognition as the “north star” of computer
vision — a scientiﬁc quest that would deﬁne and guide the ﬁeld towards the ultimate goal of artiﬁcial
visual intelligence [Li, 2019], with ImageNet operating as the canonical instantiation. In their papers,
ImageNet authors are clear about the desire to situate the dataset as the deﬁnitive benchmark of
the ﬁeld. However, the hype surrounding ImageNet and the scope of the claims derived from it are
4