4.2.2 Benchmark Subjectivity
All datasets come with an embedded perspective — there is no neutral or universal dataset [Haraway,
1988, Stitzlein, 2004, Gebru, 2020, Denton et al., 2021, Scheuerman et al., 2021]. To present a dataset,
inherently both political and value-laden, as a completely neutral scientiﬁc artifact is irresponsible.
In benchmarks promoted to assess general capabilities, such as ImageNet and GLUE, such politics
remain unacknowledged — undiscussed and hidden for the sake of maintaining the claim to broad
relevance. However, denying DRdeletethe existence of unacknowledged context does not make it
disappear. In fact, this distorted data lens is often not limited in an arbitrary way, but limited in a
way that hurts certain groups of people — those without the power to deﬁne the data themselves. For
example, people who hold transgender and gender-nonconforming gender identities and non-white,
non-Western racial identities are underrepresented in mainstream face datasets [Merler et al., 2019],
and images of members of these communities are often tagged with racial or ethnic slurs, even on
large general use datasets such as MIT Tiny Images or ImageNet [Crawford and Paglen, 2019, Gehl
et al., 2017, Birhane and Prabhu, 2021].
GLUE and SuperGLUE target one speciﬁc language (i.e. English), not “language” in the abstract.
This very speciﬁc subset of American English text in the presence of annotation artifacts [Gururangan
et al., 2018] results in inherently subjective outcomes [Waseem et al., 2020].3
The ImageNet creators did attempt to diversify their dataset by translating image queries into other
languages, including Chinese, Spanish, Dutch and Italian to source representations for the ﬁnal
English-labeled categories [Deng et al., 2009]. However, when analyzing country level geo-location
data for the 2011 version of the dataset, 45% of the images were found to be sourced from the US, and
over 60% from a small selection of Western countries in North America and Europe [Shankar et al.,
2017]. In fact, only 1% and 1.2% of images are from China and India respectively, despite the fact
that those countries are the most populous countries on the planet [Shankar et al., 2017]. This lack
of geo-diversity of sources manifests in poor dataset representation, as the dataset becomes visually
anchored to a speciﬁc dominant cultural context. de Vries et al. [2019] found that if ImageNet was
developed using the results of Hindi online image queries, rather than English ones, the result would
be a dataset that looks drastically different, embodying completely new visual representations of not
only socially deﬁned concepts, such as “wedding”, but also everyday objects, such as “spice”.
4.3 Inappropriate Community Use
When Grover arrived at the museum, he was excited and inspired by its claim to contain every object
in the “Whole Wide World” — however, once he enters, his focus is only redirected to whatever is
selected to be highlighted in the museum. Despite his initial interest being motivated by the pursuit
of generality, it is only really the subset of consciously-included objects that actually captures his
attention.
When individual dataset creators and communities overstate the generality of these benchmark
datasets, they elevate them to the status of a target the entire ﬁeld should be aiming for. This
benchmark focus can escalate to the point of researchers falling into the trap of uncritically chasing
algorithmic improvement as measured by these datasets, losing sight of the potential for performance
mismatch with the real world or more relevant problem formulations.
4.3.1 Limits of Competitive Testing
Chasing “state of the art” (SOTA) performance is a very peculiar way of doing science — one that
focuses on empirical and incremental work rather than hypothesis-based scientiﬁc inquiry [Hooker,
1995]. In 1995, Lorenza Saitta criticized benchmark chasing as “allow[ing] researchers to publish
dull papers that proposed small variations of existing supervised learning algorithms and reported
their small-but-signiﬁcant incremental performance improvements in comparison studies” [Radin,
2017, p. 61]. Thomas and Uminsky go so far as to present metric chasing as an ethical issue, stating
that “overemphasizing metrics leads to manipulation, gaming, a myopic focus on short-term goals,
and other unexpected negative consequences” [Thomas and Uminsky, 2020, p. 1].
3Waseem et al. [2020] are discussing NLP datasets and modeling in general, not GLUE, SuperGLUE or
other similar benchmarks speciﬁcally. However, their general points apply: any given dataset represents the
embodied viewpoint of its authors and annotators, and furthermore, datasets constructed without attention to
whose viewpoints are being represented will likely over-represent hegemonic ones. See also Bender et al. [2021].
8