axiomatic — they were not actively designed as abstractions of any meaningful general function or
sub-function, and are often not systematically curated in nature. Instead, what we ﬁnd in the “general”
benchmarks are sets of categories reminiscent of the inconsistent hodgepodge of rooms that Grover
visits in the “Everything in the Whole Wide World Museum”.
4.1.1 Arbitrarily Selected Tasks and Collections
Concerns of this sort were raised during early benchmark development in the ﬁeld. UCI [Dua and
Graff, 2017] was one of the ﬁrst foci of shared tasks in machine learning development and contains
datasets which pertain to a collection of individual subtasks, with community benchmarking practice
coming to focus over time on the Iris, Adult, Wine, and Breast Cancer classiﬁcation datasets. Kiri
Wagstaff voiced concern for a poor logic in the selection of this combination of subtasks. She
noted that none of tasks included in this collection represent any reasonable proxy or abstraction of
real-world problems even scientists in the respective ﬁelds that produced each dataset would care
about. She notes, “Legions of (ML) researchers have chased after the best iris or mushroom classiﬁer.
Yet this ﬂurry of effort does not seem to have had any impact on the ﬁelds of botany or mycology. Do
scientists in these disciplines even need such a classiﬁer? Do they publish about this subject in their
journals?” [Wagstaff, 2012, p.2].
The classes in ImageNet are also seemingly arbitrary, ranging from speciﬁc dog breeds to high-level
notions like “New Zealand beach” [Russakovsky et al., 2015]. ImageNet labels are derived from
the 12 “subtrees” of the WordNet ontology [Miller, 1995]: mammal, bird, ﬁsh, reptile, amphibian,
vehicle, furniture, musical instrument, geological formation, tool, ﬂower, and fruit [Deng et al., 2009].
Despite being developed in another ﬁeld, with another purpose entirely, the English-language WordNet
hierarchy was adopted, nearly whole cloth, for use in structuring ImageNet. Little consideration
was given to the impact of the inclusion of certain words in the task of image classiﬁcation. The
consequences of this oversight were made tangible by the work of Birhane and Prabhu [2021] and
Crawford and Paglen [2019] which revealed the existence of a range of derogatory and offensive
categories in the “person” subtree. The primary categorical consideration the ImageNet creators did
discuss center around the inclusion of certain categories to ensure consistency with the categories in a
previously established PASCAL benchmark [Russakovsky et al., 2015].
Similarily, the subtasks of the GLUE benchmark are not much more carefully selected. The bench-
mark was initially designed as a suite with a stated goal to “spur development of generalizable NLU
systems” [Wang et al., 2019a, p.1], embodying the idea that a system capable of using linguistic
knowledge to understand language input would be able to do so across a variety of tasks. The included
tasks were curated following a set of 30 proposals sourced from with an informal survey of colleagues
in the NLP community [Wang et al., 2019a], and thus only really represent a collection of tasks
authors from the NLP community perceived as interesting problems at the time. To ﬁlter through
proposals, authors mainly rely on practical heuristics like “licensing issues, complex formats, and
insufﬁcient headroom” [ Ibid. p. 5] before referring to high level criteria to ﬁlter down to the ﬁnal eight
or nine included tasks. As a result, the collection of tasks included in the ﬁnal benchmark neither
systematically map out a range of speciﬁc linguistic skills required for understanding (lacking in par-
ticular any exploration of pragmatics [Qiu et al., 2020], or the proper handling of negation [Ettinger,
2020]) nor present a truly varied range of ways to deploy linguistic knowledge in comprehension.
While such a collection can effectively demonstrate a model’s ability to generalize performance
across the included tasks, this ability is not equivalent to general language understanding, nor is it
evidence that the solution to any task actually involves understanding the language in a sense that
linguists might recognize.
4.1.2 Critical Misunderstandings of Domain Knowledge and Application Problem Space
GLUE and SuperGLUE benchmarks combine linguistic competence (the ability to model a linguistic
system) with general commonsense and world reasoning as if they were equivalently scoped problems.
In reference to a diagnostic component of the benchmark, authors state that “this dataset is designed
to highlight common challenges, such as the use of world knowledge and logical operators, that we
expect models must handle to robustly solve the tasks” [Wang et al., 2019a, p.1]. Thus a benchmark
designed to test for generalizability across different language understanding tasks comes to subsume
not only the task of building up linguistic competence (e.g. logical operators) in the language in
question (English) but also the ability to acquire and deploy world knowledge. It is well established
6