on speciﬁc prototype tasks, to avoid the tedious process of individually weighing the quality of
the various features of computers offered by different vendors. By 1976, benchmarking was a
fairly common practice in computing, with standard libraries of mock software programs created
for the purpose of testing speciﬁc subroutines for core functional tasks (i.e. ﬁle management, word
processing, etc.) being developed and used by the U.S. government as part of the assessment involved
in their procurement process for computer systems [Lewis and Crews, 1985].
Several linguists [e.g. Liberman, 2010, Church, 2018] have traced the inﬂuence of Fred Jelinek
at IBM and Charles Wayne at DARPA as crucial protagonists in the development of a common
framework for the quantitative assessment of computational linguistic tasks, notably within speech
recognition and machine translation. Beginning in the mid-1980s, Jelinek had been a driver in
developing what he had called the Common Task Framework (CTF). The Common Task Framework,
the precursor to modern data benchmarking in AI, was initially introduced in the 1980s as a response
to Wendell Pierce’s inﬂuential assertion of a ﬁeld “being deceived by the glamour of (a would-be)
theory, rather than actual performance” [Donoho, 2017, p.17]. The primary elements of the CTF
include (a) A publicly available training dataset with a list of feature measurements and a class
label for that observation; (b) A set of enrolled competitors whose common task is to infer a class
prediction rule from the training data; and (c) A scoring referee, to which competitors can submit
their prediction rule [Donoho, 2017, p. 572]. With DARPA’s sponsorship and IBM’s data, the CTF
soon became widely adopted as a common mode of research in machine translation and speech
recognition. Rather than experimental results that were updated “twice a year”, researchers could
evaluate their experiments every hour [Church, 2018], and, although major breakthroughs were still
rare, claims to incremental improvement enabled by this “quantitative comparison of alternative
algorithms on a ﬁxed task”, ensured that researchers could track steady progress regardless [Liberman,
2010]. Soon, similar NLP-related initiatives followed — such as Shared Task Evaluation Campaigns
(STECs) [Belz and Kilgarriff, 2006], Message Understanding Conferences (MUCs) [Grishman and
Sundheim, 1996], and Text REtrieval Conferences (TRECs) for information retrieval.2Later, STECs
within NLP coalesced around machine translation (NIST-MT)[Przybocki et al., 2009] and word sense
disambiguation (SENSEV AL)[Kilgarri, 1998].
Parallel developments also occurred in other ﬁelds. The Facial Recognition Technology (FERET)
program for automated facial recognition, inaugurated in 1993 [Phillips et al., 2000], was one of
the ﬁrst to bring a CTF type evaluation approach to the computer vision. The National Institute of
Standards (NIST) reports that, prior to the publication of their FERET database, “[o]nly a few of
these algorithms reported results on images utilizing a common database let alone met the desirable
goal of being evaluated on a standard testing protocol that included separate training and testing sets.
As a consequence, there was no method to make informed comparisons among various algorithms”
[Phillips et al., 2000, p. 2]. Meanwhile, modern reinforcement learning algorithms have traditionally
anchored to a culture of benchmarking, often evaluated on gaming environments like Atari, Starcraft,
Dota2, and Go. One of the ﬁrst games to widely capture the imagination of AI researchers was chess
which became a ﬁxture of US-Soviet Cold War competition and a stand-in for national technological
achievement. [Ensmenger, 2012, p. 6]. More generally, the UC Irvine Machine Learning Repository
(UCI) [Dua and Graff, 2017] was created in 1987 as a response to many calls for machine learning
to have a centralized location for data in machine learning [Radin, 2017] and has morphed into a
repository for a wide array of tasks and data.
2.3 Construct Validity
If reproducibility and reliability are about the precision and thus the reliable repeatability of a ﬁnding,
then challenges with validity for machine learning would be focused on how the ﬁeld approaches
the question of accuracy — namely, how closely our evaluations hit the mark in appropriately char-
acterizing the actual anticipated behaviour of the system in the real world or progress on stated
motivations and goals for the ﬁeld. The accuracy of these evaluations is thus not just a question
of reporting consistency but an actual design task involving reﬂection on what the objectives of an
effective model involve, in addition to conscious decision making on how to best represent these
desired outcomes in evaluation metrics, data and methodology. In particular, construct validity is
an external validity issue related to how well an experimental setting relates to a research claim,
or, in the context of machine learning, how well the benchmark dataset, and associated metrics of
2https://trec.nist.gov
3