Furthermore, Kiri Wagstaff points out some inherent ﬂaws of the aggregate performance evaluation
format for many “general” benchmarks and leader boards. She notes that “80% accuracy on Iris
classiﬁcation might be sufﬁcient for the botany world, but to classify as poisonous or edible a
mushroom you intend to ingest, perhaps 99% (or higher) accuracy is required. The assumption of
cross-domain comparability is a mirage created by the application of metrics that have the same range,
but not the same meaning. Suites of experiments are often summarized by the average accuracy across
all datasets. This tells us nothing at all useful about generalization or impact, since the meaning of an
x% improvement may be very different for different data sets (or classes).” [Wagstaff, 2012, p.3]
Wagstaff here calls out the fact that the task is not just poorly formulated but also likely measured
inappropriately, in a way that makes the results difﬁcult to interpret meaningfully.
Despite these issues, both GLUE and ImageNet authors situate the benchmark datasets within
designed competitive environments. GLUE authors cite “the leaderboard and error analysis toolkit”
as a differentiating factor [Wang et al., 2019a, p.3], while ImageNet authors detail the format of “an
annual competition and corresponding workshop” [Russakovsky et al., 2015, p.1,49].
4.3.2 Redirection of Focus for the Field
Benchmarks have always been historically inﬂuential, and are often created intentionally to incentivize
interest in certain research topics. The National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) invested
in excess of $6.5 million for the FERET facial recognition challenge from 1993 to 1998, in order
to encourage research participation on a technology of interest to the sponsoring agency — the
Department of Defense [Phillips et al., 2000]. The Netﬂix Prize, which ran from 2006 to 2009, was
launched by Netﬂix, an online DVD-rental and video streaming service, in order to drive innovation
for the development of collaborative ﬁltering algorithms that improved the quality of automated
movie recommendations [Bennett et al., 2007]. However, there is a notable difference between
such competitions and those involving what are presented as “general” benchmarks — namely, the
PASCAL VOC challenge running from 2005 to 2012, the ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recognition
Challenge (ILSVRC) running annually from 2010 to 2017, and the GLUE/SuperGLUE leaderboard,
which has been running since 2018. The focus of competitions involving “general” benchmarks are
much further detached from grounded applications, with tasks more vaguely deﬁned. As a result,
these competitions become interpreted as signiﬁcant markers of success across a variety of relevant
sub-domains, and their popularity grows accordingly as that competition is elevated to represent the
ultimate showcase of algorithmic performance.
Benchmarks also inﬂuence the nature of the dominant algorithmic approaches attempted. In the
1960s, chess caused the AI community to hyper-focus on deep-tree searching and the minimax
algorithms, which were most effective on improving game performance. Both of these methods
came to dominate the algorithmic development of this time, resulting in the neglect of alternate
problems and approaches [Ensmenger, 2012]. Dotan and Milli [2020] note how trends for algorithmic
development in ML are driven by performance on particular benchmarks, and how these trends result
in shifts to the entire research program of the ﬁeld. “General” benchmarks in particular often inspire
resource-intensive models: both through presenting very large training sets for models to consume
and by conﬂating size (of both training set and thus model) with generality. The current deep learning
movement would not have been possible without ImageNet [Alom et al., 2018]. In a similar way,
the success of BERT models, a breakthrough of language model development, was ﬁrst effectively
demonstrated using GLUE [Devlin et al., 2019].
4.3.3 Justiﬁcation for Practical out of Context or Unsafe Applications
General benchmarks also get mentioned in marketing copy for commercial machine learning products,
with performance on the benchmark presented as evidence of real-world technical achievement. This
context is when the signiﬁcance of benchmarks is most severely distorted, when performance on
benchmarks is not just the tool for algorithmic selection, but actually presented as some reliable
marker of expected model achievement in deployment. For instance, in January 2021, Microsoft
claimed “DeBERTa surpassing human performance on SuperGLUE marks an important milestone
toward general AI.” [He et al., 2021].ImageNet is equally elevated as an indicator of commercial
model success — so much so that Baidu cheated on the benchmark in order to inﬂate product
performance claims in marketing [Simonite, 2015].
9