that natural language understanding requires both linguistic processing and reasoning over the
combination of the linguistic signal, communicative common ground, and world knowledge [Hunter
et al., 2018], but while linguistic knowledge is relatively self-contained and reusable across different
textual domains, world knowledge is open-ended. Conﬂating these two abilities in a benchmark
that is easily (mis)interpreted as representing a much more general, ﬂexible, and robust set of
capabilities than it possesses, and thus inappropriately presented as comparable to the “human ability
to understand language” [Wang et al., 2019a].
Furthermore, language understanding relies not only on linguistic competence but also world knowl-
edge, commonsense reasoning, and the ability to model the interlocutor’s state of mind [Reddy, 1979,
Clark, 1996], none of which can be thoroughly tested through text-only tasks, such as GLUE.Several
researchers have raised the need to establish effective physical and social grounding as part of the
process of moving towards robust and effective natural language understanding, warning against
text-only learning as a limited approach [Bisk et al., 2020, Zellers et al., 2021]. Bender and Koller
[2020] additionally mention the tendency of machine learning researchers to misinterpret certain
benchmarks as capturing the model’s ability to decipher meaning in language, arguing that bench-
marks need to be constructed with care if they are to show evidence of “understanding” as opposed to
merely the ability to manipulate linguistic form sufﬁciently to pass the test.
4.2 De-contextualized Data and Performance Reporting
In “The Hall of Very, Very Light Things”, Grover ﬁnds a big rock and declares, “There has been
some mistake! This big rock is not light,” before deciding to move it to the “The Hall of Very, Very
Heavy Things”. However, such judgements are ultimately relative — that rock is certainly much less
heavy than the trailer truck in the latter room, and could be considered light in comparison. Nothing
about the museum is neutrally determined.
In this section, we explore one of the features that can lead researchers to mistakenly construe
a benchmark as “general”, namely the de-contextualization of its component tasks and datasets.
No dataset is neutral and there are inherent limits to what a benchmark can tell us — in fact, data
benchmarks are closed and inherently subjective, localized constructions. If anything, the claim
to generality will often act as cover, allowing those developing the benchmarks to escape the
responsibility of reporting details of these limitations. Part of the challenge of addressing this lack of
context is proper documentation for these datasets, which is often underdeveloped [Gebru et al., 2020,
Bender and Friedman, 2018] and the devaluation of the data work [Paullada et al., 2020, Sambasivan
et al., 2021, Hutchinson et al., 2020, Jo and Gebru, 2020].
4.2.1 Limited Scope
Even large datasets like ImageNet are ultimately closed systems, limited in their coverage of non-
Western contexts and temporally bounded. Torralba and Efros [2011] demonstrate how images from
the same class but different datasets are often distinguishable and embody a very speciﬁc style of
capturing some segment of the real world. Speciﬁcally, a well-critiqued limitation of ImageNet is
that the objects tend to be centered within the images, which does not reﬂect how “natural” images
actually appear [Barbu et al., 2019]. Additionally, it’s not clear that increasing the size of these
benchmarks to capture omitted content is even practically feasible in many cases — ImageNet authors
note the trade-off between annotation quality and size, remarking that “the scale [is] already imposing
limits on the manual annotations that are feasible to obtain” [Russakovsky et al., 2015, p.34]. There
are thus likely serious practical limits to making such benchmarks larger.
The notion of task diversity, not size, is repeated quite frequently by GLUE authors [Wang et al.,
2019a, p. 1,2,3,5] as a main differentiator from predecessors’ benchmarks, SentEval [Conneau and
Kiela, 2018] and decaNLP [McCann et al., 2018]. However, despite the expressed desire for the
benchmark to include a diverse range of tasks that “cover a diverse range of text genres, dataset
sizes, and degrees of difﬁculty” [Wang et al., 2019a, p. 1], compared to human linguistic activity,
the GLUE tasks are hardly diverse: two single-sentence tasks, two similarity and paraphrase tasks,
and four inference tasks. As noted in the development of a subsequent iteration of the benchmark,
SuperGLUE, “task formats in GLUE are limited to sentence- and sentence-pair classiﬁcation”[Wang
et al., 2019b, p. 1], requiring a subsequent expansion to include coreference resolution and question
answering (QA) task formats in SuperGLUE. SuperGLUE includes four question answering tasks,
two inference tasks, one word sense disambiguation task and one coreference task.
7