historical Common Task Framework (CTF) for machine learning as it inappropriately evolved into
what we understand today to be these benchmarks claiming to assess general capabilities. We do not
deny the utility of such benchmarks, but rather hope to point to the risks inherent in their framing.
Our goal is to dig into the details of what it means for us as a community to continue propping up
certain benchmarks with the rhetoric of “general” performance.
2 Background
2.1 Striving for Generality
The notion of a “general-purpose” AI can be traced, in part, back to the early days of the ﬁeld. In
the late 1950s, Newell et al. [1959] proposed the “General Problem Solver” in an attempt to create a
system that could solve a range of problems, as well as develop a general theory of problem solving.
While this project ultimately failed, it helped establish general intelligence as a goal within the
ﬁeld of AI. As Adam [1998] notes, the failure of the project was at the time attributed primarily to
implementation issues, rather than the perception of any ﬂaw in the formulation of a disembodied
and general-purpose problem solver as a meaningful goal.
Researchers now often use the term “generality” to refer to the development of AI systems that are
ﬂexible in nature, demonstrating competence on a wide range of tasks and in a wide range of settings,
hoping to mirror the adaptive cognitive abilities humans are perceived to possess [Shevlin et al.,
2019]. While discussions of “generality” might evoke the goal of artiﬁcial general intelligence [V oss,
2007, Pennachin and Goertzel, 2007], we set that aside in this paper and focus instead on the more
immediate (and logically prior) issue of claims of generality for a speciﬁc type of cognitive skill or
capability (e.g., vision or language), supposedly independent of context or application domains.
Within speciﬁc sub-ﬁelds and more pragmatic settings, researchers will often strive for the de-
velopment of general-purpose systems that capture a breadth of functionality or knowledge. The
development of general-purpose feature embeddings has also become a central research focus within
machine learning communities. Here, the goal is the development of representations — through
either unsupervised or supervised means — that can generalize (with minimal ﬁne-tuning) to a wide
range of other tasks they were not speciﬁcally developed for [e.g. Huh et al., 2016, Du et al., 2020,
Bommasani et al., 2021].
2.2 A Brief History of Benchmarking Practice in AI
Some assess AI progress by asking scientiﬁc and philosophical questions on the notion of intelligence,
thinking of AI as a method for modeling some general cognitive function. Others, particularly those
in the machine learning ﬁeld, evaluate performance based on the success of a model’s utility within
some practical applications. Although the former goals sparked the aspiration to measure general
cognitive capabilities, the latter application-based objectives are what data benchmarking has been
historically designed to communicate.
In this paper we describe a benchmark as a particular combination of a dataset or sets of datasets (at
least test data, sometimes also training data), and a metric, conceptualized as representing one or more
speciﬁc tasks or sets of abilities, picked up by a community of researchers as a shared framework
for the comparison of methods. The task is a particular speciﬁcation of a problem, as represented in
the dataset.1Ametric is a way to summarize system performance over some set or sets of tasks as
a single number or score. The metric provides a means of counting success and failure at the level
of individual system outputs and summarizing those counts over the full dataset. Models obtaining
the most favourable scores on the metrics for a benchmark are considered to be “state-of-the-art”
(SOTA) in terms of performance on the speciﬁed task. Here, we present a stylized history that’s far
from comprehensive, but attempts to provide the shape of the development of predecessors of current
machine learning benchmarking practice.
Before benchmarks were employed for algorithm selection in machine learning, they were used
for “computer selection” — i.e. the task of running a benchmark program on multiple computers
to determine which machine was most suitable for purchase. In 1962, Auberbach Corporation’s
Standard EDP Reports were developed as a way to directly assess the performance of machines
1This corresponds to Schlangen’s [2021] notion of extensional deﬁnition of tasks; see §4.1.
2