Poor performance on minority subgroups could possibly be disguised in aggregate and de-
contextualized “general” benchmarks to justify deployment. We already know from examples
of deployed, commercial products in facial recognition [Buolamwini and Gebru, 2018] that unbal-
anced representation impacts performance on certain groups over others, though this disproportionate
performance is often hidden in aggregate performance measures on what turn out to be biased
benchmarks [Merler et al., 2019, Raji and Buolamwini, 2019].
5 Alternative Roles for Benchmarking and Alternative Evaluation Methods
In preceding sections, we have explored the ways in which “general” benchmarks fail to serve as
effective measures of progress in machine learning. Now we ask: What can be done instead? This is
not a question of “ﬁxing”, “improving” or “expanding” the current “general” benchmarks — after all,
the solution to addressing the issues inherent to the “Everything in the Whole Wide World” museum
is not to add more rooms. The presentation of a data benchmark as being able to exist independent of
context, scope and speciﬁcity is itself a false premise for machine learning evaluation.
Instead, we note two paths forward. First, we argue that benchmarks should be developed, presented
and understood as intended — to evaluate concrete, well-scoped and contextualized tasks. Second,
when probing for more broad model objectives, behaviors and capabilities, we propose that the
ﬁeld explore alternative evaluation methods. The following are some starting points on evaluation
techniques to explore further in machine learning as an alternative to benchmarking (further details in
Appendix A):
•The systematic development of test items (see Appendix A.1), in the form of testsuites [e.g.
Lehmann et al., 1996, Ribeiro et al., 2020], audits [e.g. Buolamwini and Gebru, 2018], and
adversarial testing [e.g. Ettinger et al., 2017, Niven and Kao, 2019]. These techniques can
help map out which aspects of the problem space remain challenging and/or check for the
potential for harms coming from system biases.
•System output analysis / behavioural testing (see Appendix A.2), including error analysis
[e.g. van Miltenburg et al., 2021], disaggregated analysis [e.g. Raji and Buolamwini, 2019],
and counterfactual analysis [e.g. Garg et al., 2019, Hutchinson et al., 2020]. These techniques
can reveal the kinds of failure modes a system might produce, and potentially their causes.
•Ablation testing (see Appendix A.3) [e.g. Newell, 1975] allows researchers insight into the
speciﬁc contributions of different system components.
•Techniques for analyzing model properties (see Appendix A.4) that are orthogonal to system
outputs such as proﬁling energy consumption [e.g. Henderson et al., 2020, Schwartz et al.,
2020], memory requirements [e.g. Ethayarajh and Jurafsky, 2020], and stability in the face
of perturbations to training data [e.g. Sculley et al., 2018].
6 Conclusion
The situation with Grover and the museum’s claims are clearly ridiculous — yet in machine learning,
we follow the exact same logical fallacies to justify the elevation of a select number of benchmarks
operating as general benchmarks for the ﬁeld. However, there is no dataset that will be able to capture
the full complexity of the details of existence, in the same way that there can be no museum to
contain the full catalog of everything in the whole wide world. Open-world, universal and neutral
datasets don’t exist, and current methods of benchmarking do not offer meaningful measures of
general capabilities.
The effective development of benchmarks is critical to progress in machine learning, but what makes
a benchmark effective is not the strength of its arbitrary and false claim to “generality” but its
effectiveness in how it helps us understand as researchers how certain systems work — and how
they don’t. Benchmarking, appropriately deployed, is not about winning a contest but more about
surveying a landscape — the more we can re-frame, contextualize and appropriately scope these
datasets, the more useful they will become as an informative dimension to more impactful algorithmic
development and alternative evaluation methods (see Appendix A). Given the alternative roles and
interpretations for evaluation we could explore, it is essential that we move quickly beyond the
narrow-yet-totalizing lens of the “Everything in the Whole Wide World” benchmarks.
10