medical diagnostics when lacking access to ground truth [Yerushalmy, 1947].) Other mechanical
analyses include looking at errors by easily automatically measurable properties of system input such
as sentence length or presence or number of out of vocabulary items.
More detailed error analysis digs into the speciﬁc system inputs to look for patterns that can’t
necessarily be measured automatically and might not be modeled in any way by the system being
evaluated. For example, error analysis of a sentiment analysis system might ﬁnd that it is frequently
tripped up by sarcasm or in a simpler case by sentences with phenomena such as coordination or
subordinate clauses. Error analysis of a machine translation (MT) system might ﬁnd that it frequently
fails on examples with negation [Wetzel and Bond, 2012, Fancellu and Webber, 2015, Hossain et al.,
2020]. Error analysis can turn up important problems that don’t have a large effect on the metric. For
example, metrics for MT systems (including but not limited to BLEU) are also not good at measuring
the impact of negation errors [Hossain et al., 2020].
Disaggregated analysis Disaggregated analysis can reveal disparate patterns of performance that
may not be visible through aggregate metrics alone. This method has been leveraged within the
ground-breaking audit of facial analysis systems, performed by Buolamwini and Gebru [2018], that
evaluated performance across unitary and intersectional subgroups deﬁned by gender and Fitzpatrick
skin type. This analysis revealed signiﬁcant disparities in model performance — with darker-skinned
female subjects experiencing the highest error rates — that was not visible through examination of
aggregate performance metrics alone. The method of disaggregated analysis has since been adopted
by a myriad of auditing and evaluation works [e.g. Raji and Buolamwini, 2019] and integrated into
frameworks of standardized model reporting [Mitchell et al., 2019]. Following these works, we
encourage researchers to report performance metrics on socially salient slices of their dataset, in
addition to the full test set.
Counterfactual analysis Counterfactual analysis is another technique of model evaluation and
assessment that has gained in popularity in recent years. At a high level, these methods evaluate
how a model’s output changes in response to a counterfactual change in the input. This method has
been leveraged for fairness-informed analysis of natural language processing systems by comparing
model performance on paired inputs that differ only in a reference to a sensitive identity group [Garg
et al., 2019, Hutchinson et al., 2020]. While both counterfactual analysis and disaggregated analysis
have been leveraged to disparities in model performance for different sensitive groups, counterfactual
analysis can additionally provide insight into causal mechanisms underlying particular patterns in
performance. Counterfactual analysis can also be leveraged to assess model robustness to small
distribution shifts [Christensen and Connault, 2019].
The results of system output analysis tend to be rich and detailed and not amenable for quick cross-
system comparison. But this is a feature, in our view, and not a bug: the goal, after all, is not anoint
one system the winner (until some new system claims that spot), but rather to understand how aspects
of system design map onto different aspects of the problem space so as to inform the next iteration of
system development.
A.3 Ablation Testing
Another well-established technique for understanding system performance is ablation testing. Abla-
tion testing, as named by Newell [1975] by analogy with similar studies in biology, involves isolating
the contributions of different system components by removing them, one by one, and evaluating the
modiﬁed system. In statistical NLP prior to deep learning approaches, ablation testing was commonly
applied to different feature sets to explore the extent to which systems were using information
captured by different aspects of input representation. Ablation testing can also be performed on
subsets of training data to explore the effect of e.g. in-domain v. out-of-domain training data or
on components of system architecture, to the extent that these can be removed without completely
disabling the system. Heinzerling [2019], in a discussion inspired by Niven and Kao [2019], suggests
various data ablations that can be applied to test data as well, to investigate what cues a system might
be relying on.
19