baseline models are:
ImageGAN: ImageGAN follows the work in [ 28,36]
and does not use the story discriminator, story encoder and
Context Encoder. Each image is generated independently.
However, for a reasonable comparison, we concatenate st,
encoded story Sand a noise term as input. Otherwise, the
model fails on the task. This is the simplest version of Sto-
ryGAN.
SVC: In “Story Visualization by Concatenation” (SVC),
the Text2Gist cell in StoryGAN is replaced by simple con-
catenation of the encoded story and description feature vec-
tors [ 31]. Compared to ImageGAN, SVC includes the addi-
tional story discriminator, and is visualized in Figure 4.
𝒔𝟏& 𝝐𝟏𝑥1 𝑥2 𝑥𝑇 …Frame 
DiscriminatorStory 
Discriminator
Generated Sequence of 
Images
𝑺Full Story
GRU
𝒔𝟐& 𝝐𝟐GRU
𝒔𝑻& 𝝐𝑻GRU…
…Image 
GeneratorImage 
GeneratorImage 
GeneratorStory Encoder
…
𝐾𝐿𝒩𝝁(𝑺), diag(𝝈𝟐𝐒 ) ||𝒩 𝟎, 𝑰
Figure 4: The framework of the baseline model SVC, where the
story and individual sentence are concatenated to form the input.
SVFN : In “Story Visualization by Filter Network”
(SVFN), the concatenation in SVC is replaced by a ﬁlter
network. Sentence stis transformed into a ﬁlter and con-
volved with the encoded story. Speciﬁcally, the image gen-
erator input is ot=Filter(it)⇤h0instead of Eq. 7.
4.1. CLEVR-SV Dataset
The CLEVR [ 19] dataset was originally used for visual
question answering. We modiﬁed this data for story visual-
ization by generating images from randomly assigned lay-
outs of the object (examples in the top row of Figure 5). We
named this dataset CLEVR-SV to distinguish it from the
existing CLEVR dataset. Speciﬁcally, four rules were used
to construct the CLEVR-SV: (i)The maximum number of
objects in one story is limited to four. (ii)Objects are made
of metallic/rubber with eight different colors and two dif-
ferent sizes. (iii)The object shape can be cylinder, cube or
sphere.(iv)The object is added one at a time, resulting in a
four-image sequence per story. We generated 10,000image
sequences for training and 3,000for testing. For our task,
the story is the layout descriptions of objects.
The input stis the current object’s attribute and the rel-
ative position given by two real numbers indicating its co-
ordinates. For instance, the ﬁrst image of the left column
of Fig. 5is generated from “yellow, large, metal, sphere, (-
2.1, 2.4).” The following objects are described in the same
way. Given the description, the generated objects’ appear-
ance should have little variation from the ground truth andtheir relative positions should be similar.
Figure 5gives the results comparison. ImageGAN [ 28]
fails to keep the consistency of the ‘story’ and it mixes up
the attributes when the number of objects increases. SVC
solves this consistency problem by including the story dis-
criminator and GRU cell at the bottom, as the third row
of Figure 5has consistent objects in the image sequence.
However, SVC generates an implausible forth image in the
sequence. We hypothesize that using simple vector concate-
nation cannot effectively balance the importance of the cur-
rent description with the whole story. SVFN can alleviate
this problem to some extent, but not completely. In con-
trast, StoryGAN generates more feasible images than the
competitors. We attribute the performance improvement to
three components: (i)Text2Gist cell tracks the progress of
story;(ii)story and image discriminators keep the consis-
tency of objects in the generation process; (iii)using the
Story Encoder to initialize the Text2Gist cell gives better
result on ﬁrst generated image. Greater empirical evidence
for this ﬁnal point appears in the cartoon dataset in Sec-
tion4.2.
In order to further validate the StoryGAN model, we de-
signed a task to evaluate whether the model can generate
consistent images by changing the ﬁrst sentence descrip-
tion. Speciﬁcally, we randomly replaced the ﬁrst object’s
description while keeping the other three the same during
generation, which we visualize in Supplemental Figure 8
in Appendix B. This comparison shows that only Story-
GAN can keep the story consistency by correctly utilizing
the attributes of the ﬁrst object in later frames, as discussed
above. In Supplemental Figure 9, we give additional exam-
ples on changing the initial attributes only using StoryGAN.
Regardless of the initial attribute, StoryGAN is consistent
between frames.
ImageGAN [ 28]SVC SVFN StoryGAN
SSIM 0.596 0.641 0.654 0.672
Table 1: SSIM comparison on CLEVR-SV dataset.
We also compare the Structural Similarity Index (SSIM)
score between the generated images and ground truth [ 14].
SSIM was originally used to measure the recovery result
from distorted images. Here, it is used to determine whether
the generated images are aligned with the input description.
Table 1gives the SSIM metric for each method on the test
set. Note that though this is a generative task, using SSIM to
measure the structure similarity is reasonable because there
is little variation given the description. In this task, Story-
GAN signiﬁcantly outperforms the other baselines.
4.2. Cartoon Dataset
The Pororo dataset [ 21] was originally used for video
question answering, where each one second video clip is as-
66334