Input Story: c1and c2are standing in the snow. 
c1tells a story to c3. c3wants to joint c1
and c2. c1continuous to talk. c1looks down. 
They suddenly noticed that there is something 
lying on the snow.
C1= Pororo , C2= Loppy , C3= Crong
C1= Pororo , C2= Eddy, C3= RodyGT
Image 
GAN
SVC
SVFN
Story 
GAN
Figure 7: Generation result by changing character names in the
same story. The story template is given at the top, with the charac-
ter names c1,c2andc3in the two instances of the story, each one
shown in a column.
ture the relevant characters in the story. The nine most com-
mon characters are selected from the dataset. Their names
and pictures are provided in Supplemental Figure 9in Ap-
pendix D. Next, a character image classiﬁer is trained on
real images from training set and applied on both real and
generated images from the test set. We compare the classi-
ﬁcation accuracy (only exact matches across all characters
counts as correct) of each image/story pair as an indicator
of whether the generation is coherent to the story descrip-
tion. The classiﬁer’s performance on the test set is 86%,
which is considered an upper bound for the task. From
these results, it is clear that StoryGAN has increased char-
acter consistency compared to the baseline models. Note
that there is peculiarity in the labels, as the human labeled
description can sometimes include characters not shown in
the frame. Further, the training classiﬁer is on real images.
Domain gap between real and generated images also harm
the performance. However, these should hurt all algorithms
equally and it is a fair comparison.
Upper Bound ImageGAN [ 28]SVC SVFN StoryGAN
Acc. 0.86 0.23 0.21 0.24 0.27
Table 2: Character classiﬁcation accuracy (exact match ratio)
comparison on Pororo-SV dataset. The upper bound is the clas-
siﬁer accuracy on the real images associated with the stories.
Human Evaluation Automatic metrics cannot fully eval-
uate the performance of StoryGAN. Therefore, we per-
formed both pairwise and ranking-based human evaluation
studies on Amazon Mechanical Turk on Pororo-SV . For
both tasks, we use 170 generated image sequences sampled
from the test set, each assigned to 5 workers to reduce hu-Table 3: Results of pairwise human evaluation. The ±denotes
standard error on the metrics.
StoryGAN vs ImageGAN
Choice (%) StoryGAN ImageGAN Tie
Visual Quality 74.17 ±1.38 18.60 ±1.38 7.23
Consistence 79.15 ±1.27 15.28 ±1.27 5.57
Relevance 78.08 ±1.34 17.65 ±1.34 4.27
Table 4: Results of ranking-based human evaluation. The ±de-
notes standard error on the metrics.
Method ImageGAN SVC SVFN StoryGAN
Rank 2.91±0.05 2.42±0.04 2.77±0.04 1.94±0.05
man variance. The order of the options within each assign-
ment is shufﬂed to make a fair comparison.
We ﬁrst performed a pairwise comparison between Sto-
ryGAN and ImageGAN. For each input story, the worker
is presented with two generated image sequences and asked
to make decisions from the three aspects: visual quality2,
consistency3, and relevance4. Results are summarized in
Table 3. The standard error on these estimates is small,
demonstrating that StoryGAN drastically outperformed Im-
ageGAN on this task.
We next performed ranking-based human evaluation.
For each input story, the worker is asked to rank images gen-
erated from the four compared models on their overall qual-
ity. Results are summarized in Table 4. StoryGAN achieves
the highest average rank, while ImageGAN performs the
worst. There is little uncertainty in these estimates, so we
are conﬁdent that humans prefer StoryGAN on average.
5. Conclusion
We studied the story visualization task as a sequential
conditional generation problem. The proposed StoryGAN
model deals with the task by jointly considering the cur-
rent input sentence with the contextual information. This is
achieved by the proposed Text2Gist component in the Con-
text Encoder. From the ablation test, the two-level discrim-
inator and the recurrent structure on the inputs helps ensure
the consistency across the generated images and the story
to be visualized, while the Context Encoder efﬁciently pro-
vides the image generator with both local and global condi-
tional information. Both quantitative and human evaluation
studies show that StoryGAN improves the generation com-
pared to the baseline models. As image generators improve,
the story visualization’s quality will improve also.
2The generated images look visually appealing, rather than blurry and
difﬁcult to understand.
3The generated images are consistent with each other, have a common
topic hidden behind, and naturally forms a story, rather than looking like 5
independent images.
4The generated image sequence accurately reﬂects the input story and
covers the main characters mentioned in the story.
86336