In contrast, the goal of story visualization is to generate
a sequence of key static frames that present correct story
plots where motion features are less important. ( ii) Video
clips are often based on simple sentence input and typically
have a static background, while complex stories require the
model to capture scene changes necessary for the plot line.
In that sense, story visualization could also be viewed as
a critical step towards real-world long-video generation by
capturing sharp scene changes. To tackle these challenges,
we propose a StoryGAN framework, inspired by Genera-
tive Adversarial Networks (GANs) [ 10], a two-player game
between a generator and a discriminator. To take into ac-
count the contextual information in the sequence of sen-
tence inputs, StoryGAN is designed as a sequential condi-
tional GAN model.
Given a multi-sentence paragraph (story), StoryGAN
uses a recurrent neural network (RNN) to incorporate the
previously generated images into the current sentence’s im-
age generation. Contextual information is extracted with
our Context Encoder module, including a stack of a GRU
cell and our newly proposed Text2Gist cell. The Context
Encoder transforms the current sentence and a story encod-
ing vector into a high-dimensional feature vector (Gist) for
further image generation. As the story proceeds, the Gist
is dynamically updated to reﬂect the change of objects and
scenes in the story ﬂow. In the Text2Gist component, the
sentence description is transformed into a ﬁlter and adapted
to the story, so that we can optimize the mixing process by
tweaking the ﬁlter. Similar ideas are also used in dynamic
ﬁltering [ 18], attention models [ 34] and meta-learning [ 27].
To ensure consistency across the sequence of generated
images, we adopt a two-level GAN framework. We use an
image-level discriminator to measure the relevance of a sen-
tence and its generated image, and a story-level discrimina-
tor to measure the global coherence between the generated
image sequence and the whole story.
We created two datasets from the existing CLEVR [ 19]
and Pororo [ 21] datasets for our story visualization task,
called CLEVR-SV and Pororo-SV , respectively. Empiri-
cally, StoryGAN more efﬁciently captures the full picture
of the story and how it evolves, compared to existing base-
lines [ 36,24]. Equipped with the deep Context Encoder
module and the two-level discriminators, StoryGAN signif-
icantly outperforms previous state-of-the-art models, gener-
ating a sequence of higher quality images that are coherent
with the story in both image quality and global consistency
metrics, as well as human evaluation.
2. Related Work
Variational AutoEncoders (V AEs) [ 23], Generative Ad-
versarial Nets (GANs) [ 10], and ﬂow-based generative
models [ 7,8]) have been widely applied to a wide range of
generation tasks including text-to-image generation, videogeneration, style transfer, and image editing. Story visu-
alization falls into this broad categorization of generative
tasks, but has several distinct aspects.
Very relevant for the story visualization task is condi-
tional text-to-image transformation [ 28,17,38,35], which
can now generate high-resolution realistic images [ 36,34].
A key task in text-to-image generation is understanding
longer and more complex input texts. For example, this
has been explored in dialogue-to-image generation, where
the input is a complete dialogue session rather than a sin-
gle sentence [ 29]. Another related task is textual image
editing, which edits an input image according to a textual
editing query [ 3,30,4,9]. This task requires consistency
between the original image and the output image. Finally,
there is the task of placing pre-speciﬁed images and objects
in a picture from a text description [ 20]. This task also re-
lates text to a consistent image, but does not require a full
image generation procedure.
A second closely related task to story visualization is
video generation, especially that of text-to-video [ 24,13]
or image-to-video generation [ 1,31,32]. Existing ap-
proaches only generate short video clips [ 13,5,12] without
scene changes. The biggest challenge in video generation
is how to ensure a smooth motion transition across succes-
sive video frames. Trajectory, skeleton or simple landmarks
are used in existing works to help model the motion fea-
ture [ 12,37,33]. To this end, researchers disentangle dy-
namic and static features for motion and background, re-
spectively [ 32,24,31,6]. In our modeling of story visu-
alization, the whole story sets the static features and each
input sentence encodes dynamic features. However, there
are several differences: (i)conditional video generation has
only one input, while our task has sequential, evolving in-
puts; and (ii)the motion in video clips is continuous, while
images visualizing a story are discrete and often with dif-
ferent scene views.
There are also several other related tasks in the litera-
ture. For instance, story image retrieval from a pre-collected
training set rather than image generation [ 26]. Cartoon
generation has been explored with a “cut and paste” tech-
nique [ 11]. However, both of these techniques require large
amounts of labeled training data. An inverse task to story vi-
sualization is visual storytelling, where the output is a para-
graph describing a sequence of input images. Text genera-
tion models or reinforcement learning are often highlighted
for visual storytelling [ 16,25,15].
3. StoryGAN
StoryGAN is designed to create a sequence of images
to describe an input story S. The story Sconsists of a
sequence of sentences S=[s1,s2,···,sT], where the
lengthTmay vary. There is one generated image per sen-
tence, denoted as ˆX=[ˆx1,ˆx2,···,ˆxT], that are both
26330