Ground Truth
ImageGAN
SVC
SVFN
StoryGAN
Figure 5: Comparison among different methods on CLEVR-SV dataset.
Loopy laughs but tends to be angry.
Pororois singing and dancing and loopy is angry.
Loopy says stop to Pororo. Pororo stops.
Loopy asks reason to pororo . pororois startled.
Pororois making an excuse to loopy.
Ground Truth
ImageGAN
SVC
SVFN
StoryGAN
Ground Truth
ImageGAN
SVC
SVFN
StoryGANEddy is shocked at what happened now.
Pororotells Eddy that Crong was cloned.
Pororotells Eddy that Crong got into the machine.
Eddy says it is not a problem.
Eddy tells them that Eddy made a machine to reverse
the cloning.
Figure 6: Two generated samples on the Pororo-SV dataset.
sociated with more than one manually written description.
About40video clips forms a complete story. Each story has
several QA pairs. In total, the Pororo dataset contains 16K
clips of one second videos about 13distinct characters. The
manually written description has an average length of 13.6
words that describes what is happening and which charac-
ters are in each video clip. These 16K video clips are sorted
into408movie stories [ 21].
We modiﬁed the Pororo dataset to ﬁt story visualization
task by considering the description for each video clip as the
story’s text input. For each video clip, we randomly pick
out one frame (sampling rate is 30Hz) during training as
the real image sample. Five continuous images form a sin-
gle story. Finally, we end up with 15,336description-story
pairs, where 13,000pairs are used as training, the remain-
ing2,336pairs for testing. We call this dataset Pororo-SV
to differ it from the original Pororo QA dataset [ 21].
The text encoder uses universal encoding [ 2] with ﬁxed
pre-trained parameters. Training a new text encoder empir-
ically gave little performance gain. Two visualized storiesfrom the competing methods are given in Figure 6. The text
input is given on the top. ImageGAN does not generate con-
sistent image sequences; for instance, the generated images
switch from indoors to outdoors randomly. Additionally,
the characters’ appearance is inconsistent in the sequence of
images (e.g. Pororo’s hat). SVC and SVFN can improve the
consistency to some extent, but their limitations can be seen
in the unsatisfactory ﬁrst images. In contrast, StoryGAN’s
ﬁrst image has a much higher quality than other baselines
because of the use of the Story Encoder to initialize the re-
current cell. This shows the advantage of using the output
of the Story Encoder as ﬁrst hidden state over random ini-
tialization.
To explore how different models represent the story, we
ran experiments where only the character names in the story
were changed, shown in Figure 7. Visually, StoryGAN out-
performs the other baselines on the image quality and con-
sistency.
Further, we perform two distinct quantitative tasks. The
ﬁrst is to determine whether the generation is able to cap-
76335