StoryGAN: A Sequential Conditional GAN for Story Visualization
Yitong Li∗1, Zhe Gan2, Yelong Shen4, Jingjing Liu2, Yu Cheng2, Yuexin Wu5,
Lawrence Carin1, David Carlson1and Jianfeng Gao3
1Duke University,2Microsoft Dynamics 365 AI Research,3Microsoft Research
4Tencent AI Research,5Carnegie Mellon University
Abstract
In this work, we propose a new task called Story Vi-
sualization. Given a multi-sentence paragraph, the story
is visualized by generating a sequence of images, one for
each sentence. In contrast to video generation, story vi-
sualization focuses less on the continuity in generated im-
ages (frames), but more on the global consistency across dy-
namic scenes and characters – a challenge that has not been
addressed by any single-image or video generation meth-
ods. Therefore, we propose a new story-to-image-sequence
generation model, StoryGAN, based on the sequential con-
ditional GAN framework. Our model is unique in that it
consists of a deep Context Encoder that dynamically tracks
the story ﬂow, and two discriminators at the story and im-
age levels, to enhance the image quality and the consistency
of the generated sequences. To evaluate the model, we mod-
iﬁed existing datasets to create the CLEVR-SV and Pororo-
SV datasets. Empirically, StoryGAN outperformed state-
of-the-art models in image quality, contextual consistency
metrics, and human evaluation.
1. Introduction
Learning to generate meaningful and coherent sequences
of images from a natural language story is a challenging
task that requires understanding and reasoning on both nat-
ural language and images. In this work, we propose a new
Story Visualization task. Speciﬁcally, the goal is to generate
a sequence of images to describe a story written in a multi-
sentence paragraph, as shown in Figure 1.
There are two main challenges in this task. First, the se-
quence of images must consistently and coherently depict
the whole story. This task is highly related to text-to-image
generation [ 35,28,17,36,34], where an image is generated
∗This work was done while the ﬁrst author was an intern at Microsoft
Dynamics 365 AI Research.
Pororo and Crong are 
fishing together. Crong is looking at 
the bucket. Pororo has a fish on 
his fishing rod.Real/Fake? Coherent to text? Consistent?
“Pororo and Crong are 
fishing together . Crong
is looking at the bucket. 
Pororo has a fish on his
fishing rod.”“Pororo and Crong are 
fishing together . Crong
islooking at thebucket. 
Pororo has a fish on his 
fishing rod. ”“Pororo and Crong are 
fishing together. Crong
is looking at the bucket. 
Pororo has a fish on his 
fishing rod.”Image 
GeneratorImage 
GeneratorImage 
Generator
+ + +Figure 1: The input story is “Pororo and Crong are ﬁshing to-
gether. Crong is looking at the bucket. Pororo has a ﬁsh on his
ﬁshing rod.” Each sentence is visualized with one image. In this
work, the image generation for each sentence is enriched with con-
textual information from the Context Encoder. Two discriminators
at different levels guide the generation process.
based on a short description. However, by sequentially ap-
plying text-to-image methods to a story will not generate a
coherent image sequence, failing on the story visualization
task. For instance, consider the story “A red metallic cylin-
der cube is at the center. Then add a green rubber cube at
the right.” The second sentence alone does not capture the
entire scene.
The second challenge is how to display the logic of the
storyline. Speciﬁcally, the appearance of objects and the
layout in the background must evolve in a coherent way
as the story progresses. This is similar to video genera-
tion. However, story visualization and video generation dif-
fer as: ( i) Video clips are continuous with smooth motion
transitions, so video generation models focus on extract-
ing dynamic features to maintain realistic motions [ 32,31].
1
6329