The main contributions of this paper are: (1) provision of t he first apple dataset  with multi- modal images from RGB -D 
sensors with color , depth and range -corrected IR intensity data, and the corresponding annotations with the ground  truth 
apple locations ; (2) an analysis of the radiometric capabilities of Kinect v2 for fruit detection; (3) an implementation of a 
high-performance fruit detection system using an adaptation of Faster R -CNN for five-channel input images; (4) a study of 
the optimal anchor scales  and aspect ratios  used in the region proposal network (RPN). After this Introduction section, the 
rest of the paper is structured as follows : section 2 presents related work retrieved from the state of the art ; section  3 
describes the proposed dataset,  explaining the signal range -correction  theoretical basis, the experimental set up for data 
acquisition , the pre -processing needed to build the 5- channel multi -modal images , and the network implemented for fruit 
detection ; section 4 shows the results and discusses qualitatively and quantitatively the performance of the fruit detector 
when using each of the modalities provided by the sensor ; finally, the conclu sions are presented in section 5. 
.
2. Related work  
Over the years, different sensors and systems have been used for fruit detection and localization (Gongal et al., 2015) . 
The most commonly sensor s used are color  (or RGB) cameras (Bargoti and Underwood, 2017a; Linker, 2017; Maldonado 
and Barbosa, 2016; Zhao et al. , 2016) . However, the drawbacks to  these sensor s include the fact that they only provide 2D 
information and their measurements  are affected by lighting conditions. Advances in photonics and the exploration of non -
visible wavelengths have allowed the int roduction of other systems , including thermal, multispectral and hyperspectral 
cameras. Thermal cameras have been used in fruit detection, differen tiating  fruits from background by  the different thermal 
inertia  of the fruits . Fruits can thus be detected when  the ambient temperature is increasing or decreasing (Bulanon et al., 
2008; Stajnko et al., 2004) . Mult ispectral and hyperspectral cameras have also been used for fruit detection , allowing the 
acquisition of  data at different bands of the electromagnetic spectrum (Okamoto and Lee, 2009; Sa et al., 2016; Safren et 
al., 2007; Zhang et al., 2015) . However, l ike RGB cameras, thermal, multispectral  and hyperspectral cameras only provide 
2D information.  
More recently, LiDAR (Light Detection and Ranging) systems have been introduced in agriculture to obtain 3D models 
of crops (Escolà et al., 2 017; Rosell Polo et al., 2009; Sanz et al., 2018) . This sensor works according to th e time -of-flight 
principle (ToF), measur ing distances to the objects by computing the time required by a laser pulse to complete the round 
trip between sensor and target . Besides the geometrical information (3D point clouds), this sensor also provides the amount 
of light backscattered by the scene (related with the reflectance). In this respect , the authors have shown in a  recent study