yield estimation, images should be registered in order to count the a pples appearing in the overlapped parts only one time. 
However, this is not the goal of this work.  
A pre -processing was carried out to prepare these data as input data of the convolutional neural network. Data 
preparation included range -correction of the b ackscatter ed signal , 2D projection of the 3D point cloud,  and image 
registration between range- corrected intensity and  raw RGB images. Fig. 2  illustrates a flowchart of the data preparation 
steps.  
 
Fig. 2. Data preparation  diagram . For each frame, the sensor provides a 3D point cloud with RGB and  backscatter ed intensity data , and a 
raw RGB image. Firstly, the intensity signal  is range -corrected . Then, the 3D point cloud is projected onto a 2D plane parallel to the 
sensor , generating  the range-corrected and depth images. Finally , the projected images are resized  and cropped in order to register them  
with the RGB raw image . 5-channel multi -modal image s of the scene were obtained , with RGB channels in high resolution.  
The range  correction of the backscattered signal was performed as de scribed in Section 3.1. After obtaining the 3D point 
cloud with range -corrected intensity data, a perspective projection onto a plane parallel to th e sensor was carried out , 
generating  the corresponding  RGB projected,  range -corrected intensity and depth  images. Since the vertical  field-of-view  
(FOV ) of the depth sensor is larger than the  vertical  FOV of the RGB camera, the top and bottom  parts,  where no RGB 
information is given,  were cut (blue regions in the RGB proj. image of  Fig. 2 ). This step was the responsible of having a 
different image  aspect ratio that the original 512/424.  In order to work with an RGB image with higher resolution than that 
of the IR image , a registration between the RGB raw image and the projected images  is required . To do so,  projected 
images were resized  (bicubic in terpolation)  to 1600 x 1080 pixels  (px) to achieve the same vertical size as the RGB high 
resolution image. Finally , an image registration was performed in order to have correspondence between all images, 
obtaining a 5 -channel multi -modal image  (with RGB in high resolution ) where each pixel has information from 3 
modalities: color  (RGB) , range -corrected intensity and depth  (Fig. 2 ). Hereinafter , the RG B image obtained after the point 
cloud projection is denoted as RGB p, while the RGB image obtained after registering the raw RGB image is denoted as 
RGB hr. In order to have similar mean and variance between channels, the range- corrected intensity and depth images were