Improvements in technological fields  like robotics and computer science have  provide d farmers with tools to increase 
production in an efficient and sustainable way (Underwood et al., 2016) . The use of new technologies in precision 
agriculture has been applied in the optimization of  agricultural process es such as water irrigation, agrochemical application, 
fertilization, pruning and thinning (Auat Cheein and Carelli, 2013; Bargoti and Underwood, 2017b) . Farmers can obtain 
valuable information for optimization of these processes from the d etecti on and quantifi cation of  fruit distribution  within 
the canopy.  
Advances in sensing and computer vision have facilitated the development of  remote fruit detection systems, with 
applications in yield prediction, yield mapping and automated harvesting. Yield prediction allows farmer s to plan the 
harvest campaign, fruit st orage and sales (Ba rgoti and Underwood, 2017b; Nuske et al., 2014) . On many occasions, yield 
estimation is carried out by manual counting of a few samples, without addressing spatial variability within the orchard. 
Although simple random sampling (SRS) is a widely used te chnique for yield estimation, it is necessary to sample a 
relatively large number of trees for a precise estimation. Th ough this may sometimes be  unfeasible with manual counting, it 
could be possible by using currently available computer vision technologie s. As for  yield mapping, production maps 
provide useful information for fruit growers. Fruit orchards usually show spatial variability due to soil variations, fertility, 
water irrigation , among others (Uribeetxebarria et al., 2018) . An analysis of yield maps helps farmers to find the reasons for 
such variability and to determine which areas of lower productivity require special attent ion. Finally, fruit detection and 3D 
localization are the first step s in the development of  automated harvesting. Hand harvesting is a hard and human -resource 
intensive labor , which has to find an alternative since the decreasing availability of skilled labor  force (Gongal et al., 2015) . 
Despite  the latest advances in imaging techniques and comp uter vision, detecting and localizing  fruits within the canopy is 
still a pending issue that has to face problems derived from the heterogeneity of the environment, such as occlusions with 
other vegetative organs and variable lighting conditions. Most of the emerging sensors, such depth cameras (RGB -D 
sensors), have not yet been exploited for fruit detection and localization. The major reason is  the lack of  substantial 
datasets (Hameed et al., 2018) . 
This paper introduces the KFuji RGB -DS database, which contains multi -modal images of Fuji apples in real  orchards, 
and presents  a novel study of the usefulness of RGB -D sensors and their radiometric capabilities for fruit detection. The 
Faster Region -based Convolutional Neural Network ( Faster R- CNN ) was adapted and implemented for apple detection 
using multi -modal images obtained with Microsoft’s Kinect v2  (Microsoft, Redmond, WA , USA) . The multi -modal images 
were obtained  after pre -processing and registering three different modalities: color  (RGB), depth (D) and range -corrected 
IR intensity -proportiona l to reflectance - (S).