(Gené -Mola et al., 2018)  that some fruits , like Fuji apples,  have higher reflectance than leaves and trunks, reporting an 85% 
detection success rate when using the reflectance capabilities of  a LiDAR  sensor .  
Another technology derived from previous  ones,  and also used in crop monitoring are the RGB -D or depth cameras 
(Rosell -Polo et al., 2017, 2015) . These sensors provide 3D information with color  data, allowing the detection and 
subsequent 3D localization  of the fruit . The operating principle can be based on  stereo triangulation  (Font et al., 2014; 
Wang et al., 2017)  or on a combination of an RGB and a depth sensor , either based on structured light  (Nguyen et al., 2016)  
or on ToF  (Barnea et al., 2016; Gongal et al., 2018) . Similarly to LiDAR sensors, RGB -D systems based on the ToF 
principle provide t he amount of light backscattered by the scene, which can be related to the reflectance after range 
correction and sensor calibration (Rodríguez -Gonzálvez et al., 2016) . This radiometric capability has been applied to face 
detection (Chhokra et al., 2018)  by using the backscattered IR intensity image (without range correction)  as an additional 
channel (RGB -DI). However , to the best of the authors ’ knowledge, no previous object detection work has used range -
corrected intensity data (proportional to reflectance). The use of this additional information would be of interest in fruit 
detection, since the reflectance of some fruit varieties is higher than background  reflectance (Gené -Mola et al., 2018) .  
Regarding t he processing techniques used for fruit detection, mos t previous works have used traditional hand -crafted 
features to encode the data acquired with different sensors and infer fruit location. More recently, the introduction of deep  
neural networks has led to remarkable progress in object recognition and, ther efore, in fruit detection . The object detection 
network F aster R -CNN (Ren et al., 2017)  is the most commonly used for fruit detection (Bargoti and Underwood, 2017a; 
Gan et al., 2018; Sa et al., 2016; Stein et al., 2016) . Although other state-of-the-art networks are computational ly more  
efficien t (Liu et al., 2016; Redmon and Farhadi, 2017) , real -time inference is not normally a requirement in fruit detection, 
so Faster R-CNN is of ten chosen due to its better performance  with small objects. The main drawback of using 
convolutional neural networks is that they require a  large amount of labelled data.  As  pointed out in previous studies  
(Hameed et al., 2018) , the lack of substantial datasets is a barrier for exploring emerging senso rs that could be useful for 
fruit detection . 
3. Materials and Methods  
3.1. Theoretical basis  
As previously introduced, the operation of the Kinect v2 sensor is based on the ToF principle. Thus, the received power 
coming from an object located at a distance R  is given by the elastic LiDAR equation (Höfle and Pfeifer, 2007; Rodríguez -
Gonzálvez et al., 2016) :