2cost
r sys atmPAPRrηη θπ= ,      (1) 
where tP is the emitted power, Ais the receiving area, ris the object reflectance, sysηis the optical efficiency of the 
instrument, atmη accounts for atmospheric absorption and scattering, and θis the incidence angle. The atmηis assumed to 
be equal to unit y due to the short working range of the Kinect sensor. The received power rP is range  corrected in order to 
compare returns coming from different distances : 
2cosrPR Krθ=  ,     (2) 
where 𝐾𝐾 is the system constant that groups the instrument parameters. Rodríguez -Gonzálvez et al. (2016) showed that there 
is a linear relationship between the digitized intensity E provided by the Kinect v2 and the received power : 
·r E aP b= +        (3) 
where ais the gain and bis the offset.  From Eq. (2) and Eq. (3) it is found that the range -corrected signal Sdepends on 
the reflectance r as follows,  
2cos S ER rθ= ∝       (4) 
where 2 2 22Rxyz=++ , with [, ,]xyz  the Cartesian coordinates of each point in the 3D cloud with respect to the sensor.  
3.2. KFuji RGB -DS dataset  
3.2.1.  Data acquisition  
Data were acquired in a commercial Fuji apple orchard ( Malus domestica Borkh. cv. Fuji) located in Agramunt,  
Catalonia, Spain . The images were taken  on September 25- 28th of 2017,  three weeks before harvesting, at BBCH  
(Biologische Bundesanstalt, Bundessortenamt und CHemische Industrie)  phenological growth stage 85 (Meier, 2001) .  
The data acquisition  equip ment  consisted of  two RGB -D cameras mounted on a mobile platform at heights of 1 m and 3  
m, respectively  (Fig. 1 ) in order to capture data from all  the tree height.  The RGB -D sensors used were tw o Microsoft 
Kinect v2, which incorporate an RGB camera and a depth sensor that works according to the ToF principle. This sensor 
provides 3 different types of data: a color  image , a depth image that can be us ed to generate  a 3D point cloud of the scene, 
and the  received IR  backscattered intensity.  Specific software written in C#  was developed to collect and save data 
automatically. The software generates a 3D point cloud for each capture, with  RGB and  backscat tered intensity data for 
each point, and save s it jointly with the raw RGB image.  All captures were carried out during the night, using artificial