used to evaluate the training  after each epoch  to check model  generalization and identify if it starts to overfit . The number 
of images used for training, vali dation and test were 619, 155 and 193,  respectively.  Fig. 7  shows the loss function  for 
training and validation sets using different image modalities. By comparing models where RGB p was used, it can be seen 
how when only using color  modality (plotted in cyan ) the model  starts to overfit earlier  than with the addition of  S and D 
channels (plotted in orange  and green) . Therefore, the use of S and D channels allow ed model  training during more 
iterations without  overfit ting. With respect to  training curves, the loss function archive d lower values when using only 
color  images . However , the opposite occurred  with validation losses, with the best validation loss achieved  by combining  
all modalities. This is a consequence of early overfitting of the RGB p model, and,  from that, it was concluded that  the S and 
D channels help ed model generalization,  with better results o btained o n the validation dataset  when  using 5- channel multi -
modal images . On the other hand, when comparing the performance of using RGB p or RGB hr images, training and 
validation loss functions show ed an important improvement when RGB hr images were  used. This improvement increased 
when adding S and D channels to RGB hr, although not in the same proportion as multi -modal  images with RGB p. This 
suggest s that if future RGB -D sensors had  depth sensors with higher resolution (similar to color  cameras ), detection 
performance could be improve d even  further .  
 
Fig. 7. Train ing and validation (val) losses depending on the number of training epochs . Loss function was  computed following Ren et 
al. (2017) . In cyan , the evolution of training and validation losses is plotted using RGB projected images (RGB p). Orange  data refer to 
projected images with range-corrected signal intensity (S) data, and green data when adding depth (D) information as well. Shown in 
blue are the results corresponding to use of high resolution RGB (RGB hr -registered row image-). Finally , results of multi-modal  data 
with RGB hr, range -corrected signal and depth images  are plotted in red . Vertical lines mark the epoch where each model starts to overfit, 
which is  the epoch in which test results are reported.