Comparing results from  single  modality  images (Table 4, rows 1 -3), color  images gave the best performance with an F1 -
score of 0. 829 and a n AP of 88.7 %, followed by the range -corrected intensity image with an F1 -score of 0. 806 and a n AP 
of 85.9%. Note that, although range -corrected intensity images have never been used for fruit detection, the  results  using 
this modality are  comparable with other state -of-the-art methods . The least valuable modality was  the Depth channel which 
was only able to detect highly exposed (non- occluded) apples , as can be seen in Fig. 10 . Better results were obtained when 
combining different modalities  (multi -modal images), achieving an F1 -score of 0. 866 and a n AP of 91. 2% when all 
channels were  used. The most important benefit of adding S and D was found in the Precision metric , which rose from 
0.808 (RGB p) to 0. 869 (RGB p+S+D) , although Recall and AP also improve d albeit in  smaller  percentages . This means that 
range -corrected intensity and depth images help to  reduce  false positive s. Real examples of th is effect  can be found in Fig. 
10, where,  when  comparing  results before and after using S and D channels, a reduction in false positives  is observed. 
Another advantage of using the S channel was found when detecting fruits in shadowed regions, where the RGB image 
presents a dark non -color ed region whereas the S channel shows high intensities. This occurs  in Fig. 10 b, where  an apple in 
a shadowed region was not detected  using RGB p, but was detected  using the S channel.  
 Finally, a s was expected, the best performance was achieved using multi -modal images with  RGB hr, S and D, reporting 
an F1 -score of 0.  898 and a AP of 9 4.8%. Regarding the computational efficiency of the neural network, the number of 
inferred images per second d id not present any relation with the number of channels  used. This is because the addition of 
channels only affects the number of operations o n the first layer, which  is insignificant with respect  to the whole network.  
Although it is difficult to compare methodologies tested with different datasets,  results shows similar performance to 
other fruit detection works based on neural networks, such as Bargoti and Underwood (2017), Gan et al. (2018) and Sa et 
al. (2016)  which reported F1- scores between 0.838 and 0.929 (using les s restrictive IoU thresholds than the present work) .  
However , the use of RGB -D sensors has the advantage that, although detecting fruits in 2D images, it is straightforward to 
infer the 3D location of each detection.   
The main limitation of the proposed m ethodology is that the working conditions are restricted to low illuminance levels. 
However, we expect that future sensors could solve this limitation. For instance, L iDAR -based sensors are already able to 
build 3D models with reflectance data in natural lighting conditions. In addition , convolutional neural networks have shown 
good performances with wide enough datasets that contain different illumination conditions  (Amara et al., 2017; Chen et 
al., 2017; Rahnemoonfar and Sheppard, 2017) . From that, we expect that if future RG B-D sensors would not be influenced 
by high illumination levels, the methodology proposed could be used in daylight.