Multi- modal Deep Learning for F uji Apple Detection Using RGB -D 
Cameras and t heir Radiometric Capabilities  
Jordi Gené -Molaa, Verónica Vilaplanab, Joan R. Rosell -Poloa, Josep- Ramon Morrosb, Javier Ruiz -
Hidalgob, Eduard Gregorioa,* 
aResearch Group in AgroICT & Precision Agriculture, Department of Agricultural and Forest Engineering, Universitat de Lleida ( UdL) – Agrotecnio 
Center, Lleida, Catalonia, Spain.   
bDepartment of Signal Theory and Communications, Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya, Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain.  
Abstract  
Fruit detection and localization will be essential for future agronomic management of fruit crops, with applications in yield prediction, 
yield mapping and automate d harvesting. RGB -D cameras are promising sensors for fruit detection given that they provide geometrical 
information with color  data. Some of the se sensor s work on the principle of time -of-flight (ToF) and , besides color  and depth, provide 
the backscatter  signal intensity . However,  this radiometric capability  has not been exploited for fruit detection applications . This work 
presents the KFuji RGB -DS database, composed of  967 multi -modal images containing a total of 12 ,839 Fuji apples. Compilation of the 
database allowed a study of the usefulness of fusing RGB -D and radiometric information  obtained with Kinect v2  for fruit detection. To 
do so,  the signal  intensity  was range corrected to overcome signal attenuation, obtaining an image that was proportional to the reflectance  
of the scene. A registration between  RGB, depth and intensity images was then carried out.  The Faster R -CNN model was  adapted for 
use with five-channel input images: color  (RGB), depth  (D) and range -corrected intensity signal  (S). Results  show an improvement  of 
4.46% in F1-score when adding depth and range -corrected intensity  channel s, obtaining an F1-score of  0.898 and an AP of  94.8% when 
all channels are used. From our experimental results, it can be concluded that the radiometric capabilities of ToF sensors give  valuable 
information for fruit detection .  
Keywords: RGB -D; Multi -modal  faster R -CNN ; Convolutional Neural Networks;  Fruit det ection; Agricultural robotics;  Fruit reflectance   
1. Introduction  
To meet the food needs of a world’s growing population, horticulture must  find new ways to increase the production of 
fruits and vegetables (Siegel et al., 2014) . This is a major challenge for agricultural communities , especially  in a context of 
rising farming costs and a shortage of skilled labor. E fficient and sustainable agronomic management is required to  reduce 
economic and environmental costs while increasing orchard productivity.  
 
* Corresponding author.   
E-mail address: egregorio@eagrof.udl.cat