5. Conclusions  
This work presents a novel methodology for fruit detection using RGB -D sensors,  taking advantage of their radiometric 
capabilities. Multi -modal image s were  built using data provided by  Microsoft’s  Kinect v2. To do so, a range correction of 
the backscattered intensity signal was carried out  to overc ome signal attenuation  (R-2 dependence) . Then, a registration 
between different channels  was performed , obtaining images with 3 modalities : color  (RGB ), depth  (D), and range -
corrected intensity (S) . The KFuji RGB -DS dataset  and the corresponding annotations  have been made publicly available, 
being the first dataset for fruit detection that contains RGB, depth and range -corrected intensity channels. The Faster R -
CNN object detection network was used to evaluate the usefulness of fusing all modalities . Result s show an improvement 
of 4.46%  in F1 -score when  all modalities  were used -from 0.829  (RGB p) to 0.866  (RGB p-D-S)-. This entails an advance in 
the field of fruit detection, since the results  are comparable to  other fruit detection methodologies retrieved from the state of 
the art , with the additional advantage that , by using RGB -D sensors, it is possible to infer the 3D position of each detection.  
The optimum anchor scales used in the region proposal network  were als o analyzed . It is concluded that,  for KFuji RGB -
DS dataset where fruits  are spherical and  small with respect to the image size, the optimum configuration were anchor 
scales of 4 and aspect ratios of 1:1 . The main limitation  of using RGB -D is that the performance of the depth sensor drops 
under direct sunlight.  Future work s will include 3D fruit localization  by projecting the 2D fruit detection on to the 3D world 
using the depth channel data  as well as collecting data of diffe rent fruit varieties and at different growth stages .  
Acknowledgements  
This work was partly funded by the Secretaria d’Universitats i Recerca del Departament d’Empresa i Coneixement de la 
Generalitat de Catalunya, the Spanish Ministry of Economy and Compet itiveness and the European Regional Development 
Fund (ERDF) under Grants 2017 SGR 646, AGL2013- 48297- C2-2-R and MALEGRA, TEC2016- 75976- R. The Spanish 
Ministry of Education is thanked for Mr. J. Gené’s pre- doctoral fellowships (FPU15/03355). We would also l ike to thank 
Nufri and Vicens Maquinària Agrícola S.A. for their support during data acquisition, and Adria Carbó for his assistance in 
Faster R -CNN implementation.   
REFERENCES  
Amara, J., Bouaziz, B., Algergawy, A., 2017. A Deep Learning -based Approach for Banana Leaf Diseases Classification. Btw 79 –88. 
Auat Cheein, F.A., Carelli, R., 2013. Agricultural robotics: Unmanned robotic service units in agricultural tasks. IEEE Ind. Electron. Mag. 7, 48 –58. 
doi:10.1109/ MIE.2013.2252957