Fig. 6. Anchors tested  compared with the image size. Five anchor scales were tested: 2 (magenta), 4 (cyan), 8 (green), 16 (blue) and 32 
(red). For each anchor, three d ifferent aspect ratios were used: 0.5, 1 and 2.  
To evaluate the performance, average precision ( AP), precision, recall and F1 -score metrics are reported  for the test 
dataset . Predictions were  considered as true positive if the  intersection over union  (IoU) between prediction and ground 
truth bounding boxes was greater than 0. 5. The network was implemented in PyTorch framework  (Paszke et al., 2017)  and 
has been made publicly  available at www.grap.udl.cat/en/publications/datasets.html.  
4. Results and discussion  
This section presents a qualitative and quantitative evaluation of the proposed fruit detection methodology, assessing the 
performance when using different image modalities provided by Kinect v2, and studying the optimal anchor scale 
configurations propose d in the RPN.  
To study the usefulness of different image modalities (RGB, S and D), different Faster R -CNN models were trained 
using each modality separately as well as combinations thereof . This study was carried out using projected color images  
RGB p since they have the same resolution as S and D images, to enable a comparison between modalities performed  under 
the same conditions. Nevertheless, results with 5 -channel multi -model images using RGB hr are also provided to assess the 
potential of the sensor for fruit detection.  
4.1. Training asse ssment  
The network was trained end -to-end using the loss function proposed in Ren et al.  (2017) , which is comprised of  the 
sum of a  classification loss and a bounding box regression loss.  Following Ren et al. (2017) , the training loss function 
considered  positive  detections  if IoU>0.7 and negative if IoU<0.3, while anchors that are neither positive nor negative do 
not contribute to the los s function. Adam optimizer with a learning rate of 0.0001 was used  to update network weights 
iteratively , performing a total of 309 training  (38 validation)  iterations per epoch with a batch size of 4 images . Data 
augmentation was performed  with left- right flipping to expand the variability of the training dataset.  A validation set was