3/28/24, 11:54 AM Protecting privacy in an AI-driven world | Brookings
https://www.brookings.edu/articles/protecting-privacy-in-an-ai-driven-world/ 4/11—via proxies, for automated decision-making that is against the interests of the
individual involved thus implicates privacy interests in controlling how information is
used.
“This charade of consent has made it obvious that notice-and-choice has
become meaningless. For many AI applications … it will become utterly
impossible.”
Second, protecting such privacy interests in the context of AI will require a change in
the paradigm of privacy regulation. Most existing privacy laws, as well as current
Federal Trade Commission enforcement against unfair and deceptive practices, are
rooted in a model of consumer choice based on “notice-and-choice” (also referred to
as “notice-and-consent”). Consumers encounter this approach in the barrage of
notifications and banners linked to lengthy and uninformative privacy policies and
terms and conditions that we ostensibly consent to but seldom read. This charade of
consent has made it obvious that notice-and-choice has become meaningless. For
many AI applications—smart traffic signals and other sensors needed to support self-
driving cars as one prominent example—it will become utterly impossible.
Although almost all bills on Capitol Hill still rely on the notice-and-choice model in
some degree, key congressional leaders as well as privacy stakeholders have
expressed desire to change this model by shifting the burden of protecting individual
privacy from consumers over to the businesses that collect data. In place of
consumer choice, their model focuses on business conduct by regulating companies’
processing of data–what they collect and how they can use it and share it. Addressing
data processing that results in any algorithmic discrimination can fit within this model.
A model focused on data collection and processing may affect AI and algorithmic
discrimination in several ways:9
Data stewardship requirements, such as duties of fairness or loyalty, could militate
against uses of personal information that are adverse or unfair to the individuals the
data relates to.
Data transparency or disclosure rules, as well as rights of individuals to access
information relating to them, could illuminate uses of algorithmic decision-making.