3/28/24, 11:54 AM Protecting privacy in an AI-driven world | Brookings
https://www.brookings.edu/articles/protecting-privacy-in-an-ai-driven-world/ 3/11Privacy issues in AI
The challenge for Congress is to pass privacy legislation that protects individuals
against any adverse effects from the use of personal information in AI, but without
unduly restricting AI development or ensnaring privacy legislation in complex social
and political thickets. The discussion of AI in the context of the privacy debate often
brings up the limitations and failures of AI systems, such as predictive policing that
could disproportionately affect minorities or Amazon’s failed experiment with a hiring
algorithm that replicated the company’s existing disproportionately male workforce.
These both raise significant issues, but privacy legislation is complicated enough even
without packing in all the social and political issues that can arise from uses of
information. To evaluate the effect of AI on privacy, it is necessary to distinguish
between data issues that are endemic to all AI, like the incidence of false positives and
negatives or overfitting to patterns, and those that are specific to use of personal
information.
The privacy legislative proposals that involve these issues do not address artificial
intelligence in name. Rather, they refer to “automated decisions” (borrowed from EU
data protection law) or “algorithmic decisions” (used in this discussion). This language
shifts people’s focus from the use of AI as such to the use of personal data in AI and to
the impact this use may have on individuals. This debate centers in particular on
algorithmic bias and the potential for algorithms to produce unlawful or undesired
discrimination in the decisions to which the algorithms relate. These are major
concerns for civil rights and consumer organizations that represent populations that
suffer undue discrimination.
Addressing algorithmic discrimination presents basic questions about the scope of
privacy legislation. First, to what extent can or should legislation address issues of
algorithmic bias? Discrimination is not self-evidently a privacy issue, since it presents
broad social issues that persist even without the collection and use of personal
information, and fall under the domain of various civil rights laws. Moreover, making
these laws available for debate could effectively open a Pandora’s Box because of the
charged political issues they touch on and the multiple congressional committees with
jurisdiction over various such issues. Even so, discrimination is based on personal
attributes such as skin color, sexual identity, and national origin. Use of personal
information about these attributes, either explicitly or—more likely and less obviously7
8