3/28/24, 11:54 AM Protecting privacy in an AI-driven world | Brookings
https://www.brookings.edu/articles/protecting-privacy-in-an-ai-driven-world/ 2/11information about every facet of our lives and puts privacy into the spotlight as a
global public policy issue.
Artificial intelligence likely will accelerate this trend. Much of the most privacy-
sensitive data analysis today–such as search algorithms, recommendation engines,
and adtech networks–are driven by machine learning and decisions by algorithms. As
artificial intelligence evolves, it magnifies the ability to use personal information in
ways that can intrude on privacy interests by raising analysis of personal information
to new levels of power and speed.
“As artificial intelligence evolves, it magnifies the ability to use personal
information in ways that can intrude on privacy interests by raising analysis
of personal information to new levels of power and speed.”
Facial recognition systems offer a preview of the privacy issues that emerge. With the
benefit of rich databases of digital photographs available via social media, websites,
driver’s license registries, surveillance cameras, and many other sources, machine
recognition of faces has progressed rapidly from fuzzy images of cats to rapid
(though still imperfect) recognition of individual humans. Facial recognition systems
are being deployed in cities and airports around America. However, China’s use of
facial recognition as a tool of authoritarian control in Xinjiang and elsewhere has
awakened opposition to this expansion and calls for a ban on the use of facial
recognition. Owing to concerns over facial recognition, the cities of Oakland, Berkeley,
and San Francisco in California, as well as Brookline, Cambridge, Northampton, and
Somerville in Massachusetts, have adopted bans on the technology. California, New
Hampshire, and Oregon all have enacted legislation banning use of facial recognition
with police body cameras.
This policy brief explores the intersection between AI and the current privacy debate.
As Congress considers comprehensive privacy legislation to fill growing gaps in the
current checkerboard of federal and state privacy, it will need to consider if or how to
address use personal information in artificial intelligence systems. In this brief, I
discuss some potential concerns regarding artificial intelligence and privacy, including
discrimination, ethical use, and human control, as well as the policy options under
discussion.3
4
5
6