3/28/24, 11:54 AM Protecting privacy in an AI-driven world | Brookings
https://www.brookings.edu/articles/protecting-privacy-in-an-ai-driven-world/ 8/11Because of the difficulties of foreseeing machine learning outcomes as well as
reverse-engineering algorithmic decisions, no single measure can be completely
effective in avoiding perverse effects. Thus, where algorithmic decisions are
consequential, it makes sense to combine measures to work together. Advance
measures such as transparency and risk assessment, combined with the retrospective
checks of audits and human review of decisions, could help identify and address
unfair results. A combination of these measures can complement each other and add
up to more than the sum of the parts. Risk assessments, transparency, explainability,
and audits also would strengthen existing remedies for actionable discrimination by
providing documentary evidence that could be used in litigation. Not all algorithmic
decision-making is consequential, however, so these requirements should vary
according to the objective risk.
Looking ahead
The window for this Congress to pass comprehensive privacy legislation is narrowing.
While the Commerce Committee in each house of Congress has been working on a
bipartisan basis throughout 2019 and have put out discussion drafts, they have yet to
reach agreement on a bill. Meanwhile, the California Consumer Privacy Act went into
effect on Jan. 1, 2020, impeachment and war powers have crowded out other
issues, and the presidential election is going into full swing.
“The window for this Congress to pass comprehensive privacy legislation is
narrowing.”
In whatever window remains to pass privacy legislation before the 2020 election, the
treatment of algorithmic decision-making is a substantively and politically challenging
issue that will need a workable resolution. For a number of civil rights, consumer, and
other civil society groups, establishing protections against discriminatory algorithmic
decision-making is an essential part of legislation. In turn, it will be important to
Democrats in Congress. At a minimum, some affirmation that algorithmic
discrimination based on personal information is subject to existing civil rights and
nondiscrimination laws, as well as some additional accountability measures, will be
essential to the passage of privacy legislation.21