feature is sequentially merged with the output of LSTM-
based [ 8] language model at each step to infer a multimodal
representation. However, the multimodal interaction only
considers the linguistic and visual information individually
within their local contexts. It may not sufﬁciently capture
global interaction information essential for semantic under-
standing and segmentation.
In this paper, we address the limitations of aforemen-
tioned methods. We propose a cross-modal self-attention
(CMSA) module to effectively learn long-range dependen-
cies from multimodal features that represent both visual and
linguistic information. Our model can adaptively focus on
important regions in the image and informative keywords in
the language description. Figure 1shows an example that
illustrates the cross-modal self-attention module, where the
correlations among words in the language and regions in the
image are presented. In addition, we propose a gated multi-
level fusion module to further reﬁne the segmentation mask
of the referred entity. The gated fusion module is designed
to selectively leverage multi-level self-attentive features.
In summary, this paper makes the following contribu-
tions: (1) A cross-modal self-attention method for refer-
ring image segmentation. Our model effectively captures
the long-range dependencies between linguistic and visual
contexts. As a result, it produces a robust multimodal
feature representation for the task. (2) A gated multi-
level fusion module to selectively integrate multi-level self-
attentive features which effectively capture ﬁne details for
precise segmentation masks. (3) An extensive empirical
study on four benchmark datasets demonstrates that our
proposed method achieves superior performance compared
with state-of-the-art methods.
2. Related Work
In this section, we review several lines of research related
to our work in the following ﬁelds.
Semantic segmentation : Semantic segmentation has
achieved great advances in recent years. Fully convolu-
tional networks (FCN) [ 18] take advantage of fully convolu-
tional layers to train a segmentation model in an end-to-end
way by replacing fully connected layers in CNN with con-
volutional layers. In order to alleviate the down-sampling
issue and enlarge the semantic context, DeepLab [ 3] adopts
dilated convolution to enlarge the receptive ﬁeld and uses
atrous spatial pyramid pooling for multi-scale segmenta-
tion. An improved pyramid pooling module [ 30] further en-
hances the use of multi-scale structure. Lower level features
are explored to bring more detailed information to comple-
ment high-level features for generating more accurate seg-
mentation masks [ 1,18,21].
Referring image localization and segmentation : In re-
ferring image localization, the goal is to localize speciﬁc
objects in an image according to the description of a refer-ring expression. It has been explored in natural language
object retrieval [ 11] and modelling relationship [ 9,28]. In
order to obtain a more precise result, referring image seg-
mentation is proposed to produce a segmentation mask in-
stead of a bounding box. This problem was ﬁrst intro-
duced in [ 10], where CNN and LSTM are used to extract
visual and linguistic features, respectively. They are then
concatenated together for spatial mask prediction. To bet-
ter achieve word-to-image interaction, [ 17] directly com-
bines visual features with each word feature from a lan-
guage LSTM to recurrently reﬁne segmentation results. Dy-
namic ﬁlter [ 20] for each word further enhances this inter-
action. In [ 22], word attention is incorporated in the image
regions to model key-word-aware context. Low-level visual
features are also exploited for this task in [ 15], where Con-
volutional LSTM (ConvLSTM) [ 25] progressively reﬁnes
segmentation masks from high-level to low-level features
sequentially. In this paper, we propose to adaptively inte-
grate multi-level self-attentive features by the gated fusion
module.
Attention : Attention mechanism has been shown to be a
powerful technique in deep learning models and has been
widely used in various tasks in natural language process-
ing [ 2,23] to capture keywords for context. In the mul-
timodal tasks, word attention has been used to re-weight
the importance of image regions for image caption genera-
tion [ 26], image question answering [ 27] and referring im-
age segmentation [ 22]. In addition, attention is also used
for modeling subject, relationship and object [ 9] and for re-
ferring relationship comprehension [ 28]. The diverse atten-
tions of query, image and objects are calculated separately
and then accumulated circularly for visual grounding in [ 5].
Self-attention [ 23] is proposed to attend a word to all
other words for learning relations in the input sequence. It
signiﬁcantly improves the performance for machine trans-
lation. This technique is also introduced in videos to cap-
ture long-term dependencies across temporal frames [ 24].
Different from these works, we propose a cross-modal self-
attention module to bridge attentions across language and
vision.
3. Our Model
The overall architecture of our model is shown in Fig. 2.
Given an image and a referring expression as the query, we
ﬁrst use a CNN to extract visual feature maps at different
levels from the input image. Each word in the referring
expression is represented as a vector of word embedding.
Every word vector is then appended to the visual feature
map to produce a multimodal feature map. Thus, there is a
multimodal feature map for each word in the referring ex-
pression. We then introduce self-attention [ 23] mechanism
to combine the feature maps of different words into a cross-
modal self-attentive feature map. The self-attentive feature
10503