“chair” “couch” “partial chair in front” “bottom left portion
of couch on left”
“woman” “umbrella” “red” “a woman in
a green coat”
“pot” “pot on left” “two pot on the right” “the pot on the far left”
Figure 5. (Best viewed in color) Visualization of spatial feature representation. These spatial heatmaps show the responses of the network
to different query expressions.
Query: “boy on right”
Query: “ legs on left”
Query: “car next to cab”
Query: “right bike”
(a) (b) (c)
Figure 6. Some failure examples of our model: (a) original image;
(c) segmentation result; (c) ground truth. The failures are due to
factors such as language ambiguity (1st and 2nd rows), similar
object appearance (3rd row) and occlusion (4th row).cases in Fig. 6. These failures are caused by the ambiguity
of the language (e.g. two boys on right in the 1st example
and the feet in the 2nd example), similar object appearance
(e.g. car vs cab in the 3rd example), and occlusion (the
wheel of the motorbike in the 4th example). Some of these
failure cases can potentially be ﬁxed by applying object de-
tectors.
5. Conclusion
We have proposed cross-modal self-attention and gated
multi-level fusion modules to address two crucial chal-
lenges in the referring image segmentation task. Our cross-
modal self-attention module captures long-range dependen-
cies between visual and linguistic modalities, which results
in a better feature representation to focus on important in-
formation for referred entities. In addition, the proposed
gated multi-level fusion module adaptively integrates fea-
tures from different levels via learnable gates for each in-
dividual level. The proposed network achieves state-of-the-
art results on all four benchmark datasets.
Acknowledgements : LY , MR and YW are supported by
NSERC. ZL is supported by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China under Grant No. 61771301. LY and
MR are also supported by the GETS and UMGF programs
at the University of Manitoba. Thanks to NVIDIA for do-
nating some of the GPUs used in this work.
10509