Cross-Modal Self-Attention Network for Referring Image Segmentation
Linwei Ye†Mrigank Rochan†Zhi Liu‡∗Yang Wang†∗
†University of Manitoba, Canada‡Shanghai University, China
{yel3, mrochan, ywang }@cs.umanitoba.ca liuzhi@staff.shu.edu.cn
Abstract
We consider the problem of referring image segmenta-
tion. Given an input image and a natural language ex-
pression, the goal is to segment the object referred by the
language expression in the image. Existing works in this
area treat the language expression and the input image sep-
arately in their representations. They do not sufﬁciently
capture long-range correlations between these two modali-
ties. In this paper, we propose a cross-modal self-attention
(CMSA) module that effectively captures the long-range
dependencies between linguistic and visual features. Our
model can adaptively focus on informative words in the re-
ferring expression and important regions in the input image.
In addition, we propose a gated multi-level fusion module
to selectively integrate self-attentive cross-modal features
corresponding to different levels in the image. This mod-
ule controls the information ﬂow of features at different lev-
els. We validate the proposed approach on four evaluation
datasets. Our proposed approach consistently outperforms
existing state-of-the-art methods.
1. Introduction
Referring image segmentation is a challenging problem
at the intersection of computer vision and natural language
processing. Given an image and a natural language expres-
sion, the goal is to produce a segmentation mask in the im-
age corresponding to entities referred by the the natural lan-
guage expression (see Fig. 4for some examples). It is worth
noting that the referring expression is not limited to specify-
ing object categories (e.g. “person”, “cat”). It can take any
free form language description which may contain appear-
ance attributes (e.g. “red”, “long”), actions (e.g. “standing”,
“hold”) and relative relationships (e.g. “left”, “above”), etc.
Referring image segmentation can potentially be used in a
wide range of applications, such as interactive photo editing
and human-robot interaction.
A popular approach (e.g. [ 10,15,22]) in this area is to
∗Zhi Liu and Yang Wang are the corresponding authors
Figure 1. (Best viewed in color) Illustration of our cross-modal
self-attention mechanism. It is composed of three joint operations:
self-attention over language (shown in red), self-attention over im-
age representation (shown in green), and cross-modal attention be-
tween language and image (shown in blue). The visualizations of
linguistic and spatial feature representations (in bottom row) show
that the proposed model can focus on speciﬁc key words in the
language and spatial regions in the image that are necessary to
produce precise referring segmentation masks.
use convolutional neural network (CNN) and recurrent neu-
ral network (RNN) to separately represent the image and
the referring expression. The resultant image and language
representations are then concatenated to produce the ﬁnal
pixel-wise segmentation result. The limitation of this ap-
proach is that the language encoding module may ignore
some ﬁne details of some individual words that are impor-
tant to produce an accurate segmentation mask.
Some previous works (e.g. [ 17,20]) focus on learning
multimodal interaction in a sequential manner. The visual
10502