Res3
Res4
Res5
Word 
EmbeddingSpatial 
coordinateconcatDeepLab
concat
concat
CMSA⊕
CMSA
CMSA⊕
Conv ⊕Gate
Gate
Gate
man in yellow shirt
⊕Multimodal Features Gated Multi -Level Fusion Cross -Modal Self -Attention
Figure 2. An overview of our approach. The proposed model consists of three components including multimodal features, cross-modal
self-attention (CMSA) and a gated multi-level fusion. Multimodal features are constructed from the image feature, the spatial coordinate
feature and the language feature for each word. Then the multimodual feature at each level is fed to a cross-modal self-attention module
to build long-range dependencies across individual words and spatial regions. Finally, the gated multi-level fusion module combines the
features from different levels to produce the ﬁnal segmentation mask.
map captures rich information and long-range dependencies
of both linguistic and visual information of the inputs. In the
end, the self-attentive features from multiple levels are com-
bined via a gating mechanism to produce the ﬁnal features
used for generating the segmentation output.
Our model is motivated by several observations. First
of all, in order to solve referring image segmentation,
we typically require detailed information of certain indi-
vidual words (e.g. words like “left”, “right”). Previous
works (e.g. [ 10,15,22]) take word vectors as inputs and use
LSTM to produce a vector representation of the entire refer-
ring expression. The vector representation of the entire re-
ferring expression is then combined with the visual features
for referring image segmentation. The potential limitation
of this technique is that the vector representation produced
by LSTM captures the meaning of the entire referring ex-
pression while missing sufﬁciently detailed information of
some individual words needed for the referring image seg-
mentation task. Our model addresses this issue and does not
use LSTM to encode the entire referring expression. There-
fore, it can better capture more detailed word-level informa-
tion. Secondly, some previous works (e.g. [ 17,20]) process
each word in the referring expression and concatenate it
with visual features to infer the referred object in a sequen-
tial order using a recurrent network. The limitation is that
these methods only look at local spatial regions and lack the
interaction over long-range spatial regions in global con-
text which is essential for semantic understanding and seg-
mentation. In contrast, our model uses a cross-modal self-
attention module that can effectively model long-range de-
pendencies between linguistic and visual modalities. Lastly,
different from [ 15] which adopts ConvLSTM to reﬁne seg-
mentation with multi-scale visual features sequentially, the
proposed method employs a novel gated fusion module for
combining multi-level self-attentive features.3.1. Multimodal Features
The input to our model consists of an image Iand a refer-
ring expression with Nwordswn,n21,2,...,N . We ﬁrst
use a backbone CNN network to extract visual features from
the input image. The feature map extracted from a speciﬁc
CNN layer is represented as V2RH⇥W⇥Cv, whereH,
WandCvare the dimensions of height, width and feature
channel, respectively. For ease of presentation, we only use
features extracted from one particular CNN layer for now.
Later in Sec. 3.3, we present an extension of our method
that uses features from multiple CNN layers.
For the language description with Nwords, we encode
each word wnas a one-hot vector, and project it into a com-
pact word embedding represented as en2RClby a lookup
table. Different from previous methods [ 10,15,22] that
apply LSTM to process the word vectors sequentially and
encode the entire language description as a sentence vector,
we keep the individual word vectors and introduce a cross-
modal self-attention module to capture long-range correla-
tions between these words and spatial regions in the image.
More details will be presented in Sec. 3.2.
In addition to visual features and word vectors, spatial
coordinate features have also been shown to be useful for
referring image segmentation [ 10,15,17]. Following prior
works, we deﬁne an 8-D spatial coordinate feature at each
spatial position using the implementation in [ 17]. The ﬁrst
3-dimensions of the feature map encode the normalized hor-
izontal positions. The next 3-dimensions encode normal-
ized vertical positions. The last 2-dimensions encode the
normalized width and height information of the image.
Finally, we construct a joint multimodal feature repre-
sentation at each spatial position for each word by concate-
nating the visual features, word vectors, and spatial coordi-
nate features. Let pbe a spatial location in the feature map
V, i.e.p2{1,2,...,H⇥W}. We usevp2RCvto denote
10504