RobBERT: a Dutch RoBERTa-based Language Model
Pieter Delobelle1andThomas Winters1andBettina Berendt1;2
1Department of Computer Science, KU Leuven
2Faculty of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, TU Berlin
firstname.lastname@kuleuven.be
Abstract
Pre-trained language models have been dom-
inating the ﬁeld of natural language process-
ing in recent years, and have led to signiﬁcant
performance gains for various complex natu-
ral language tasks. One of the most prominent
pre-trained language models is BERT, which
was released as an English as well as a multi-
lingual version. Although multilingual BERT
performs well on many tasks, recent studies
show that BERT models trained on a single
language signiﬁcantly outperform the multi-
lingual version. Training a Dutch BERT model
thus has a lot of potential for a wide range of
Dutch NLP tasks. While previous approaches
have used earlier implementations of BERT
to train a Dutch version of BERT, we used
RoBERTa, a robustly optimized BERT ap-
proach, to train a Dutch language model called
RobBERT. We measured its performance on
various tasks as well as the importance of the
ﬁne-tuning dataset size. We also evaluated
the importance of language-speciﬁc tokenizers
and the model’s fairness. We found that Rob-
BERT improves state-of-the-art results for var-
ious tasks, and especially signiﬁcantly outper-
forms other models when dealing with smaller
datasets. These results indicate that it is a
powerful pre-trained model for a large vari-
ety of Dutch language tasks. The pre-trained
and ﬁne-tuned models are publicly available to
support further downstream Dutch NLP appli-
cations.
1 Introduction
The advent of neural networks in natural lan-
guage processing (NLP) has signiﬁcantly im-
proved state-of-the-art results within the ﬁeld. Ini-
tially, recurrent neural networks and long short-
term memory networks dominated the ﬁeld. Later,
the transformer model caused a revolution in NLP
by dropping the recurrent part and only keeping
attention mechanisms (Vaswani et al., 2017). Thetransformer model led to other popular language
models, e.g. GPT-2 (Radford et al., 2018, 2019).
BERT (Devlin et al., 2019) improved over previ-
ous models and recurrent networks by allowing
the system to learn from input text in a bidirec-
tional way, rather than only from left-to-right or
the other way around. This model was later re-
implemented, critically evaluated and improved in
the RoBERTa model (Liu et al., 2019).
These large-scale attention-based models pro-
vide the advantage of being able to solve NLP
tasks by having a common, expensive pre-training
phase, followed by a smaller ﬁne-tuning phase.
The pre-training happens in an unsupervised way
by providing large corpora of text in the desired
language. The second phase only needs a rela-
tively small annotated dataset for ﬁne-tuning to
outperform previous popular approaches in one of
a large number of possible language tasks.
While language models are usually trained on
English data, some multilingual models also ex-
ist. These are usually trained on a large quan-
tity of text in different languages. For example,
Multilingual-BERT is trained on a collection of
corpora in 104 different languages (Devlin et al.,
2019), and generalizes language components well
across languages (Pires et al., 2019). However,
models trained on data from one speciﬁc language
usually improve the performance of multilingual
models for this particular language (Martin et al.,
2019; de Vries et al., 2019). Training a RoBERTa
model (Liu et al., 2019) on a Dutch dataset thus
also potentially increases performances for many
downstream Dutch NLP tasks. In this paper, we
introduce RobBERT1, a Dutch RoBERTa-based
pre-trained language model, and critically evaluate
its performance on various language tasks against
1The model named itself RobBERT when it was
prompted with “Ik heet <mask>BERT. ” (“My name is
<mask>BERT. ” ), which we found quite a suitable name.arXiv:2001.06286v2  [cs.CL]  16 Sep 2020