waardlandmetersportmanactrice
zakenmanhuisvrouw
boxer
ﬁlantroop
editorbaronmilitairnon
non
kennisballerina
socialitebutlerschoolhoofd<mask> gaat naar een <T>. <mask> werkt als een <T>.
⇠ She ("Zij")     |    He ("Hij") ⇢  ⇡ She ("Zij") ranked higher
⇣ He ("Hij") ranked higher⇠ She ("Zij")     |    He ("Hij") ⇢  ⇠ She ("Zij")     |    He ("Hij") ⇢  Ranking difference−40−30−20−100
Associated gender−1,0 −0,5 0 0,5 1,0
Associated gender−1,0 −0,5 0 0,5 1,0
Associated gender−1,0 −0,5 0 0,5 1,0<mask> is een <T>.Figure 2: Ranking difference between gendered pro-
nouns for various professions. Three templates were
used to evaluate, were <T>is replaced by a profes-
sion. In the leftmost template, the pronoun and profes-
sion refer to different entities.
occupations and (ii) unequal predictive power for
texts written by men and women. These exempliﬁ-
cations highlight how language models risk affect-
ing the experience of the end user, or replicating
and reinforcing stereotypes.
5.1 Gender Stereotyping
To assess how gender stereotypes of professions
are present, we performed a template-based asso-
ciation test similar to Kurita et al. (2019) and the
semantically unbleached templates of May et al.
(2019). We used RobBERT’s LM head—trained
during pre-training with the MLM task—to ﬁll in
the<mask>slot for each template, in the same
manner as the zero-shot task described in Sub-
section 4.2. These templates have a second slot,
which is used to iterate over the professions.
For this list of professions and the gender pro-
jection on the he-she axis, we base us on the work
by Bolukbasi et al. (2016), who crowdsourced the
associated gender for various professions. Ideally,
we would use a similarly crowdsourced Dutch
dataset. However, since this does not yet exist,
we opted for manually translating these English
professions using the guidelines established by
the European Parliament for gender neutral pro-
fessions (Dimitrios Papadimoulis, 2018), meaning
that we opted for the inclusive form for neutral
professions in English that do not have a neutral
counterpart, but an inclusive binary male variant
and a female variant with explicit gender (e.g. for
lawyer: using “advocaat” and not “advocate” ).
In the rare case that an inclusive or neutral form
translated to an exclusive binary form, we ex-
cluded this profession.
We evaluated three templates on RobBERT, in-
cluding one control template without co-referententities (“<mask>goes to a<T>”) (Figure 2).
For the control template, there should be no and
indeed is no correlation between ranking differ-
ence for both pronouns and the associated gen-
der of a profession. Interestingly, none of the in-
stances has a positive ranking difference, meaning
the language model always ranks the male pro-
noun as more likely.
When the profession and <mask>slot refer to
the same entity, the general assessment of the lan-
guage model correlates with the associated gender.
But again, RobBERT estimates that the male pro-
noun is more likely in almost all cases, even when
these professions have a gendered sufﬁx. Curi-
ously, actress (“ actrice ”) is the only word where
this is not the case. Since RobBERT estimates the
male pronoun to be more likely even in the control
template, we suspect that the effect is due to more
coverage of men in the training corpus.
5.2 Unequal Predictive Performance
Unfairness is particularly problematic if it leads
to unequal predictive performance. This prob-
lem has been demonstrated for decision support
systems, including recidivism prediction (Angwin
et al., 2016) and public employment services (All-
hutter et al., 2020). Such predictions can be down-
stream tasks of language understanding; for exam-
ple when job resums are processed (Van Hautte
et al., 2020).
To review fairness in downstream tasks, we
evaluated the sentiment analysis task on DBRD, a
dataset with scraped book reviews. Although this
task in itself may have low impact for end users, it
still serves as an illustrative example of how ﬁne-
tuned models can behave unfairly.
To investigate whether such bias might result
for our ﬁne-tuned model, we analyzed its out-
come for different values of a sensitive attribute
(in this case gender), as is commonly done in
fair machine learning research (Zemel et al., 2013;
Hardt et al., 2016; Delobelle et al., 2020). To this
end, we augmented the held-out test set of DBRD
with gender as a sensitive attribute for each re-
view3. Values were obtained from the reviews’
author proﬁles with a self-reported binary gender
(‘man’ or‘vrouw’ ) (64%). The remaining 36%
of reviews did not report author gender, and they
were discarded for this evaluation. Of the remain-
3We make this augmentation of DBRD available under
CC-by-NC-SA at https://people.cs.kuleuven.b
e/˜pieter.delobelle/data.html .