other Dutch languages models. We also pro-
pose several new tasks for testing the model’s ze-
roshot ability, evaluate its performance on smaller
datasets, and for measuring the importance of a
language-speciﬁc tokenizer. Finally, we provide
an extensive fairness evaluation using recent tech-
niques and a new translated dataset.
2 Related Work
Transformer models have been successfully used
for a wide range of language tasks. Initially, trans-
formers were introduced for use in machine trans-
lation, where they efﬁciently improved the state-
of-the-art (Vaswani et al., 2017). This cornerstone
was used in BERT, a transformer model obtain-
ing state-of-the-art results for eleven natural lan-
guage processing tasks, such as question answer-
ing and natural language inference (Devlin et al.,
2019). BERT is pre-trained with large corpora of
text using two unsupervised tasks. The ﬁrst task is
called masked language modeling (MLM), mak-
ing the model guess which word is masked in cer-
tain position in the text. The second task is next
sentence prediction, in which the model has to pre-
dict if two sentences occur subsequent in the cor-
pus, or randomly sampled from the corpus. These
tasks allow the model to create internal represen-
tations about a language, which could thereafter
be reused for different language tasks. This archi-
tecture has been shown to be a general language
model that could be ﬁne-tuned with little data in
a relatively efﬁcient way for a very distinct range
of tasks and still outperform previous architectures
(Devlin et al., 2019).
Transformer models are also capable of gen-
erating contextualized word embeddings (Peters
et al., 2018). Traditional word embeddings, e.g.
word2vec (Mikolov et al., 2013) and GloVe (Pen-
nington et al., 2014), lack the capibility of differ-
entiating words based on context (e.g. “a stick”
versus “let’s stick to” ). Transformer models, like
BERT, on the other hand automatically incorpo-
rate the context a word occurs into its embedding.
The attention mechanism in transformer en-
coder models also allows for better resolution of
coreferences between words (Joshi et al., 2019a).
For example, in the sentence “The trophy doesnt ﬁt
in the suitcase because its too big. ” , the word “it”
would refer to the the suitcase instead of the trophy
if the last word was changed to “small” (Levesque
et al., 2012). Being able to resolve these corefer-ences is for example important for translation, as
dependent words might change form, e.g. due to
word gender.
While BERT has been shown to be a power-
ful language model, it also received scrutiny on
its training and pre-processing. The authors of
RoBERTa (Liu et al., 2019) showed that while
the NSP pre-training task made the model perform
better, it was not due to its intended reason, as it
might merely predict relatedness between corpus
sentences rather than subsequent sentences. That
Devlin et al. (2019) trained a better model when
using NSP than without NSP is likely due to the
model learning long-range dependencies that were
longer than when just using single sentences. As
such, the RoBERTa model uses only the MLM
task, and uses multiple full sentences in every in-
put. Other researchers later improved the NSP
task by instead making the model predict for two
subsequent sentences if they occur in the given or
ﬂipped order in the corpus (Lan et al., 2019).
Devlin et al. (2019) also presented a multi-
lingual model (mBERT) with the same archi-
tecture as BERT, but trained on Wikipedia cor-
pora in 104 languages. Unfortunately, the qual-
ity of these multilingual embeddings is consid-
ered worse than their monolingual counterparts,
as R ¨onnqvist et al. (2019) illustrated for German
and English models in a generative setting. The
monolingual French CamemBERT model (Mar-
tin et al., 2019) also outperformed mBERT on all
tasks. Brandsen et al. (2019) also outperformed
mBERT on several Dutch tasks using their Dutch
BERT-based language model, called BERT-NL,
trained on the small SoNaR corpus (Oostdijk et al.,
2013a). More recently, de Vries et al. (2019)
also showed similar results for Dutch using their
BERTje model, outperforming multilingual BERT
in a wide range of tasks, such as sentiment analy-
sis and part-of-speech tagging by pre-training on
multiple corpora. Since both these works are con-
current with ours, we compare our results with
BERTje and BERT-NL in this paper.
3 Pre-training RobBERT
We pre-trained RobBERT using the RoBERTa
training regime. We trained two different versions,
one where only the pre-training corpus was re-
placed with a Dutch corpus (RobBERT v1) and one
where both the corpus and the tokenizer were re-
placed with Dutch versions (RobBERT v2) . These