Page 3 of 16
 Shi et al. J Wireless Com Network         (2021) 2021:31 
 
to identify the correct cluster number in the dataset [19]. The Elbow method [13] is 
the oldest method to distinguish the potential optimal cluster number for the analyzed 
dataset, whose basic idea is to specify K = 2 as the initial optimal cluster number K, and 
then keeps increasing K by step 1 to the maximal specified for the estimated potential 
optimal cluster number, and finally distinguish the potential optimal cluster number K 
corresponding to the plateau. The optimal cluster number K is distinguished by the fact 
that before reaching K, the cost rapidly decreases to the called cost peak value, and after 
exceeding K, it continues to increase with the called cost peak value almost unchanged, 
as shown in Fig.  1a with an explicit elbow point. Meanwhile, the optimal cluster number 
corresponding to the elbow point depends on the manmade selection. There is, however, 
a problem with the Elbow method in that the elbow point cannot be unambiguously dis -
tinguished by the experienced analysts when the plotted curve is fairly smooth, as shown 
in Fig. 1b, with an ambiguous elbow point.
The Silhouette method [20, 21] is another well-known method with decent perfor -
mance to estimate the potential optimal cluster number, which uses the average distance 
between one data point and others in the same cluster and the average distance among 
different clusters to score the clustering result. The metric of scoring of this method is 
named the silhouette coefficient (S), and S is defined as (b−a)
max (a,b) , where a and b represent 
the mean intra-cluster distance and the mean nearest-cluster distance, respectively. The 
interval of the S values was −1≤S≤1 . A value of S closer to 1 indicates that a sample is 
better clustered, and if it is closer to − 1, the sample should be categorized into another 
cluster. This method is preferable for estimating the potential optimal cluster number. 
Meanwhile, the silhouette index can evaluate the best number of clusters in most cases 
for many distinct scenarios [22].
Meanwhile, the gap statistic methods can be used to identify the optimal cluster 
number in the analyzed dataset. The gap statistic method [23, 24] obtains the potential 
optimal cluster number through the following steps: It obtains the output of K-means, 
compares the change in intra-cluster dispersion, and obtains the appropriate cluster 
number. Hierarchical agglomerative clustering (HAC [25]) usually performs the K-means 
N times, obtains the dendrogram, and obtains the potential optimal cluster number [26]. 
b a
Fig. 1 a A visual curve with an explicit elbow point. b A visual curve being fairly smooth with an ambiguous 
elbow point