Page 2 of 16 Shi et al. J Wireless Com Network         (2021) 2021:31 
specify the cluster number as the input parameter in advance of training. Hierarchical 
clustering (e.g., BIRCH [5], CURE [6], and ROCK [7]) and clustering algorithms based 
on fuzzy theory (e.g., FCM [8], FCS [9], and MM [10]) also have disadvantages in the 
number of clusters that need to be preset.
In addition, estimating the potential optimal cluster number for the analyzed data -
set is a fundamental issue in clustering algorithms. With little prior information on the 
properties of a dataset, there are still a few methods to evaluate the potential optimal 
cluster number. As the oldest visual method for estimating the potential optimal clus -
ter number for the analyzed dataset, the Elbow method [11, 12] usually needs to per -
form the K-means on the same dataset with a contiguous cluster number range: [1, L] 
(L is an integer greater than 1). Then, compute the sum of squared errors (SSE) for each 
user-specified cluster number k, plotting a curve of the SSE against each cluster number 
k. Finally, the experienced analysts estimate the optimum elbow point by analyzing the 
above-mentioned curve, that is, the optimum elbow point corresponds to the estimated 
potential optimal cluster number with high probability. However, when the relationship 
curve of the SSE against each value of k is a fairly smooth curve, the experienced analysts 
cannot clearly identify the ‘elbow’ from the plotted curve. That is, the Elbow method 
does not always work well to determine the optimal cluster number [13]. The cluster 
number obtained by using the Elbow method is a subjective result because it is a visual 
method [14], and does not provide a measurement metric to show which elbow point is 
explicitly the optimum. To overcome these shortcomings of the Elbow method, a quan -
titative discriminant method is proposed to work out a straightforward value as the esti -
mated potential optimal cluster number for the analyzed dataset. Our newly proposed 
method is based on the Elbow method [15], K-means++ [16], MinMaxScaler [17] for 
normalization, and cosine of interaction angle of elbow as criteria.
In the rest of the sections, a brief overview of the related work and our proposed 
method are introduced in Sect.  2. In Sect.  3, the simulated datasets and a common 
benchmark dataset are used to test and verify the validity of our newly proposed 
method. Finally, the conclusions are provided in Sect. 4.
2  Methods
2.1  Related work
A major challenge is how to obtain the optimal cluster number in cluster analysis. The 
potential optimal cluster number needs to be provided in advance for the partitioning 
clustering algorithms, which is an important input parameter. In some cases, there is 
sufficient priori information about the dataset, so that the potential appropriate cluster 
number can be intuitively assigned to these partitioning clustering algorithms. However, 
in general, there is not enough priori information to determine an appropriate cluster 
number that can be specified in advance for the value of an important input parameter 
of these partitioning clustering algorithms. Therefore, it is necessary to estimate a poten -
tial optimal cluster number for the dataset to be analyzed. In the case of an unknown 
number of clusters, the first step is usually to specify a potential estimated range for the 
optimal cluster number in almost all methods to distinguish the optimal cluster number.
Many methods have been used to determine the cluster number of the analyzed data -
set [ 18]. The Elbow and Silhouette methods are the two state-of-the-art methods used