Page 14 of 16 Shi et al. J Wireless Com Network         (2021) 2021:31 
correct cluster number, as shown in Fig.  3. In addition, for the dataset with mixed 
uniform distribution and multivariate normal distribution, the proposed method 
yields the same optimal cluster number. However, Silhouette method does not give 
the correct cluster number for this case, as shown in Fig. 4 .
3.2  Common benchmark datasets
For the field of machine learning, Iris Dataset is perhaps the best known dataset as 
a common benchmark dataset. It is a multivariate dataset containing 150 instances 
with four features (sepal length, sepal width, petal length, and petal width) and three 
species (Iris Setosa, Iris Versicolor, and Iris Virginia). In this evaluation, we split the 
Iris dataset into two datasets, namely the sepal and petal datasets. The sepal dataset 
(Dataset4) is comprised of sepal length and sepal width, and the petal dataset (Data -
set5) is comprised of petal length and petal width. There are only three clusters in 
Iris. Therefore, we initialize the search range of Kopt as [1 , 10].
On the two subsets of Iris, as shown in Figs.  5 and 6 , Silhouette method does not 
outline the maximal silhouette coefficient score indicating the optimal cluster num -
ber. Rather, the proposed method shows a clear minimum of the angle at index 3, 
which is consistent with the real cluster number in Iris. The execution times of the 
two methods based on Dataset4 and Dataset5 are listed in Table 3 .
Therefore, as shown in the above case, the optimal cluster number obtained by the 
proposed method is consistent with the real cluster number contained in the dataset and 
shows better performance than the Silhouette method.
From Table  3, we know that the execution time of the proposed method is faster than 
the Silhouette method for the experimental dataset. Meanwhile, for the figures based on 
the experimental results, we know that the optimal cluster number obtained by the pro -
posed method is more consistent with the real cluster number contained in the dataset 
than the Silhouette method.
4  Conclusions
The Elbow method can be one of the oldest methods to distinguish the potential opti -
mal cluster number for the dataset to be analyzed, which is a visual method. Using the 
Elbow method, the estimated potential optimal cluster number for the analyzed dataset 
is somewhat subjective. This is because if there is a clear elbow in the line chart, then the 
elbow point corresponds to the estimated optimal cluster number with high probability, 
whereas if there is no clear elbow in the line chart, then the Elbow method does not 
work well.
A new method for distinguishing the potential optimal or most appropriate cluster 
number used in the clustering algorithm is proposed in this paper. We exploited the 
interaction angle of the adjacent elbow point as a criterion to work out a discriminant 
elbow point. Experimental results demonstrate that the estimated potential optimal 
cluster number output by our newly proposed method is consistent with the real cluster 
number and better than the Silhouette method on the same experimental datasets.