19) PyGAD has built-in support to visualize the results. For exam-
ple, the best_solution() method shows how the ﬁtness
changes by generation.
20) There are many resources to help you get started with PyGAD.
This includes documentation, blog posts, examples, projects,
and a community over GitHub, reddit, StackOverﬂow, Face-
book, and Twitter.
IV. C ONCLUSION
This paper proposed a new Python library called PyGAD for
single-objective optimization using the genetic algorithm. PyGAD
is an intuitive library that makes it easy to optimize problems in just
3 steps: ﬁtness function creation, instantiating the pygad.GA class,
and calling run() method. There is a wide range of parameters and
attributes to have a high degree of customizing the genetic algorithm.
This includes deﬁning a space of values for each gene, customizing
each gene’s data type, training Keras and PyTorch models, rejecting
duplicates, and more. PyGAD has a lifecycle to keep track of the
evolution process from the beginning to the end. PyGAD supports
a simpler interface for users with less experience with Python to
solve problems with few lines of code and even faster than the other
libraries.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
I would like to thank everyone who used or showed interest in
PyGAD. Some of those people who reported issues or suggested
useful features are Tamer Farrag (Assistant Professor, Misr Higher
Institute for Engineering and Technology, Egypt), Hamada Kassem
(RA/TA, Faculty of Engineering, Alexandria University, Egypt),
Curt McDowell , Andrei Rozanski (PhD Bioinformatics Specialist,
Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry, Germany), Marios
Giouvanakis (PhD candidate in Electrical & Computer Engineer,
Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Greece), L ´aszl´o Fazekas (CTO
Senior Software Developer at Pressenger Ltd, Hungary), and special
thanks to Rainer Engel (Imaging Artist and Pipeline Developer,
Germany) for his generous suggestions and time offered in inspecting
PyGAD.
REFERENCES
[1] Simon, Dan. Evolutionary optimization algorithms . John Wiley & Sons,
2013.
[2] Gad, Ahmed Fawzy. Practical computer vision applications using deep
learning with CNNs. Apress, 2018.
[3] Fortin, F ´elix-Antoine, et al. ”DEAP: Evolutionary algorithms made easy.”
The Journal of Machine Learning Research 13.1 (2012): 2171-2175.
[4] Kim, Jinhan, and Shin Yoo. ”Software review: Deap (distributed evolu-
tionary algorithm in python) library.” Genetic Programming and Evolv-
able Machines 20.1 (2019): 139-142.
[5] Perone, Christian S. ”Pyevolve: a Python open-source framework for
genetic algorithms.” Acm Sigevolution 4.1 (2009): 12-20.
[6] Coletti, Mark A., Eric O. Scott, and Jeffrey K. Bassett. ”Library for
evolutionary algorithms in Python (LEAP).” Proceedings of the 2020
Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference Companion. 2020.
APPENDIX A
PYGAD S UPPLEMENTAL RESOURCES
This appendix lists some tutorials and articles to get started with
PyGAD.
5 Genetic Algorithm Applications Using PyGAD, June 2020,
Ahmed Gad
Building a Game-Playing Agent for CoinTex Using PyGAD,
July 2020, Ahmed Gad
Working with Different Genetic Algorithm Representations in
PyGAD, September 2020, Ahmed Gad
Train Neural Networks Using a Genetic Algorithm in Python
with PyGAD, September 2020, Fatima Ezzahra JarmouniHow To Train Keras Models Using the Genetic Algorithm with
PyGAD, December 2020, Ahmed Gad
Genetic Algorithm V Gradient Boosting, January 2021, Mark
Littlewood
Clustering Using the Genetic Algorithm with PyGAD, March
2021, Ahmed Gad
Train PyTorch Models Using Genetic Algorithm with PyGAD,
March 2021, Ahmed Gad
How Genetic Algorithms Can Compete with Gradient Descent
and Backprop, March 2021, L ´aszl´o Fazekas
Adaptive Mutation in Genetic Algorithm with PyGAD Exam-
ples, April 2021, Ahmed Gad
PyGAD v GBM, June 2021, Mark Littlewood
APPENDIX B
PROJECTS WITH PYGAD
This is a list of some projects built using PyGAD with their source
code:
github.com/ahmedfgad/CoinTex/tree/master/PlayerGA: Play a
game called CoinTex.
github.com/ahmedfgad/FlappyBirdPyGAD: Play the ﬂappy bird
game.
github.com/ahmedfgad/8QueensGenetic: Solve the 8-queen puz-
zle.
github.com/ahmedfgad/GARI: Reproduce gray and RGB im-
ages.