writing this paper. The library supports single-objective optimization
with a wide range of parameters to customize the GA for different
types of problems in an easy-to-use way with less effort. PyGAD
has a lifecycle to trace how everything is working from population
creation until ﬁnding the best solution. The lifecycle can also be
customized to help researchers alter its sequence, enable or disable
some operations, make modiﬁcations, or introduce new operators.
PyGAD works with both decimal and binary representations. The
genes can be of int,float , or any supported NumPy numeric
data types ( int/uint /float ). Given the advantages of the GA over
the gradient-based optimizers, PyGAD supports training Keras and
PyTorch models.
The paper is organized so that section II covers the related
work, section III extensively introduces PyGAD and brieﬂy com-
pares PyGAD with DEAP and LEAP, and ﬁnally, section IV draws
conclusions. Appendix A lists some resources to know more about
PyGAD and Appendix B lists the GitHub links of some projects built
with PyGAD.
II. R ELATED WORK
There are already existing Python libraries for building the genetic
algorithm. Some examples include:
A DEAP (Distributed Evolutionary Algorithms in Python) II-A
B Pyevolve II-B
C EasyGA II-C
D LEAP (Library for Evolutionary Algorithms in Python) II-D
This section gives an overview of these libraries by explaining
their objectives and limitations.
A. DEAP
DEAP (Distributed Evolutionary Algorithms in Python) [3] is
considered one of the most common Python libraries for optimization
using the genetic algorithm based on the number of installations,
GitHub issues, and stars (4.2K). One of the reasons is being one
of the ﬁrst libraries about EAs which was published in 2012. DEAP
supports other algorithms than GA like non-dominated sorting genetic
algorithm II (NSGA-II), particle swarm optimization (PSO), and
evolution strategy (ES). Its latest release at Python Package Index
(PyPI) is 1.3.1 released on Jan 2020.
DEAP uses 2 main structures which are creator andtoolbox .
Thecreator module is used for creating data types like ﬁtness,
individual, and population. These data types are empty and ﬁlled
using the toolbox module. Given the special structure of DEAP,
the user would take some time until understanding getting familiar.
It needs more than a beginner’s level in Python.
One problem about DEAP is being not user-friendly as the user
has to do some efforts for each optimization problem. For example,
the user has to write extra code for creating the population and ﬁlling
it with appropriate values. The motivation for that is to enable the
user to create custom data types that are not supported. But this
boilerplate code unnecessarily increases the length of the Python
script and makes it uncomfortable for users to write and understand
more syntax about DEAP. Sometimes, the scripts are hard to read.
Moreover, the users have to create a main function in which
everything is grouped in an evolutionary loop. The loop in this user-
deﬁned function should is where the user needs to follow the GA
pipeline by 1) calculating the ﬁtness function, 2) selecting the parents,
3) applying crossover and mutation, 4) and repeating that for several
generations. This is not the best interface for users who try to focus
on the experiments and save time on the other stuff. Writing the
evolutionary loop makes the library non-friendly.
Even if the library supports some ready-to-use algorithms that
save time building the main function, each algorithm does a speciﬁc
task and is limited in its features. With the few parameters each
algorithm accepts, there is little customization possible. Examples of
these algorithms are eaSimple ,eaMuPlusLambda , and varOr .The library leaves much stuff to be built by the end-user which
makes the user feel lost between the modules, classes, and functions
needed to customize the library to solve a problem. For example,
building a population of mixed data types requires the user to:
1) Register a data type for each gene.
2) Register an individual that combines those gene data types.
3) Register a population that uses that individual.
4) Build the population
There is no way to restrict the gene values to a set of sparse
discrete values. This is necessary for some problems where the gene
value may not fall within a regular range. To select which genes to
mutate, DEAP only supports the mutation probability. There is no
way to specify the exact number of genes to be mutated.
DEAP only supports the traditional mutation operators where all
solutions, regardless of their ﬁtness value, are given equal mutation
probability. This would distort the high-quality solutions.
Another major drawback of DEAP is the lack of means of
visualizing the results after the evolution completes [4]. The users
have to manually create their plots to summarize the results.
B. Pyevolve
Pyevolve is another pure Python library for building the genetic
algorithm [5]. Even that it is published in 2009, it is less popular than
DEAP and this is based on the total number of installations (50K for
all the time), GitHub stars (301), and citations. It also has a limited
community compared to DEAP.
Its scripts start by creating the ﬁtness function, preparing the
chromosome, setting some parameters like which operators to use,
create an instance of the GSimpleGA class and then call the
evolve() method to start the evolution.
Like DEAP, this library has boilerplate code for conﬁgurations that
makes its scripts unnecessarily longer even for simple problems. The
supported mutation operators apply mutation equally to all solutions
independent of their ﬁtness value.
Even that Pyevolve is easier than DEAP, but it is limited in its
features. It supports some predeﬁned data types for the genes like in-
teger and real. To create new data types, then more details about some
classes in the library are needed like GenomeBase.GenomeBase
which may be problematic for some users.
A comparison between DEAP and Pyevolve shows that the number
of code lines needed to solve the OneMax problem is 59 for DEAP
and 378 for Pyevolve [3]. Given the simplicity of the problem,
Pyevolve needed too many lines.
This library is no longer maintained as the latest version was
released at the end of 2014 and the most recent commit on its GitHub
project was at the end of 2015.
C. EasyGA
The EasyGA library allows only deﬁning a continuous range for
the gene values. If the range has some exclusions or if the gene values
do not follow a range at all, then there is no way to deﬁne the gene
values. Moreover, the user has to build the solutions manually without
given a simple interface. Commonly, users would like to focus more
on the algorithm itself and save time building additional modules
specially if they are not involved in Python.
This library has a limited number of operators for crossover,
mutation, and parent selection. Given the
The EasyGA library supports a random mutation operation that
applies mutation over any solution in the population, including
parents, and is not restricted to the new offspring. It randomly selects
the solutions to mutate. This is against the nature of the GA as only
random changes could be introduced to the offspring, not the parents.
The users have to know about decorators, at some stage, to
build their operators. While writing the paper, the GitHub project
of EasyGA has only 22 stars.