PyGAD: An Intuitive Genetic Algorithm Python
Library
Ahmed Fawzy Gad
School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
University of Ottawa
Ottawa, ON, Canada
agad069@uottawa.ca
©2021 Ahmed Fawzy Gad. Published at arXiv on June, 10 2021. Donation is open at PayPal (paypal.me/ahmedfgad or e-mail ahmed.f.gad@gmail.com),
OpenCollective (opencollective.com/pygad), and Interac e-Transfer (ahmed.f.gad@gmail.com).Abstract —This paper introduces PyGAD, an open-source easy-
to-use Python library for building the genetic algorithm. PyGAD
supports a wide range of parameters to give the user control over
everything in its life cycle. This includes, but is not limited to,
population, gene value range, gene data type, parent selection,
crossover, and mutation. PyGAD is designed as a general-
purpose optimization library that allows the user to customize
the ﬁtness function. Its usage consists of 3 main steps: build
the ﬁtness function, create an instance of the pygad.GA class,
and calling the pygad.GA.run() method. The library supports
training deep learning models created either with PyGAD itself
or with frameworks like Keras and PyTorch. Given its stable
state, PyGAD is also in active development to respond to the
user’s requested features and enhancement received on GitHub
github.com/ahmedfgad/GeneticAlgorithmPython. PyGAD comes
with documentation pygad.readthedocs.io for further details and
examples.
Keywords— genetic algorithm, evolutionary algorithm, optimiza-
tion, deep learning, Python, NumPy, Keras, PyTorch
I. I NTRODUCTION
Nature has inspired computer scientists to create algorithms for
solving computational problems. These naturally-inspired algorithms
are called evolutionary algorithms (EAs) [1] where the initial solution
(or individual) to a given problem is evolved across multiple iterations
aiming to increase its quality. The EAs can be categorized by different
factors like the number of solutions used. Some EAs evolve a single
initial solution (e.g. hill-climbing) and others evolve a population of
solutions (e.g. particle swarm or genetic algorithm).
The genetic algorithm (GA) a biologically-inspired EA that solves
optimization problems inspired by Darwin’s theory “survival of the
ﬁttest” [1], [2]. Originally, the GA was not designed for being a
computational algorithm rather understanding how natural selection
happens. Later, it becomes one of the most popular computational
EAs.
The core concepts of the GA are derived from the natural solution.
There are several organisms called population. The members of
the population may have the ability to mate and reproduce new
organisms. Because the good organisms can produce better offspring,
then the good members of the population are selected for mating and
others die. When 2 good organisms mate, their offspring will likely
be better specially when some new, hopefully, better, changes are
introduced. These concepts form the core of the GA in computer
science.
The GA steps are explained in Figure 1 [2]. The ﬁrst step creates
an initial population of solutions for the problems. These solutions
are not the best for the problem and thus evolved. The evolution starts
by selecting the ﬁttest solutions as parents based on a maximization
ﬁtness function. Each pair of parents mate to produce one or more
Fig. 1. Flowchart of the genetic algorithm.
children. Each child shares genes from its 2 parents using the
crossover operation.
To go beyond the parents’ capabilities, the mutation is introduced
to make some changes to the children. Due to the randomness in these
changes, some children may be ﬁtter or worse than their parents. By
mating the best parents and producing more children, a better solution
is likely found after each generation. Either the offspring only or
combined with the parents form the next generation’s population.
The process is repeated for a limited number of generations or until
a satisfactory solution is found where no further optimization is
necessary.
There are many parameters to tune in to make the GA ﬁts the
problem. For experimentation, it is essential to use an easy tool for
building the genetic algorithm.
This paper introduces PyGAD, an open-source intuitive Python
library for optimization using the genetic algorithm. PyGAD was
released in April 2020 and has over 185K installations at the time ofarXiv:2106.06158v1  [cs.NE]  11 Jun 2021