Fig. 3. PyGAD lifecycle.
pre-processing or post-processing tasks in the on_start() and
on_stop() functions, respectively.
For research purposes and supporting an operator that is not
supported by PyGAD, the user can deﬁne custom crossover and
mutation operators in the callback functions.
Theon_generation() callback function can be used to add
some conditions and alter the execution. For example, returning the
string ”stop” immediately stops the run() method earlier before
completing all generations.
D. PyGAD Features
The previous sections should have covered some features of
PyGAD. This section highlights the main features supported byPyGAD that make it distinctive compared to the other libraries. For
more details, check its documentation pygad.readthedocs.io.
1) PyGAD is very intuitive to use. Its steps are self-explanatory
and easy to follow in a user-friendly way. With just 3 simple
steps, PyGAD can optimize different types of problems.
2) All parameters are grouped in the constructor of the pygad.GA
class. This helps the user to be focused and not distracted.
3) A user-deﬁned gene value space, either for all genes at once
or for each gene, can be created using the gene_space
parameter. This is helpful even if the gene’s values do not follow
a certain pattern. If a gene has values enclosed within a given
range, then the gene value can be randomly generated from a
user-deﬁned range.
4) It is possible to control the gene data type, for all genes or
each gene, using the gene_type parameter. The supported
data types are Python’s int andfloat in addition to all
int/uint /float types in the NumPy library.
5) Using the initial_population parameter, a user-deﬁned
initial population can be used as the start point. This helps to
continue where the evolution stopped. PyGAD builds an initial
population randomly if this parameter is not set.
6) PyGAD has a lifecycle to keep track of everything. A call to a
callback function can be triggered for each step in the lifecycle.
7) The user can stop the evolution at any time. For example, return-
ing the string “stop” from the on_generation() callback
function stops PyGAD at the current generation.
8) It is easy to access the best solutions across all generations
in addition to their ﬁtness using the best_solutions and
best_solutions_fitness attributes, respectively.
9) The crossover and mutation operations can be disabled by
setting crossover_type ormutation_type toNone and
then plug a user-deﬁned operation in the lifecycle.
10) There are different ways to specify the number of genes to
mutate. According to the user’s preference, this can be speci-
ﬁed as probability ( mutation_probability ), percentage
(mutation_percent_genes ), or an explicit number of
genes ( mutation_num_genes ).
11) PyGAD supports adaptive mutation so that the user controls
how mutation is applied based on the solution’s ﬁtness. For
the high-quality solutions, low mutation probability/percent-
age/number is expected compared to low-quality solutions. This
helps to maintain the quality of the good solutions in addition
to increasing the quality of the bad solutions.
12) The mutation_by_replacement bool parameter selects
whether the mutation adds to or replaces the gene value.
13) A bool parameter called allow_duplicate_genes helps
to accept or reject duplicate values in the same chromosome.
For this to work, there must be enough value space to guarantee
unique genes’ values.
14) Ability to control the number of parents to keep in the next
generation using the keep_parents parameter. This helps to
save 0 or more parents to keep the ﬁtness curve increasing.
15) The instance attributes in the pygad.GA class starting with
last_generation_ help to keep track of the outcomes of
each generation.
16) PyGAD supports training Keras and PyTorch models using the
pygad.kerasga andtorchga modules, respectively.
17) PyGAD also has its own modules to build and train neu-
ral networks ( pygad.nn ,pygad.gann ,pygad.cnn , and
pygad.gacnn ).
18) The interface to use any PyGAD feature is very simple and
does not require much knowledge about Python compared to
the other libraries. The minimum level is to know how to create
variables, how to deﬁne a Python function that accepts param-
eters and returns something, little about classes like creating
instances in addition to accessing class/instance attributes.