sample. The network attempts to mitigate the peaks that
appear in intermediate layers, but this creates larger picks
on other channels of the subsequent layers. Note how the
maximum response increases with layer depth. Figure 4also
shows that, beyond the large picks, there are many small
activations in the deeper layers. This is also consistent with
the ”whack-a-mole” hypothesis. When combined with the
ReLU of ( 10), the impetus to produce large negative residu-
als results in many activations Fl(x)of small or zero value.
Hence, as depth lincreases, the activations become peakier
and of lower entropy. From ( 1), the Gram matrices are then
likely to have the same property.
It should be noted that this discussion applies to the stan-
dard residual connection structure of the ResNet [ 14], which
is widely used. One possibility to improve stylization perfor-
mance would be to change the architecture. An example is
given at the bottom of Figure 5, where the skip connection
is moved to precede the output ReLU of layer l−1. Since,
in this case, the addition of activation and residual operates
on two real numbers, the pressure for activations to grow
would be smaller. We have tried several of these variations,
but found that they tend to result in ineffective architectures
for image recognition. The example modiﬁcation of Figure
5reduces the mean classiﬁcation accuracy of the ResNet-
50 on CIFAR-100 (ImageNet) from 77% to65% (76% to
62%). Hence, even if it turned out to enhance stylization
performance, it would result on different architectures for
stylization and classiﬁcation, which is undesirable. In what
follows, we show that it is possible to improve stylization
while maintaining the widely used network architecture .
3.5. Stylization With Activation Smoothing
In this work, we leverage the observations above to im-
prove the stylization performance of networks with residual
connections. We propose a very simple solution, inspired
by the interpretation of stylization as knowledge distilla-
tion [ 15], where signiﬁcant gains are observed by smoothing
teaching distributions. In the same vein, we propose to avoid
peaky activations of low entropy, by smoothing all activa-
tions with a softmax-based smoothing transformation4
σ(Fl
ik(x)) =eFl
ik(x)
/summationtext
m,neFlmn(x), (11)
Note that the softmax layer is notinserted in the network,
which continues to be the original model, but only used to
redeﬁne the style and content loss functions of ( 2), which
4We experimented with adding a temperature parameter, but this made
no difference. The detailed discussion can be found in the supp.become
Lcontent(xc
0,x) =1
2||σ(Fl(x))−σ(Fl(xc
0))||2
2,(12)
Lstyle(xs
0,x) =L/summationdisplay
lwl
4D2
lM2
l||Gl(σ(Fl(x)))
−Gl(σ(Fl(xs
0))||2
2.(13)
The softmax transformation reduces large peaks and in-
creases small values, creating a more uniform distribution.
Since this can be seen as a form of smoothing, we denote this
approach to stylization as Stylization With Activation smooth-
inG(SWAG), and denote the resulting models with a ‘ ∗’
superscript, e.g. r-ResNet∗. ResNet∗of ﬁgure 3shows that
SWAG successfully suppresses the maxima and increases
entropies, especially on deeper layers.
The impact of activation smoothing on stylization perfor-
mance is illustrated in Figure 2iand2j, where SWAG results
are presented for the r-ResNet∗and p-ResNet∗networks. In
both cases, the quality of the stylized images improves sub-
stantially after smoothing, in the sense that more high-level
style patterns are transferred. The results of the r-ResNet∗
approach those of the r-VGG and it could be claimed that the
p-ResNet∗outperforms the p-VGG. This is next evaluated
quantitatively. It should be noted that there are other ways
of smoothing activations and decreasing their entropy, e.g.
softmax with different temperature, nested softmax, or even
multiplying a small constant ( <0.1), that we found working
in our experiments. We chose the softmax of ( 11) because it
is simple, hyperparameter-free, and achieves similar effects
with other smoothing methods.
4. Experimental Evaluation
In this section we discuss an experimental evaluation of
the stylization gains of SWAG models. More results and
implementation details can be found in the supplementary
materials.
4.1. Qualitative evaluation
We start by evaluating SWAG for two popular non-
VGG architectures, other than the ResNet, that also rely on
shortcut connections: Inception-v3 [ 36] and Wide ResNet
(WRN) [ 45]. WRN experiments use all settings of the
ResNet, while conv2d 1a, conv2d 3b, mixed 5b, mixed 6a,
mixed 7a leayers are used for Inception. This is, again, for
consistency with the VGG model of [ 7]. We denote VGG,
ResNet, WRN, and Inception-v3 networks as ‘ V’, ‘R’, ‘W’,
and ‘ I’, for brevity. Figure 6presents style transfer results
on four different images, using the pre-trained versions of
all networks, comparing results of SWAG (∗) and standard
129