The observation of small entropies is consistent with
at least two explanations for poor stylization performance.
Both of these follow from the fact that the only variables
in the optimization of ( 4) are the activations Fl(x), which
are encouraged to have Gram matrix as similar as possible
to those of the style image Fl(xs
0). A ﬁrst explanation is
derived from the well known outlier sensitivity of the L2
distance [ 20]. Due to this outlier sensitivity, when the Gram
matrices derived from xs
0are “peaky” (low entropy), the op-
timization will focus mostly on creating equal peaks on the
matrices produced by x∗, while paying less attention to the
remaining entries of the Gram matrix. From ( 1), the Gram
matrix value of location i,jis a measure of similarity of the
vectors of activations Fl
i,kandFl
j,kacross the channel depth
dimension k. Hence, the Gram matrix peaks identify pairs
of locations of strong activations that are highly correlated
across the channel dimension. By giving disproportionate
emphasis to these location pairs, the optimization overﬁts on
a few style patterns, ignoring most of the remaining. This
explains why small entropies degrade stylization. Note that
the appearance of Gram peaks in the deeper layers is con-
sistent with the stylization results of Figure 2. While the
r-ResNet and r-pseudo-ResVGG can transfer the localized
color patterns captured by the earlier layers, they fail to cap-
ture the long-range correlations that are essential for texture
and style perception and only accessible in the later layers.
A second explanation derives from interpreting stylization
as a knowledge distillation problem [ 15]. For classiﬁcation,
neural networks are typically trained to minimize a cross-
entropy loss between the posterior distribution qand a target
distribution p, which is typically a one-hot code. Knowledge
distillation aims to, instead, minimize the distance between
the distribution of a student network qand that of a soft
teacher network p. [15] has shown that using the soft prob-
ability output of a pre-trained larger network as target p
can improve training speed and converge to a better model
than using the hard one-hot target. This is because a teacher
distribution of high entropy produces gradients of much
less variance during training. The same rationale can be
applied to stylization, which can be seen as a form of knowl-
edge distillation, where the optimization of ( 2) seeks the x∗
that minimizes the distance between the ‘student’ (Fl(x),
Gl(Fl(x)))and ‘teacher’ (Fl(xc
0),Gl(Fl(xs
0)))pairs of ac-
tivations and Gram matrices. Under the distillation view,
pairs of higher entropy should make learning easier.
3.4. Why are residual network activations and
Gram matrices peaky?
We next investigate why residual networks produce peaky
activations and Gram matrices. We start by recalling the
details of the bottleneck ResNet block, shown in Figure 5.
At layer l, this module computes a residual R(Fl−1(x)),
which is added to the output Fl−1(x)of layerl−1to create
Conv 1x1
BN
ReLU
Conv 3x3
BN
ReLU
Conv 1x1
BN
ReLU+Conv 3x3
BN
ReLU
Conv 3x3
BN
ReLU+Conv 1x1
BN
ReLU
Conv 3x3
BN
ReLU
Conv 1x1
BN
ReLU+ReLU
Figure 5: Top: bottleneck; Middle: Basicblock; Bottom: a
variation of bottleneck.
the output of layer l
Fl(x) =R(Fl−1(x))+Fl−1(x), (9)
whereR(·)is implemented with a sequence of convolutional
(Conv), batch normalization (BN) and ReLU layers. An
important detail is that the addition of ( 9) is computed be-
tween the last BN and ReLU layers in the module, as shown
at the top and middle of Figure 5, i.e. ( 9) is effectively
implemented as
Fl(x) =ReLU/parenleftbig
R(Fl−1(x)/parenrightbig
+Fl−1(x)). (10)
This design choice contributes to the existence of large
activation maxima for deeper layers. Note that Fl−1(x)is
the output of a ReLU layer, i.e. a positive number, and
Ri(Fl−1), a real number. It follows that, for any i, there are
at least two ways in which Fl
i(x)can be large: 1) a large
residualRi(Fl−1(x)), or 2) a positive residual Ri(Fl−1(x))
ifFl−1
i(x)is already large. The second condition is particu-
larly prone to creating large peaks, since positive residuals
enableFi(x)to grow from layer to layer. In fact, the only
way to cancel a large Fl−1
i(x)is to make Ri(Fl−1(x))large
and negative. However, it may be impossible to generate
a large negative residual for one channel without generat-
ing large positive residuals for others. Hence, the attempt
to correct for the second condition could create the ﬁrst.
This would imply that, once a large activation emerges at
an intermediate layer, the network could be forced into a
game of ”whack-a-mole,” producing large amplitudes for the
subsequent layers.
To investigate this hypothesis, we tracked the evolution
of activations through the network. For a randomly selected
style image, we randomly sampled image positions and
tracked the corresponding activation values accross the net-
work layers, using nearest-neighbor interpolation. Figure
4shows a typical random sample of 10 activation tracks.
The ”whack-a-mole” effect is visible even in this limited
128