p-VGG p-ResNet r-ResNet r-ResNet * r-VGG contentstyle p-ResNet *
Figure 7: Comparison of neural style transfer performance between standard and SWAG (denoted with∗) implementations of
different stylization algorithms. Top: algorithm of [ 22]; Bottom: algorithm of [ 24]. The results of the VGG model are also
shown for comparison.
p-R p-R*top: content
bottom: style (texture)
Figure 8: Top: reconstruction of the top-left content image;
Bottom: texture synthesis of the bottom-left image.
both pre-trained and random networks, models with SWAG
always earned more preferences than models without. Sec-
ond, all models with SWAG signiﬁcantly outperformed the
standard VGG implementation. All these results suggest that
SWAG eliminated the dependence of stylization on the VGG
architecture.
4.3. Ablation study
For stylization, the target image is usually initialized with
the content image [ 7,13,3], i.e. the optimization of ( 2) uses
the content image xc
0as initial condition. This reduces the
difﬁculty in transferring content information to the target
image. In fact, it can make the content loss negligible [ 27],
to the point where the latter can be removed from the op-
timization altogether [ 3]. This creates difﬁculties to ablate
the effectiveness of SWAG on the content and style loss
individually.For this, we leveraged two alternative tasks: image re-
construction and texture synthesis, using a random initial
image. Following [ 7,6], we matched conv3 4 features from
the content images for image reconstruction, and multilayer
features from the texture image for texture synthesis. As
shown in Figure 8, SWAG produces better reconstructed
images (average PSNR over 10randomly selected content
images of p-R/p-R∗:27.9(±0.1)/28.3(±0.1))and synthe-
sizes textures with a larger diversity of patterns, including
small-scale and large-scale style patch patterns. This sug-
gests that 1) residual connections hurt both losses fail; 2)
SWAG can match styles at deeper layers, which capture
larger-scale features, to improve reconstruction and texture
synthesis quality.
5. Conclusion
We have studied the lack of robustness of stylization al-
gorithms for non-VGG architectures. This showed that a
signiﬁcant factor is the use of residual connections, which
decreases the entropy of deeper layer activations. A simple
solution was proposed by adding activation smoothing to the
loss functions used for stylization, using a softmax function.
This was denoted as SWAG, and shown to be effective for
various architectures, forms of pre-training (random vs. Ima-
geNet), and stylization algorithms. It was shown that, with
the addition of SWAG, the lightweight non-VGG becomes a
viable alternative to VGG in future stylization work.
Acknowledgement
This work was partially funded by NSF awards IIS-
1924937, IIS-2041009, a gift from Amazon, a gift from
Qualcomm, and NVIDIA GPU donations. We also acknowl-
edge and thank the use of the Nautilus platform for some of
the experiments discussed above.
131