explain the discrepancy between stylization results. Taking
the ResNet as a non-VGG architecture representative, we
study the statistics of both activations and the derived Gram
matrices, usually used to encode image style. A striking
observation is that, when normalized into a probability dis-
tribution, the ResNet activations of deeper layers have large
peaks and small entropy. This shows that they are dominated
by a few feature channels and have nearly deterministic cor-
relation patterns. It suggests that the optimization used to
synthesize the stylized images is biased into replicating a
few dominant patterns of the style image and ignoring the
majority. This explains why the ResNet is unable to transfer
high-level style patterns, such as strokes, that are usually
captured in deeper layers of the network. In contrast, VGG
activations are approximately uniform for all layers, cap-
turing a much larger diversity of style patterns. We then
analyze the architectural properties that could lead to very
peaky activations, and conclude that they can be, in signiﬁ-
cant part, explained by the existence of residual or shortcut
connections between layers. The fact that these connections
are prevalent in most modern architectures explains why the
robustness problem is so widespread. In summary, residual
connections are not good for style transfer.
We then investigate whether it is possible to solve the ro-
bustness problem without changing the network architecture,
and in a manner that is compatible with the large diversity of
stylization losses in the literature. Taking inspiration from
knowledge distillation, we propose to smooth the activations
used in the computation of these loss functions. This can be
implemented by adding a simple softmax transformation to
existing losses. We denote the novel version of stylization
asStylization With Activation smoothinG (SWAG). Experi-
ments show that SWAG is an important contribution at three
levels. First, it improves the performance of several popu-
lar stylization algorithms for several popular architectures,
including ResNet, Inception, and WideResNet. Second, for
these architectures, it improves the performance of random
networks to the level of pre-trained ones. Third, for pre-
trained networks, non-VGG models with SWAG can even
outperform the VGG with standard stylization.
2. Related Work
Stylization. For an extensive review of stylization meth-
ods please see [ 21]. Starting with [ 7], it has been shown
that a pre-trained image classiﬁer can be used as a fea-
ture extractor to drive style transfer [ 7,22,41]. Style
transfer algorithms either implement an iterative optimiza-
tion [ 7,3,13], or directly learn a feed-forward genera-
tor network [ 22,40,37]. Unlike all these papers, we
do not propose a new stylization algorithm. Instead, we
note that all previous algorithms use VGG pre-trained mod-
els [43,30,23,25,19,41,2,8,26]. In fact, even recent
GAN-based proposals [ 46] use a VGG encoder. We seek tomake these algorithms applicable to a broader set of network
architectures. To the best of our knowledge, no previous
work discusses the architecture robustness of style transfer.
Random Networks. Our work is partly motivated by
some theoretical and practical studies on random weights [ 17,
18,29,28,40,39,5]. For example, Gaier et al. [ 5] pro-
pose the weight agnostic neural network, by ﬁxing randomly
initialized weights and searching optimal network architec-
tures, which is shown to achieve good results in several
reinforcement and supervised learning tasks. [ 38] studies
several low-level vision problems and uses random weights
to show that the structure of a generator network is sufﬁcient
to capture image statistics. [ 1] compares the performance of
many saliency algorithms based on random and pre-trained
weights. He et al. [ 13] used a random weight network for
texture synthesis and neural style transfer. However, their ap-
proach does not use genuinely random weights, as discussed
in Section 3.2. In contrast, all random models and results
presented in this work are based on purely random weights.
3. Robust Stylization
3.1. Preliminaries
Consider a color image x0∈RW0×H0×3, whereW0
andH0are the image width and height. A convolutional
neural network (CNN) maps x0into a set of feature maps
{Fl(x0)}L
l=1, whereFl:RW0×H0×3→RWl×Hl×Dlis the
mapping from the image to the tensor of activations of the lth
layer, which has Dlchannels of spatial dimensions Wl×Hl.
The activation tensor Fl(x0)can also be reshaped into a ma-
trixFl(x0)∈RDl×Ml, whereMl=WlHl. Image style is
frequently assumed to be encoded by a set of Gram matrices
{Gl}L
l=1whereGl∈RDl×Dlis derived from the activa-
tionsFlof layerlby computing the correlation between
activation channels, i.e.
[Gl(Fl)]ij=/summationdisplay
kFl
ikFl
jk. (1)
To simplify the discussion, we focus on the Gram matrix
loss [ 7,24,37,3,13]. However, in the experiment section,
we show that all results hold for other losses. We consider the
image stylization framework of [ 7], where given a content
imagexc
0and a style image xs
0, an image x∗that presents the
content of xc
0under the style of xs
0is synthesized by solving
x∗= argmin
x∈RW0×H0×3αLcontent(xc
0,x)+βLstyle(xs
0,x).(2)
with
Lcontent(xc
0,x) =1
2||Fl(x)−Fl(xc
0)||2
2, (3)
Lstyle(xs
0,x) =L/summationdisplay
l=1wl
4D2
lM2
l||Gl(Fl(x))−Gl(Fl(xs
0))||2
2,
(4)
125