Rethinking and Improving the Robustness of Image Style Transfer
Pei Wang
UC, San Diego
pew062@ucsd.eduYijun Li
Adobe Research
yijli@adobe.comNuno Vasconcelos
UC, San Diego
nuno@ucsd.edu
Abstract
Extensive research in neural style transfer methods has
shown that the correlation between features extracted by a
pre-trained VGG network has a remarkable ability to cap-
ture the visual style of an image. Surprisingly, however, this
stylization quality is not robust and often degrades signif-
icantly when applied to features from more advanced and
lightweight networks, such as those in the ResNet family.
By performing extensive experiments with different network
architectures, we ﬁnd that residual connections, which rep-
resent the main architectural difference between VGG and
ResNet, produce feature maps of small entropy, which are not
suitable for style transfer. To improve the robustness of the
ResNet architecture, we then propose a simple yet effective
solution based on a softmax transformation of the feature
activations that enhances their entropy. Experimental results
demonstrate that this small magic can greatly improve the
quality of stylization results, even for networks with random
weights. This suggests that the architecture used for feature
extraction is more important than the use of learned weights
for the task of style transfer.
1. Introduction
Image style transfer aims to map a content image into
the style of a different reference image. It has received
substantial attention, particularly with the introduction of
neural style transfer algorithms based on deep networks. A
consistent observation from this work [ 43,24,30,23,25,
19,9,2,8] is that the correlation between the activations
of a pre-trained VGG [ 33] network has remarkable ability
to capture the visual style of an image. It is, however, puz-
zling that when the VGG is replaced by architectures of
better performance in other tasks, e.g. classiﬁcation, such
as the ResNet [ 14,44,42], InceptionNet [ 35,34,36] or
DenseNet [ 16], stylization performance degrades signiﬁ-
cantly. This is even more puzzling because, when imple-
mented with the VGG, style transfer is very robust. For
example, a VGG model with random weights performs com-
parably to a pre-trained model [ 14,3].p-VGG Content
Style p-ResNetr-VGG
r-ResNet
On pre-trained models On random models
Figure 1: Neural style transfer by different architectures,
using the methods of [ 7,27] (‘p-’, ‘r-’ denotes pre-trained
and randomly initialization. Please zoom in the picture for a
detailed comparison).
Figure 1shows an example of style transfer using differ-
ent models. The VGG transfers style (color, texture, strokes)
more faithfully than the ResNet, for both pre-trained and
random weights. While these observations have spurred dis-
cussion in the literature, about why style transfer is much
more effective for the VGG [ 27,12,4], there are still no
clear answers. In particular, there has not been a compre-
hensive study of (i) what architectural differences between
the VGG and other networks cause this striking performance
difference, and (ii) what remedies could make non-VGG
networks perform as well as the VGG. One explanation is
that VGG features are more robust than others. To validate
this conjecture, [ 27,4] trained a ResNet with adversarial
examples [ 10] to improve feature robustness. They found
this can signiﬁcantly improve stylization quality. However,
the fact that the VGG with random weights can generate
comparable results [ 13,3] suggests that robustness is not a
property of the training data, but inherent to the architecture.
In this work, we investigate this hypothesis by comparing
stylizations produced with activations from different archi-
tectures. We seek the architectural properties that explain the
differences between these activations, and how these could
124