8 D. Ruta et al.
from AAHQ. Together, these result in 10’000 evaluation images, when models are used
to stylize all combinations.
We measure the content similarity using the two LPIPS variants (Alexnet [ 15], and
VGG [25]), and we measure the style similarity using SIFID.
LPIPS [27] evaluates the variance between two images based on perceptual infor-
mation better aligned to human perception compared to more traditional statistics based
methods. We use this LPIPS variation to compute the average variation between each
stylized image and its original content image. A lower average variation value would
indicate a more similar semantic structure, therefore, a lower value is better.
Like Swapping Autoencoders, we employ the Single Image Fr ´echet Inception Dis-
tance ( SIFID ) introduced in SinGAN [ 23]. This metric evaluates FID, but uses only a
single image at a time, which is most appropriate when evaluating style transfer com-
puted using a single source sample. A lower value indicates better style transfer here.
Finally, we measure the time it takes to synthesize the stylized image in seconds per
image. A low inference time is essential for the practicality of a model in real use cases.
All timings were computed on an RTX 3090 GPU.
4.2 Baselines
To test the performance of our approach, we train 7 other methods on the FFHQ and
AAHQ datasets: Swapping Autoencoders [ 19], Gatys [ 6], ArtFlow [ 3], PAMA [ 17],
SANet [ 18], NNST [ 14], and ContraAST [ 4]. From these, Swapping Autoencoders is
the most closely related, as it also operates over a StyleGAN2 space, thus, we separate
it from the other more traditional methods which do not.
Table 1 shows the LPIPS, SIFID, and timing results computed for our own Hyper-
NST method, and the other methods we evaluate against. The results show the superiority
of HyperNST in retaining the most semantic structure in the facial reconstructions, in-
dicated by the lowest LPIPS value. Meanwhile, we achieve comparable SIFID values
(2.279) to Swapping AutoEncoders (1.948), indicating a small gap in stylization quality.
Only our HyperNST model can embed a portrait into a model with semantic editing
capabilities. Finally, the inference time of our model is similar to other methods and low
enough for practical use of the model in real applications.
One disadvantage of the hypernetwork based approach is the current limitation with
how strongly the StyleGAN2 model can be ﬁne-tuned. As per our ﬁndings and the
HyperStyle authors’, hyper-learning weight deltas for every individual weight would be
infeasible on current hardware (requiring over 3 billion parameters for a StyleGAN2
model) - we are limited by the technology of our time. So at best, we can aim to at most
match a method where the model is fully trained, the closest comparison being Swapping
AutoEncoders. The Swapping AutoEncoders model also ﬁne-tunes a StyleGAN2 model.
However, the more straightforward training approach affords the luxury to ﬁne-tune
individual weights in the generator, compared to the channel-wise mean shifts, currently
possible with a hyper-network on today’s hardware.
Nevertheless, hyper-network based NST is interesting to study, as such limitations
are temporary. Both model and hardware improvements with subsequent works will
reduce such limitations in time. We can compare hyper-network approaches directly
with fully-trained counterparts for the current state of the art.