HyperNST: Hyper-Networks for Neural Style Transfer 7
too greatly affected during stylization training. Layer 13 is a sweet middle spot with
the best balance between stylization and retaining good face structure reconstruction. A
visual example of this phenomenon can be seen in Fig.3.
We further make changes to the patch co-occurrence discriminator. The Swapping
Autoencoders model generates images in 1024x1024 resolution, with a discriminator
operating over 8 patches of 128x128 dimensions. Our hypernetwork model generates
images with a resolution of 256x256 pixels, therefore, we adjust our discriminator’s
patch sizes to a lower size of 32x32.
3.5 Region mask driven patch discriminator
We also use facial semantic segmentation masks in the patch co-occurrence discrimina-
tor, to provide a style signal separated by semantic region.
In the original discriminator, patches are extracted from across the entire image
at random. Instead, our process is repeated for each semantic class’ map. Patches are
extracted at random, ensuring that the mean intersection over union (IoU) mostly covers
pixels attributed to the respective semantic class. As in the original case, the losses
from the patches are averaged to form the style learning signal. However, instead of
comparing the stylized patches with patches randomly selected from the reference style
image, we select patches bound by the respective semantic region - e.g. style hair patches
are matched with stylized hair patches, background with background, face with face, etc.
Implementation The semantic regions predicted by FaRL contain several regions
which individually cover only small areas in the pixel space. Given our use of the regions
as patches we extract for ALADIN and the patch co-occurrence discriminator, we could
not accurately use these small regions without the patches mainly containing pixel data
from the surrounding regions. Instead, we group up the regions into 3 larger classes
which typically cover larger areas of a portrait: (1) Hair, (2) Face, and (3) Background.
Due to overlap that cannot be avoided, the Face region also contains eyes, noses, and
lips. Furthermore, some images do not contain hair, for which this semantic class is not
used. In the semantically driven patch co-occurrence loss, we use 3 patches for each
region, totaling 9 patches.
4 Evaluation
Experiments generally required around 24 hours to converge. We ran our experiments
on a single NVIDIA RTX 3090 with 24GB of VRAM. The HyperNST experiments
were executed with a batch size of 1, which required around 22GB of VRAM, due to
the high number of weights needed in the hypernetwork conﬁguration.
4.1 Datasets
We create a test dataset for use in evaluation, using images from FFHQ [ 11], and AAHQ
[16]. We extract 100 random content images from FFHQ and 100 random style images