HyperNST: Hyper-Networks for Neural Style Transfer 3
embedding into the StyleGAN weight space, including the quality/editability tradeoff
this imposes. Their work enables multiple vectors of editability for images generated
through StyleGAN across several domains. Restyle [ 1] improves the reconstruction
quality of images embedded into the weight space by executing three ﬁne-tuning op-
timization steps at run-time. Also, using StyleGAN as target generators, HyperStyle
[2] embeds real portrait images into the weight space with high ﬁdelity. Similar to our
approach, they use a hyper-network to generate weight updates for StyleGAN, trained
to infer weights to bridge the gap between quick rough inversions and the fully detailed
reference portrait images. Strengths of this approach are the high reconstruction ﬁdelity
and strong photorealistic editing control for portrait photos. They further undertake
some early explorations at domain adaptation for images by changing StyleGAN check-
points. However, the HyperStyle work focuses on photorealism and does not enable
region-based control or style space parameterization as we propose in HyperNST.
Our approach is inspired by the StyleGAN-NADA [ 5] work, which explores style
transfer in the StyleGAN weight space through CLIP-based optimization. Though effec-
tive, this incurs long-running optimization passes, which are impractical for wide use.
Moreover, this method has no built-in methods to effectively embed real portrait images
into the weight space for reconstruction and editing. Recently, FaRL [ 28] undertakes
representation learning of facial images, through multi-modal vision-text data, with face
segmentation models that cope well with various visual appearances for portraits.
3 Methodology
Domain adaptation models like CycleGAN perform well at image translation, where
style features from a style image are correctly mapped to the matching semantic features
in a content image. A limitation of CycleGAN is that transfer only between a single
pair of image domains (styles) is possible. Hypernetwork [ 7] models are used to predict
the weights of a target model. Such a hypernetwork can be conditioned on some input
before inferring the target model weights. Early experiments with a CycleGAN back-
bone yielded promising results, especially when we re-framed the training process into a
more manageable task by learning weight offsets to a pre-trained checkpoint rather than
a from-scratch model. Motivated by these ﬁndings, we use a more extensive, modern
generator such as StyleGAN2 with weight updates predicted using a hyper-network.
This echoes the recent optimization based approach StyleGAN-NADA which updates
weights via ﬁne-tuning for stylization rather than hyper-network prediction. HyperStyle
[2] uses a channel-wise mean shift in the target generator, which signiﬁcantly reduces
the target number of trainable weights into a practical range.
3.1 HyperNST Architecture
We compose the stylization pipeline of our model with a hyper-network set up to gen-
erate weight deltas for a target frozen, pre-trained StyleGAN2 model. Fig 1 shows an
architecture diagram of HyperNST, showing the losses and the conditioning process of
the hyper-network upon the content image and semantically arranged ALADIN style
codes of the style image.