HyperNST: Hyper-Networks for Neural Style Transfer
Dan Ruta1, Andrew Gilbert1, Saeid Motiian2, Baldo Faieta2, Zhe Lin2, and John
Collomosse1;2
1University of Surrey
2Adobe Research
Abstract. We present HyperNST; a neural style transfer (NST) technique for
the artistic stylization of images, based on Hyper-networks and the StyleGAN2
architecture. Our contribution is a novel method for inducing style transfer pa-
rameterized by a metric space, pre-trained for style-based visual search (SBVS).
We show for the ﬁrst time that such space may be used to drive NST, enabling
the application and interpolation of styles from an SBVS system. The techni-
cal contribution is a hyper-network that predicts weight updates to a StyleGAN2
pre-trained over a diverse gamut of artistic content (portraits), tailoring the style
parameterization on a per-region basis using a semantic map of the facial regions.
We show HyperNST to exceed state of the art in content preservation for our
stylized content while retaining good style transfer performance.
1 Introduction
Neural style transfer (NST) methods seek to transform an image to emulate a given
appearance or ‘style’ while holding the content or structure unchanged. Efﬁcient, stylis-
tically diverse NST remains an open challenge. Feed-forward NST methods are fast
yet typically fail to represent a rich gamut of styles. At the same time, optimization
based approaches can take several seconds or minutes at inference time, lacking the
speed for practical, creative use. Moreover, NST algorithms are often driven by one or
more exemplar ‘style’ images, rather than an intuitive parameter space, impacting their
controllability as a creative tool.
In this work, we propose a fast feed-forward method for driving neural stylization
(NST) parameterized by a metric embedding for style representation. Our approach is
based upon a hyper-network trained to emit weight updates to a StyleGAN2[ 13] model,
trained on a large dataset of artistic portraits (e.g. AAHQ [ 16]) in order to specialize it
to the depiction of the given target style. Our work is inspired by the recent StyleGAN-
NADA [ 5], in which a CLIP [ 20] objective is optimized by ﬁne-tuning a pre-trainedarXiv:2208.04807v1  [cs.CV]  9 Aug 2022