4 D. Ruta et al.
We direct the training to ﬁnd a set of weight deltas for StyleGAN2, which can
generate the same image as the content image for reconstruction. We begin with the
GAN inversion, using e4e to reconstruct a given content portrait image roughly. An
encoder encodes this image into a tensor used by the hyper-network weight generator
modules along with style information to predict weight deltas to apply to the frozen,
pre-trained StyleGAN2. Stylization then occurs by changing the style embedding in the
hypernetwork conditioning.
3.2 Conditioning on style, and facial semantic regions
We further introduce conditioning on a target style image by injecting a style represen-
tation embedding. We project the initial 16x16x512 encoding into 16x16x256, using
ALADIN [ 22] codes to compose the other half of the 16x16x512 tensor. Each ALADIN
code is a 1x256 vector representing the artistic style of an image. We project semantically
arranged ALADIN embeddings into a second 16x16x256, which we then concatenate
together with the ﬁrst to form the 16x16x512 tensor upon which the hypernetwork is
conditioned.
Facial portraits are very heavily grounded in their semantic structure. We therefore
condition the stylization process on these semantic regions to ensure that the content is
maintained. We execute this using segmentation masks extracted via FaRL [28].
To condition on semantic regions, we aim to use the ALADIN style code represent-
ing only the style contained within a given semantic region. Given that ALADIN codes
can only be extracted from square or rectangular inputs, we use the average ALADIN
code extracted across several patches per semantic region.
We use FaRL to compute the semantic regions, extract patches from the image
randomly, and use mean intersection over union (IoU) to ensure that patches mainly
cover pixels attributed to these respective semantic classes for each region. The ALADIN
codes from these patches are averaged to form the average ALADIN code for a given
semantic class. These average style codes are tiled and re-arranged on a per-pixel basis
to match the semantic segmentation maps of the content image before they are projected
by an encoder into the second 16x16x256 tensor, as above.
This projected 16x16x256 semantically arranged ALADIN tensor and the original
16x16x256 tensor encoded from the content image, are concatenated in the channel
dimension to 16x16x512, making up the ﬁnal tensor which the hypernetwork weight
delta generating modules operate over.
3.3 HyperNST training process
We use three iterations per batch reﬁning methodology during training. We include a
patch co-occurrence discriminator Dpatch to introduce a style loss and an image-level
discriminator D. The hypernetwork weight deltas generator His conditioned on the
encoded content images Ec(c), and ALADIN style codes arranged by the semantic
segmentation mask of the content image M(x;Emask), seen in Eq 1.
M(x;Emask) =Emask 
rearrange PP
p=1A(crop(x;SM x)p)
P;SM c!!
(1)