2 D. Ruta et al.
StyleGAN2 model to induce NST. We extend this concept to a feed-forward framework
using a hyper-network to generate the weight updates. Furthermore, we introduce the
use of a metric parameter space (ALADIN [ 22]) originally proposed for style driven
visual search to condition the hyper-network prediction (vs. CLIP in [ 5]) and adaptively
drive this parameterization using a semantic map derived from the source and target
image. Without loss of generality, our experiments focus on the challenging domain of
facial portraits driven using a semantic segmentation algorithm for this content class.
We show our method improves target image content retention versus the state of the
art while retaining comparable accuracy for diverse style transfer from a single model
– and despite using a hyper-network exhibiting comparable inference speed to leading
feed-forward NST [ 19]. Moreover, our method exhibits good controllability; using a
metric space for our style code enables intuitive interpolation between diverse styles
and region-level controllability of those parameters. We adopt the recent ALADIN style
code for this purpose, raising the novel direction of unifying style based visual search
and stylization from a single representation.
2 Related Work
Neural Style Transfer (NST) The seminal work of Gatys et al. [ 6] enabled artistic style
transfer through neural models. This work demonstrates the correlation between artis-
tic style and features extracted from speciﬁc layers in a pre-trained vision model. The
AdaIN work [ 8] introduced parameterized style transfer through ﬁrst and second moment
matching, via mean and standard deviation values extracted from random target style
images. MUNIT [ 9] explores domain translation in images through the de-construction
of images into semantic content maps and global appearance codes. ALADIN [ 22] ex-
plored the creation of a metric space modeling artistic style, across numerous areas of
style. The embedding space was trained in conjunction with AdaIN and a modiﬁed
version of the MUNIT model and weakly supervised contrastive learning over the BAM-
FG dataset. A follow-up work [ 21] studying multi-modal artistic style representation
expanded upon ALADIN, pushing the representation quality further through a vision
transformer model. CycleGAN also explored domain transfer in images, but through
learned model weight spaces, encoding pairwise image translation functions into sepa-
rate generators for each image domain. Enforced by cyclic consistency, the translation
quality between a pair of image domains was high, at the cost of requiring bespoke
models for each domain translation to be trained. Using StyleGAN as a generator model,
Swapping Autoencoders [ 19] directly learn the embedding of images into a StyleGAN
generator’s weight space while simultaneously encoding a vector representation of the
visual appearance of an image externally. These models separately focus on landscapes,
buildings, bedrooms, or faces.
StyleGAN Inversion The evolution of the StyleGAN models [ 12,13,10] explore gener-
ation of extremely realistic portrait images. They use weight modulation based editing
of visual appearance in the generated images. They also undertake preliminary investiga-
tions into the inversion of existing images into the GANs’ weight spaces for reconstruc-
tion. The work in e4e [ 26] includes an undertaking of a deeper analysis of real image