AI for Next Generation Computing: Emerging Trends and Future Directions
Harshit Mehta is Principal Data Scientist with Dell Technologies. He has led many Data Science projects from
ideation to production.He has extensive experience in diﬀerent domains of AI like Natural language Processing,
Fraud Detection and Anomaly Detection. Harshit graduated from University of Texas at Austin with a Masters in
Operation Research.
Soumya K Ghosh received the M.Tech. and Ph.D. degrees from the Department of Computer Science and
Engineering,IndianInstituteofTechnology(IIT)Kharagpur,India.HeiscurrentlyaProfessorwiththeDepartment
of Computer Science and Engineering, IIT Kharagpur. He was with the Indian Space Research Organization, India.
He has authored or coauthored more than 300 research papers in reputed journals and conference proceedings.
His current research interests include spatial data science, spatial web services, and cloud computing. He is the
recipient of National Geospatial Chair Professor award from Department of Science and Technology, Govt. of India. He is senior
member of IEEE and member of ACM.
Thar Baker is Associate Professor in the Department of Computer Science at The University of Sharjah (UoS)
in UAE. Before joining UoS, Thar was Reader in Cloud Engineering and Head of Applied Computing Research
Group (ACRG) in the Faculty of Engineering and Technology at Liverpool John Moores University (LJMU, UK).
He received his PhD in Autonomic Cloud Applications from LJMU in 2010 and became a Senior Fellow of
Higher Education Academy (SFHEA) in 2018. Dr Baker has published numerous refereed research papers in
multidisciplinary research areas including parallel and distributed computing, autonomic computing, federated learning, and IoT.
Ajith Kumar Parlikad is Professor of Asset Management at Cambridge University Engineering Department. He
is based at the Institute for Manufacturing, where he is the Head of the Asset Management research group.
He is a Fellow and Tutor at Hughes Hall. Ajith leads research activities on engineering asset management and
maintenance. His particular focus is examining how asset information can be used to improve asset performance
through eﬀective decision-making. He actively engages with industry through research and consulting projects. He
is currently the Scientiﬁc Secretary of the IFAC TC5.1 Working Group on ‘Advanced Maintenance Engineering,
Services and Technology’ and sits on the steering committee of the UK Digital Twin Hub. Ajith’s current research focuses on the
development and exploitation of digital twins of complex asset systems bringing together data from disparate sources to improve
asset management. Ajith joined Cambridge University to read for his PhD degree, which he successfully completed in August 2006.
For his PhD, he developed a methodology for quantifying the beneﬁts of improving product information availability and quality on
the eﬀectiveness of product recovery processes.
Hanan Lutﬁyya is a Professor and the Chair of the Department of Computer Science, University of Western
Ontario (UWO), Canada. Her research interests include Internet of Things, software engineering, self-adaptive and
self-managing systems, autonomic computing, monitoring and diagnostics, mobile systems, policies, and clouds.
She was a recipient of the UWO Faculty Scholar Award in 2006. She is a Past Member of the Natural Science
and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) Discovery Grant Committee, and a Past Member and
the Chair of an NSERC Strategic Grants Committee. She was a member of the Computer Science Accreditation
Council. She is currently an Associate Editor of the IEEE Transactions on Network and Service Management and
has recently served as the Program Co-Chair for the IEEE/IFIP Network Operations and Management Symposium and the IEEE
International Conference on Network and Service Management. She is currently on the steering committee for the Ontario Celebration
of Women in Computing Conference.
Salil S. Kanhere received the MS and PhD degrees from Drexel University, Philadelphia, USA. He is a Professor
of Computer Science and Engineering at UNSW Sydney, Australia. His research interests include the Internet
of Things, cyber-physical systems, blockchain, pervasive computing, cybersecurity, and applied machine learning.
Salil is also aﬃliated with CISRO’s Data61 and the Cybersecurity Cooperative Research Centre. He is a Senior
Member of the IEEE and ACM, an ACM Distinguished Speaker and an IEEE Computer Society Distinguished
Visitor. He has received the Friedrich Wilhelm Bessel Research Award (2020) and the Humboldt Research Fellowship (2014), both
Sukhpal Singh Gill et al.: Preprint Accepted for Publication in Elsevier IoT Journal, 24 Feb 2022 Page 41 of 43