AI for Next Generation Computing: Emerging Trends and Future Directions
•API Gateway: An API gateway that is both centrally controlled and entirely managed is achievable with a
serverless API gateway [37]. This application makes it feasible to administer, secure, and analyse APIs on a
globalscale.Themanagementofauthorisationandotherservices(suchascontentanduserservices)istherefore
madesimplerforaserverlessAPIgateway.ServerlesscomputinginfrastructureenablesautomatedAPIsupport
using AI and database connectivity for every service that requires it, as stated previously [134].
PlatformsacrosstheboardareembracingAIbecauseitisthefutureoftechnology.We’vebeenabletomakebetter,
faster judgments because of these AI-powered platforms. They’ve changed the way businesses do business, the way
customersinteractwiththem,andthewaywegatherandanalysebusinessdata.Complicatedmachinelearningsystems
haveasigniﬁcantimpactontheproductivityandeﬃciencyofdevelopers[124].Aserverlessdesign,ontheotherhand,
addressesmostoftheissuesthatdevelopersexperience.Usingaserverlessarchitecture,themachinelearningmodels
areproperlyhandledandtheresourcesareeﬀectivelymanaged[135].Asaresultofthisdesign,developersmayspend
more time and resources working on AI model training rather than server infrastructure management.
Complex challenges typically need the development of machine learning systems. They analyse and preprocess
data,trainmodels,andﬁne-tuneAImodels,amongotherthings.Asaresult,APIsshouldbeabletorunsmoothly[136].
Serverless computing and AI should be used to ensure that data storage and message delivery are uninterrupted.
Machine learning models may beneﬁt greatly from serverless architecture, which oﬀers a wide range of options and
advantages [137]. Virtually little administration is required to run any form of application or back-end service. As
incoming requests of any traﬃc volume come in, the infrastructure provider allocates its own computing execution
power accurately.
AI/ML integrated serverless architecture will have following merits:
•Fair pricing: Serverless design makes execution-based pricing possible, so you only pay for services that are
really being used [138]. As a result, the pricing model is more ﬂexible and the cost is signiﬁcantly reduced.
•Independent work: Serverless computing enables the development teams to operate autonomously with little
intervention and delays. Models are viewed as distinct functions because of this. Invoking this function has no
impact on the rest of the system and can be done at any time [37].
•Autoscaling: This feature frees up the developer to work on other projects while the system adjusts itself to the
changingscope[139].Storagepredictionisnolongernecessarywhenusingautoscalingbecausedevelopersmay
make changes on the ﬂy.
•Pay-as-per-usage:Usinganewmodelcalled“pay-per-use”,customersonlypayforresourceswhentheyreallyuse
them.Youdon’tpayfortheamountofserverswithserverlesscomputing,butratherfortheuseofservices[140].
Combined with the scale-to-zero feature of serverless, one just has to pay for the number of executions and the
length of time resources are utilised for.
•Hassle-free server management: Serverless computing provides backend services that may be accessed only
whentheyareneeded,freeingusersfromtheburdenofmanagingservers[141].Aserverlessserviceeliminates
theneedfortheusertobeconcernedwiththeinfrastructurethatunderpinstheservice.Withserverlessbackends,
serviceprovidersdon’thavetomodifytheirsetupsiftheywanttoraiseorreducetheamountofbandwidththey
arereservingorpayingfor[139].Itwasdiﬃcultandexpensiveforwebdeveloperstoownthehardwarenecessary
to run a server before the introduction of the Internet.
•High availability: Serverless programmes have become more popular due to their built-in availability and fault
tolerance. No need to construct services that will deliver these features to your application, therefore you don’t
have to. Your company doesn’t need to invest in new capabilities because they are constantly available [142].
By reinventing automation and enhancing the corporate environment, AI has taken over today’s life and made it
easier. Machine learning algorithms on serverless architecture may be used in a variety of ways to make jobs easier
and data more accurate [139]:
•Applications that employ GPS gather user data, such as their location and their purchasing habits, to provide
suggestions about their preferences or the next thing they should buy. AI assesses the frequency of alerts and
suggestsanumberofoptionsthattheappusersmaybeabletobearandenjoybeforeturningoﬀthenotiﬁcations.
Using this method ensures that clients ﬁnd the material useful and enriches the user experience [140].
Sukhpal Singh Gill et al.: Preprint Accepted for Publication in Elsevier IoT Journal, 24 Feb 2022 Page 18 of 43