AI for Next Generation Computing: Emerging Trends and Future Directions
downtime and impact [59]. As a result, the cost of doing business is transformed, and the customer experience
is transformed as well.
•CostSavings:Cloudcomputingallowsbusinessestojustpayfortheresourcestheyutilise.Thissavesasigniﬁcant
amountofmoneycomparedtothetypicalinfrastructureexpendituresofbuildingandmaintainingmassivedata
centres [60]. Saved money may be utilised to build more strategic AI tools and accelerators, which can then
be used to increase revenue and save the company money at the core [61]. This will lead to better operational
quality and cheaper expenses.
3.1.1. Open Challenges
The following issues that may arise when these two technologies are combined:
•Integration: It is never easy to get started with a seamless integration of two diﬀerent technologies. In order to
accomplishthisintegration,companiesmustﬁrstmovealloftheirappsandtechnologiestothecloud[57].This
is no small feat for many companies. Businesses may only begin to consider cloud-based AI after undergoing
such a seismic shift. Thus, the technological sync is excessively reliant on companies that are implementing
tangible digital transformations of their systems.
•Inadequatedata:Largedatasetswithhigh-qualitydataareidealforAItechnologies.Businessesmustmakesure
thattheirdataisbothaccessibleandcleaninorderforAItobeofanyuse[62].Becausedataisoftenunorganised
or missing, this is a big diﬃculty. It is critical that the solution’s value be derived from high-quality data.
•Securityandprivacyissues:Topreventdatabreaches,businessesmustbevigilantaboutprotectingtheirsensitive
and ﬁnancial information from adversaries, who are likely to target them [63].
ThissynchronisationofAIwiththecloudnecessitatestremendousknowledge,resources,andﬁnancialinvestment
if it is to be worthwhile for businesses. It is only when cloud computing and AI systems are properly integrated that
companies will be able to utilise a wide range of powerful machine learning capabilities, such as image recognition
and natural language processing [64, 65]. As a result, additional businesses will follow suit in the future. Businesses
will require an AI cloud in order to keep up with the rapid advancements in cloud computing. After successful
implementation of it, AI operations will eventually become the standard approach for cloud management [47]. The
cloudisalreadyapowerfultechnology,buttheybelievethatAIwillmakeitevenmoreso.Withthiscombination,data
analysis and management will undergo a radical shift. The marriage of AI with the cloud is a game-changer and will
bring unparalleled value to end-users in a world ﬂooded with vast volumes of data [62]. Now that cloud computing
andAIaremorewidelyavailable,theyareproducingupheavalinawiderangeofindustriesthroughouttheglobe.Itis
clear that technology has moved from being merely operational to one of strategic importance. AI is expected to help
the company tackle new and more visible challenges, as well as open up a new universe for its potential clients.
3.2. Fog Computing
Fog computing was established to supplement cloud computing services because of the rising use of the IoT and
the necessity to handle and store massive amounts of produced data [66]. IoT applications with minimal reaction
time requirements can be supported by fog computing, which provides basic network services [67]. It is diﬃcult to
distribute IoT application activities eﬃciently inside fog nodes in order to fulﬁl QoS and quality of experience (QoE)
restrictions due to fogs’ scattered, heterogeneous, and restricted resource nature [68]. Vehicle-to-Everything (V2X),
healthmonitoringandindustrialautomationemployfogcomputingbecauseitprovidescomputingcapabilitiesnearto
theusertomeetreactiontimeexpectationsfortheseapplications[69].Asaresult,theseappscreateenormousamounts
of information from the widespread use of IoT devices. Because of delays in long-distance data transmission and
network congestion, cloud computing is unable to meet latency requirements [66]. It provides a network of gateways,
routers, and compute nodes between the source of data and cloud computing centres. Because of the low latency
and energy eﬃciency, as well as the reduction in bandwidth required for data transport, fog computing extends cloud
computing [70]. Fog nodes can be used to process sensitive data instead of sending it to the cloud, which improves
security[71].UsingthedatageneratedfromvariousIoTdevices,theseapplicationsaimtoprovidehelpfulinformation
while also addressing latency concerns [67]. In recent years, researchers have increasingly turned to AI to help them
analyse large amounts of data for the aforementioned uses. AI’s Machine Learning (ML) and Deep Learning (DL)
Sukhpal Singh Gill et al.: Preprint Accepted for Publication in Elsevier IoT Journal, 24 Feb 2022 Page 12 of 43