AI for Next Generation Computing: Emerging Trends and Future Directions
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                
                             
Sensors  
Monitor              
 
Effectors  
Analyze        
 
Plan                   
 
Executor         
     
Knowledge Base                              
Figure 1: MAPE-K loop for Autonomic Computing
1.1. AI/ML for Next Generation Computing: A Vision
AI and ML can be used to support and develop autonomic behaviours based on data collected about systems
operations.MLtechniques,forexample,canbeusedtodiscoverpatternsintheworkload,wherethesepatternscanbe
usedtooptimiseresourcemanagement[14].Additionally,tomitigatemodeluncertainty,ML-baseddynamicalsystem
identiﬁcation methods, such as recurrent neural networks, could be adaptively invoked by the autonomic manager to
achieveself-learning.Thus,black-andgray-boxmodelsofthemanagedsystemcanbegeneratedduringaconceptdrift
andsubsequentlyveriﬁedtochecktheirsanityoreven,detectmission-criticalalterationsofthesystem’soperation[15].
Further, AI may be employed in the analysis and planning stages of autonomic systems that are often arranged as
monitor-analyze-plan and execute (MAPE) cycles [16], in addition to the use of techniques from control theory. It is
thecombinationoffeedbackcontrolwithdata-drivenmodelconstructionusingMLthatoﬀerskeybeneﬁtsinsupport
autonomic self-management.
Among the notable types of autonomous computing solutions: feedback-based control is one common solution.
Theuseofself-organizingsystems,suchasparticleswarmoptimisation,cellularautomataandgeneticalgorithms,are
others. In the ﬁrst category of solutions, systematic techniques for designing closed-loop systems capable of tracking
systemperformanceandalteringcontrolparametersareprovidedbyautonomiccomputing[17].Thereisavastcorpus
of control theory literature and design tools that are used in these techniques. When it comes to the second type of
solution, a variety of newly developing peer-to-peer approaches are now being employed to create massively scaled
self-managing networks [18].
1.2. Motivation and Aim
Autonomic computing has been integrated in computing paradigms such as cloud, fog, edge, serverless and
quantum computing using AI/ML techniques [19]. The use of autonomic computing techniques is particularly
signiﬁcant when there is a large number of potential conﬁguration options for a system. The greater the potential
parameterspaceoverwhichconﬁgurationoptionscanvary,thegreaterthepotentialtooptimisesearchoverthisspace
ofpossibleoptions.Autonomiccomputingtechniquesaremostuseful underthehood ,i.e.asaprogrammaticinterface
that can be invoked directly [20] from an application.
There are many applications that can manage node failures, network setup/updates and a limited ability to carry
outperformanceoptimizationontheirownsincemostpeer-to-peernetworksarefundamentallyautonomous.AI-and
ML-basedself-managingcapabilitiesarebecomingincreasinglycommoninwebservicesanddatacentermanagement
software, allowing these systems to automatically adapt to shifting workloads [21]. However, autonomic features are
not always included in schedulers and workﬂow managers, as such systems frequently lack the ability to monitor
system condition and provide real-time feedback, making it diﬃcult for these systems to be fully autonomous [22].
Integrating “tuning” capability that makes use of AI/ML techniques can extend the capability of such systems. For
instance, self-managed computing platforms, such as Hadoop/MapReduce, provide self-healing and self-organizing
capabilities that enable the use of a large number of resources [23].
AI-andML-basedautonomiccomputingwillbecomeprevalentwithincreasingscaleandinterconnectivityofour
systems,makingmanualadministrationandadaptationofsuchsystemschallengingandexpensive.WeexpectAI-and
Sukhpal Singh Gill et al.: Preprint Accepted for Publication in Elsevier IoT Journal, 24 Feb 2022 Page 3 of 43