AI for Next Generation Computing: Emerging Trends and Future Directions
from the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation in Germany. He has held visiting positions at I2R Singapore, Technical University
Darmstadt, University of Zurich and Graz University of Technology. He serves as the Editor in Chief of the Ad Hoc Networks Journal
and as an Associate Editor of IEEE Transactions On Network and Service Management, Computer Communications, and Pervasive
and Mobile Computing. He has served on the organising committee of several IEEE/ACM international conferences including IEEE
PerCom, IEEE/ACM IPSN, IEEE ICBC, IEEE WoWMoM, ACM MSWiM, etc. He has co-authored a book titled Blockchain for
Cyberphysical Systems published by Artech House in 2020. Further details are at: https://salilkanhere.net/ .
RizosSakellariou obtained his Ph.D. from the University of Manchester in 1997. Since then he held positions with
Rice University and the University of Cyprus, while currently he is Professor with the University of Manchester
leading a laboratory that carries out research in High-Performance, Parallel and Distributed systems. He has carried
out research on a number of topics related to parallel and distributed computing, with an emphasis on problems
stemming from eﬃcient resource utilization and workload allocation and scheduling issues. He has published over
160 research papers, His research has been supported by several UK and EU projects and has been on the Program
Committee of over 180 conferences and workshops. He values collaboration and a strong work ethic.
Schahram Dustdar is Full Professor of computer science heading the Research Division of Distributed Systems
at the TU Wien, Austria. He is founding Co-Editor-in-Chief of the new ACM Transactions on Internet of Things
(ACM TIoT) as well as Editor-in-Chief of Computing (Springer). He is an Associate Editor of IEEE Transactions
on Services Computing, IEEE Transactions on Cloud Computing, ACM Transactions on the Web, and ACM
Transactions on Internet Technology, as well as on the editorial board of IEEE Internet Computing and IEEE
Computer. Dustdar is IEEE Fellow (2016), recipient of the ACM Distinguished Scientist Award (2009), the ACM
Distinguished Speaker ward (2021), the IBM Faculty Award (2012), an Elected Member of the Academia Europaea: The Academy
of Europe, where he is Chairman of the Informatics Section. In 2021 Dustdar was elected EAI Fellow as well as Fellow and President
for the Asia-Paciﬁc Artiﬁcial Intelligence Association (AAIA).
Omer Rana is a Professor of Performance Engineering in School of Computer Science & Informatics at Cardiﬀ
UniversityandDeputyDirectoroftheWelshe-ScienceCentre.HeholdsaPh.D.fromImperialCollege.Hisresearch
interests extend to three main areas within computer science: problem solving environments, high performance
agent systems and novel algorithms for data analysis and management. Moreover, he leads the Complex Systems
research group in the School of Computer Science & Informatics and is director of the ‘Internet of Things’ Lab, at
Cardiﬀ University. He has published over 310 papers in peer-reviewed international conferences and journals. He
serves on the Editorial Board of IEEE Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems, ACM Transactions on Internet Technology,
and ACM Transactions on Autonomous and Adaptive Systems. He has served as a Co-Editor for a number of journals, including
Concurrency: Practice and Experience (John Wiley), IEEE Transactions on System, Man, and Cybernetics: Systems, and IEEE
Transactions on Cloud Computing.
IvonaBrandic is University Professor for HPC Systems at the Institute of Information Systems Engineering, Vienna
University of Technology (TU Wien) where she leads High Performance Computing Systems Research Group. In
2015, she was awarded the FWF START prize, the highest Austrian award for early career researchers. Since 2016
she has been a member of the Young Academy of the Austrian Academy of Sciences. She received her PhD degree
in 2007 and her venia docendi for practical computer science in 2013, both from Vienna University of Technology.
Brandic was on the Editorial Board of IEEE Magazine on Cloud Computing, IEEE Transactions on Parallel and
Distributed Systems and IEEE Transactions on Cloud Computing. In 2011 she received the Distinguished Young Scientist Award
from the Vienna University of Technology for her project on the Holistic Energy Eﬃcient Hybrid Clouds. Her interests comprise
virtualized HPC systems, energy eﬃcient ultra-scale distributed systems, massive-scale data analytics, Cloud & workﬂow Quality of
Service (QoS), and service-oriented distributed systems. In 2019 she chaired the CHIST-ERA panel (ANR) on Smart Distribution of
Computing in Dynamic Networks (SDCDN).
Sukhpal Singh Gill et al.: Preprint Accepted for Publication in Elsevier IoT Journal, 24 Feb 2022 Page 42 of 43