AI for Next Generation Computing: Emerging Trends and Future Directions
3.5.2. Quantum Artiﬁcial Intelligence (QAI)
Quantum computing is more eﬀective than classical computing in managing large amounts of data. A quantum
algorithmisamathematicalalgorithmthatexecutesonarealisticmodelofquantumcomputation;thequantumcircuitry
ofcomputationisthemostoftenusedmodel.Thestateofaquantumcomputingsystemcanbeseenastheinformation
encodedinthephysicalquantumstatesupportingthespeciﬁcimplementation.Quantuminformationtheoryisbasedon
thesefundamentalobject,quantumbits(theunitofinformation),quantumgates(thedevicesthatoperatesonquantum
bits), and quantum channels that connect gates and circuitry to preserve quantum superposition and entanglement.
Quantum computers can handle and process exponentially larger amount of data than conventional computers can,
because they intrinsically incorporate and manage the tensor product structure of composite quantum systems, which
thenumberofparametersneededtoobtainacompletedescriptionscaleas 2N,whereNisthenumberofqubits.So,for
instance,ifN= 100thevectorspaceinwhichthequantumsystemevolveswouldhaveadimensionthatis 2100.That
meansthatwhilewemayneeda 100qubitsonaquantumcomputer(assumingthatwedonotneederrorcorrection)to
describetheevolutionofcompositesystem,thesamedescribedonaclassicalmachine,wouldrequire 2100parameters.
Itisthenclearthatquantumcomputersareintrinsicallypreparedinmanagingtheevolutionofsystemsdescribedbya
large number of parameters.
Quantum devices, coherently controlling quantum superposition and entanglement, can exploit quantum paral-
lelism,i.e.,theycansimultaneously exploremultipleevolution.Forexample,inclassicaldecisiontheproblemisoften
represented as a decision tree , where the evolution of the decision path is determined by a binary choice and the state
of initialization of the register. This method becomes less eﬀective when the creation of branches form each decision
split-pointslowsdownbecausethetimeneededtoobtainanoutcometodecidethesplitistoolong.Quantumdevices,
exploiting quantum superposition to initialize the input register, and quantum evolution (that coherently preserves
superposition)mayexplore,simultaneously,thevariouspossiblebranchesofadecision,speedingupconsiderablythe
application of these kind of decision-tree approaches. It is still diﬃcult to provide a certain foreseeable future for the
developmentandtoknowpreciselyhowandwhenwewillhaveacompleteanddeepapplicationofquantumadvantage,
however it is reasonable to say that the exponential speedup of quantum computing will involve all sort of problems
with large amounts of data to manage, like pattern recognition, or training in machine learning models.
Trainingofmachinelearningmodels,likeinreinforcementlearningbasemuchoftheireﬀectivenessonthespeed
atwhichthe agentslearn,interactingwiththeenvironment:Theyinteract,obtainsomefeedback,andadapt(learning)
their behaviour on the base of the feedback received. This approach has been conﬁrmed, e.g., in a recent experiment
[170] where not only the training of agents has been improved and accelerated by using a quantum channel, but it
has been also integrated to implement a hybrid quantum/classical scenario, using a very promising integrated nano-
photonic processor, where classical communication are used for tuning and to achieve the optimal control of the
learning progress.
Clearly, if the computational speedup is exponential, as it is for quantum computing vs classical, when dealing
withlargeamountsofdata,suchaspeedupmayhaveapplicationonmanydiﬀerentaspectsofthedevelopmentofAI.
Figure 5 provides a clear view of quantum computing with AI for modern applications.
Biometric recognition and autonomous driving are two critical examples that can utilize QAI for processing
workloads. The fact that quantum computers can process more data in a shorter time than traditional computers has
revealed the concept of QAI [171]. An example scheme for QAI is given in Figure 5. QAI involves combination of
Quantum Computing and AI to achieve superior performance results compared to classical AI [172]. Reinforcement
Learning(RL)isawell-establishedbranchofMLthataimstomaximizetherewardbytrialanderrorbymeansofanthe
agent[139].ItiscertainthatcombiningRLwithQuantumComputingwillleadtogreatadvancesincomputingsystems.
With quantum computers accelerating machine learning, the potential for impact is certain to be enormous[173].
Applications of quantum AI for quantum search, quantum game theory, quantum Algorithms for decision problems,
algorithms for learning are shown in the Figure 5.
The ability of quantum computing to execute a task quickly, may be helpful for AI systems employed, e.g., in
problemsrelatedtoautonomousdrivingnatural,naturallanguageprocessing(NLP)algorithms[174]and,ingeneral,
in tasks where classical approaches are extremely time-consuming and expensive. Characters and words are the basis
forthecurrentalgorithms.Theideaofbecoming“meaningaware”isagoalofquantumalgorithms[175].Tobuildreal-
timespeechpatterns,thesealgorithmsmayusephrasesandparagraphs.Itisimportanttonotethatpredictiveanalytics
are a key AI application and commercial use case. Massive amounts of data can be used to train AI systems that are
adeptatmachinelearninganddeeplearning.However,complexandambiguousissuessuchasstockmarketprojections
and climate change control systems require unique data created by quantum principles employing entanglement
Sukhpal Singh Gill et al.: Preprint Accepted for Publication in Elsevier IoT Journal, 24 Feb 2022 Page 22 of 43