AI for Next Generation Computing: Emerging Trends and Future Directions
subﬁeldsgiveusefuldatainsightsanddecisionhelp[72,73].Followingthat,wearediscussingsomeoftheAI-enabled
fog computing technologies that make these applications possible.
For the IoT, 5G signiﬁes more than just a new era of wireless innovation. More than trillions of sensors, gadgets,
and machines are powered by AI and run autonomously from the data centre to the edge of the network [72, 73].
In terms of speeding up data analysis and decision making, fog computing and edge computing are the two best
technologies. Many “fog devices” will be networked and co-located as part of a distributed computing system known
as fog computing [66]. Edge management, data collection, monitoring, analytics, and streaming all take place at the
edgeofthenetworkinthefogcomputingnodes[74].Whilefogcomputingiscapableofconnectingalimitednumber
ofdevices,thistechnologyhasafargreatercapabilitytohandlereal-timerequestsandtoaggregatedatafromamuch
larger numberof sources. Input-responsedelay is thereforegreatly reduced. Wehave been ableto access resourcesof
alltypes,havescalablearchitectureswiththepressofabutton,andutilisethemfromanywheresinceAmazon’scloud
was launched in 2006 [75]. Cisco claimed in 2008 that IoT, is the one of the technologies that will beneﬁt from the
cloud, but its roots date back to 1999 [76]. For example, we can save sensor data and act on it, automate processes
using AI, and react in real time to circumstances that previously necessitated direct involvement. When IoT was ﬁrst
introduced, it promised to extend to both professional and personal areas, and how sensorization and communication
protocolshadtochangetomeetthesenewdemands[77].Newparadigmshaveemergedasaresultoftheintegrationof
sensordataandtheapplicationofAItoit.Newtermslike“Smarthome”arebeingusedtodescribenewtechnologies
thatmakeiteasierandmoreconvenienttomanageourhomes’energyuseandotheraspectsofourdailylives[78].Ona
broaderscale,theterm“SmartCity”isusedtodescribecities,while“SmartFactory”isusedtodescribemanufacturing
andprocessingfacilities.Onethingtheyallhaveincommonistheutilisationofdataandautomateddecision-making
in combination with automation, which can be easily achieved using AI and ML techniques.
An example of this is altering the conﬁguration of a computer or railway, putting the brakes on an autonomous
automobile,orsendingawarningforapreventativemaintenance.Itisevidentfromtheexamplesthatdecision-making
and action-taking cannot be done on the cloud, but rather on devices that are closer to the sensors that collect the
data. In contrast to cloud computing, fog computing oﬀers a variety of advantages for IoT applications [79]. First and
foremost, quicker and real-time processing are possible because local processing is used rather than relying on the
cloud. As a result of the large number of IoT devices already in use and expected in the future, less network traﬃc
meansbettercommunication.Additionally,moreappsmaybedevelopedandoperatedeverywherethereisanInternet
connection. We need to think how AI could help in the automation?
3.2.1. Open Challenges
Researchonapplicationdeploymenthasalreadybeendoneinseveraldomains,suchasindustryandmanufacturing,
but there are still a number of issues that need to be addressed.
•Execution Time: For both service providers and customers, time is the most pressing issue. One of the key
motivationsforputtingsoftwareinthefogistospeedupuserreactiontime.Thetimeparameterwasoneofthe
performance indicators investigated in the literature [80, 81]. When there are more demands, the QoS suﬀers.
This diﬃculty has been partially alleviated by the presented techniques, but it remains a concern [82]. In the
application placement problem, applied techniques for optimising time performance metrics in the category of
deep learning algorithms [83, 84, 85]. We may be able to achieve better outcomes if we use diﬀerent machine
learning algorithms and evolutionary algorithms or novel combinatorial techniques.
•Mobility-awareness:Fogcomputing’slackofmobilitysupportmaybenoticedwhendealingwithalargenumber
of mobile users with varying application needs [86]. Consequently, migration methods and architectures that
can handle a wide range of mobility activities are required. Migrating VMs or containers is something that has
been discussed in a few publications [87]. Moving to a new location may be expensive, as well. Reinforcement
learning(RL)approacheslikeQ-learningandState–Action–Reward–State–Action(SARSA)havebeenusedto
study this topic [88], but it remains a challenge in practical contexts where there are many requests [89, 90].
•ResourceScheduling:Anotherproblemtheauthorsencounterismanagingresourcesinadynamicenvironment
like fog, which has a limited amount of resources and a short reaction time for the user. The Fog environment
is less ﬂexible than the cloud when it comes to resource sharing [91]. Therefore, the issue of eﬃcient resource
utilisationmuststillbeaddressed.Resourceallocationwasbasedonasurveyofexistingresearchandtheuseof
neural networks, support vector machines, and k-nearest neighbours (KNNs) [92].
Sukhpal Singh Gill et al.: Preprint Accepted for Publication in Elsevier IoT Journal, 24 Feb 2022 Page 13 of 43