AI for Next Generation Computing: Emerging Trends and Future Directions
with a speciﬁc node. ‘DOWN’ status is reported for that unit, and the unit is restarted, and the state of that node is
measured. Alternatively, new resources are added if the node state goes to ‘ACTIVE’. After an alarm is sent by a
hardware or software agent, the analysis unit begins examining the behaviour of the node’s hardware and software
(self-healing).Node‘N’shouldbesetto“DOWN”ifanalertisproducedduringworkloadexecutionandrestarted,to
measure the state of that node. The execution of the node’s state switches to ‘ACTIVE’ if execution is continued, or
alternativelyanotherreliablenodeischosen.Self-protectionbeginsbyexaminingattacklogsonceanalarmisproduced
bythesecurityagentandasignatureiscreatedbytheanalysingcomponent.Afteranalarmisissuedbyahardwareor
softwarecomponent,theanalysisunitbeginsstudyingthebehaviourofanode’shardwareandsoftwarecomponents.It
isnecessarytodesignateahardwarecomponentas“DOWN”,resetthefailedcomponent,andthenstartitagaininorder
to predict whether or not it is “CRITICAL” or “ERROR”. Again when the data has been processed, this framework
takes care of implementing the alert-related actions on its own.
Further,beforeanyadaptationdoestakeplace,themoduleswillﬁrstprovideevidencethattheproposedplanwill
indeed complete successful. This is achieved using a combination of formal guarantees, which can be derived from
theuseofcontroltheory.AnAI-modelcanalsobeusedtopredictwhentheusersmightissueagoalupdate–basedon
external information or other types of operational data—and prepare/assess an adaptation plan ahead of time.
2.3.4. Executor
Aplanisputintoactionbytheexecutor[2,8,9,10],whoseprimarypurposeinself-optimizationtoenhanceQoS
and execute tasks within a pre-deﬁned deadline. Using the data from the analyzer, the executor may quickly, cheaply
andeﬃcientlyaddanewnodetothepoolofresources.Iftheresourcesarenotalreadyinthepoolofavailableresources,
then notify the user and negotiate a SLA before adding a new node from the backup pool of resources with the least
amountofworkload,priceandpowerusagerequirements.TheseaspectscanbepredictedinadvanceusingAI/ML.A
node that is not reliable should be replaced with a node that is the most stable amongst those available. To relaunch
the node, the current status of a node is stored (checkpointed). The node is then restarted. If the problem persists, an
alert is subsequently generated.
Forself-healing,wheneveranewcomponentisintroduced,itshouldbelinkedtoothercomponentsandrestarted.
2.3.5. Eﬀector
New policies, regulations, and notiﬁcations are sent to other computing nodes via the eﬀector [2, 8, 9, 10], which
serves as an interface between the various computing nodes. Through the eﬀector, the computing nodes can work
together to form a more powerful system. It is worthwhile mentioning that a system-of-systems approach is likely to
beleveragedforsuchapplications;hence,eﬀectorsofatopsystemmightbetriggeringadaptationofabottomsystem
and so on.
2.3.6. Knowledge Base
Themainaspectsofinformationstoredintheknowledgebasearethefollowing:(a)Thecurrentandpreviousstates
of the system (including deployed applications, available computing resources, etc.), whose values are read via the
system’smonitors.(b)Thedesiredstateofthesystem,whichisdrivenbyspeciﬁcationssetbytheuser/admin/operator
ofthesystem;theyincludebothfunctionalrequirements,suchasthemicroservicesnetworkofdeployedapplications,
as well as nonfunctional requirements, such as QoS Service Level Objectives (SLOs) on desired response time, tail
latency,targetresourceutilization,etc.(c)Current,pastandpredictedmodels—aswellasmetamodelsandsurrogate
models—ofthesystemanditsenvironmentgeneratedviaAI/MLaswellastheeﬃcacyofthevariousAI/MLmethods
used for their training. (d) Current and past execution plans that are devised by the planner module and implemented
by the executor module. (e) The actual code of the various interfaces the system provides to enable informed self-
adaptationbyautonomicallyincorporatingimprovedmethodsforvariousoperatingaspects.Forexample,newAI/ML,
scheduling and resource management algorithms, could be selected by the self-adaptation algorithm and added in,
which would eliminate the need for the software engineering team to have to patch the system. (f) Further, the
Knowledge Base will maintain pre-stored policies with predeﬁned conﬁgurations to support system management. It
is the responsibility of the system administrator to periodically update the policies stored in the Knowledge Base to
reﬂect changes in resource scheduling regulations. A system admin will be replaced by an AI-based autonomic agent
to handle the execution automatically.
Crucially, the knowledge module needs to provide a centralized location for the various running tasks, which
could be executed as threads, processes and of course across multiple nodes of the distributed cluster, to safely
Sukhpal Singh Gill et al.: Preprint Accepted for Publication in Elsevier IoT Journal, 24 Feb 2022 Page 9 of 43