AI for Next Generation Computing: Emerging Trends and Future Directions
ML-basedautonomiccomputingwillbethenorminthefuture—withhumanusersstillabletoinﬂuencethebehaviour
of these systems through the use of judiciously integrated interfaces. Crucially, with the advent of cyberphysical
systems and digital twins, quality-assured and mission-critical adaptations will become mandatory because the self-
adaptive software will be responsible for physical assets, such as the unit operations of a processing plant.
But how should self-adaptive systems and AI/ML be combined? According to IBM, an autonomic system must
meet the following eight criteria for computing systems using AI and ML techniques [2, 8, 9, 10, 24, 25, 26, 27]:
•The resources that are available to the AI-powered system, as well as the capabilities and limits of the system,
must be known by the system.
•As the computing environment changes, e.g., because of a concept drift, the system must be able to adapt and
reconﬁgure autonomously.
•An eﬃcient computer process requires a system that can maximise its performance via AI- and ML-based
prediction.
•When an error occurs, the system should be able to ﬁx itself or redirect processes away from the source of the
issue.
•To ensure overall system security and integrity, the system must be able to detect, identify, and respond to
numerous forms of threats automatically.
•Astheenvironmentchanges,thesystemmustbeabletointeractwithanddevelopcommunicationprotocolswith
other systems.
Despite the system’s transparency, it must be able to predict demand on its resources, which can be forecasted
with AI/ML techniques. Small, even inconspicuous computers will be able to communicate with each other across
more linkednetworks, leading tothe notion of “TheInternet of Everything(IoE)”, thanks inpartto the emergenceof
ubiquitous computing and autonomic computing [28]. Crucially, AI-powered self-adaptive systems promise to cost-
eﬀectivelyandsustainablymeetchangingrequirementsinachangingenvironmentandinthepresenceofuncertainty—
vs., just adding more and more resources. Hence, in conjunction with the latest AI and ML techniques, autonomic
computing is being studied and applied by a number of industry giants.
1.3. Beneﬁts of AI/ML-integrated Next Generation Computing
AI-basedAutonomiccomputing’sprimaryadvantageislowertotalcostofownership[29].Asaresult,maintenance
expenditureswillbesigniﬁcantlyreduced.Therewillalsobeareductioninthenumberofpeopleneededtomaintainthe
systems. AI-powered automated IT systems will save deployment and maintenance costs, time, and boost IT system
stability. Companies will be able to better manage their business using IT systems that can adopt and implement
directives based on business strategy and can make alterations in response to changing surroundings, according to
the higher-order advantages. Server consolidation is another beneﬁt of using AI-based autonomic computing, since it
reduces the cost and human labour required to maintain huge server farms [30]. Management of computer systems
should be made easier using AI for autonomous computing. As a result, computing systems will be signiﬁcantly
improved. Another example of an application is server load distribution, which may be accomplished by distributing
workacrossseveralservers[31].Further,cost-eﬀectiveandsustainablepowersupplypoliciescanbeaccomplishedby
continuously monitoring the power supply.
As a consequence of AI, the following changes have occurred in autonomic computing:
•Cost-eﬀective:Usingcomputersystemsinsteadofon-sitedatacentreshasitsadvantages.Despitethehighinitial
costs,organisationsmayeasilyacquireAItechnologyviaamonthlychargeinthecloud.SystemsusingAImay
analyse data without involving a human being.
•Autonomic: Enterprises may become more eﬃcient, strategic, and insight-driven through the use of AI cloud
computing.AIhasthepotentialtoboostproductivitybyautomatingtediousandrepetitivetasks,aswellasdoing
data analysis without the use of operator interaction.
•Data Organization: Real-time personalisation, anomaly detection, and management scenario prediction may be
achieved by integrating AI technology with Google Cloud Stream analytics.
Sukhpal Singh Gill et al.: Preprint Accepted for Publication in Elsevier IoT Journal, 24 Feb 2022 Page 4 of 43