AI for Next Generation Computing: Emerging Trends and Future Directions
Next 
Generation 
Computing 
Paradigms Cloud 
Computing
Fog 
Computing
Edge 
ComputingServerless 
ComputingQuantum 
Computing
Figure 4: Emerging computing paradigms
Cloud computing environments and solutions are helping businesses to become more agile, adaptable, and cost-
eﬀectivebecausethissigniﬁcantlycutsinfrastructureadministrationexpensesforcorporations[50].Asawaytohandle
enormousdatarepositories,simplifydata,improveworkﬂows,andcreatereal-timeinsightsforday-to-dayoperations,
AI gives companies more freedom. The operational weight may be shifted from processes and people to engineering
and data [51]. That is why AI is boosting cloud computing in a variety of ways. The Software as a Service (SaaS)
paradigm is currently being used to successfully employ cloud-based AI [52]. SaaS companies are incorporating AI
into their solutions, which provides clients and end-users with enhanced capabilities. Another method businesses
are adopting AI to enhance their present cloud infrastructure is through AI as a service [53]. The use of AI makes
applications more ﬂexible and eﬃcient, reducing mistakes and increasing production.
The cloud native paradigm derived from cloud computing has shifted the traditional monolithic cloud application
into light-weight, loose-coupled and ﬁne-grained microservices [54]. This paradigm can support the applications
to be updated in a much more eﬃcient manner. However, due to the increased number and time-sensitive features
of microservices, their eﬃcient management can be challenging. AI/ML based solutions can address some of the
challenges,forinstance,neuralnetworkbasedapproachcanbeappliedtopredictworkloadsofmicroservices,andML
based techniques can be utilized to analyze the dependency of microservices.
The following are various advantages to deploying AI in the cloud:
•Enhanceddatamanagement:Dataiskingintoday’sdata-drivenworld,whichnecessitatesbetterwaystohandle
it. An enterprise’s ability to keep track of that data is a major hurdle [55]. Cloud-based AI tools and apps that
recognise, update, catalogue, and provide real-time data insights to clients. AI techniques may also be used to
detectfraudulentactivityandidentifyanomaloussystemtrends[56].Banksandotherﬁnancialinstitutionsrely
heavily on this technology to remain competitive and safe in today’s high-risk climate.
•Automation: Intelligent automation can now be implemented throughout a whole business thanks to the
combinationofAIandthecloud,whichremovesthelastremainingroadblocks[57].Predictivenessisenhanced
byAIsincealgorithmicmodelsdrawonhistoricaldataandotherpatternstodeliverin-the-momentinsights[58].
AI and cloud computing solutions can help businesses go from semi-structured to unstructured documents
cognitivelyautomatedwhilealsopushingthefrontiersofeﬀectiveinfrastructuremanagement,resultinginlittle
Sukhpal Singh Gill et al.: Preprint Accepted for Publication in Elsevier IoT Journal, 24 Feb 2022 Page 11 of 43