AI for Next Generation Computing: Emerging Trends and Future Directions
IEEE CCGRID. He has received several awards, including the Distinguished Reviewer Award from SPE (Wiley), 2018, Best Paper
Award AusPDC at ACSW 2021 and has also served as the PC member for venues such as PerCom, UCC, CCGRID, CLOUDS, ICFEC,
AusPDC. Dr. Gill served as a Guest Editor for SPE (Wiley) and JCC Springer Journal. He is a regular reviewer for IEEE TPDS,
IEEE TSC, IEEE TNSE, IEEE TSC, ACM CSUR and Wiley SPE. He has edited a research book for Elsevier. Dr. Gill has reviewed
370+ research articles of high ranked journals and prestigious conferences according to the data from Publons. His research interests
include Cloud Computing, Fog Computing, Software Engineering, Internet of Things and Energy Eﬃciency. For further information,
please visit http://www.ssgill.me .
Minxian Xu is currently an associate professor at Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy
of Sciences. He received the B.Sc. degree and the M.Sc. degree, both in software engineering from University of
Electronic Science and Technology of China. He obtained his Ph.D. degree from the University of Melbourne in
2019. His research interests include resource scheduling and optimization in cloud computing. He has co-authored
30+ peer-reviewed papers published in prominent international journals and conferences, such as ACM Computing
Surveys,IEEETransactionsonSustainableComputing,IEEETransactionsonCloudComputing,JournalofParallel
and Distributed Computing, Software: Practice and Experience, International Conference on Service-Oriented
Computing. His Ph.D. Thesis was awarded the 2019 IEEE TCSC Outstanding Ph.D. Dissertation Award. He is member of CCF and
IEEE. More information can be found at: http://www.minxianxu.info .
Carlo Ottaviani is Associate Lecturer at Department of Computer Science and Research Fellow at the York
Centre for Quantum Technologies (YCQT) of the University of York, UK. His research activity is in Quantum
Information and Quantum Technologies. He worked on theoretical proposals to design quantum-phase gates,
quantum memories and quantum repeaters using non-linear quantum atom-optics systems. In recent years he
focused on security, quantum-key distribution, and the realisation of quantum relays and quantum networks based
on quantum continuous-variable systems.
Panos Patros is a Senior Lecturer with the Department of Software Engineering, University of Waikato, Aotearoa
New Zealand. He leads the Cloud and Adaptive Systems (Ohu Rangahau Kapua Aunoa) ORKA Lab, is a member
of the Ahuora Smart Energy Systems Centre and focuses on self-adaptive computer systems and digital twins. He
received the Ph.D. degree in computer science from the University of New Brunswick, Fredericton, NB, Canada,
on multitenancy, performance, and modeling of cloud systems. Contact him at panos.patros@waikato.ac.nz.
Rami Bahsoon is is a Reader at the School of Computer Science, University of Birmingham, UK. Bahsoon’s
research is in the area of software architecture, cloud and services software engineering, self-aware software
architectures,self-adaptiveandmanagedsoftwareengineering,economics-drivensoftwareengineeringandtechnical
debt management in software. He co-edited four books on Software Architecture, including Economics-Driven
Software Architecture; Software Architecture for Big Data and the Cloud; Aligning Enterprise, System, and
Software Architecture. He was a Visiting Scientist at the Software Engineering Institute (SEI), Carnegie Mellon
University, USA (June–August 2018) and was the 2018 Melbourne School of Engineering (MSE) Visiting Fellow of
The School of Computing and Information Systems, the University of Melbourne (August to Nov 2018). He holds a Ph.D. in Software
Engineering from University College London (2006) and was MBA Fellow in Technology at London Business School (2003–2005). He
is a fellow of the Royal Society of Arts and Associate Editor of IEEE Software - Software Economies .
ArashShaghaghi received the B.Sc. degree from Heriot-Watt University, the M.Sc. degree in information security
from University College London (UCL), and the PhD degree in Computer Science and Engineering from The
University of New South Wales (UNSW Sydney), Australia. He is currently a Senior Lecturer in Cyber Security
at RMIT University, Melbourne, Australia. He is also a Visiting Fellow at the School of Computer Science and
Engineering, UNSW Sydney. He has previously been aﬃliated with Deakin University, UNSW Sydney, Data61
CSIRO, The University of Melbourne, and The University of Texas at Dallas. He is a multi-award winner cyber security educator and
researcher with a track record of publications at competitive international conferences and journals. To this date, he has received a
total funding of more than 300,000 AUD (as PI and CI combined) for his cyber security research from various internal and external
sources, including the Australian Government. Arash currently serves as an Associate Editor for Ad Hoc Networks journal and has
had roles (TPC member, organizing member, and reviewer) at prestigious security and networking journals and conferences. He is
Sukhpal Singh Gill et al.: Preprint Accepted for Publication in Elsevier IoT Journal, 24 Feb 2022 Page 39 of 43