AI for Next Generation Computing: Emerging Trends and Future Directions
a member of IEEE and the Australian Information Security Association. Visit http://www.arashshaghaghi.com for more information .
Muhammed Golec is a PhD student in Computer Science at Queen Mary University. After his undergraduate
graduation, he was awarded the Ministry of Education Scholarship, one of the most prestigious scholarships in
his country. Within the scope of this scholarship, he graduated from Queen Mary University of London Computer
Science with a high degree (Distinction). His master thesis was found successful and published in IEEE Consumer
Electronics Magazine. He worked at Sisecam Company as an Electrical and Electronics Maintenance Engineer for
one year to consolidate his academic skills in the private sector. His research interests include AI, Cloud Computing, and Security and
Privacy. For further information, please visit https://www.linkedin.com/in/muhammed-golec-b55756119/ .
Vlado Stankovski is a Full Professor of Computer and Information Science at the University of Ljubljana. Vlado
Stankovski was awarded his Eng. Comp. Sc., M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees in computer science from the University
of Ljubljana in 1995, 2000 and 2009, respectively. He began his career in 1995 as consultant and later as project
manager with the Fujitsu-ICL Corporation in Prague. From 1998-2002 he worked as researcher at the University
Medical Centre in Ljubljana. In the period 2003-2019, he was with the Department of Construction Informatics
at the University of Ljubljana. From 2020 he lectures at all levels (undergraduate, postgraduate) at the Faculty
of Computer and Information Science. Vlado Stankovski’s research interests are in semantic and distributed-
computing technologies. He is currently the scientiﬁc and technical coordinator of the Horizon Europe Next Generation Internet
project ONTOCHAIN.
Huaming Wu received the BE and MS degrees from the Harbin Institute of Technology, China, in 2009 and
2011, respectively, both in electrical engineering, and the PhD degree with the highest honor in computer science
at Freie Universität Berlin, Germany, in 2015. He is currently an associate professor with the Center for Applied
Mathematics,TianjinUniversity.Hisresearchinterestsincludemodel-basedevaluation,wirelessandmobilenetwork
systems, mobile cloud computing and deep learning. He is a member of IEEE and ACM.
Ajith Abraham received the M.Sc. degree from Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, in 1998, and the
Ph.D. degree in computer science from Monash University, Melbourne, Australia, in 2001. He is currently the
Director of the Machine Intelligence Research Labs (MIR Labs), a Not-for-Proﬁt Scientiﬁc Network for Innovation
and Research Excellence connecting Industry and Academia. The Network with HQ in Seattle, USA, has currently
more than 1000 scientiﬁc members from more than 100 countries. As an Investigator/Co-Investigator, he has
won research grants worth more than U.S.$100 million from Australia, USA, EU, Italy, Czech Republic, France,
Malaysia, and China. He works in a multi-disciplinary environment involving machine intelligence, cyber-physical systems, the Internet
of Things, network security, sensor networks, web intelligence, web services, data mining, and applied to various real-world problems.
In these areas, he has authored/coauthored more than 1400 research publications out of which there are more than 100 books covering
various aspects of computer science. He has more than 46,000 academic citations (H-index of 100 as per Google Scholar). He is also
the Editor-in-Chief of Engineering Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence (EAAI) and serves/served the editorial board of more than 15
international journals indexed by Thomson ISI. More information can be available at http://www.softcomputing.net .
ManmeetSingh is Scientist C at the Centre for Climate Change Research, Indian Institute of Tropical Meteorology,
Pune since 2013. He was a Fulbright-Kalam fellow at the Jackson School of Geosciences, The University of
Texas at Austin in 2021. He is specially interested in AI/ML techniques, causal approaches, recurrence plots,
complex networks and non-linear time series analysis for solving grand challenges in Earth System Science. He
is an experienced climate modeller having contributed to the IITM Earth System Model simulations towards the
IPCC AR6 report. Together with his PhD co-advisor Dr Ayantika Dey Choudhury, he developed and coupled the
aerosol module of IITM-ESM. Recently, his work has focussed on the impacts of the proposals suggesting volcanic
eruptions as an analogue of solar geoengineering to halt climate change. His international collaborations include researchers from
PIKPotsdam,UTAustin,PennStateUniversity,UniversityofTübingen,Magdeburg-StendalUniversityofAppliedSciences,Germany.
Sukhpal Singh Gill et al.: Preprint Accepted for Publication in Elsevier IoT Journal, 24 Feb 2022 Page 40 of 43