AI for Next Generation Computing: Emerging Trends and Future Directions
4. Modern Autonomic Computing with Embedded Intelligence
Thissectiondiscussesthenewresearchdevelopmentsrelatedtoautonomiccomputingwithembeddedintelligence.
New advances in intelligent edge, intelligent things and sensors as actuators are detailed here.
4.1. Intelligent Edge
IoTisbringingbillionsofnewgadgetsonline,creatinganunprecedentedamountofdatathatwillbechallengingto
manage.Over75billionIoTdevicesareexpectedtobeinusebytheyear2025,accordingtoresearch[180].Businesses
aredevelopingandinstallingmoreandmorethingsmeanttoimprovetheend-userexperienceandalsogeneratemassive
amounts of data, such as linked automobiles, smart metres, and in-store sensors. This new data, meanwhile, requires
real-time collection, management, and processing [181]. Exactly how will this happen? One approach to go forward
may be through the use of edge and fog computing [182].
Edge computing is expected to get a huge amount of attention than fog computing in the next years, but what
exactly is it? As opposed to typical cloud computing, in which data is stored and handled in a central location, edge
computing processes data on-the-ﬂy [183]. The cloud and edge are not mutually exclusive in fog computing, which
means that some computation can be done in the cloud, while other parts are handled by edge devices.
As a result, the data sent between linked devices might take too long, and edge computing utilises signiﬁcantly
less network capacity than traditional computing. Time can be saved by processing it locally on the device or inside a
localnetwork[66].Edgecomputing,ontheotherhand,mightprovidecloudcomputingwithmuch-neededassistance
in dealing with the massive amounts of data generated by the IoT and other connected devices [169].
Inbothfogandedge,emergingIoTdevicesgenerateandtransferdata,andtheprocessingcapacityofthosedevices
is used to accomplish operations which might normally be carried out in the cloud. Both fog and edge allude to these
new IoT device locations in the network. As a result, they help organisations lessen their dependence on the cloud
by sending data to analytics platforms, where it can be analysed and turned into useful information. Corporations
may cut down on network latency by using edge and fog technologies to reduce their reliance on cloud platforms for
data analysis. As a result, you will be able to make data-driven decisions faster. In addition, because edge devices
lack storage capacity, they must send data to the cloud when real-time processing is ﬁnished so that analytics may be
conducted on it.
With today’s cloud computing, bandwidth, and processing power, business communication network focuses
primarilyonsupportingallofyourdistantapplications,aswellasoﬀeringinﬁnitestoragespace.Thatwilleventually
change. In order to get the most out of data, it must be processed in real time, at the edge [66]. Looking for future,
network infrastructures must be more adaptive and willing to manage a far greater number of smart devices than
they currently are now. Having the decision-making process near to where the data is created is essential for real-
time intelligence. For example, self-driving cars or self-maintaining smart manufacturing equipment can make fast
judgments on the go [184]. Real-time engine performance data generated by sensors installed in aeroplanes can be
usedtotakepreventativeactionbeforetheaircraftreturnsfromthesky.Thesavingsmightbesubstantial.Acompany’s
ability to deliver processing power and an intelligent environment will increase as it expands its network of corporate
endpoints.
We will need quicker and more reliable data processing as our demand for data grows and billions of devices
are linked to the network. Despite the beneﬁts of cloud computing, the development of IoT and mobile devices has
necessitated ever higher bandwidth requirements [185]. Cloud computing isn’t required by every smart device, and
avoiding transferring data back and forth over the cloud is a good idea in some circumstances. The edge may help
enterprises become more nimble, decrease expenses, minimise latency, and better regulate network capacity [186].
How to provide enough computing power for intelligent applications at the edge has become a serious challenge.
Intelligent edge is a promising way that pushes intelligence to the Edges of Internet, which has played the role of
intelligentdecision-makinginmanyaspectsofedgecomputing,includingtaskoﬄoading,edgecaching,andresource
scheduling. Among them, edge oﬄoading is a distributed computing paradigm that provides computing services for
edgecaching,edgetraining,andedgeinference.ByintegratingmethodssuchasDistributedMachineLearning(DML),
Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) and Collaborative Machine Learning (CML) into the edge computing, it is
beneﬁcial to cope with the explosive growth of communication and computing of emerging IoT applications [187],
and achieve the energy-eﬃcient and real-time processing [188].
Instead, single pass AI techniques that can operate on resource-restricted environments have been proposed. For
instance, an alternative to traditional machine learning is data-stream mining. This ML paradigm treats its datasets
Sukhpal Singh Gill et al.: Preprint Accepted for Publication in Elsevier IoT Journal, 24 Feb 2022 Page 24 of 43