AI for Next Generation Computing: Emerging Trends and Future Directions
3.5. Quantum Computing
Quantum computing promise is to be the one technology that has the potential to fundamentally alter AI. This
section introduces the capabilities of quantum computing and its potential inﬂuences on AI and the economy [149].
The consequences of this approach to computation could aﬀect a considerable range of aspect of intellectual and
economic activities on our societies. With the enormous inﬂuence is AI having, all across the world, the combination
with Quantum computing may have a multiplier eﬀect to trigger a revolutionary eﬀect on AI.
Quantum computing utilises a novel approach to data and information processing: Information, encoded in the
quantum states of quantum systems, is processed accordingly to the law of quantum mechanics opening up some
opportunitiesthatarenotavailabletotheclassicalwayofprocessinginformation.Forexample,quantumsuperposition
and quantum entanglement [150]. Quantum entangled is the property of quantum systems of limiting the amount of
information an observer may obtain on parts of a global quantum state, making it impossible to provide a complete
description from the knowledge of only the component states. The term “superposition” refers to the possibility of
combining quantum state in order to produce another valid quantum state.
Previous features of quantum systems trigger, from one side, the power of quantum computing (if suﬃciently
shielded from interactions with environment), but represent also the main limitations that do not allow an eﬃcient
simulationofquantumsystemsbypresentcomputersystems,evenAI-poweredsupercomputers.Infact,thescalingof
thephasespacewithinwhichcompositequantumsystemsevolvegrowthsexponentiallywiththenumberofcomponent
systems.
TheunitofinformationusedbyQuantumcomputersisthequbit,whichreplacesthebitusedinclassicalcomputers.
The state of a qubit ð ë, which could be an atom, a photon, a circuit, etc., can be represented, mathematically, as a
vector in the complex Hilbert space [150], with two mutually orthogonal basis states ^ð0ë,ð1ë`as follows
ð ë=að0ë+bð1ë; (1)
where ðað2+ðbð2= 1,anda;bËCareComplexnumbers.Theexploitationofquantumsuperposition(SeeEq.(1)),and
quantumentanglementiswhatmakesquantumcomputingconsiderablymorepowerfulforcertaintasksthanclassical
counterpart [150].
The simulation of quantum systems has been the original scope motivating the endeavour to build a quantum
computer [151], but it has only been after the discovery of quantum algorithms able to achieve practical goals that
the interest in building this devices started to attract increasing attention. After the seminal works to formalize the
concept of quantum computer [152], several algorithms followed that allowed to achieve tasks that were considered
hard for classical computers. The discovery of the Shor’s algorithm [153] provided an eﬃcient solution for factoring
large numbers, that had critical implications for crypto-analysis, boosting studies in both quantum computation and
quantum cryptography. Running eﬀectively the Shor algorithm on a working quantum hardware, however, it would
requirealevelofaccuracyinimplementingregisterinitialization,quantumoperationsonmultiplequbits,andstorage
of quantum states that are not yet achieved by current state-of-the-art devices [154]. It is also worth to mention
that quantum computers have their own limitations. For example, it is not expected that they can eﬃciently solve
NP-hard optimization problems [155] and, coming to searching, the speed-up oﬀered by quantum computers scales
quadratically with respect to the time needed by a classical computer (Grover’s algorithm [156]).
Buildingaquantumcomputeris,infact,notaneasytask:asexperimentalistsknowprettywell,theadvantagesof
quantum computing, oﬀered by features like quantum superposition and entanglement, tend to vanish exponentially
faster with the size and complexity (i.e., the number of quantum systems involved) of the hardware. Nevertheless,
in recent years, we have seen a spectacular increase in the interest of major high-tech players (IBM, Microsoft,
Google, Amazon, Intel, Honeywell), and a ﬂourishing of many young companies aiming at proposing solutions for
quantumcomputing,withvariouscoretechnologiesemployed,rangingformsuperconductingdevises[154],totrapped
ions [157], to integrated light circuits [158]. These are just some of the many companies that are today ﬁnancing
quantuminitiativesandareinterestedindevelopingthistechnology.Despitethediﬃcultchallengesahead,GoogleAI
group has made signiﬁcant progress during the recent years [154], achieving what is known as quantum advantage
building a programmable quantum computer, named Sycamore. Similarly, IBM has recently announced the ﬁrst
quantum computer to pack more than 100 qubits in their hardware, Eaglechip [159], representing only a ﬁrst step
of busy research and engineering program during which the tech-giant is planning to push ﬁgures to more than 1000
qubitsby2023.However,assaid,thechallengestopreservethedelicatefeaturesofcompositequantumstatesrelyon
the ability to shield these devices from the external environment to allow coherent quantum evolution to take place
under the presence of even very small amount of noise. For this reason these devices need ultra-low temperature of
Sukhpal Singh Gill et al.: Preprint Accepted for Publication in Elsevier IoT Journal, 24 Feb 2022 Page 20 of 43