AI for Next Generation Computing: Emerging Trends and Future Directions
store and exchange information. This kind of architecture is required for highly distributed systems; otherwise, direct
communication between the various units will result in dramatic slowdowns due to locking and contention, increase
the attack surface or even worse, into system failure due to synchronization issues, such as race conditions, that can
invalidate information manipulated by multiple actors. Finally, the knowledge base needs to be replicated, potentially
across multiple reliability zones, to assure business continuity in cases of hardware and communication failures or
even a catastrophe that knocks down a whole datacenter. As such, distributed consensus and adaptive data recovery
algorithms are required to maintain data validity.
2.4. Service Management Layer
There is a database manager in this position (which manages the data of IoT applications eﬀectively). AI-based
systems can be used by Security Manager to predict and guard against external threats on task execution [40].
Application data may be securely sent during task execution with the help of a blockchain service. At runtime, the
serverlessmanagercontrolsthecloudresourcesthatIoTapplicationsareconsuming.WiththeintegrationofServerless
datapipelineswithquantumcomputers,eﬃcientloadbalancinganddynamicprovisioningmaybeachievedfortheedge
computing paradigm. It is the responsibility of the application manager to control the deployment of IoT applications
and to provide data for the allocation of resources in advance, which can be achieved using AI/ML. The placement
module serves as a bridge between the application manager and the application placement module.
Fourcategoriesofservicesareincludedatthebottomlayer[40]:function(FaaS),software(SaaS),platform(PaaS),
andinfrastructure(IaaS).Functioncontainersareusedtoprovideavirtualenvironmentforcomputersystemsthatcan
be dynamically scaled up and down. SaaS uses the notion of virtualization based on VMs to deliver cloud-based
services.PlatformasaservicecanbeprovidedviaMicrosoftAzure,AmazonWebService(AWS),orOpenStack.By
loweringlatencyandreactiontimeattheedgedevices,fogandedgecomputingmaybeusedtodelivertheinfrastructure
service.Orchestratingcontainersusingorchestrationisanintermediarystepbetweendeployingcontainersasaservice
and deploying them as software as a service (SaaS). The placement of IoT applications for dynamic provisioning and
management is handled by application placement, which is a bridge between SaaS and PaaS. Machine learning and
artiﬁcialintelligence-basedapproachesareusedtoschedulethecloudresourcesofPaaSandIaaS[41].Usingquantum
technology, the system is able to perform nonce or Proof-of-work (PoW) computations in a fraction of the time.
3. AI for Computing: Current Status and Open Challenges
It is very important to identify the research opportunities for leveraging AI and ML in next generation computing
for emerging computing paradigms, including cloud, fog, edge, serverless and quantum computing environments as
shown in Figure 4. This section discusses various new trends and open challenges in AI-integrated next generation
computing.
3.1. Cloud Computing
It is becoming increasingly evident that the rise of cloud computing and the rise of AI are mutually reinforcing.
Asaresult,usingAIinthecloudcanimprovethecloud’sperformance,eﬃciency,anddigitaltransformation[42].AI
in the cloud computing environment is a crucial key to enabling organisations to become more eﬃcient, strategic and
insight-driven,whileatthesametimeprovidinggreaterﬂexibility,agilityandcostsavings[43].Asaresult,weturned
to industry insiders for their insights about the expanding importance of AI in cloud computing.
AIandcloudcomputingmaybecombinedinavarietyofwaystoenhancecloudcomputing.AItoolsandsoftware
aresynchedwiththepowerofcloudcomputinginordertoprovideanenhancedvaluetotheexistingcloudcomputing
environments[44].Thiscombinationmakesenterpriseseﬃcient,strategic,andinsightful.Dataandapplicationshosted
on the cloud allow businesses to be more responsive and adaptable, while also saving money for the company as
a whole [44]. Existing capabilities gain intelligence, and customers receive an excellent experience, thanks to the
additionofthisadditionallayerofAIthataidsinthegenerationofinsightsfromdata[44].Asaresult,businessesmay
proﬁtfromatremendouslydistinctivemix.Cloudislikeavideogame,whichemitsanenormousquantityofoperating
dataandtelemetry,muchlikeaTeslaelectricvehicle[45].Asaresult,AI-basedcloudcomputingisbasicallyAIOps,
whichusesalgorithmstomakesenseofallthisdataratherthanrelyingonhumans[46,47].Inthepost-COVIDfuture,
cloud-computing investment increased by 37 percent to $29 billion in the ﬁrst quarter of 2020 compared to the ﬁrst
quarter of 2019 [48]. Integrating AI and cloud computing can therefore help businesses get closer to their consumers
while also increasing their operational eﬃciency [49].
Sukhpal Singh Gill et al.: Preprint Accepted for Publication in Elsevier IoT Journal, 24 Feb 2022 Page 10 of 43