AI for Next Generation Computing: Emerging Trends and Future Directions
•Energy-eﬃciency: The amount of energy used if supplied policies and algorithms are improved, idle fog nodes
may be turned-oﬀ and energy consumption can be avoided in combination with QoS and QoE since the
applicationmodulesaresituatedinthedispersedfognodes[80,81].Energyconsumptionandcostareinﬂuenced
bymemory,CPU,andbandwidthusewhichcanbepredictedusingmachinelearningmethodsincludeK-means,
KNNs, logistic regressions, branch and bounds and Deep Q-Network (DQN) and SARSA [93].
•Security and privacy: Fog infrastructure is critical to determining the security of the applications because of
securityconcernssuchasinformationdegradation,identitydisclosure,replay,anddenialofserviceassaults[94].
Authentication,encryption,anddataintegrationallneedtobeimplementedindynamiccomputingsettingsdue
to the lack of control that users have over their information [94].
•Fault-tolerance and availability: One of the primary reasons for the development of fog computing was to
improvedependability.Whenitcomestofogcomputing,diﬃcultieslikesensorfailure,alackofaccessnetwork
coverage in a particular region or the entire network, service platform failure, and a broken user interface
system connection are all part of the equation [72]. Another challenge in the fog environment is to increase
theavailabilityofapps.AheuristicapproachtoimprovingserviceavailabilityandQoSistomapapplicationsto
fogcommunitiesandthentransitivelyputtheirservicesonthefogdevices’community,accordingtotheservice
placement problem [66].
Images, video, natural language processing (NLP), and robotics are some of the more recent fog computing
applications that are only starting to emerge [64, 65]. Fog computing’s picture placement and processing is one of
the most widely utilised sectors of AI in research and industry, with the goal of diﬀerentiating objects or people from
one another and the capacity to classify and discriminate photos based on image processing algorithms [95]. The use
of fog computing for image processing-based applications decreases response time and improves QoS. Placement in
fog settings with eﬀective scheduling algorithms might be beneﬁcial in circumstances linked to medical applications
that demand precision in image processing and fast processing of medical data [33]. According to a literature, deep
learning algorithms, such as Convolution Neural Networks (CNN) and Generative Adversarial Network (GAN), can
be used in the image processing area in fog [96].
AnotherareaofinterestinthesectorisNLP[96].Forsoundprocessingandrecognition,cloudandfogenvironments
are needed to store data. For security reasons, deep learning approaches with sound imitation might be useful. For
example, scenarios for smart homes and processing and identifying the homeowner’s speech from outsiders should
be done with care and speed, wherein eﬀective scheduling methods for placement of NLP applications in fog will be
proposed.Techniquesfromtheﬁeldofdeeplearningmaybebeneﬁcialhere.Industry,trade,agriculture,andhealthall
beneﬁtgreatlyfromrobotics,makingitanessentialissuefordiscussion[33].Incircumstanceswhenquickjudgments
must be made, the usage of fog environments that employ machine learning to process and make decisions, may
be acceptable. In order for robots to communicate data, they require an environment like fog that responds quickly
to their commands [97]. IoT deﬁnes each robot as an item capable of interacting with other IoT things and other
robots [98]. Literature reported [97, 98, 99] that deep learning approaches for placement robot tasks in fog, however
furtherresearchisneeded.Inthefuture,methodsandschedulingalgorithmsforfogcomputing’sapplicationplacement
problemwillneedtobeestablisheddependingonthetypesandcategoriesofrequestapplications,accordingtoresearch
and evaluations of literature [100]. An application placement issue in fog for robotics or simple image, video, audio
processing is an example of this type of diﬃculty [101]. As a result, the QoS and QoE will be enhanced using AI.
3.3. Edge Computing
Distributedcomputinghasevolvedfromcontentdeliverynetworkstobecomeagenerallyacceptedandcommonly
used edge computing paradigm that brings processing and data storage closer to the end user’s location [102][103].
Instant data that is created by the user, and only for the user, requires compute and storage on the edge, but big
data always requires cloud-based storage [104]. As customers spend more time on mobile devices, businesses have
recognisedtheyneedtomovekeycomputationtothedeviceinordertoservicemorecustomers.Theedgecomputing
market has a chance to develop as a result of this. By the year 2023, it is expected to reach $1.12 trillion [105]. 74
percent of all data will need to be handled on the edge by 2022, according to Gartner, compared to 91 percent of all
data currently being processed in centralised systems [105].
Customers are more concerned about their privacy and want to know how and where their data is acquired
and maintained. After completing the app’s authentication procedure, a slew of businesses serve their clients by
Sukhpal Singh Gill et al.: Preprint Accepted for Publication in Elsevier IoT Journal, 24 Feb 2022 Page 14 of 43