AI for Next Generation Computing: Emerging Trends and Future Directions
•Using AI models, it is possible to examine a customer’s ﬁnancial viability before recommending an increase in
purchasing power. Prior to requesting any further information, the system will run a credit check to determine
their creditworthiness. As soon as all of the prior invoices have been paid, the system decides if the transaction
should go through or be put on hold.
•As part of logistics, it is important to keep an eye on the routes and determine how traﬃc overloads inﬂuence
customers. In order to help businesses make better decisions and enhance customer service, AI analyses the
routes and proposes alternate routes [136].
3.4.1. Open Challenges
The following is a quick description of the open issues and challenges that serverless computing presents for AI
applications:
•Vendor locking: If a company has committed to a cloud-based provider that provides technological implemen-
tation, switching suppliers will be diﬃcult. The lack of industry-wide standards is responsible for around half
of the challenges to cloud computing adoption [143]. To understand the consequences of vendor lock-in, no
amount of investigation or study can be relied upon. Those who fail to keep an eye out for traps end up falling
prey to them. In addition, a serverless interface must be carefully monitored because of the multiple risks it
presents [144].
•Switching vendors: Lock-in circumstances can be seen in two diﬀerent ways, depending on who is looking at
the event. In their opinion, the problem with serverless computing today is not the programme itself. Another
contributing cause is serverless computing, a new and fragmented technology that now has a younger audience
that is overly reliant on it [145]. Businesses should only agree to a platform after conducting comprehensive
research and receiving multiple oﬀers from rival service providers. A single cloud may be all you need instead
of hurrying to implement a slew of diﬀerent ones.
•Less transparency: As the backend infrastructure is handled by an outside company, there is less transparency
abouthowthingsactuallyfunction.Theprogram’sinnerworkingsmaybeobscured,especiallyifitinteractswith
otherapplications.Hereareafewexamplesofhowthismaybeputtogooduse:Thesecuritymeasuresassociated
with an external PaaS service connected to your application, for example, are generally not well known [146].
•Others are in-charge of infrastructure management: Because our infrastructure is in the hands of a third party,
itismorediﬃculttohaveacomprehensiveunderstandingoftheentiresystem.Usingend-user-targeteddevices
underthisparadigm,infrastructure isunderthecontrolofanother ﬁrm,malwarecannonethelessinﬁltrateyour
environment [147].
•Sustainability: An increasing amount of data generated on the edge is being submitted to the cloud for ML
training/inference;theoveralltransmissionenergyisaround30%ofthetotalenergyrequirementsofdatacenters
globally and rising fast. Research is required to ensure the upcoming serverless paradigm is sustainable with a
focusonpower-oﬀtechniques,increasedcomputationaldensityviasmartworkloadconsolidation,submittingthe
kilobytes-long function to the data vs., submitting terrabytes of data to the function, and eﬀectively combining
serverless edge resources for multitenant clients—e.g., by sharing artiﬁcial neural network layers with an
acceptable tradeoﬀ in accuracy [148].
AIhasrevolutionisedmarketresearchandcustomerbehaviour.Customers’preferencesarerecordedandanalysed
by an AI model, which then shows their customised content. Serverless computing simpliﬁes the AI development
process by removing the need for a dedicated server. As a result, serverless architecture entails handing over the
management and monitoring of the infrastructure to a third party. That is why it is a good idea to work with a
reputable cloud service provider. To guarantee that the infrastructure works smoothly, the cloud provider must have
handled multiple comparable projects and have expertise in hosting and handling AI/machine learning and serverless
architectures.
Sukhpal Singh Gill et al.: Preprint Accepted for Publication in Elsevier IoT Journal, 24 Feb 2022 Page 19 of 43