AI for Next Generation Computing: Emerging Trends and Future Directions
෍𝑿𝟐
Quantum CPU
AgentActionReward StateQD QDBiometric 
Recognition 
Autonomous 
Driving QD: Quantum Data        c0
1
AlgorithmsQubit
Quantum 
ChannelQuantum 
Channel
Figure 5: Overview of Quantum Artiﬁcial Intelligence
and superpositions [169]. New discoveries in Artiﬁcial Intelligence algorithms intended for quantum computers,, or
QuantumArtiﬁcialIntelligence(QAI),areexpectedtodeliverthecriticalbreakthroughsrequiredtoadvancethescience
of climate change. Improvements in weather and climate forecasting as a consequence of this research are predicted
to have a cascading eﬀect on a wide range of socioeconomic advantages. For example, NASA has established the
Quantum Artiﬁcial Intelligence Laboratory (QuAIL), which is dedicated to investigating the possibilities of using
quantum computers and algorithms to machine learning problems in NASA’s missions.
NanotechnologyandnanosciencemayalsobeintegratedintoAIforverysmall,microscopicdevicesatmolecular,
atomic,andsubatomiclevels,thankstoquantumcomputing.Quantumphysicsﬁndsuseinnanotechnology.Theseare
onlyafewexamplesofquantumcomputing’simpactonAIandmachinelearning[176].Machinelearningapplications
for quantum devices are already being developed, in the hope to employ quantum computing to speed up the training
of machine learning models and produce more eﬃcient algorithms for learning [172]. Machine learning and artiﬁcial
intelligence are likely to beneﬁt from improvements in quantum computing technology even before a comprehensive
quantum computing solution is ready. Hence, the ﬁeld of Quantum Machine Learning (QML) is expected to pick up,
followed by its autonomic expansion, Adaptive Quantum Machine Learning, which will be able to leverage quantum
computing to adaptively achieve self-learning.
Open-source quantum machine learning library TensorFlow Quantum (TFQ) is available from Google [177].
Cirq is integrated with TensorFlow and provides high-level abstractions for the design and implementation of
both discriminative and generative quantum-classical models by providing quantum computing primitives that are
compatible with existing TensorFlow APIs, along with high-performance quantum circuit simulators. Quantum
computinghas,indeed,thepotentialtotransformAIinanumberofways.Constraintresolution,uncertaintyhandling,
and constraint fulﬁlment will all be improved by quantum computing, as will adaptive machine learning and spatial
andtemporalreasoning[178].Evenifquantumcomputingisstillinitsinfancynow,fromacommercialandeconomic
standpoint, it is an excellent moment for startups to join this path. The future of our economy will not be decided by
cryptocurrencies, but rather by quantum computing solutions [179].
Sukhpal Singh Gill et al.: Preprint Accepted for Publication in Elsevier IoT Journal, 24 Feb 2022 Page 23 of 43