AI for Next Generation Computing: Emerging Trends and Future Directions
as individual datapoints coming in one at a time, while performing adapting learning with a ﬁnite memory budget.
From an autonomics perspective, data-stream mining also leverages the notion of adaptive concept drifts, i.e., to save
resourcesontheedge,thedata-streammodelisretrainedonlywhenitsperformancecrossesbellowathreshold[189].
4.2. Intelligent Things
Intelligence integrated in a technology relates to the capacity of a product to analyse and consider its own
performance.Inaddition,itmustbeabletodealwiththeworkloadanditsownworkingconditions[190].Asaresultof
this,theoverallexperienceoftheenduserisenhanced.Whenbuildinganewproducts/services,itisimportanttokeep
inmindthenotionofself-evaluationoftheproductbasedondatafromembeddedsensors[191].Abusinessintelligence
systemmustbeattheheartofanintegralmodeltoproductorserviceintroduction.Employinganembeddedintelligent
systemandamachinelearningalgorithmmodelisamajorbeneﬁt[192].Thismaybeassessedbylookingathowwell
it performs in areas like launching smart product systems and setting up smart business services, to name just two.
With the help of this cutting-edge infrastructure, it is possible to better understand and anticipate how the business
landscape will shift in the future [193]. Because of this, it is an area where human analysts typically fall short. As a
result,machineintelligencecapabilitiesbasedonsensorsintegratedincurrentgadgetsandgoodshavebecomeaneed
in today’s corporate environment [194].
The convergence of emerging applications and machine intelligence capabilities has led to an evolution in this
process [190, 191, 192, 193, 194]. Embedded intelligence is increasingly being used to design the future IoT:
•AI: Human-machine intelligence synthesis is what this term denotes. In a speciﬁc gadget or service, the ability
to make choices like the intellectual is possible.
•DataIntegrity:Devicehistorymaybetrackedusingblockchain,abusinessintelligenceapplicationorinnovation.
Blockchain is made up of strings of interconnected block headers and blocks bodies [195]. The block body
consists of all transactions in the block. The block header, on the other hand, is generated using the hash value,
timestampofthepreviousblock,andaMerklerootofthetransactionsitcontains.Therefore,eachblockiscreated
usingthehashvalueofthepreviousblockandlinkedtoeachother.Interferingwithanyblockwillchangethehash
valueofthatblockandthusallblockswillbeaﬀected.ThispromisestheavailabilityofBlockchaintechnologyin
protectingtheintegrityofdata[196].Blockchaintechnology,apartfromcryptocurrency(e.g.,Bitcoin),hasbeen
used to further enhance and optimise existing solutions such as cloud storage (e.g., [197]), authentication (e.g.,
[198]),health-care(e.g.,[199]),andmore.Integratingblockchainallowstohaveaclearaudittrailofthedataand
models used to verify the machine decision process, which will lead to increasing the device’s trustworthiness
[200].Thelatterisofextremeimportanceinmachine-to-machinecommunication.Furthermore,runningAIcode
overDecentralizedAutonomousOrganization(DAO)withsmartcontractsattachedtoitlimitscatastrophicrisk
scenarios by limiting the action space.
•Smart Healthcare: Utilizing IoT in the healthcare business may pay out. As a result, healthcare would be even
more widely available, and progress could proceed at a rapid pace.
•Predictive Maintenance: Predictive maintenance is a notion that has emerged as a result of the growth of the
InternetofThings.Thismeansthepractiseofaddingsensorstohouseholdappliancessothattheymaysendout
notiﬁcations when they need to be serviced.
From natural language processing, face recognition, bio-medicine to autonomous driving, more and more
intelligent applications are being deployed on IoT devices [201]. Due to the slow hardware development in small-
sized equipment, the contradiction between the limited computing capacity of IoT devices and running complicated
AI applications cannot be eﬃciently solved in a short time [202]. In addition, there remains signiﬁcant challenges
in developing system-level, algorithm-level, architectural-level or infrastructure-level technologies for embedded
intelligence, e.g., real-time decision making, energy-eﬃcient Deep Neural Network (DNN) training and DNN
inference, and security deployments.
4.3. Things as Sensor-Actuator Network
Cyber-PhysicalSystems(CPS)arethenextgenerationofembeddedInformationandCommunicationsTechnology
(ICT) systems that employ sensor-actuator networks to oﬀer users with a wide range of smart applications and
services by being aware of their physical surroundings [203]. With the help of autonomous control loops, many IoT
Sukhpal Singh Gill et al.: Preprint Accepted for Publication in Elsevier IoT Journal, 24 Feb 2022 Page 25 of 43