AI for Next Generation Computing: Emerging Trends and Future Directions
to accommodate incoming data traﬃc from numerous nodes [108]. High bandwidth needs and redundant data
reporting and routing requirements for IT managers have increased the search for cloud suppliers capable of
meeting these demands [111].
•Additionally, establishing an AI-integrated edge computing environment requires an initial investment in edge-
enabled software frameworks and hardware [109]. The fact that this investment typically has to compete with
other company objectives makes it a bottleneck. In developing countries, this problem is exacerbated.
•Manysmallandmedium-sizedbusinesses(SMEs),ITmanagers,andgovernmentdecision-makersareunaware
of the possibilities and applications of AI-integrated edge computing [84]. It may take some time for nations
inAsia-Paciﬁcthatarestilllearningaboutcloudcomputingtoadoptitscapabilitiesforedgecomputing.Micro
datacentres,ratherthanedgeworkloads,arepreferredbymostserviceprovidersinemergingeconomies,asthey
are more cost-eﬀective [112].
•With the arrival of 5G, billions of devices will be able to communicate with each other, and the network will
see a rise in the rate at which connected devices are added and removed [105]. IT managers’ judgement in
implementingedgecomputingwillalwaysbequestionedandadoptionwillneverachieveitsfullpotentialwithout
a standard, proven, and recognised edge monitoring technology [113].
•Faster R&D interventions and innovations in security, governance and standards/frameworks are the road to
alleviate the diﬃculties for the adoption of AI-integrated edge computing [114].
Satellites in low-Earth orbit (LEO) are being built by private ﬁrms including SpaceX and Amazon to give
worldwide broadband internet access [122]. It will be vital to determine if and how edge computing principles could
be implemented in LEO satellite networks as the group of subscribers to such a access network increases.
3.4. Serverless Computing
Whenitcomestodesigningcloud-nativeapps,serverlesscomputingisbecomingincreasinglypopular.Serverless
is a cloud computing paradigm that abstracts away the management of operational aspects [123]. Because developers
no longer have to worry about maintaining infrastructure, serverless computing is likely to expand considerably
quicker [124]. Because of this, cloud service providers may more easily manage infrastructure and automated
provisioning with serverless computing. The time and resources required for infrastructure management are also
reducedasaresultof[125].Itisthepurposeofserverlesscomputingtoguaranteethattheﬁnestserverlesstechnologies
are used so that the investment is minimised and the return is highest [126]. Serverless computing and infrastructure
are characterised by the following terms:
•Functions: Using event-driven models, serverless functions are implemented in serverless computing. Because
thecodeisautomaticallyexecutedaseventsoccur,theyareabletospeedupthedevelopmentprocess[127].As
a result, numerous services can be linked to the present application. Using these features, you may eﬀectively
create the pay-per-execution model [128]. It is billed for the time and resources used on executing code under
this paradigm.
•Kubernetes: Developers have the option of bringing their own containers to Kubernetes through Serverless
Kubernetes [129]. In Kubernetes-managed clusters, these containers may be automatically scaled up or scaled
down. In order to deal with exceptional traﬃc situations and ﬂuctuating workloads, this automatic scaling
function is activated.
•Workﬂows:Alow-codeorno-codeapproachisusedwithserverlessworkﬂows[130].Itisanaimofthismethod
to reduce the planning overheads associated with several activities at once. With these processes, developers
mayconnectvariouscloudandon-premisesservices.ServerlesscomputinghasthecapabilitytolearnnewAPIs
or standards, so interactions do not need to be coded [131].
•Application environments: Both the back-end and front-end of a serverless application environment are hosted
on a dedicated server service. Fully-managed services via dedicated servers assume responsibility for the
application’sscalability,security,andcompliancemonitoring[132].Asaresult,runninganAI-basedapplication
on a serverless computing platform is signiﬁcantly simpler, as serverless computing meets the dynamic
scalability and security requirements of applications while still conforming to industry standards [133].
Sukhpal Singh Gill et al.: Preprint Accepted for Publication in Elsevier IoT Journal, 24 Feb 2022 Page 17 of 43