AI for Next Generation Computing: Emerging Trends and Future Directions
oﬀeringapplicationswithAI-enabledtailoredfeatures[106].Theseaidusersinprotectingtheirpersonalinformation.
Customers often utilise speakers, phones, tablets, and robots to access AI-enabled gadgets [107]. Multiple levels of
encryption and a dynamic encryption process are required due to the sensitive and personal nature of the data. Edge
nodesfacilitatetheconstructionofahighlydistributedarchitectureandhelpestablishtheappropriatesecuritystrategy
for each device [108]. There are worries about latency when data is sent across networks and devices since services
aredispersedatboththenetworkanddevicelevels.Duetothisdelay,theworkmustbedoneontheﬂy.Havingseveral
endpoints of load balancing is a need when an application has to be end-to-end resilient and have a widely spread
architecture.Resiliencyatthedevicelevelisincreasedbythefactthatdatacomputingservicesareclosertothemobile
deviceorontheedge(referredtoasa“cloudlet”)[109].Wehavetothink,howthesechallengescanbeovercameusing
AI?
Edge computing is a major enabler for AI, giving high-quality performance at a low cost. This is the best way
to understand the link between AI and edge computing. We can beneﬁt from the marriage of AI with cutting-edge
computers [110]. Edge Computing helps AI-enabled applications overcome the technical problems of AI-enabled
applications because of the data- and compute-intensive nature of AI. AI and machine learning systems absorb vast
volumesofdatatospotpatternsanddeliverreliablesuggestions[111].Cloud-basedstreamingofhigh-deﬁnitionvideo
data results in latency issues and increased costs, since huge bandwidth is utilised, in AI use cases requiring video
analysis [84]. When ML triggers, decisions and actions must be made in real time, the latency and dependence on
central processing in the cloud are detrimental. Processing and decision making may be done at the source of data,
which means that actions can be taken at the edge and backhaul expenses can be avoided, making the edge an ideal
location for data processing [112]. Rather of storing sensitive data on the cloud, the edge stores client location data.
Streaming data to the cloud only includes the most important information and data sets, leaving the rest of the data
behind [113].
Duetotheirscatteredandcomplicatednature,edgecomputingnetworkshavebroughtseveralissueswhenitcomes
to infrastructure management. There are a number of activities that must be completed in order to eﬀectively manage
resources.TheseincludeworkloadestimationandtaskschedulingaswellasVMconsolidation,resourceoptimization,
and energy conservation [114]. In dynamic, fast changing settings and in real-time scenarios, traditional pre-deﬁned
rules, largely based on operation research approaches, have been used for resource management in the past. AI-based
technologies are increasingly being employed to address these concerns, particularly when decisions must be made.
Approaches including AI, ML, and DL have become widespread in recent years. On the other hand, deciding where
to carry out a work on the edge is a diﬃcult choice that takes into account aspects such as the amount of traﬃc on
edge servers and the mobility of users [115]. In order to further on the element of user mobility, the cache must be
able to forecast where the user will go. For the sake of reducing expenses and energy consumption, it is located at
an appropriate edge server. Reinforcement learning, neural network models, and genetic algorithms are some of the
approaches that are employed [116].
In the commercial and industrial sectors, the advantages of Edge have quickly spread. Speciﬁcally, the reduction
of IT equipment’s growing expenditures on cloud and network bandwidth. All of the company’s activities take place
in diﬀerent parts of the world. Only an estimated 1% of the monitoring data is relevant for business insights like
anomaly identiﬁcation or future event prediction, despite the fact that the cloud and big data centres are overﬂowing
with data [117]. Edge delivers high-quality business services through local processing, analytics, and local devices.
Thisistheoperationaleﬃciencyandsigniﬁcanceoftheedge,sinceitpreventsthetransferofterabytesofunnecessary
data to the cloud/data centres and only communicates pertinent actionable data to the end user [118]. Every day, new
andcreativeapplicationsforedge’scapabilitiesemerge.Edgecomputingstillhasaprobleminmovingtothelast-mile
of dispersed networks, but new use cases in industrial applications show a strong convergence with AI in particular,
oﬀeringsubstantialvaluetobusinesses[119].Intheautomotive,construction,process,andmanufacturingindustries,
augmented reality, virtual reality, and mixed reality are becoming increasingly popular [118]. This necessitates a
scalable, highly adaptable, and quick-to-respond computing infrastructure that is always available. Provides a low-
latency experience and application instances that are near to the end user AI and machine learning have a plethora of
uses in Edge Computing. NLP and CNN are two developing technologies that are used in a wide range of everyday
applications[96].Smartretail,contactcentres,security,andlegalassistantshipallbeneﬁtfromNLP’sabilitytoparse
humanvoice,recognisehandwritingandclassifytext.Usecasessuchasqualitycontrol,facialidentiﬁcation,healthcare,
and industrial safety can beneﬁt from CNN capabilities in visualisation algorithms, which enable to detect faces and
other visual data [96].
Sukhpal Singh Gill et al.: Preprint Accepted for Publication in Elsevier IoT Journal, 24 Feb 2022 Page 15 of 43