AI for Next Generation Computing: Emerging Trends and Future Directions
•Theprimarygoalofself-protectionistokeepthesystemsecurefromhostilepurposefulactsbykeepingtrackof
suspiciousactivityandrespondingappropriatelyinordertokeepthesystemrunningsmoothly[9].Topreventan
attack,thesystemmustbeabletotellthediﬀerencebetweenwhatislawfulandwhatisnot.AI-basedprediction
systems can be used to achieve this: for instance, the system could be trained to detect vulnerabilities in the
communications conﬁgurations/policies or identify code smells in the user-submitted functions/lambdas.
•Installing missing or obsolete parts without requiring any human interaction is the primary goal of self-
conﬁguration. Depending on the situation, a developer may need to reinstall speciﬁc components or perform
software upgrades [2]. Self-conﬁguration takes care of the cost of resources and penalties for SLA violations,
which can be predicted in advance through AI/ML.
•Dynamicschedulingapproachesareusedtomatchjobsandworkloadstothebestavailableresourcesintheself-
optimizing aspect [27]. The autonomic element’s input is used to constantly enhance the system’s performance
through dynamic scheduling. AI/ML based adaptive scheduling can be used for data-intensive applications
because it is ﬂexible and can be adjusted to a changing environment with ease. Further, the impact of diﬀerent
QoS characteristics on system performance can be measured automatically [8].
Modelsforcomplexdistributedsystemsthatcanself-heal,self-conﬁgure,self-optimiseandself-protecthavebeen
developedusingthisidea.Autonomicelements(AEs)areprimarilyinchargeofmanagingresourcesontheirown[1].
Figure 1 shows a schematic representation of the many components that make up an AE system. Interaction between
all the AEs is necessary for the sharing of messages on system performance. AEs complete a necessary sub-task to
maintain the system’s performance based on interaction. There are four stages to the IBM model of an autonomic
system [1]: Monitor, analyse, plan, and execute are the four steps in the process, which will be supported by AI/ML
models to improve the monitoring, analysing, planning and execution. Further, AI-powered techniques could also
improve the eﬃciency of the persistence (knowledge) component of the MAPE-K loop, especially in eﬀectively
resolving state synchronization in a highly-distributed and potentially unreliable environment.
2.3.1. Sensors
SensorsgatherdataontheQoSmetricsofthepresentstatenodes’performance[2,8,9,10].Inputfromcomputation
elementsisﬁrstsenttothemanager,whichsubsequentlysendsthisinformationtoMonitorsthroughthemanagernode.
Faults(software,network,andhardware),freshupdatesoncomponentstatus(outdatedormissing),andsecuritythreats
are all included in the recent developments (intrusion detection rate).
2.3.2. Monitor
Initiallymonitorsdatafromtheresourcemanagernodetocontinuallycheckperformancevariancesbycontrasting
AI-basedpredictedandrealoutcomes[2,8,9,10].ThethresholdvalueofQoSmetrics,whichalsocontainsthehighest
value of SLA violation, is already recorded in the knowledge base. The faults (network, software, and hardware),
fresh upgrades of resources (obsolete or lost), security assaults, variation in QoS parameters, and SLA violations are
noted, and this data is transmitted to the next module for more investigation. Each node has a QoS agent deployed to
monitorandpredicttheperformanceoftheabove-mentionedQoSparametersforself-optimization.Self-protectionis
achievedbyinstallingsecurityagentsonallprocessingnodes,whicharethenutilisedtotrackdownbothundiscovered
andrecognizedattacks.Afteranalysingthesystem’scurrentdatabase,additionalabnormalitiescanbepredictedusing
AI/ML.Systeminvasionsandsystemabusearedetectedandclassiﬁedaseithernormalorabnormalutilisingitsmonitor
and the system’s attributes are compared with metadata. Hardening agents for software, networks, and hardware will
be reducing attack surfaces by identifying corresponding ﬂaws to achieve self-healing and self-protection. When a
new node is introduced to the cloud, the hardware hardening agent scans the drivers and validates the replica of the
original drivers. The new node is inserted when the device driver has veriﬁed it. This node will create a warning if it
is still present in the system. The performance of the software and hardware components is monitored by agents for
self-conﬁguration.Thesoftwarecomponentagentretrievestheactivecomponentconditionforallsoftwarecomponents
that are employed on separate processing nodes.
2.3.3. Analyze and Plan
Whenthemonitoringmodulesendsdata,theAnalyzeandPlanunitevaluatesitandidentiﬁesastrategyforreacting
tothealarm[2,8,9,10].AfteraQoSagentgeneratesanalert,theanalysisunitbeginspredictingQoSmetricsassociated
Sukhpal Singh Gill et al.: Preprint Accepted for Publication in Elsevier IoT Journal, 24 Feb 2022 Page 8 of 43