AI for Next Generation Computing: Emerging Trends and Future Directions
fractions of Kelvin, which pose challenges also for designing the appropriate materials able to perform well at such
low temperatures.
3.5.1. Open Challenges
While universal quantum computers remain the long term challenge of quantum computing, Noisy intermediate-
ScaleQuantum(NISQ)devicesareaforeseeabletargettoachieveintheforthcomingyears.Withsuchdevicesphysicist
maystarttoeﬀectivelysimulatecomplexcompositequantumsystems,andshouldbeabletostudyexoticquantumstates
that have not been accessible in physics laboratory yet.
Forthenextstep,onceNISQdeviceswillbereliableandwelldeveloped,wewillneedtoovercomethelimitations
imposedbythepresenceofnoiseduringcomputation,bysupportingthemaincomputingunitwitheﬀectivequantum
error correction (QEC) circuitry. That may open road towards fault-tolerant quantum computation that will need to
involve thousands and more qubits. In fact, QEC requires a considerable cost in terms of the number of qubits and
logic gates to be implemented. The road towards the implementation of complex operations like those needed by the
Shor factoring algorithm is still long but while the research is focused on improving the performance of quantum
devicesandtheoptimizationofquantumoperations,numerousentrepreneursarealsointerestedinproducingquantum
softwaresolutions.Consequently,manyinvestorsareexpectedtoinvestinstart-upcompaniesthatarerevolvingaround
quantum computing technologies, and in perspective the interest in quantum computing is likely to increase.
Pharmaceutical investors’ interest in quantum computing has sparked. Many sectors can beneﬁt from quantum
computers and commercial solutions. The ﬁnancial industry, healthcare, genetics, pharmacology, transportation,
sustainability, and cybersecurity are all direct beneﬁciaries of quantum computing [160]. Quantum computing’s
potentialhasbeenpickedupbythebankingindustry.Financialanalystsfrequentlymakeuseofquantumcomputational
modelsthatincorporateprobabilitiesandassumptionsabouthowmarketsandportfoliosoperate.Todothis,quantum
computers might help by processing data faster, running better foresight models, and balancing conﬂicting options
more accurately. They might also assist in the resolution of complex optimization problems, such as portfolio risk
optimization and fraud detection [161].
Quantum algorithms in IBM’s Cloud Computing platforms outperform classical Monte Carlo simulations,
accordingtoaresearchthecompanyjustpresented.Thereisalotofpotentialforthehealthcarebusinesstoproﬁtfrom
quantum solutions. Quantum computing might lead to improved approaches to personalised medicine by allowing
quickergenomicanalysistocreatepersonalisedtreatmentstrategiesspeciﬁctoeachpatient[162].Genealogyresearch
generatesalotofdata.Asaresult,analysingDNAinformationrequiresasigniﬁcantamountofprocessingpower[163].
Currently, companies are reducing the costs and resources needed to sequence the human genome; but, a powerful
quantum computer might sift through this data considerably faster, making genome sequencing more eﬃcient and
scalable [164].
Another area where drug development might beneﬁt from quantum computing is in the ﬁeld of protein fold-
ing[165].Thismighthelpspeedupdrugdiscoveryeﬀortsbymakingiteasiertopredicttheeﬀectsofpharmacological
compounds [166].
A crucial aspect where quantum computers, and the promise to build one, have had considerable impact is in
the ﬁeld of security and cryptography. Public-key cryptosystems are the foundation of today’s era of communication.
Rivest-Shamir-Adleman (RSA) encryption is in fact the most common cryptosystems for securing transmission of
data over networks, and its working mechanism and security requires factoring large prime numbers, beyond the
capabilities of current classical computing limits. However, as mentioned above, quantum computing capabilities,
exploitingShor’sfactoringalgorithmmayrenderssuchencryptionmodelsobsolete.Thishasledtoincreasingresearch,
and investment, over the last decades to build safe cryptosystems in a quantum computing era, and the projections
for the next years show this interest to grow, e.g., Toshiba’s quantum cryptography revenue target is $3 billion by
2030 [167]. In the meantime, while the eﬀorts to design and implement eﬀective quantum-key distribution (QKD)
protocols expand, the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) has also issued recommendations for
post-quantum cryptography standards [168]. It has begun a process to request, assess, and standardise one or more
public-key cryptography algorithms that are resistant to eavesdropping performed by quantum hardware.
Quantumcomputershavealsobeenproposedforenvironmentalapplications,inthehopethatquantumcomputing
mayopenupnewavenuesfordealingwithclimatecrises,identifyingandoptimisingprocessthatmayhelpcopewith
global warming and other climate change eﬀects [169].
Sukhpal Singh Gill et al.: Preprint Accepted for Publication in Elsevier IoT Journal, 24 Feb 2022 Page 21 of 43