AI for Next Generation Computing: Emerging Trends and Future Directions
3.3.1. Open Challenges
As compared to cloud, fog, or serverless computing, the problems of edge computing environments are markedly
diﬀerent. As a result, the edge environment is plagued by issues related to scalability and performance, especially
when dealing with mission-critical data and applications [111]. It is tough to keep track of the health and state of
each IT component, especially when there are so many remote edge locations to keep track of, much alone visualise
and analyse their inﬂuence on other linked equipment, when considering the scale issue [120]. Highly dispersed and
diversenetworksdeﬁneedgesettings.Becauseofthedisparatenatureoftheinfrastructure’scomponentsandthehigh
costs associated with acquiring the various skills and resources required, this creates “edge silos”, which only serves
tocomplicatemattersfurther[84].Tohandletheextremelydispersedandheterogeneousedgeenvironment,AI-based
intelligent software is crucial. It helps to collect and unify data from many sources and provides a highly abstracted
“low touch” monitoring and administration, which eliminates human involvement. It is also possible to have entire
client security without the client’s involvement thanks to automated security and responses. You may pick from a
varietyofsuppliers,avoidingvendor“lock-in”,andswitchoutequipmentwithnonegativeimpactonyourbusinessor
cutting-edge eﬃciency [112].
Additionally, real-time performance management between end points, such as consumers and cloud/data centres,
is a critical issue [113]. End-to-end views and data repositories at all sites are supported by technology tools that
continually monitor performance metrics and data ﬂow. For situations when edge equipment fails or is unavailable,
edgeinfrastructurehasbuilt-inredundancytoisolate,repairandsustainacceptablelevelsoffunctioning[114].Ifyou
run an edge data centre where multiple teams are in charge of diﬀerent portions of the infrastructure, you’ll run into
certainineﬃciencies.Advancedcorrelationandanalytics,basedonAI,arequitehelpfulinthissituationforexamining,
consolidating, and unifying data from many sources, transforming data into information, and communicating that
information with the concerned roles in the team. Information that can be used to help automated processes is
supplied [115].
The followings are the key open issues of adopting AI in edge computing:
•With tremendous advantages, edge computing has a number of challenges to overcome. Edge computing
adoption is being stiﬂed by some of the causes listed above. Edge computing has no legal, societal, or ethical
framework for the use of AI. We need to do more study on the present benchmark tools and techniques. Newer
technologieshaveahardtimebeingintegratedintoexistinglegacyindustrialsystemssincetheyaren’tmodular.
Informationsecurityissuesandalackofintegrationtestingwithnewentrantsfurtherlimittechnologyuse[116].
•Small and inexpensive, most edge devices do not require third-party API authentication, leaving them open to
exploitation [104]. They are designed with simplicity of use and low cost in mind, not security in mind. Edge
devicesthatgatherpersonalinformation,suchasemailaddresses,phonenumbers,healthinformation,andcredit
carddata,areontheriseasaresultofspecialisedapps[121].ThenecessityforanAIbasedsecurityframework
before beginning large-scale and sensitive edge initiatives naturally causes IT and network administrators to be
apprehensive [117].
•For AI-integrated edge workﬂows, new software frameworks and toolkits are needed [111]. Working with
heterogeneous hardware and platforms, as well as the resources available in a workﬂow, will be supported by
these software frameworks [96].
•When it comes to the administration of edge devices, there are no set standards and regulations that apply
universally. The complexity of the IoT network architecture increases as more IoT devices are added to
the edge [118]. There is still much to learn about the local consequences of IoT standards for diﬀerent
companiesacrossdiﬀerentgeographies,despitethefactthattheUSandUKgovernmentshaveproducedthem.
Organizations require a framework of regulations and criteria before they can make the decision to shift their
dataandapplicationassetstoAI-integratededgecomputingenvironments,accordingtotheirperspective[115].
•Only by fully integrating edge computing into existing cloud architecture can its full potential be realised
usingAI,makingedgecomputingthecrucialmissingconnectionbetweendatasources(thedevices)andcloud
computing (core network) [107] because edge nodes have a limited storage and computing capacity [110].
•The main strength of this system is its tight interaction with the cloud. As more businesses move to a multi-
cloud environment, it becomes more diﬃcult for the cloud to set up a redundant AI-integrated edge network
Sukhpal Singh Gill et al.: Preprint Accepted for Publication in Elsevier IoT Journal, 24 Feb 2022 Page 16 of 43