AI for Next Generation Computing: Emerging Trends and Future Directions
•Over-relianceonAIModels:Asitstands,AI/MLalgorithmsareonlyasmallpartofcomplexsoftware-intensive
systems. Software engineers leverage them for completing highly specialized tasks, while designing an large
apparatus of more traditional algorithms around them, including sensor-data sanitization and ﬁltering. Further,
anAImodelisonlyasgoodasthedataitwastrainedon.Hence,strongdataengineeringprocessesarerequired
to select appropriate/representative datasets and conduct various data engineering steps as well as thorough
review processes need to be followed when transfer learning models are selected. Hence, from an autonomics
perspective,allthesestepsneedtobecarefullyhandledbytheMAPE-Kloop,whichwillessentiallyneedtoact
both as a software and a data engineer when conducting adaptations to the ML models.
7. Emerging Trends and Future Directions
On the basis of current research, we’ve selected a number of computing study ﬁelds for three distinct maturity
levels (5 years, 5 to 10 years, and more than ten years). We have identiﬁed a number of emerging technologies
over the next decade, all of which have the potential to make eﬃcient use of AI/ML-integrated next-generation
computing [122, 217, 218, 219]. Figure 6 depicts the hype cycle for next-generation computing. There has been a
lotofstudydoneoncloudcomputingandIoT,butserverlesscomputingiscurrentlyatitspeak.Undertheumbrellaof
computing, research ﬁelds including fog computing, edge computing, AI Orchestration, and mobile edge computing
areonlygettingstarted.Itmighttakeuptotenyearsfortheapplicationofcomputingintheseﬁeldstoreachmaturity.
However,thehypecycleforExplainableAI(XAI),AIengineering,hyperscaleedgecomputing,distributedenterprise,
sustainability,quantumInternetandquantumMLisprojectedtolastmorethantenyears.Thehypearoundsmartrobots,
digital twins, cyber security, edge AI, human-centric AI, edge intelligence, dew computing and privacy enhancing
computation is at an all-time high. It is anticipated that they will be fully developed in less than ﬁve years under the
umbrella of autonomous computing. Expected to signiﬁcantly evolve in the next ﬁve to ten years, MLOps, AIOps,
AI-integrated electric vehicles (EV), decision intelligence and exascale computing have likewise hit their height
of overblown expectations. Generative AI, hyperautomation, neuromorphic computing, hybrid quantum computing,
digital ﬁnance, 6G and quantum computing all have a long way to go before they reach the heights of the hype cycle.
Gridcomputingandvirtualizationhavereceivedalotofattentioninthepastseveralyears,andtheymightcontinueto
do so over the next ﬁve years.
In the following, we have highlighted a number of unsolved problems and research paths that require further
investigation.
7.1. Cloud Computing
•New ensemble machine learning approaches for container management systems, such as Docker Swarm and
Kubernetes, are needed to govern user-based QoS-based container clusters.
•CloudservicedependabilityandQoSmustbemaintainedthroughtheuseofadvancedmachineordeeplearning
techniques.
•Network virtualization must be provided at a reasonable cost in an SDN-based cloud computing environment
that uses AI/ML models to minimise energy consumption and boost dependability.
•Using AI/ML, cloud-based Big Data analysis tools may ﬁnd trends in client behaviour, make better decisions,
and better understand their customers. It is a diﬃcult challenge that has to be solved in order to ensure that
scaling choices are executed or processed in a timely manner utilising AI/ML.
•Thermal-aware task and resource scheduling can be improved by using new AI/ML-inspired methodologies.
•AI/ML-based autonomic computing is becoming increasingly important as the IoT and scientiﬁc applications
grow.
7.2. Fog Computing
•ItisimperativethatthenewestAIandMLapproachesbeusedinordertoforecastsecurityvulnerabilitiesinthe
fog layer and IoT devices because of their intrinsic decentralisation.
Sukhpal Singh Gill et al.: Preprint Accepted for Publication in Elsevier IoT Journal, 24 Feb 2022 Page 27 of 43