AI for Next Generation Computing: Emerging Trends and Future Directions
sensors are conceivable because of the inclusion of improved processing and analysis of data collected by sensors,
as well as planning and executing plans utilizing actuators [204]. Methods are needed to aid in the design and
developmentofthesesystemsbecauseoftheircomplexity[205].InthecontextofCPS,thesystemsthatareembedded
orsoftwareintegratedintophysicalthings,networked,andoﬀeringresidentsandcompanieswithawiderangeofsmart
applications and services are referred to as ICT systems [206].
Transport systems, buildings, electricity grids, and water infrastructure are all examples of CPS [207]. This type
of CPS is meant to detect and react to the physical environment, allowing for quick, reliable autonomic control loops
combining sensing and actuation, perhaps with linguistic and cognitive capabilities, as well [208]. Using wireless
sensor/actornetworks,CPScanmonitorandrespondtothephysicalenvironment.Sensorsandotheralternativesources
collecthistoricalandreal-timedata,whichisusedtoperformadvancedanalysisandprocessinginthetypeofautonomic
control loops [209]. These loops then plan and execute actions in accordance with a set of goals or rules. Real-time
or historical data is used to support this implementation [210]. There are several elements that make CPS systems
diﬃcult to manage, including the use of a wide range of sensors and actuators, the necessity for real-time processing
of enormous amounts of data, and the implementation of plans for issue solving [211]. As a result of the system’s
complexity,engineersneedtoolsandtechniquestoaidtheminthedesigningprocess;adaptivedigitaltwinsarepoised
to play a signiﬁcant role in de-risking such complex engineering and cyber-physical projects.
5. Explainable AI (XAI) for Next Generation Computing
Intelligent decisions are critical to the success of computing initiatives. Is a computing system stable and robust
enough to execute workloads? Are the trained models black boxes or causally explainable? These are just a few
examples of challenges that are faced before a computing system can be implemented [212]. Inaccurate decision-
making is expensive in terms of both cost and resource usage when it comes to these complex and advanced
technologies [213]. There have been a number of AI/ML applications in computing systems to enhance decision-
makingforallocationofresourcesandenergyeﬃciency.Nevertheless,theseAI/MLmodels’predictionsforcomputing
systems are still not practical, explainable, or executable [214]. AI/ML models are frequently hampered by these
constraints. Even if QoS continues to be a primary concern, some recent research have turned their attention to
explaining how QoS is achieved [215]. Is there anything that researchers can do to further the advancement of the
computing community? As a result, a thorough understanding of Explainable AI (XAI) and hands-on expertise with
XAI tools and approaches [216] is needed in order to make informed resource management decisions (an example
application of AI for Computing). These issues may be addressed by using Explainable AI approaches, such as
formulatingpredictionsaboutresourceandenergyusageandSLAdeviationsandthenimplementingtimely,intelligent
action to solve them. In order to make computing more feasible, explainable, and executable, XAI prediction models
must be properly implemented.
6. Potential Risks of AI-integrated Computing
AI can save money, but it requires a highly-trained workforce, that can be expensive at the start. AI’s other
drawbacks in computing systems would include following ones:
•Internet Connectivity Issues: ML/AI techniques based on autonomous computing are frequently hindered by
slow internet connections. There seems to be a latency between transferring information to the cloud/fog/edge
andreceivingreplies,evenifautonomiccomputingisfasterthantraditionalcomputing.MLmethodsforservers
are prone to this issue since forecasting speed is among the most important considerations.
•Privacy of Data: AI systems need an enormous quantity of data, which include information on customers and
providers. Understanding who owns the data is far more beneﬁcial than having private information that can’t
be attributed to a speciﬁc individual. Challenges about data security and compliance with regulations arise
frequently when businesses make utilisation conﬁdential material. Autonomic computing with AI necessitates
privacy regulations and data security.
•PossibilityofErrors:AlthoughAImayseemexciting,likewithanyexperimentation,itisn’talwayseﬀectivein
accomplishing its goals. During its search for solutions, the AI system generated many problematic statements
on sensitive topics. With AI, there is a high risk of mistakes because to the many options. Before further usage
of this innovation, trust and control must be established.
Sukhpal Singh Gill et al.: Preprint Accepted for Publication in Elsevier IoT Journal, 24 Feb 2022 Page 26 of 43