AI for Next Generation Computing: Emerging Trends and Future Directions
8. Conclusions and Summary
Computing systems have advanced computer science in the past couple of decades and are now the heart of the
corporateworld,providingservicesbasedonCloud,Fog,Edge,Serverless,andQuantumComputing.Manyreal-world
problems that require low latency and response time have been solved due to modern computing systems. This has
helped young talents around the globe to launch start-ups allowing large computing capacity for solving challenging
problems to speed up scientiﬁc progress.
Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI), Machine Learning (ML) and Deep Learning (DL) have become increasingly popular
in recent years because of the advances in accuracy pioneered by them in areas such as computer vision, natural
language processing and other allied applications. For training these models, massive amounts of data has been
collected in the previous few years in addition to the development in state-of-the-art computing hardware such as the
GraphicsProcessingUnit(GPU),Google’sTensorProcessingUnit(TPU)andAITesla’sDojoProcessingUnit(DPU).
ComputationalresearchersandpractitionersshouldbeawareofAI/ML/DLalgorithmsandmodels.WithAI/ML/DL,
moderncomputingmayproﬁtfrommoreeﬃcientresourcemanagement,whilecomputingisavitalplatformforhosting
AI/ML/DLservicesbecauseofitshugecomputationalcapacity.Thismeansthatbothsidesgainfromtheother.Large-
scalecomputingpowerandexternaldatasourcesareneededformanyAI/ML/DLtechniques,whichmaybemoreeasily
obtainedviacomputingsystems.ThisisespeciallyimportantnowthatmethodsfortrainingsophisticatedAI,ML,and
DLmodelscanbeimplementedinparallelandinlargequantities.Tothatend,itisforeseenthatcontinuedinterestin
AI/ML/DLapplicationswillspurnewresearchintowell-establisheddatacentreresourcemanagementissuesincluding
VM provisioning, consolidation, and load balancing, while also making it easier to cope with scale-out challenges.
InnovativeresearchonExplainableAI(XAI)mightpavethewayformorewidespreaduseofAIinmoderncomputer
systems.
AI and ML are bringing important necessary demands for computing systems in the upcoming years, from large-
scaleheterogeneousIoTandsensornetworksgeneratingextremelyhugedatastreamstostore,maintain,andinvestigate
to QoS-aware (latency, energy, cost, response time) customised computing service adapting for an array of hardware
devices while maximising for multicriteria including software-level QoS constraints and ﬁnancial restraints. As a
result of these needs, new methodologies and research strategies are needed to harness the AI and ML models
in order to overcome the challenges such as latency and scalability as well as resource and security management.
As a cost-eﬀective technique to increase computing application performance, scaling and ﬂexibility are functional
abilities that are yet to completely utilise AI and ML models. AI and ML may be strategically used in resource
management and scheduling techniques to maximise QoS to improve modern computing. At this time, there are
no comprehensive models of service resilience, autonomous methods for managing availability and reliability, and
provisioningalgorithmsthatarecognizantoffailuresinthecurrentresearch.Next-generationorfuturisticcomputing
couldbeestablishedwiththehelpofAI/MLtechniques,whichcanhandletheseproblemsquicklyandeﬀectively.The
implementationofAI/ML-basedresourcemanagementpoliciescanhelpdatatoautomaticallyadjusttheirownenergy
usage and deliver QoS without aﬀecting the system’s reliability. AI and ML techniques may also be used to predict
thedemandforenergyusageinadvancebycombiningrenewableandnon-renewableenergysources.Further,AI/ML
modes can be used to analyse Big Data for security breaching. Figure 7 shows the summary of new trends and future
directions for AI-integrated next generation computing.
In this article, we have given our vision and explored numerous new trends in AI and ML for cloud, fog, edge,
serverless and quantum computing, as well as for other computing platforms and technologies. This is a holistic
futuristic research article that has drawn together breakthroughs and highlighted the obstacles remaining to be solved
in implementing the use of AI/ML for modern computing. We have also developed a conceptual framework for
integratingcutting-edgetechnologyinthefuturetoprovideeﬀectivecomputingservices.Newresearchdevelopments
related to autonomic computing with embedded intelligence have been discussed. In addition, various potential risks
ofAI-integratednextgenerationcomputinghavebeenpresented.Thisworkrecognisedrecentsigniﬁcantchallengesin
AI/ML-embeddednextgenerationcomputingandhassummarisedresearchﬁndingswithlimitations.Additionally,this
futuristic work has examined how current computing issues would be aﬀected by new trends. In this visionary work,
potentialresearchdirectionsforAI/ML-basednext-generationormoderncomputingarehighlighted.ItisclearthatAI
andMLcanbeusedtosolvecomplicatedissuesinthefuture,andthisforward-thinkingstrategyinspiresotherscholars
andresearcherstofollowsuitinasimilarfashion.Weexpectthatthisvisionaryresearchwillbeusefultopractitioners,
scientists, engineers and researchers who are interested in conducting research in any area of AI/ML-integrated next
generation computing in the future.
Sukhpal Singh Gill et al.: Preprint Accepted for Publication in Elsevier IoT Journal, 24 Feb 2022 Page 30 of 43