Sensors 2020 ,20, 2533 3 of 34
In order to make possible this scenario, e cient artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) algorithm could be
deployed on the devices as SVM (support vector machine) [ 11,12], deep learning (DL) [ 13,14] and,
inter alia , neural networks (NNs) [ 15,16]. It is noteworthy that NNs require less computational power
in the application phase than in the training phase. This feature can be exploited to execute algorithms
of AI on devices with limited resources, as microcontrollers (MCUs), allowing local data processing.
In fact, in the learning phase, a large amount of data is used to calculate the weights and biases of
the network, thus requiring a performing machine in this phase. Once the learning phase has been
completed and the network has been trained, the model can be used for inference (in statistic ﬁeld, it is
the process of using data analysis to deduce properties of an underlying probability distribution) with
a lower computational request. In fact, once the coe cients have been calculated, they are stored in the
program memory and the AI algorithm can be executed on a device with a low capacity in terms of RAM
(random access memory). ML algorithms are used for di erent topics such as smart cities [ 5,17–22],
computer vision [ 23–27], health care [ 28–33], automotive [ 34–37], and others. Concerning these ﬁelds,
there are di erent examples of how machine learning could be brought on edge devices. Anandhalli
and Baligar in 2017 proposed in [ 18] a video processing algorithm that identiﬁed and counted the
vehicles on a road. The algorithm was run on a Raspberry Pi3 (1.2 GHz quad-core ARMv8, 1 GB of
RAM) with a built-in camera, using the library OpenCV5 (Open Source Computer Vision Library [ 38]).
In [23], the authors developed a face recognition algorithm for law enforcement agencies within a smart
city. A portable wireless camera mounted on the uniform of a police o cer is used to capture the images
that are then passed on to a Raspberry Pi3 to perform facial recognition. The Viola-Jones algorithm [ 39]
is ﬁrst used to identify faces in the images, then the ORB algorithm [40] extracts the peculiar features
from the faces that are then transmitted to an SVM algorithm in the cloud to identify people. Therefore,
for IoT purposes, the devices must be su ciently powerful to perform certain tasks, even though,
in general, it is possible to insert AI even in any embedded devices by exploiting a certain class of
algorithms. The use of ML algorithms also allows the extension of the average battery life of the device,
with power saving one of the fundamental tasks of the IoT world. For example, authors in [ 28] focused
on increasing the battery life of a device used for e-health purposes by optimizing sampling times and
data transfers using ML algorithms. Any unnecessary data that are transferred, stored, and processed
appear to be a potential waste of energy. Using an SVM algorithm, based on the RBF (radial basis
function) [ 41], kernel function, and varying the sampling frequency, it was possible to increase the life
of the device from 2 weeks to years (997 days). In the same scenario considered, the wearable sensor
platform for health-care in a residential environment (SPHERE) [ 42] is used to classify human activity
into three categories: Sedentary, moderate, and sportive. The data measured by an accelerometer are
sent to the MCU using Serial Peripheral Interface (SPI) protocol. After processing the data, they are
packed by the microcontroller and sent using advertisement mode to a Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE)
radio, which transmits data outside the smart home to a central unit. The use of SVM can also be found
in [43], which highlights how the use of ML algorithms allows greater e ciency and low consumption
in predicting patients’ seizures. In fact, crisis prediction is a di cult task due to the variability of the
electroencephalography (EEG) signal depending on the patient. A neurostimulator able to identify
and react to a principle of crisis can facilitate applications that would not otherwise be feasible, such as
the possibility of generating a stimulus to suppress the crisis itself. The article demonstrates how ML
techniques like SVM can be used to identify possible crises in each patient. The use of NN on embedded
devices can be found in [ 44], which deals with the use of learning algorithms on an inexpensive robot
built to perform sense-motor tasks. The robot, in particular, learns to trace objects by identifying the
peculiarities of the object itself. The algorithm uses a CNN (convolutional neural network) to combine
color, brightness, motion, and audio information while training is carried out using supervised ML
algorithms. The images are properly analyzed to eliminate redundant input data. A Motorola board
populated with a 68HC11, an 8-bit MCU with Complex Instruction Set Computer (CISC) architecture is
used, which converts and processes the gyroscope outputs and generates sound feedback and timing
signals for 14 servomotors that allow 3 degrees of freedom for each of the four legs and two degrees of