Sensors 2020 ,20, 2533 14 of 34
neural networks) in which the computing is distributed across an hierarchical system, consisting of the
cloud, the edge (fog), and end devices. DDNN also allows fast and localized inference using shallow
portions of the NN at the edge and end devices. Due to the distributed nature, DDNNs improve the
fusion of the data from network sensors, system fault tolerance, and privacy for users. Generally,
a common feature for the edge approaches is that the edge server serves a limited geographical area,
so the input data and, thus, their DNN outputs may be similar.
6.3. Distributed Computing
Hierarchical scenario is based on the o oad of the network to more powerful entities like edge
devices or cloud. In the distributed perspective the DNN computations can be distributed across
multiple peer edge devices, like in DeepThings [ 90]. It distributes the DNN executions between end
devices such as Raspberry Pi and Android smartphones. The DNN partition choice is based on the
computation capabilities and memory of the end devices.
7. Privacy
Both in edge server-based architectures and in joint computation, the data are exchanged over
the network (e.g., from end device to edge server or from edge server to cloud) and it may contain
sensitive information. This can lead to privacy issues. In fact, as already mentioned, edge servers
work locally in a geographically limited area. Therefore, the origin of the data is practically known.
Although ML on edge devices allows the data reduction on the network and, therefore, improving
privacy by itself, it is possible to improve the system through additional techniques, such as adding
noise to data or cryptographic techniques.
7.1. Add Noise to Data
A solution is to add noise to the samples uploaded on the network during inference.
Wang et al. [ 175] deployed a smaller DNN locally on the edge device to extract features, add noise
to the features, and then upload the features to the cloud for further inference processing by a more
powerful DNN. The DNN on the cloud is pretrained with noisy samples so that the noisy inference
samples uploaded from the end devices can still be classiﬁed with high accuracy at test time. This is
based on di erential privacy mechanism [176–179].
7.2. Cryptographic Techniques
Cryptographic techniques can be used to compute the inference with a high level of privacy.
The target of secure computation [ 66] is to ensure that the end device receives an inference result
without learning anything about the DNN model on the edge server and vice versa. One method of
secure computation is homomorphic encryption, in which the communicated data are encrypted and
computation can be performed on the encrypted data, as done in CryptoNets [180–182]. The DNN is
converted in CryptoNets, approximating the common activation functions and operations in a DNN,
in a low-degree polynomial, which guarantees the homomorphic encryption. However, a bottleneck
of the homomorphic encryption tends to be its compute times. Multiparty computation is another
technique for secure computation. In secure multiparty computation, multiple machines work together
and communicate in multiple rounds to jointly compute a result. Secure multiparty computation
focuses on the privacy of the intermediate computation steps, but its bottleneck tends to be the
communication complexity.
8. Training
Thus far, edge computing and deep learning have mostly been discussed assuming that a deep
learning model has already been trained o ine on a prebuilt dataset. This section presents a discussion
on training algorithms and hardware for the edge ﬁeld. Usually, training data produced by end devices