Sensors 2020 ,20, 2533 6 of 34
2.3. Tree-Based ML Algorithms
Tree-based ML algorithms are used for classiﬁcation and regression problems that are a very
common practice in the IoT ﬁeld. However, due to the limited resources of the devices, the usual tree
algorithms could not be brought on them. An emerging algorithm is Bonsai [ 63]. The tree algorithm [ 64]
is designed speciﬁcally for severely resource-constrained IoT devices and it maintains prediction
accuracy while minimizing model size and prediction costs. It learns ﬁrst a single sparse tree reducing
the size model, then it makes nonlinear predictions through the internal nodes and the leaf ones.
Eventually, Bonsai learns sparse matrix, projecting all data into a low dimensional space in which the
tree is learned. This allows the algorithm to be brought on tiny devices like IoT ones.
The referenced implementation was carried out on an Arduino board populated with an 8-bit
ATmega328P microcontroller with 16 MHz operating frequency, 2 kB of Static Random Access Memory
(SRAM), and 32 kB of read-only ﬂash memory and on BBC Micro:Bit which has an ARM architecture
32-bit Cortex with an operating frequency of 16 MHz, 16 kB of SRAM and 256 kB of ﬂash.
2.4. SVM
One of the most widely used ML algorithms at the embedded level is the SVM [ 28,29,43,52].
SVM is a supervised learning algorithm that can be used for both classiﬁcation and regression problems.
The algorithm discriminates between two or more classes of data by deﬁning an optimal hyperplane
that separates all classes (Figure 3a). The support vectors are the data closest to the hyperplane, which,
if removed, would result in a redeﬁnition of the hyperplane itself. For these reasons they are considered
the critical elements of the dataset. Usually, the loss function used by the algorithm is the Hinge loss
and the optimization function is the descending gradient technique.
Sensors 2020, 20, x FOR PEER REVIEW   6 of 33 
 accuracy  while minimizing  model size and prediction  costs. It learns first a single sparse tree reducing  
the size model, then it makes nonlinear  predictions  through the internal nodes and the leaf ones. 
Eventually,  Bonsai learns sparse matrix, projecting  all data into a low dimensional  space in which the 
tree is learned. This allows the algorithm  to be brought on tiny devices like IoT ones. 
The referenced  implementation  was carried out on an Arduino  board populated  with an 8‐bit 
ATmega328P  microcontroller  with 16 MHz operating  frequency,  2 kB of Static Random  Access 
Memory  (SRAM),  and 32 kB of read‐only flash memory and on BBC Micro:Bit  which has an ARM 
architecture  32‐bit Cortex with an operating  frequency  of 16 MHz, 16 kB of SRAM and 256 kB of flash. 
2.4. SVM 
One of the most widely used ML algorithms  at the embedded  level is the SVM [28,29,43,52].  
SVM is a supervised  learning algorithm  that can be used for both classification  and regression  
problems.  The algorithm  discriminates  between two or more classes of data by defining an optimal 
hyperplane  that separates  all classes (Figure 3a). The support vectors are the data closest to the 
hyperplane,  which, if removed,  would result in a redefinition  of the hyperplane  itself. For these 
reasons they are considered  the critical elements  of the dataset. Usually, the loss function used by the 
algorithm  is the Hinge loss and the optimization  function is the descending  gradient technique.  
  
(a)  (b) 
Figure 3. (a) Hyperplane  that separate two classes of data, (b) kernel trick. 
Sometimes  the data are linearly separable,  but this only represents  a subset of cases. SVM can 
efficiently  perform a classification  using the kernel trick. Suppose  we face the problem represented  
in Figure 3b: It is impossible  to find a single line to separate the two classes in the input space. But, 
after projecting  the data into a higher dimension,  it is possible to find the hyperplane  which classifies  
the data. Kernel helps to find a hyperplane  in the higher dimensional  space without increasing  the 
computational  cost too much. 
3. Bringing  Machine  Learning  to the Edge 
3.1. Architectures  
To meet latency requirements,  different  architectures  for quick‐performing  model inference  
have been proposed.  The research focused on three important  architectures  (depicted  in Figure 4): (1) 
On‐device computation,  where DNNs are executed  on the end device; (2) edge server‐based 
architectures  (the data are sent from the end devices to edge servers for computation);  and (3) joint 
computation  which includes the possibility  to have cloud processing.  
Figure 3. (a) Hyperplane that separate two classes of data, ( b) kernel trick.
Sometimes the data are linearly separable, but this only represents a subset of cases. SVM can
eciently perform a classiﬁcation using the kernel trick. Suppose we face the problem represented in
Figure 3b: It is impossible to ﬁnd a single line to separate the two classes in the input space. But, after
projecting the data into a higher dimension, it is possible to ﬁnd the hyperplane which classiﬁes
the data. Kernel helps to ﬁnd a hyperplane in the higher dimensional space without increasing the
computational cost too much.
3. Bringing Machine Learning to the Edge
3.1. Architectures
To meet latency requirements, di erent architectures for quick-performing model inference
have been proposed. The research focused on three important architectures (depicted in Figure 4):
(1) On-device computation, where DNNs are executed on the end device; (2) edge server-based