Sensors 2020 ,20, 2533 18 of 34
Table 4. Accuracy for di erent activation functions.
First Level Second Level Accuracy on Test
relu relu 96.20%
tanh tanh 96.80%
sigmoid sigmoid 96.96%
relu tanh 97.18%
tanh relu 96.64%
sigmoid relu 96.88%
relu sigmoid 97.25%
tanh sigmoid 97.21%
sigmoid tanh 97.10%
The loss function used, being a classiﬁcation problem, is the cross entropy applied directly on the
softmax . The function tf.nn.softmax_cross_entropy_with_logits(logits, labels) , combines the two operations
making it faster, but also numerically stable. Instead, as optimization function it is possible to use
an adaptive function, i.e., ADAM. Once the model is deﬁned, we have all the requirements for the
training of the NN. Before starting the training, it is necessary to initialize the variables (weights
and biases) using the tf.global_variables_initializer() method. Tensorﬂow uses Xavier [ 219] as default
initialization. Then, it is necessary to deﬁne the size of the batches, their number as a function of the
size of the dataset, and a threshold for the loss function related to the validation dataset, so that if the
error increases, early stopping prevents overﬁtting. It should be noted that the threshold has been set
at a high value, so that early stopping will not occur at the ﬁrst time. The ﬁnal part of the required
code is related to the actual training, realized through a cycle. For each period, which is repeated to be
a complete iteration of the dataset, a relative to the batches is deﬁned, through which it is possible to
calculate the average error relative to the single period as the sum of the errors associated with the
batches on the number of batches. At the end of each epoch, it is possible to calculate the loss relative
to the validation dataset; if the current validation error is higher than the previous one, then the model
has conformed too much to the dataset and, therefore, has no ability to adapt and it is necessary to stop
learning using early stopping.
The model made with Tensorﬂow is too heavy in terms of memory occupation for an edge
application; in this example the NN weighed around 15 MB. Tensorﬂow Lite (TFLite) [ 220] was created
speciﬁcally to overcome this problem, proposing a set of tools that help programmers to run embedded,
mobile, and IoT devices IA models. In the following, we will show how to use TFLite to bring the NN
on a microcontroller. The workﬂow that we will follow in this tutorial is the following:
- Deﬁnition of the model in Keras (using Tensorﬂow backend),
- Conversion of the model from Keras to TFLite,
- Implementation of a post-training quantization to further decrease the dimension of the NN,
- Design of a Graphical User Interface (GUI) to draw the digit, and
- Test on hardware devices.
9.3. Keras Model
The NN can be built using CNN and the dropout technique. The use of CNN is not necessary,
but it is recommended since the number of input variables is very high (CNN allows training the
model on a smaller dataset, reducing considerably the number of parameters to learn). The model is
deﬁned using the Sequential() method which, according to the documentation [ 221], allows deﬁning the
model as a linear stack of layers. The ﬁrst layer is a 2D convolution layer that creates a convolutional
kernel that is superimposed convolutionally with the input layer to produce an output tensor.
To the second layer, also convolutional, is added the MaxPooling operation for spatial data (2D).
The Dropout is then applied to the network in input. The last two layers are densely connected layers;
at the penultimate layer a reluis applied as activation function, whereas at the last one a softmax . Finally,