Sensors 2020 ,20, 2533 8 of 34
from which further techniques have been developed. DeepIoT [ 73] presents a pruning method for
commonly used deep learning structures in IoT devices, and the pruned DNN can be immediately
deployed on edge devices without modiﬁcation. Loss-approximating Taylor expansion was used
in [74] as a gradient-based importance metric used for pruning. Anwar et al. [ 75] selected pruning
candidate by hundreds of random evaluations. Yang et al. [ 76] selected pruning candidate weighted by
energy consumption. Early pruning [ 77] and dynamic pruning [ 78] explored how to integrate pruning
with a better retraining, and saved the retraining time. A technique that is not among those of pruning
and quantization, but which has a signiﬁcant value, is the knowledge distillation. This involves creating
a smaller DNN that imitates the behavior of a larger one [ 79]. This is done by training the smaller
DNN using the output predictions produced from the larger one and the smaller DNN approximates
the function learned by the larger one.
Sensors 2020, 20, x FOR PEER REVIEW   8 of 33 
 candidate  by hundreds  of random evaluations.  Yang et al. [76] selected pruning candidate  weighted  
by energy consumption.  Early pruning [77] and dynamic  pruning [78] explored  how to integrate  
pruning with a better retraining,  and saved the retraining  time. A technique  that is not among those 
of pruning and quantization,  but which has a significant  value, is the knowledge  distillation.  This 
involves creating a smaller DNN that imitates the behavior  of a larger one [79]. This is done by 
training the smaller DNN using the output predictions  produced  from the larger one and the smaller 
DNN approximates  the function learned by the larger one. 
 
Figure 5. Pruning effect on the network.  
3.2.3. Hardware  Choice 
The choice of the algorithm  to be used is important  to run a model on an edge device. However,  
this must also be coupled to an optimal choice of hardware.  The metric to be used for choosing  the 
hardware  is based on accuracy,  energy consumption,  throughput,  and cost [67]. The accuracy  of ML 
algorithms  must be measured  on a dataset large enough to be able to affirm that the obtained  result 
is valid. Energy efficiency,  on the other hand, is closely related to the programmability  and size of 
the NN. By “programmability”  we mean the adaptation  of the model to the variation  of the context, 
i.e., the model varies the weights as the scenario varies. By “NN size” we mean, instead, the number 
of layers that the processor  must support. The high size and the variability  of the scenario imply an 
increase in terms of computation.  In particular,  the high size of the NN increases  the number of data, 
and, instead, the programmability  involves the need to access the memory,  read the weight value, 
and modify it. This generally  involves an increase in energy consumption.  By “throughput”  we mean 
the number of operations  required  in the unit of time and with “cost” the amount of memory 
required.  
Microcontrollers  can be used for AI but implementing  the algorithm  on them is challenging.  
They are excellent  choices in IoT applications  and may run networks  that are not too large for low‐
data fusion tasks. A good tool to facilitate  the implementation  of a DNN on a microcontroller  is the 
X‐CUBE‐AI [80], suitable only for STMicroelectronics  MCUs. It is an expansion  of the STM32CubeMX  
environment  that extends the potential  of the tool, allowing  an automatic  conversion  of pretrained  
NNs to low‐resource  hardware.  X‐CUBE‐AI also optimizes  libraries by modifying  layers and 
reducing  the number of weights to make the network more “memory ‐friendly”.  
Tiny hardware  that can be used for IoT purposes  and recommended  on the Tensorflow  lite 
website [81] are: 
‐ Arduino  Nano 33 BLE Sense [82] 
‐ SparkFun  Edge [83] 
‐ STM32 microcontrollers  [84] 
‐ Adafruit  EdgeBadge  [85] 
Figure 5. Pruning e ect on the network.
3.2.3. Hardware Choice
The choice of the algorithm to be used is important to run a model on an edge device. However,
this must also be coupled to an optimal choice of hardware. The metric to be used for choosing the
hardware is based on accuracy, energy consumption, throughput, and cost [ 67]. The accuracy of ML
algorithms must be measured on a dataset large enough to be able to a rm that the obtained result
is valid. Energy e ciency, on the other hand, is closely related to the programmability and size of
the NN. By “programmability” we mean the adaptation of the model to the variation of the context,
i.e., the model varies the weights as the scenario varies. By “NN size” we mean, instead, the number
of layers that the processor must support. The high size and the variability of the scenario imply
an increase in terms of computation. In particular, the high size of the NN increases the number of
data, and, instead, the programmability involves the need to access the memory, read the weight value,
and modify it. This generally involves an increase in energy consumption. By “throughput” we mean
the number of operations required in the unit of time and with “cost” the amount of memory required.
Microcontrollers can be used for AI but implementing the algorithm on them is challenging.
They are excellent choices in IoT applications and may run networks that are not too large for low-data
fusion tasks. A good tool to facilitate the implementation of a DNN on a microcontroller is the
X-CUBE-AI [ 80], suitable only for STMicroelectronics MCUs. It is an expansion of the STM32CubeMX
environment that extends the potential of the tool, allowing an automatic conversion of pretrained
NNs to low-resource hardware. X-CUBE-AI also optimizes libraries by modifying layers and reducing
the number of weights to make the network more “memory-friendly”.
Tiny hardware that can be used for IoT purposes and recommended on the Tensorﬂow lite
website [81] are:
- Arduino Nano 33 BLE Sense [82]