Sensors 2020 ,20, 2533 11 of 34
WiFi networks (IEEE 802.11) use an access point (AP) as an Internet gateway and have good
data capacity and coverage inside buildings. Until recently it was quite expensive to integrate
WiFi connectivity into devices with low computing performance, due to the size and complexity of
WiFi and TCP /IP software and the high power consumption that make it not suitable for use with
battery-powered devices. Now, however, new devices support WiFi and TCP /IP software and have
reduced power consumption. The power consumption of these devices can be further reduced by
activating the radio section only for short periods, allowing them to operate for over a year with two
AA batteries [121].
Many di erent WiFi protocols are available and operate at either 2.4 GHz or 5 GHz. IEEE 802.11n
and IEEE 802.11ac are the most widely used protocols but di erent versions have been developed
in the past years for higher versatility. WiFi HaLow (IEEE 802.11ah) is designed for low data rate
and long-range devices [ 122]. It operates in the sub-GHz ISM band and implements power-saving
techniques, such as target wake time (TWT) that wake up the device at deﬁned intervals for a very short
time. HaLow was released in 2016, but is not yet widely used in commercial products. The 802.11af [ 123]
has the same target applications of HaLow but it relies on unused TV spectrums in UHF and VHF
bands and never took o .
The 802.11ax [ 124] is a more recent version of WiFi technologies that support higher transfer speed
and also introduce power-saving features such as TWT, making it more attractive for IoT applications.
It also includes features that allow it to extend the range and allows the partition of the channel into
smaller subchannels to reduce the data rates while extending the number of devices that can be reliably
connected to an access point, allowing it to scale up to thousands of devices.
Radio-frequency identiﬁcation (RFID) is a technology that uses sub-GHz ISM bands, designed
speciﬁcally so devices without batteries could send a signal [ 125]. NFC (near-ﬁeld communication) is
a protocol used for very close communication [ 126]. It operates in the 13.56 MHz and is designed to
exchange data with another NFC device, allowing bidirectional communications. The low data rate
and short communication distance make it suitable only for niche IoT applications.
LoRa (long range) [ 127,128] is a low-power, wide-area network (LPWAN) technology. It is
based on spread spectrum modulation techniques and it could be used for empowering the IoT
scenario [ 129]. In [ 130], it is presented a solution of machine learning on edge devices with the use
of LoRa as a low-power transmission protocol. Implementing machine learning with LoRa allow it
to reduce transmitted data by 512 times and extend battery life by 3 times for that speciﬁc scenario.
Nowadays, the most common strategy for processing data is the use of the cloud, but the transmission
of large amounts of data requires frequent recharging of the devices, thus negating the prerogatives
of the IoT. In addition, IoT applications could require long-distance data transmission, such as for
trac monitoring. IoT devices must, therefore, have a low-energy proﬁle and sometimes be able to
transmit over great distances for a given scenario [ 125,130,131]. Furthermore, IoT devices require edge
processing for bandwidth, latency, and privacy issues. Under these conditions, the e cient use of data
reduction and local processing must be coupled with long-range and small-bandwidth transmission
protocols and this could be obtained using LoRa.
SigFox [ 132] is another LPWAN solution. It is a narrowband technology and allows the use
of simpler devices that are available from di erent manufacturers. However, it requires the use of
sophisticated and expensive gateways and access points and the network is controlled by SigFox
and has a fee. On the contrary, LoRa is open and its use is free with no subscriptions and no
constraints on installation of gateways and network servers. However, the production of LoRa radio is
a Semtech exclusive.
LTE (long-term evolution), commonly known as “4G LTE”, is a standard for wireless broadband
communication based on GSM /EDGE and UMTS /HSPA technologies [ 133]. After the LTE introduction,
it began to compete with the emerging technologies for IoT ﬁeld such as BLE, narrowband Internet of
Things (NB-IoT), ZigBee, and LoRa. The 4G has improved the capabilities of cellular networks but it is
not fully optimized for IoT applications [134,135].