Sensors 2020 ,20, 2533 5 of 34
high accuracy requires more memory than a model with low accuracy due to the number of parameters.
The metric used to measure accuracy depends on the domain in which the ML algorithm is applied.
For example, in object detection, the accuracy may be measured by the mean average precision
(mAP) [ 56], which measures how well the predicted object location overlaps with the ground-truth
location, averaged across multiple categories of objects.
Sensors 2020, 20, x FOR PEER REVIEW   5 of 33 
  
Figure 2. Deep Neural Network  (DNN) example. 
2.2. RNN, GAN, K‐NN 
A particular  type of NN are the RNNs (recurrent  neural networks)  [57]. In this type of NN, the 
output values of a high layer are used as input for a lower one. This interconnection  allows the use 
of one of the layers as state memory.  Providing  a temporal  sequence  of values as input, it allows us 
to model also dynamic  temporal  behavior.  This makes them applicable  to predictive  analysis tasks 
on data sequences,  such as handwriting  recognition  or speech recognition  [58]. A particular  RNN is 
LSTM (long short‐term memory)  [59]. A LSTM unit is composed  of a cell, an input gate, an output 
gate, and a forget gate. The cell remembers  the values over the time and the gates regulate the flow 
of information  into and out of the cell. In particular,  the forget gate can learn what information  is kept 
or forgotten  during training.  
Another type of NN is the generative  adversarial  network (GAN) [60]. They consist of two 
networks:  Generator  and discriminator.  The first generates  data after it learns the data distribution  
from a training dataset of real data. The second one is in charge of classifying  the real data from the 
fake ones generated  by the generator.  
K‐nearest neighbors  algorithm  (K‐NN) [61] is an algorithm  used in the field of patterns 
recognition,  based on the characteristics  of the objects close to the one considered.  This method is 
used both for classification  and regression  problems.  There are different  modified  versions of k‐NN 
that helps to implement  the algorithm  in hardware ‐constrained  devices and the most innovative  is 
ProtoNN  [62]. It is a k‐NN‐based algorithm.  The main problems  of the K‐NN for the computation  at 
the edge are: The training data size (the algorithm  generates  prediction  using the entire datasets),  the 
prediction  time, and the choice of the distance metric. To address these issues, ProtoNN  works on a 
smaller training dataset excluding  the unnecessary  data. The dataset is then projected  to a low 
dimension  matrix and jointly learned across all data points. Gupta et al. implemented  ProtoNN  on 
an Arduino  Uno to evaluate its performance  using 14 datasets and reported  almost the same 
classification  accuracy  as the state of the art. 
2.3. Tree‐Based ML Algorithms  
Tree‐based ML algorithms  are used for classification  and regression  problems  that are a very 
common  practice in the IoT field. However,  due to the limited resources  of the devices, the usual tree 
algorithms  could not be brought on them. An emerging  algorithm  is Bonsai [63]. The tree algorithm  
[64] is designed  specifically  for severely resource ‐constrained  IoT devices and it maintains  prediction  
Figure 2. Deep Neural Network (DNN) example.
2.2. RNN, GAN, K-NN
A particular type of NN are the RNNs (recurrent neural networks) [ 57]. In this type of NN,
the output values of a high layer are used as input for a lower one. This interconnection allows the use
of one of the layers as state memory. Providing a temporal sequence of values as input, it allows us
to model also dynamic temporal behavior. This makes them applicable to predictive analysis tasks
on data sequences, such as handwriting recognition or speech recognition [ 58]. A particular RNN is
LSTM (long short-term memory) [ 59]. A LSTM unit is composed of a cell, an input gate, an output
gate, and a forget gate. The cell remembers the values over the time and the gates regulate the ﬂow of
information into and out of the cell. In particular, the forget gate can learn what information is kept or
forgotten during training.
Another type of NN is the generative adversarial network (GAN) [ 60]. They consist of two
networks: Generator and discriminator. The ﬁrst generates data after it learns the data distribution
from a training dataset of real data. The second one is in charge of classifying the real data from the
fake ones generated by the generator.
K-nearest neighbors algorithm (K-NN) [ 61] is an algorithm used in the ﬁeld of patterns recognition,
based on the characteristics of the objects close to the one considered. This method is used both for
classiﬁcation and regression problems. There are di erent modiﬁed versions of k-NN that helps to
implement the algorithm in hardware-constrained devices and the most innovative is ProtoNN [ 62].
It is a k-NN-based algorithm. The main problems of the K-NN for the computation at the edge are:
The training data size (the algorithm generates prediction using the entire datasets), the prediction
time, and the choice of the distance metric. To address these issues, ProtoNN works on a smaller
training dataset excluding the unnecessary data. The dataset is then projected to a low dimension
matrix and jointly learned across all data points. Gupta et al. implemented ProtoNN on an Arduino
Uno to evaluate its performance using 14 datasets and reported almost the same classiﬁcation accuracy
as the state of the art.