Sensors 2020 ,20, 2533 4 of 34
freedom for the robot’s head. A Charge-Coupled Device (CCD) camera is mounted on the top of the
robot, which acts as the robot’s eye.
As seen from the previous papers, ML algorithms can be implemented on devices with limited
computational power and this can be used to improve the IoT ﬁeld [ 45,46], thus enabling the edge
computing . A related term, fog computing , describes an architecture where the cloud is extended to be
closer to the IoT end devices, thereby improving latency and security by performing computations
near the network edge [ 4]. Therefore, also for the fog computing, the task is to bring the processing
phase closer to where the data are generated but the main di erence is where the “intelligence” is
located. In fog computing the processing phase is at the LAN (local-area network) level, in a fog node
or IoT gateway. In edge computing, data are mainly processed directly on the devices to which the
sensors are attached (physically very close to the sensors). The closer to the sensor, the better it is in
terms of privacy and power consumption because of the reduction of the energy request related to
data transmission. In this scenario, a variety of possibilities of energy harvesting from di erent sources
paves the way for AI-enabled passive or semipassive IoT sensor platforms [47–51].
This survey focused on ML systems deployed on edge devices. Section 2 provides a comparison
between the ML algorithms implementable in edge computing. In Section 3, the process of bringing
ML to the edge is analyzed. Section 4 describes edge server-based architectures while in Section 5
the wireless standards for AI-enabled IoT devices are introduced. Section 6 provides edge-speciﬁc
solutions for o oading techniques, detailing the di erences of the joint computation alternatives.
Section 7 deals with privacy issues and how to protect user privacy in uploading data. Section 8
describes the edge implementations of the training phase, in ML design. In Section 9, an example
of edge machine learning implementation is provided, commonly regarded as the machine learning
“Hello World”. The conclusions are, ﬁnally, drawn in Section 10.
2. Machine Learning Algorithms
We now discuss ML algorithms that could be used in resource-constrained settings at the edge of
the network. The machine learning algorithms introduced in the next paragraphs are the most used in
the papers that a ord the problem of bringing AI in devices with resource-constrained hardware.
2.1. Deep Learning
A deep learning model can be thought as a combination of weights and biases [ 52].
These parameters are varied by an optimization function (ADAM [ 53] optimization algorithm is
generally used) based on an objective function (loss function or reward function, if the learning is,
respectively, supervised or reinforcement) that measures the predictive power of the model. Following
a training phase, the AI algorithm identiﬁes an underlying pattern between the data, predicting
a value as a function of the inputs’ data. Depending on the training phase, we can distinguish various
learning techniques: (1) Supervised learning (both inputs and outputs are provided to the algorithm),
(2) unsupervised learning (only inputs are provided), and (3) reinforcement learning (an objective
reinforcement function is maximized). During the inference, the inputs’ data pass through the layers
and each layer performs matrix multiplications. The output of the ﬁnal layer is either a number or
a classiﬁcation output. A deep neural network (DNN) [ 13] (Figure 2) is an artiﬁcial neural network
(ANN) with multiple layers between the input and output layers and the operations include linear or
nonlinear functions. A special case of DNNs involves the usage of the matrix multiplications with
convolutional ﬁlter operations, which is common in DNNs that are designed for image and video
analysis. This type of models is known as convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [ 54] and they are
used when the numbers of input variables are high. The DNNs designed especially for time series
prediction are called recurrent neural networks (RNNs) [ 55], characterized by having loops in their
layer connections to keep state and enable predictions on sequential inputs.
There are many possible choices on how to design a NN model, provided that di erent
hyperparameters of the network bring a di erent level of accuracy. In particular, a model with