Sensors 2020 ,20, 2533 10 of 34
but the proposed solution uses transfer learning to reduce the computational resources consumed by
each request. Transfer learning enables multiple applications to share the common lower layers of the
DNN model and computes higher layers unique to the speciﬁc application, thus reducing the overall
amount of computation.
5. Wireless Standards for AI-Enabled IoT Devices
Most of the energy in the IoT device is wasted due to the communication protocol. Indeed, any
unnecessary data that are transferred, stored, and processed appear to be a potential waste of energy.
Consequently, excellent algorithms must also be accompanied by e cient communication protocols.
According to the speciﬁc scenario, the developers can use di erent communication protocols (Table 2).
This is because we can distinguish protocols that allow us to transmit a small amount of data over
long distances with a low energy consumption and protocols that can transmit a great amount of
data over long distances with a high consumption. If the spectrum band use is considered, we can
also classify them into technologies that use the licensed or the unlicensed spectrum, e.g., Industrial,
Scientiﬁc and Medical (ISM) bands [ 100]. Among the many communication technologies, we include
BLE [ 101], an example [ 102] that presents the design and optimization of a smart sensor supplied
by 2.4 GHz Radio Frequency (RF) power and performing infrared-based motion detection and BLE
communication. Bluetooth wireless technology is widely used, including the introduction of Bluetooth
5 [103,104] that uses less power and supports mesh topology, enables large-scale device networks,
and many-to-many communications. Bluetooth 5 meets the requirements for recent IoT devices with
its good range, increased speed up to 2 Mbps, and a long-range mode with higher sensitivity at lower
bit rates.
ZigBee [ 105] is one of the main IoT communication standards. It is based on IEEE 802.15.4 [ 106]
standard for WPAN (wireless personal area network) and its primary application is in the ﬁeld of
wireless sensor networks (smart energy and home automation) [ 107]. It could be used in di erent
ﬁelds: Smart cities [ 108,109], agriculture [ 110,111], automotive [ 112,113], and health care [ 114,115].
ZigBee operates mainly in the 2.4 GHz, but also supports the 868 MHz and 916 MHz ISM bands.
Another solution is Z-Wave, a sub-GHz mesh network protocol often used for security systems,
home automation, and lighting controls [ 116]. Like Zigbee, Z-Wave is a low-power technology based
on IEEE 802.15.4 that transfers small amounts of data over short and medium distances. Z-wave uses
a proprietary radio system and has a strictly regulated product ecosystem targeting smart homes,
while Zigbee devices can be used for a variety of applications and are not fully interoperable.
ANT [117] is a proprietary protocol operating in the 2.4 GHz band designed for low bit rate and
low-power networks. It supports point-to-point, star, tree, and mesh networks and up to 65,533 nodes
for each of the available channels. It was originally used in sports and ﬁtness sensors but later used
for home automation and industrial applications. ANT +is a standardized layer on top of the ANT
protocol allowing devices’ interoperability [118].
In the wake of the market demands of direct IP-based connectivity, new wireless mesh networking
standards have been developed. The 6LoWPAN (IPv6 over low-power wireless personal area
networks) [ 119] is a light-weight, IP-based communication and is an open IoT network protocol,
primarily used for home and building automation. However, the standard only deﬁnes an e cient
adaptation layer between the 802.15.4 data link layer and the TCP /IP stack. Thread [ 120] is a secure
and reliable mesh protocol for home automation running over 6LoWPAN and IEEE 802.15.4 radio.
The stack is an open standard built as a collection of existing standards and is optimized for low-power
operation, but the application layer is not standardized.
The aforementioned WPAN solutions require an application-level gateway that runs the TCP /IP
stack via Ethernet or WiFi. Instead, 6LoWPAN-based solutions use an edge router that only forwards
packets at the network layer and does not implement an application layer state, allowing low-cost
bridging to other IP networks.