Sensors 2020 ,20, 2533 13 of 34
6. Joint Computation
Although the edge server can accelerate DNN processing, it is not always necessary to have the
edge devices executing DNNs on edge servers. We will introduce three o oading scenarios (Figure 6):
(1) partial o oading of partitioned DNN (the decision is what fraction of the DNN computations
should be o oaded), (2) hierarchical architectures (o oading is performed across a combination
of edge devices, edge servers, and cloud), and (3) distributed computing approaches (the DNN
computation is distributed across multiple peer devices).
Sensors 2020, 20, x FOR PEER REVIEW   13 of 33 
 Although  the edge server can accelerate  DNN processing,  it is not always necessary  to have the 
edge devices executing  DNNs on edge servers. We will introduce  three offloading  scenarios  (Figure 
6): (1) partial offloading  of partitioned  DNN (the decision is what fraction of the DNN computations  
should be offloaded),  (2) hierarchical  architectures  (offloading  is performed  across a combination  of 
edge devices, edge servers, and cloud), and (3) distributed  computing  approaches  (the DNN 
computation  is distributed  across multiple  peer devices).  
 
Figure 6. Joint computation  among devices, edge, and cloud servers. 
6.1. Partial Offload 
In model partitioning  approaches,  some layers are computed  on the device and the others are 
computed  by the edge server or the cloud. This approach  can potentially  offer latency reductions  
thanks to the compute  cycles of other edge devices. Indeed, after the first few layers of the DNN 
model have been computed,  the size of the intermediate  results is relatively  small and the output can 
be sent over the network to an edge server in a faster way than the original raw data [90]. Critical is 
the choice of the point where the network needs to be partitioned  and one algorithm  that can be used 
is Neurosurgeon  [173]. It is a light‐weight scheduler  used to automatically  partition  DNN 
computation  between mobile devices and datacenters  at the granularity  of NN layers. So, it decides 
where to partition  the DNN, layer‐wise, while accounting  for network conditions.  
The partition  could also be applied to the input data (e.g., raw image) and this is useful for 
hardware  with constrained  memory that is largely used in the IoT scenario,  such as IoT sensors. 
However,  input‐wise partitioning  can result in increased  data dependence,  as computing  subsequent  
DNN layers requires data results from adjacent partitions.  DeepThings  [90] uses input‐wise 
partitioning.  
6.2. Hierarchical  Architectures  
ML algorithm  can be performed  on edge devices and on the cloud. Entrusting  the computational  
task to the cloud could create a latency problem.  Instead, the use of powerful  computational  cloud 
resources  can potentially  decrease  the total processing  time. For example,  Li et al. [45] divided the 
DNN model into two parts: The edge server computes  the initial layers (lower layers) of the DNN 
model after it received the input data and then the cloud computes  the higher layers of the DNN. The 
cloud sends back the final results to the end devices after processing.  In this way, the cloud helps the 
edge server with the heavier computations.  There are also other approaches  like DDNN [174] 
(distributed  deep neural networks)  in which the computing  is distributed  across an hierarchical  
system, consisting  of the cloud, the edge (fog), and end devices. DDNN also allows fast and localized  
Figure 6. Joint computation among devices, edge, and cloud servers.
6.1. Partial O oad
In model partitioning approaches, some layers are computed on the device and the others are
computed by the edge server or the cloud. This approach can potentially o er latency reductions
thanks to the compute cycles of other edge devices. Indeed, after the ﬁrst few layers of the DNN model
have been computed, the size of the intermediate results is relatively small and the output can be
sent over the network to an edge server in a faster way than the original raw data [ 90]. Critical is the
choice of the point where the network needs to be partitioned and one algorithm that can be used is
Neurosurgeon [ 173]. It is a light-weight scheduler used to automatically partition DNN computation
between mobile devices and datacenters at the granularity of NN layers. So, it decides where to
partition the DNN, layer-wise, while accounting for network conditions.
The partition could also be applied to the input data (e.g., raw image) and this is useful for hardware
with constrained memory that is largely used in the IoT scenario, such as IoT sensors. However,
input-wise partitioning can result in increased data dependence, as computing subsequent DNN layers
requires data results from adjacent partitions. DeepThings [90] uses input-wise partitioning.
6.2. Hierarchical Architectures
ML algorithm can be performed on edge devices and on the cloud. Entrusting the computational
task to the cloud could create a latency problem. Instead, the use of powerful computational cloud
resources can potentially decrease the total processing time. For example, Li et al. [ 45] divided the DNN
model into two parts: The edge server computes the initial layers (lower layers) of the DNN model after
it received the input data and then the cloud computes the higher layers of the DNN. The cloud sends
back the ﬁnal results to the end devices after processing. In this way, the cloud helps the edge server
with the heavier computations. There are also other approaches like DDNN [ 174] (distributed deep