Sensors 2020 ,20, 2533 15 of 34
would be sent to the cloud, which would then perform the training and ﬁnally distribute the trained
model back to the edge devices. Leaving data at the edge is useful when privacy is highly desired and
also helps to reduce the network bandwidth requirements.
8.1. Training Algorithms
Exchanging model parameters and other data between edge devices and cloud servers is mandatory
for training an edge–cloud-based DL model. However, as the size of the training model increases, more
data needs to be exchanged between edge devices and servers. The high network communication cost
is a bottleneck for a training model, and a local edge training implementation is required. An example
of local networks is a mobile computing system for DNN applications (MoDNN). MoDNN [ 183] uses
a pretrained DNN model and scans each layer of the DNN model to identify layer types. If the layer is
a convolutional one, the input layer is divided by biased one-dimensional partition (BODP) method.
BODP decreases the computing by reducing the input size. If a fully connected layer is detected,
the layer input is assigned to di erent work nodes (mobile devices) to achieve the minimum total
execution time. In this case the network does not change the weights as the external scenario varies
because it is pretrained. However, the structure of the edge system is hierarchical and the training
can be distributed among peer edge devices and the cloud. In-edge AI [ 6] is a framework which
allows better collaboration among devices and edge nodes to exchange the learning parameters for
a better training and inference of the model. It integrates deep reinforcement learning techniques and
federated learning for mobile computing purpose. Teerapittayanon et al. [ 174] used a cloud server
for training the DDNN among di erent devices (including edge devices and the cloud), while the
most powerful one trains the network. The training of DDNNs is di cult because of multiple exit
points. To address this issue, the network was trained jointly by combining losses from each exit point
during back-propagation. The training could be made also on pruned model: Chandakkar et al. [ 184]
designed a new architecture to retrain a pruned network on an edge device. A complete DNN is
trained for an epoch (when an entire dataset is passed forward and backward through the DNN) on
the original data. Also, layer-wise, magnitude-based weight pruning is performed with a user-deﬁned
threshold value. This approach greatly reduces the computational complexity by removing connections
in a DNN model and makes it suitable to run on a limited resources device. Unfortunately, any pruning
process reduces the accuracy of a model. To overcome this issue, this approach ﬁnds the indices of
the most important weights for an important feature and excludes these elements from being pruned.
Finally, the pruned DNN network is used while training the next epoch because these operations are
performed cyclically.
To reduce communication costs and keep model accuracy high, Tao and Li introduced a new
method called edge stochastic gradient descent (eSGD) [ 185]. In this approach, all edge devices
run training tasks separately with independent data and the gradient values generated by the edge
devices are sent to the cloud servers. The server, after obtaining the gradients from the end devices,
uniforms the gradients by performing the average. After that, it updates the parameters by using this
average value. These updated parameters are sent back to the edge devices for the next training step.
This process is called parameter synchronization. Unfortunately, this gradient selection technique
decreases model accuracy. The eSGD uses two mechanisms to maintain a high level of accuracy for the
training:
 ‘Important’ updating: After each mini-batch, only a small fraction of the gradient coordinates
need to be updated. The algorithm determines main gradients, which will then be updated by the
server. This process signiﬁcantly reduces communication cost.
 Momentum residual accumulation: This mechanism is applied for tracking and accumulating
out-of-date residual gradients, which helps to avoid low convergence rate caused by the previous
important updating method.