Sensors 2020 ,20, 2533 21 of 34
- Weight compression: It is applicable only to dense layers (or fully connected layers) and is based
on weight-sharing algorithms such as K-means clustering.
- Layers fusion: It allows merging two layers to optimize data placement, decreasing the number
of the DNNs layers (e.g., nonlinearities or pooling after a convolutional layers).
- Activation function optimization: Part of the memory is used to store temporary hidden layers
values, so activation memory is reused across di erent layers.
- Once the model is compressed (in this example we opted for a x4 compression), the tool gives
the possibility to make an analysis of the NN to understand if it is loadable on the chosen
microcontroller and to visualize the diagram of the loaded model. The Table 6 reports the output
analysis of the network implemented in the example. It includes:
- RAM: Indicates the size of the memory required to store the intermediate calculations;
- ROM /Flash: Indicates the memory size needed to store weight and bias after compression; and
- Complexity: Reports the complexity of the model in MAC (multiply-accumulate operations),
unit of measure used also to express the complexity of the activation functions.
Table 6. Prediction of model on hardware.
Name RAM FLASH Complexity
Network 135.68 kBytes 668.97 kBytes 11497654 MAC
Sensors 2020, 20, x FOR PEER REVIEW   21 of 33 
   
Figure 8. STMicrolectronics  NUCLEO ‐F746ZG. 
Table 6. Prediction  of model on hardware.  
Name   RAM  FLASH  Complexity  
Network  135.68 kBytes 668.97 kBytes 11497654  MAC 
Finally, it is possible to proceed to the validation  to compare  the defined model with the one 
generated  in C language  by the ST tool, feeding both models the same set of data. The validation  can be 
carried out as: 
‐ Validation  on desktop: The model in C is executed  on the PC. 
‐ Validation  on target: The generated  model is executed  on the device of interest. It is 
necessary  to load the code on the microcontroller  and set a serial communication  to 
communicate  with the host. 
In both cases the data can be either randomly  generated  by the tool or can be imported  from 
outside as csv file. After loading the code on the microcontroller,  it is possible to enable the validation  
on the target, and to load the data generated  using the GUI as input. The STM32CubeMx  reports the 
model results and it is possible to notice that, in this case, the NN allows effectively  recognizing  the 
numeric digit between 10 classes (Figure 9) with an accuracy  of 100.00%,  root‐mean‐square error 
(rmse) = 0.0000, and medium average error (mae) = 0.0000. In Figure 10, the results obtained  during 
validation  are reported;  the calculation  took about 330 ms and the execution  time layer by layer is 
shown in Table 7. 
With this example,  the full implementation  of an eML application  of image recognition  has been 
designed  and put into practice with good performances.  
Figure 8. STMicrolectronics NUCLEO-F746ZG.