Sensors 2020 ,20, 2533 20 of 34
iteratively removing connections between layers, given a sparsity parameter (percentage of weights
eliminated) and scheduling (pruning frequency). To help the model convergence, connections should
not be eliminated immediately but every tot; in this example we set the elimination starting from
2000 step every 100 steps. Next, it is necessary to deﬁne, among the pruning parameters, the end step.
Then, the model is deﬁned by setting the pruning parameters and applying them to the NN. Finally,
it is possible to convert the model and make the quantization. The technique reduces the number of
parameters and the computations, preserving the model’s accuracy in terms of predictions. The main
impact is due to quantization, but also pruning contributes to this purpose by increasing the inference
speed and reducing the amount of energy used, thus allowing the use of the IA model on devices with
low energy proﬁle and low computational power.
9.6. Graphical User Interface
To test the model validity once brought to the microcontroller, a suitable GUI that allows the
user to type the numeric digit can be used, as well as the direct transfer of saved handwritten digit as
input data. The GUI can be made with PIL [ 225] (Python Imaging Library), Tkinter [ 226], de facto
standard of GUIs in Python. The GUI allows drawing the numeric digit using the mouse motion on
the canvas object (Figure 7). Once the drawing is ﬁnished, it is possible to export the image as csv,
a format supported for the validation on target made by X-CUBE-AI tool.
Sensors 2020, 20, x FOR PEER REVIEW   20 of 33 
 input data. The GUI can be made with PIL [225] (Python Imaging Library),  Tkinter [226], de facto 
standard  of GUIs in Python. The GUI allows drawing  the numeric digit using the mouse motion on 
the canvas object (Figure 7). Once the drawing  is finished,  it is possible to export the image as csv, a 
format supported  for the validation  on target made by X‐CUBE‐AI tool. 
 
Figure 7. Digit “6” drawn by the user. 
9.7. Validation  on Target 
The STMicroelectronics  NUCLEO ‐F746ZG board [227] (Figure 8) and the STM32CubeMx  tool 
were used for deploying  the model to a real hardware.  To guarantee  higher performance,  the 
operating  frequency  of the microcontroller  must be set to 216 MHz, and the cache should be enabled. 
To test the model on the microcontroller,  it is necessary  to enable the X‐CUBE‐AI tool by choosing  
Validation  as project mode. The Universal  Synchronous ‐Asynchronous  Receiver/Transmitter  
(USART)  can be used to let the Personal  Computer  (PC) communicate  with the microcontroller.  The 
artificial intelligence  tool [80] is used to bring the model on the device. The tool does not yet support 
techniques  such as quantization  for NNs defined with TFlite and pruning,  but it is possible to load 
on the microcontroller  the nonquantized  model using the compression  provided  by the program  
itself. In particular,  the compression  method aims to optimize  memory usage both in terms of Read‐
only memory (ROM) and RAM, using a dataset‐less approach.  The reduction  of the NN by the tool 
is made possible through the use of various expedients  [80]: 
‐ Weight compression:  It is applicable  only to dense layers (or fully connected  layers) and 
is based on weight‐sharing algorithms  such as K‐means clustering.  
‐ Layers fusion: It allows merging two layers to optimize  data placement,  decreasing  the 
number of the DNNs layers (e.g., nonlinearities  or pooling after a convolutional  layers). 
‐ Activation  function optimization:  Part of the memory is used to store temporary  hidden 
layers values, so activation  memory is reused across different layers. 
‐ Once the model is compressed  (in this example we opted for a x4 compression),  the tool 
gives the possibility  to make an analysis of the NN to understand  if it is loadable on the 
chosen microcontroller  and to visualize  the diagram of the loaded model. The Table 6 
reports the output analysis of the network implemented  in the example.  It includes:  
‐ RAM: Indicates  the size of the memory required to store the intermediate  calculations;  
‐ ROM/Flash:  Indicates  the memory size needed to store weight and bias after compression;  
and 
‐ Complexity:  Reports the complexity  of the model in MAC (multiply ‐accumulate  
operations),  unit of measure used also to express the complexity  of the activation  
functions.  
Figure 7. Digit “6” drawn by the user.
9.7. Validation on Target
The STMicroelectronics NUCLEO-F746ZG board [ 227] (Figure 8) and the STM32CubeMx tool
were used for deploying the model to a real hardware. To guarantee higher performance, the operating
frequency of the microcontroller must be set to 216 MHz, and the cache should be enabled. To test the
model on the microcontroller, it is necessary to enable the X-CUBE-AI tool by choosing Validation as
project mode. The Universal Synchronous-Asynchronous Receiver /Transmitter (USART) can be used to
let the Personal Computer (PC) communicate with the microcontroller. The artiﬁcial intelligence tool [ 80]
is used to bring the model on the device. The tool does not yet support techniques such as quantization for
NNs deﬁned with TFlite and pruning, but it is possible to load on the microcontroller the nonquantized
model using the compression provided by the program itself. In particular, the compression method
aims to optimize memory usage both in terms of Read-only memory (ROM) and RAM, using
a dataset-less approach. The reduction of the NN by the tool is made possible through the use of
various expedients [80]: