Sensors 2020 ,20, 2533 7 of 34
architectures (the data are sent from the end devices to edge servers for computation); and (3) joint
computation which includes the possibility to have cloud processing.
Sensors 2020, 20, x FOR PEER REVIEW   7 of 33 
  
Figure 4. (a) On‐device computation,  (b) edge server‐based architectures,  and (c) joint computation.  
3.2. Model and Hardware  
Several research papers focused on the possibility  of bringing  artificial intelligence  to devices 
with limited resources  [44,65–67]  and there have been efforts in decreasing  the model’s inference  time 
on the device. To bring an AI model on embedded  devices, ML developers  should deal with the 
proper hardware  choice that fits model design and compression.  
3.2.1. Model Design 
ML developers  focus on designing  models with a reduced number of parameters  in the DNN 
model, thus reducing  memory and execution  latency, while aiming to preserve  high accuracy.  There 
are several efficient models designed  specifically  to execute a NN on devices with low computational  
capacity and power, such as MobileNets  [68] or SqueezeNet  [69], originally  born for computer  vision 
tasks. MobileNets  are based on a streamlined  architecture  that uses depth‐wise separable  
convolutions  to build light‐weight deep NNs. SqueezeNet  downsamples  the data using special 1 × 1 
convolution  filters. 
3.2.2. Model Compression  
The model compression  allows us to run the model on tiny devices [70] and there are two main 
ways to reduce the network:  Lower precision  (fewer bits per weight) and fewer weights (pruning).  
Post‐training quantization  reduces computing  power demand and energy consumption  at the 
expense of a slight loss in accuracy.  By default, the model weights are float32 type variables,  which 
lead to two problems:  Firstly, the model is very large because 4 bytes are associated  at each weight, 
with a considerable  memory requirement;  secondly,  the execution  is remarkably  slow compared  to 
uint8 type variables.  It is possible to considerably  reduce the weights from 32 bits to 8 bits, obtaining  
a 4x reduction  in the size of the NN. Note that post‐quantization  is a technique  that is carried out 
after training the model, but it could be done even before training.  ML libraries,  such as Tensorflow  
[71] or Keras [72], give the possibility  to apply quantization.  As stated above, the reduction  of the 
model size can be obtained  not only with quantization,  but also with pruning techniques  that allow 
the elimination  of connections  that are not useful to the NN (Figure 5); this leads to a decrease  of the 
computation  request and program  memory.  Quantization  and pruning approaches  have been 
considered  individually  as well as jointly [70]. These two techniques  are the basis of NN compression,  
from which further techniques  have been developed.  DeepIoT  [73] presents a pruning method for 
commonly  used deep learning structures  in IoT devices, and the pruned DNN can be immediately  
deployed  on edge devices without modification.  Loss‐approximating  Taylor expansion  was used in 
[74] as a gradient‐based importance  metric used for pruning.  Anwar et al. [75] selected pruning 
Figure 4. (a) On-device computation, ( b) edge server-based architectures, and ( c) joint computation.
3.2. Model and Hardware
Several research papers focused on the possibility of bringing artiﬁcial intelligence to devices with
limited resources [ 44,65–67] and there have been e orts in decreasing the model’s inference time on
the device. To bring an AI model on embedded devices, ML developers should deal with the proper
hardware choice that ﬁts model design and compression.
3.2.1. Model Design
ML developers focus on designing models with a reduced number of parameters in the DNN
model, thus reducing memory and execution latency, while aiming to preserve high accuracy. There
are several e cient models designed speciﬁcally to execute a NN on devices with low computational
capacity and power, such as MobileNets [ 68] or SqueezeNet [ 69], originally born for computer
vision tasks. MobileNets are based on a streamlined architecture that uses depth-wise separable
convolutions to build light-weight deep NNs. SqueezeNet downsamples the data using special 1 1
convolution ﬁlters.
3.2.2. Model Compression
The model compression allows us to run the model on tiny devices [ 70] and there are two main
ways to reduce the network: Lower precision (fewer bits per weight) and fewer weights (pruning).
Post-training quantization reduces computing power demand and energy consumption at the expense
of a slight loss in accuracy. By default, the model weights are ﬂoat32 type variables, which lead
to two problems: Firstly, the model is very large because 4 bytes are associated at each weight,
with a considerable memory requirement; secondly, the execution is remarkably slow compared
to uint8 type variables. It is possible to considerably reduce the weights from 32 bits to 8 bits,
obtaining a 4x reduction in the size of the NN. Note that post-quantization is a technique that is
carried out after training the model, but it could be done even before training. ML libraries, such as
Tensorﬂow [ 71] or Keras [ 72], give the possibility to apply quantization. As stated above, the reduction
of the model size can be obtained not only with quantization, but also with pruning techniques that
allow the elimination of connections that are not useful to the NN (Figure 5); this leads to a decrease
of the computation request and program memory. Quantization and pruning approaches have been
considered individually as well as jointly [ 70]. These two techniques are the basis of NN compression,