On Learning Invariant Representations for Domain Adaptation
Han Zhao1Remi Tachet des Combes2Kun Zhang1Geoffrey J. Gordon1 2
Abstract
Due to the ability of deep neural nets to learn
rich representations, recent advances in unsuper-
vised domain adaptation have focused on learning
domain-invariant features that achieve a small er-
ror on the source domain. The hope is that the
learnt representation, together with the hypothesis
learnt from the source domain, can generalize to
the target domain. In this paper, we ﬁrst construct
a simple counterexample showing that, contrary
to common belief, the above conditions are not
sufﬁcient to guarantee successful domain adapta-
tion. In particular, the counterexample exhibits
conditional shift : the class-conditional distribu-
tions of input features change between source and
target domains. To give a sufﬁcient condition for
domain adaptation, we propose a natural and in-
terpretable generalization upper bound that explic-
itly takes into account the aforementioned shift.
Moreover, we shed new light on the problem by
proving an information-theoretic lower bound on
the joint error of anydomain adaptation method
that attempts to learn invariant representations.
Our result characterizes a fundamental tradeoff
between learning invariant representations and
achieving small joint error on both domains when
the marginal label distributions differ from source
to target. Finally, we conduct experiments on
real-world datasets that corroborate our theoreti-
cal ﬁndings. We believe these insights are helpful
in guiding the future design of domain adaptation
and representation learning algorithms.
1. Introduction
The recent successes of supervised deep learning methods
have been partially attributed to rich datasets and increasing
1Machine Learning Department, Carnegie Mellon University,
Pittsburgh, PA, USA2Microsoft Research, Montreal, Canada. Cor-
respondence to: Han Zhao <han.zhao@cs.cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36thInternational Conference on Machine
Learning , Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).computational power. However, in many critical applica-
tions, e.g., self-driving cars or personal healthcare, it is often
prohibitively expensive and time-consuming to collect large-
scale supervised training data. Unsupervised domain adap-
tation (DA) focuses on such limitations by trying to transfer
knowledge from a labeled source domain to an unlabeled tar-
get domain, and a large body of work tries to achieve this by
exploring domain-invariant structures and representations
to bridge the gap. Theoretical results (Ben-David et al.,
2010; Mansour et al., 2009a; Mansour & Schain, 2012) and
algorithms (Glorot et al., 2011; Becker et al., 2013; Ajakan
et al., 2014; Adel et al., 2017; Pei et al., 2018) under this
setting are abundant.
Due to the ability of deep neural nets to learn rich feature
representations, recent advances in domain adaptation have
focused on using these networks to learn invariant repre-
sentations , i.e., intermediate features whose distribution is
the same in source and target domains, while at the same
time achieving small error on the source domain. The hope
is that the learnt intermediate representation, together with
the hypothesis learnt using labeled data from the source
domain, can generalize to the target domain. Nevertheless,
from a theoretical standpoint, it is not at all clear whether
aligned representations and small source error are sufﬁcient
to guarantee good generalization on the target domain. In
fact, despite being successfully applied in various applica-
tions (Zhang et al., 2017; Hoffman et al., 2017), it has also
been reported that such methods fail to generalize in certain
closely related source/target pairs, e.g., digit classiﬁcation
from MNIST to SVHN (Ganin et al., 2016).
Given the wide application of domain adaptation methods
based on learning invariant representations, we attempt in
this paper to answer the following important and intriguing
question:
Is ﬁnding invariant representations while at the
same time achieving a small source error sufﬁ-
cient to guarantee a small target error? If not,
under what conditions is it?
Contrary to common belief, we give a negative answer to
the above question by constructing a simple example show-
ing that these two conditions are not sufﬁcient to guarantee
target generalization, even in the case of perfectly aligned
representations between the source and target domains. In