On Learning Invariant Representations for Domain Adaptation
(a) USPS!MNIST
 (b) USPS!SVHN
 (c) SVHN!MNIST
 (d) SVHN!USPS
Figure 2. Digit classiﬁcation on MNIST, USPS and SVHN. The horizontal solid line corresponds to the target domain test accuracy
without adaptation. The green solid line is the target domain test accuracy under domain adaptation with DANN. We also plot the least
square ﬁt (dashed line) of the DANN adaptation results to emphasize the negative slope.
"T(hg) = 1 , but in this case our result gives a trivial lower
bound of 0. Nevertheless, our result still sheds new light
on the importance of matching marginal label distributions
in learning invariant representation for domain adaptation,
which we believe to be a promising direction for the design
of better adaptation algorithms.
5. Experiments
Our theoretical results on the lower bound of the joint error
imply that over-training the feature transformation function
and the discriminator may hurt generalization on the target
domain. In this section, we conduct experiments on real-
world datasets to verify our theoretical ﬁndings. The task is
digit classiﬁcation on three datasets of 10 classes: MNIST,
USPS and SVHN. MNIST contains 60,000/10,000 train/test
instances; USPS contains 7,291/2,007 train/test instances,
and SVHN contains 73,257/26,032 train/test instances. We
show the label distribution of these three datasets in Fig. 3.
Figure 3. The label distributions of MNIST, USPS and SVHN.
Before training, we preprocess all the samples into gray
scale single-channel images of size 1616, so they can be
used by the same network. In our experiments, to ensure a
fair comparison, we use the same network structure for all
the experiments: 2 convolutional layers, one fully connected
hidden layer, followed by a softmax output layer with 10
units. The convolution kernels in both layers are of size 55,
with 10 and 20 channels, respectively. The hidden layer
has 1280 units connected to 100 units before classiﬁcation.
For domain adaptation, we use the original DANN (Ganin
et al., 2016) with gradient reversal implementation. Thediscriminator in DANN takes the output of convolutional
layers as its feature input, followed by a 500100fully
connected layer, and a one-unit binary classiﬁcation output.
We plot four adaptation trajectories in Fig. 2. Among the
four adaptation tasks, we can observe two phases in the
adaptation accuracy. In the ﬁrst phase, the test set accu-
racy rapidly grows, in less than 10 iterations. In the second
phase, it gradually decreases after reaching its peak, despite
the fact that the source training accuracy keeps increasing
smoothly. Those phase transitions can be veriﬁed from
the negative slopes of the least squares ﬁt of the adapta-
tion curves (dashed lines in Fig. 2). We observe similar
phenomenons on additional experiments using artiﬁcially
unbalanced datasets trained on more powerful networks in
Appendix ??. The above experimental results imply that
over-training the feature transformation and discriminator
does not help generalization on the target domain, but can
instead hurt it when the label distributions differ (as shown
in Fig. 3). These experimental results are consistent with
our theoretical ﬁndings.
6. Conclusion and Future Work
In this paper we theoretically and empirically study the im-
portant problem of learning invariant representations for
domain adaptation. We show that learning an invariant rep-
resentation and achieving a small source error is not enough
to guarantee target generalization. We then prove both up-
per and lower bounds for the target and joint errors, which
directly translate to sufﬁcient and necessary conditions for
the success of adaptation. We believe our results take an im-
portant step towards understanding deep domain adaptation,
and also stimulate future work on the design of stronger
deep domain adaptation algorithms that align conditional
distributions. Another interesting direction for future work
is to characterize what properties the feature transformation
function should have in order to decrease the conditional
shift. It is also worth investigating under which conditions
the label distributions can be aligned without explicit labeled
data from the target domain.