Broader Impact
Our development could be added to a growing literature of constrained Markov decision processes
(CMDPs) in a broad area of safe reinforcement learning (safe RL). Not only aiming to maximize
the total reward, but almost all real-world sequential decision-making applications must also take
control of safety regarding cost, utility, error rate, or efﬁciency, e.g., autonomous driving, medical
test, ﬁnancial management, and space exploration. Handling these additional safety objectives leads
to constrained decision-making problems. Our research could be used to provide an algorithmic
solution for practitioners to solve such constrained problems with non-asymptotic convergence and
optimality guarantees. Our methodology could be new knowledge for RL researchers on the direct
policy search methods for solving inﬁnite-horizon discounted CMDPs.
The decision-making processes that build on our research could enjoy the ﬂexibility of adding practical
constraints and this would improve a large range of uses, e.g., autonomous systems, healthcare
services, and ﬁnancial and legal services. We may expect a broad range of societal implications and we
list some of them as follows. The autonomous robotics could be deployed to hazard environments, e.g.,
forest ﬁres or earthquakes, with added safety guarantees. This could accelerate rescuing while saving
robotics. The discovery of medical treatments could be less risky by restraining the side effect. Thus
the bias of treatments could be minimized effectively. The policymaker in government or enterprises
could encourage economic productivity as much as they can but under law/environment/public health
constraints. Overall, one could expect a lot of social welfare improvements supported by the uses of
our research.
However, applying any theory to practice has to care about assumption/model mismatches. For
example, our theory is in favor of well-deﬁned feasible problems. This usually requires domain
knowledge to justify. We would suggest domain experts develop guidelines for assumption/model
validation. We would also encourage further work to establish the generalizability to other settings.
Another issue could be the bias on gender or race. Policy parametrization selected by biased
policymakers may inherit those biases. We would also encourage research to understand and mitigate
the biases.
Acknowledgments and Disclosure of Funding
D. Ding and M. R. Jovanovi ´c were supported by the National Science Foundation under Awards
ECCS-1708906 and ECCS-1809833. Research of K. Zhang and T. Ba¸ sar was supported in part by
the US Army Research Laboratory (ARL) Cooperative Agreement W911NF-17-2-0196, and in part
by the Ofﬁce of Naval Research (ONR) MURI Grant N00014-16-1-2710.
References
[1]N. Abe, P. Melville, C. Pendus, C. K. Reddy, D. L. Jensen, V. P. Thomas, J. J. Bennett, G. F.
Anderson, B. R. Cooley, M. Kowalczyk, et al. Optimizing debt collections using constrained
reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining ,
pages 75–84, 2010.
[2]J. Achiam, D. Held, A. Tamar, and P. Abbeel. Constrained policy optimization. In International
Conference on Machine Learning , volume 70, pages 22–31, 2017.
[3]A. Agarwal, S. M. Kakade, J. D. Lee, and G. Mahajan. On the theory of policy gradient methods:
Optimality, approximation, and distribution shift. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.00261 , 2019.
[4]E. Altman. Constrained Markov Decision Processes , volume 7. CRC Press, 1999.
[5]F. Bach and E. Moulines. Non-strongly-convex smooth stochastic approximation with con-
vergence rate o (1/n). In Advances in neural information processing systems , pages 773–781,
2013.
[6]Q. Bai, A. Gattami, and V . Aggarwal. Model-free algorithm and regret analysis for MDPs with
peak constraints. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.05555 , 2020.
[7]A. Beck. First-order Methods in Optimization , volume 25. SIAM, 2017.
10