However, most existing theoretical guarantees are asymptotic in nature and/or only provide local
convergence guarantees to stationary-point policies. Theoretical non-asymptotic global convergence
guarantees are largely absent: for arbitrary initial points, algorithms with a ﬁnite number of iterations
and samples converge to an ✏-optimal solution that enjoys ✏-optimality gap and ✏-constraint violation.
It is thus imperative to establish theoretical guarantees for PG methods in solving CMDPs. Our
motivation also comes from recent advances on the global convergence properties of PG methods [ 18,
56,9,48,3,57].
In this work, we provide a theoretical foundation for the non-asymptotic global convergence of the
NPG method in solving CMDPs and answer the following questions: (i) can we employ NPG methods
for solving CMDPs?; (ii) if and how fast do these methods converge to the globally optimal value
within the underlying constraints?; (iii) what is the effect of the function approximation error caused
by a restricted policy parametrization?; and (iv) what is the sample complexity of NPG methods?
Contribution. Our contribution is four-fold: (i) We propose a simple but effective primal-dual
algorithm – Natural Policy Gradient Primal-Dual (NPG-PD) method – for solving discounted inﬁnite-
horizon CMDPs. We employ natural policy gradient ascent to update the primal variable and projected
sub-gradient descent to update the dual variable; (ii) Even though we show that the maximization
problem has a nonconcave objective function and nonconvex constraint set under the softmax policy
parametrization, we prove that our NPG-PD method achieves global convergence with rate O(1/p
T)
regarding both the optimality gap and the constraint violation, where Tis the total number of
iterations. Our convergence guarantees are dimension-free, i.e., the rate is independent of the size
of the state-action space; (iii) For the general smooth policy class, we establish convergence with
rateO(1/p
T)for the optimality gap and O(1/T1/4)for the constraint violation, up to a function
approximation error caused by restricted policy parametrization; and (iv) We show that two sample-
based NPG-PD algorithms that we propose inherit such non-asymptotic convergence properties and
provide the ﬁnite-sample complexity guarantees. To the best of our knowledge, our work is the ﬁrst
to provide non-asymptotic convergence guarantees for solving inﬁnite-horizon discounted CMDPs in
the primal-dual framework.
Related Work. Our work is related to Lagrangian-based CMDP algorithms [ 4,12,11,15,46,23,
37,36,53]. However, convergence guarantees of these algorithms are either local (to stationary-point
or locally optimal policies) [ 11,15,46] or asymptotic [ 12]. When function approximation is used for
policy parametrization, [ 53] recognized the lack of convexity and showed asymptotic convergence
(to a stationary point) of a method based on successive convex relaxations. In contrast, we establish
global convergence in spite of the lack of convexity. References [ 36,37] are closely related to our
work. In [ 37], the authors provide duality analysis for CMDPs in the policy space and propose a
provably convergent dual descent algorithm by assuming access to a nonconvex optimization oracle.
However, how to obtain the solution to this nonconvex optimization was not analyzed/understood,
and the global convergence of their algorithm was not established. In [ 36], the authors provide a
primal-dual algorithm but do not offer any theoretical justiﬁcation. In spite of the lack of convexity,
our work provides global convergence guarantees for a new primal-dual algorithm without using any
optimization oracles. Other related policy optimization methods include CPG [ 47], CPO [ 2,51], and
IPPO [ 27]. However, theoretical guarantees for these algorithms are still lacking. Recently, optimism
principles have been used for efﬁcient exploration in CMDPs [ 42,59,16,38,17,6]. In comparison,
our work focuses on the optimization landscape within a primal-dual framework.
Our work is also pertinent to recent global convergence results for PG methods. References [ 18,32,
33] provide global convergence guarantees for (natural) PG methods for nonconvex linear quadratic
regulator problems in both discrete- and continuous-time. For general MDPs, [ 56] shows that locally
optimal policies are achievable using PG methods with a simple reward-reshaping. Reference [ 48]
shows that (natural) PG methods converge to the globally optimal value when overparametrized neural
networks are used. As a variant of natural PG, trust-region policy optimization (TRPO) [ 39] has also
been shown to converge to the globally optimal policy with overparametrized neural networks [ 26] and,
in general, with regularized MDPs [ 41]. References [ 9,10] study global optimality and convergence
of PG methods from a policy iteration perspective. Reference [ 3] provides characterizations of the
global convergence properties of (natural) PG methods regarding computational, approximation, and
sample size issues. Recent advances along this line include references [ 30,55,13,28]. While all
these references handle a lack of convexity in the objective function, additional effort is required to
deal with nonconvex constraint sets that arise in CMDPs, and our paper addresses this challenge.
2