Appl. Sci. 2020 ,10, 5841 4 of 14
sequential modeling problems and is widely used for text classiﬁcation. Unlike the LSTM network,
the Bi-LSTM network has two parallel layers that propagate in two directions with forward and reverse
passes to capture dependencies in two contexts [ 16,17]. The structure of the Bi-LSTM network is shown
in Figure 3.
Appl. Sci. 2020 , 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW 4 of 14 
performance for sequential modeling problems and is widely used for text classification. Unlike the 
LSTM network, the Bi-LSTM network has two parallel  layers that propagate in two directions with 
forward and reverse passes to capture dependencies in two contexts [16,17]. The structure of the 
Bi-LSTM network is shown in Figure 3. 
 
Figure 3. The Bi-long short-term memory (LSTM) proce ss used to capture sequential features. The 
last hidden layer of the LSTM is extrac ted as features representing the text. 
2.1.4. Attention Mechanism 
The RNN-based seq2seq model has two major prob lems. Since all the information cannot be 
compressed in one fixed-size vector, there can be instances of information loss, and a vanishing gradient problem [18]. Hence the accuracy deteriorate s with the increased length of the input. As an 
alternative, an attention mechanism has been prop osed as an emerging technique for increasing the 
prediction accuracy, although this decreases when th e input sequence becomes long [19]. That is, the 
decoder predicts the output word in every time st ep, and the entire input sentence from the encoder 
is referenced once again. However, not all the input sentences are referenced equally; the part of the input word that is related to the word to be predict ed at that time receives more attention [20]. The 
attention mechanism gives initial weights to each  input, and these weights are updated during 
training according to the correlation between each input and the final prediction. 
2.2. Related Research 
Melamud et al. [21] proposed a B-LSTM neural  network architecture based on Word2vec’s 
CBOW architecture. The main goal of the model  was to efficiently learn the general context 
embedding function for variable-length sentence  contexts around the target word, making 
contextual expression very simple. This resulted in cutting-edge results in sentence completion, vocabulary replacement, and word sense clarificat ion, outperforming other techniques of general 
contextual representation of average word embedding. Another key model was proposed for 
medical texts by Zagreb [22]; they developed a mo del for understanding complex, specific medical 
structures as medical text contains  some of the most specialized information that only field experts 
can understand. The proposed embedding model is ge nerated in a specialized general corpus with 
o r  w it h o u t  fe at u r e s  h an d c r aft e d  b y  m e d ic a l  e x p e r t s .  X i ao  e t  a l.  [ 23 ] p r o p o s e d  a  t e x t  c la s s i f ic at io n  model based on Word2vec and LSTM to efficiently classify text in the security field. They used a pre-trained Word2vec model to overcome the high dimensionality suffered by traditional methods. 
Finally, by training the LSTM classification model , the study extracted text functions and performed 
patent text classification in the security fiel d. The results show that the model can provide 
Figure 3. The Bi-long short-term memory (LSTM) process used to capture sequential features. The last
hidden layer of the LSTM is extracted as features representing the text.
2.1.4. Attention Mechanism
The RNN-based seq2seq model has two major problems. Since all the information cannot be
compressed in one ﬁxed-size vector, there can be instances of information loss, and a vanishing
gradient problem [ 18]. Hence the accuracy deteriorates with the increased length of the input. As
an alternative, an attention mechanism has been proposed as an emerging technique for increasing
the prediction accuracy, although this decreases when the input sequence becomes long [ 19]. That
is, the decoder predicts the output word in every time step, and the entire input sentence from the
encoder is referenced once again. However, not all the input sentences are referenced equally; the part
of the input word that is related to the word to be predicted at that time receives more attention [ 20].
The attention mechanism gives initial weights to each input, and these weights are updated during
training according to the correlation between each input and the ﬁnal prediction.
2.2. Related Research
Melamud et al. [ 21] proposed a B-LSTM neural network architecture based on Word2vec’s CBOW
architecture. The main goal of the model was to e ciently learn the general context embedding function
for variable-length sentence contexts around the target word, making contextual expression very
simple. This resulted in cutting-edge results in sentence completion, vocabulary replacement, and word
sense clariﬁcation, outperforming other techniques of general contextual representation of average
word embedding. Another key model was proposed for medical texts by Zagreb [ 22]; they developed
a model for understanding complex, speciﬁc medical structures as medical text contains some of the
most specialized information that only ﬁeld experts can understand. The proposed embedding model
is generated in a specialized general corpus with or without features handcrafted by medical experts.
Xiao et al. [ 23] proposed a text classiﬁcation model based on Word2vec and LSTM to e ciently classify
text in the security ﬁeld. They used a pre-trained Word2vec model to overcome the high dimensionality
suered by traditional methods. Finally, by training the LSTM classiﬁcation model, the study extracted
text functions and performed patent text classiﬁcation in the security ﬁeld. The results show that