Appl. Sci. 2020 ,10, 5841 2 of 14
in the previous state should be retained or forgotten in the current state. Hence, the gating mechanism
helps the LSTM address the issue of long-term information preservation and the vanishing gradient
problem encountered by traditional RNNs [ 5]. The LSTM’s powerful ability to extract advanced text
information plays an important role in text classiﬁcation. The scope of application of LSTMs has
expanded rapidly in recent years, and many researchers have proposed many ways to revamp LSTMs
to further improve their accuracy [6].
To further increase the sentiment classiﬁcation accuracy of unstructured text, Yoon Kim [ 7]
proposed a 1D CNN approach for text classiﬁcation. CNN is more accurate than LSTM, especially
during the feature extraction step. 1D CNN processes text as a one-dimensional image and a 1D
CNN is used to capture the latent associations between neighboring words, in contrast with LSTMs,
which process each word in a sequential pattern [8].
In this study, to address the individual weaknesses and leverage the distinct advantages of
LSTM and CNN, we propose a Bi-LSTM +CNN hybrid model that classiﬁes text using an Internet
Movie Database (IMDB) movie review dataset. To further improve the accuracy and reduce the
number of learnable parameters the model is boosted by an attention mechanism. The model uses
a CNN to extract features from di erent locations in a sentence, thereby shrinking the amount of
input features. The LSTM is used to extract contextual information from the features obtained from
the convolutional layer. The attention mechanism uses bias alignment over the inputs and assigns
weights to input components that are highly correlated with classiﬁcation, hence further decreasing
the number of parameters to be learned during training. The attention mechanism also enhances the
weight distribution for variable-length sequences. We also use weights that were pretrained using
Word2vec with a large corpus, which ensured the model had higher accuracy. The accuracy of the
model was evaluated in terms of precision, recall, and F1-score.
The ﬁrst set of results were obtained by ﬁxing the data size and evaluating the performance of the
proposed model per each training epoch. The accuracy is 0.8874 for CNN, 0.8940 for LSTM, 0.7129 for
multi-layer perceptron (MLP), 0.8906 for the hybrid model, and the proposed model 0.9141. As for
the F1 score, CNN achieved 0.8875, 0.8816 for LSTM and 0.7708 for MLP , the hybrid model achieved
0.8887 while the proposed model achieved the highest score of 0.9018. The second set of results were
obtained with variable data size and the proposed model was superior in terms of accuracy and F1
score. It is evident from the two sets of results that the proposed model outperformed the existing
CNN, LSTM, MLP , and hybrid model baselines.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. A review of related research is presented in
Section 2. The architecture and details of the proposed model are described in Section 3. Experiments
are presented in Section 4, the results are covered in Section 5, the analysis is in Section 6 and future
works in Section 7. Finally, conclusions are provided in Section 8.
2. Background and Related Research
2.1. Deep Learning Model
2.1.1. Word2vec
Word2vec is a popular sequence embedding method that transforms natural-language into
distributed vector representations [ 9]. It can capture contextual word-to-word relationships in a
multidimensional space and has been widely used as a preliminary step for predictive models in
semantic and information retrieval tasks. Figure 1 describes the Word2vec process, which involves two
distinct components: Continuous Bag of Words (CBOW) and skip-gram [ 10]. The CBOW component
infers the target word when given the context words, while the skip-gram component infers the context
words when given an input word [11].