Appl. Sci. 2020 ,10, 5841 5 of 14
the model can provide classiﬁcation of 93.48% for these patent texts. This laid a solid foundation for
further research and e ective use of patents.
To increase the classiﬁcation accuracy, CNN and LSTM have been combined in some studies.
The LSTM model and a CNN were used for a variety of natural-language processing (NLP) tasks with
surprising and e ective results. Rehman et al. [ 24] proposed a hybrid model that uses a very deep
CNN and LSTM to overcome previous challenges for sentiment analysis. The proposed model also
uses dropout techniques, normalization techniques, and rectiﬁed linear units to increase the prediction
accuracy. Results show that the proposed hybrid CNN-LSTM model outperforms conventional deep
learning and machine learning technologies in terms of precision, recall, F1-score, and accuracy.
The study in [25] proposed a text classiﬁcation model called CNN-COIF-LSTM and experiments that
included eight variants, showed that the combination of CNN and LSTM without an activation function
or a variant thereof exhibited higher accuracy. Wang et al. [ 26] proposed a local CNN-LSTM model
with a tree structure to measure the steps in emotional analysis. Unlike conventional CNNs, where
the entire text is considered as the input, which is divided into multiple regions and useful emotional
information is extracted from each region and weighted according to that region; the proposed regional
CNN uses a portion of the text as a region. By combining CNN and LSTM, the classiﬁcation accuracy
is further increased because this combination considers both local (regional) information in sentences
and long-distance dependencies between sentences. Novel hybrid CNN-LSTM models have been
proposed and achieved good results than the previous ones. She et al. [ 27] have proposed a novel
hybrid approach that leverages the capabilities of CNN to extract local features and addresses its
inherent weakness to express long-term contextual features. The model also tries to tackle the natural
weaknesses of LSTM which processes information sequentially and hence making it a worst feature
extractor. The hybrid model achieved better results compared to counterparts’ models, but the
results were not interesting as compared with the models that use attention mechanism. Salur et
al. [28] proposed a novel hybrid model that combines di erent word embedding (Word2Vec, FastText,
and character-level embedding) with various learning approaches (LSTM, Gated recurrent unit (GRU),
Bi-LSTM, CNN). The model used CNN and LSTM for feature extraction. Various other studies such
as [29] have used this hybrid approach but with the absence of an attention mechanism, the results
have been not improved. More recently the attention models have been introduced and achieved
state-of-the-art results. Dong et al. [ 30] proposed a method that use a self-interaction attention approach
and combined it with label embedding. The model leverages the novelty of BERT (bidirectional encoder
representation from transformers) [ 31] for text extraction. The approach uses the joint embedding of
words and labels to improve the classiﬁcation accuracy due to self-interaction attention mechanism.
However, the BERT model has been found to be hard to train especially for big text. Traditional
machine learning approaches like decision trees and K Nearest Neighbor (KNN) have also performed
well in certain classiﬁcation scenarios. Joulin et al. [ 32] have trained a FastText model using more
than one billion words and classiﬁed a half a million sentences in 312K classes. This seemingly
traditional approach outperformed some of the deep learning approaches. However, with the reported
fast performance the authors remained uncertain if sentiment classiﬁcation can be used as the right
candidate to compare such shallow models against deep learning approaches which have much higher
representational power.
3. The Proposed Model
LSTMs have received considerable research attention, and various studies that leverage them for
sequence-based sentiment classiﬁcation have produced great results. Various gating mechanisms used
by LSTMs help them track long-term dependencies and tackle the inherent drawbacks of vanishing
gradients, especially when longer sequences are used as input. However, the existing LSTMs fail to
extract the context information of future tokens and lack the ability to extract local context information.
The accuracy of the LSTM is further hampered by its inability to recognize di erent relationships
between parts of a document. To tackle this drawback, a 1D CNN has been proposed. In this study,