implementations would not allow for features like changing agent orders (like the reverse card in
Uno).
6.4 Additional API Features
Theagents attribute is a list of all agents in the environment, as strings. The rewards ,dones ,
infos attributes are agent-keyed dictionaries for each attribute (note that the rewards are the in-
stantaneous ones resulting from the most recent action). These allow access to agent properties
at all points on a trajectory, regardless of which is selected. The action_space(agent) and
observation_space(agent) functions return the static action and observation spaces respectively
for the agent given as an argument. The observe(agent) method provides the observation for a
single agent by passing its name as an argument, which can be useful if you need to observe an
agent in an unusual context. The state method is an optional method returns the global state of an
environment, as is required for centralized critic methods. The agent_selection method returns
the agent that can currently be acted upon per agent_iter .
The motivation for allowing access to all these lower level pieces of information is to let researchers to
attempt novel, unusual experiments. The space of multi-agent RL has not yet been comprehensively
explored, and there are many perfectly plausible reasons you might want access to other agents
rewards, observations, and so on. For an API to be universal in an emerging ﬁeld, it inherently has
to allow access to all the information researchers could plausibly want. For this reason we allow
access to a fairly straightforward set of lower level attributes and methods in addition to the standard
higher level API. As we outline in Section 6.5, we’ve structured PettingZoo in a way such that
including these low-level features doesn’t introduce engineering overhead in creating environments,
as discussed further in the documentation website.
To handle environments where different agents can be present on each reset of an environment,
PettingZoo has an optional possible_agents attribute which lists all the agents that might exist in
an environment at any point. Environments which generate arbitrary numbers or types of agents will
not deﬁne a possible_agents list, requiring the user to check for new agents being instantiated as
the environment runs. After resetting the environment, the agents attribute becomes accessible and
lists all agents that are currently active. For similar reasons, num_agents ,rewards ,dones ,infos ,
andagent_selection are not available until after a reset.
To handle cases where environments need to have environment agents as per the formal AEC Games
model, the standard is to put it into the agents with the name envand have it take None as it’s action.
We do not require this for all environments by default as it’s rarely used and makes the API more
cumbersome, but this is an important feature for certain edge cases in research. This connects to the
formal model in that, when this feature is not used, the environment actor from the formal model and
the agent actor that acted before it are merged together.
6.5 Environment Creation and the Parallel API
PettingZoo environments actually only expose the reset ,seed ,step ,observe ,render , and close
base methods and the agents ,rewards ,dones ,infos ,state andagent_iter base attributes.
These are then wrapped to add the last method. Only having environments implement primitive
methods makes creating new environments simpler, and reduces code duplication. This has the useful
side effect of allowing all PettingZoo environments to be easily changed to an alternative API by
simply writing a new wrapper. We’ve actually already done this for the default environments and
added an additional “parallel API” to them that’s almost identical to the RLlib POSG-based API via
a wrapper. We added this secondary API because in environments with very large numbers of agents,
this can improve runtime by reducing the number of Python function calls.
7 Default Environments
Similar to Gym’s default environments, PettingZoo includes 63 environments. Half of the included
environment classes (MPE, MAgent, and SISL), despite their popularity, existed as unmaintained
“research grade” code, have not been available for installation via pip, and have required large
amounts of maintenance to run at all before our cleanup and maintainership. We additionally included
multiplayer Atari games from Terry and Black [2020], Butterﬂy environments which are original and
8