3.The OpenSpiel API does not handle continuous actions (a common and important case in
RL), though this was a choice that is not inherent to the EFG model.
It’s also worth brieﬂy noting that some simple strictly turn based games are modeled with the
single-agent Gym API, with the environment alternating which agent is controlled, [Ha, 2020]. This
approach is unable to reasonably scale beyond two agents due to the difﬁculties of handling changes
in agent order (e.g. Uno), agent death, and agent creation.
3 PettingZoo Design Goals
Our development of PettingZoo both as a general library and an API centered around the following
goals.
3.1 Be like Gym
In PettingZoo, we wanted to leverage Gym’s ubiquity, simplicity and universality. This created two
concrete goals for us:
• Make the API look and feel like Gym, and relatedly make the API pythonic and simple
• Include numerous reference implementations of games with the main package
Reusing as many design metaphors from Gym as possible will help its massive existing user base to
almost instantly understand PettingZoo’s API. Similarly, for an API to become standardized, it must
support a large collection of useful environments to attract users and for adoption to begin, similar to
what Gym did.
3.2 Be a Universal API
If there is to be a Gym-like API for MARL, it has to be able to support all use cases and types
of environments. Accordingly, several technically difﬁcult cases exist that have to be carefully
considered:
• Environments with large numbers of agents
• Environments with agent death and creation
• Environments where different agents can be chosen to participate in each episode
• Learning methods that require access to specialty low level features
Two related softer design goals for universal design are ensuring the API is simple enough for
beginners to easily use, and making the API easily changeable if the direction of research in the ﬁeld
dramatically changes.
4 Case Studies of Problems With The POSG Model in MARL
To supplement the description of the problems with the POSG models described in Section 2.1, we
overview problems with basing APIs around these models that could theoretically occur in software
games, and then examine real cases of those problems occurring in popular MARL environments.
We speciﬁcally focus on POSGs here because EFG based APIs are extraordinarily rare (OpenSpiel is
the only major one), while POSG based ones are almost universal.
4.1 POSGs Don’t Allow Access To Information You Should Have
Another problem with modeling environments using simultaneous actions in the POSG model is that
all of an agent’s rewards (from all sources) are summed and returned all at once. In a multi-agent
game though, this combined reward is often the composite reward from the actions of other agentss
and the environment. Similarly, you might want to be able to attribute the source of this reward for
various learning reasons, or for debugging purposes to ﬁnd out the origin of your rewards. However,
in thinking about reward origins, having all rewards emitted at once proves to be very confusing
4