of our own creation, and popular classic board and card game environments. All default environments
included are surveyed in depth in Appendix B.
8 Adoption
In it’s relatively short lifespan, PettingZoo has already achieved a meaningful amount of adoption. It
is supported by the following learning libraries: The Autonomous Learning Library [Nota, 2020],
AI-Traineree [Laszuk, 2020], PyMARL (ongoing) [Samvelyan et al., 2019], RLlib [Liang et al.,
2018], Stable Baselines 2 [Hill et al., 2018] and Stable Baselines 3 [Rafﬁn et al., 2019], similar
libraries such as CleanRL [Huang et al., 2020] (through SuperSuit [Terry et al., 2020b]), and Tianshou
(ongoing) [Weng et al., 2020]. Perhaps more signiﬁcantly than any of this, PettingZoo is already
being used to teach in both graduate and undergraduate reinforcement learning classes all over the
world.
9 Conclusion
This paper introduces PettingZoo, a Python library of many diverse multi-agent reinforcement
learning environments under one simple API, akin to a multi-agent version of OpenAI’s Gym library,
and introduces the agent environment cycle game model of multi-agent games.
Given the importance of multi-agent reinforcement learning, we believe that PettingZoo is capable of
democratizing the ﬁeld similar to what Gym previously did for single agent reinforcement learning,
making it accessible to university scale research and to non-experts. As evidenced by it’s early
adoption into numerous MARL libraries and courses, PettingZoo is moving in the direction of
accomplishing this goal.
We’re aware of one notable limitation of the PettingZoo API. Games with signiﬁcantly more than
10,000 agents (or potential agents) will have meaningful performance issues because you have to step
each agent at once. Efﬁciently updating environments like this, and inferencing with the associated
policies, requires true parallel support which almost certainly should be done in a language other than
Python. Because of this, we view this as a practically acceptable limitation.
We see three directions for future work. The ﬁrst is additions of more interesting environments
under our API (possibly from the community, as has happened with Gym). The second direction we
envision is a service to allow different researchers’ agents to play against each other in competitive
games, leveraging the standardized API and environment set. Finally, we envision the development
of procedurally generated multi-agent environments to test how well methods generalize, akin to the
Gym procgen environments [Cobbe et al., 2019].
Acknowledgements
Justin Terry was supported during part of this work by the QinetiQ Fundamental Machine Learning
Fellowship. Thank you to Kyle Sang for their contributions to the documentation website. Thank
you Rohan Potdar and Sang Hyun Son for their contributions to the Butterﬂy benchmarks. Thank
you to Deepthi Raghunandan and Christian Clauss for their contributions to testing and continuous
integration. Thank you to the PettingZoo community for the numerous bug reports and contributions
to the package, especially Ross Allen and their group.
References
Nolan Bard, Jakob N. Foerster, Sarath Chandar, Neil Burch, Marc Lanctot, H. Francis Song, Emilio
Parisotto, Vincent Dumoulin, Subhodeep Moitra, Edward Hughes, Iain Dunning, Shibl Mourad,
Hugo Larochelle, Marc G. Bellemare, and Michael Bowling. The hanabi challenge: A new frontier
for AI research. CoRR , abs/1902.00506, 2019. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1902.00506 .
Daniel S. Bernstein, Robert Givan, Neil Immerman, and Shlomo Zilberstein. The complexity of
decentralized control of markov decision processes. Mathematics of Operations Research , 27(4):
819–840, 2002. doi: 10.1287/moor.27.4.819.297. URL https://doi.org/10.1287/moor.27.
4.819.297 .
9