In any environment that’s even slightly complex, a tremendous number of instances where tie-breaking
must be handled will typically occur. In any cases where a single one is missed, the environment
will have race conditions that your code will attempt to learn. While ﬁnding these will always be
important, a valuable tool to mitigate these possibilities is to use an API that treats each agent as
acting sequentially, returning new observations afterwards. This entirely prevents the opportunity
for introducing race conditions. Moreover, this entire problem stems from the fact that using APIs
that model agents as updating sequentially for software MARL environments generally makes more
conceptual sense than modeling the updates as simultaneous—unless the authors of environments
use very complex parallelization, the environments will actually be updated one agent at a time. It is
worth mentioning that this race condition cannot occur in an environment simulated in the physical
world with continuous time or a simulated environment with a sufﬁcient amount of observation delay
(though most actively researched environment in MARL do not currently have any observation delay).
In Appendix A.1 we go through a case study of a race condition like this happening in the open source
implementation of the social sequential dilemma game environments [Vinitsky et al., 2019]. These
are popular multi-agent grid world environments intended to study emergent behaviors for various
forms of resource management, and has imperfect tie-breaking in a case where two agents try to act
on resources in the same grid while using a simultaneous API. This bug in particular illustrates how
extraordinarily difﬁcult making all tie-breaking truly unbiased is in practice even for fairly simple
environments. We defer this to the appendix as explaining the speciﬁc origin requires a large amount
of exposition and diagrams about the rules of the environment.
5 The Agent Environment Cycle Games Model
Motivated by the problems with applying the POSG and EFG models to MARL APIs, we developed
the Agent Environment Cycle (“AEC”) Game. In this model, agents sequentially see their observation,
agents take actions, rewards are emitted from the other agents, and the next agent to act is chosen.
This is effectively a sequentially stepping form of the POSG model.
Modeling multi-agent environments sequentially for APIs has numerous beneﬁts:
•It allows for clearer attribution of rewards to different origins, allowing for various learning
improvements, as described in Section 4.1.
•It prevents developers adding confusing and easy-to-introduce race conditions, as described
in Section 4.2.
•It more closely models how computer games are executed in code, as described in Sec-
tion 4.2.
•It formally allows for rewards after every step as is required in RL, but is not generally a
part of the EFG model, as discussed in Section 2.2.
•It is simple enough to serve as a mental model, especially for beginners, unlike the EFG
model as discussed in Section 2.2 and illustrated in the deﬁnition in Appendix C.2.
•Changing the number of agents for agent death or creation is less awkward, as learning code
does not have to account for lists constantly changing sizes, as discussed in Section 2.1.
•It is the least bad option for a universal API, compared to simultaneous stepping, as alluded
to in Section 2.1. Simultaneous stepping requires the use of no-op actions if not all agents
can act which are very difﬁcult to deal with, whereas sequentially stepping agents that could
all act simultaneously and queuing up their actions is not especially inconvenient.
In Appendix C.3 we mathematically formalize the AEC games model, however understanding the
formalism in full is not essential to understanding the paper. In Appendix D we further prove that for
every AEC game an equivalent POSG exists and that for every POSG an equivalent AEC game exists.
This shows that the AEC games model is as powerful a model as the most common current model of
multi-agent environments.
One additional conceptual feature of the AEC games model exists that we have not previously
discussed because it does not usually play a role in APIs (see Section 6.4). In the AEC games
model, we deviate from the POSG model by introducing the “environment” agent, which is analogous
to the Nature agent from EFGs. When this agent acts in the model it indicates the updating of
6