the environment itself, realizing and reacting to submitting agent actions. This allows for a more
comprehensive attribution of rewards, causes of agent death, and discussion of games with strange
updating rules and race conditions. An example of the transitions for Chess is shown in Figure 5,
which serves as the inspiration for the name “agent environment cycle”.
Player 1
Environment Step 1
Player 2Environment Step 2
Figure 5: The AEC diagram of Chess
6 API Design
6.1 Basic API
The PettingZoo API is shown in Figure 6, and the strong similarities to the Gym API (Figure 1)
should be obvious — each agent provides an action to astep function and receives observation,
reward, done, info as the return values. The observation and state spaces also use the the exact
same space objects as Gym. The render andclose methods also function identically to Gym’s,
showing a current visual frame representing the environment to the screen whenever called. The
reset method similarly has identical function to Gym — it resets the environment to a starting
conﬁguration after being played through. PettingZoo really only has two deviations from the regular
Gym API — the last andagent_iter methods and the corresponding iteration logic.
from pettingzoo.butterfly import pistonball_v0
env = pistonball_v0.env()
env.reset()
for agent in env.agent_iter(1000):
env.render()
observation, reward, done, info = env.last()
action = policy(observation, agent)
env.step(action)
env.close()
Figure 6: An example of the basic usage of Pettingzoo
6.2 The agent_iter Method
Theagent_iter method is a generator method of an environment that returns the next agent that
the environment will be acting upon. Because the environment is providing the next agent to act,
this cleanly abstracts away any issues surrounding changing agent orders, agent generation, and
agent death. This generation also parallels the functionality of the next agent function from the AEC
games model. This method, combined with one agent acting at once, allows for the support of every
conceivable variation of the set of agents changing.
6.3 The last Method
An odd aspect of multi-agent environments is that from the perspective of one agent, the other agents
are part of the environment. Whereas in the single agent case the observation and rewards can be
given immediately, in the multi-agent case an agent has to wait for all other agents to act before it’s
observation ,reward ,done andinfo can be fully determined. For this reason, these values are
given by the last method, and they can then be passed into a policy to choose an action. Less robust
7