challenge. A large part of this is because, unlike single agent reinforcement learning which has
OpenAI’s Gym, no de facto standard API exists in MARL for how agents interface with environments.
This makes the reuse of existing learning code for new purposes require substantial effort, consuming
researchers’ time and preventing more thorough comparisons in research. This lack of a standardized
API has also prevented the proliferation of learning libraries in MARL. While a massive number of
Gym-based single-agent reinforcement learning libraries or code bases exist (as a rough measure 669
pip-installable packages depend on it at the time of writing GitHub [2021]), only 5 MARL libraries
with large user bases exist [Lanctot et al., 2019, Weng et al., 2020, Liang et al., 2018, Samvelyan
et al., 2019, Nota, 2020]. The proliferation of these Gym based learning libraries has proved essential
to the adoption of applied RL in ﬁelds like robotics or ﬁnance and without them the growth of applied
MARL is a signiﬁcantly greater challenge. Motivated by this, this paper introduces the PettingZoo
library and API, which was created with the goal of making research in MARL more accessible and
serving as a multi-agent version of Gym.
Prior to PettingZoo, the numerous single-use MARL APIs almost exclusively inherited their design
from the two most prominent mathematical models of games in the MARL literature—Partially
Observable Stochastic Games (“POSGs”) and Extensive Form Games (“EFGs”). During our develop-
ment, we discovered that these common models of games are not conceptually clear for multi-agent
games implemented in code and cannot form the basis of APIs that cleanly handle all types of
multi-agent environments.
To solve this, we introduce a new formal model of games, Agent Environment Cycle (“AEC”) games
that serves as the basis of the PettingZoo API. We argue that this model is a better conceptual ﬁt
for games implemented in code. and is uniquely suitable for general MARL APIs. We then prove
that any AEC game can be represented by the standard POSG model, and that any POSG can be
represented by an AEC game. To illustrate the importance of the AEC games model, this paper
further covers two case studies of meaningful bugs in popular MARL implementations. In both cases,
these bugs went unnoticed for a long time. Both stemmed from using confusing models of games,
and would have been made impossible by using an AEC games based API.
The PettingZoo library can be installed via pip install pettingzoo , the documentation is avail-
able at https://www.pettingzoo.ml , and the repository is available at https://github.com/
Farama-Foundation/PettingZoo .
2 Background and Related Works
Here we brieﬂy survey the state of modeling and APIs in MARL, beginning by brieﬂy looking at
Gym’s API (Figure 1). This API is the de facto standard in single agent reinforcement learning, has
largely served as the basis for subsequent multi-agent APIs, and will be compared to later.
import gym
env = gym.make(’CartPole-v0’)
observation = env.reset()
for _ in range(1000):
action = policy(observation)
observation, reward, done, info = env.step(action)
Figure 1: An example of the basic usage of Gymfrom ray.rllib.examples.env.multi_agent
import MultiAgentCartPole
env = MultiAgentCartPole()
observation = env.reset()
for _ in range(1000):
actions = policies(agents, observation)
observation, rewards, dones,
infos = env.step(actions)
Figure 2: An example of the basic usage of
RLlib
The Gym API is a fairly straightforward Python API that borrows from the POMDP conceptualization
of RL. The API’s simplicity and conceptual clarity has made it highly inﬂuential, and it naturally
accompanying the pervasive POMDP model that’s used as the pervasive mental and mathematical
model of reinforcement learning [Brockman et al., 2016]. This makes it easier for anyone with an
understanding of the RL framework to understand Gym’s API in full.
2.1 Partially Observable Stochastic Games and RLlib
Multi-agent reinforcement learning does not have a universal mental and mathematical model like
the POMDP model in single-agent reinforcement learning. One of the most popular models is the
partially observable stochastic game (“POSG”). This model is very similar to, and strictly more
2