because rewards from different sources are all combined. Accessing this information via an API
modeled after a POSG requires deviating from the model. This would come in the form of returning
a 2D array of rewards instead of a list, which would be difﬁcult to standardize and inconvenient for
learning code to parse.
A notable case where this caused an issue in practice is in the popular pursuit gridworld environment
from Gupta et al. [2017], shown in Figure 4. In it, 8red controllable pursuer must work together to
surround and capture 30randomly moving blue evaders. The action space of each pursuer is discrete
(cardinal directions or do nothing), and the observation space is a 77box centered around a pursuer
(depicted by the orange box). When an evader is surrounded on all sides by pursuers or the game
boundaries, each contributing pursuer gets a reward of 5.
Figure 4: The pursuit environment from Gupta et al. [2017].
In pursuit, pursuers move ﬁrst, and then evaders move randomly, before it’s determined if an evader
is captured and rewards are emitted. Thus an evader that “should have” been captured is not actually
captured. Having the evaders move second isn’t a bug, it’s just way of adding complexity to the classic
genre of pursuer/evader multi-agent environments [Vidal et al., 2002], and is representative of real
problems. When pursuit is viewed as an AEC game, we’re forced to attribute rewards to individual
steps, and the breakdown becomes pursuers receiving deterministic rewards from surrounding the
evader, and then random reward due to the evader moving after. Removing this random component
of the reward (the part caused by the evaders action after the pursuers had already moved), should
then lead to superior performance. In this case the problem was so innocuous that ﬁxing it required
switching two lines of code where their order made no obvious difference. We experimentally validate
this performance improvement in Appendix A.1, showing that on average this change resulted in up
to a 22% performance in the expected reward of a learned policy.
Bugs of this family could easily happen in almost any MARL environment, and analyzing and
preventing them is made much easier when using the POSG model. Because every agent’s rewards
are summed together in the POSG model, this speciﬁc problem when looking at the code was
extraordinarily non-obvious, whereas when forced to attribute the reward of individual agents this
becomes clear. Moreover if an existing environment had this problem, by exposing the actual sources
of rewards to learning code researchers are able to remove differing sources of reward to more
easily ﬁnd and remove bugs like this, and in principle learning algorithms could be developed that
automatically differently weighted different sources of reward.
4.2 POSGs Based APIs Are Not Conceptually Clear For Games Implemented In Code
Introducing race conditions is a very easy mistake to make in MARL code in practice, and this occurs
because simultaneous models of multi-agent games are not representative of how game code normally
executes. This stems from a very common scenario in multi-agent environments where two agents
are able to take conﬂicting actions (i.e. moving into the same space). This discrepancy has to be
resolved by the environment (i.e. collision handling); which we call “tie-breaking.”
Consider an environment with two agents, Alice and Bob, in which Alice steps ﬁrst and tie-breaking
is biased in Alice’s favor. If such an environment were assumed to have simultaneous actions, then
observations for both agents would be taken before either acted, causing the observation Bob acts on
to no longer be an accurate representation of the environment if a conﬂict with biased tie-breaking
occurs. For example, if both agents tried to step into the same square and Alice got the square
because she was ﬁrst in the list, Bob’s observation before acting was effectively inaccurate and the
environment was not truly parallel. This behavior is a true race condition—the result of stepping
through the environment can inadvertently differ depending on the internal resolution order of agent
actions.
5