Artistic Style Transfer with Internal-external
Learning and Contrastive Learning
Haibo Chen Lei ZhaoZhizhong Wang Huiming Zhang
Zhiwen Zuo Ailin Li Wei XingDongming Lu
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
{cshbchen, cszhl, endywon, qinglanwuji, zzwcs, liailin, wxing, ldm}@zju.edu.cn
Abstract
Although existing artistic style transfer methods have achieved signiﬁcant im-
provement with deep neural networks, they still suffer from artifacts such as
disharmonious colors and repetitive patterns. Motivated by this, we propose an
internal-external style transfer method with two contrastive losses. Speciﬁcally,
we utilize internal statistics of a single style image to determine the colors and
texture patterns of the stylized image, and in the meantime, we leverage the ex-
ternal information of the large-scale style dataset to learn the human-aware style
information, which makes the color distributions and texture patterns in the stylized
image more reasonable and harmonious. In addition, we argue that existing style
transfer methods only consider the content-to-stylization and style-to-stylization
relations, neglecting the stylization-to-stylization relations. To address this issue,
we introduce two contrastive losses, which pull the multiple stylization embeddings
closer to each other when they share the same content or style, but push far away
otherwise. We conduct extensive experiments, showing that our proposed method
can not only produce visually more harmonious and satisfying artistic images, but
also promote the stability and consistency of rendered video clips.
1 Introduction
Artistic style transfer is a long-standing research topic that seeks to render a photograph with a
given artwork style. Ever since Gatys et al. [10] for the ﬁrst time proposed a neural method, which
leverages a pre-trained Deep Convolutional Neural Network (DCNN) to separate and recombine
contents and styles of arbitrary images, an unprecedented booming [ 20,26,15,30,36,51,48] in
style transfer has been witnessed.
Despite the recent progress, there still exists a large gap between real artworks and synthesized
stylizations. As shown in Figure 1, the stylized images usually contain some disharmonious colors
and repetitive patterns, which makes them easily distinguishable from real artworks. We argue
that this is because existing style transfer methods often conﬁne themselves to the internal style
statistics of a single artistic image. In some other tasks (for example, image-to-image translation
[17,60,16,25,8,18]), the style is usually learned from a collection of images, which inspires us to
leverage the external information reserved in the large-scale style dataset to improve the stylization
results in style transfer. Why is the external information so important for style transfer? Our analyses
are as follows:
Although different images in the style dataset vary greatly in ﬁne details, they share a key commonality:
they are all human-created artworks, whose brushstrokes, color distributions, texture patterns, tones,
Corresponding author
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).