AdaIN SANet
 Avatar -Net LST
 Gatys et al .
 WCT
 Ours Style Content
Figure 1: Stylization examples. The ﬁrst and second columns show the style and content images,
respectively. The other seven columns show the stylized images produced by our method, Gatys et al.
[10], AdaIN [15], WCT [30], Avatar-Net [41], LST [28], and SANet [36].
etc., are more consistent with human perception. Namely, they contain some human-aware style
information that is lacked in synthesized stylizations. A natural idea is to utilize such human-aware
style information to improve stylization results. To this end, we employ an internal-external learning
scheme during training, which takes both internal learning and external learning into consideration.
To be more speciﬁc, on the one hand, we follow previous methods [ 10,20,46,54,58], utilizing
internal statistics of a single artwork to determine the colors and texture patterns of the stylized
image. On the other hand, we employ Generative Adversarial Nets (GANs) [ 11,39,2,56,3] to
externally learn the human-aware style information from the large-scale style dataset, which is then
used to make the color distributions and texture patterns in the stylized image more reasonable and
harmonious, signiﬁcantly bridging the gap between human-created artworks and AI-created artworks.
In addition, there is another problem with existing style transfer methods: they usually employ a
content loss and a style loss to enforce the content-to-stylization relations and style-to-stylization
relations, respectively, while neglect the stylization-to-stylization relations, which are also important
for style transfer. What are stylization-to-stylization relations? Intuitively, stylized images rendered
with the same style image should have closer relations in style than those rendered with different
style images. Similarly, stylized images based on the same content image should have closer relations
in content than those based on different content images. Inspired by this, in this paper we introduce
two contrastive losses: content contrastive loss and style contrastive loss that can pull the multiple
stylization embeddings closer to each other when they share the same content or style, but push far
away otherwise. To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst work that successfully leverages the
power of contrastive learning [6, 12, 21, 38] in the style transfer scenario.
Our extensive experiments show that the proposed method can not only produce visually more
harmonious and plausible artistic images, but also promote the stability and consistency of rendered
video clips.
To summarize, the main contributions of this work are threefold:
We propose a novel internal-external style transfer method which takes both internal learning
and external learning into consideration, signiﬁcantly bridging the gap between human-
created and AI-created artworks.
We for the ﬁrst time introduce contrastive learning to style transfer, yielding more satisfying
stylization results with the learned stylization-to-stylization relations.
We demonstrate the effectiveness and superiority of our approach by extensive comparisons
with several state-of-the-art artistic style transfer methods.
2 Related Work
Artistic style transfer. Artistic style transfer is an image editing task that aims at transferring artistic
styles onto everyday photographs to create new artworks. Earlier methods usually resort to traditional
2