model without EL only focuses on increasing the style similarity between the stylized image and the
style image, without considering whether the color distributions and texture patterns in the stylized
image are natural and harmonious. In comparison, the model with EL can learn the human-aware
style information from the large-scale style dataset, leading to more realistic and harmonious stylized
images that cannot be distinguished from real artworks by the discriminator. In addition, we also ﬁnd
that our method can better match the target style to the content image with the proposed contrastive
losses. This is because our contrastive losses can help the network to learn better style and content
representations by taking the stylization-to-stylization relations into consideration, further reﬁning
the stylization results. The user preference results reported in the last column of Figure 5 (a) also
demonstrate that our full model has the best performance.
Similar ablation studies are also conducted on video style transfer. As shown in Figure 5 (b), the
stability degradation can be observed after we remove external learning or contrastive learning from
our method (notice the color of hair and skin), which is in line with the reported LPIPS distance. The
results indicate that both external learning and contrastive learning can improve the stability of video
style transfer. As we analyzed in Section 4.2, external learning obtains stability gains by eliminating
distorted texture patterns, and contrastive learning obtains stability gains by pulling adjacent stylized
frames closer to each other.
5 Limitations
One limitation of this work is that the proposed internal-external learning scheme and two contrastive
losses cannot be applied to learning-free style transfer methods, such as WCT [ 30], Avatar-Net [ 41],
LST [ 28],etc. This is because the training process is necessary for our method. Therefore, our
method can only be incorporated into learning-based methods, such as Johnson et al. [20], AdaIN
[15], SANet [ 36] (in this work, we mainly take SANet as our backbone to show the effectiveness and
superiority of our method), etc. Another limitation is that in the inference stage, the style images that
are too different from the training styles may not beneﬁt from the external learning scheme, since
they are out of the learned style distributions.
6 Conclusion
In this paper, we propose an internal-external style transfer method with two novel contrastive losses.
The internal-external learning scheme learns simultaneously both the internal statistics from a single
artistic image and the human-aware style information from the large-scale style dataset. As for the
contrastive losses, they are dedicated to learning the stylization-to-stylization relations by pulling
the multiple stylization embeddings closer to each other when they share the same content or style,
but pushing far away otherwise. Extensive experiments show that our method can not only produce
visually more harmonious and satisfying artistic images, but also signiﬁcantly promote the stability
and consistency of rendered video clips. The proposed method is simple and effective, and may shed
light on more future understandings of artistic style transfer from a new perspective. In the future, we
would like to extend our method to other vision tasks, for example, texture synthesis.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported in part by the projects No. 2020YFC1523202, 19ZDA197, LY21F020005,
2021009, 2019C03137, MOE Frontier Science Center for Brain Science & Brain-Machine Integration
(Zhejiang University), National Natural Science Foundation of China (Research on Key Technologies
of art image restoration based on decoupling learning), and Key Scientiﬁc Research Base for Digital
Conservation of Cave Temples (Zhejiang University), State Administration for Cultural Heritage. We
would also like to thank the reviewers and AC for their constructive and insightful comments on the
early submission.
Funding Transparency Statement
The projects mentioned in our Acknowledgments provided funding and support to this work. There
are no additional revenues related to this work.
10