Table 2: The average LPIPS distances for different methods. The lower the better.
Inputs Gatys et al. AdaIN WCT Avatar-Net LST SANet Ours
LPIPS Distance 0.231 0.488 0.369 0.460 0.341 0.326 0.372 0.317
(a) (b)
LPIPS
0.317
0.325
0.321
Preference
0.388
0.281
0.331
Figure 5: Ablation studies of external learning ( abbr. EL) and contrastive learning ( abbr. CL) on (a)
image style transfer and (b) video style transfer. Please zoom in for a better view and details.
them the stylized images generated by our and competing methods side-by-side in a random order.
Next, we ask each participant to choose his/her favorite stylization result for each content-style pair.
We ﬁnally collect 1000 votes from 50 participants and present the percentage of votes for each method
in the second row of Table 1. The results indicate that the stylized images generated by our method
are more preferred by human participants compared to those generated by the competing methods.
Deception score. To measure the gap between AI-created artistic images and human-created artworks,
we conduct another user study: for each participant, we show them 80 artistic images which consist
of 10 human-created artworks collected from WikiArt [ 22] and 70 stylized images generated by our
and 6 baseline methods (note that each method provides 10 stylized images). Then for every image,
we ask these participants to guess if it is a real artwork or not. The deception score is calculated as
the fraction of times that the stylized images generated by this method are identiﬁed as “real”. For
comparison, we also report the fraction of times that the human-created artworks are identiﬁed as
“real”. The results are shown in the third row of Table 1, where we can see that the deception rate of
our method is closest to that of human-created artworks, further demonstrating the effectiveness of
our method.
To quantitatively evaluate the stability and consistency of the proposed method on video style transfer,
we adopt LPIPS ( Learned Perceptual Image Patch Similarity ) [57] as the evaluation metric.
LPIPS. LPIPS is a widely used metric in the ﬁeld of multimodal image-to-image translation (MI2I)
[61,16,25,8] to measure diversity. In this paper, we employ LPIPS to measure the stability and
consistency of rendered clips by computing the average perceptual distances between adjacent frames.
Note that contrary to MI2I methods that expect a higher LPIPS value to achieve better diversity, we
expect a lower LPIPS value to achieve better stability and consistency. We synthesize 18 stylized
video clips for each method and report the average LPIPS distances in Table 2, where we observe that
our approach obtains the best score among all methods, consistent with the qualitative comparisons
in Figure 4.
4.4 Ablation Studies
In this section, we conduct several ablation studies to highlight the effect of different components in
our model.
We ﬁrst explore the effect of external learning ( abbr. EL) and contrastive learning ( abbr. CL) on
image style transfer. As for internal learning, since its effect has been fully validated in existing style
transfer methods, we do not ablate it in this experiment. Figure 5 (a) shows the image stylization
results of our method with and without EL/CL. It can be observed that, without EL, the stylized
images become messier with abrupt colors and obvious distortions. The reason could be that the
9