techniques such as stroke rendering [ 13], image analogy [ 14,42,9,31], and image ﬁltering [ 52] to
perform artistic style transfer. These methods typically rely on low-level statistics and often fail to
capture semantic information. Recently, Gatys et al. [10] discovered that the Gram matrix upon deep
features extracted from a pre-trained DCNN can notably represent the characteristics of visual styles,
which opens up the neural style transfer era. Since then, a suite of neural methods have been proposed,
boosting the development of style transfer from different concerns. Speciﬁcally, [ 20,27,46] utilize
feed-forward networks to improve efﬁciency. [ 26,54,36,58,35] reﬁne various elements in the
stylized images (including content preservation, textures, brushstrokes, etc.) to enhance visual quality.
[7,15,30,41,28] propose universal style transfer methods to achieve generalization. [ 29,47,51]
inject random noise to the generative network to encourage diversity. Despite the rapid progress,
these style transfer methods still suffer from spurious artifacts such as disharmonious colors and
repetitive patterns.
Notice that there is another line of work [ 40,24,23,45,4,5] that aims to learn an artist’s style from
all his/her artworks. In comparison, instead of learning an artist’s style , we focus on better leaning
an artwork’s style (just like the style transfer methods mentioned in the previous paragraph) with
the assist of the human-aware style information reserved in the external style dataset. Therefore, our
method is orthogonal to these works.
Image-to-image translation. Image-to-image translation (I2I) [ 17,60,16,25,8,18] aims at learning
the mapping between different visual domains, which is closely related to style transfer. [ 60,16]
have distinguished these two tasks: (i) I2I can only translate between content-similar visual domains
(such as horses$zebras and summer $winter), while style transfer does not have such limitation,
whose content image and style image can be totally different ( e.g., the former is a photo of a person
and the latter is van Gogh’s The Starry Night ). (ii) I2I aims to learn the mapping between two image
collections, while style transfer aims to learn the mapping between two speciﬁc images. However,
we argue that we can borrow some insights from I2I, and leverage the external information of the
large-scale style image collections to improve the stylization quality in style transfer.
Internal-external learning. Internal-external learning has shown effectiveness in various image
generation tasks, such as super-resolution, image inpainting, and so on. In detail, Soh et al. [44]
presented a fast, ﬂexible, and lightweight self-supervised super-resolution method by exploiting both
external and internal samples. Park et al. [37] developed an internal-external super-resolution method
that facilitates super-resolution networks to further enhance the quality of the restored images. Wang
et al. [49] proposed a general external-internal learning inpainting scheme, which learns semantic
knowledge externally by training on large datasets while fully utilizes internal statistics of the single
test image. However, in the ﬁeld of style transfer, existing methods only use a single artistic image to
learn style, resulting in unsatisfying stylization results. Motivated by this, in this work we propose
an internal-external style transfer method that takes both internal learning and external learning into
consideration, signiﬁcantly bridging the gap between human-created and AI-created artworks.
Contrastive learning. Generally, there are three key ingredients in a contrastive learning process:
query, positive examples, and negative examples. The target of contrastive learning is to associate
a “query” with its “positive” example while disassociate the “query” with other examples that are
referred to as “negatives”. Recently, contrastive learning has demonstrated its effectiveness in the
ﬁeld of conditional image synthesis. To be more speciﬁc, ContraGAN [ 21] introduced a conditional
contrastive loss (2C loss) to learn both data-to-class and data-to-data relations. Park et al. [38]
maximized the mutual information between input and output with contrastive learning to encourage
content preservation in unpaired image translation problems. Liu et al. [34] introduced a latent-
augmented contrastive loss to encourage images generated from adjacent latent codes to be similar
and those generated from distinct latent codes to be dissimilar, achieving diverse image synthesis.
Yuet al. [55] proposed a dual contrastive loss in adversarial training that generalizes representation
to more effectively distinguish between real and fake, and further incentivizes the image generation
quality. Wu et al. [53] improved the image dehazing result by introducing contrastive learning, which
ensures that the restored image is pulled closer to the clear image and pushed far away from the hazy
image in representation space.
Note that all the above contrastive learning methods cannot be adopted for style transfer. In this
work, we make the ﬁrst attempt to adapt contrastive learning to artistic style transfer, and propose two
novel contrastive losses: content contrastive loss and style contrastive loss to learn the stylization-to-
stylization relations that are ignored by existing style transfer methods.
3