•Hosting the models : to ensure the availability of the models from the Model Zoo, we host
them in our own cloud storage on Google Drive6. At the moment, they take around 24 GB
of space which ﬁts into the 100 GB storage plan that costs 2 USD per month.
•Running evaluations : we run all evaluations on the GPU servers that are available to our
research groups which incurs no extra costs.
Moreover, as we mention in the outlook (Sec. 5), we also plan to expand the benchmark to new
datasets and threat models which can slightly increase the required maintenance costs since we may
need to upgrade the storage plan. We also expect the benchmark to be community-driven and to
encourage this we have provided instructions7on how to submit new entries to the leaderboard and to
the Model Zoo.
D Details of the ImageNet leaderboards
Extending the benchmark to ImageNet presents some challenges compared to CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-
100. First, the ImageNet validation set (usually used as the test set) contains 50’000 images which
makes it infeasible to run expensive evaluations on it. Thus, we deﬁne a ﬁxed subset (5’000 randomly
sampled images in our case) for faster evaluation, whose image IDs we make available in the Model
Zoo. Second, it is not obvious how to handle the fact that different models may use different
preprocessing techniques (e.g., different resolution, cropping, etc) which makes the search space for
an attack not fully comparable across defenses. For this, we decide to allow models with different
preprocessing steps and input resolution, considering them yet another design choice similarly to the
choice of the network architecture which also has a large inﬂuence on the ﬁnal results. Since in the `1-
threat model the constraints are componentwise independent, we use the same threshold "1=4=255
for every classiﬁer, regardless of the input dimensionality which is used after preprocessing.
E Reproducibility and runtime
Here we discuss the main aspects of the reproducibility of the benchmark.
First of all, the code to run the benchmark on a given model is available in our repository, and an
example of how to run it is given in the README ﬁle. The installation instructions are also provided
in the README ﬁle and the requirements will be installed automatically.
To satisfy other points from the reproducibility checklist8which are applicable to our benchmark, we
also discuss next the variability of the robust accuracy over random seeds and the average runtime
of the benchmark. Evaluation of the accuracy on common corruptions [ 58] is deterministic if we
do not take into account non-deterministic operations on computational accelerators such as GPUs9
which, however, do not affect the resulting accuracy. On the other hand, robustness evaluation using
AutoAttack has an element of randomness since it relies on random initialization of the starting points
and also on the randomness in the update of the Square Attack [ 4]. To show the effect of randomness
on the robust accuracy given by AutoAttack, we repeat evaluation over four random seeds on four
models available in the Model Zoo from different threat models covering all datasets considered. In
Table 2, we report the average robust accuracy with its standard deviation and observe that different
seeds lead to very similar results. Moreover, we indicate the runtime of each evaluation, which is
largely inﬂuenced by the size of the model, the computing infrastructure (every run uses a single
Tesla V100 GPU), and the dataset. Moreover, less robust models require less time for evaluation
which is due to the fact that AutoAttack does not further attack a point if an adversarial example is
already found by some preceding attack in the ensemble.
Additionally, as mentioned above, for ImageNet we have randomly sampled and ﬁxed 5000 images
from the validation set. We provide the IDs of those images and code to load them in our repository.
Note that we use the same set of images for `p-robustness and for common corruptions, in which case
for every point 15 types of corruptions at 5 severity levels are applied, consistently with the other
datasets.
6https://www.google.com/drive/
7https://github.com/RobustBench/robustbench#adding-a-new-model
8https://www.cs.mcgill.ca/~jpineau/ReproducibilityChecklist.pdf
9https://pytorch.org/docs/stable/notes/randomness.html
19