on evaluations submitted by the community, which however do not occur often enough. Thus even
though RobustML has been a valuable contribution to the community, now it does not provide a
comprehensive overview of the recent state of the art in adversarial robustness.
Finally, it has become common practice to test new attacks wrt `1on the publicly available models
from Madry et al. [88] and Zhang et al. [168] , since those represent widely accepted defenses which
have stood many thorough evaluations. However, having only two models per dataset (MNIST and
CIFAR-10) does not constitute a sufﬁciently large testbed, and, because of the repetitive evaluations,
some attacks may already overﬁt to those defenses.
What is different in RobustBench .Learning from these previous attempts, RobustBench presents
a few different features compared to the aforementioned benchmarks: (1) a baseline worst-case
evaluation with an ensemble of strong ,standardized attacks [ 28] which includes both white- and black-
box attacks, unlike RobustML which is solely based on adaptive evaluations, integrated by external
evaluations, (2) we add a ﬂagin AutoAttack raised when the evaluation might be unreliable, in which
case we do additional adaptive evaluations ourselves and encourage the community to contribute, (3)
clearly deﬁned threat models that correspond to the ones used during training of submitted models,
(4) evaluation of not only standard defenses [ 88,168] but also of more recent improvements such
as [19,50,111]. Moreover, RobustBench is designed as an open-ended benchmark that keeps an
up-to-date leaderboard, and we welcome contributions of new defenses and evaluations using adaptive
attacks. Finally, we open source the Model Zoo for convenient access to the 80+ most robust models
from the literature which can be used for downstream tasks and facilitate the development of new
standardized attacks.
3 Description of RobustBench
We start by providing a detailed layout of our proposed leaderboards for `1,`2, and common
corruption threat models. Next, we present the Model Zoo, which provides uniﬁed access to most
networks from our leaderboards.
3.1 Leaderboard
Restrictions. We argue that accurate benchmarking adversarial robustness in a standardized way
requires some restrictions on the type of considered models. The goal of these restrictions is to
prevent submissions of defenses that cause some standard attacks to fail without truly improving
robustness. Speciﬁcally, we consider only classiﬁers f:Rd!RCthat
•have in general non-zero gradients with respect to the inputs. Models with zero gradients,
e.g., that rely on quantization of inputs [ 13,53], make gradient-based methods ineffective
thus requiring zeroth-order attacks, which do not perform as well as gradient-based attacks.
Alternatively, speciﬁc adaptive evaluations, e.g. with Backward Pass Differentiable Approx-
imation [ 5], can be used which, however, can hardly be standardized. Moreover, we are not
aware of existing defenses solely based on having zero gradients for large parts of the input
space which would achieve competitive robustness.
•have a fully deterministic forward pass . To evaluate defenses with stochastic components,
it is a common practice to combine standard gradient-based attacks with Expectation over
Transformations [ 5]. While often effective it might be not sufﬁcient, as shown by Tramèr
et al. [142] . Moreover, the classiﬁcation decision of randomized models may vary over
different runs for the same input, hence even the deﬁnition of robust accuracy differs from
that of deterministic networks. We note that randomization canbe useful for improving
robustness and deriving robustness certiﬁcates [ 82,25], but it also introduces variance in the
gradient estimators (both white- and black-box) making standard attacks much less effective.
•do not have an optimization loop in the forward pass. This makes backpropagation through it
very difﬁcult or extremely expensive. Usually, such defenses [ 118,84] need to be evaluated
adaptively with attacks that rely on a combination of hand-crafted losses.
Some of these restrictions were also discussed by [ 12] for the warm-up phase of their challenge. We
refer the reader to Appendix E therein for an illustrative example of a trivial defense that bypasses
gradient-based and some of the black-box attacks they consider. We believe that such constraints
4