RobustBench : a standardized adversarial robustness
benchmark
Francesco Croce
Univ. of TübingenMaksym Andriushchenko
EPFLVikash Sehwag
Princeton Univ.Edoardo Debenedetti
EPFL
Nicolas Flammarion
EPFLMung Chiang
Purdue Univ.Prateek Mittal
Princeton Univ.Matthias Hein
Univ. of Tübingen
Abstract
As a research community, we are still lacking a systematic understanding of the
progress on adversarial robustness which often makes it hard to identify the most
promising ideas in training robust models. A key challenge in benchmarking
robustness is that its evaluation is often error-prone leading to robustness overesti-
mation . Our goal is to establish a standardized benchmark of adversarial robustness,
which as accurately as possible reﬂects the robustness of the considered models
within a reasonable computational budget. To this end, we start by considering
the image classiﬁcation task and introduce restrictions (possibly loosened in the
future) on the allowed models. We evaluate adversarial robustness with AutoAttack
[28], an ensemble of white- and black-box attacks, which was recently shown in
a large-scale study to improve almost all robustness evaluations compared to the
original publications. To prevent overadaptation of new defenses to AutoAttack,
we welcome external evaluations based on adaptive attacks [ 142], especially where
AutoAttack ﬂags a potential overestimation of robustness. Our leaderboard, hosted
athttps://robustbench.github.io/ , contains evaluations of 120+ models
and aims at reﬂecting the current state of the art in image classiﬁcation on a set
of well-deﬁned tasks in `1- and`2-threat models and on common corruptions,
with possible extensions in the future. Additionally, we open-source the library
https://github.com/RobustBench/robustbench that provides uniﬁed ac-
cess to 80+ robust models to facilitate their downstream applications. Finally,
based on the collected models, we analyze the impact of robustness on the per-
formance on distribution shifts, calibration, out-of-distribution detection, fairness,
privacy leakage, smoothness, and transferability.
1 Introduction
Since the ﬁnding that state-of-the-art deep learning models are vulnerable to small input perturbations
called adversarial examples [135], achieving adversarially robust models has become one of the
most studied topics in the machine learning community. The main difﬁculty of robustness evaluation
is that it is a computationally hard problem even for simple `p-bounded perturbations [ 70] and
exact approaches [ 138] do not scale to large enough models. There are already more than 3000
papers on this topic [ 16], but it is often unclear which defenses against adversarial examples indeed
improve robustness and which only make the typically used attacks overestimate the actual robustness.
There is an important line of work on recommendations for how to perform adaptive attacks that
are selected speciﬁcally for a particular defense [ 5,17,142] which have in turn shown that several
Equal contribution.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.arXiv:2010.09670v3  [cs.LG]  31 Oct 2021