Figure 1: The top-3 entries of our CIFAR-10 leaderboard hosted at https://robustbench.github.
io/for the`1-perturbations of radius "1=8=255.
seemingly robust defenses fail to be robust. However, recently Tramèr et al. [142] observe that
although several recently published defenses have tried to perform adaptive evaluations, many of
them could still be broken by new adaptive attacks. We observe that there are repeating patterns in
many of these defenses that prevent standard attacks from succeeding. This motivates us to impose
restrictions on the defenses we consider in our proposed benchmark, RobustBench , which aims
atstandardized adversarial robustness evaluation. Speciﬁcally, we rule out (1) classiﬁers which
have zero gradients with respect to the input [ 13,53], (2) randomized classiﬁers [ 161,100], and (3)
classiﬁers that use an optimization loop at inference time [ 118,84]. Often, non-certiﬁed defenses
that violate these three restrictions only make gradient-based attacks harder but do not substantially
improve robustness [ 17]. However, we will lift (some of) these constraints if a standardized reliable
evaluation method for those defenses becomes available. We start from benchmarking robustness
with respect to the `1- and`2-threat models, since they are the most studied settings in the literature.
We use the recent AutoAttack [ 28] as our current standard evaluation which is an ensemble of diverse
parameter-free attacks (white- and black-box) that has shown reliable performance over a large set of
models that satisfy our restrictions. Moreover, we accept and encourage external evaluations, e.g.
with adaptive attacks, to improve our standardized evaluation, especially for the leaderboard entries
whose evaluation may be unreliable according to the ﬂagthat we propose. Additionally, we collect
models robust against common image corruptions [ 58] as these represent another important type of
perturbations which should not change the decision of a classiﬁer.
Contributions. We make following key contributions with our RobustBench benchmark:
•Leaderboard (https://robustbench.github.io/ ): a website with the leaderboard
(see Fig. 1) based on more than 120 evaluations where it is possible to track the progress and
the current state of the art in adversarial robustness based on a standardized evaluation using
AutoAttack complemented by (external) adaptive evaluations. The goal is to clearly identify
the most successful ideas in training robust models to accelerate the progress in the ﬁeld.
•Model Zoo (https://github.com/RobustBench/robustbench ): a collection of the
most robust models that are easy to use for any downstream applications. As an example,
we expect that this will foster the development of better adversarial attacks by making it
easier to perform evaluations on a large set of more than 80 models.
•Analysis : based on the collected models from the Model Zoo, we provide an analysis of
how robustness affects the performance on distribution shifts, calibration, out-of-distribution
detection, fairness, privacy leakage, smoothness, and transferability. In particular, we ﬁnd
that robust models are signiﬁcantly underconﬁdent that leads to worse calibration, and that
not all robust models have higher privacy leakage than standard models.
2 Background and related work
Adversarial perturbations. Letx2Rdbe an input point and y2f1;:::;Cgbe its correct label.
For a classiﬁer f:Rd!RC, we deﬁne a successful adversarial perturbation with respect to the
2