Sensors 2019 ,19, 322 2 of 27
sensor is not sufﬁcient due to its limited communication range. In order to cover a more consequent
space, several sensors are deployed and connected to each other, thereby forming a Wireless Sensor
Network (WSN) [1].
By designing a WSN, the most important parameter to be taken into account is the energy
consumption because it deﬁnes the lifetime of a sensor node and thereafter the lifetime of the whole
network [ 2]. A trade-off between the energy restriction and the resources constraints of sensors is
imperative for the performance of the network. Nevertheless, when the amount of nodes within the
network is extensive, the usual direct routing consumes more energy and may reduce the network
lifetime considerably [ 3]. From the original wireline networks, hierarchical or cluster-based routing are
widely used for large WSNs because they are techniques with advantages related to scalability, efﬁcient
communication, and fault tolerance [ 4]. In hierarchical architectures, the whole network is divided
into sub-networks called clusters. Each cluster is led by a special node named Cluster Head (CH)
which is responsible for gathering or fusion data from nodes that belong to the same cluster [ 5]. In this
kind of routing technique, the inter-cluster and intra-cluster communications may act in a multihop
manner. Thus, a sensor node communicates only with its nearest neighbor in order to preserve its
remaining energy and not to waste its energy by trying to communicate with a neighbor which is far
away [ 4]. Other clustering approaches aim at ﬁnding a trade-off between the reliability of sensing and
communication overhead based on unsupervised learning process [6].
Meanwhile, traditional hierarchical based algorithms are mostly probabilistic clustering
approaches [ 7]. However, like the authors of [ 8], for example, the clustering on WSN remains a
Non-deterministic Polynomial (NP) hard optimization problem which cannot be solved efﬁciently
by traditional approaches. Thus, a more accurate resolution of the NP optimization of the clustering
is made possible by using approaches based on recent research on Computational Intelligence
(CI) and Machine Learning (ML). These recent clustering paradigms are known as optimized
clustering algorithms.
The clustering solutions based on CI or ML consider environmental and biological behaviors
and outperform most of the traditional clustering solutions in terms of scalability, reliability, fault
tolerance, amount of data delivered, energy consumption, better coverage of the experimental ﬁeld,
and the increase of the network lifetime [ 7–11]. Meanwhile, according to the type of application,
the choice of the appropriate approach is very important both on the cost of the network deployment
and its lifetime.
1.2. Author’s Contributions
The main goal of this paper is to give a quick overview to a beginner or senior in the research
ﬁeld about clustering approaches based on ML and CI, it also helps readers in choosing a clustering
technique adapted to the speciﬁcations of their application. To achieve it, we conducted a large review
of the recent optimized clustering solutions. They are classiﬁed by the ML/CI implemented; thus,
several performance parameters are used to compare and to evaluate them. It is then easy to have an
overview of MI/CI based approaches according to the requirements of WSN’s applications. In short,
our main contributions can be summarized as follows:
 Wide review of recent intelligent clustering approaches for WSN;
 Classiﬁcation of algorithms in terms of the CI or ML used;
 Intensive evaluation and comparison of the selected algorithms according to 10 parameters.
1.3. Paper’s Organization
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 shows the principal routing techniques
used in WSN; in Section 3, a wide presentation of the optimized clustering based on ML and CI
are given; a comparison between several optimized clustering approaches is provided in Section 4;
conclusion and directions for future work are presented in Section 5.