Sensors 2019 ,19, 322 19 of 27
remaining energy, etc.) for computations by the BS. In distributed approaches, the decision
and the computation are made by the nodes themselves. The BS receive results of computations
or decisions, in some case the BS is replaced by the sink node.
 Another metric considered in this study is the homogeneity of nodes within the ﬁeld. The network
is said to be homogeneous when all the nodes have the same characteristics (performance
of the microcontroller, available memory, communication range, energy level, etc.); however,
it is heterogeneous when the algorithm considers one or more special nodes with extended
performance compared to other normal nodes. In this last case, these special nodes are mostly
set as CHs due to their performance and the number of clusters mostly depend of the number of
these special nodes.
 In order to evaluate the amount of energy consume by each node within the ﬁeld, clustering
approach integrate a radio model which has to be as accurate as possible to real behavior.
This parameter is important because most of the energy dissipated by a sensor is caused by
transmitting and receiving data through the transceiver. The type of radio model also allows
you to know whether or not the implementation in real environment can be similar to the
simulation context.
 For our analysis, we evaluate if the presented algorithms are based or not on multihop
communication between nodes. The multihop ability assumes that a node can send a data to
another far node out of reach but helps by an intermediate node within its communication range.
 To consider the fault tolerance of the presented algorithms, we set the multipath metric.
Algorithms that implement multipath are more fault tolerance than others that do not use it,
if a route to a BS is not available anymore, it is possible to access the BS by a secondary path.
This parameter allows an algorithm to avoid the entire network failure caused by nodes crash.
Table 1 presents the crosstab between the ML/CI and the energy consumption. We observe that
the approaches which consume the most the energy are based on FL or GA. However, the solutions
based on the BCO, PSO, and FL have a lower energy consumption than the others paradigms. Thus,
we may say that algorithms based on SI and on FL consume less energy that GA, NN, and RL based
algorithms. This can be explained knowing that clustering algorithms based on GA and NN are mostly
complex to implement and need more node computations. Due to their limited resources, nodes would
waste their energy faster.
Table 1. Comparison of CI’s approaches according to the energy consumption.
ML/CIEnergy Consumption
Total
Low Average High
FL 3 3 3 9
FL/SI 1 0 0 1
GA 1 2 1 4
NN 0 2 0 2
RL 1 1 0 2
PSO 1 4 1 6
ACO 0 4 1 5
BCO 1 3 0 4
Total 8 19 6 33
Table 2 compare the scalability of the presented algorithms by the CI-ML used. We note that
the optimized strategies based on FL, NN, or GA have less scalability than the others do. However,
solutions which used SI are the best in terms of the scalability. The higher scalability of the SI based
approaches is due to the fact that the SI considers the collaboration between a large amount of agents
in a population. However, on FL, NN, and GA when the number of node increases, the complexity of