Sensors 2019 ,19, 322 14 of 27
PSO-ECHS
Srinivasa Rao et al. [ 60] proposed an energy efﬁcient CH selection algorithm based on PSO called
PSO-ECHS. It consists in two phases: the CH election and the cluster formation. The CH election phase
is based on PSO and considers the residual energy of nodes and their distance with the BS. Initially,
nodes send their location and residual energy to the BS which executes the PSO algorithm. For the
CH selection in PSO-ECHS, a particle represents optimal positions of the CHs by representing the
coordinates of the sensor nodes to be selected as CH. Contrary to algorithms where non-CH sensor
nodes simply join a cluster by considering only the distance with the CH, in PSO-ECHS, the non-CH
sensor nodes join a CH depending on the weight function called CH_Weight which consider the
distance, the remaining energy, and the node degree of CHs. The evaluation of PSO-ECHS consists of
three different scenarios on the position of the BS: at the ﬁrst scenario, the BS is located in the center of
the study ﬁeld; the second scenario considers the BS located at the top right corner of the ﬁeld; and
the last scenario assumes the BS is located outside the ﬁeld. Experimentations are conducted on these
scenarios by varying the number of nodes on four networks (300, 400, 500, and 700). The proposed
algorithm is compared to LEACH, E-LEACH, LEACH-C, PSO-C, and the Least Distance Clustering
algorithm (LDC) [ 61]. The results show that PSO-ECHS outperforms the others algorithms in terms of
the energy consumption and thereafter has the best network lifetime. The results have also shown that
PSO-ECHS had the highest packets received by the BS in the different scenarios with network which
consist of 300, 400, 500, or 700 nodes.
3.5.2. Ant Colony Optimization
The Ant Colony Optimization (ACO) is deﬁned by [ 62] as a novel nature-inspired metaheuristic
for the solution of hard combinatorial optimization problems. The ACO algorithm originates from the
behavior of ants which communicate with each other by using chemical deposits called pheromones.
When ants move, they lay pheromones on the ground, and they receive the current strength of
pheromone [ 29]. Figure 6 below presents the simple ACO functioning in which ants ﬁnd the best
path between a food source and the nest. The main idea of the ACO metaheuristic is to model the
problem as a search for the best path by constructing a path-graph that represents the states of the
problem [9]. Many works in the WSN ﬁeld used clustering algorithms based on the ACO to improve
the performance of sensor networks.
1 
  
Figure 6. Presentation of the Ant Colony Optimization (ACO) model.