Sensors 2019 ,19, 322 13 of 27
ﬂooding method. The BS ﬁnds the average energy level of all nodes and only nodes with an energy
level above the average are eligible to be a CCH. After, the BS runs the PSO algorithm to ﬁnd the best
k-CHs where a particle is represented as a sequence of candidate CHs ID’s. For the formation of the
cluster, the BS constructs the ﬁrst clusters tier by assigning each non-CH node to a CH according to the
RSSI value for the link between them. However, during the steady phase, each member node uses
its Time Division Multiple Access (TDMA) schedule like on LEACH to transmit its data to the next
hop. When a simple node ﬁnishes its data transmission slot, it enters the sleep state to save its energy.
PSO-HC is compared to clustering algorithms LEACH, LEACH-C, and PSO-C. The obtained results
show that the average energy consumption per node of PSO-HC is less than the other algorithms.
The results also reveal that the link quality when using PSO-HC is better than the other because it has
the highest throughput among all.
MPSICA
MPSICA is an intelligent and fast routing recovery scheme based on PSO [ 58]. It was performed
for heterogeneous WSN and should maintain K disjoint paths from each source node to the nearest
super-node (CH) and the available path from super-nodes to the sink. MPSICA is highly fault tolerant
to the failure of ordinary node paths or CHs paths, since traditional retransmissions can be decreased
and the reliability can be improved with lower energy consumption and longer lifetime. In order
to efﬁciently use the energy consumption, MPSICA is centralized and is performed by each of the
super-nodes which have higher resources than simple nodes. Each node on MPSICA represents
a particle where some nodes can form a particle sequence corresponding to a path until the sink.
The proposed algorithm then optimizes for each node’s particle sequence the optimal path by using
an optimal ﬁtness function on the super-node. MPSICA is compared to the clustering algorithm
EEHC and the fault tolerant protocol for Inter-Cluster Communication (ICE). The results obtained
have shown that MPSICA has the minimum ratio of energy depletion (the higher ratio of alive nodes)
compared to the other two protocols. The results also showed that the proposed protocol presents a
smaller delay of packet delivery.
TPSO-CR
Elhabyan & Yagoub [ 59], proposed a two-tier PSO protocol for the Two-tier Particle Swarm
Optimization for Clustering and Routing protocol (TPSO-CR) in WSNs. The proposed algorithm used
a clustering algorithm which ﬁnds the optimal set of CHs in order to efﬁciently use the energy, and
maximize the transmission reliability and the network coverage. Meanwhile, its routing algorithm is
developed with a novel particle encoding scheme and ﬁtness function which ﬁnds the optimal routing
tree that connects these CHs to the BS. TPSO-CR is similar to PSO-HC in the sense that it is centralized
and based on the information received by the BS. After the computation of the average energy level
of nodes by the BS, only nodes with an energy level above the average are eligible to be CCHs for
each round to ensure that only nodes with sufﬁcient energy are selected as CHs. Next, the BS runs
the ﬁrst-tier algorithm (clustering algorithm) which ﬁnd the best K-CHs. The second-tier algorithm
(routing algorithm) is performed after the ﬁrst-tier and is responsible for constructing the optimal
routing tree. In order to evaluate TPSO-CR, the authors have used two different scenarios WSN#1 and
WSN#2 which use, respectively, homogeneous and heterogeneous nodes. The PSO-based approach
is compared with the well-known protocols LEACH, EHE-LEACH, EEHC, LEACH-C, PSO-C, and
GA-C. The results have shown that TPSO-CR has a smaller number of non-clustered nodes than other
protocols on both scenarios WSN#1 and WSN#2. The results have also revealed that TPSO-CR has
the highest throughput, its energy consumption is less than energy consumption of LEACH, EEHC,
EHE-LEACH but is slightly similar to the consumed energy of protocols LEACH-C, PSO-C, and GA-C.