Sensors 2019 ,19, 322 17 of 27
ABC-C
ABC-C is a novel energy efﬁcient clustering mechanism, based on the Artiﬁcial Bee Colony
(ABC) algorithm [ 71]. ABC simulates the intelligent foraging behavior of honeybee swarms and has
been successfully implemented in clustering techniques. Three bees’ groups in ABC are performed:
onlookers to choose a food source, scouts which perform randomly search, and employed bees which
go to the food source visited by another bee. The clustering mechanism of the ABC-C is based on
the clustering technique of LEACH protocol where CHs perform data aggregation processes of their
clusters. For intra-cluster communication, CHs perform TDMA with the BS. The election of CHs is
performed by ABC algorithm at the BS which is a node with unlimited energy supply. Sensor nodes are
assigned to the clusters by using the shortest distances until the CHs. After receiving and calculating
cross-distance values, the nodes send these values to the BS in order to be used during the selection
process. To evaluate ABC-C, the authors considered a network which contains 100 nodes randomly
placed. The performance of ABC-C is compared to that of LEACH and PSO-C about the network
lifetime (number of alive nodes), amount of received signals and the energy consumption. The results
have shown that ABC-C improves the network lifetime (highest number of alive nodes) than the other
algorithms. The proposed algorithm also outperforms LEACH and PSO-C in terms of energy use and
of the number of received signals.
Bee-Sensor-C
Bee-Sensor-C is an energy-aware and scalable multipath routing protocol based on dynamic
cluster and foraging behavior of bees swarm [ 70]. It adopts an enhanced multipath construction
strategy so that it achieves the balance of energy consumption within the network, reduces overheads
of routing, improves the network scalability and performance, then its lifetime. The event-driven of
Bee-Sensor-C allow to perform a dynamic clustering scheme near an event. During the ﬁrst phase of
Bee-Sensor-C (clusters formation), the HiveHeader into the bee-hive claims to be a CH node when it
detects an event within an event area. Nodes nearby the event will become activated and measure
the speciﬁc perceived attribute, then the nodes having information about the event will join the
cluster. The second phase (multipath construction) occurs when CH needs to send data until the
sink node. The CH looks whether there are appropriate foragers of any nodes in the cluster for the
existing multipath. The last phase consists in the transmission and occurs when the backward scout
with unique path ID arrives at the CH and recruits foragers using the waggle dance. For evaluated
Bee-Sensor-C, two different scenarios are considered and the number of nodes varies until 500 (ﬁrst
scenario). In the ﬁrst scenario, there is only one event that occurred in the network whereas in the
second scenario several events (at least 2) can be detected. The proposed algorithm is compared to
the bee-inspired routing protocol BeeSensor [ 72], IEEABR [ 73], and the ﬂood forward ant routing
FF-Ant [ 74]. The obtained results have revealed that Bee-Sensor-C consumes less energy but has the
highest packet delivery rate compared to the three other protocols.
BeeSwarm
Mann et al. [ 75] proposed a CI based metaheuristic for energy efﬁcient hierarchical routing
named BeeSwarm. It is made up of three phases: BeeCluster, BeeSearch, and BeeCarrier. During
the set-up phase (BeeCluster), a similar approach of the ABC is used for the formation of optimal
clusters known as Bee Zones (BZs) and the selection of a corresponding CH known as Zonal Head
(ZH). To form a BZ, BeeSwarm applies an agglomerative hierarchal clustering, in which two clusters
separated by a short distance are combined to obtain the optimal cluster in order to minimize the
energy consumption. After clustering of nodes, ZHs are elected for each BZ based on the residual
energy and the distance between the BS. The BeeSearch phase occurs after the BeeCluster and consists
in the discovery of routes by scout bees. The BeeSearch performs the forward-search to explore the
network and the backward-search which maintains different routes between BS and nodes. Meanwhile,