Sensors 2019 ,19, 322 7 of 27
3.1.5. SEP-FL
SEP-FL is a FL approach improving election of CH within heterogeneous WSN [ 35], it is an
improved version of SEP which is based on the election of CH by balancing the probabilities on
the residual energy for each node. SEP-FL provides a longer stability period and a lower instability
period and increases the lifetime of nodes. The approach is based on the distance from the BS and the
residual energy level of each node type. The fuzzy system is divided into two Fuzzy Inference Systems
(FIS); one for each type of nodes (advanced and normal nodes). SEP-FL is compared with LEACH,
LEACH-LF, and the original algorithm SEP , the results show that SEP-FL increases the network lifetime
and reduces the energy consumption better than the other three algorithms.
3.1.6. EAUCF
Authors of [ 36] have proposed a fuzzy based algorithm for the energy-aware in unequal clustering
called EAUCF. It aims to reduce the energy consumption of CHs within clusters since they are either
close to the BS or may have low remaining battery power. The FL implemented in EAUCF uses an
if-then mapping rules to handle doubts in CH radius estimation. Moreover, the algorithm also uses
a probabilistic model which is employed for electing tentative CHs. In each clustering round, every
sensor node has to generate a random number between 0 and 1 and compares it with the predeﬁned
threshold. If the random number is more than the threshold, the node becomes a tentative CH, for
electing the ﬁnal CH, EAUCF take into account the residual energy and the distance to the BS before
calculating the competition radius. EAUCF has a better performance compared to LEACH, CHEF, and
EEUC in terms of the death of ﬁrst node, the half nodes alive, and the energy consumption.
3.1.7. DFLC
DFLC (Distributed Fuzzy Logic-Based Clustering) is a clustering algorithm based on the fuzzy
logic which is executed on a distributed manner by nodes within the network [ 37]. DFLC considers
the network as a tree in which a node can be sink (BS), root (CH), member (node within a cluster),
parent or child node. A parent node is an intermediate node and receives data sent by a child node
to the root. In order to efﬁciently select the CH, each node runs the fuzzy logic engine with ﬁve
input parameters: the residual energy, the distance of a node to the other nodes in the tree (centrality),
the distance to the BS, the number of hops, and the number of neighbor nodes of a node (node density).
During the execution of the fuzzy logic engine only necessary nodes that have a higher probability
of being selected as a new root node are considered. DFLC avoids the crash of the network when
sensor nodes may not perform their responsibilities due to the energy depletion. When a node receives
a Discovery message during the set-up phase, it stores the id of the sender node and denotes this
node as a closest neighbor node to the sink node, thus if the network crashes, an alternative path can
be used to adapt the system to failures without delays. DFLC is implemented in NS2 simulator to
test and compare its performances in terms of the energy consumption, the number of nodes alive,
the network lifetime, and the amount of received messages within ﬁve networks (100, 200, 300, 400,
and 500 nodes). The proposed algorithm is compared to LEACH, ACAWT [ 38], FCH, and CHEF. The
results of experimentations shown that DFLC outperforms the others algorithms in terms of all the
experimental metrics.
3.1.8. SIF
SIF is a Swarm Intelligence protocol based on FL routing and considers the residual energy [ 39], the
distance to the sink, and the distance from the cluster center to select appropriate CHs. SIF uses a Fuzzy
C-Means (FCM) clustering algorithm to cluster all sensor nodes into balanced clusters, the appropriate
CHs are selected via the Mamdani fuzzy inference system. SIF integrates a hybrid swarm intelligence
called FA-SA. FA-SA is based on the ﬁreﬂy behaviors algorithm (FA) and the powerful local search
algorithm SA, both are used to optimize the fuzzy rule base table of the fuzzy system. Authors have