Sensors 2019 ,19, 322 18 of 27
once nodes are registered to speciﬁc ZHs, ZH prepares a TDMA schedule and transmits this schedule
to its registered nodes in the cluster, BeeSwarm uses a LP in other to optimize the transmission. The
proposed BeeSwarm approach is evaluated and is compared to routing protocols MRP and to the
evolutionary algorithm ERP [ 76] on several performance parameters. The results have shown that
BeeWarm slightly outperforms the other routing protocols in terms of the total number of packet
delivered and the packet delivery ratio. It is also observed that BeeSwarm consumes less energy than
the two other protocols, thus increases the network lifetime.
ABC-SD [24]
ABC- SD is a power efﬁcient cluster-based routing algorithm for WSNs. The proposed approach
is also based on the ABC algorithm for efﬁcient searching features. ABC-SD is a semi-distributed
approach in which the clustering process is achieved at the BS using the residual energy and the
position of nodes and their neighbors. Nevertheless, the data routing is realized by all nodes in a
distributed manner. During the set-up phase, the BS which is responsible for built clusters and selected
their CHs starts by the construction of the set of candidate’s CHs based on position between BS and
the residual energy. After the construction of sets, ABC algorithm is executed in order to assign
nodes to CH and formed clusters. During the steady-phase a multi-hop TDMA based on a B-MAC
which implements a sleep/wake-up mechanism is performed to transmit the gathered data to its
corresponding CH, either in a single-hop or in a multi-hop manner, depending on the density of the
cluster and the location of the CH. When the clustering process is completed, each cluster member
starts a route discovery in order to construct a pre-determined path toward its CH. To evaluate the
performance of ABC-SD, authors have compared the proposed algorithm with LEACH, LEACH-C,
PSO-C, PSO-HC, and ABC-C. The observations of the results have revealed that ABC-SD has the lowest
average energy consumed by nodes and a higher energy efﬁciency than the other algorithms. It is also
observed that ABC-SD minimizes the number of non-clustered nodes, improves the throughput, and
maximizes the data delivery compared to the ﬁve other approaches.
4. Comparison of the Optimized Clustering Approaches
In this section, we present a summary of some optimized clustering algorithms. They are
compared and classiﬁed according to the ML/CI used, the data delivery rate, the energy consumption
which takes in account the network lifetime, the scalability of the algorithms, the type of the approach
which can be centralized or distributed, the integration or not of a data aggregation technique, and the
homogeneity of nodes.
 The data delivery rate concerns the amount of data received by the BS or a receiver node according
to the number of sent data by another node. This metric is very important because it helps to have
an overview of the data loss during transfers and reliability during communication.
 The energy consumption metric here is the most important parameter to take into account to
evaluate a clustering algorithm. The energy consumed by a sensor node across the time is strongly
related to its lifetime that can affect to the lifetime of the whole network. Then a node with a lower
energy consumption would have a longer lifetime than another node consuming more energy.
 Since our study is focused on large scale WSNs, we examine the scalability of the presented
algorithm. The scalability here aims to classify the proposed solutions by the number of nodes
present in the sensor ﬁeld. Algorithms with more than 500 nodes are more interesting for our
study because they manage more efﬁciently the amount of communication between nodes than
other with less than 100 or 200 nodes within the sensor ﬁeld.
 Approaches used to implement clustering algorithm can be either centralized or distributed.
On centralized clustering approaches, important decision making and most of the operations are
done at the BS, which is not usually limited by its resources. On these approaches, the MI/CI
is implemented by the BS, each node has to send their necessary information (its location,