Sensors 2019 ,19, 322 24 of 27
5. Conclusions and Future Work
In this paper, we conducted a wide review of the recent hierarchical approaches based on CI
or ML. To achieve this, we classiﬁed these algorithms in terms of the CI used which can be FL, GA,
NN, RL or SI. In order to evaluate and to compare them, we consider 10 parameters: CI used; the
data delivery rate (depend of the amount of data received by the BS); data aggregation; the energy
consumption that characterize the network lifetime; the scalability of the algorithm when increasing
the number of nodes; the approach of the algorithm which can be centralized or either distributed;
homogeneity or the heterogeneity of the network that considers whether sensors have or not the same
performance; the radio model used by the optimized algorithms which represent the model of energy;
multihop to identify if an optimized solution considers or not multihop communications; multipath
for the fault tolerance of algorithms. The tables of comparison show that optimized clustering based
on SI are more recent and outperforms the other algorithms in terms of scalability, energy consumption
and the amount of data delivered to the BS.
As future works, we plan to classify the optimized clustering in terms of WSN types. We would
talk about clustering parameters used to WSNs which locations are non-terrestrial or not above the
ground but rather under the water or under the ground. In addition to future work, we would discuss
about the spectrum-awareness or spectrum-efﬁcient clustering studies in practical large wireless
sensor networks.
Author Contributions: The presented work in this paper is the collaborative development of all authors. D.W.S.
conducted the review and the evaluation of the algorithms. B.O.Y. and A.F. help at designing and comparing in
terms of clustering and Machine Learning/Computational Intelligence the presented algorithms. P .D. gave a
formal overview and the organization of the paper.
Funding: This research received no external funding. The APC is funded by the University of Bremen in
partnership with the University of Ngaound éré.
Acknowledgments: The authors would like to thank the editor and the anonymous reviewers for their insightful
comments and remarks that lead to improvement of the content and presentation of the paper.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
References
1. Dargie, W.; Poellabauer, C. Fundamentals of Wireless Sensor Networks ; John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.: Chichester, UK,
2010; ISBN 9780470666388.
2. Yenke, B.O.; Wohwe Sambo, D.; Adamo Ado, A.A.; Gueroui, A. MMEDD: Multithreading Model for an
Efﬁcient Data Delivery in wireless sensor networks. Int. J. Commun. Netw. Inf. Secur. 2016 ,8, 179–186.
3. Boukerche, A.; Ahmad, M.Z.; Turgut, B.; Turgut, D. A Taxonomy of Routing Protocols in Sensor Networks.
InAlgorithms and Protocols for Wireless Sensor Networks ; John Wiley & Sons, Inc.: Hoboken, NJ, USA, 2008;
pp. 129–160. ISBN 9780470396360.
4. Sabor, N.; Sasaki, S.; Abo-Zahhad, M.; Ahmed, S.M. A Comprehensive Survey on Hierarchical-Based Routing
Protocols for Mobile Wireless Sensor Networks: Review, Taxonomy, and Future Directions. Wirel. Commun.
Mob. Comput. 2017 ,2017 , 1–23. [CrossRef]
5. Avril, F.; Bernard, T.; Bui, A.; Sohier, D. Clustering and communications scheduling in wsns using mixed
integer linear programming. J. Commun. Netw. 2014 ,16, 421–429. [CrossRef]
6. Ding, G.; Wu, Q.; Song, F.; Wang, J. Decentralized Sensor Selection for Cooperative Spectrum Sensing
Based on Unsupervised Learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Communications,
Ottawa, ON, Canada, 10–15 June 2012.
7. Sirsikar, S.; Wankhede, K. Comparison of clustering algorithms to design new clustering approach. Procedia
Comput. Sci. 2015 ,49, 147–154. [CrossRef]
8. Solaiman, B.; Sheta, A. Computational Intelligence for Wireless Sensor Networks: Applications and
Clustering Algorithms. Int. J. Comput. Appl. 2013 ,73, 1–8. [CrossRef]
9. Kulkarni, R.V .; Förster, A.; Venayagamoorthy, G.K. Computational intelligence in wireless sensor networks:
A survey. IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutor. 2011 ,13, 68–96. [CrossRef]