Sensors 2019 ,19, 322 9 of 27
many NP-hard problems which include the clustering problem on WSN [ 7,8,20]. An example of the
GA model is presented in Figure 4. Some clustering approaches based on GA are presented below.
Sensors 2019 , 19, x FOR PEER REVIEW 9 of 27 
 cluster. Each relay node has to transmit data either  to a simple node or another relay node or the BS. 
The chromosome is represented here by a specific routing protocol as a string of the node numbers 
where the length of each chromosome is equal to the number of relay nodes. The proposed routing 
algorithm is compared to two models of routing: the traditional Multi-Hop Data Transmission Model 
(MHDTM) and the Minimum Transmission Energy Model (MTEM). MHDTM finds the optimal path 
until the BS, whereas in MTEM, each relay node i transmits to its nearest neighbor j if this last is closer 
to the BS than the relay node i. Applied on large scale network the proposed GA approach 
significantly extends the lifetime of the network than the other two models. 
 
Figure 4. Presentation of the Genetic Algorithm model. 
3.2.2. Hussain et al. [44] 
The proposed technique uses a GA to build an initial set of clusters. In the beginning, the 
proposed GA uses all nodes in order to create clus ters; however, during computation only alive nodes 
are used to create clusters so th at the early death of some nodes du e to data transfer is prevented. 
This approach is centralized because the formation of clusters is done by the BS. The chromosome 
presented by Hussain et al. [44] is designed to minimize the energy consumption and increase the 
network lifetime. The parameters used here are the distance to the BS, the cluster distance, the energy 
level, and the data transfer. The algorithm proposed in [44] is compared to LEACH, HCR-1, and HCR-2. The results obtained show that the approach  increases the network lifetime by improving the 
number of alive nodes than the other algorithms. 
3.2.3. LEACH-GA  
LEACH-GA is an improved version of LEACH based on a GA [45]. In addition to the set-up and 
the steady-state of LEACH, LEACH-GA has a prep aration phase where nodes initially perform the 
selection of the CH and determine whether or not ea ch node should be a candidate CH (CCH). During 
the preparation phase, information like node status, IDs, and the location are sent until the BS. LEACH-GA is also a centralized protocol since the BS receives messages sent from all nodes and 
performs GA operations in order to determine the optimal arrangement which shall minimize the 
energy consumption in each round. The proposed  algorithm determines the optimal threshold 
probability for the formation of a cluster. Result s have shown that LEACH-GA improves the network 
lifetime than LEACH by increasing th e number of nodes alive per round. 
3.2.4. GABEEC  
GABEEC is a GA based for energy efficient clusters  in WSN proposed in [46] in order to improve 
the network lifetime. Contrary to LEACH-GA, GABEEC  has only two states: set-up and steady-state. 
In the first phase, all clusters are created statica lly one time, but CHs within a cluster are changing 
dynamically based on the residual energy. GABEEC uses a binary representation of the network 
where each sensor node is a bit in which “1” corresp ond to a CH and “0” to a simple node. An instance 
of the network represents a specific chromosome, the GA evaluates each chromosome and selects the 
b e s t  p r o f ile  s o  t h at  t h e  e n e r g y  is  e ff ic ie n t ly  u s ed then increases the network lifetime. GABEEC is 
Figure 4. Presentation of the Genetic Algorithm model.
3.2.1. Wazed et al. [43]
Authors of [ 43] have proposed a Genetic Algorithm in extending the lifetime of two-tiered sensor
networks. It schedules the data gathering of relay nodes and can signiﬁcantly extend the lifetime
of the relay node. A relay node acts as a CH and receives data from nodes which belong to its own
cluster. Each relay node has to transmit data either to a simple node or another relay node or the BS.
The chromosome is represented here by a speciﬁc routing protocol as a string of the node numbers
where the length of each chromosome is equal to the number of relay nodes. The proposed routing
algorithm is compared to two models of routing: the traditional Multi-Hop Data Transmission Model
(MHDTM) and the Minimum Transmission Energy Model (MTEM). MHDTM ﬁnds the optimal path
until the BS, whereas in MTEM, each relay node itransmits to its nearest neighbor jif this last is closer
to the BS than the relay node i. Applied on large scale network the proposed GA approach signiﬁcantly
extends the lifetime of the network than the other two models.
3.2.2. Hussain et al. [44]
The proposed technique uses a GA to build an initial set of clusters. In the beginning, the proposed
GA uses all nodes in order to create clusters; however, during computation only alive nodes are used
to create clusters so that the early death of some nodes due to data transfer is prevented. This approach
is centralized because the formation of clusters is done by the BS. The chromosome presented by
Hussain et al. [ 44] is designed to minimize the energy consumption and increase the network lifetime.
The parameters used here are the distance to the BS, the cluster distance, the energy level, and the
data transfer. The algorithm proposed in [ 44] is compared to LEACH, HCR-1, and HCR-2. The results
obtained show that the approach increases the network lifetime by improving the number of alive
nodes than the other algorithms.
3.2.3. LEACH-GA
LEACH-GA is an improved version of LEACH based on a GA [ 45]. In addition to the set-up
and the steady-state of LEACH, LEACH-GA has a preparation phase where nodes initially perform
the selection of the CH and determine whether or not each node should be a candidate CH (CCH).
During the preparation phase, information like node status, IDs, and the location are sent until the
BS. LEACH-GA is also a centralized protocol since the BS receives messages sent from all nodes
and performs GA operations in order to determine the optimal arrangement which shall minimize
the energy consumption in each round. The proposed algorithm determines the optimal threshold
probability for the formation of a cluster. Results have shown that LEACH-GA improves the network
lifetime than LEACH by increasing the number of nodes alive per round.