Sensors 2019 ,19, 322 10 of 27
3.2.4. GABEEC
GABEEC is a GA based for energy efﬁcient clusters in WSN proposed in [ 46] in order to improve
the network lifetime. Contrary to LEACH-GA, GABEEC has only two states: set-up and steady-state.
In the ﬁrst phase, all clusters are created statically one time, but CHs within a cluster are changing
dynamically based on the residual energy. GABEEC uses a binary representation of the network where
each sensor node is a bit in which “1” correspond to a CH and “0” to a simple node. An instance
of the network represents a speciﬁc chromosome, the GA evaluates each chromosome and selects
the best proﬁle so that the energy is efﬁciently used then increases the network lifetime. GABEEC is
compared at ﬁrst to LEACH (100 homogenous nodes), afterwards to HCR and the algorithm proposed
in [44] (200 nodes used). The results show that GABEEC has a better percentage of alive nodes in
both simulations.
3.3. Neural Network
Neural Networks (NNs) are mathematical models inspired from biological networks of neurons.
Similar to a large and dense network, each neuron is connected to many other neurons. A NN consists
of a network of neurons organized in input, hidden, and output layers where the NN learns the
different paths and determine their interrelationships [ 20,47]. Figure 5 below presents a simple model
of NN. The NNs are used for solving the problems of sensor fusion, data mining, and clustering.
Some NNs solutions for clustering are presented below.
Sensors 2019 , 19, x FOR PEER REVIEW 10 of 27 
 compared at first to LEACH (100 homogenous nodes), afterwards to HCR and the algorithm 
proposed in [44] (200 nodes used). The results show that GABEEC has a better percentage of alive 
nodes in both simulations. 
3.3. Neural Network 
Neural Networks (NNs) are mathematical models in spired from biological networks of neurons. 
Similar to a large and dense network, each neuron is  connected to many other neurons. A NN consists 
of a network of neurons organized in input, hidde n, and output layers where the NN learns the 
different paths and determine their interrelationships  [20,47]. Figure 5 below presents a simple model 
of NN. The NNs are used for solving the problems of sensor fusion, data mining, and clustering. 
Some NNs solutions for clustering are presented below. 
 
Figure 5. A simple Neural Network model. 
3.3.1. Cordina & Debono [48] 
The algorithm proposed in [48] presents a novel a pproach of clustering ba sed on Self Organizing 
Map (SOM) neural networks. It aims to optimize the network by cutting it efficiently into clusters so 
that the energy consumption is minimized and the power needed by each node is reduced. It 
performs mechanisms which include a minimum se paration distance from the CH. A SOM strategy 
is used for CH election, a system of CH rotation an d a load balancing of helps by cost functions. Each 
round starts with a set-up phase in which the cluste rs are organized. During the transmission phase, 
data from nodes are transferred or not to the CH depending on scenarios. Data received from nodes 
of a cluster by the CH are aggregated and relayed to  the BS. The election of the CHs is carried out by 
SOM using a 4-input, 16-output neuron mapping, bu t nodes and CHs which have a residual energy 
less than critical energy, send a “ Node dead ”/”CH dead ” message directly to the BS. The results of 
comparison have shown that the st rategy presented in [48] increase s the network lifetime (FND and 
HND is better) than the traditional LEACH. The pr esented protocol also has an amount of data 
delivered which is better than on LEACH. 
3.3.2. Kumar et al. [49] 
The algorithm presented in [49] is a NN based for energy efficient clustering and routing, which 
aims to optimize the network lifetime. It uses an  LP formulation where the objective is to choose a 
number of nodes with higher leve ls of residual energy to form an  optimal route, while minimizing 
the total routing cost. The CH election is conducted by using adaptive learning in NN joined by 
routing and data transmission. Contrary to [48], th e proposed strategy is defined in three phases: set-
up, routing, and data transmission phase. The set-up phase allows the election of CHs taken into the set of CHs nodes based on a cost metric. During  the routing and data transmission phase, the 
proposed protocol scans all routes (store in R) an d finds the best route to reach the BS. A source will 
then select the route that is the most energy effici ent so that it maximizes the network lifetime. The 
Figure 5. A simple Neural Network model.
3.3.1. Cordina & Debono [48]
The algorithm proposed in [ 48] presents a novel approach of clustering based on Self Organizing
Map (SOM) neural networks. It aims to optimize the network by cutting it efﬁciently into clusters so
that the energy consumption is minimized and the power needed by each node is reduced. It performs
mechanisms which include a minimum separation distance from the CH. A SOM strategy is used for
CH election, a system of CH rotation and a load balancing of helps by cost functions. Each round starts
with a set-up phase in which the clusters are organized. During the transmission phase, data from
nodes are transferred or not to the CH depending on scenarios. Data received from nodes of a cluster
by the CH are aggregated and relayed to the BS. The election of the CHs is carried out by SOM using a
4-input, 16-output neuron mapping, but nodes and CHs which have a residual energy less than critical
energy, send a “ Node dead ”/”CH dead ” message directly to the BS. The results of comparison have
shown that the strategy presented in [ 48] increases the network lifetime (FND and HND is better) than
the traditional LEACH. The presented protocol also has an amount of data delivered which is better
than on LEACH.