Sensors 2019 ,19, 322 6 of 27
3.1.1. FCH
The Cluster-head Election using Fuzzy Logic (FCH) is presented in [ 31]. It integrates a FL
approach for the election of the CH based on the energy, node concentration, and centrality during
computation. CH is elected by the BS in each round by deﬁning the chance each node has to become
the CH, helped by the fuzzy descriptors (energy, concentration, and centrality). The model of FL
consists in four steps: fuzziﬁcation for the input descriptors, rule evaluation, aggregation of rules, and
the defuzziﬁcation. LCH is compared to the famous LEACH protocol, it ameliorates the FND better
than in LEACH and then increases the network lifetime in relation to LEACH.
3.1.2. CHEF
Kim et al. [ 32] proposed the Cluster Head Election mechanism based on the Fuzzy logic (CHEF).
Contrary to LEACH, CHEF uses the distance to the BS and the remaining energy of node for the CH
selection. At each round, a node generates a random value between 0 and 1, and thereafter compares
the obtained value with a threshold, Popt. If the random value is smaller than Popt, the chance value is
calculated by using fuzzy IF-THEN rules. Thus, the node sends a message called Candidate_Message
with the calculated chance. The Candidate_Message sent by the node means that it is a candidate
for being a CH with the value of its chance. The node which sent a Candidate Message, waits for
Candidate Messages and appropriate chance values from its neighbors. If its own chance is bigger than
every chance from other nodes, the sensor node notiﬁes the network with a CH-Message which means
that the sensor node itself is elected as the CH. If a node which is not a CH receives the CH-message,
the node selects the closest CH as its CH and joins a cluster by sending a Cluster Join Message to the
CH. For the evaluation of CHEF, the authors consider 400 nodes randomly distributed in the area and
the BS is not located within the experimental ﬁeld. The comparison between LEACH and CHEF has
shown that the cluster formation on CHEF was more efﬁcient than on LEACH. Thus, CHs are not as
closed with the proposed algorithm as with LEACH; there are too many nodes within a cluster that
may rapidly decrease the energy of the CH. The results of experimentations have also shown that
the lifetime of the network on CHEF is 22.7%, which is better than the lifetime of the network with
LEACH according to the FND.
3.1.3. LEACH-FL
LEACH-FL is an improved version of LEACH using FL [ 33]. It has a similar mechanism with
LCH but the variables (parameters) used are battery level, distance from sink, and the node density.
Election of CH is centralized on the sink, which has to calculate the chance of nodes becoming
the CH like in LCH. LEACH-FL has three main parts: fuzziﬁcation module (four functions), an
inference engine, and a defuzziﬁcation module. The authors of [ 33] compare LEACH-FL and LEACH,
the experimentations have shown that the proposed algorithm has a lower energy consumption rate
than LEACH. The network lifetime of the network using LEACH-FL outperforms the network lifetime
when using LEACH.
3.1.4. ICT2TSK
ICT2TSK is an improved clustering algorithm which uses a type-2 Takagi-Sugeno-Kang (TSK)
as FL system [ 34]. ICT2TSK is used to elect the CH and to choose the one which can deal with the
rule uncertainties better than a type-1 TSK FL system. It balances the network load by introducing a
ﬁxed competition radius for each CH so that energy is improved efﬁciency. When the network starts
to work, all nodes use the LEACH protocol to send information about their location and their residual
energy. ICT2TSK is centralized and uses the BS to select CHs. The FL system ICT2TSK is used to
calculate the probability for each node to become a CH according to its residual energy, distance to the
BS, and number of neighbor nodes.