Sensors 2019 ,19, 322 16 of 27
ACA-LEACH
The ACA-LEACH algorithm proposed in [ 66] is an improved version of LEACH which
performs the Ant Colony Algorithm (ACA) into inter-cluster routing mechanism to reduce the energy
consumption of CHs and ﬁnally prolong the lifetime of networks. ACA-LEACH also considers the
node residual energy and the distance between the nodes and CHs for the selection of CHs. When the
distance between two CHs is less than the threshold distance, ACA-LEACH compares the energy
value between the two, and then chooses the CH with more energy as the new CH but with less as the
member node. Due to the random choice of CHs, the phenomenon of relative concentration of CHs
may exist. kants are placed on each CH and set a matrix which is used to store and record the generated
path, ACA selects the optimal path between each CH and the sink helps by the value of pheromones.
Afterwards, the kants in each CH are transferred to the next accessible CH with a possibility pof each
adjacent CHs being selected as the next hop of adjacent clusters. The kants in each CH should select
the shortest path with the lowest energy consumption. In order to evaluate ACA-LEACH, the authors
have used 200 nodes randomly deployed in a squared sensor ﬁeld. ACA-LEACH is compared to
traditional LEACH and results have shown that the proposed algorithm has a lower average energy
consumption than LEACH and its number of alive nodes is better than in the other algorithm.
MRP
MRP is a Multipath Routing Protocol for clustering based on Ant Colony Optimization for
WSNs [ 67]. MRP adopts a dynamic clustering algorithm and is divided into three main phases: cluster
formation, multipath construction, and data transmission. During the cluster formation, only a node
with higher residual energy, more neighbors and stronger RSSI (more than a threshold) has more
opportunity of becoming a CH. An improved version of ACO algorithm is used in order to establish
multiple paths with minimal energy cost. Three types of ants are used in MRP: search ants (SANTs )
which have to ﬁnd paths and gather information along these paths until the sink; backward ants (BANTs )
which are used to evaluate the cost of each path discovered by the SANTs ; and the abnormal ants
(AANTs ), which are used to avoid the failure of the protocol. When the residual energy of the current
CH is 50% lower than the average energy of all nodes in the cluster, a new CH will be elected. The CH
will initiate a new route discovery process when the number of multiple paths is less than two, which
means the reliability of path decreased signiﬁcantly. The evaluation of MRP is conducted by the used
of comparisons metrics like average energy, energy consumption, the deviation of energy and the
network lifetime on a network with a population varying from 100 to 500 nodes. Based on these
parameters, MRP is compared to the clustering algorithm TEEN and the multipath algorithms MP [ 68]
and MACS [ 69]. The results have shown that MRP has the best average energy and the lowest energy
consumption. The standard deviation of energy in MRP is slightly lower than in TEEN and results
have also revealed that the proposed ACO-based improves the network lifetime signiﬁcantly more
than the other three protocols.
3.5.3. Bee Colony Optimization
The Bee Colony Optimization (BCO) protocols are inspired from honeybees foraging behaviors.
Insects are capable of individual proactive abilities and self-organizing capacity [ 13]. Honeybees can be
grouped into a colony and living within a hive, and show impressive auto-solving problem capabilities.
Scout bees explore the surrounding of the hive in order to detect possible sources of food, when a
ﬂower (food) is discovered, the scout bee returns back to the hive to recruit the forager bees through
a special dance called waggle dance [ 70]. The BCO are widely used to solve the clustering NP hard
problems efﬁciently.