Sensors 2019 ,19, 322 3 of 27
2. Routing on Wireless Sensor Networks
The main goal of routing in WSN is to carry out data communication when trying at the same time
to prolong the network lifetime and provide high quality of service during data delivery [ 12]. Based on
the network structure, routing on WSN can be classiﬁed as data centric based routing, location based
routing, group-based routing, or as hierarchical based routing.
2.1. Data Centric Based
In several sensor networks, it is not obvious to assign an identiﬁer to each node because of
the large number of nodes deployed. Besides the problem of identiﬁcation of nodes, the random
deployment of nodes makes it difﬁcult to select a speciﬁc node during the routing of data through
the network. Nevertheless, since data are usually transmitted from each node within the deployment
region, the redundancy of these data can be signiﬁcant then waste a lot of energy.
The resolution of redundant data during routing has led to the data centric approach, which is
different from the traditional address-based routing where routes are created between addressable
nodes [ 12–14]. In data centric based routing, before data have to be sent by nodes in a selected region,
the sink node should send queries to a selected region and wait for the incoming data [ 12]. The ﬁrst
and the most popular data centric protocol is the Sensor Protocols for Information via Negotiation
(SPIN), in which negotiation between nodes is considered in order to eliminate redundant data and
reduce the energy consumption. There are several kinds of data centric based routing like Directed
Diffusion [15], Energy-aware routing, Rumor routing, or Gradient-Based Routing [13,15].
2.2. Location Based Routing
The position of sensor node is required in applications like military tracking, ecology monitoring,
or health care. Contrary to data centric based routing where the position of a node can be unknown,
the location-based protocols are very interesting since they can signiﬁcantly decrease the complexity of
ﬁnding best routes through the network. The distance between two neighbor nodes can be therefore
estimated by the Received Signal Strength (RSS) [ 12]. When the study area is well known in advance,
using the location of sensors will eliminate the number of transmissions signiﬁcantly because the
queries would be assigned only to a particular region at a particular time [ 12]. However, information
about a position can be done through the use of a GPS (Global Positioning System) module on the sensor.
Since the one goal when designing a sensor network is low cost and energy management, the use of
GPS by sensors on a large scale network is quite expensive and energy consuming [ 16]. An example
of location-based protocol is the Minimum Energy Communication Network (MECN), it reduces
the energy consumption into the network by using a low power GPS module on each sensor node.
Meanwhile, it is best applicable to sensor networks, which are not mobile [ 12]. Another well-known
location-based algorithm is the Geographic Adaptive Fidelity (GAF) designed initially for mobile ad
hoc networks. Presentations of location-based protocols are conducted in [3,17].
2.3. Group Based Routing
Having the location of each node within a ﬁeld is not easy when the amount of sensors increases
considerably. A more easy approach consists of deploying sensor nodes in groups. In this kind of
routing, nodes in the same group are most of the time closed to each other [ 18,19]. In group-based
routing solutions, each group is able to perform its own application independently. Take, for example,
the measurement of the environmental impact of an area made up of a small forest, a sandy place, and
a marine reef. In this example, three groups can be deployed according to the measurements of each
application (forest, sand, underwater). However, the deployment of group-based protocol within the
study ﬁeld needs to be meticulous. As explained by Donggang et al. [ 19], in a group-based solution,
each sensor node is assigned to its group before the deployment. There are several algorithms based
on group routing. Lloret et al. [ 18] proposed the Group-Based Protocol for Large Wireless Ad Hoc and