Sensors 2019 ,19, 322 4 of 27
Sensor Networks called GBP-WAHSN. Another group-based algorithm is called Group based Mobile
Agent Routing (GMAR) [20], which uses a mobile agent in order to aggregate data in each group.
2.4. Hierarchical Based Routing
Clustering is an efﬁcient topology control approach for maximizing the lifetime and scalability of
WSNs. The hierarchical based routing is a part of the group-based routing and consists of creating
a virtual hierarchy among the nodes of the sensor network [ 21]. This class of routing techniques is
generally designed for large scale networks and aims to efﬁciently maintain the energy consumption
of sensor nodes and increase the network lifetime by cutting the whole network into clusters [ 14].
Each cluster is led by a node called Cluster Head (CH) which receives data from nodes within the
cluster. CHs communicate each other in order to ﬁnd a better route up to the sink node or the BS.
This is done in order to reduce the energy consumption of sensor nodes by reducing the number
of transmitted/received messages to the sink node. In addition to CH election, a second special
node called Vice Cluster Head (VCH) can be elected in order to improve the lifetime of the CH as
shown in [ 22]. Mechanisms like multihop communication, data aggregation, and data fusion are
performed so that the energy is efﬁciently used within the cluster [ 12,13]. The most popular clustering
algorithm is the Low-Energy Adaptive Clustering Hierarchy (LEACH), it uses probability computing
and the received signal strengths to locally select the CHs which have to serve as router of the data
up to the BS. In LEACH, local data fusion and aggregation are performed by local CH [ 3]. For a
large scale network, LEACH is able to increase the network lifetime [ 21]. However, due to its single
hop conﬁguration, the CH on LEACH is assumed to have a long communication range. Thus, the
data sent by the CH has to reach the BS directly. Another approach subdivides the problem into
two layers: an organization layer to manage communications and a distribution layer made up of
cluster members [ 23].Many hierarchical based routing algorithms are proposed in the literature,
such as the PEGASIS, TEEN, EEHC, PEACH, or HEED. Authors of [ 4,6,16,18,19] present several
classical hierarchical algorithms and show how the scalability, the energy efﬁciency, network lifetime,
data delivery, and the fault tolerance are greatly improved on large scale sensor network.
Except for the network structure, protocols in WSN ﬁeld can also be classiﬁed according to the
path establishment (proactive, reactive, hybrid); the protocol operations (multipath-based, query-based,
negotiation-based, delivery-based, QoS-based, coherent-based); the next hop selection (broadcast,
location, comment, probabilistic). Figure 1 gives a global overview of this classiﬁcation. More details
about each category can be found in [4,24–27].
Sensors 2019 , 19, x FOR PEER REVIEW 4 of 27 
 algorithm is called Group based Mobile Agent Routing (GMAR) [20], which uses a mobile agent in 
order to aggregate data in each group. 
2.4. Hierarchical Based Routing 
Clustering is an efficient topology control appr oach for maximizing the lifetime and scalability 
of WSNs. The hierarchical based routing is a part of the group-based routing and consists of creating a virtual hierarchy among the nodes of the sensor network [21]. This class of routing techniques is generally designed for large scale networks and aims  to efficiently maintain the energy consumption 
of sensor nodes and increase the network lifetime by cutting the whole network into clusters [14]. 
Each cluster is led by a node called Cluster Head (CH) which receives data from nodes within the cluster. CHs communicate each other in order to fi nd a better route up to the sink node or the BS. 
This is done in order to reduce the energy consumption of sensor nodes by reducing the number of 
transmitted/received messages to the sink node. In  addition to CH election, a second special node 
called Vice Cluster Head (VCH) ca n be elected in order to improve the lifetime of the CH as shown 
in [22]. Mechanisms like multihop communication, data aggregation, and data fusion are performed so that the energy is efficiently used within the cl uster [12,13]. The most popular clustering algorithm 
is the Low-Energy Adaptive Clustering Hierarchy (LEACH), it uses probability computing and the received signal strengths to locally select the CHs wh ich have to serve as router of the data up to the 
BS. In LEACH, local data fusion and aggregation are performed by local CH [3]. For a large scale 
network, LEACH is able to increase the network lifetime [21]. However, due to its single hop configuration, the CH on LEACH is assumed to ha ve a long communication range. Thus, the data 
sent by the CH has to reach the BS directly. Anothe r approach subdivides the problem into two layers: 
an organization layer to manage  communications and a distributi on layer made up of cluster 
members [23]. Many hierarchical based routing algori thms are proposed in the literature, such as the 
PEGASIS, TEEN, EEHC, PEACH, or HEED. Authors of [4,6,16,18,19] present several classical 
hierarchical algorithms and show how the scalabilit y, the energy efficiency, network lifetime, data 
delivery, and the fault tolerance are greatly improved on large scale sensor network. 
Except for the network structure, protocols in WS N field can also be classified according to the 
path establishment (proactive, reactive, hybrid); the protocol operations (multipath-based, query-
based, negotiation-based, delive ry-based, QoS-based, coherent-b ased); the next hop selection 
(broadcast, location, comment, probabilistic). Figure 1 gives a global overview of this classification. 
More details about each category can be found in [4,24–27]. 
 
Figure 1. Classification of routing protocol in a Wireless Sensor Network (WSN).  
Figure 1. Classiﬁcation of routing protocol in a Wireless Sensor Network (WSN).