Sensors 2019 ,19, 322 11 of 27
3.3.2. Kumar et al. [49]
The algorithm presented in [ 49] is a NN based for energy efﬁcient clustering and routing,
which aims to optimize the network lifetime. It uses an LP formulation where the objective is to
choose a number of nodes with higher levels of residual energy to form an optimal route, while
minimizing the total routing cost. The CH election is conducted by using adaptive learning in NN
joined by routing and data transmission. Contrary to [ 48], the proposed strategy is deﬁned in three
phases: set-up, routing, and data transmission phase. The set-up phase allows the election of CHs
taken into the set of CHs nodes based on a cost metric. During the routing and data transmission
phase, the proposed protocol scans all routes (store in R) and ﬁnds the best route to reach the BS. A
source will then select the route that is the most energy efﬁcient so that it maximizes the network
lifetime. The Strategy proposed in [ 49] is compared to PEACH and results show that the proposed
algorithm performs better by increasing the percentage of alive nodes.
3.4. Reinforcement Learning
The Reinforcement Learning (RL) is a sub-domain of ML which teaches an agent on what to do
and how to assign situations to particular actions so as to be intelligent [ 10]. The agent would try
several actions, and learns from its experience the best action it has to choose in order to optimize the
network performance [ 8–10,20]. Most of the RL based protocols are used in some clustering algorithms
in WSN ﬁnding optimal paths and prolonging network lifetime [11].
3.4.1. CLIQUE
CLIQUE is a role free clustering which use a RL algorithm called Q-Learning [ 50]. On the proposed
algorithm, nodes should know the identity of the cluster to which they belong. Contrary to traditional
clustering approaches, CLIQUE does not have a conventional phase to select CHs by nodes within
a cluster, but rather uses a Q-Learning strategy. The RL used on CLIQUE allows nodes to learn and
independently decide whether or not to act as a CH. CH would be the cluster node which has the best
routing cost to all sinks. CLIQUE assigns Q-values to each possible action; the learning process allows
the agent (node) to select and execute an action (routing) and receives afterwards the corresponding
reward used to update the Q-value. CLIQUE is compared to the Traditional Random Cluster head
Assignment (TRC) which uses an a-priori probability at each node to decide whether or not to become
a CH. The results obtained after simulations have shown that CLIQUE has a better performance than
TRC in terms of energy consumption (FND), data delivery, and communication overhead.
3.4.2. Ramli et al. [51]
Authors of [ 51] propose a cooperative algorithm based on RL for energy efﬁcient dual hop
clustered networks. The major contribution of the proposed strategy is to allow cluster members
to exchange channel historical information in order to facilitate learning. It allows each cluster to
adapt the number of required preferred channel size depending on the local area density and trafﬁc.
The proposed cooperative RL assumes two phases: the exploration and exploitation phases. During
the exploration phase, for each successful transfer by a cluster member, its CH updates the weight on a
channel. Meanwhile, during the exploitation stage, a cluster member used a channel when it had a
weight of more than the threshold value.
3.5. Swarm Intelligence
The Swarm Intelligence (SI) is deﬁned in [ 52] as “any attempt to design algorithms or distributed
problem-solving devices inspired by the collective behavior of social insects and other animal societies”.
Most of the proposed are based on the social behaviors of ﬂocks of birds, schools of ﬁshes, and insect
cooperation like ants, bees, butterﬂies, etc. which have limited resources like sensor nodes used in WSN.
SI approaches can be classify into Particle Swarm, Ant Colony, and Bee Colony Optimizations [ 8,11,43].