Sensors 2019 ,19, 322 15 of 27
T-ANT
T-ANT is a clustered data dissemination strategy based on the ant swarm behavior [ 63].
It promotes a uniform distribution of CHs, which subsequently enables substantial energy savings.
The cluster formation is achieved by exploiting two swarm behaviors: foraging and brood sorting.
During the cluster setup (CS) phase, a node checks to see whether or not it possesses an ant when
the timer expires. If the node has an ant, it becomes CH and advertises its neighbors by broadcasting
a message with its node ID. During the set-up phase, the election of CHs uses a swarm of ants in
which an ant corresponds to a control message. The ant could travel into the network up to the
sink as deep as restricted by its time-to-live (TTL) ﬁeld. When an ant arrives at a node, the next
node is randomly chosen. In order to evaluate the performance of T-ANT, comparison with The
Time-Controlled Clustering Algorithm (TCCA) and a multihop version of LEACH called m-LEACH is
achieved. The obtained results have shown that the average energy consumed per round in T-ANT is
slightly better the other two protocols. However, concerning the number of alive nodes, T-ANT highly
achieves the best number of alive nodes.
EBAB
The Energy Balanced Ant-Based Routing Protocol (EBAB) [ 64] is a new adaptive dynamic routing
algorithm based on simple biological ants that explore the network and ﬁnd routes. EBAB produces
clusters of unequal sizes to balance energy consumption. Clusters closer to the BS have smaller cluster
sizes in order to maximize the lifetime of the network. According to the signal sent by the BS, all the
nodes calculate their distance from the BS based on the RSSI, and then nodes decide to compete if
necessary to be the unique CH when they are in the same area. In order to form clusters, each CH
sends message in a range to tell the other nodes. The nodes send “ACK” message to join the cluster.
However, if the node receives more than one message, it will choose the optimal CH according the
distance and the energy. The inter-cluster communications are performed by an ameliorated version of
ACO in which CH generates initially a Forward Ants (FA). If the FA is not on the BS, it continues to
the next step, nevertheless, if it is on the BS, it then activates the backward ants which will increase the
pheromone value. The proposed algorithm EBAB is compared to the traditional clustering LEACH
in terms of the network lifetime and the amount of data received by the BS. Results have shown that
the lifetime of EBAB (number of alive nodes) is longer than the network of LEACH because of the
balanced model of the proposed algorithm. Results have also revealed that the amount of data received
by EBAB is 1.7 times higher than LEACH.
ACO-C
The authors of [ 65] proposed an energy aware protocol called Ant Colony Optimization for
Clustering (ACO-C). ACO algorithms have been used for clustering problems in which N objects
are assigned to K clusters based on the distance between each object and the middle of the cluster.
ACO-C is centralized, BS selects only nodes with the residual energy above the average energy of the
network as possible CHs and uses the ACO algorithm to ﬁnd the best solution according to a cost
function. After ﬁnding the best route, the BS informs each node about its CHs and cluster it belongs to.
Each CH has to coordinate the transmission of data in their corresponding clusters by using a simple
TDMA schedule. At the end of each round, the CH aggregates data it received from its members, and
sends the aggregated data to the BS. The algorithm ACO-C is evaluated in two network scenarios;
each one contains 100 nodes with unequal initial energy. On the ﬁrst scenario the BS is located in the
middle of the network whereas on the second scenario it is located outside the sensor ﬁeld. ACO-C is
compared with LEACH, LEACH-C, and PSO-C in both scenarios. The obtained results have shown
that ACO-C performs the best number of alive nodes through the time, and thus increases the network
lifetime better than the three other algorithms. The issues also reveal that ACO-C outperforms LEACH,
LEACH-C, and PSO-C in terms of the number of data received by the BS.