Sensors 2019 ,19, 322 8 of 27
shown that SIF is energy efﬁcient in terms of forming balanced clusters, minimizing the intra-cluster
distances, prolonging the network lifetime, and maximizing the total number of data packets received
in the sink. The comparison of SIF against protocols LEACH, LEACH-DT, ASLPR, and LEACH-FL
shows that the proposed protocol signiﬁcantly increases the network lifetime (by increasing the ﬁrst
node dies FND, the half node die HND, and last node dies LND). The results obtained also show that
the amount of data received by the sink node on SIF is better than the others protocols according to the
FND, the HND, and the LND.
3.1.9. FBUC
FBUC or Fuzzy Based Unequal Clustering is an improved version of EAUCF [ 40]. Additionally,
to EAUCF, FBUC uses a probabilistic threshold value instead of a predeﬁned threshold value and
adds a fuzzy variable called node degree used for the election of the CH during competition of radius.
The members join the CH based on distance and the CH degree in order to efﬁciently use the energy
and then increase the network lifetime. FBUC is compared with protocols LEACH and EAUC in
two scenarios, WSN#1 (sink node inside the sensor ﬁeld) and WSN#2. FBUC shows a better energy
consumption and a better network lifetime than the other two algorithms according to the FND and
the LND on the different scenarios.
3.1.10. EEDCF
The authors of [ 41] propose an energy-efﬁcient distributed clustering algorithm based on fuzzy
called EEDCF. The proposed approach deﬁnes four (04) different states for each node: the initial state,
the competing CH state, the elected CH state, and the member node state. During the ﬁrst phase,
each node has to build its own information table which contains the node ID, its residual energy,
the neighbors’ ID, and their corresponding remaining energy. After each round, the node updates
its information helped by the packet Node_MSG, which classiﬁes the proximity of neighbors from
itself. At the second phase, the node performs the fuzzy logic analysis based on its residual energy,
the number of neighbor’s nodes within its communication radius (node degree) and the average
residual energy of its neighbors. At the end of this step, each node turns into compete CH state and
sends its output to all neighbor nodes within its communication radius. Where the output is obtained
through IF-THEN rules in accordance with the mechanism of the TSK fuzzy model, the node with
the lesser output turns into the member node state, and waits for joining a suitable cluster after CH
election. However, the node with higher output turns into the elected CH state as well. Based on the
RSSI, nodes join appropriate CH and thereafter build clusters. In order to evaluate EEDCF, authors
have considered two scenarios with the same area size and the same location of the BS. The ﬁrst
scenario deploys 100 nodes whereas the second scenario uses 150 nodes within the study ﬁeld. The
experimentations shown that EEDCF outperforms the distributed algorithm for the energy-efﬁcient
data gathering protocol based on cluster structure called EADEEG [ 42] and DFLC. The lifetime of the
network on EEDCF is better than on EADEEFG and on DFLC and has the best value of FND, HND,
and LND in both scenarios. The results have also shown that the proposed approach had a better data
delivery rate than EADEEG and DFLC.
3.2. Genetic Algorithm
The Genetic Algorithm (GA) is an adaptive heuristic approach based on biological genetic
evolution for intelligent search and optimization. GA models the natural evolution by performing
ﬁtness tests on new structures to choose the best population [ 9]. With GA approaches, a population
is made up of a group of chromosomes where a chromosome represents a complete solution to a
relevant problem, and ﬁtness shows the quality of a chromosome in function of concrete needs [ 28].
This kind of optimized algorithm is used for randomized search and optimization during routing of
data. GA showed ﬂexibility in solving dynamic problems and has been successfully applied within