Sensors 2019 ,19, 322 12 of 27
3.5.1. Particle Swarm Intelligence
The Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) is an evolutionary computation technique and is related
to the bird ﬂocking, ﬁshing schooling, and swarm theory. Like the other evolutionary computation
techniques, PSO is a population-based search algorithm and is initialized with a population of random
solutions, called particles. A particle will have a ﬁtness value, which will be evaluated by a ﬁtness
function to be optimized in each generation [ 53,54]. In order to increase the performances of WSNs,
clustering strategies using PSO are proposed nowadays.
PSO-C
An energy-aware clustering approach for WSN using PSO is proposed in [ 55]. The authors
presented a distance based and centralized approach which takes into account the maximum distance
between the non-cluster head node and its CH, and the remaining energy of CH candidates in the
CH selection. In the beginning, during the setup phase, all nodes send information about their
residual energy and positions to the BS. To ensure that only nodes with a sufﬁcient energy are selected
as CHs, the nodes with an energy more than the average are eligible to be a CCH for each round.
The PSO algorithms are executed at the BS to determine the best k-CHs which can minimize the cost
during routing. PSO-C is compared to the traditional clustering LEACH and its amelioration version
LEACH-C on two different scenarios. In the ﬁrst scenario, the BS is located within the sensor ﬁeld,
whereas in the second scenario the BS is located outside the sensor ﬁeld. The results after simulations
have shown that PSO-C improves the amount of data delivered to the BS to 101%, 25% better than
LEACH and LEACH-C, respectively, for the ﬁrst scenario and 60%, 50% for the second scenario. PSO-C
also increases the network lifetime by improving the number of alive nodes in both scenario.
Kuila & Jana [56]
Authors propose an energy efﬁcient clustering and routing algorithms for WSN based on the
PSO paradigm. The routing algorithm is developed on an efﬁcient particle encoding scheme with a
trade-off between transmission distance and multi-objective ﬁtness function. Meanwhile, the clustering
algorithm is presented by considering energy conservation of the nodes through the load balancing
strategy. At the beginning (network setup), the protocol performs three phases: bootstrapping (each
gateway and node are assigned unique IDs); route setup; and the clustering phase. The gateways can
collect the IDs of the sensor nodes and the other gateways that are within their communication range
and ﬁnally send the information to the BS. All the CHs which are heavily used as next hop relay nodes
in data forwarding are assigned a lesser number of sensor nodes. Thus the energy consumption of the
CHs is signiﬁcantly balanced and the lifetime of the network is improved. The algorithms are based
on the derivation of efﬁcient particle encoding scheme and ﬁtness function for routing and clustering
separately. The algorithm is evaluated using two network scenarios WSN#1 (BS is located outside the
sensor ﬁeld) and WSN#2 (BS is located in the center of the sensor ﬁeld). The proposed algorithm is
compared to GA-based approach and the two clustering strategies GLBCA and LDC. Results show
that the proposed PSO-based approach increase signiﬁcantly the network lifetime (First Gateway Die
FGD and Last Gateway Die LGD) on both scenarios than the other three algorithms. Results have also
shown that the PSO-based approach increases the data delivered to the BS and reduces the number of
hops until the BS than the other strategies.
PSO-HC
The PSO-HC is a hierarchical clustering based on the PSO paradigm [ 57] to maximize the network
lifetime by minimizing the number of active CHs and to maximize the network scalability by using
two-hop communication between the sensor nodes and their respective CHs. PSO-HC has also two
phases per round: the set-up and the steady phases. During the set-up phase, each node updates its
neighbor table with the RSSI value and sends it to add to ID and residual energy until the BS using the