F. M. Shiri et al.    
21 
 Positional encodings in transformer architecture were achieved by using sine and cosine 
functions of various frequencies:  
{𝑃𝐸(𝑝𝑜𝑠,2𝑖) = 𝑠𝑖𝑛(𝑝𝑜𝑠/100002𝑖/𝑑𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙)               
𝑃𝐸(𝑝𝑜𝑠,2𝑖+1) = 𝑐𝑜𝑠(𝑝𝑜𝑠/100002𝑖/𝑑𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙)                                                                                       (20) 
where 𝑝𝑜𝑠 is the position and 𝑖 is the dimension. Every dimension of the positional encoding 
has a sinusoidal relationship. The wavelengths range from 2𝜋 𝑡𝑜 10000·2𝜋 in a geometric 
development. This function was selected because it would make it simple for the model to learn 
how to attend to relative positions, since for any fixed offset 𝑘, 𝑃𝐸𝑝𝑜𝑠+𝑘 can be expressed as a 
linear function of 𝑃𝐸𝑝𝑜𝑠. 
5.1 Transformer  Variants  
The Transformer architecture has proven to be highly versatile, with numerous variants 
developed to address specific challenges across different domains. Typically, Transformers are pre -
trained on large datasets using unsupervised methods to learn general representations, which are 
then fine -tuned on specific tasks using supervised learning. This hybrid approach leverages the 
strengths of both learning paradigms. Some notable Transformer variants include:  
➢ Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers (BERT ) [153]: A multi -layer 
bidirectional Transformer encoder for unsupervised pre -training in natural language 
understanding (NLU) tasks.  
➢ Generative pre -training Transformer (GPT)  [154, 155]: A type of Transformer model 
developed by OpenAI that excels in natural language processing (NLP) tasks through 
unsupervised pre -training followed by supervised fine -tuning . 
➢ Transformer -XL [156]: It is proposed for language modeling to permit learning reliance 
beyond a set length without compromising temporal coherence. Transformer -XL 
(Transformer -Extra Long) comprises a unique relative  positional encoding method and a 
segment -level recurrence mechanism. This approach not only makes it possible to record 
longer -term dependencies, but also fixes the issue of context fragmentation.  
➢ XLNet [157]: It is a generalized autoregressive (AR) pretraining technique that combines the 
benefits of autoencoding (AE) and autoregressive (AR) techniques with a permutation 
language modeling aim. XLNet's neural architecture, which integrates Transformer -XL and the  
two-stream attention mechanism, is built to function effortlessly with the autoregressive (AR) 
objective.       
➢ Fast Transformer  [158]: It introduces multi -query attention as an alternative to multi -head 
attention. This approach reduces memory bandwidth requirements, leading to increased 
processing speed.  
➢ Multimodal Transformer (MulT)  [159]: It is designed for analyzing human multimodal 
language. At the heart of MulT is the crossmodal attention mechanism, which provides a latent 
crossmodal adaptation that fuses multimodal information by directly attending to low -level 
features in other modalities . 
➢ Vision Transformer (ViT)  [160]: An innovative approach based on Transformer structure for 
visual tasks like image classification.  
➢ Pyramid Vision Transformer  (PVT)  [161]: An Transformer framework for complex 
prediction tasks like semantic segmentation and object recognition . 
➢ Swin Transformer  [162]: A hierarchical transformer that uses shifted windows to construct 
its representation.  A wide variety of vision tasks, including semantic segmentation, object 
detection, and image classification, may be performed with Swin Transformer.  
➢ Tokens -to-Token  Vision Transformer (T2T -ViT)  [163]: A vision transformer that can be