Review Article  
A Comprehensive Overview and Comparative Analysis on 
Deep Learning Models  
Farhad Mortezapour Shiria, Thinagaran Perumala, Norwati Mustaphaa, and 
Raihani Mohameda 
aFaculty of Computer Science and Information Technology, University Putra Malaysia (UPM), Serdang, 
43400, Malaysia  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 Introduction  
Artificial intelligence (AI) aims to emulate human -level intelligence in machines. In computer 
science, AI refers to the study of "intelligent agents," which are objects capable of perceiving their 
environment and taking actions to maximize their chances o f achieving specific goals [1]. Machine 
learning (ML) is a field that focuses on the development and application of methods capable of 
learning from datasets  [2]. ML finds extensive use in various domains, such as speech recognition, 
ABSTRACT  
 
Deep learning (DL) has emerged as a powerful subset of machine 
learning (ML) and artificial intelligence (AI), outperforming 
traditional ML methods, especially in handling unstructured and 
large datasets. Its impact spans across various domains, including 
speech recognition, healthcare, autonomous vehicles, cybersecurity, 
predictive analytics, and more. However, the complexity and 
dynamic nature of real -world problems present challenges in 
designing effective deep learning models. Consequently, several 
deep  learning models have been developed to address different 
problems and applications. In this article, we conduct a 
comprehensive survey of various deep learning models, including 
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN), Recurrent Neural Network 
(RNN), Temporal Convolutional Networks (TCN), Transformer, 
Kolmogorov -Arnold networks (KAN), Generative Models, Deep 
Reinforcement Learning (DRL), and Deep Transfer Learning. We 
examine the structure, applications, benefits, and limitations of each 
model. Furthermore, we perform an analysis using three publicly 
available datasets: IMDB, ARAS, and Fruit -360. We compared the 
performance of six renowned deep learning models: CNN, RNN, 
Long Short -Term Memory (LSTM), Bidirectional LSTM, Gated 
Recurrent Unit (GRU), and Bidirecti onal GRU alongside two newer 
models, TCN and Transformer, using the IMDB and ARAS datasets. 
Additionally, we evaluated the performance of eight CNN -based 
models, including VGG (Visual Geometry Group), Inception, 
ResNet (Residual Network), InceptionResNet, Xception (Extreme 
Inception), MobileNet, DenseNet (Dense Convolutional Network), 
and NASNet (Neural Architecture Search Network), for image 
classification tasks using the Fruit -360 dataset.  
 KEYWORDS  
 
Deep Learning  
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN)  
Long Short -Term Memory (LSTM)  
Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU)  
Temporal Convolutional Network (TCN)  
Transformer  
Kolmogorov -Arnold networks (KAN)  
Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL)  
Deep Transfer Learning (DTL)  
Autoencoder  
Generative Adversarial Network (GAN)  
Deep Belief Network (DBN)