A Comprehensive Overview and Comparative Analysis on Deep Learning Models  
20 
 Multi -head attention is equivalent to the blended of 𝑛 distinct scaled dot -product attention 
(self-attention). It can effectively process the three vectors Q, K, and V, in parallel to obtain the 
final result by combining and calculating. The formula is visible in Eq. ( 17). 
{𝑀𝑢𝑙𝑡𝑖𝐻𝑒𝑎𝑑  (𝑄,𝐾,𝑉)=𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑐𝑎𝑡(ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑑1,…,ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑑2)𝑊𝑂
𝑤ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑒 ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑑𝑖=𝐴𝑡𝑡𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛  (𝑄𝑊𝑖𝑄,𝐾𝑊𝑖𝐾,𝑉𝑊𝑖𝑉)                                                                 (17) 
Where the projections are parameter matrices 𝑊𝑖𝑄 ∈ ℝ𝑑𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙×𝑑𝑘,𝑊𝑖𝐾 ∈ ℝ𝑑𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙×𝑑𝑘,𝑊𝑖𝑉 ∈
 ℝ𝑑𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙×𝑑𝑉,𝑎𝑛𝑑 𝑊𝑂 ∈ ℝℎ𝑑𝑣×𝑑𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙 . 
The main component of the transformer, scaled dot -product attention (self-attention), uses the 
weight of each sensor event in the input vector, which is represented by  
𝐴𝑡𝑡𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛  (𝑄,𝐾,𝑉)=𝑠𝑜𝑓𝑡𝑚𝑎𝑥 (𝑄𝐾𝑇
√𝑑𝑘)𝑉                                                                                         (18) 
The initial step in scaled dot -product attention is to convert the input data into an embedding 
vector and the three vectors of query vector (Q), key vector (K), and value vector (V) are then 
extracted from the embedding vectors. Next, a score is determined for every vector: score is equal 
to 𝑄· 𝐾. Score normalization (dividing by √𝑑𝑘) is used for gradient stability.  Next, the score is 
processed using the softmax activation function. The weighted score 𝑣 for every input vector is 
obtained by taking the softmax dot product value 𝑣. The final result is produced after summing. 
Scaled dot -product attention and multi -head attention are displayed in Fig. 22 [152].  
Position -wise Feed -Forward Networks: Each encoder and decoder layer have a fully connected 
feed-forward network in addition to attention sub -layers. This feed -forward network is applied to 
each position independently and in the same way. This is made up of two linear transformations 
connected  by a ReLU activation.  
𝐹𝐹𝑁(𝑥)= 𝑚𝑎𝑥(0,𝑥𝑊1 +𝑏1)𝑊2 + 𝑏2                                                                                             (19) 
Positional Encoding: Since the Transformer model does not rely on recurrence or convolution, it 
requires a way to capture the relative or absolute positions of tokens within a sequence to effectively 
utilize the sequence's order. To address this, positional encoding is introdu ced at the input level of 
both the encoder and decoder stacks. These positional encodings are added to the input embeddings, 
as they share the same dimensionality, 𝑑𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙 . This combination enables the model to incorporate 
positional information, allowing it to better understand the sequential nature of the data [146]. 
 
 
(a)            (b)  
Figure 22. (a) Scaled Dot -Product Attention, (b) Multi -Head Attention.