A Comprehensive Overview and Comparative Analysis on Deep Learning Models  
24 
 and adversarial -based deep transfer learning.  
 
Figure 25.  Learning process of transfer learning.  
 
Instances -based deep transfer learning involves selecting a subset of instances from the source 
domain and assigning appropriate weight values to these selected instances to supplement the 
training set in the target domain. Algorithms such as TaskTrAdaBoos t [192] and TrAdaBoost.R2 
[193] are well -known approaches based on this strategy.  
Mapping -based deep transfer learning focuses on mapping instances from both the source and 
target domains into a new data space, where instances from the two domains exhibit similarity and 
are suitable for training a unified deep neural network. Successful  methods based on this approach 
include Extend MMD  (Maximum Mean Discrepancy ) [194], and MK-MMD  (Multiple Kernel 
variant of MMD ) [195]. 
Network -based (model -based) deep transfer learning involves reusing a segment of a pre -
trained network from the source domain, including its architecture and connection parameters, and 
applying it to a deep neural network in the target domain. These model -based approaches are highly 
effective for domain adaptation between source and target data by adjusting the network (model), 
making them the most widely adopted strategies in deep transfer learning (DTL). Remarkably, 
these me thods can even adapt target data that is significantly different from the source data  [196].  
Network -based (model-based ) approaches in deep transfer learning typically involve pre -
training, freezing, fine -tuning, and adding new layers. Pre -trained models consist of layers from a 
deep learning network (DL model) that have been trained using source data. Two key methods for 
training a mode l with target data are freezing and fine -tuning. These methods involve using some 
or all layers of a pre -defined model. When layers are frozen, they retain fixed parameters/weights 
from the pre -trained model. In contrast, fine -tuning involves initializing parameters and weights 
with pre -trained values instead of starting with random values, either for the entire network or 
specific layers [196]. 
A recent advancement in model -based deep transfer learning  is Progressive Neural Networks 
(PNNs). This strategy involves the freezing of a pre -trained model and integrating new layers 
specifically for training on target data [197]. The concept behind progressive learning is grounded 
in the idea that acquiring a new skill necessitates leveraging existing knowledge. This mirrors the 
way humans learn new abilities. For instance, a child learns to run by employing all the skills 
acquir ed during crawling and walking. PNN constructs a new model for each task it encounters.