F. M. Shiri et al.    
13 
  
Figure 15.  The structure of the causal convolutional network [85]. 
 
The depth of the network could lead to issues such as vanishing gradients, ultimately degrading 
network performance or causing it to plateau. To address these challenges, TCN employs dilated 
convolutions [88], which exponentially expand the receptive field, allowing the network to process 
large time series efficiently without a proportional increase in computational complexity. The 
architecture of a dilated convolutional network is depicted in  Fig. 16 . 
By inserting gaps between the weights of the convolutional kernel, dilated convolutions 
effectively increase the network's receptive field while maintaining computational efficiency. The 
mathematical formulation of a dilated convolution is given by Eq. (1 1). 
𝐹(𝑠)=(𝑥∗𝑑𝑓)(𝑠)=∑𝑓(𝑖)∙𝑥𝑠−𝑑∙𝑖                                                                                                  (11)𝑘−1
𝑖=0 
where 𝑑 is the dilation rate, 𝑘 is the size of the filter, and 𝑠−𝑑∙𝑖 accounts for the 
direction of the past. Dilation is the same as adding a fixed step in between each pair of neighboring 
filter taps. When 𝑑 = 1, dilated convolution becomes a regular convolution. As 𝑑 increases, the 
output at the higher layers reflects a broader range of inputs, improving performance on long -range 
dependencies in time series.  
Residual Connections :  
To construct a more expressive TCN model, it is essential to use small filter sizes and stack 
multiple layers. However, stacking dilated and causal convolutional layers increases the depth of 
the network, potentially leading to problems such as gradient decay or vanishing gradients during 
training. To mitigate these issues, TCN incorporates residual connections int o the output layer. 
Residual connections facilitate the flow of data across layers by adding a shortcut path, allowing 
the network to learn residual functions, which are modifications to the identity mapping, rather than 
learning a full transformation. Thi s approach has been shown to be highly effective in very deep 
networks.  
 
Figure 16.  Dilated convolutional structure [85].