A Comprehensive Overview and Comparative Analysis on Deep Learning Models  
22 
 trained from scratch on ImageNet.  T2T-ViT overcomes ViT's drawbacks by accurately 
modeling the structural information of images and enhancing feature richness.  
➢ Transformer in Transformer (TNT)  [164]: A vision transformer for visual recognition . Both 
local and global representation s are extracted by the TNT architecture through the use of an 
inner  transformer and an outer transformer.  
➢ PyramidTNT [165]: A improve d TNT model which used pyramid architecture, and 
convolutional stem  in order to greatly enhance the original TNT model.  
➢ Switch Transformers  [166]: It is suggested as a straightforward and computationally effective 
method of increasing a Transformer model's parameter count.  
➢ ConvNeXt [167]: A redesigned transformer architecture that makes use of the transformer 
attention mechanism and incorporates convolutional layers into the encoder and decoder 
modules to extract spatially localized data.  
➢ Evolutionary  Algorithm  Transformer  (EATFormer ) [168]: An improved vision 
transformer influenced by an evolutionary algorithm.  
6 Deep Reinforcement Learning  
Reinforcement learning (RL) is a machine learning approach that deals with sequential 
decision -making, aiming to map situations to actions in a way that maximizes the associated reward. 
Unlike supervised learning, where explicit instructions are given afte r each system action, in the 
RL framework, the learner, known as an agent, is not provided with explicit guidance on which 
actions to take at each timestep 𝑡. The RL agent must explore through trial and error to determine 
which actions yield the highest r ewards [169]. Furthermore, unlike supervised learning, where the 
correct output is obtained and the model is updated based on the loss or error, RL uses gradients 
without a differentiable loss function to teach a model to explore randomly and learn to make 
optimal dec isions [170]. Fig. 23 depicts the agent -environment interaction in reinforcement 
learning (RL). The standard theoretical framework for RL is based on a Markov Decision Process 
(MDP), which extends the concept of a Markov process and is used to model decision -making 
based on states, actions, and rewards  [171]. 
Deep reinforcement learning combines the decision -making capabilities of reinforcement 
learning with the perception function of deep learning. It is considered a form of "real AI" as it 
aligns more closely with human thinking. Fig. 24 illustrates the basic structure of deep 
reinforcement learning, where deep learning processes sensory inputs from the environment and 
provides the current state data. The reinforcement learning process then links the current state to 
the appropriate actio n and evaluates values based on anticipated rewards  [172, 173].