VQA-LOL 11
Fig. 4: Learning Curve comparison for models (Red: LXMERT, Blue: LOL) trained
on our datasets (solid lines: VQA + Comp , dotted lines: VQA + Comp +Supp )
for composition. The answers to these component questions (predicted by VQA
models) can be re-combined with the predicted logical formula to obtain the nal
answer. We use parsers to map components and logical operations to predened
slots in a logical function. The oracle parser uses the ground truth component
questions and combines predicted answers using the true formula. However, at
test time we do not have access to the true mapping and components. So we
train a RoBERTa-Base [ 26] parser using B-I-O tagging [ 37] for a Named-Entity
Recognition task with constituent questions as entities.1
The performance of the oracle parser serves as the upper bound as we have
a perfect mapping, with the QA system being the only source of error. The
trained parser has an exact-match accuracy of 85%, but only a 72% accuracy
in determining the number of operands. The parser has an accuracy of 89% for
questions with 3 or less operands, but only 78% for longer compositions. End-
to-end (E2E) models do not need to parse questions and hence overcome these
hurdles, but do require an understanding of logical operations. Table 4 shows
that both oracle and trained parsers when used with LOL outperform parsers
with LXMERT, by 6 :82%) and 5:60% respectively. The LOL model without using
any parsers is better than both LXMERT and LOL with the trained parser by
7:55% and 1:95% respectively.
5.2 Explicit Training with Logically Composed Questions
Can models trained on the VQA-v2 dataset answer logically composed
questions? The rst section of Table 2 shows that LXMERT, when trained only
on questions from VQA-v2 has near random accuracy ( 50%) on our logically
composed datasets, thus exhibiting little robustness to such questions.
Can baseline model improve if trained explicitly with logically com-
posed questions questions? We train the models with data containing a
combination of samples from VQA-v2, VQA-Compose , and VQA-Supplement . The
accuracy on VQA-Compose andVQA-Supplement improves, but there is a drop in
performance on yes-no questions from VQA. Our models with our attention mod-
ules (qATTand`ATT) are able to retain performance on VQA-v2 while achieving
improvements on all validation datasets.