2 T. Gokhale et al.
1 Introduction
Theories about logic in human understanding have a long history. In modern
times, Piaget and Fodor [ 35] studied the representation of logical hypotheses
in the human mind. George Boole [ 7] formalized conjunction, disjunction, and
negation into an \algebra of thought" as a way to improve, systemize, and
mathematize Aristotle's Logic [ 12]. Horn regarded negation to be a fundamental
and dening characteristic of human communication [ 19], following the traditions
of Sankara [ 36], Spinoza [ 43], and Hegel [ 18]. Recent studies [ 11] have suggested
that infants can formulate intuitive and stable logical structures to interpret
dynamic scenes and to entertain and rationally modify hypotheses about the
scenes. As such we argue that understanding logical structures in questions, is a
fundamental requirement for any question-answering system.
If a question can be put at all, then it can be answered. [45]
In the above proposition, Wittgenstein linked the process of asking a question
with the existence of an answer. While we do not comment on the existence of
an answer, we suggest the following softer proposition -
If questions Q1:::Q ncan be answered, then so should all
composite questions created from Q1:::Q n
Visual question answering (VQA) [ 3] is an intuitive, yet challenging task that
lies at a crucial intersection of vision and language. Given an image and a question
about it, the goal of a VQA system is to provide a free-form or open-ended answer.
Consider the image in Figure 1 which shows a person in front of an open fridge.
When asked the questions Q1(Is there beer? ) andQ2(Is the man wearing shoes? )
independently, the state-of-the-art model LXMERT [ 44] answers both correctly.
However when we insert a negation in Q2(Is the man not wearing shoes? ) or for a
conjunction of two questions :Q2^Q1 (Is the man not wearing shoes and is there
beer? ), the system makes wrong predictions. Our motivation is to reliably answer
such logically composed questions. In this paper, we analyze VQA systems under
thisLens of Logic (LOL) and develop a model that can answer such questions
re
ecting human logical inference. We oer our work as the rst investigation
into the logical structure of questions in visual question-answering and provide a
solution that learns to interpret logical connectives in questions.
The rst question is: can models pre-trained on the VQA dataset answer
logically composed questions? It turns out that these models are unable to do so,
as illustrated in Figure 1 and Table 2. An obvious next experiment is to split the
question into its component questions, predict the answer to each, and combine
the answers logically. However language parsers (either oracle or trained parsers)
are not accurate at understanding negation, and as such this approach does not
yield correct answers for logically composed questions. The question then arises:
can the model answer such questions, if we explicitly train it with data that also
contains logically composed questions? For this investigation, we construct two
datasets, VQA-Compose andVQA-Supplement , by utilizing annotations from the