12 T. Gokhale et al.
(a)
 (b)
 (c)
Fig. 5: Accuracy for each type of question in (a) VQA-Compose, (b) VQA-
Supplement and for questions with number of operands greater than 2.
5.3 Analysis
Training with Closed Questions only: We analyse the performance of mod-
els when trained only with closed questions from VQA, VQA + Comp and VQA
+Comp +Supp and see that our model achieves the best accuracy on logically
composed questions, as shown in sections 3 and 4 in Table 2. Since we train only
closed questions, we do not use our question attention module for this experiment.
Eect of Logically Composed Questions: We increase the number of logical
samples in the training data on a log scale from 10 to 100k. As can be seen from
the learning curves in Figure 4(a), models trained on VQA + Comp +Supp are
able to retain performance on VQA validation data, while those trained only
on VQA + Comp data deteriorate. Figure 4(b) shows that our models improve
on VQA Yes-No performance after being trained on more logically composed
samples, exhibiting transfer learning capabilities. In (c) both our models are
comparable to the baseline, but our model shows improvements over the base-
line when trained on VQA + Comp +Supp. In (d) for all levels of additional
logical questions, our model trained on VQA + Comp +Supp is the best per-
forming. From (c) and (d), we observe that a large number of logical questions
are needed during training for the models to learn to answer them during infer-
ence. We also see that our model yields the best performance on VQA-Supplement .
Compositional Generalization: To test for compositional generalization, we
train models on questions with a maximum of one connective (single) and test
on those with multiple connectives. It can be seen from Table 3 that our models
are better equipped than the baseline to generalize to multiple connectives and
also to be able to generalize from VQA-Compose toSupplement .
Inductive Generalization: We test our models on questions composed with
more than two components. Parser-based models have this property by default.
As shown by Figure 5c our E2E models outperform the baseline LXMERT.