6 T. Gokhale et al.
The seed questions for creating these datasets are all closed binary questions
from VQA-v2 [ 17]. These datasets serve as test-beds, and enable experiments
that analyze performance of models when answering such questions.
VQA-Compose: Consider the rst two rows in Table 1. Q1andQ2are two
questions about the image in Figure 1 taken from the VQA dataset. Additional
questions are composed from Q1andQ2by using the formulas in Table 1. Thus
for each pair of closed questions in the VQA dataset, we get 10 logically composed
questions. Using the same train-val-test split as the VQA-v2 dataset [ 17], we get
1.25 million samples for our VQA-Compose dataset. The dataset is balanced in
terms of the number of questions with armative and negative answers.
VQA-Supplement: Images in VQA-v2 follow identical train-val-test splits as
their source MS-COCO [ 25]. Therefore, we use the object annotations from
COCO to create additional closed binary questions, such as \Is there a bottle" for
the example in Figure 1. We also create \adversarial" questions about objects,
like\Is there a wine-glass?" by using an object that is not present in the image
(wine-glass), but is semantically close to an object in the image (bottle). We
use Glove vectors [ 34] to nd the adversarial object with the closest embedding.
Following a similar strategy, we also convert captions provided in COCO to closed
binary questions, for example \Does this seem like a man bending over to look
inside the fridge" . Since we know what objects are present in the image, and the
captions describe a \true" scene, we are able to obtain the ground-truth answers
for questions created from objects and captions. Similar methods for creation of
question-answer pairs have previously been used in [38,28].
Thus for every question, we obtain several questions from objects and captions,
and use these to compose additional questions by following a process similar to
the one for VQA-Compose . For each closed question in the VQA dataset, we get
20 additional logically composed questions by utilizing questions created from
objects and captions, yielding a total of 2.55 million samples asVQA-Supplement .
3.3 Analytical Setup
In order to test the robustness of our models to logically composed questions, we
devise ve key experiments to analyse baseline models and our methods. These
experiments help us gain insights into the nuances of the VQA dataset, and allow
us to develop strategies for promoting robustness.
Eect of Data Augmentation: In this experiment, we compare the perfor-
mance of models on VQA-Compose andVQA-Supplement with or without logically
composed training data. This experiment allows us to test our hypotheses about
the robustness of any VQA model to logically composed questions. We rst use
models trained on VQA data to answer questions in our new datasets and record
performance. We then explicitly train the same models with our new datasets,
and make a comparison of performance with the pre-trained baseline.