VQA-LOL 3
VQA dataset, as well as object and caption annotations from COCO [ 25]. We
use these datasets to train the state-of-the-art model LXMERT [ 44] and perform
multiple experiments to test for robustness towards logically composed questions.
After this investigation, we develop our LOL model architecture that jointly
learns to answer questions while understanding the type of question and which
logical connective exists in the question, through our attention modules, as shown
in Figure 3. We further train our model with a novel Frchet-Compatibility loss
that ensures compatibility between the answers to the component questions
and the answer of the logically composed question. One key nding is that our
models are better than existing models trained on logical questions, with a small
deviation from state-of-the-art on VQA test set. Our models also exhibit better
Compositional Generalization i.e. models trained to answer questions with a single
logical connective are able to answer those with multiple connectives.
Our contributions are summarized below:
1.We conduct a detailed analysis of the performance of the state-of-the-art
VQA model with respect to logically composed questions,
2.We curate two large scale datasets VQA-Compose andVQA-Supplement that
contain logically composed binary questions.
3.We propose LOL { our end-to-end model with dedicated attention modules
that answer questions by understanding the logical connectives in questions.
4.We show a capability of answering logically composed questions, while re-
taining VQA performance.
2 Related Work
Logic in Human Expression: Is logical thinking a natural feature of human
thought and expression? Evidence in psychological studies [ 10,16,11] suggests that
infants are capable of logical reasoning, toddlers understand logical operations
in natural language and are able to compositionally compute meanings even in
complex sentences containing multiple logical operators. Children are also able to
use these meanings to assign truth values to complex experimental tasks. Given
this, question-answering systems also need to answer compositional questions,
and be robust to the manifestation of logical operators in natural language.
Logic in Natural Language Understanding: The task of understanding com-
positionality in question-answering (QA) can also be interpreted as understanding
logical connectives in text. While question compositionality is largely unstudied,
approaches in natural language understanding seek to transform sentences into
symbolic formats such as rst-order logic (FOL) or relational tables [ 31,49,24].
While such methods benet from interpretability, they suer from practical
limitations like intractability, reliance on background knowledge, and failure to
process noise and uncertainty. [ 8,40,42] suggest that better generalization can
be achieved by learning embeddings to reason about semantic relations, and to
simulate FOL behavior [ 41]. Recursive neural networks have been shown to learn
logical semantics on synthetic English-like sentences by using embeddings [ 9,33].