VQA-LOL 7
Fig. 3: LOL model architecture showing a cross-modal feature encoder followed
by our Question-Attention ( qATT) and Logic Attention ( `ATT) modules. The con-
catenated output of is used by the Answering Module to predict the answer.
Learning Curve: We train our models with an increasing number of logically
composed questions and compare performance. This serves as an analysis of the
number of logical samples needed by the model to understand logic in questions.
Training only with Closed Questions: In this ablation study, we restrict the
training data to only closed questions i.e. \Yes-No" VQA questions, VQA-Compose
andVQA-Supplement , allowing our model to focus solely on closed questions.
Compositional Generalization: We address whether training on closed ques-
tions containing single logical operation ( :Q1,Q1_Q2) can generalize to multiple
operations ( Q1^:Q2,:Q1_Q2). For instance, rows 1 through 6 in Table 1 are
single operation questions , while rows 7 through 12 are multi-operation questions .
Our aim is to have models that exhibit such compositional generalization.
Inductive Generalization: We investigate if training on compositions of two
questions (:Q1_Q2) can generalize to compositions of more than two questions
(Q1^:Q2^Q3:::). This studies whether our models develop an understanding
of logical connectives, as opposed to simply learning patterns from large data.
4 Method
In this section. we describe LXMERT [ 44] (a state-of-the-art VQA model), our
Lens of Logic (LOL) model, attention modules which learn the question-type and
logical connectives in the question, and the Frchet-Compatibility (FC) Loss. This
section refers to a composition of two questions, but applies to n2 questions.
4.1 Cross-Modal Feature Encoder
LXMERT (Learning Cross-Modality Encoder Representations from Transform-
ers) [ 44] is one of the rst cross-modal pre-trained frameworks for vision-and-
language tasks, that combines a strong visual feature extractor [ 39] with a strong