14 T. Gokhale et al.
6 Discussion
Consider the example, \Is every boy who is holding an apple or a banana, not
wearing a hat?" , humans are able to answer it to be true if and only if each boy
who is holding at least one of an apple or a banana is not wearing a hat [ 11].
Natural language contains such complex logical compositions, not to mention
ambiguities and the in
uence of context. In this paper, we focus on the simplest
{ negation, conjunction, and disjunction. We have shown that existing VQA
models are not robust to questions composed with these logical connectives, even
when we train parsers to split the question into its components. When humans
are faced with such questions, they may refrain from giving binary (Yes/No)
answers. For instance, logically, the question \Did you eat the pizza and did you
like it?" has a negative answer if either of the two component questions has a
negative answer. However, humans might answer the same question with the
answer \Yes, but I did not like it" . While human question-answering is indeed
elaborate, explanatory, and clarifying, that is the scope of our future work; here
we focus only on predicting a single binary answer.
We have shown how connectives in a question can be identied by enhancing
LXMERT encoders with dedicated attention modules and loss functions. We
would like to stress on the fact that we do not use knowledge of the connectives
during inference, but instead train the network to be aware of it based on cross-
modal features, instead of predicting purely based on language model embeddings
which fail to capture these nuances. Our work is an attempt to modularize the
understanding of logical components to train the model to utilize the outputs
of the attention modules. We believe this work has potential implications on
logic-guided data augmentation, logically robust question answering, and for
conversational agents (with or without images). Similar strategies and learning
mechanisms may be used in the future to operate \logically" in the image-space
at the level of object classes, attributes, or semantic segments.
7 Conclusion
In this work, we investigate VQA in terms of logical robustness. The key hypothesis
is that the ability to answer questions about an image, must be extendable to a
logical composition of two such questions. We show that state-of-the-art models
trained on VQA dataset lack this. Our solution involves the \Lens of Logic"
model architecture that learns to answer questions with negation, conjunction,
and disjunction. We provide VQA-Compose and VQA-Supplement , two datasets
containing logically composed questions to serve as benchmarks. Our models
show improvements in terms of answering these questions, while at the same
time retaining performance on the original VQA test-set.
Acknowledgments
Support from NSF Robust Intelligence Program (1816039 and 1750082), DARPA
(W911NF2020006) and ONR (N00014-20-1-2332) is gratefully acknowledged.