Supplementary Material
Abstract. In our paper, we investigated visual question answering
(VQA) through the lens of logical transformation. We showed that state-
of-the-art VQA models are unable to reliably predict answers for questions
composed with logical operations, i.e. negation, conjunction, and disjunc-
tion. We introduced new datasets VQA-Compose and VQA-Supplement,
created with logical composition and a novel methodology to train models
to learn logical operators in questions In this supplementary material, we
elaborate upon the following topics:
{Data creation process,
{Dataset analysis,
{Training datasets used for each experiment,
{Additional details about model training and hyper-parameters,
{Additional details about parser models, and
{Further analysis and insights about our results.
1 Dataset Creation
The key idea behind our dataset creation process is to leverage existing annota-
tions from the VQA-v2 dataset [ 3] and from MS-COCO [ 25] which is the source
of images in VQA-v2. We use questions from VQA-v2, and object annotations
and captions from MS-COCO for each image.
In order to create logically composed questions, we rst lter out the \yes-no"
questions which constitute 38% of the VQA dataset. We further lter these
by retaining only those yes-no questions with a single valid answer. These
questions which are 20% of the VQA data, have an unambiguous answer, chosen
unanimously by all human annotators who created the VQA dataset. This satises
the denition of \closed questions" [6] that we use, and are thus the atoms of
our data creation process.
We use two closed questions corresponding to the same image to create logically
composed questions using the Boolean operators: negation ( :), conjunction (^),
and disjunction ( _). Since they have a clear unambiguous answer that is either
\yes" or \no", we can treat them as Boolean variables, and obtain answers for
every new question composed. For negating a question, we follow a template-
based procedure negates the question by adding a \no" or \not" before a verb,
preposition or noun phrase, as shown in Table 1. Note that our data creation
method chooses to put a not or no either before a preposition, verb, or noun
phrase. For instance, Is this an area near the city? is transformed to either Is
this not an area near the city? orIs this an area not near the city? randomly.
Conjunction and disjunction are straightforward, we add the words \and" and
\or" between two closed questions.