for network backbones speciﬁc for semantic segmentation.
We further show state-of-the-art performance without Im-
ageNet pretraining, and signiﬁcantly outperforms FRRN
[60] and GridNet [ 17] on Cityscapes [ 13].
Neural Architecture Search Method Neural Architec-
ture Search aims at automatically designing neural network
architectures, hence minimizing human hours and efforts.
While some works [ 22,34,92,49] search RNN cells for
language tasks, more works search good CNN architectures
for image classiﬁcation.
Several papers used reinforcement learning (either pol-
icy gradients [ 92,93,5,77] or Q-learning [ 3,89]) to train
a recurrent neural network that represents a policy to gen-
erate a sequence of symbols specifying the CNN architec-
ture. An alternative to RL is to use evolutionary algorithms
(EA), that “evolves” architectures by mutating the best ar-
chitectures found so far [ 63,84,53,48,62]. However, these
RL and EA methods tend to require massive computation
during the search, usually thousands of GPU days. PNAS
[47] proposed a progressive search strategy that markedly
reduced the search cost while maintaining the quality of the
searched architecture. NAO [ 52] embedded architectures
into a latent space and performed optimization before de-
coding. Additionally, several works [ 59,49,1] utilized ar-
chitectural sharing among sampled models instead of train-
ing each of them individually, thereby further reduced the
search cost. Our work follows the differentiable NAS for-
mulation [ 69,49] and extends it into the more general hier-
archical setting.
Neural Architecture Search Space Earlier papers, e.g.,
[92,63], tried to directly construct the entire network. How-
ever, more recent papers [ 93,47,62,59,49] have shifted to
searching the repeatable cell structure, while keeping the
outer network level structure ﬁxed by hand. First proposed
in [93], this strategy is likely inspired by the two-level hier-
archy commonly used in modern CNNs.
Our work still uses this cell level search space to keep
consistent with previous works. Yet one of our contributions
is to propose a new, general-purpose network level search
space, since we wish to jointly search across this two-level
hierarchy. Our network level search space shares a similar
outlook as [ 67], but the important difference is that [ 67] kept
the entire “fabrics” with no intention to alter the architec-
ture, whereas we associate an explicit weight for each con-
nection and focus on decoding a single discrete structure.
In addition, [ 67] was evaluated on segmenting face images
into3classes [ 35], whereas our models are evaluated on
large-scale segmentation datasets such as Cityscapes [ 13],
PASCAL VOC 2012 [ 15], and ADE20K [ 90].
The most similar work to ours is [ 6], which also studied
NAS for semantic image segmentation. However, [ 6] fo-
cused on searching the much smaller Atrous Spatial Pyra-mid Pooling (ASPP) module using random search, whereas
we focus on searching the much more fundamental network
backbone architecture using more advanced and more efﬁ-
cient search methods.
3. Architecture Search Space
This section describes our two-level hierarchical archi-
tecture search space. For the inner cell level (Sec. 3.1), we
reuse the one adopted in [ 93,47,62,49] to keep consistent
with previous works. For the outer network level (Sec. 3.2),
we propose a novel search space based on observation and
summarization of many popular designs.
3.1. Cell Level Search Space
We deﬁne a cellto be a small fully convolutional module,
typically repeated multiple times to form the entire neural
network. More speciﬁcally, a cell is a directed acyclic graph
consisting of Bblocks.
Each block is a two-branch structure, mapping from 2
input tensors to 1output tensor. Block iin celllmay be
speciﬁed using a 5-tuple(I1,I2,O1,O2,C), whereI1,I2∈
Il
iare selections of input tensors, O1,O2∈ O are selections
of layer types applied to the corresponding input tensor, and
C∈ Cis the method used to combine the individual outputs
of the two branches to form this block’s output tensor, Hl
i.
The cell’s output tensor Hlis simply the concatenation of
the blocks’ output tensors Hl
1,...,Hl
Bin this order.
The set of possible input tensors, Il
i, consists of the out-
put of the previous cell Hl−1, the output of the previous-
previous cell Hl−2, and previous blocks’ output in the cur-
rent cell{Hl
1,...,Hl
i}. Therefore, as we add more blocks
in the cell, the next block has more choices as potential
source of input.
The set of possible layer types, O, consists of the follow-
ing8operators, all prevalent in modern CNNs:
•3×3depthwise-separable conv
•5×5depthwise-separable conv
•3×3atrous conv with rate 2
•5×5atrous conv with rate 2•3×3average pooling
•3×3max pooling
•skip connection
•no connection (zero)
For the set of possible combination operators C, we sim-
ply let element-wise addition to be the only choice.
3.2. Network Level Search Space
In the image classiﬁcation NAS framework pioneered by
[93], once a cell structure is found, the entire network is
constructed using a pre-deﬁned pattern. Therefore the net-
work level was not part of the architecture search, hence its
search space has never been proposed nor designed.
This pre-deﬁned pattern is simple and straightforward: a
number of “normal cells” (cells that keep the spatial reso-
lution of the feature tensor) are separated equally by insert-
ing “reduction cells” (cells that divide the spatial resolution
84