Auto-DeepLab:
Hierarchical Neural Architecture Search for Semantic Image Segmentation
Chenxi Liu1∗, Liang-Chieh Chen2, Florian Schroff2, Hartwig Adam2, Wei Hua2,
Alan Yuille1, Li Fei-Fei3
1Johns Hopkins University2Google3Stanford University
Abstract
Recently, Neural Architecture Search (NAS) has success-
fully identiﬁed neural network architectures that exceed hu-
man designed ones on large-scale image classiﬁcation. In
this paper, we study NAS for semantic image segmentation.
Existing works often focus on searching the repeatable cell
structure, while hand-designing the outer network structure
that controls the spatial resolution changes. This choice
simpliﬁes the search space, but becomes increasingly prob-
lematic for dense image prediction which exhibits a lot more
network level architectural variations. Therefore, we pro-
pose to search the network level structure in addition to the
cell level structure, which forms a hierarchical architecture
search space. We present a network level search space that
includes many popular designs, and develop a formulation
that allows efﬁcient gradient-based architecture search (3
P100 GPU days on Cityscapes images). We demonstrate
the effectiveness of the proposed method on the challeng-
ing Cityscapes, PASCAL VOC 2012, and ADE20K datasets.
Auto-DeepLab, our architecture searched speciﬁcally for
semantic image segmentation, attains state-of-the-art per-
formance without any ImageNet pretraining.1
1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have been proved successful
across a large variety of artiﬁcial intelligence tasks, includ-
ing image recognition [ 38,25], speech recognition [ 27],
machine translation [ 73,81]etc. While better optimiz-
ers [36] and better normalization techniques [ 32,80] cer-
tainly played an important role, a lot of the progress comes
from the design of neural network architectures. In com-
puter vision, this holds true for both image classiﬁcation
[38,72,75,76,74,25,85,31,30] and dense image predic-
tion [ 16,51,7,64,56,55].
More recently, in the spirit of AutoML and democra-
∗Work done while an intern at Google.
1Code for Auto-DeepLab released at https://github.com/
tensorflow/models/tree/master/research/deeplab .Auto Search
Model Cell Network Dataset Days Task
ResNet [ 25] ✗ ✗ - - Cls
DenseNet [ 31] ✗ ✗ - - Cls
DeepLabv3+ [ 11] ✗ ✗ - - Seg
NASNet [ 93] ✓ ✗ CIFAR-10 2000 Cls
AmoebaNet [ 62] ✓ ✗ CIFAR-10 2000 Cls
PNASNet [ 47] ✓ ✗ CIFAR-10 150 Cls
DARTS [ 49] ✓ ✗ CIFAR-10 4 Cls
DPC [ 6] ✓ ✗ Cityscapes 2600 Seg
Auto-DeepLab ✓ ✓ Cityscapes 3 Seg
Table 1: Comparing our work against other CNN architec-
tures with two-level hierarchy. The main differences in-
clude: (1) we directly search CNN architecture for semantic
segmentation, (2) we search the network level architecture
as well as the cell level one, and (3) our efﬁcient search only
requires3P100 GPU days.
tizing AI, there has been signiﬁcant interest in designing
neural network architectures automatically , instead of rely-
ing heavily on expert experience and knowledge. Impor-
tantly, in the past year, Neural Architecture Search (NAS)
has successfully identiﬁed architectures that exceed human-
designed architectures on large-scale image classiﬁcation
problems [ 93,47,62].
Image classiﬁcation is a good starting point for NAS,
because it is the most fundamental and well-studied high-
level recognition task. In addition, there exists benchmark
datasets ( e.g., CIFAR-10) with relatively small images, re-
sulting in less computation and faster training. However,
image classiﬁcation should not be the end point for NAS,
and the current success shows promise to extend into more
demanding domains. In this paper, we study Neural Archi-
tecture Search for semantic image segmentation, an impor-
tant computer vision task that assigns a label like “person”
or “bicycle” to each pixel in the input image.
Naively porting ideas from image classiﬁcation would
not sufﬁce for semantic segmentation. In image classiﬁca-
tion, NAS typically applies transfer learning from low res-
1
82