4.1. Continuous Relaxation of Architectures
4.1.1 Cell Architecture
We reuse the continuous relaxation described in [ 49]. Every
block’s output tensor Hl
iis connected to all hidden states in
Il
i:
Hl
i=/summationdisplay
Hl
j∈Il
iOj→i(Hl
j) (1)
In addition, we approximate each Oj→iwith its continuous
relaxation ¯Oj→i, deﬁned as:
¯Oj→i(Hl
j) =/summationdisplay
Ok∈Oαk
j→iOk(Hl
j) (2)
where
|O|/summationdisplay
k=1αk
j→i= 1 ∀i,j (3)
αk
j→i≥0 ∀i,j,k (4)
In other words, αk
j→iare normalized scalars associated with
each operator Ok∈ O, easily implemented as softmax.
Recall from Sec. 3.1thatHl−1andHl−2are al-
ways included in Il
i, and that Hlis the concatenation of
Hl
1,...,Hl
B. Together with Eq. ( 1) and Eq. ( 2), the cell
level update may be summarized as:
Hl=Cell(Hl−1,Hl−2;α) (5)
4.1.2 Network Architecture
Within a cell, all tensors are of the same spatial size, which
enables the (weighted) sum in Eq. ( 1) and Eq. ( 2). How-
ever, as clearly illustrated in Fig. 1, tensors may take dif-
ferent sizes in the network level. Therefore in order to set
up the continuous relaxation, each layer lwill have at most
4hidden states {4Hl,8Hl,16Hl,32Hl}, with the upper left
superscript indicating the spatial resolution.
We design the network level continuous relaxation to ex-
actly match the search space described in Sec. 3.2. We as-
sociated a scalar with each gray arrow in Fig. 1, and the
network level update is:
sHl=βls
2→sCell(s
2Hl−1,sHl−2;α)
+βl
s→sCell(sHl−1,sHl−2;α)
+βl
2s→sCell(2sHl−1,sHl−2;α) (6)
wheres= 4,8,16,32andl= 1,2,...,L . The scalars β
are normalized such that
βl
s→s
2+βl
s→s+βl
s→2s= 1 ∀s,l (7)
βl
s→s
2≥0βl
s→s≥0βl
s→2s≥0∀s,l (8)also implemented as softmax.
Eq. ( 6) shows how the continuous relaxations of the two-
level hierarchy are weaved together. In particular, βcon-
trols the outer network level, hence depends on the spatial
size and layer index. Each scalar in βgoverns an entire set
ofα, yetαspeciﬁes the same architecture that depends on
neither spatial size nor layer index.
As illustrated in Fig. 1, Atrous Spatial Pyramid Pooling
(ASPP) modules are attached to each spatial resolution at
theL-th layer (atrous rates are adjusted accordingly). Their
outputs are bilinear upsampled to the original resolution be-
fore summed to produce the prediction.
4.2. Optimization
The advantage of introducing this continuous relaxation
is that the scalars controlling the connection strength be-
tween different hidden states are now part of the differen-
tiable computation graph. Therefore they can be optimized
efﬁciently using gradient descent. We adopt the ﬁrst-order
approximation in [ 49], and partition the training data into
two disjoint sets trainA andtrainB . The optimization alter-
nates between:
1. Update network weights wby∇wLtrainA(w,α,β)
2. Update architecture α,β by∇α,βLtrainB(w,α,β)
where the loss function Lis the cross entropy calculated
on the semantic segmentation mini-batch. The disjoint set
partition is to prevent the architecture from overﬁtting the
training data.
4.3. Decoding Discrete Architectures
Cell Architecture Following [ 49], we decode the dis-
crete cell architecture by ﬁrst retaining the 2 strongest pre-
decessors for each block (with the strength from hidden
statejto hidden state ibeingmaxk,Ok/negationslash=zeroαk
j→i; recall
from Sec. 3.1that “zero” means “no connection”), and then
choose the most likely operator by taking the argmax.
Network Architecture Eq. ( 7) essentially states that the
“outgoing probability” at each of the blue nodes in Fig. 1
sums to 1. In fact, the βvalues can be interpreted as
the “transition probability” between different “states” (spa-
tial resolution) across different “time steps” (layer number).
Quite intuitively, our goal is to ﬁnd the path with the “max-
imum probability” from start to end. This path can be de-
coded efﬁciently using the classic Viterbi algorithm, as in
our implementation.
5. Experimental Results
Herein, we report our architecture search implementa-
tion details as well as the search results. We then report
semantic segmentation results on benchmark datasets with
our best found architecture.
86