from statistical mechanics, such as the replica theory[30]. We will illustrate in this article how methods from
statistical physics still have helped to characterize both the equilibrium phase of an idealized RBM where the
coupling matrix has a structured spectrum, and how the learning dynamics can be analyzed in some specic
regimes, both results being obtained with traditional mean-eld approaches.
The paper is organized as follows. We will rst give the denition of the RBM and review the typical
learning algorithm used to train the model in Section (2). Then, in Section (3), we will review dierent types
of RBMs by changing the prior on its variables and show explicit links with other models. In Section (4), we
will review two approaches that characterize the phase diagram of the RBM and in particular its compositional
phase , based on two dierent hypothesis over the structure of the parameters of the model. Finally, in Section (5)
we will show some theoretical development helping to understand the formation of patterns inside the machine
and how we can use the mean-eld or TAP equations to learn the model.
2 Definition of the model and learning equations
2.1 Definition of the RBM
The RBM is an Ising model (or equivalently, a Markov random eld), dened on a bipartite graph structure
over two layers of variables: the visible nodes 𝑠𝑖, for𝑖= 1, . . . , 𝑁 𝑣and the hidden nodes 𝜏𝑎= 1, . . . , 𝑁 ℎ, denoting
𝑁𝑣and𝑁ℎthe number of visible and hidden nodes respectively. In the following, we will use 𝑖, 𝑗, 𝑘, . . . to
enumerate the visible variables and 𝑎, 𝑏, 𝑐, . . . for the hidden ones. No connection between any pair of visible
or hidden nodes occurs . Hence, we will call 𝑤the coupling or weight matrix and denote its elements as 𝑤𝑖𝑎
since no other interactions are present (such as 𝑤𝑖𝑗or𝑤𝑎𝑏). In addition to the pairwise coupling matrix 𝑤,
each visible and hidden node can have a local magnetic eld, or local bias (we will refer to it as bias in the rest
of the article), respectively named 𝜃𝑖and𝜂𝑎. We can introduce the following Hamiltonian
ℋ[𝑠,𝜏] =−∑︁
𝑖𝑎𝑠𝑖𝑤𝑖𝑎𝜏𝑎−∑︁
𝑖𝜃𝑖𝑠𝑖−∑︁
𝑎𝜂𝑎𝜏𝑎, (1)
from which we dene a Boltzmann distribution
𝑝(𝑠,𝜏) =1
𝑍exp(−ℋ[𝑠,𝜏]).
where 𝑍is given by
𝑍=∑︁
{𝑠},{𝜏}exp(−ℋ[𝑠,𝜏]).
The structure of the RBM is represented on Figure 1
where the visible nodes are represented by black dots, the hidden nodes by red dots and the weight matrix by
blue dotted lines.
The benet of having a bipartite structure is that, when keeping xed an entire layer, in our case all the visible
or all the hidden nodes, the variables of the other layer become statistically independent. In other words, the
measure 𝑝(𝑠|𝜏) and 𝑝(𝜏|𝑠) factorizes over the visible/hidden nodes respectively. This is an important property
to keep in mind since it will be used in the learning procedure of the model. We will see that this property is
widely used during the learning in order to draw new samples using a Monte-Carlo Markov Chain (MCMC) by
Gibbs sampling.
3