a mean-eld estimate of the response functions involved in the gradient of the log-likelihood. For the response
term on the data we get
⟨𝑠𝛼𝜏𝛽⟩data=⟨𝑠𝛼(𝑠𝛽𝑤𝛽−𝜃𝛽)(1−𝑞𝛽[𝑠])⟩data
where the parameter 𝑞𝛽[𝑠] is a variant attached to mode 𝛽of the spin-glass parameter taken as a function of
¯𝑚in equation (39), when the visible nodes are pinned to the dataset (see[36]for details). The negative term
is more complicated to compute. It depends on the xed points obtained through equations (39) and (40) for
a given set of model parameters. Once the xed point are obtained, the response terms of the RBM can be
written
⟨𝑠𝛼𝜏𝛽⟩ℋ=1
𝑍MF∑︁
𝛾𝑒−𝐿𝑓(𝑚𝛾,¯𝑚𝛾,𝑞𝛾,¯𝑞𝛾)𝑚𝛾
𝛼𝑚𝛾
𝛽=⟨𝑚𝛾
𝛼𝑚𝛾
𝛽⟩MF
𝑍MF=∑︁
𝛾𝑒−𝐿𝑓(𝑚𝛾,¯𝑚𝛾,𝑞𝛾,¯𝑞𝛾)
where 𝛾runs over the set of xed points; 𝑓is the mean-eld free energy that can be derived from eq. (36).
These response terms allows one also to compute the skew-symmetric rotation generators of the visible and
hidden singular vectors of 𝑤through

𝑢
𝛼𝛽=𝑤𝛽
𝑤2𝛼−𝑤2
𝛽(︀
⟨𝑠𝛼𝜏𝛽⟩data−⟨𝑠𝛼𝜏𝛽⟩ℋ)︀
+𝑤𝛼
𝑤2𝛼−𝑤2
𝛽(︀
⟨𝑠𝛽𝜏𝛼⟩data−⟨𝑠𝛽𝜏𝛼⟩ℋ)︀
,

𝑣
𝛼𝛽=𝑤𝛼
𝑤2𝛼−𝑤2
𝛽(︀
⟨𝑠𝛼𝜏𝛽⟩data−⟨𝑠𝛼𝜏𝛽⟩ℋ)︀
+𝑤𝛽
𝑤2𝛼−𝑤2
𝛽(︀
⟨𝑠𝛽𝜏𝛼⟩data−⟨𝑠𝛽𝜏𝛼⟩ℋ)︀
.
With this at hand it is therefore possible to integrate numerically the learning process of the RBM random
ensemble dened by (33) hence given the typical learning trajectory. If doable in principle with any arbitrary
data, this was actually tested in[36]on a simple synthetic dataset made of separated clusters. The result is
shown on Figure 13.
We see again the dierent eigenvalues emerging one by one, and that each newly learned eigenvalue is triggering
a jump of the likelihood together with a jump in the number of xed points. At the end of the learning, the
obtained mean-eld xed points are located at the center of each cluster of the dataset, as can be seen on the
scatter plots. In[36], it is also shown that the behavior is qualitatively similar to what is routinely obtained
when performing a standard learning based on PCD.
5.6 Other mean-field approach
Other approaches using for instance, message-passing technique such as BP have been developed in order to
infer the magnetization of RBM instances. These approaches usually are correct in the limit of weak couplings,
and can be used on single instance by iteratively updating a set of messages, here 𝒪(𝑁ℎ𝑁𝑣) until convergence
(see for instance[49,81]). In these works, it is shown how BP can be used to infer the magnetization or the free
energy in few well-chosen cases. However, as far as practical learning tasks are concerned, it is not clear that
this can be used in general when dealing with the ferromagnetic phase, as can be expected when considering
structured data. In fact, it has been showed in many works that BP can have very bad convergence properties
in a ferromagnetic phase when the underlying factor-graph is not a tree[82](particularly if the couplings are
35