00.20.40.60.811.21.41.61.82
1000 2000 3000 4000wα
tSingular values
−15−10−5051015
−15−10−5 0 5 10 15x2
x1Figure 6: Left: the learning curves for the modes 𝑤𝛼using an RBM with ( 𝑁𝑣, 𝑁ℎ) = (100 ,100) learned on
a synthetic dataset distributed in the neighborhood of a 20d ellipsoid embedded into a 100d space. Here the
modes interact together: the weaker modes push the stronger ones higher, and they all accumulate at the top
of the spectrum, as explained in Section 3.2. Right: a scatter plot projected on the rst two SVD modes of
the training (blue) and sampled data from the learned RBM (red) for a problem in dimension 𝑁𝑣= 50 with
two condensed modes. We can see that the learned matrix 𝑢captures relevant directions and that the RBM
generates data perfectly similar to the one of the training set.
Gaussian-Spherical RBM — In the case of the Gaussian-Spherical case, it is again possible to obtain an
exact analytical expression for the response function of the RBM ⟨𝑠𝛼𝜏𝛽⟩[40]for both the positive and negative
terms, where the average is performed respectively over the dataset and the model distribution. The qualitative
pictures is very similar to the previous one. As for the linear model, linear correlations between dierent modes
vanish and therefore the matrix 𝑢has to rotate until it is properly aligned with the principal directions of the
dataset. At the same time singular values get either amplied or damped. In contrary to the linear case they do
not evolve independently. Instead, as seen on the left panel of Figure 6 lower modes willing to condense exert
some pressure on higher modes and accumulate at the top of the spectrum, hence pushing the whole spectrum
upward. On the right panel of Figure 6, to illustrate the result of mode condensation, we show a scatter plot
containing data from the training dataset and data generated on the trained model when two modes condense.
5.2 Pattern formation in the 1D Ising chain
In a recent work[69], the formation of features is studied analytically on a RBM with one hidden node. The
training dataset is generated from a 1D Ising chain with a uniform coupling constant and periodic boundary
conditions. The model used for generating the data has a translational symmetry which is exploited to solve
the learning dynamics exactly. There is indeed available a closed form expression for the correlation func-
tion. Thanks to the translation invariance this depends only on the relative distance between the variables.
Numerically, it is found that:
•the weights 𝑤function of the visible node index have a peak value for one of the visible node and decay
with distance to this node. Since the position of the center breaks the translation symmetry it tends to
25