the SVD of 𝑤, can aect very badly the MCMC that is used to compute the gradient. By inspecting the phase
diagram on the left panel of Figure 4, we understand that at the beginning of the learning it is important to
start with a weight matrix with a small variance 𝜎in order to avoid starting from the SG phase. Then, we
expect during learning that one or many eigenvalues 𝑤𝛼will be expressed and that the trajectory will drift
toward the ferromagnetic phase.
The nature of the ferromagnetic phase — it is instructive to look more in details at the ferromagnetic
phase to understand the behavior of the RBM. We can distinguish two cases: in the rst one only one eigenvalue
𝑤𝛼is learned ( 𝑤𝛼> 𝜎) and the other ones are close to zero; in the second scenario, many eigenvalues are
expressed. In fact the rst case is quite simple. Since only one mode has been learned the system will condense
along this mode and it will be very similar to a ferromagnet. In the second scenario, we may have many 𝑤𝛼
that have been learned, i.e. which are above noise threshold. The question then is whether the system will
preferentially condense along one single mode taken out of the learned ones or whether it will be able to make
compositions by condensing on several modes at the same time. In order to analyze this second scenario, it
is important to recall that in order to derive the phase diagram one has to perform the quenched averaging
over the matrices 𝑢and𝑣. The results will depend on the distribution that is used for the averaging. In[36],
it is shown that depending on the kurtosis of the distribution taken over 𝑢and𝑣, the system can behave in
dierent ways. Denoting with 𝛾the relative kurtosis (w.r.t. the normal distribution) three dierent behaviors
are identied:
•𝛾= 0, e.g. the Gaussian distribution. In that case, only the strongest mode is stable, and the weaker ones
are unstable w.r.t. to the strongest one. Here, the system will condense along the strongest mode only.
•𝛾 <0 e.g. the uniform or the Bernoulli distribution. Here the weaker modes can be metastable if they
are not \too far away" from the strongest one. However the system will condense only toward one mode.
•𝛾 >0 e.g. a sparse Bernoulli, or the Laplace distribution. In that case, the strongest mode is unstable
w.r.t. weaker ones, leaving the possibility to have condensation over many modes at the same time.
This corresponds to a dual compositional phase, by reference to the terminology introduced in[58]which
corresponds to combination of features instead of modes.
Hence depending on the form that will take the matrices 𝑢and𝑣during the learning, dierent types of
condensation may appear. This give us some insight on the way the statistical properties of the SVD of the
weight matrix are re
ected on the recall phase. In some cases the system might recall one macroscopic state,
in another one an equilibrium state can be made of a mixture of modes. We illustrate on the right panel of
Figure 4 the learning trajectory on the phase diagram obtained both on articial and MNIST data.
5 Learning RBM
Let us now discuss possible mechanisms at work during the learning of a RBM, which as we expect should
have something to do with pattern formation mechanisms[68]. We start by summarizing what is understood
in exactly solvable models such as the Gaussian-Gaussian and Gaussian-Spherical RBMs. Then we will review
23