distribution, hence adjusting a likelihood function on the data. In this latter case, no label is assigned to the
data and the result depends thus solely on the structure of the considered model and of the dataset.
In this review, we are interested in a particular model: the Restricted Boltzmann Machine (RBM). Origi-
nally called Harmonium[5]or product of experts[6], RBMs were designed[7]to perform unsupervised tasks even
though they can also be used to accomplish supervised learning in some sense. RBMs are part of what is called
generative models which aim to learn a latent representation of the data in order to later be used to generate
statistically similar new data |but dierent from those of the training set. There are Markov Random Fields
(or Ising model for physicists), that were designed as a way to automatically interpret an image using a parallel
architecture including a direct encoding of the probability of each \hypothesis" (latent description of a small
portion of an image). Later on, RBMs started to take an important role in the Machine Learning community,
when a simple learning algorithm introduced by Hinton et al.[6], the contrastive divergence (CD), managed to
learn a non trivial dataset such as MNIST[8]. It was in the same period that RBMs became very popular in
the ML community for its capability to pre-train deep neural networks (for instance deep auto-encoder), in a
layer wise style. And, it was then showed that RBMs are universal approximator[9]of discrete distributions,
that is, an arbitrary large RBM can approximate arbitrarily well any discrete distribution (which led to many
rigorous results about the modelization mechanism of RBMs[10]). In addition, RBMs oer the possibility to
be stacked to form a multi-layer generative model known as a deep Boltzmann machine (DBM)[11]. In the
more recent years, RBMs continued to attract scientic interest. Firstly because it can be used on continuous
or discrete variable very easily[12–15]. Secondly, because the possible interpretations of the hidden nodes can
be very useful[16,17]. Interestingly, in some cases, more elaborate methods such as GAN[18]are not working
better[19]. Finally it can be used for other tasks as well such as classication or representation learning[20]. Be-
sides all these positive aspects, the learning process itself of the RBM remains poorly understood. The reasons
are twofold: rstly, the gradient can be computed only in an approximated way as we will see; secondly, simple
changes may have terrible impact on the learning or, messed up completely with the other meta-parameters.
For instance making a naive change of variable in the MNIST dataset[21,22]can aect importantly the training
performance1. Another example, when varying the number of hidden nodes, keeping the other mete-parameters
xed, will aect not only the representational power of the rbm but also the learning dynamics itself.
The statistical physics community, on its side, has a long tradition of studying inference and learning
process with its own tools. Using idealized inference problems, it has managed in the past to shed light on
the learning process of many ML models. For instance, in the Hopeld model[23–26], a retrieval phase was
characterized where the maximum number of patterns that can be retrieved can be expressed as a function of
the temperature. Another example is the computation of the storage capacity of the Perceptron[27]on synthetic
datasets[28,29]. In these approaches, the formalism of statistical physics explains the macroscopic behavior of
the model in term of its position on a phase diagram in the large size limit.
From a purely technical point of view, the RBM can be seen for a physicist as a disordered Ising model on
a bipartite graph. Yet, the dierence with respect to the usual models that are studied in statistical physics is
that the phase diagram of a trained RBM involves a highly non-trivial coupling matrix where the components
are correlated as a result of the learning process. These dependencies make it non-trivial to adapt classical tools
1In MNIST, it is usual to consider binary variable {0,1}to describe the dataset. Taking instead {±1}naively will affect
dramatically the learning of the RBM.
2