Interestingly, the threshold does not depend on the value of 𝛾in that case, meaning that the instability is
a generic properties of the learning dynamics. The only change is the speed with which the instabilities will
develop.
3.4 Bernoulli-Gaussian RBM
The next case is the Bernoulli-Gaussian RBM where we consider the following prior
𝑞𝑣(𝑠𝑖) =1
2(𝛿𝑠𝑖,0+𝛿𝑠𝑖,1),
𝑞ℎ(𝜏𝑎) =1√︀
2𝜋𝜎2
ℎexp(︂
−𝜏2
𝑎
2𝜎2
ℎ)︂
.
Again, a Gaussian prior implies that the activation function is Gaussian. It is interesting to consider this
version of the RBM through its relation with the Hopeld model[23]realized in[48]. Since the hidden variables
are Gaussian they can be integrated out which leads to a simple analytical form for the marginals of the visible
variables. In some recent works, the opposite approach has been done, starting with an Hopeld model and
expressing it as a RBM using the Hubbard-Stratonovitch (HS) transformation (expressing the exponential of
a square as Gaussian integral) to decouple the interactions between each spin[49,50]. After integrating over the
hidden nodes in eq. (3), we end up with the following distribution
𝑝(𝑠) =1
𝑍exp⎛
⎝𝜎2
ℎ
2∑︁
𝑖𝑗𝑠𝑖𝑠𝑗[︃∑︁
𝑎𝑤𝑖𝑎𝑤𝑗𝑎]︃⎞
⎠
We recognize a Hopeld model where the patterns are given by the weights 𝑤𝑖𝑎of the RBM and the eective
coupling between two variables 𝑖and𝑗is𝐽𝑖𝑗=∑︀
𝑎𝑤𝑖𝑎𝑤𝑗𝑎. We can also consider that the variances of the
hidden nodes is related to the temperature of the model.
Some experiments have been conducted in[51]in order to compare the learning process of the Hopeld model
versus the Bernoulli-Gaussian RBM on articial data generated from an Hopeld model with dicrete patterns.
It is interesting to note that, when assuming discrete patterns, the inverse procedure can be formulated in terms
of an approximated Hopeld model. Thus, the inference of the pattern can be done directly using a set of TAP
equations of the Hopeld model, and it has been shown that the articial patterns were inferred exacltly. When
using the RBM's formulation, in the absence of information over the patterns, only the subspace covered by the
patterns were retrieved with a weak overlap with the true patterns. In fact, in that case the marginal over the
visible nodes is a function of 𝑤𝑤𝑇, which is invariant by rotation of the 𝑣matrix. It explains why the learned
weight matrix in the RBM context does not overlap with the true patterns.
With this machine, it is also possible to impose a maximum rank in order to reduce the number of parameters
needed to describe the dataset giving the possibility of a trade-o between a good description of the dataset
and the number of parameters. This properties has been used in[50]to nd global patterns in protein foldings,
using the RBM version of the Hopeld model with 𝑞discrete states.
3.5 Gaussian-Bernoulli RBM
At this point we now focus on models where the hidden layers will have a stronger impact. The integration
of the hidden layer will not end up in a simple analytical form and therefore will make it dicult to understand
14