Figure 3: From[63]. Overlap with dierent patterns when varying the dilution factor 𝑝(named 𝑑on the gure)
at low temperature. Left: a case with 3 patterns where we can observe how at small dilution, only one pattern
is fully retrieved while the second and third one appear for larger dilution. Right: a case with 6 patterns
where the gure is zoomed in the high dilution region where the branching phenomena is occurring and all the
overlaps converge toward the same value.
a binary-binary RBM where the number of hidden nodes has the same scaling. Hence, having 𝑁ℎ∼log(𝑁𝑣),
we can write exactly the partition function of the binary-binary RBM in the limit of large system size
𝑍=∑︁
{𝑠},{𝜏}exp⎛
⎝𝛽∑︁
𝑖,𝑎𝑠𝑖𝑤𝑖𝑎𝜏𝑎⎞
⎠
=∑︁
{𝑠}∏︁
𝑎cosh(︃
𝛽√𝑁𝑣∑︁
𝑖𝑤𝑖𝑎𝑠𝑖)︃
≈∑︁
{𝑠}exp⎛
⎝𝛽2
2𝑁𝑣∑︁
𝑖,𝑗∑︁
𝑎𝑤𝑖𝑎𝑤𝑗𝑎𝑠𝑖𝑠𝑗⎞
⎠
=∑︁
{𝑠}exp(︃
𝑁𝑣𝛽2
2∑︁
𝑎𝑚𝑎(𝑠)2)︃
recovering the Hopeld model with a square inverse temperature, and where we dene the magnetization along
the pattern 𝑎as𝑚𝑎(𝑠). In[63], the authors considered a weight dilution as in eq. (32) applied to the above
binary-binary RBM, or equivalently to a Hopeld model with a rescaled temperature. It is important to mention
that it is a dierent procedure than diluting the network itself, see[65]for more details on the other case. Having
sparse patterns allows the network to retrieve more than one pattern at a time. In particular, global minima of
the free energy can have an overlap with many patterns and locally stable states can be composed of a complex
mixture of patterns. We reproduce below on Figure 3 the plot from the article[63]showing the overlap over
three and six patterns in the (almost) zero temperature limit. We observe on the left panel that one pattern
is fully retrieved when the dilution is low. Then, when increasing 𝑝𝑖, more and more patterns are retrieved
together until the system enters a paramagnetic phase at high dilution.
Replica approach of the random-RBM — We will now follow the approach of Tubiana et al.[60]and give
more details on the derivation. This approach is based on a Bernoulli-RELU architecture giving the possibility
to have continuous positive value for the hidden variables.
The characterization of the phase diagram is based on the determination of the free energy in thermodynamic
limits. Given the weight ensemble (see eq. (32)), the weight matrix is now made of independent and sparse
18