the spectrum of a Gaussian random matrix, quite quickly, many eigenvalues get out of the bulk as they are
learned by the machine.
To summarize we have identied the following stages:
•Stage 1: at initialization, the features are completely random and therefore the histogram of distances is
Gaussian and centered at zero. The spectrum of 𝑤follows the Marchenko-Pastur distribution. The RBM
starts from the paramagnetic phase.
•Stage 2: the RBM enters the ferromagnetic phase, the rst strongest mode of the SVD is learned by
all features, giving a high positive or negative overlap in the inter-features distances while the generated
samples have a high overlap with the learned features.
•Stage 3: where many modes have emerged, but the learned features remain global and close to the modes
of the dataset. The histogram of distances becomes much broader but the generated sample correspond
basically to the learned features with few variety. The RBM is in a pure Mattis phase analogous to the
recall phase of the Hopeld model.
•Stage 4: nally, after a much longer period, we observed that the learned features are much alike an
ICA decomposition while the distances between features is still centered in zero but with a much smaller
variance. Finally the generated samples look very similar to the provided dataset. The RBM is in a
compositional phase, both regarding the features and the modes (the dual one).
•Stage 5: empirically, we observe that the learning of the modes of 𝑤never stops. Hence, a macroscopic
number of modes is expressed and it is not clear anymore what would be the behavior of the machine in
this regime, whether this corresponds to a standard spin-glass phase[62]or another unknown disordered
phase.
In future works, it could be interesting to understand the mechanism leading to the localization of the
features, in particular whether this is related to some specic tail distribution of the weight matrix spectrum.
An aspect of RBMs completely absent from the previous description of the learning process is the behaviour
of the biases associated to hidden nodes. These are very important since they determine the threshold above
which the features are activated and their learning dynamics is quite intertwined with the modes dynamics.
This aspect of the learning could be worth studying especially to improve present learning algorithms.
5.4 Learning RBM using TAP equations
The diculty of learning an RBM comes as already said from the negative term which requires to compute
the thermal average of correlations between a visible and hidden nodes. In particular, when the machine starts
to learn many modes, it becomes more and more dicult to estimate this term correctly using Monte-Carlo
methods due to the eventually large relaxation time. In addition, to get a precise measurement, it is necessary
to get many statistically independent samples in order to reduce the statistical error.
In this section we will derive the mean-eld self-consistent equations that can be used to approximate the
negative term by using a high-temperature expansion of the Boltzmann measure. We illustrate the method
showing the result of Gabri e et. al[72]where a RBM has been trained by using the TAP equations. An
30