one. Then, a certain number of numerical results are provided on the MNIST dataset which tends to conrm
that the behavior of the learned RBM looks similar to a "compositional phase". It would therefore be of great
interest to characterize the learning curve theoretically in order to understand how this phase is reached. It is
also interesting to mention a recent work investigating the role of the diluted weights[66]during the learning in
a RBM with one hidden node. In this article, it is shown that the proportion of diluted weights tends to vanish
during the learning procedure. This might be a signal that when the number of hidden features is very low, the
RBM automatically adjusts itself in the ferromagnetic phase described above, learning a global pattern of the
dataset.
4.2 Mean-field approach using rank 𝐾weight matrix
The diculty with the RBM is to be able to study the phase diagram of the model without discarding the
fact that during the learning, the weights 𝑤𝑖𝑎become correlated between each others: starting from indepen-
dently distributed 𝑤𝑖𝑎, we can observe how the spectrum of the weight matrix is modied during the learning
(see Figure 11 for instance). Classical approaches in statistical mechanics consider a set of independent weights,
all identically distributed, before trying to compute the quenched free energy of the system by the replica trick3.
In the present case the hypothesis of independent weights cannot hold, as can be seen by looking at the spectrum
of the weight matrix at the beginning of the learning and a few iterations later. The absorption of information
by the machine prompts the development of strong correlations. This phenomena is illustrated in Section 5.3 on
Figure 11. In order to understand how these eigenvalues aect the phase diagram of the system, it is reasonable
to assume a particular statistical ensemble of the weight matrix of the form
𝑤𝑖𝑎=𝐾∑︁
𝛼=1𝑢𝛼
𝑖𝑤𝛼𝑣𝛼
𝑎+𝑟𝑖𝑎 (33)
where 𝐾≪𝑁𝑣, assuming a low-rank decomposition of the weight matrix plus some random noise 𝑟𝑖𝑎, where 𝑟is
a random matrix with iid centered Gaussian elements with variance 𝜎. With this decomposition we assume that
the eigenvalues 𝑤𝛼correspond to some intrinsic property of a learned dataset, while the matrix, 𝑟,𝑢and𝑣can
be treated as quenched disorder and averaged over. The set of vectors 𝑢𝛼and𝑣𝛼correspond approximately to
the left and right eigenvectors of the matrix 𝑤. We can thus start to average 𝑍𝑛over all these variables. Starting
with the average over the random matrix 𝑟, it introduces the following interaction term∑︀
𝑖𝑎,𝑝̸=𝑞𝑠𝑝
𝑖𝑠𝑞
𝑖𝜏𝑝
𝑎𝜏𝑞
𝑎, where
𝑝, 𝑞runs over the 𝑛replicas. In this term, it is possible to decouple the interaction between the visible and the
hidden nodes by introducing the overlap parameters
𝑄𝑝𝑞∼E𝑟,𝑣,𝑢[⟨𝜏𝑞
𝑎𝜏𝑝
𝑎⟩] (34)
𝑄𝑝𝑞∼E𝑟,𝑣,𝑢[⟨𝑠𝑞
𝑖𝑠𝑝
𝑖⟩] (35)
3in few words, considering the quantity 𝑍𝑛for a given (integer) 𝑛, where 𝑍is the partition function, for small 𝑛, we can develop
𝑍𝑛≈1 +𝑛log(𝑍). The key point here is that it is generally possible to compute the quenched 𝑍𝑛and then making a small 𝑛
expansion.
20