the eect of the features and to characterize properly the learning dynamics. We rst mention the Gaussian-
Bernoulli case dealing with the following priors:
𝑞𝑣(𝑠𝑖) =1√︀
2𝜋𝜎2𝑣exp(︂
−𝑠2
𝑖
2𝜎2𝑣)︂
, (25)
𝑞ℎ(𝜏𝑎) =1
2(𝛿𝜏𝑎,0+𝛿𝜏𝑎,1). (26)
When using the discrete {0,1}variables, we obtain the sigmoid activation function for the hidden nodes
𝑝(𝜏𝑎= 1|𝑠) =1
1 + exp(−∑︀
𝑖𝑤𝑖𝑎𝑠𝑖+𝜂𝑎).
With this parameterization, it is natural to interpret a hidden node 𝜏as an active feature when 𝜏= 1 and
an inactive one if 𝜏= 0. When responding to a given input through the conditional probability 𝑝(𝜏|𝑠), the
machine is turning on the hidden nodes corresponding to overlapping features with the input. Therefore,
the input undergoes a non-linear decomposition on the learned features. Saying it that way, it is somewhat
reminiscent of the Independent Component Analysis[52]where a matrix 𝑋is factorized on a set of independent
sources or components 𝑦:𝑥=𝐴𝑦. The sources here are independent in the sense that they are independently
distributed. In the context of ICA, the goal is to nd the inverse of the mixing matrix in order to recover the
sources from the received signal. Concerning this particular RBM, it is proven[35]that under some assumptions
| (i) having the same number of visible and hidden nodes, (ii) that the signal comes from a set of independent
sources and (iii) that the variance of the visible variables is much smaller than the mean of the signal| there
exists a stable solution for the learning dynamics where the learned weight matrix corresponds to the un-mixing
matrix of the signal. In this regime, the RBM acts as an ICA. In other words, if the signal 𝑠𝑑used as an input
for the RBM can be written as a mixture of sources: 𝑠=𝐴𝑦, a stable solution of the learning process consists
in recovering the inverse mixing matrix in the weight matrix: 𝑤=𝐴−1.
To end up with this variant of the RBM, it is interesting to note that the prior variance of the visible
variables here is in principle a xed parameter. It has been noted that when using the prior (25-26) the mean of
the conditional distribution over the visible 𝑝(𝑠𝑖|𝜏) is stretched by the variance 𝜎𝑣. It might be useful to remove
this eect by renormalizing the weight matrix and the visible biases as in[14]:𝑤→𝑤/𝜎2
𝑣and𝜃𝑖→𝜃𝑖/𝜎2
𝑣.
Using this parametrization, we obtain
𝑝(𝑠𝑖|𝜏)≈𝒩(𝜃𝑖+∑︁
𝑎𝑤𝑖𝑎𝜏𝑎, 𝜎2
𝑣),
where𝒩represents the normal distribution. Note that it is possible to include the learning of these parameters
in the likelihood ascent as in[14]. It is however important to stress here that even if appealing, the possibility
to tune the variance of each visible node doesn't solve the problem of learning individual variances of separated
clusters in a dataset. Indeed, consider the problem where the dataset is formed of many well-separated clusters
with distinct variances. For a given visible node 𝑖, its variance computed over the whole dataset or instead over
a given cluster have no reason to coincide. And the the prior variance if properly learned will only account
for the global variance of this node. This should involve a more complex setting of the RBM which we won't
discuss here in order to account for individual variances of clusters in a complex dataset.
15