Figure 7: Left: gure from[69], the value of 𝑤𝑖for each visible site of a RBM with 3 hidden nodes trained on
the dataset of the 1D homogeneous Ising model with periodic boundary condition. We see three similarly peak
shaped potentials with a decreasing magnitude of similar order for the three. Each peak intends to reproduce
the correlation pattern around a central node, and therefore cannot reproduce the translational symmetry of
the problem. Right: gure from[69], the position of the three peaks as a function of the number of training
epochs. We observe that the peaks diuse while repelling each others. The diusion aims at reproducing the
correlation patterns of the translational symmetry, while the repelling interaction ensure that two peaks will
not overlap.
diuse over the system during the learning.
•Using more hidden nodes (but still few), it is observed that each feature is peaked at dierent places an
repel each other to encode the correlation patterns of the data. Again, the position of the peaks diuse
with time even though some repulsive interaction seems to forbid them to cross. See Figure 7 taken
from[69]illustrating this phenomena.
Now in[69], the author compute the gradient of a system with one hidden node
𝜕logℒ
𝜕𝑤𝑖=⟨
𝑠𝑖tanh⎛
⎝𝛽∑︁
𝑗𝑠𝑗𝑤𝑗⎞
⎠⟩
data−tanh( 𝑤𝑖)
This expression can be developed up to the fourth order in 𝑤(and 𝛽), giving in the case of the 1D Ising chain
𝜕logℒ
𝜕𝑤𝑖≈𝛽(𝑤𝑖+1+𝑤𝑖−1)−𝑤𝑖∑︁
𝑘𝑤2
𝑘+𝑤3
𝑖+𝒪(𝑤4, 𝛽𝑤3)
It is easy to identify in the rst two terms the 1D discrete spatial diusion. This equation can be cast into a
spatial diusion equation with additional term in the continuous time limit (see[69]for more details). From this
small coupling expansion it is also possible to study the stationary solution in the one hidden node case and
show that it is consistent with experimental results: it describes a peaked function decreasing rapidly as the
distance from the center increases. An approximated weak coupling equations can also be derived in the case
of two hidden units. In that case, an eective coupling between the two features vectors 𝑤1and𝑤2is present
and responsible for a repulsive interaction between the two peaks.
This illustrates nicely how the features learned by the RBM tend to describe local correlations between
variables. In addition, these features diuse over the whole system during the learning to restore the translational
symmetry without crossing thanks to a repulsive interactions between them. In the next section, we will focus
on the learning behavior on the MNIST dataset and see that in that case, the learned features similarly describe
local correlations.
26