strong). This would be most probably the case with RBMs. It is also worth mentioning that in the case of the
inverse Ising model, BP approaches never manage to succeed because of the convergence problems[82]and the
TAP solution was preferred when inferring the couplings[83,84]. However, some attempts[59,85]using BP and
the replica theory on a RBM with one hidden unit were done. In that setting, it is possible to compute the
marginal over the weight matrix using BP and therefore to compute its maximum likelihood given some observed
datapoints. The results tend to show that, as the number of data increases, the learned features become more
localized as is observed in many experiments. Managing to extend this result to the case of many hidden nodes
would open the possibility to study the pattern formation using message-passing techniques. An even more
recent study[86], using a variational approach to approximate the posterior distribution of the patterns given
the RBM and a dataset shows on articial data that the patterns are recovered during the learning. Once again,
the missing convincing piece in that case is the applicability to real dataset and the ability to samples complex
distribution.
6 Conclusion
With this review, we strive at showing that not only is RBM part of a hectic eld of study, but it is also an
intriguing puzzle with pieces which are missing in order to be able to understand the way these models can/could
assimilate complex information/more complex information. While the black box nature of the learning process
starts to fade away very slowly, there are still many key aspects that we do not understand or master for such
simple models. We try to list interesting leads for the future.
•Learning quality: Despite the fact that we are maximizing a likelihood function (which can not be com-
puted) it is very hard to obtain a good indicator for comparing two learned RBM. Even if many methods
exist to compute the likelihood approximately[87,88]the obtained scores are in general not commented in
regard to robust statistical analysis. If for very hard cases of image generation, it is easy to compare the
results by eye inspection, there are no general method that manage to assess the quality of the samples
in terms of how well the learned distribution reproduces the dataset distribution. Some recent work[89]
introduced the notion of \ressemblance" and \privacy" that test the geometric repartition of the true data
against the generated samples. This could be a rst step dening scores according to dierent criteria
(actually, this problem is not specic to the RBM but concerns actually most of the unsupervised learning
models (GANs, VAEs, ...).
•The number of hidden nodes: It is striking that we are still unable to have a principled manner of
deciding how many hidden nodes are necessary to learn datasets which are not too complex. For instance,
on MNIST, it is possible to learn a machine with only 50 hidden nodes and it somehow manages to
produce decent samples. The understanding on how much hidden nodes are necessary to reach a given
sample quality is completely missing. In addition, the number of hidden nodes in
uences a lot the learning
behavior of the machine, again in a way that is not fully understood.
•The landscape of free energy: When using statistical mechanics to understand RBMs, the natural
question that comes in mind is about the landscape of free energy of the learned machine. It is easy to
37