𝑠1 𝑠n𝑣𝜏1 𝜏nℎ
𝑠𝑖𝜏𝑎Hidden layer
Visible layer𝑊𝑖𝑎
Figure 1: bipartite structure of the RBM.
Historically, the RBM was rst dened with binary {0,1}variables for both the visible and the hidden nodes
in line with the sigmoid activation function of the perceptron, hence being directly intepretable as spin-glass
model of statistical mechanics. A more general denition is considered here by introducing a prior distribution
function for both the visible and hidden variables, allowing us to consider discrete or continuous variables. This
generalization will allow us to see the links between RBMs and other well-known models of machine learning.
From now on we will write all the equations for the generic case using the notation 𝑞𝑣(𝜎) and 𝑞ℎ(𝜏) to indicate
an arbitrary choice of \prior" distribution. Averaging over the RBM measure corresponding to Hamiltonian (1)
will then be denoted by
⟨𝑓(𝑠,𝜏)⟩ℋ=∑︁
{𝑠,𝜏}𝑝(𝑠,𝜏)𝑓(𝑠,𝜏) (2)
where here  can represent both discrete sums or integrals and with the RBM distribution dened from now
on as
𝑝(𝑠,𝜏) =1
𝑍𝑞𝑣(𝑠)𝑞ℎ(𝜏) exp(−ℋ[𝑠,𝜏]). (3)
It is worth mentioning that, the choice of the prior distribution can be rephrased in terms of an activation
function on the conditioned distribution over the visible or hidden variables. Therefore, when specifying a prior
distribution, we will systematically indicate the corresponding activation function for the hidden layer, that is
𝑝(𝜏|𝑠), which is obtained using the Bayes theorem
𝑝(𝜏|𝑠) =𝑝(𝑠,𝜏)∑︀
𝜏𝑝(𝑠,𝜏)=𝑞ℎ(𝜏) exp(−ℋ[𝑠,𝜏])∑︀
{𝜏}𝑞ℎ(𝜏) exp(−ℋ[𝑠,𝜏])
Before entering more into the technical details about the RBM, it is important to recall that it has been designed
as a \learnable" generative model in practice. In that sense, the usual procedure is to feed the RBM with a
dataset, tune its parameter 𝑤,𝜃and𝜂such that the equilibrium properties of the learned RBM reproduce
faithfully the correlations (or the patterns) present in the dataset. In other words, it is expected that the
learned model is able to produce new data statistically similar but distinct from the training set. To do so,
the classical procedure is to proceed with a stochastic gradient ascent (to be explained in Section 2.2) of the
likelihood function that can be easily expressed. Usually the learning of ML models involves the minimization
of a loss function which happens here to be minus the log likelihood, thus in the following we will refer to
Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) instead. First, consider a set of datapoints {𝑠(𝑑)
𝑖}, where 𝑑= 1, . . . , 𝑀 is
4