where we used the following identities for the second order computation
𝜕2𝛽𝐴
𝜕𝛽𝜕𝑚 𝑖⃒⃒⃒⃒
𝛽=0=−∑︁
𝑎𝑤𝑖𝑎𝑚𝑎
𝜕2𝛽𝐴
𝜕𝛽𝜕𝑚 𝑎⃒⃒⃒⃒
𝛽=0=−∑︁
𝑖𝑤𝑖𝑎𝑚𝑖
As show in[72], the expansion can be easily extended to the third order without a big computational cost due to
the particular topology of the RBM. Deriving the free energy obtained at this order w.r.t. the magnetization,
we obtain the self-consistent set of equations dening the TAP equations for the RBM
𝑚𝑖= tanh(︃∑︁
𝑎𝑤𝑖𝑎𝑚𝑎−∑︁
𝑎𝑤2
𝑖𝑎𝑚𝑖(1−𝑚2
𝑎))︃
(41)
𝑚𝑎= tanh(︃∑︁
𝑖𝑤𝑖𝑎𝑚𝑎−∑︁
𝑖𝑤2
𝑖𝑎𝑚𝑎(1−𝑚2
𝑖))︃
(42)
Hence, a solution of the TAP equations should satised eqs. (41) and (42) and give us at the same time the
approximated free energy associated to this solution:
𝐹[𝑚] =∑︁
𝑖𝑆(𝑚𝑖) +∑︁
𝑎𝑆(𝑚𝑎)−∑︁
𝑖𝑎𝑤𝑖𝑎𝑚𝑖𝑚𝑎+∑︁
𝑖𝑎𝑤2
𝑖𝑎
2(1−𝑚𝑖)2(1−𝑚𝑎)2(43)
We can now use these mean-eld equations to learn the RBM. First, we need to take into account the fact that
many solutions to eqs. (41) and (42) exist, each one with a given value of the free energy. Hence, the partition
function can be approximated by
𝑍=∑︁
𝛾𝑒−𝐹(𝑚(𝛾)
𝑖,𝑚(𝛾)
𝑎)
where the sum runs over all the possible solution to the mean-eld equations (41)-(42), weighted by the free
energy given in (43). Using this approximation in the computation of the likelihood we obtain the following
gradient
𝜕ℒ
𝜕𝑤𝑖𝑎=⟨𝑠𝑖𝜏𝑎⟩data−⟨𝑚𝑖𝑚𝑎+𝑤2
𝑖𝑎(1−𝑚2
𝑖)(1−𝑚2
𝑎)⟩MF
where
⟨𝑂⟩𝑀𝐹=∑︀
𝛾𝑂𝛾𝑒−𝐹𝛾
∑︀
𝛾′𝑒−𝐹𝛾′(44)
correspond to the model average over all the solutions of the mean-eld equations. We can see here a notable
dierence with the approach developed in[72]. In their work, Gabri e et al runs the sums over all obtained xed
point from the mean-eld equations divided by the number of xed points only. The risk is that if the mean-eld
equations converge toward a xed point that is suboptimal (have a high free energy) or even spurious (being a
a maximum of the free energy) the estimation of the negative term will be polluted by such xed points. More
details on the Plefka expansion on bipartite Ising model can be found here[78]. As a nal remark, let us insist
on the fact that, even if the convergence of the TAP equations is not guaranteed, problems of convergence are
practically not met in the ferromagnetic phase. On the contrary, such problems occur quite often in the spin
glass phase which we wish to avoid in the context of learning the RBM.
33