elements. In this context, the replica analysis can be used to perform the quenched average. The replicated
interaction term can be rst easily computed and gives
E𝑤[︃
exp(︃
𝛽∑︁
𝑝𝑠𝑝
𝑖𝑤𝑖𝑎𝜏𝑝
𝑎)︃]︃
≈exp(︃
𝑝𝑖𝛽2
2𝑁∑︁
𝑝𝑞𝑠𝑝
𝑖𝑠𝑞
𝑖𝜏𝑝
𝑎𝜏𝑞
𝑎)︃
for the interaction term ( 𝑖𝑎). The interaction between the visible and hidden nodes can be decoupled using the
HS transformation
exp(︃
𝑝2
𝑖𝛽2
2𝑁∑︁
𝑝𝑞𝑠𝑝
𝑖𝑠𝑞
𝑖𝜏𝑝
𝑎𝜏𝑞
𝑎)︃
∼∫︁∏︁
𝑝𝑞𝑑𝑞𝑝𝑞𝑑𝑞𝑝𝑞
2𝜋exp(︂
−𝑁𝛽(𝑞𝑝𝑞𝑞𝑝𝑞−𝑞𝑝𝑞𝑝𝑖
𝑝𝑠𝑝
𝑖𝑠𝑞
𝑖−1
2𝛽𝑝𝜏𝑝
𝑎𝜏𝑞
𝑎))︂
introducing the spin-glass order parameter over the replicas (we denoted by 𝑝, 𝑞, . . . , the replica index):
𝑞𝑝𝑞∼E𝑤[⟨𝜏𝑞
𝑎𝜏𝑝
𝑎⟩]
𝑞𝑝𝑞∼E𝑤[⟨(𝑝𝑖/𝑝)𝑠𝑞
𝑖𝑠𝑝
𝑖⟩]
where we note that the parameters over the visible nodes are weighted by the sparsity of the network. Using
the replica symmetric ansatz, the quenched free energy can be computed and from it a set of order parameters
emerges. An new order parameter is introduced in their derivation: the number ~𝐿of hidden nodes that have
a macroscopic activation ∼𝒪 (𝑚√
𝑁), while the other ones remain silents (of order 1). This parameter is
reminiscent from the replica approach of the Hopeld model[24–26]. In this approach, the number of pattern
that can be expressed is xed, in order to investigate the stability of retrieving one or more patterns. The
important dierence here is that the sparsity 𝑝imposes that the diluted weights can let many patterns to be
expressed at the same time. Hence, the phase diagram will be characterized by, the value of the weight sparsity
𝑝and ~𝐿the number of activated hidden nodes. The phase diagram is computed numerically, by scanning the
possible value for the order parameters (see[60]for more details). It is found that when
•𝑝= 1 and ~𝐿= 1: no sparsity and only one hidden node is activated. At low temperature, it gives back the
behavior of the well-known Hopeld model having a recall phase of the patterns. An interesting additional
result when using ReLu activations is that the capacity of the network can be increased by playing with
the bias on the hidden nodes, at the cost of reducing the basin of attraction of the patterns.
•𝑝 <1 a ferromagnetic transition is found when imposing ~𝐿= 1, where one pattern is recalled at a time.
•𝑝 <1, when all the hidden nodes are all weakly activated, a SG phase is found.
•𝑝 <1 and ~𝐿is such that 1≪~𝐿≪𝑁ℎ; acompositional phase is numerically identied. It is characterized
by an intermediate number of hidden nodes strongly activated.
In this analysis, it is demonstrated that in the possible equilibrium behaviors of the random-RBM, an interesting
phase mixing many patterns is present that characterizes in some way the ecient working regime of a learned
RBM. It is of course a simplied case where the patterns are {±1}with a certain dilution factor. Now, the fact
that there exists a family of weights where this phase exists is quite dierent from showing that the learning
dynamics converges toward such a phase and how. In Tubiana's thesis, a stability analysis of the dierent phases
is done showing that for a range of parameters of the RBM, the compositional phase is indeed the dominant
19