Restricted Boltzmann Machine, recent advances and mean-field
theory∗
Aur´ elien Decelle1,2†and Cyril Furtlehner2
1Departamento de F´ ısica T´ eorica I, Universidad Complutense, 28040 Madrid, Spain
2TAU team INRIA Saclay & LISN Universit´ e Paris Saclay, Orsay 91405, France
Abstract
This review deals with Restricted Boltzmann Machine (RBM) under the light of statistical physics. The
RBM is a classical family of Machine learning (ML) models which played a central role in the development of
deep learning. Viewing it as a Spin Glass model and exhibiting various links with other models of statistical
physics, we gather recent results dealing with mean-field theory in this context. First the functioning of the
RBM can be analyzed via the phase diagrams obtained for various statistical ensembles of RBM leading
in particular to identify a compositional phase where a small number of features or modes are combined
to form complex patterns. Then we discuss recent works either able to devise mean-field based learning
algorithms; either able to reproduce generic aspects of the learning process from some ensemble dynamics
equations or/and from linear stability arguments.
Keywords: RBM, Machine Learning, Statistical Physics
PACS: 02.50.-r, 02.30.Z, 05.70.F
1 Introduction
During the last decade, machine learning has experienced a rapid development, both in everyday life with
the incredible success of image recognition used in various applications, and in research[1,2]where many dierent
communities are now involved. This common eort involves fundamental aspects such as why it works or how to
build new architectures and at the same time a search for new applications of machine learning to other elds,
like for instance improving biomedical images segmentation[3]or detecting automatically phase transitions in
physical system[4]. Machine learning classical tasks are divided into at least two big categories: supervised and
unsupervised learning (putting aside reinforcement learning and the more recently introduced approach of self-
supervised learning). Supervised learning consists in learning a specic task | for instance recognizing an object
on an image or a word in a speech| by giving the machine a set of samples together with the correct answer
and correcting the prediction of the machine by minimizing a well-design and easy computable loss function.
Unsupervised learning consists in learning a representation of the data given an explicit or implicit probability
∗AD was supported by the Comunidad de Madrid and the Complutense University of Madrid (Spain) through the Atracci´ on de
Talento program (Ref. 2019-T1/TIC-13298).
†Corresponding author. E-mail: adecelle@ucm.es
1arXiv:2011.11307v2  [cond-mat.dis-nn]  28 May 2021