00.511.52
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4Paramagnetic
phase
Ferromagnetic
phase
SpinGlass
phase
AT
1/σ
wα/σ
Figure 4: Left: the phase diagram of the model. The y-axis corresponds to the variance of the noise matrix,
the x-axis to the value of the strongest mode of 𝑤. We see that the ferromagnetic phase is characterized by
having strong mode eigenvalues. In this phase, the system can behave either by recalling one eigenmode of 𝑤
or by composing many modes together (compositional phase). For the sake of completeness, we indicate the AT
region where the replica symmetric solution is unstable, but for practical purpose we are not interested in this
phase. Right: An example of a learning trajectory on the MNIST dataset (in red) and on a synthetic dataset
(in blue). It shows that starting from the paramagnetic phase, the learning dynamics brings the system toward
the ferromagnetic phase by learning a few strong modes.
where
ℎ(𝑥, 𝑢) =𝜅1
4(︀
𝜎√𝑞𝑥+∑︁
𝛾(𝑤𝛾𝑚𝛾−𝜂𝛾)𝑢𝛾)︀
,
ℎ(𝑥, 𝑣) =𝜅−1
4(︀
𝜎√𝑞𝑥+∑︁
𝛾(𝑤𝛾𝑚𝛾−𝜃𝛾)𝑣𝛾)︀
.
A rst look at the equations for the magnetization over the mode 𝛼tells us that they correspond to the usual
mean-eld equations of the Sherrington-Kirkpatrick model[67]projected on the SVD decomposition of the weight
matrix. The same is true for the overlap, with the dierence that we have an overlap parameter for each layer.
Analyzing these equations, we can distinguish three phases.
•A Paramagnetic phase: it correponds to the case where 𝑞= 0, ^ 𝑞= 0, 𝑚𝛼= 0 and ^ 𝑚𝛼= 0. In the
high temperature phase there exists only one minimum to the free energy.
•A Ferromagnetic phase: given by 𝑞,𝑞, 𝑚 𝛼,𝑚𝛼̸= 0. In this phase, the magnetization of the system is
polarized toward one or many modes 𝛼.
•A Spin Glass phase: where 𝑞,𝑞̸= 0, but 𝑚𝛼= ^𝑚𝛼= 0. In that phase, the system is trapped into
one of the many minima of the free energy that are completely uncorrelated with the SVD modes of the
weight matrix.
On left panel of Figure 4 is shown the phase diagram as a function of 1 /𝜎and of 𝑤max/𝜎, the ratio of strongest
mode of 𝑤to the variance 𝜎of the noise.
From the learning perspective, the interesting phase is the ferromagnetic one. It seems also important that
the learning avoid entering into the spin glass (SG) phase. The SG phase, apart from being uncorrelated with
22