Figure 9: Left: the rst 10 modes of the MNIST dataset (top) and the RBM (bottom) at the beginning of the
learning. The similarity between most of them is clearly visible. Right: 100 random features of the RBM at
the same moment of the learning. We can see that most features correspond to a mode of the dataset when
comparing with the left-top panel.
identical at rst order in 𝑤𝛼to (14) in the Gaussian-Gaussian case, when 𝜎𝑣=𝜎ℎ= 1. Hence, at the beginning
of the learning, this RBM follows the same trajectory as the Gaussian-Gaussian one, where the mode 𝑤𝛼are
amplied by the principal modes of the dataset. Similarly, it can be shown that the matrix 𝑢will start to align
with the principal direction of the dataset. To see how the features evolve in the non-linear regime, we train
an RBM with a very low learning rate and 500 hidden nodes on MNIST. On Figure 9 we observe as expected
from the linear stability analysis, that at the beginning of the learning the rst modes of the weight matrix
are almost identical to the one of the SVD of the dataset. We see in particular that the features themselves
correspond to modes of the dataset, meaning that the RBM starts by learning global features.
Additionally, at this stage of the learning the MC samples obtained from the RBM are typically prototypes:
each sample is almost identical (or have a large overlap) with a learned feature. In fact, during the training,
if we monitor samples at each epoch (keeping a low learning rate), we can see that the samples have a high
overlap with one mode at the beginning, then later on with combinations of modes. To be more precise, we can
distinguish dierent stages of the learning by inspecting the features, the produced samples and the distance
between the discretize features (taking the sign of each feature and computing the overlap).
We illustrate these dierent stages on Figure 10.
Finally at the end of the learning we recover localized features as in the study-case of the previous section. It
has been noticed many times that these localized features are very similar to the ones given by an ICA. To which
extent this aspect of learning is aected by the dataset that is considered is an open and interesting question.
If we push further the learning, we observe that the RBM keeps learning more and more modes. It is not clear
if the system enters in another phase (spin-glass or something else) or if it just overts the dataset. To end up
with these numerical experiments, let us look at the spectrum of 𝑤, at the beginning, at an intermediate stage
and at the end of the learning. On Figure 11, we see that starting from a Marchenko-Pastur law, coming from
28