PCD-1
P-MF
P-TAP
Figure 12: Top: |gure taken from[72]| Samples taken from the permanent chain at the end of the training
of the RBM. The rst two lines correspond to samples generated using PCD. The second two lines to samples
obtained using the P-nMF approximation and the last two, using P-TAP. Bottom: A 100 features obtained
after the training, we can see that they are qualitatively very similar to the ones obtain when training the RBM
with P-TAP.
Experiment with TAP learning We show here some results obtained on MNIST using the same parameters
as above but with the mean-eld approximation taken from[72]. Here, the comparison is done using the persistent
chain algorithm, where a set of MC chains is maintained all along the learning whenever using CD, nMF or the
TAP approximation (in the case of nMF or TAP, the chain is updated using the corresponding self-consistent
equations), see Figure 12.
First we see that the samples generated by all the three methods are qualitatively similar. Second, the
features learned are also qualitatively similar to the PCD case. Therefore, on the MNIST dataset the two
machines are hardly distinguished by just looking at the generated samples and learned features indicating that
the MF/TAP approximation is working very well. It is also important to point out here that, the advantage of
the mean-eld approximation in that case does not rely on any speed up with regard to the learning procedure.
But, more importantly, it provides complementary tools such as the xed points as local maxima of the free
energy and their associated free energy. For instance, in[79]a RBM is used as a prior distribution in the context
of compressed sensing where the mean-eld equations are used to infer equilibrium values of the variables.
In[80], the RBM is used to reconstruct images from partial observations, again using the mean-eld formulation
to infer the states of the missing information.
5.5 Mean-Field learning: ensemble average
The mean-eld equations derived in section (4.2) for the RBM, where the weight matrix is constructed
as a low rank decomposition, can be integrated numerically in order to learn the parameters of the RBM. By
contrast to the TAP equations described in section (5.4) which are solved on single instances, they correspond
to the ensemble average (over the parameters 𝑢,𝑣and the noise), i.e. are meant to represent an average case
of learning.
In the approach developed in[36], using the statistical ensemble dened in Section 4.2 it is possible to have
34