GENERALIZED RANDOM FORESTS 1157
are trying to solve is encoded in (8 ), while the second scanning step is a universal
step shared across all different types of forests.
We expect this approach to provide more consistent computational performance
than optimizing ( 5) at each split directly. When growing a tree, the computation is
typically dominated by the split-selection step, and so it is critical for this step to
be implemented as efﬁciently as possible [conversely, the labeling step ( 8) is only
solved once per node, and so is less performance sensitive]. From this perspective,using a regression splitting criterion as in ( 9) is very desirable, as it is possible
to evaluate all possible split points along a given feature with only a single passover the data in the parent node (by representing the criterion in terms of cumu-
lative sums). In contrast, directly optimizing the original criterion ( 5) may require
solving intricate optimization problems for each possible candidate split.
This type of gradient-based approximation also underlies other popular statis-
tical algorithms, including gradient boosting [Friedman (2001)] and the model-
based recursive partitioning algorithm of Zeileis, Hothorn and Hornik (2008).
Conceptually, tree splitting bears some connection to change-point detection if we
imagine tree splits as occurring at detected change-points in θ(x); and, from this
perspective, our approach is closely related to standard techniques for moment-based change-point detection [ Andrews (1993), Hansen (1992), Hjort and Koning
(2002), Nyblom (1989), Zeileis (2005), Zeileis and Hornik (2007), Ploberger and
Krämer (1992)].
In our context, we can verify that the error from using the approximate criterion
(9) instead of the exact /Delta1-criterion ( 5) is within the tolerance used to motivate the
/Delta1-criterion in Proposition 1, thus suggesting that our use of ( 6) to guide splitting
may not result in too much inefﬁciency. Note that consistent estimates of A
Pcan in
general be derived directly via, for example, ( 7), without relying on Proposition 2.
PROPOSITION 2. Under the conditions of Proposition 1,if|AP−
∇E[ψˆθP,ˆνP(Oi)|Xi∈P]| → P0,that is ,APis consistent, then/Delta1(C 1,C2)
and/tildewide/Delta1(C 1,C2)are approximately equivalent, in that /tildewide/Delta1(C 1,C2)=/Delta1(C 1,C2)+
oP(max{r2,1/nC1,1/nC2}).
2.4. Building a forest with theoretical guarantees . Now, given a practical
splitting scheme for growing individual trees, we want to grow a forest that al-lows for consistent estimation of θ(x) using ( 2) paired with the forest weights ( 3).
We expect each tree to provide small, relevant neighborhoods for xthat give us
noisy estimates of θ(x); then we may hope that forest-based aggregation will pro-
vide a single larger but still relevant neighborhood for xthat yields stable estimates
ˆθ(x).
To ensure good statistical behavior, we rely on two conceptual ideas that have
proven to be successful in the literature on forest-based least-squares regression:Training trees on subsamples of the training data [ Mentch and Hooker (2016),