1174 S. ATHEY, J. TIBSHIRANI AND S. WAGER
FIG.3 . Generalized random forest estimates (along with pointwise 95% conﬁdence intervals )for
the causal effect of having a third child on the probability that a mother works for pay ,as identiﬁed
by the same sex instrument of Angrist and Evans (1998); a positive treatment effect means that the
treatment reduces the probability that the mother works. We vary the mother’s age at ﬁrst birth and
the father’s income ;other covariates are set to their median values in the above plots .The forest
was grown with a subsample fraction s/n=0.05, a minimum leaf size k=800 and consists of
B=100,000 trees .
Results from a generalized random forest analysis are presented in Figure 3.
These results suggest that the observed treatment effect is driven by mothers whose
husbands have a lower income. Such an effect would be intuitively easy to justify:It seems plausible that mothers with wealthier husbands can afford to hire help in
raising their children, and so can choose whether or not to work based on other
considerations. That being said, we caution that the father’s income was measuredin the census, so there is potentially an endogeneity problem: Perhaps a mother’schoice not to work after having a third child enables the husband to earn more.
Ideally, we would have wanted to measure the husband’s income at the time of the
second child’s birth, but we do not have access to this measurement in the presentdata. Moreover, the conﬁdence intervals in Figure 3are rather wide, attesting to
the importance of formal asymptotic theory when using forest-based methods for
instrumental variables regression.
8. Discussion. We introduced generalized random forests as a versatile
method for adaptive, local estimation in a wide variety of statistical models. We
discussed our method in the contexts of quantile regression and heterogeneous
treatment effect estimation, and our approach also applies to a wide variety of
other settings, such as demand estimation or panel data analysis. Our software,grf, is implemented in a modular way that should enable users to implementsplitting rules motivated by new statistical questions.