1150 S. ATHEY, J. TIBSHIRANI AND S. WAGER
the treatment affects long-term survival, and the other at its effect on the length
of hospital stays. It is plausible that the treatment heterogeneity in each setting
would be based on disparate covariates, for example, a patient’s smoking habitsfor long-term survival, and the location and size of the hospital for the length of
stay.
Thus, each time we apply random forests to a new scientiﬁc task, it is important
to use rules for recursive partitioning that are able to detect and highlight hetero-
geneity in the signal the researcher is interested in. In prior work, such problem-speciﬁc rules have largely been designed on a case by case basis. Although the
CART rules of Breiman et al. (1984) have long been popular for classiﬁcation
and regression tasks, there has been a steady stream of papers proposing new
splitting rules for other problems, including Athey and Imbens (2016)a n d Su et
al.(2009) for treatment effect estimation, Beygelzimer and Langford (2009)a n d
Kallus (2017) for personalized policy allocation and Gordon and Olshen (1985),
LeBlanc and Crowley (1992), Molinaro, Dudoit and van der Laan (2004)a sw e l l
as several others for survival analysis. Zeileis, Hothorn and Hornik (2008) propose
a method for constructing a single tree for general maximum likelihood problems,
where splitting is based on hypothesis tests for improvements in goodness-of-ﬁt.
In contrast, we seek a uniﬁed, general framework for computationally efﬁcient
problem-speciﬁc splitting rules, optimized for the primary objective of captur-ing heterogeneity in a key parameter of interest. In the spirit of gradient boost-
ing [ Friedman (2001)], our recursive partitioning method begins by computing a
linear, gradient-based approximation to the nonlinear estimating equation we aretrying to solve, and then uses this approximation to specify the tree-split point. Al-gorithmically, our procedure reduces to iteratively applying a labeling step where
we generate pseudo-outcomes by computing gradients using parameters estimated
in the parent node, and a regression step where we pass this labeled data to a stan-
dard CART regression routine. Thus, we can make use of pre-existing, optimized
tree software to execute the regression step, and obtain high quality neighborhoodfunctions while only using computational resources comparable to those required
by standard CART algorithms. In line with this approach, our generalized random
forest software package builds on the carefully optimized ranger implementa-
tion of regression forest splitting rules [ Wright and Ziegler (2017)].
Moment conditions of the form ( 1) typically arise in scientiﬁc applications
where rigorous statistical inference is required. The bulk of this paper is devoted
to a theoretical analysis of generalized random forests, and to establishing asymp-
totic consistency and Gaussianity of the resulting estimates ˆθ(x).W ea l s od e v e l o p
methodology for asymptotic conﬁdence intervals. Our analysis is motivated by
classical results for local estimating equations, in particular Newey (1994a), paired
with machinery from Wager and Athey (2018) to address the adaptivity of the ran-
dom forest weighting function.
The resulting framework presents a ﬂexible method for nonparametric statis-
tical estimation and inference with formal asymptotic guarantees. In this paper,