1170 S. ATHEY, J. TIBSHIRANI AND S. WAGER
than our gradient-based loss criterion ( 9), and let each tree compute its own treat-
ment effect estimate rather than using the weighting scheme from Section 2.1
(these methods are exactly equivalent for regression forests, but not for causal
forests). Wager and Athey (2018) also consider a second approach, Procedure 2,
that obtains its neighborhood function via a classiﬁcation forest on the treatmentassignments W
i.
A weakness of the methods in Wager and Athey (2018), as they note in their
discussion, is that these two procedures have different strengths—Procedure 1 ismore sensitive to changes in the treatment effect function, while Procedure 2 ismore robust to confounding—but the hard coded nature of these methods madeit difﬁcult to reconcile their relative advantages. Conversely, given the framing ofgeneralized random forests via estimating equations, it is “obvious” that we canleverage best practices from the literature on estimating equations and orthogonal-ize our moment conditions by regressing out the main effect of X
ionWiandYi
as in Robinson (1988).
To illustrate the value of orthogonalization, we revisit a simulation of Wager and
Athey (2018)w h e r e Xi∼U([0,1]p),Wi|Xi∼Bernoulli (e(X i)),a n dYi|Xi,
Wi∼N(m(X i)+(Wi−0.5)τ(X i),1). The authors consider two different sim-
ulation settings: One with no confounding, m(x)=0a n de(x) =0.5, but with
treatment heterogeneity τ(x)=ς(x 1)ς(x 2),ς(u)=1+1/(1+e−20(u −1/3)),a n d
second with no treatment effect, τ(x)=0, but with confounding, e(x)=1
4(1+
β2,4(x3)),m(x) =2x3−1, where βa,bis the β-density with shape parameters a
andb. We also consider a third setting with both heterogeneity and confounding,
that combines τ(·)from the ﬁrst setting with m(·)ande(·)from the second. For the
ﬁrst setting, Wager and Athey (2018) used their Procedure 1, whereas for the sec-
ond they used Procedure 2, while noting that it is unfortunate that the practitioneris forced to choose one procedure or the other.
Results presented in Table 1are reassuring, suggesting that generalized random
forests with centering do well under both settings, and can better handle the casewith both confounding and treatment heterogeneity than either of the other twoprocedures. In contrast, Procedure 1 of Wager and Athey does poorly with pureconfounding, whereas Procedure 2 of Wager and Athey is good in the pure con-founding setting, but does poorly with strong heterogeneity; this is as expected,noting the design of both methods.
7. Application: Instrumental variables regression. In many applications,
we want to measure the causal effect of an intervention on an outcome, all whilerecognizing that the intervention and the outcome may also be tied togetherthrough noncausal pathways, thus ruling out the exogeneity assumption madeabove. One approach in this situation is to rely on instrumental variables (IV) re-gression, where we ﬁnd an auxiliary source of randomness that can be used toidentify causal effects.