1162 S. ATHEY, J. TIBSHIRANI AND S. WAGER
(1994a). The core idea of these methods is to ﬁrst derive a sharp, linearized ap-
proximation to the local estimator ˆθ(x), and then to analyze the linear approx-
imation instead. In our setup, the inﬂuence function heuristic motivates a nat-ural approximation ˜θ
∗(x)toˆθ(x) as follows. Let ρ∗
i(x)denote the inﬂuence
function of the ith observation with respect to the true parameter value θ(x),
ρ∗
i(x):= −ξ/latticetopV( x)−1ψθ(x),ν(x) (Oi). These quantities are closely related to the
pseudo-outcomes ( 8) used in our gradient tree splitting rule; the main difference
is that, here, the ρ∗
i(x)depend on the unknown true parameter values at xand are
thus inaccessible in practice. We use the ∗-superscript to remind ourselves of this
fact.
Then, given any set of forest weights αi(x)used to deﬁne the generalized ran-
dom forest estimate ˆθ(x) by solving ( 2), we can also deﬁne a pseudo-forest
(12) ˜θ∗(x):=θ(x)+n/summationdisplay
i=1αi(x)ρ∗
i(x),
which we will use as an approximation for ˆθ(x). We note that, formally, this
pseudo-forest estimate ˜θ∗(x)is equivalent to the output of an (infeasible) regres-
sion forest with weights αi(x)and outcomes θ(x)+ρ∗
i(x).
The upshot of this approximation is that, unlike ˆθ(x), the pseudo-forest ˜θ∗(x)is
aU-statistic. Because ˜θ∗(x)is a linear function of the pseudo-outcomes ρ∗
i(x),w e
can write it as an average of pseudo-tree predictions ˜θ∗(x)=1
B/summationtextB
b=1˜θ∗
b(x)with
˜θ∗
b(x)=/summationtextn
i=1αib(x)(θ(x) +ρ∗
i(x)). Then, because each individual pseudo-tree
prediction ˜θ∗
b(x)is trained on a size- ssubsample of the training data drawn without
replacement (see Section 2.4),˜θ∗(x)is an inﬁnite-order U-statistic whose order
corresponds to the subsample size, and so the arguments of Mentch and Hooker
(2016)o rWager and Athey (2018) can be used to study the averaged estimator
˜θ∗(x)using results about U-statistics [Efron and Stein (1981), Hoeffding (1948)].
Following this proof strategy, the key difﬁculty is in showing that our inﬂuence-
based statistic ˜θ∗(x)is in fact a good approximation for ˆθ(x).T od os o ,w es t a r tb y
establishing consistency of ˆθ(x) forθ(x) given our assumptions; we note that this
is the only point in the paper where we use the fact that ψis the negative gradient
of a convex loss as in Assumption 6.
THEOREM 3. Given Assumptions 1–6,estimates (ˆθ(x),ˆν(x)) from a forest
satisfying Speciﬁcation 1converge in probability to (θ(x),ν(x)) .
Building on this consistency result, we obtain a coupling of the desired type in
Lemma 4, the main technical contribution of this paper. We note that separating
the analysis of moment estimators into a local approximation argument that hinges
on consistency and a separate result that establishes consistency is standard; see,
for example, Chapter 5.3 of van der Vaart (1998). The remainder of our analysis