1158 S. ATHEY, J. TIBSHIRANI AND S. WAGER
Algorithm 1 Generalized random forest with honesty and subsampling
All tuning parameters are prespeciﬁed, including the number of trees Band the sub-sampling
srate used in S UBSAMPLE . This function is implemented in the package grf forRandC++.
1:procedure GENERALIZED RANDOM FOREST (set of examples S, test point x)
2: weight vector α←ZEROS (|S|)
3: forb=1 to total number of trees Bdo
4: set of examples I←SUBSAMPLE (S,s)
5: sets of examples J1,J2←SPLIT SAMPLE (I)
6: treeT←GRADIENT TREE(J1,X)⊿See Algorithm 2.
7: N←NEIGHBORS (x,T,J2) ⊿Returns those elements of J2that fall
into the same leaf as xin the tree T.
8: for all example e∈Ndo
9: α[e]+ = 1/|N|
10: output ˆθ(x), the solution to (2 ) with weights α/B
The function Z EROS creates a vector of zeros of length |S|;SUBSAMPLE draws a subsample of
sizesfromSwithout replacement; and S PLIT SAMPLE randomly divides a set into two evenly-
sized, nonoverlapping halves. The step ( 2) can be solved using any numerical estimator. Our
implementation grf provides an explicit plug-in point where a user can write a solver for ( 2)
appropriate for their ψ-function. Xis the domain of the Xi. In our analysis, we consider a
restricted class of generalized random forests satisfying Speciﬁcation 1.
Scornet, Biau and Vert (2015), Wager and Athey (2018)], and a subsample split-
ting technique that we call honesty [ Biau (2012), Denil, Matheson and De Freitas
(2014), Wager and Athey (2018)]. Our ﬁnal algorithm for forest-based solutions
to heterogeneous estimating equations is given as Algorithm 1; we refer to Sec-
tion 2.4 of Wager and Athey (2018) for a more in-depth discussion of honesty in
the context of forests. As shown in Section 3, assuming regularity conditions, the
estimates ˆθ(x) obtained using a generalized random forest as described in Algo-
rithm 1are consistent for θ(x). Moreover, given appropriate subsampling rates, we
establish asymptotic normality of the resulting forest estimates ˆθ(x).
3. Asymptotic analysis. We now turn to a formal characterization of gener-
alized random forests, with the aim of establishing asymptotic Gaussianity of the
ˆθ(x), and of providing tools for statistical inference about θ(x). We ﬁrst list as-
sumptions underlying our theoretical results. Throughout, the covariate space and
the parameter space are both subsets of Euclidean space; speciﬁcally, X=[0,1]p
and(θ,ν)∈B⊂Rkfor some p,k > 0, where Bis a compact subset of Rk.M o r e -
over, we assume that the features Xhave a density that is bounded away from 0
and∞; as argued in, for example, Wager and Walther (2015), this is equivalent to
imposing a weak dependence condition on the individual features (Xi)jbecause
trees and forests are invariant to monotone rescaling of the features. All proofs arein the supplement [ Athey, Tibshirani and Wager (2018)].