GENERALIZED RANDOM FORESTS 1149
where ψ(·)is some scoring function and ν(x) is an optional nuisance pa-
rameter. This setup encompasses several key statistical problems. For example,
if we model the distribution of Oiconditionally on Xias having a density
fθ(x),ν(x) (·)then, under standard regularity conditions, the moment condition ( 1)
withψθ(x),ν(x) (O)=∇ log(fθ(x),ν(x) (Oi))identiﬁes the local maximum likeli-
hood parameters (θ(x),ν(x)) . More generally, we can use moment conditions of
the form ( 1) to identify conditional means, quantiles, average partial effects, etc.,
and to develop robust regression procedures via Huberization. Our main substan-tive application of generalized random forests involves heterogeneous treatment
effect estimation with instrumental variables.
Our aim is to build a family of nonparametric estimators that inherit the de-
sirable empirical properties of regression forests—such as stability, ease of useand ﬂexible adaptation to different functional forms as in, for example, Biau and
Scornet (2016)o r Varian (2014)—but can be used in the wide range of statistical
settings characterized by ( 1) in addition to standard conditional mean estimation.
This paper addresses the resulting conceptual and methodological challenges and
establishes formal asymptotic results.
Regression forests are typically understood as ensemble methods, that is, forest
predictions ˆμ(x) are written as the average of Bnoisy tree-based predictors ˆμ
b(x),
ˆμ(x)=B−1/summationtextB
b=1ˆμb(x); and, because individual trees ˆμb(x)have low bias but
high variance, such averaging meaningfully stabilizes predictions [ Bühlmann and
Yu(2002), Scornet, Biau and Vert (2015)]. However, noisy solutions to moment
equations as in (1 ) are generally biased, and averaging would do nothing to allevi-
ate the bias.
To avoid this issue, we cast forests as a type of adaptive locally weighted es-
timators that ﬁrst use a forest to calculate a weighted set of neighbors for each
test point x, and then solve a plug-in version of the estimating equation ( 1)u s i n g
these neighbors. Section 2.1gives a detailed treatment of this perspective. This
locally weighting view of random forests was previously advocated by Hothorn
et al. (2004) in the context of survival analysis and by Meinshausen (2006)f o r
quantile regression, and also underlies theoretical analyses of regression forests[e.g., Lin and Jeon (2006)]. For conditional mean estimation, the averaging and
weighting views of forests are equivalent; however, once we move to more general
settings, the weighting-based perspective proves substantially more effective, and
also brings forests closer to the literature on local maximum likelihood estimation
[Fan and Gijbels (1996), Loader (1999), Newey (1994a), Stone (1977), Tibshirani
and Hastie (1987)].
A second challenge in generalizing forest-based methods is that their success
hinges on whether the adaptive neighborhood function obtained via partitioning
adequately captures the heterogeneity in the underlying function θ(x) we want to
estimate. Even within the same class of statistical tasks, different types of questionscan require different neighborhood functions. For example, suppose that two sci-entists are studying the effects of a new medical treatment: One is looking at how