1166 S. ATHEY, J. TIBSHIRANI AND S. WAGER
One challenge with the empirical moment estimator based on the above is that,
ifBis small, the variance estimates /hatwideHBLB
n(x)may be negative. In our software,
we avoid this problem by using a Bayesian analysis of variance following, for
example, Gelman et al. (2004), with an improper uniform prior for /hatwideHHS
n(x)over
[0,∞).W h e n Bis large enough, this distinction washes out.
5. Application: Quantile regression forests. Our ﬁrst application of gener-
alized random forests is to the classical problem of nonparametric quantile re-gression. This problem has also been considered in detail by Meinshausen (2006),
who proposed a consistent forest-based quantile regression algorithm; his methodalso ﬁts into the paradigm of solving estimating equations ( 2) using random forest
weights ( 3). However, unlike us, Meinshausen (2006) does not propose a splitting
rule that is tailored to the quantile regression context, and instead builds his forestsusing plain CART regression splits. Thus, a comparison of our method with that of
Meinshausen (2006) provides a perfect opportunity for evaluating the value of our
proposed method for constructing forest-based weights α
i(x)that are speciﬁcally
designed to express heterogeneity in conditional quantiles.
Recall that, in the language of estimating equations, the qth quantile θq(x)of
the distribution of Yconditionally on X=xis identiﬁed via ( 1), using the mo-
ment function ψθ(Yi)=q1({Yi>θ})−(1−q)1({Yi≤θ}). Plugging this moment
function into our splitting scheme (8 ) gives us pseudo-outcomes ρi=1({Yi>
ˆθq,P(X i)}),w h e r e ˆθq,P(X i)is the qth quantile of the parent node P(X i)contain-
ingXi, up to a scaling and recentering that do not affect the subsequent regression
split on these pseudo-outcomes. In other words, gradient-based quantile regression
trees try to separate observations that fall above the qth quantile of the parent from
those below it.
We compare our method to that of Meinshausen (2006) in Figure 2.I nt h el e f t
panel, we have a mean shift in the distribution of Yiconditional on Xiat(Xi)1=0,
and both methods are able to pick it up as expected. However, in the right panel,
the mean of Ygiven Xis constant, but there is a scale shift at (Xi)1=0. Here,
our method still performs well, as our splitting rule targets changes in the quan-tiles of the Y-distribution. However, the method of Meinshausen (2006) breaks
down completely, as it relies on CART regression splits that are only sensitiveto changes in the conditional mean of Ygiven X. We also note that general-
ized random forests produce somewhat smoother sample paths than the method ofMeinshausen (2006); this is due to our use of honesty as described in Section 2.4.
If we run generalized random forests without honesty, then our method still cor-
rectly identiﬁes the jumps at x=0, but has sample paths that oscillate locally just
as much as the baseline method. The purpose of this example is not to claim thatour variant of quantile regression forests built using gradient trees is always su-
perior to the method of Meinshausen (2006) that uses regression-based splitting
to obtain the weights α
i(x); rather, we found that, our splitting rule is speciﬁcally
sensitive to quantile shifts in a way that regression splits are not—and, moreover,