2
extended these trends have been exhausted. However, all is not
lost, yet; advancements and innovations are still progressing.
In fact, there has been a Cambrian explosion of computing
technologies and architectures in recent years. Specializa-
tion of circuits for certain functionalities is being exploited
whereby certain often-used operational kernels, methods, or
functions are being accelerated with specialized circuit blocks
and chips. These accelerators are designed with a different
balance between performance and functional ﬂexibility. One
area in which we are seeing an explosion of accelerators is
ML processors and accelerators [3]. Understanding the relative
beneﬁts of these technologies is of particular importance to
applying AI to domains under signiﬁcant constraints such as
size, weight, and power, both in embedded applications and
in data centers.
But before we get to the survey of ML processors and
accelerators, we must cover several topic that are important for
understanding several dimensions of evaluation in the survey.
We must discuss the types of neural networks for which these
ML accelerators are being designed; the distinction between
neural network training and inference; and the numerical
precision with which the neural networks are being used for
training and inference:
Types of Neural Networks – AI and machine learning
encompass a wide set of statistics-based technologies as
one can see in the taxonomy detailed in the algorithm
section (Section 3) of this MIT Lincloln Laboratory
technical report [4]. Even among neural networks, there
are a growing number of neural network patterns [5].
This paper will focus on processors that are geared
toward deep neural networks (DNNs) and convolutional
neural networks (CNNs). Overall, the most emphasis of
computational capability for machine learning is on DNN
and CNNs because they are quite computationally inten-
sive [6], with the fully connected and convolutional lay-
ers being the most computationally intense. Conversely,
pooling, dropout, softmax, and recurrent/skip connection
layers are not computationally intensive since these types
of layers stipulate datapaths for weight and data operands.
Neural Network Training versus Inference – Neural net-
work training uses libraries of input data to converge
model weight parameters by applying the labeled input
data (forward projection), measuring the output predic-
tions and then adjusting the model weight parameters
to better predict output predictions (back projections).
Neural network inference is using a trained model of
weight parameters and applying it to input data to receive
output predictions. Processors designed for training can
also perform well at inference, but the converse is not
always true.
Numerical precision – The numerical precision with
which the model weight parameters are stored and com-
puted has an impact on the effectiveness and efﬁciency
with which networks are trained and used for inference.
Generally higher numerical precision representations,
particularly ﬂoating point representations, are used for
training, while lower numerical precision representations,including integer representations, have been shown to
be reasonably effective for inference [7], [8]. However,
it has also generally been established that very limited
numerical precisions like int4, int2, and int1 do not
adequately represent model weight parameters and sig-
niﬁcantly affect model output predictions.
The survey in the next section of this paper focuses on the
computational throughput of the processors and accelerators
along with the power that is consumed to achieve that perfor-
mance. Other factors include the memory bandwidth to load
and update model parameters and data; memory capacity for
model weight parameters and input data, both close to the
arithmetic units and the global memory of the processors and
accelerator; and arithmetic intensity [9] of the neural network
models being processed by the processor or accelerator. These
factors are involved in managing model parameters and input
data ﬂows within the model; hence, they also inﬂuence the
trade-offs between chip bandwidth capabilities, data ﬂow
ﬂexibility, and conﬁguration and amount of computational
capability. These factors, however, are beyond the scope of
this paper, and they will be addressed in future phases of this
research.
II. S URVEY OF PROCESSORS
Many recent advances in AI can be at least partly credited
to advances in computing hardware [10], [11]. In particular,
modern computing advances have been able to realize many
computationally heavy machine-learning algorithms such as
neural networks. While machine-learning algorithms such as
neural networks have had a rich theoretic history [12], recent
advances in computing have made the application of such
algorithms a reality by providing the computational power
needed to train and process massive quantities of data. Al-
though the computing landscape of the past decade has been
rich with numerous innovations, more embedded and mobile
applications that require low size, weight, and power (SWaP)
systems will need capabilities that are beyond those delivered
by the traditional architectures of central processing units
(CPUs) and graphics processing units (GPUs). For example,
in commercial applications, it is common to off-load data
conditioning and algorithms to non-SWaP constrained plat-
forms such high-performance computing clusters or processing
clouds. Defense applications among others, on the other hand,
may need AI applications to be performed inside low-SWaP
platforms or local networks (edge computing) and without the
use of the cloud due to insufﬁcient security or communication
infrastructure.
The survey in this section gathers performance and power
information from publicly available materials including re-
search papers, technical trade press, company benchmarks, etc.
While there are ways to access information from companies
and startups (including those in their silent period), this infor-
mation is intentionally left out of this survey; such data will
be included in this survey when it becomes publicly available.
The key metrics of this public data are plotted in Figure 2,
which graphs recent processor capabilities (as of May 2019)
mapping peak performance vs. power consumption. The x-axis