1
Survey and Benchmarking of Machine Learning
Accelerators
Albert Reuther, Peter Michaleas, Michael Jones, Vijay Gadepally, Siddharth Samsi, and Jeremy Kepner
MIT Lincoln Laboratory Supercomputing Center
Lexington, MA, USA
freuther,pmichaleas,michael.jones,vijayg,sid,kepner g@ll.mit.edu
Abstract —Advances in multicore processors and accelerators
have opened the ﬂood gates to greater exploration and application
of machine learning techniques to a variety of applications. These
advances, along with breakdowns of several trends including
Moore’s Law, have prompted an explosion of processors and
accelerators that promise even greater computational and ma-
chine learning capabilities. These processors and accelerators are
coming in many forms, from CPUs and GPUs to ASICs, FPGAs,
and dataﬂow accelerators.
This paper surveys the current state of these processors and
accelerators that have been publicly announced with performance
and power consumption numbers. The performance and power
values are plotted on a scatter graph and a number of dimensions
and observations from the trends on this plot are discussed and
analyzed. For instance, there are interesting trends in the plot
regarding power consumption, numerical precision, and inference
versus training. We then select and benchmark two commercially-
available low size, weight, and power (SWaP) accelerators as
these processors are the most interesting for embedded and
mobile machine learning inference applications that are most
applicable to the DoD and other SWaP constrained users. We
determine how they actually perform with real-world images and
neural network models, compare those results to the reported
performance and power consumption values and evaluate them
against an Intel CPU that is used in some embedded applications.
Index Terms —Machine learning, GPU, TPU, dataﬂow, accel-
erator, embedded inference
I. I NTRODUCTION
Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) and machine learning (ML) have
the opportunity to revolutionize the way many industries,
militaries, and other organizations address the challenges of
evolving events, data deluge, and rapid courses of action.
Innovations in computations, data sets, and algorithms have
driven many advances for machine learning and its application
to many different areas. AI solutions involve a number of
different pieces that must work together in order to provide
capabilities that can be used by decision makers, warﬁghters,
and analysts; Figure 1 depicts these important pieces that are
needed when developing an end-to-end AI solution. While
certain components may not be as visible to end-users as
others, our experience has shown that each of these interrelated
This material is based upon work supported by the Assistant Secretary of
Defense for Research and Engineering under Air Force Contract No. FA8721-
05-C-0002 and/or FA8702-15-D-0001. Any opinions, ﬁndings, conclusions or
recommendations expressed in this material are those of the author(s) and do
not necessarily reﬂect the views of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for
Research and Engineering.components play a major role in the success or failure of an
AI system.
Fig. 1. Canonical AI architecture consists of sensors, data conditioning,
algorithms, modern computing, robust AI, human-machine teaming, and users
(missions). Each step is critical in developing end-to-end AI applications and
systems.
On the left side of Figure 1, structured and unstructured
data sources provide different views of entities and/or phe-
nomenology. These raw data products are fed into a data con-
ditioning step in which they are fused, aggregated, structured,
accumulated, and converted to information. The information
generated by the data conditioning step feeds into a host
of supervised and unsupervised algorithms such as neural
networks, which extract patterns, predict new events, ﬁll in
missing data, or look for similarities across datasets, thereby
converting the input information to actionable knowledge.
This actionable knowledge is then passed to human beings
for decision-making processes in the human-machine teaming
phase. The phase of human-machine teaming provides the
users with useful and relevant insight turning knowledge into
actionable intelligence or insight.
Underlying all of these phases is a bedrock of modern
computing systems that is comprised of one or more heteroge-
nous computing elements. For example, sensor processing may
occur on low power embedded computers, while algorithms
may be computed in very large data centers. With regard to
performance advances in these computing elements, Moore’s
law trends have ended [1], as have a number of related
laws and trends including Denard’s scaling (power density),
clock frequency, core counts, instructions per clock cycle, and
instructions per Joule (Koomey’s law) [2]. Many of the tech-
nologies, tricks and techniques of processor chip designers thatarXiv:1908.11348v1  [cs.PF]  29 Aug 2019