3
indicates peak power, and the y-axis indicate peak giga opera-
tions per second. (GOps/s) Note the legend on the right, which
indicates various parameters used to differentiate computing
techniques and technologies. The computational precision of
the processing capability is depicted by the geometric shape
used; the computational precision spans from single bit int1
to single byte int8 and four-byte ﬂoat32 to eight-byte ﬂoat64.
The form factor is depicted by the color; this is important
for showing how much power is consumed, but also how
much computation can be packed onto a single chip, a single
PCI card, and a full system. Blue is only the performance
and power consumption of a single chip. Orange shows the
performance and power of a card (note that they all are in
the 200-300 Watt zone). Green shows the performance and
power of entire systems – in this case, single node desktop and
server systems. This survey is limited to single motherboard,
single memory-space systems. Finally, the hollow geometric
objects are performance for inference only, while the solid
geometric ﬁgures are performance for training (and inference)
processing. Mostly, low power solutions are only capable
of inference, though there are some high-power accelerators
(WaveDPU, Goya, Arria, and Turing) that are targeting high
performance for inference only.
From Figure 2, we can make a number of general obser-
vations. First, much of the recent efforts have focused on
processors that are in the 10-300W range in terms of power
utilization, since they are being designed and deployed as pro-
cessing accelerators. (300W is the upper limit for a PCI-based
accelerator card.) For this power envelope, the performance
can vary depending on a variety of factors such as architecture,
precision, and workload (training vs. inference). There are
many solutions under the 1 TeraOps/W line; however, there
are several inference solutions and a few training solutions
that are reporting greater than 1 TeraOps/W.
With the current offerings, at least 100W must be employed
to perform training; all of the points on the scatter plot below
100W are inference-only processors/accelerators. There are a
number of possible explanations for this, but it is likely that
there is currently little driving a requirement for low-power
training, though there is much demand for low-power infer-
ence on devices ranging from smartphones to remotely piloted
aircraft (RPA) and autonomous vehicles. From a technology
standpoint, this may suggests that the trade-offs necessary to
do neural network training under the 100W envelope affect
the performance, numerical accuracy, and prediction accuracy
too greatly.
Many hardware manufacturers, faced with limitations in
fabrication processes, have been able to exploit the fact that
machine-learning algorithms such as neural networks can
perform well even when using limited or mixed precision [8],
[13] representation of activation functions, weights, and bi-
ases. Such hardware platforms (often designed speciﬁcally for
inference) may quantize weights and biases to half precision
(16 bits) or even single bit representations in order to improve
the number of operations/second without signiﬁcant impact to
model prediction, accuracy, or power utilization. To that point,
in the inference engines, the entire neural network model is
usually loaded onto the chip before any inference is performed.Loading the model turns the model’s parameters into constants
that are stored with the operator rather than operands that must
be loaded from volatile (DRAM or SRAM) memory thereby
reducing the number of operand/parameter loads that must
occur separate from the instruction load.
There are a number of dimensions with which we can
present the processors and accelerators in this survey. We have
chosen to roughly categorize the scatter plot into six regions
that roughly correspond to performance and power consump-
tion: Very Low Power and Research Chips, Cell (Smartphone)
GPUs, Mobile and Embedded Chips and Systems, FPGA
Accelerators, Data Center Chips and Cards, and Data Center
Systems. In the following listings, the angle-bracketed string is
the label of the item on the scatter plot, and the square bracket
after the angle bracket is literature reference from which the
performance and power values came. Some of the performance
values are reported in frames per second (fps) with a given
machine learning model. For those values, Samuel Albanie has
Matlab code and a web site that lists all of the major machine
learning models with their operations per epoch/inference,
parameter memory, feature memory, and input size [14]; the
operations per epoch/inference are used to compute operations
per second from frames per second. Finally, if a neural network
model is not mentioned, the performance reported is peak
performance.
A. Very Low Power and Research Chips
Chips in the very low power regime have been mainly
university and industry research chips. However, a few vendors
have announced or are offering products in this space.
MIT Eyeriss chip hEyeriss i[7], [15], [16] is a research
chip from Vivienne Sze’s group in MIT CSAIL. Their
goal was to develop the most energy efﬁcient inference
chip possible. The result was acquired running AlexNet
with no mention of batch size.
The TrueNorth hTrueNorth i[17], [18] is a digital neuro-
morphic research chip from the IBM Almaden research
lab. It was developed under DARPA funding in the
Synapse program to demonstrate the efﬁcacy of digital
spiking neural network (neuromorphic) chips. Note that
there are points on the graph for both the system, which
draws the 44 W power, and the chip, which itself only
draws up to 275 mW.
The Intel MovidiusX processor hMovidiusX i[19] is an
embedded video processor that includes a Neural Engine
for video processing and object detection.
In early 2019, Google released a TPU Edge processor
hTPUEdge i[20] for embedded inference application. The
TPU Edge uses TensorFlow Lite, which encodes the
neural network model with low precision parameters for
inference.
The DianNao series of dataﬂow research chips came
from a university research team in China. They pub-
lished four different designs aimed at different types
of ML processing [21]. The DianNao hDianNao i[21]
is a neural network inference accelerator, and the Da-
DianNao hDaDianNao i[22] is a many-tile version of