Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9, 1113 10 of 16
Validation of the models was done as shown in Figures 6–9. It can be clearly observed
from Figure 6 that the experimental data (black, continuous line) and the predicted values (red,
discontinuous) obtained from the training and the testing data of the PSOANFIS and the GAANFIS
algorithms are strongly correlated with the experimental values. Such an assumption was validated
with the training part (147 samples) of the data, as well as with the validation part (63 data), for
the PSOANFIS and GAANFIS optimized algorithms. Indeed, it was universally concluded that
both methods had the same effectiveness and a similar rate of success in ﬁnding optimal solutions.
However, it can be observed that the PSOANFIS model was slightly better than GAANFIS, as the PSO
optimization algorithm was a better candidate in terms of computational efﬁciency [ 63]. In this work,
the authors did not focus on such information, but rather performed the predictions with the same
iteration criterion (i.e., 1000 iterations) on the PSO and the GA.
Appl. Sci. 2019 , 9, x 11 of 18 
However, it can be observed that the PSOANFIS model was slightly better than GAANFIS, as the 
PSO optimization algorithm was a better candidate in terms of computational efficiency [63]. In this 
work, the authors did not focus on such informatio n, but rather performed the predictions with the 
same iteration criterion (i.e., 1000 iterations) on the PSO and the GA. 
 
Figure 6. Experimental and predicted values of comp ressive strength with different models: ( a) 
training particle swarm optimizatio n (PSO)-based ANFIS (PSOANFIS), ( b) testing PSOANFIS, ( c) 
training genetic algorithm (GA)-based ANFIS (GAANFIS), and ( d) testing GAANFIS. 
(a) (b) 
(c) (d) 
Figure 6. Experimental and predicted values of compressive strength with different models: ( a) training
particle swarm optimization (PSO)-based ANFIS (PSOANFIS), ( b) testing PSOANFIS, ( c) training
genetic algorithm (GA)-based ANFIS (GAANFIS), and ( d) testing GAANFIS.
Appl. Sci. 2019 , 9, x 12 of 18 
 
Figure 7. Correlation coefficients of different models: ( a) training PSOANFIS, ( b) testing PSOANFIS, 
(c) training GAANFIS, and ( d) testing GAANFIS. 
(a) (b) 
(c) (d) 
Figure 7. Cont.