Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9, 1113 9 of 16
position (PSO) and chromosomes (GA) were ﬁnally selected and compared to derive the optimal
consequent and antecedent parameters.
(6) Construction of the ﬁnal models: the ﬁnal PSOANFIS and GAANFIS models were built using the
optimal consequent and antecedent parameters in this step. Validation of the ﬁnal models was also
done using several methods (RMSE, MAE, and R).
Appl. Sci. 2019 , 9, x 10 of 18 
 
Figure 5. Modeling methodology flow chart of this study. 
5. Results and Discussion 
In order to reduce greenhouse emissions in civil engineering activities, many novel construction 
materials were developed in recent decades [61]. Unlike the fabrication process of OPC using compounds that release carbon dioxide, GPC uses waste by-product materials which are 
environment friendly [62], and can be defined as green materials. Mechanical properties of GPC 
proved that this material can work as effectively as traditional OPC-based materials. 
In this study, two hybrid AI models (PSOANFI S and GAANFIS) are proposed for predicting the 
compressive strength of the GPC using entirely waste-sourced steel slag as fine and coarse 
aggregates. Basically, the AI algorithm can predict the results which are only in good agreement with 
the target data, but not better regarding quality and quantity. However, for concrete composite 
materials, the influence of the variables can be bette r understood if they are set as ratios; thus, we 
used three parameters, namely X
1 (molar mass of the NaOH solution), X 2 (mass ratio between alkaline 
activated solution and fly ash), and X 3 (mass ratio between the sodium silicate and the sodium 
hydroxide solutions), as input variables. The co rresponding compressive strength of samples was 
used as the target variable (Y) for the predicti on modeling, and they were determined from a 
compressive strength test of 210 GPC samples. 
Validation of the models was done as shown in Figures 6–9. It can be clearly observed from 
Figure 6 that the experimental data (black, co ntinuous line) and the predicted values (red, 
discontinuous) obtained from the training and th e testing data of the PSOANFIS and the GAANFIS 
algorithms are strongly correlated with the experi mental values. Such an assumption was validated 
with the training part (147 samples) of the data, as well as with the validation part (63 data), for the PSOANFIS and GAANFIS optimized algorithms. Ind eed, it was universally concluded that both 
methods had the same effectiveness and a similar rate of success in finding optimal solutions. 
Figure 5. Modeling methodology ﬂow chart of this study.
5. Results and Discussion
In order to reduce greenhouse emissions in civil engineering activities, many novel construction
materials were developed in recent decades [ 61]. Unlike the fabrication process of OPC using
compounds that release carbon dioxide, GPC uses waste by-product materials which are environment
friendly [ 62], and can be deﬁned as green materials. Mechanical properties of GPC proved that this
material can work as effectively as traditional OPC-based materials.
In this study, two hybrid AI models (PSOANFIS and GAANFIS) are proposed for predicting the
compressive strength of the GPC using entirely waste-sourced steel slag as ﬁne and coarse aggregates.
Basically, the AI algorithm can predict the results which are only in good agreement with the target
data, but not better regarding quality and quantity. However, for concrete composite materials, the
inﬂuence of the variables can be better understood if they are set as ratios; thus, we used three
parameters, namely X 1(molar mass of the NaOH solution), X 2(mass ratio between alkaline activated
solution and ﬂy ash), and X 3(mass ratio between the sodium silicate and the sodium hydroxide
solutions), as input variables. The corresponding compressive strength of samples was used as the
target variable (Y) for the prediction modeling, and they were determined from a compressive strength
test of 210 GPC samples.