Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9, 1113 3 of 16
2. Machine Learning Methods
2.1. Adaptive Neuro Fuzzy Inference System
The adaptive neuro fuzzy inference system (ANFIS) is a typical model of a general fuzzy modeling
structure described by two distinctive features including interpretation and accuracy. The ANFIS
interpreting capability refers to the ability of the fuzzy model to represent the habits of its systems.
The accuracy of ANFIS refers to the ability of the fuzzy model to honestly represent the modeling
system [ 40]. The ANFIS establishes a set of fuzzy if–then rules with suitable membership functions
to create the stipulated input–output sets. The ANFIS utilizes neural systems and fuzzy deduction
systems. The task of fuzzy if–then rules is to simulate expert knowledge, whereas the task of the neural
network is to optimize the membership capacities to reduce the mistake rate in the output. An ANFIS
comprises ﬁve layers, and each layer is composed of some nodes and node functions [ 41]. There are
two sorts of nodes: adaptive nodes and ﬁxed nodes. Adaptive nodes are stamped by squares that
serve as parameter sets, which can be altered. Fixed nodes are stamped by circles, and their parameter
sets are settled in the system (Figure 1) [41].
Appl. Sci. 2019 , 9, x 3 of 18 
2.1. Adaptive Neuro Fuzzy Inference System 
The adaptive neuro fuzzy inference system (A NFIS) is a typical model of a general fuzzy 
modeling structure described by tw o distinctive features including interpretation and accuracy. The 
ANFIS interpreting capability refers to the ability of the fuzzy model to represent the habits of its 
systems. The accuracy of ANFIS refers to the abi lity of the fuzzy model to honestly represent the 
modeling system [40]. The ANFIS establishes a set of fuzzy if–then rules with suitable membership functions to create the stipulated input–output sets. The ANFIS utilizes neural systems and fuzzy 
deduction systems. The task of fuzzy if–then rules is  to simulate expert knowledge, whereas the task 
of the neural network is to optimize the membersh ip capacities to reduce the mistake rate in the 
output. An ANFIS comprises five layers, and each layer is composed of some nodes and node 
functions [41]. There are two sorts of nodes: adap tive nodes and fixed nodes. Adaptive nodes are 
stamped by squares that serve as parameter sets, which can be altered. Fixed nodes are stamped by circles, and their parameter sets are settled in the system (Figure 1) [41]. 
 
Figure 1. The structure of the adaptive neuro fuzzy  inference system (ANFIS) algorithm. 
2.2. Particle Swarm Optimization 
Particle swarm optimization (PSO) introduced by Kennedy et al. [42] is one of the most 
commonly used evolutionary algorithms in optimizing  the parameters of a classification model [43]. 
The principle of the PSO algorithm is based on the social and biological behavior of animals when 
seeking food. In a PSO, each particle represents a potential answer to the problem. Each particle randomly moves along the search space where it ca n get disrupted as a result of its own knowledge 
and that of its neighbors [39,44]. Therefore, particle  searches can be influenced by other particles in 
the swarm. This means that the particles learn and acquire knowledge from each other in a group 
and forward the same to their best neighbors [39,44]. Thus, in the PSO, each individual can adjust its 
position at the best location within the search sp ace in comparison to its adjacent neighbors. The 
combined model of the regression model and the PSO optimization technique is considered very 
promising in classification and forecasting problems [39,44]. 
2.3. Genetic Algorithm 
The genetic algorithm (GA) is an algorithm simi lar to natural evolution, whereby a population 
of specific species adapt to enviro nmental conditions [45]. In this process, a population is designed 
and created to grow in a controlled environment. The algorithmic nature of the structure is such that 
each individual is considered to be a solution to the problem. In the population, an individual is called a chromosome, which consists of different prob lem variables that act as genes in the algorithm. 
Figure 1. The structure of the adaptive neuro fuzzy inference system (ANFIS) algorithm.
2.2. Particle Swarm Optimization
Particle swarm optimization (PSO) introduced by Kennedy et al. [ 42] is one of the most commonly
used evolutionary algorithms in optimizing the parameters of a classiﬁcation model [ 43]. The principle
of the PSO algorithm is based on the social and biological behavior of animals when seeking food.
In a PSO, each particle represents a potential answer to the problem. Each particle randomly moves
along the search space where it can get disrupted as a result of its own knowledge and that of its
neighbors [ 39,44]. Therefore, particle searches can be inﬂuenced by other particles in the swarm. This
means that the particles learn and acquire knowledge from each other in a group and forward the
same to their best neighbors [ 39,44]. Thus, in the PSO, each individual can adjust its position at the best
location within the search space in comparison to its adjacent neighbors. The combined model of the
regression model and the PSO optimization technique is considered very promising in classiﬁcation
and forecasting problems [39,44].
2.3. Genetic Algorithm
The genetic algorithm (GA) is an algorithm similar to natural evolution, whereby a population
of speciﬁc species adapt to environmental conditions [ 45]. In this process, a population is designed
and created to grow in a controlled environment. The algorithmic nature of the structure is such that
each individual is considered to be a solution to the problem. In the population, an individual is
called a chromosome, which consists of different problem variables that act as genes in the algorithm.