Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9, 1113 6 of 16
Appl. Sci. 2019 , 9, x 6 of 18 
 
Figure 2. Gradation curves of fine aggregate. 
 
Figure 3. Gradation curves of coarse aggregate. 
Figure 3. Gradation curves of coarse aggregate.
Appl. Sci. 2019 , 9, x 7 of 18 
 
Figure 4. (a) Samples of geopolymer concrete (GPC) using steel slag aggregate; ( b) forced mixing 
concrete mixer; ( c) compressive strength test of the specimen; ( d) fracture mode. 
3.2. Data Used for Modeling 
In GPC, silica and aluminum oxides in fly ash react with activated alkaline solutions to form a 
binder in order to bond aggregate particles. Ther efore, physical and mechanical properties of GPC 
highly depend on correlation factors including sili con, aluminum, alkali, and water content. Similar 
to cement concrete, the aggregates contain about 7 5–80% of the total weight of GPC. The compressive 
strength of GPC is affected by the ratio and properties of the ingredients that form the geopolymer binder. In this study, three main factors (concent ration of NaOH solution , mass ratio of alkali 
activating solution to fly ash, and mass ratio of Na
2SiO 3 solution to NaOH solu tion) were used to 
predict the compressive strength of the GPC. 
3.2.1. Concentration of NaOH Solution (X 1) 
A strong alkaline solution, su c h  a s  N a O H  o r  K O H ,  i s  n e c e ssary for the geopolymerization 
process in GPC. Previous studies on GPC using natu ral aggregates showed that increasing the molar 
concentration of alkaline solution will generate higher solubility of the material [51–53]. Fernández-Jimenez [54] concluded that GPC using 12.5 M NaOH gave higher compressive strength than that 
while using 8 M NaOH. However, a high concentration of alkaline solution is also suggested to reduce compressive strength of GPC. In the work of Palomo et al., the authors concluded that the 
geopolymer mortars produced with 12 M KOH had a faster activation rate and a higher compressive 
strength than those produced with 18 M KOH [55]. In this study, the molar concentrations of NaOH 
were selected as 10 M, 12 M, and 14 M). 
3.2.2. Mass Ratio of Alkali Activating Solution to Fly Ash (X
2) 
The activated alkaline mass in the mixture might also affect the compressive strength of GPC. 
A s  a n  e x a m p l e ,  X i e  a n d  X i  [ 5 6 ]  s h o w e d  t h a t  h i g h e r  c o m p r e s s i v e  s t r e n g t h  c o u l d  b e  a c h i e v e d  b y  decreasing the mass ratio of alkali activated solu tion to fly ash (AAS/FA). In another work, Rangan 
Figure 4. (a) Samples of geopolymer concrete (GPC) using steel slag aggregate; ( b) forced mixing
concrete mixer; ( c) compressive strength test of the specimen; ( d) fracture mode.
3.2. Data Used for Modeling
In GPC, silica and aluminum oxides in ﬂy ash react with activated alkaline solutions to form a
binder in order to bond aggregate particles. Therefore, physical and mechanical properties of GPC
highly depend on correlation factors including silicon, aluminum, alkali, and water content. Similar to
cement concrete, the aggregates contain about 75–80% of the total weight of GPC. The compressive
strength of GPC is affected by the ratio and properties of the ingredients that form the geopolymer
binder. In this study, three main factors (concentration of NaOH solution, mass ratio of alkali activating