Applications of artiﬁcial intelligence in business management, e-
commerce and ﬁnance
Harikumar Pallathadkaa,⇑, Edwin Hernan Ramirez-Asisb, Telmo Pablo Loli-Pomac,
Karthikeyan Kaliyaperumald, Randy Joy Magno Ventayene, Mohd Navedf
aManipur International University, Imphal, Manipur, India
bDepartment of Economic and Administrative Sciences Faculty, Universidad San Pedro, Huaraz, Peru
cDepartment of Business and Tourism Faculty Universidad Nacional Santiago Antúnez de Mayolo, Huaraz, Perú
dIT @ IoT – HH Campus, AMBO University, Ethiopia
ePublic Relations, Publication and Information Ofﬁce, Philippines
fDepartment of Business Analytics, Jagannath University, Delhi-NCR, India
article info
Article history:
Available online xxxx
Keywords:
Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Machine learningE-commerceFinancePredictionAnalysisabstract
In the e-commerce and ﬁnancial industries, AI has been deployed to achieve better customer experience,
efﬁcient supply chain management, improved operational efﬁciency, and reduced mate size, with themain goal of designing standard, reliable product quality control methods and the search for new ways
of reaching and serving customers while maintaining low cost. Machine learning and deep learning are
two of the most often used AI approaches. Individuals, businesses, and government agencies utilize thesemodels to anticipate and learn from data. Machine learning models for the complexity and diversity of
data in the food industry are being developed at the moment. This article discusses machine learning
and artiﬁcial intelligence applications in e-commerce, corporate management, and ﬁnance. Sales growth,proﬁt maximization, sales forecast, inventory management, security, fraud detection, and portfolio man-agement are some of the major uses.
/C2112021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the scientiﬁc committee of the International Confer-ence on Nanoelectronics, Nanophotonics, Nanomaterials, Nanobioscience & Nanotechnology.
1. Introduction
Artiﬁcial intelligence usually refers to the artiﬁcial fabrication of
human minds that can learn natural language, plan it, perceive it or
process it [1]. It is the theory and development of computer sys-
tems that can generally carry out activities requiring human intel-
ligence, such as visual perception, recognition of speech, decision-
making and language translation [3]. Artiﬁcial intelligence is an IT
industry that mostly works with machines which are built to oper-
ate like a human being. John McCarthy (AI’s dad) described AI as
‘‘the scientiﬁc and technical knowledge of developing smart com-puter programs in particular”.
Machine learning and profound learning are two of the most
often utilized AI methods. These models learn from data and areused for predicting by individuals, ﬁrms and government organiza-
tions. Machine learning models for the complexity and diversity of
data in the food business are nowadays being developed [2,3] .
In e-commerce and ﬁnancial industries with a major aim to
design standard, reliable product quality control methods and
the search for new ways of reaching and serving customers, while
at the same time maintaining low cost, has required deployed AI in
order to achieve better customer experience, efﬁcient management
of the supply chain, improved operational efﬁciency, reduced mate
size.
This article presents applications of machine learning and arti-
ﬁcial intelligence in e-commerce, business management and
ﬁnance. Major applications include sales increase, proﬁt maximiza-
tion, sales prediction, inventory management, security, fraud
detection and portfolio management.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matpr.2021.06.419
2214-7853/ /C2112021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the scientiﬁc committee of the International Conference on Nanoelectronics, Nanophotonics, Na nomaterials,
Nanobioscience & Nanotechnology.⇑Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: harikumar@miu.edu.in (H. Pallathadka), edwin.ramirez@u-
sanpedro.edu.pe (E.H. Ramirez-Asis), plolip@unasam.edu.pe (T.P. Loli-Poma), rven-
tayen@psu.edu.ph (R.J.M. Ventayen).Materials Today: Proceedings xxx (xxxx) xxx
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Materials Today: Proceedings
journal homepage: www.else vier.com/locate/matpr
Please cite this article as: H. Pallathadka, Edwin Hernan Ramirez-Asis, Telmo Pablo Loli-Poma et al., Applications of artiﬁcial intelligence in bus iness man-
agement, e-commerce and ﬁnance, Materials Today: Proceedings, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matpr.2021.06.419