dom Forest may be used to estimate user product suggestions in
the context of e-commerce.
The Support Vector Machine is the supervised learning model
used for categorization (SVM). It has received a great deal of inter-
est in the categorization sector. A noticeable gap separates
instances of the various categories in vector space in the SVM
model. When a new sample arrives, it is mapped into the speciﬁed
vector space and its label is assigned to a category based on which
side of the gap it falls [9]. An SVM can do non-linear classiﬁcation
effectively by employing the kernel technique.
Clustering, also known as cluster analysis, is the job of arranging
a collection of things so that elements in one group are more sim-
ilar to those in another. As the similarities between things in one
group and the dissimilarities between things in other groups rose,
so did the clustering. Clustering is the cornerstone of data miningand may be employed in a wide range of applications like image
processing, data compression, computer graphics, machine learn-
ing, and many more.
Clustering can be used in combination with other object-
categorization techniques such as classiﬁcation, segmentation,
and partitioning. When comparing Cluster analysis to classiﬁca-
tion, we may state that clustering is an example of unsupervised
learning. Cluster analysis varies from classiﬁcation in that classiﬁ-
cation retains knowledge of classes, but clustering does not main-
tain knowledge of classes. Furthermore, fresh samples are grouped
into established classes in the case of classiﬁcation, whereas
groups are recommended in the case of cluster analysis based on
data patterns [9].
3. Applications of artiﬁcial intelligence in business
management, e-commerce and ﬁnance
Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Machine Learning in
Business management, e-commerce and ﬁnance are discussed in
this section [10–15] .
/C15Chatbots
Most of the E-commerce and ﬁnancial web sites are using chat-
bots to improve customer satisfaction and provide enhanced ser-
vices to customers. These chatbots are developed using artiﬁcial
intelligence and machine learning techniques. They are capable
of behaving like humans. These chatbots have learning capability;
on the basis of availability of past data they are capable of provid-
ing best recommendation to customers.
/C15Image search
Image search on e-commerce web site is implemented using
artiﬁcial intelligence. It is based on image processing algorithms.
It helps in improving customer services. Customers are able to
search item by images it. There is no need to search item using
the keywords.
/C15Handling Customer Data
E-commerce has a large amount of associated data. Machine
learning algorithms are capable of performing analytical study on
past data related to sales, human resources, marketing, and cus-
tomer purchase pattern. This analytical result can help in proﬁt
maximization, sales maximization, resources optimization. This
helps ecommerce and ﬁntech companies to ﬁnaliz their products
for a particular type of customer.
/C15Recommendation SystemsMachine learning algorithms are able to perform analysis of
customer past data related to customers choice, behavior. They
can predict customer choices effectively and can suggest or recom-
mend most suitable products to customer. It helps e-commerce
and ﬁnancial companies in increasing sales and customer
satisfaction.
/C15Inventory Management
Artiﬁcial intelligence algorithms help e-commerce companies
in managing inventory. These algorithms perform analytical studyon past sales data and they ﬁnd a correlation between the current
sales and future sales. It helps managers in predicting future sales
and maintain inventory accordingly.
/C15Cybersecurity
Machine learning algorithms are capable of detecting vulnera-
bilities in system and provide suitable security solutions to keep
e-commerce platform secure. Financial companies also ﬁnd
machine learning algorithms suitable for fraud detection and
prevention.
/C15CRM
In the past, CRM used the employees to gather a vast quantity of
data to collect the data and to service the customers. Today, how-
ever, artiﬁcial intelligence is able to forecast which clients will buy
and how we can better deal with them. Artiﬁcial intelligence appli-
cations may be used to assist determine trends and plan activities
based on the newest trends. Advanced CRM may learn and improve
over time with the aid of machine learning techniques.
/C15Credit Scoring, Loan Underwriting, Portfolio management
Machine learning algorithms are able to classify past data and
can predict future data on the basis of analysis of past data. These
algorithms help up to a great extent in Credit Scoring, Loan Under-
writing and Portfolio management. It helps companies in cutting
down risk.
/C15
Human Resources
The proper source to obtain the candidate is identiﬁed by AI
Engines. NLP may also assist select applicants using screen
resumes. Today, AI bots are utilized for video interviews, even for
ﬁrst-tier screening. This can save time and enhance the process
of recruiting. But after recruiting and selection, the work of an
HR does not cease. The commitment of employees is also an impor-
tant part that AI can improve. Machine learning can propose inno-
vative training techniques.
/C15Sales
Sales begin with customer acquisition. AI can assess your com-
pany goals together with multiple data sources and then propose
the most relevant client acquisition possibilities. Price optimiza-
tion with the aid of AI and ML may also be achieved to maximize
proﬁt. AI and ML may also contribute to the improvement of con-
sumer suggestions and market basket analysis for improved sales.
4. Conclusion
AI has been used in the e-commerce and ﬁnancial industries to
improve customer experience, efﬁcient supply chain management,H. Pallathadka, Edwin Hernan Ramirez-Asis, Telmo Pablo Loli-Poma et al. Materials Today: Proceedings xxx (xxxx) xxx
3