2. Different artiﬁcial intelligence and machine learning
techniques
Machine learning is the most important AI technique. Relation-
ship between machine learning and artiﬁcial intelligence is shown
below in Fig. 1 . This section contains prominent machine learning
techniques.
Machine learning (ML) [4]is a new area of data mining that
allows a computer program to grow increasingly accurate in pre-
dicting outcomes without explicitly programming it. These ML
techniques are often divided into two types: supervised and unsu-pervised learning techniques employ labeled training data for
inference (classiﬁcation, regression), whereas unsupervised learn-
ing techniques employ unlabeled data to identify hidden existing
patterns (clustering).
The act of transforming an input collection of instances P into a
unique collection of characteristics Q, also known as target attri-
butes or labels, is known as classiﬁcation. Classiﬁcation techniques
such as decision tree classiﬁers, bayesian classiﬁers, and artiﬁcial
neural networks, nearest neighbor classiﬁers, random forest, and
support vector machines are used in a variety of applications [5].
We’ll go through each of them brieﬂy. Each strategy is based on
the learning algorithm that it utilizes.
A decision tree is one of the most basic and simple classiﬁers
used to solve classiﬁcation issues. A decision tree is a graph in
which occurrences are classiﬁed by sorting them depending on
their feature values. The decision tree is composed of nodes and
branches, with each node representing a classiﬁcation instance
and each branch representing a value that the node might take
on. In decision, instance categorization starts at the root node,
and instance sorting is done based on feature values.
Predicting the class label for a given collection of input qualities
can be challenging in some situations. Furthermore, even when
utilizing the speciﬁed input attributes set values to match some
of the attributes in the training data set, class variables are non-
deterministic. This is possible due to the presence of some noisy
data and perplexing features that are not considered during analy-
sis. For example, projecting the possibility of heart disease in a
given person based on that individual’s daily activity.
In this instance, it is probable that the majority of people who
consume nutritious foods and exercise on a regular basis are at risk
of acquiring heart disease owing to other variables such as smok-ing, alcohol intake, and potentially inheritance. In such circum-
stances, the categorization model is created based on well
recognized heart disease characteristics, which cannot offer correct
information. In such situations, there is a requirement to describe
probabilistic correlations between the attribute collection and the
class label, and the Bayesian classiﬁer is all about justifying such
duties [6].
An artiﬁcial neural network (ANN) is based on biological neural
networks, which are used to build animal brains. ANN is also
known as a connectionist system since it is built up of linked nodes
and directed linkages. Each linked connection is assigned a weight
and is responsible for sending a signal from one node to another.
When a node gets a signal, it processes it before passing it through
to another node.
In ordinary ANN implementations, the signal at the link
between artiﬁcial neurons is basically a real number, and the out-
put of each neuron is determined by a non-linear function of the
sum of all its inputs. Because of the weights of artiﬁcial neurons
and the connections between them, the signal intensity rises or
decreases as learning continues [7].
There are two approaches to building a learning model in ML
classiﬁcation. One of them is that the model begins learning as
soon as the training set is available; such models are known as
eager learners. Another model observes all training examples but
only achieves classiﬁcation if the test instance’s properties per-
fectly match any of the training instances. Such pupils are known
as lazy pupils [8].
The Nearest Neighbour (NN) classiﬁer treats each sample as a
data point in a d-dimensional space, where d is the number of
characteristics. It is determined the distance between the provided
test example and all data points in the training set. The data point
X’s k-Nearest Neighbors are the k points nearest to the X.
The data point is then categorised based on the class labels of its
neighbors. If a data point has more than one class labeled neighbor,
the class label with the most class labels is applied to the data
point. The precise value of k’s nearest neighbors should be estab-
lished. If the value of k is too low, it may misclassify owing to noise
in the training data. On the other hand, if the value of k is too big,
there is a risk of misclassiﬁcation since the collection of nearest
neighbors may contain data points that are situated far away from
the test attribute’s neighborhood.
To begin, Random forest is a supervised machine learning tech-
nique composed of a forest of judgments produced by many deci-
sion trees produced using random vectors. This method may be
used to solve classiﬁcation problems as well as regression opera-
tions. The random forest’s outcome is connected to the number
of trees it combines in the forest in such a manner that as the num-
ber of trees in the forest rises, so does the chance of attaining moreaccuracy. It is critical to understand that establishing the forest is
not the same as generating decision trees
[8].
The main difference between decision trees and random forests
is that in random forest classiﬁcation, identifying the root node and
separating the feature nodes happens at random. Random forest
categorization is popular due of its advantages. One of these is that
it may be used for both classiﬁcation and regression. Another
advantage of this strategy is that it avoids the problem of overﬁt-
ting if a sufﬁcient number of trees are available. A random forest
classiﬁer, in addition, can handle missing data and can be modelled
in the case of categorical data.
Random forest classiﬁers are used in medical, ﬁnance, e-
commerce, and the stock market. In banking, random classiﬁers
are used to distinguish between loyal and fraudulent clients. Ran-
dom Forest is used in medicine to discover the optimal mix of med-
ications and to diagnose illness based on a patient’s past medical
information. In the stock market, Random Forest classier is used
to watch a stock’s activity and then detect the loss and proﬁt. Ran-
 Fig. 1. Relationship between Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Machine Learning.H. Pallathadka, Edwin Hernan Ramirez-Asis, Telmo Pablo Loli-Poma et al. Materials Today: Proceedings xxx (xxxx) xxx
2