or the estimated boxes from the last sampling step are sent
into the detection decoder to predict the category classifica-
tion and box coordinates. After obtaining the boxes of the
current step, DDIM [84] is adopted to estimate the boxes
for the next step. We note that sending the predicted boxes
without DDIM to the next step is also an optional progres-
sive refinement strategy. However, it brings significant de-
terioration, as discussed in Section 4.4.
Box renewal. After each sampling step, the predicted boxes
can be coarsely categorized into two types, desired andun-
desired predictions. The desired predictions contain boxes
that are properly located at corresponding objects, while the
undesired ones are distributed arbitrarily. Directly sending
these undesired boxes to the next sampling iteration would
not bring a benefit since their distribution is not constructed
by box corruption in training. To make inference better
align with training, we propose the strategy of box renewal
to revive these undesired boxes by replacing them with ran-
dom boxes. Specifically, we first filter out undesired boxes
with scores lower than a particular threshold. Then, we con-
catenate the remaining boxes with new random boxes sam-
pled from a Gaussian distribution.
Flexible usage. Thanks to the random boxes design, we
can evaluate DiffusionDet with an arbitrary number of ran-
dom boxes and the number of iteration times, which do not
need to be equal to the training stage. As a comparison,
previous approaches [10, 90, 114] rely on the same number
of processed boxes during training and evaluation, and their
detection decoders are used only once in the forward pass.
3.5. Discussion
We conduct a comparative analysis between Diffusion-
Det and previous multi-stage detectors [7, 10, 74, 90]. Cas-
cade R-CNN adopts a three-stage prediction refinement pro-
cess where the three stages do not share parameters and are
used only once as a complete head during the inference
phase. Recent works [10, 90, 114] have adopted a similar
structure as Cascade R-CNN but with more stages ( i.e., six),
following the default setting of DETR [10]. While Diffu-
sionDet also employs the six-stage structure within its head,
the distinguishing feature is that DiffusionDet can reuse the
entire head multiple times to achieve further performance
gains. However, prior works could not improve perfor-
mance by reusing the detection head in most cases or could
only achieve limited performance gains. More detailed re-
sults are in Section 4.4.
4. Experiments
We first show the attractive flexibility of Diffusion-
Det. Then we compare DiffusionDet with previous well-
established detectors on COCO [57] and CrowdHuman [80]
dataset. Finally, we provide ablation studies on the compo-nents of DiffusionDet.
COCO [57] dataset contains about 118K training images
in the train2017 set and 5K validation images in the
val2017 set. There are 80 object categories in total.
We report box average precision over multiple IoU thresh-
olds (AP), threshold 0.5 (AP 50) and 0.75 (AP 75).
LVIS v1.0 [34] dataset is a large-vocabulary object de-
tection and instance segmentation dataset which has 100K
training images and 20K validation images. LVIS shares the
same source images as COCO, while its annotations capture
the long-tailed distribution in 1203 categories. We adopt
MS-COCO style box metric AP, AP 50and AP 75in LVIS
evaluation. For LVIS, the training schedule is 210K, 250K,
and 270K.
CrowdHuman [80] dataset is a large dataset covering var-
ious crowd scenarios. It has 15K training images and 4.4K
validation images, including a total of 470K human in-
stances and 22.6 persons per image. Following previous
settings [54, 90, 109, 113], we adopt evaluation metrics as
AP under IoU threshold 0.5.
4.1. Implementation Details.
The ResNet and Swin backbone are initialized with pre-
trained weights on ImageNet-1K and ImageNet-21K [15],
respectively. The newly added detection decoder is ini-
tialized with Xavier init [29]. We train DiffusionDet us-
ing AdamW [61] optimizer with the initial learning rate as
2.5×10−5and the weight decay as 10−4. All models are
trained with a mini-batch size 16 on 8 GPUs. The default
training schedule is 450K iterations, with the learning rate
divided by 10 at 350K and 420K iterations. Data augmen-
tation strategies contain random horizontal flip, scale jitter
of resizing the input images such that the shortest side is
at least 480 and at most 800 pixels while the longest is at
most 1333 [101], and random crop augmentations. We do
not use the EMA and some strong data augmentation like
MixUp [106] or Mosaic [26].
At the inference stage, we report performances of Diffu-
sionDet under diverse settings, which are combinations of
different numbers of random boxes and iteration steps. The
predictions at each sampling step are ensembled together by
NMS to get the final predictions.
4.2. Main Properties
The main properties of DiffusionDet lie on once training
for all inference cases . Once the model is trained, it can
be used with changing the number of boxes and the num-
ber of iteration steps in inference, as shown in Figure 3 and
Table 1. Therefore, we can deploy a single DiffusionDet
to multiple scenarios and obtain a desired speed-accuracy
trade-off without re-training the network.
Dynamic number of boxes. We compare DiffusionDet
19834