*This work has been submitted to the IEEE for possible publication. Copyright may be transferred without notice, 
after which this version may no longer be accessible . 2 
limits further improvement of the CNN to accommodate a 
wider range of applications.  
The exploration of the interpretability of CNN h as not 
stopped.  Alekseev  [27] proposed an interpretable CNN call 
GaborNet . In this paper, Gabor wavelet is used as the 
convolution kernel of the neura l network for image input, which 
makes the convolutional combination interpretability.  Grezmak  
[28]  proposed  an interpretable CNN for gearbox fault d iagnosis 
based on layer-wise relevance  propagation . In order to find the 
physical meaning of convolutional (Conv) layer output, some 
studies have visualized the output of each layer of the CNN  [29], 
[30]. Bojarski  [31] proposed a novel CNN called PilotNet, and 
explain w hat it learn s and how  it makes its decisions by 
visualizing the feature map of each layer.   
Nonetheless, all these interpretable neural networks are 
mostly for 2D input. In mechanical fault diagnosis, we often get 
1D vibration signals, and there is no specific convolutional 
kernel design method to extract impuls ive component , which  is 
the essential signal component rel ated to machine fault. The 
results of Ref. [32] show t hat the first convolutional layer  is one 
of the most critical part of current  waveform -based CNNs . The 
first layer of CNN not only handles data with high-dimensional, 
but is also more su sceptible to the problem of vanishing 
gradient , especially when the network architect ure is very deep.  
This will lead to the learned filters of CNN typically employ a 
noisy and uncoordinated multi -band shape, particularly  in the 
case of few training sample s. These learned filters certainly 
make sense for the neural network, but they cannot effectively 
represent the mechanical signals. Therefore, it is desired  to 
design a network t hat can extract their features according to the 
characteristics of the signals.  
A promising approach to overcome the difficult y is explored  
in this paper , where a  continuous wavelet convolution layer 
(CWConv) layer is designed to replace the first convolution  
layer, which aims to help the CNNs discover filters with a 
certain physical meaning . Based on this, the wavelet driven 
CNN, termed as WaveletKernelNet  (WKN ), is proposed, which 
can make the output of the first layer of CNN interpretable.  The 
filter bank c haracteristics of standard CNN depend on a set of 
random ly initialized  parameters  (each element of the filter 
vector can be directly learned) . By comparison , WKN  
convolves  the input signal with a cluster  of parametrized 
wavelet dictionar ies that accomplish wavelet transform. The 
scale and translation parameter s are the only two parameters of 
the CWConv layer  learned  from input signal . This approach 
forces the first layer of the network to focus on extracting 
features of the input signals, making the result of network 
output has clear physical meaning and more robust to different 
data. The main contributions of our work can be  summarized as 
follows : 
1) WaveletKernelNet is designed to extract  fault feature s 
from  mechanical signals. The first convolution  layer is 
replaced by the CWConv layer . This is equivalent to 
adding some con straints to the waveform of the filters.  
Therefore, the essential semantic information with a clear 
physical meaning  can be extracted from high -dimensional 
data.  
2) The designed CWCo nv layer can extract the characteristics of the mechanical signal by means of inner product 
matching. This makes the feature maps acquired  in the first 
layer interpretable.  
3) The proposed CWConv layer is generalizable, and it can be 
applied to any existing convolution -based network. 
Besides, the parameters in the first convolutional layer are 
drastically reduced, and the convergence speed of the 
neural network is accelerated.  
The remainder of this paper is organized as: theoretical 
foundation about  replacing the CWConv layer with standard 
one is introduced in section II, based on which a novel machine 
fault diagnosis pipeline  is shown in Section III. In Section IV, 
three data sets were experimentally studied to verify the 
effectiveness of WKN . Beside s, in contrast test its performa nce 
were compared with other methods .  In Section V, we further 
discus s the i nterpretability  and properties of WKN . 
Conclusions are shown in Section  VI. 
II. THEORETICAL FOUNDATION  
A.  CNN  
CNN consists of an input layer, a number of  hidden layers  
for feature extraction, and an output layer to output the results . 
Generally, t he hidden layer contains  a convolution (Conv) layer, 
a pooling layer, an activation layer, and a full y connected  layer.  
In the convolutional layer , each randomly initialized  kernel 
convolves through the width and height of the input  as is shown 
in Fig. 1 . The k-th feature map of the l-th layer before the 
nonlinear activation has  the feature value
l
kh , which can be 
denoted as:  
 
kl l l
kk h w x b=  +  (1) 
where
l
kw  is the weight of k-th convolutional kernel of the l-th 
layer and
l
kb denotes  the bias. x is the input signal, * is the 
convolutional operator.  
Input signal 
Feature maps Kernel
(Random ly initialized ) Element -wise multiplication
Partial sum accumulation
L
 
 
 
Fig. 1. Convolution process of the standard Conv layer in CNN . 
An activation function is needed after the convolution 
operation. Since the feature map is nonlinearly activated, it can 
be denoted as:     
 
()ll
kkz f h=  (2) 
where  
l
kzis the activated feature maps.  
After the convolutional layer, a large number of feature maps 
will be obtained, so the pooling layer is often used for down 
sampling operation to achieve the purpose of reducing the 
parameters of the model and retaining the main features.  
Mathematically, a pooling operation is defined as: