*This work has been submitted to the IEEE for possible publication. Copyright may be transferred without notice, 
after which this version may no longer be accessible . 3 
 
y ( ( ) )l+1 l+1 l l+1
kk f down z b=+  (3)          
where 
() down   is the down sampling function,
l+1  is the weight 
of the down sampling function of 
( - )l+1 th  layer. If the average 
pooling with filter size is 2× 2, the value of 
  equals to  1/4. 
After a series of stacked convolution and pooling layer s, the 
final feature map s are flattened and then classified or regressed 
by the fully  connected layer [33], [34]. The softmax  function is 
often used for classification tasks to predict the prob ability of 
different categories.  Cross entropy is often used as the loss 
function for CNN in model training , which can be de notes  as: 
 
ii
iH(r, p)= - rlog(p )   (4) 
where i is the number of class, 
0,1r is the sample label , p is 
the probability got from softmax  function. The cross entropy 
loss is used to compute  the erro r between the true  label  and the 
predicted probability . The gradient of the weight associated 
with the loss function is obtained by the back propagation  
algorithm , and the weight is updated by the stochastic gradient 
descent.  
B. Continuous Wavelet Transform  
Convolution operation in CNN as shown in Eq . (1) can be 
express ed as the inner product of t wo vectors in signal 
processing.  Also based on inner product, t he principle of the 
continuous wavelet transform (CWT ) is as follows.  
In the temporal domain,  a general  wavelet dictionary 
{ ( )} tu,s
[35-37] can be defined by dilating the parameter s > 0, 
and translat ing the parameter  
uR of the mother  wavelet 
() as 
follows:  
 
,1( ) ( )ustuts s−=  (5) 
where t denotes the time, s is a scale  parameter that is inversely 
proportional to frequ ency, and u is a translational parameter.  
The scale parameter  s can swell or compress the signal . When 
the scale parameter  is relatively low, the signal shrinks more, 
resulting in a more detailed result ing graph.  Besides , when the 
scale parameter  is relatively high, the signal is stretched out 
which means t hat the resulting graph will be presented in less 
detail.  
The CWT of signal 
g ( )xt=  is obtained by calculating the 
inner product with 
*
,(t)su  which can be expressed as  [38]: 
 
*
,1CWT ( ) g, (t) (t) ( )f u stuu,s x dts s−==   (6) 
where 
*()  denotes the complex conjugate of the mother 
wavelet 
() . Eq. (6) indicates t hat the CWT is similar to 
Fourier transform , where t he basis function used by the Fourier 
transform to implement inner product matching is a 
trigonometric function.  Besides, Fourier transform is full -band, 
so it does not have multi -scale propert ies, and the wavelet 
transform achieves multi -scale analysis of non -statio nary 
signals by two parameters.  The process of continuous wavelet 
transform is shown in Fig. 2, which contains  three steps.  
a) Select a wavele t basis function, then using Eq. (6) to 
calculate the similarity coefficient with a portion of the 
signal;  b) Shift the wavelet to the right by u and continue to calculate 
the similarity coefficient until all parts of the signal are 
calculated;  
c) Change the scale parameter s of the wavelet and repeat 
steps a) and b) until the analysis of all scales is completed.  
Time Shift u
···
1()tu
s s−
()xtShift
Shift
Shift
1 11()t
s s
1 11()tu
s s−
1 112()tu
s s−
1 11()t nu
s s−
Fig. 2. Signal continuous wavelet transform processes.  
After traversing all the scales, the signal x(t) is decomposed 
into a series of similarity coefficients. At the same time, the 
wavelet dictionary is used to transform the signal x(t) and 
project it to two -dimensional (2-D) time and scale dimensions.  
C. The Continuous Wavelet C onvolutional Layer 
The first layer of CNN  is very important. The feature map it 
extracts often affect s the entire model. Normally, the first layer 
of a standard CNN performs a set of time -domain convolutions 
between the input signal  and some  Finite Impulse Response 
(FIR) filters [39]. However, the impact  components in the 
signal cannot be accurately extracted by convolution  operations , 
besides, the extracted features also ha ve no physical meaning  
and are not human readable.  
To tackle this issue , according to the relationship between 
convolution operations and CWT, in WKN the first convolut ion 
layer is replaced by the CWConv layer,  where the CWConv 
layer consist of wavelet kernels with different scale parameter 
and translation parameter  as is shown in Fig. 3. 
Input signal 
 Element -wise multiplication
Partial sum accumulation
 
L
 
Wavelet kernel
1()tu
s s− 

 Readable feature maps
 
Fig. 3. The convolution pro cess of the CWConv layer in CNN.  
Conversely, the proposed WKN  performs  the convolution  
operation  with a predefin ed function 
,us(t) that depends  on 
two learnable parameters  and s only, as denoted  in the 
following equation:  
 
,us h (t) x=  (7)                  
where t he predefined function 
,us(t) can be some wavelet 
functions with time -domain expressions, and here 
h  denotes 
the result of the CWConv operation.