*This work has been submitted to the IEEE for possible publication. Copyright may be transferred without notice, 
after which this version may no longer be accessible . 1 
  Abstract—Convolutional neural network (CNN) , with ability 
of feature learning  and nonlinear mapping , has demonstrated  its 
effectiveness in prognostic s and health management (PHM). 
However , explanation on  the physical meaning of a CNN 
architecture has  rarely been studied . In this paper, a novel wavelet 
driven deep neural network termed as  WaveletKernelNet  (WKN)  
is presented, where a continuous wavelet convolutional (CWConv) 
layer  is designed to replace the  first convolutional layer of the 
standard CNN . This  enables  the first CWConv layer to  discover 
more meaningful filters. Furthermore, only the scale parameter 
and translation parameter are directly learned from raw data at 
this CWConv  layer. This provides  a very effective  way to obtain  a 
customized filter bank , specifically tuned  for extracting defect -
related  impact component  embedded in the vibration signal . In 
addition , three experimental verification using data from 
laboratory envir onment are carried out to verify effectiveness of 
the proposed method  for mechanical fault diagnosis . The results 
show the importance of the designed CWConv layer and the 
output of CWConv layer is interpretable. Besides, it is found that 
WKN has fewer para meters, higher fault classification accuracy 
and faster convergence speed than  standard CNN . 
 
Index Terms —Prognostic and health management (PHM), 
convolutional neural network, continuous wavelet transform, 
continuous wavelet convolutional layer, machine fa ult diagnosis.  
 
I. INTRODUCTION  
ROGNOSTIC  and health management (PHM) in 
mechanical system ha s been applied widely to achieve 
predictive maintenance, including fault tracking, reduced 
downtime and asset preservation  [1-3]. The rise of PHM has 
benefited from the development of advanced sensing 
technology, wireless communication and computing systems in 
recent years, which have generated a large amount of data for 
manufacturing systems  [4], [5]. 
 Traditionally, PHM consists of three main phases: sensor 
signal acquisition, feature extract ion and selection, followed by 
fault classification and  fault prediction . Sensor signals are 
collected from  PHM system. Feature extraction and selection 
are the critical section s in fault diagnosis, even once became a 
research hotspot in PHM. For example, Li [6] proposed semi -
supervised k ernel Marginal Fisher analysis for feature 
extraction . It can catch sight of  the inherent manifold structure 
of the data set, and consider the tightness inside the class and 
the separability between classes.  Qiao [7] used empirical mode 
decomposition, fuzzy feature extract ion and support vector 
machines  to diagnose turbine generator sets under three  
different operating conditions . Chen [8] used the wavelet packet 
 
Tianfu Li, Zhibin Zhao, Chuang Sun , Li Cheng, Xuefeng Chen  and Ruqiang 
Yan are with School of Mechanical  Engineering, X i’an Jiaotong University, 
Xi’an , Shaanxi 710049,  China . Corresponding author: Ruqiang Yan , E-mail: 
yanruqiang@xjtu.edu.cn .  to extract features, and proposes an online monitoring model 
based on logistic regression to analyze the vibration signal of 
tool wear.  In the last stage, machine learning models are trained 
by the extracted featur es and output the results of fault 
predictions. However, these traditional fault diagnosis methods 
have some limitations in PHM . First, traditional methods rely 
on manually selected features. If the extracted features  are 
inadequate for the task, the perfo rmance of the final 
classification algorithm will be greatly degenerate d. Second, 
the handcrafted features are time -consuming, especially when 
dealing with large amounts of data, a nd even if the model is 
trained usin g the extracted features, the efficiency of the final 
prediction or classification still needs to be improved.  
Unlike the above methods, the Deep Learning (DL) approach 
provides an effective solution to overcome these limitations, in 
part because of their p owerful capabilities  in feature learning . 
The deep architecture has multiple hidden layers , this could 
allow the deep architecture learn the essential  features hidden 
in the monitoring data and improve diagnostic accuracy.  There 
are many kinds of neural ne twork structures in deep learning , 
such as deep belief network (DBN) [9], [10], auto -encoder (AE)  
[11], [12] and convolutional neural network (CNN)  [13], [14] . 
CNN  as a kind of DL architecture has been broadly  applied to 
many areas [16], such as  natural language processing  [17], 
speech recognition  [18], computer vision  [19].  
 In recent years, the DL  methods using CNN have swept the 
field of fault diagnosis and produced many remarkable 
achievements  [20-22]. From the perspective of network input , 
it can be classified into one -dimensional  input CNN  (1D-CNN ) 
and two -dimensional  input CNN  (2D-CNN ). For example, Eren  
[23] employed  compact adaptive 1D -CNN  classifier for a 
generic real -time induction bearing fault diagnosis system.  Jia 
[24] proposed a novel 1D -CNN framework for the fault 
diagnosis of three imbalanced bearing datasets . Besides, Yang 
[25] implemented  Fourier transform for the collected bearing 
signals and the obtained spectra were used as the input of the 
1D-CNN for bearing fault diagnosis . For 2D -CNN, Ding [26] 
proposed a multi -scale feature mining method based on wavelet 
packet energy image and de ep CNN for spindle bearing fault 
diagnosis.  
Although these  CNN based DL methods have achieved 
successful applications in PHM, there are still problems 
associated with them . A main  limitation of CNNs in mechanical 
fault diagnosis is that they operate in a black box, which  does 
not offer  insight into how to make the final decision. This may 
not only challenges the credibility of the decision itself, but also 
Robert X. Gao  is with Department of Mechanical and Aerospace 
Engineering, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA . WaveletKernelNet : An Interpretable Deep Neural 
Network for Industrial Intelligent Diagnosis  
Tianfu Li, Student  Member, IEEE , Zhibin Zhao, Chuang Sun, Li Cheng,  
Xuefeng Chen, Senior Member, IEEE , Ruqiang Yan, Senior Member, IEEE , Robert X. Gao, Fellow, IEE E 
P