*This work has been submitted to the IEEE for possible publication. Copyright may be transferred without notice, 
after which this version may no longer be accessible . 5 
Algorithm : WaveletKernelNet for mechanical fault 
diagnosis  
1. Data preprocessing:  Maximum -Minimum 
normalization  
2. Model preparation  
1) Select a CNN model as the backbone;  
2) Replace the first standard Conv layer by CWConv 
layer.  
3. Model training : 
Input: Collected vibration signal  dataset
 12, , ,n X x x x=
 with fault label
12y ,y , ,yn
  
1) Train WaveletKernelNet  with the dataset X; 
2) Use Eq. (9) to update the first layer of the model, and 
use BP algorithm to update other layers of the model.  
Output: the WaveletKernelNet . 
4. Model validation : 
Input: Validate set of the machine.  
Output: Fault category of the machine and classification 
accuracy.  
IV. EXPERIMENTAL VERIFICATION  
To discuss the properties of WKN  and validate  its 
effectiveness, experiments on t hree datasets including bearing 
fault dataset, helical gear fault dataset  and aeroengine bevel 
gear fault dataset  were conducted . In addition, contrast  
experiments are also implemented  to compare the performance  
of the proposed method with the standard CNN.  
A. Bearing Fault Dataset  
3
1
shaft drivemotor1 2
7
8
23
46
accelerometer gearbox4
fault/driven gear inner structure of the gearbox6 7 8normal /driving gear5
load5transmission 
ratio: 75/55
 
Fig. 5. Experimental facility.  
The bearing fault dataset are acquired from the bearing fault 
simulation machine, shown in Fig. 5. The test machine  mainly 
consist  of the test machine drive motor, transmission part, gear 
fault simulation system, magnetic powder actuator, loading 
system, bearing fault simulation and dynamic balance 
simulation. The motor speed is controlled through the controller. 
This experiment main ly simulates the fault part of the bearing 
fault of the test bench.  
The test was performed on 3,0205  tapered roller bearing with 
six prefabricated fault locations , including  cage, rolling element, 
upper edge of outer ring, middle of outer ring, lower edge  of 
outer ring, and inner ring . Fig. 6  illustrates some of the 
prefabricated faults . Together with the fault -free bearings, there 
are seven types of labels in total.  In the experiment, the spindle speed was  1,200 r/min, and f or each fault type, 2 minutes o f 
vibration data with sampling rate of 96 kHz was collected.   
For data preparation, a sliding  window is used to truncate  the 
vibration signal without overlap and each data sample contains  
1,000 data points.  After data preparation, t he entire  dataset is 
splited  into training  dataset and testing  dataset , randomly . For 
each failure mode , it contains 7 ,474 data sample s for model 
training and 1 ,869 data sample s for model testing. Therefore, 
the training set have  52,318 data samples and the testing set 
have  13,083  data sample . 
In this 7 -class classification task, three kind of CWConv 
layer  are designed  as the first layer of WKN, they  are formed 
by Mexhat wavelet  [41], Morlet wavelet [42] and Laplace 
wavelet  [43], respectively . In comparative experiments , we 
added a comparison experiment using the sin function as the 
first layer filter.  In model  settings, the length of the wavelet 
filter set s to 16  and u se Adam  as the optimizer . To verify the 
network stability  and reduce the effects of the randomness, we 
take the average of 20 experimen tal results as the final result.  
The experimental results are shown in Table I and Fig. 7 .  
 
Fig. 6. Some f ault types of tapered roller bearings. (a) outer ring fault; (b) inner 
ring fault; (c) cage fault; (d)rolling element fault.  
As can be see n from these results, all the three types of 
WaveletKernelNet s are able to achieve a higher classification 
accuracy  and a smaller training loss  than the standard  CNN . 
Besides, we can see the Laplace WaveletNet achieves  the 
highest mean classification accuracy and has the fastest 
convergence speed among the three WaveletKernelNet s. 
However, the SinCNN gets the lowest classification accuracy 
and the slowest convergence speed.  
TABLE I. 
    CLASSIFICATION RESULTS OF BEARING DATASET  
Model  Mean accuracy  Variance  
MexhatWaveletNet  92.61%  0 
Morlet WaveletNet  92.85%  0 
Laplace WaveletNet  99.91%  0 
CNN  89.59%  0.041  
SinCNN  86.72%  0.001