S3S4S5
 Uncertainty-minimal Query Selection
 Decoder & Head
F5  Efficient Hybrid Encoder
C
Fusion
Conv1x1 s1
BN
SiLU
Conv3x3 s2
BN
SiLU
FusionFusion
Position Embedding
Image Feature
Object QueryAIFIFigure 4. Overview of RT-DETR. We feed the features from the last three stages of the backbone into the encoder. The efficient hybrid
encoder transforms multi-scale features into a sequence of image features through the Attention-based Intra-scale Feature Interaction (AIFI)
and the CNN-based Cross-scale Feature Fusion (CCFF). Then, the uncertainty-minimal query selection selects a fixed number of encoder
features to serve as initial object queries for the decoder. Finally, the decoder with auxiliary prediction heads iteratively optimizes object
queries to generate categories and boxes.
C F Concatenate Element-wise add Flatten
1x1 Convc
1x1 Convc
c
RepBlock c
N×C
cFFusion
Figure 5. The fusion block in CCFF.
D, DS5not only significantly reduces latency ( 35% faster),
but also improves accuracy ( 0.4%AP higher). CCFF is opti-
mized based on the cross-scale fusion module, which inserts
several fusion blocks consisting of convolutional layers into
the fusion path. The role of the fusion block is to fuse two
adjacent scale features into a new feature, and its structure is
illustrated in Figure 5. The fusion block contains two 1×1
convolutions to adjust the number of channels, NRepBlock s
composed of RepConv [ 7] are used for feature fusion, and
the two-path outputs are fused by element-wise add. We
formulate the calculation of the hybrid encoder as:
Q=K=V=Flatten (S5),
F5=Reshape (AIFI (Q,K,V)),
O=CCFF ({S3,S4,F5}),(1)
where Reshape represents restoring the shape of the flat-
tened feature to the same shape as S5.
4.3. Uncertainty-minimal Query Selection
To reduce the difficulty of optimizing object queries in
DETR, several subsequent works [ 39,41,42] propose query
selection schemes, which have in common that they use the
confidence score to select the top Kfeatures from the en-
coder to initialize object queries (or just position queries).The confidence score represents the likelihood that the fea-
ture includes foreground objects. Nevertheless, the detector
are required to simultaneously model the category and loca-
tion of objects, both of which determine the quality of the
features. Hence, the performance score of the feature is a la-
tent variable that is jointly correlated with both classification
and localization. Based on the analysis, the current query
selection lead to a considerable level of uncertainty in the
selected features, resulting in sub-optimal initialization for
the decoder and hindering the performance of the detector.
To address this problem, we propose the uncertainty mini-
mal query selection scheme, which explicitly constructs and
optimizes the epistemic uncertainty to model the joint latent
variable of encoder features, thereby providing high-quality
queries for the decoder. Specifically, the feature uncertainty
Uis defined as the discrepancy between the predicted dis-
tributions of localization Pand classification Cin Eq. (2).
To minimize the uncertainty of the queries, we integrate
the uncertainty into the loss function for the gradient-based
optimization in Eq. (3).
U(ˆX) =∥P(ˆX)− C(ˆX)∥,ˆX∈RD(2)
L(ˆX,ˆY,Y) =Lbox(ˆb,b) +Lcls(U(ˆX),ˆc,c)(3)
where ˆYandYdenote the prediction and ground truth,
ˆY={ˆc,ˆb},ˆcandˆbrepresent the category and bounding
box respectively, ˆXrepresent the encoder feature.
Effectiveness analysis. To analyze the effectiveness of the
uncertainty-minimal query selection, we visualize the clas-
sification scores and IoU scores of the selected features on
COCO val2017 , Figure 6. We draw the scatterplot with
classification scores greater than 0.5. The purple and green
dots represent the selected features from the model trained
with uncertainty-minimal query selection and vanilla query
16969