computational redundancy and further improve accuracy.
For the former, we observe that although the introduction
of multi-scale features is beneficial in accelerating the train-
ing convergence [ 42], it leads to a significant increase in
the length of the sequence feed into the encoder. The high
computational cost caused by the interaction of multi-scale
features makes the Transformer encoder the computational
bottleneck. Therefore, implementing the real-time DETR
requires a redesign of the encoder. And for the latter, pre-
vious works [ 39,41,42] show that the hard-to-optimize ob-
ject queries hinder the performance of DETRs and propose
the query selection schemes to replace the vanilla learnable
embeddings with encoder features. However, we observe
that the current query selection directly adopt classification
scores for selection, ignoring the fact that the detector are
required to simultaneously model the category and location
of objects, both of which determine the quality of the fea-
tures. This inevitably results in encoder features with low
localization confidence being selected as initial queries, thus
leading to a considerable level of uncertainty and hurting the
performance of DETRs. We view query initialization as a
breakthrough to further improve performance.
In this paper, we propose the Real-Time DEtection
TRansformer (RT-DETR), the first real-time end-to-end ob-
ject detector to our best knowledge. To expeditiously process
multi-scale features, we design an efficient hybrid encoder to
replace the vanilla Transformer encoder, which significantly
improves inference speed by decoupling the intra-scale in-
teraction and cross-scale fusion of features with different
scales. To avoid encoder features with low localization con-
fidence being selected as object queries, we propose the
uncertainty-minimal query selection, which provides high-
quality initial queries to the decoder by explicitly optimizing
the uncertainty, thereby increasing the accuracy. Further-
more, RT-DETR supports flexible speed tuning to accommo-
date various real-time scenarios without retraining, thanks
to the multi-layer decoder architecture of DETR.
RT-DETR achieves an ideal trade-off between the speed
and accuracy. Specifically, RT-DETR-R50 achieves 53.1%
AP on COCO val2017 and108FPS on T4 GPU, while RT-
DETR-R101 achieves 54.3%AP and 74FPS, outperforming
LandXmodels of previously advanced YOLO detectors in
both speed and accuracy, Figure 1. We also develop scaled
RT-DETRs by scaling the encoder and decoder with smaller
backbones, which outperform the lighter YOLO detectors ( S
andMmodels). Furthermore, RT-DETR-R50 outperforms
DINO-Deformable-DETR-R50 by 2.2%AP (53.1%AP vs
50.9%AP) in accuracy and by about 21times in FPS ( 108
FPS vs 5FPS), significantly improves accuracy and speed
of DETRs. After pre-training with Objects365 [ 32], RT-
DETR-R50 / R101 achieves 55.3%/56.2%AP, resulting in
surprising performance improvements. More experimental
results are provided in the Appendix.The main contributions are summarized as: (i). We pro-
pose the first real-time end-to-end object detector called RT-
DETR, which not only outperforms the previously advanced
YOLO detectors in both speed and accuracy but also elimi-
nates the negative impact caused by NMS post-processing
on real-time object detection; (ii). We quantitatively analyze
the impact of NMS on the speed and accuracy of YOLO
detectors, and establish an end-to-end speed benchmark to
test the end-to-end inference speed of real-time detectors;
(iii). The proposed RT-DETR supports flexible speed tuning
by adjusting the number of decoder layers to accommodate
various scenarios without retraining.
2. Related Work
2.1. Real-time Object Detectors
YOLOv1 [ 29] is the first CNN-based one-stage object de-
tector to achieve true real-time object detection. Through
years of continuous development, the YOLO detectors have
outperformed other one-stage object detectors [ 20,23] and
become the synonymous with the real-time object detec-
tor. YOLO detectors can be classified into two categories:
anchor-based [ 1,10,14,24,27,28,34,35] and anchor-
free [ 9,11,15,37], which achieve a reasonable trade-off
between speed and accuracy and are widely used in vari-
ous practical scenarios. These advanced real-time detectors
produce numerous overlapping boxes and require NMS post-
processing, which slows down their speed.
2.2. End-to-end Object Detectors
End-to-end object detectors are well-known for their stream-
lined pipelines. Carion et al. [4] first propose the end-to-
end detector based on Transformer called DETR, which has
attracted extensive attention due to its distinctive features.
Particularly, DETR eliminates the hand-crafted anchor and
NMS components. Instead, it employs bipartite matching
and directly predicts the one-to-one object set. Despite its
obvious advantages, DETR suffers from several problems:
slow training convergence, high computational cost, and
hard-to-optimize queries. Many DETR variants have been
proposed to address these issues. Accelerating convergence.
Deformable-DETR [ 42] accelerates training convergence
with multi-scale features by enhancing the efficiency of the
attention mechanism. DAB-DETR [ 22] and DN-DETR [ 16]
further improve performance by introducing the iterative
refinement scheme and denoising training. Group-DETR [ 5]
introduces group-wise one-to-many assignment. Reduc-
ing computational cost. Efficient DETR [ 39] and Sparse
DETR [ 31] reduce the computational cost by reducing the
number of encoder and decoder layers or the number of
updated queries. Lite DETR [ 17] enhances the efficiency
of encoder by reducing the update frequency of low-level
features in an interleaved way. Optimizing query initial-
16966