ConcatMSE
C
Concat
SSE
B
CSF
D
SSE
 AIFICCFF
E
 A
Concat
Intra-scale Cross-scale Decoupled EnhancedFigure 3. The encoder structure for each variant. SSE represents the single-scale Transformer encoder, MSE represents the multi-scale
Transformer encoder, and CSF represents cross-scale fusion. AIFI andCCFF are the two modules designed into our hybrid encoder.
on T4 GPU with TensorRT FP16. According to the re-
sults ( cf. Table 2 ), we conclude that anchor-free detectors
outperform anchor-based detectors with equivalent accu-
racy for YOLO detectors because the former require less
NMS time than the latter . The reason is that anchor-based
detectors produce more prediction boxes than anchor-free
detectors (three times more in our tested detectors).
4. The Real-time DETR
4.1. Model Overview
RT-DETR consists of a backbone, an efficient hybrid en-
coder, and a Transformer decoder with auxiliary prediction
heads. The overview of RT-DETR is illustrated in Figure 4.
Specifically, we feed the features from the last three stages
of the backbone {S3,S4,S5}into the encoder. The effi-
cient hybrid encoder transforms multi-scale features into a
sequence of image features through intra-scale feature inter-
action and cross-scale feature fusion ( cf.Sec. 4.2). Subse-
quently, the uncertainty-minimal query selection is employed
to select a fixed number of encoder features to serve as ini-
tial object queries for the decoder ( cf.Sec. 4.3). Finally, the
decoder with auxiliary prediction heads iteratively optimizes
object queries to generate categories and boxes.
4.2. Efficient Hybrid Encoder
Computational bottleneck analysis. The introduction of
multi-scale features accelerates training convergence and im-
proves performance [ 42]. However, although the deformable
attention reduces the computational cost, the sharply in-
creased sequence length still causes the encoder to become
the computational bottleneck. As reported in Lin et al. [18],
the encoder accounts for 49% of the GFLOPs but contributes
only11% of the AP in Deformable-DETR. To overcome this
bottleneck, we first analyze the computational redundancy
present in the multi-scale Transformer encoder. Intuitively,
high-level features that contain rich semantic information
about objects are extracted from low-level features, making it
redundant to perform feature interaction on the concatenated
multi-scale features. Therefore, we design a set of variants
with different types of the encoder to prove that the simulta-neous intra-scale and cross-scale feature interaction is ineffi-
cient, Figure 3. Specially, we use DINO-Deformable-R50
with the smaller size data reader and lighter decoder used in
RT-DETR for experiments and first remove the multi-scale
Transformer encoder in DINO-Deformable-R50 as variant A.
Then, different types of the encoder are inserted to produce a
series of variants based on A, elaborated as follows (Detailed
indicators of each variant are referred to in Table 3):
•A→B: Variant B inserts a single-scale Transformer en-
coder into A, which uses one layer of Transformer block.
The multi-scale features share the encoder for intra-scale
feature interaction and then concatenate as output.
•B→C: Variant C introduces cross-scale feature fusion
based on B and feeds the concatenated features into the
multi-scale Transformer encoder to perform simultaneous
intra-scale and cross-scale feature interaction.
•C→D: Variant D decouples intra-scale interaction and
cross-scale fusion by utilizing the single-scale Transformer
encoder for the former and a PANet-style [ 21] structure
for the latter.
•D→E: Variant E enhances the intra-scale interaction and
cross-scale fusion based on D, adopting an efficient hybrid
encoder designed by us.
Hybrid design. Based on the above analysis, we rethink
the structure of the encoder and propose an efficient hybrid
encoder , consisting of two modules, namely the Attention-
based Intra-scale Feature Interaction (AIFI) and the CNN-
based Cross-scale Feature Fusion (CCFF). Specifically, AIFI
further reduces the computational cost based on variant D
by performing the intra-scale interaction only on S5with
the single-scale Transformer encoder. The reason is that
applying the self-attention operation to high-level features
with richer semantic concepts captures the connection be-
tween conceptual entities, which facilitates the localization
and recognition of objects by subsequent modules. How-
ever, the intra-scale interactions of lower-level features are
unnecessary due to the lack of semantic concepts and the
risk of duplication and confusion with high-level feature in-
teractions. To verify this opinion, we perform the intra-scale
interaction only on S5in variant D, and the experimental
results are reported in Table 3 (see row D S5). Compared to
16968