NOVEMBER 2020  |  VOL. 63  |  NO. 11  |   COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM    139Generative Adversarial Networks
By Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu,  
David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair, Aaron Courville, and Yoshua BengioDOI:10.1145/3422622
Abstract
Generative adversarial networks are a kind of artificial intel-
ligence algorithm designed to solve the generative model-
ing problem. The goal of a generative model is to study a 
collection of training examples and learn the probability 
distribution that generated them. Generative Adversarial 
Networks (GANs) are then able to generate more examples 
from the estimated probability distribution. Generative 
models based on deep learning are common, but GANs 
are among the most successful generative models (espe-
cially in terms of their ability to generate realistic high-
resolution images). GANs have been successfully applied 
to a wide variety of tasks (mostly in research settings) but 
continue to present unique challenges and research 
opportunities because they are based on game theory 
while most other approaches to generative modeling are 
based on optimization.
1. INTRODUCTION
Most current approaches to developing artificial intelli-
gence are based primarily on machine learning. The most 
widely used and successful form of machine learning to date 
is supervised learning. Supervised learning algorithms are 
given a dataset of pairs of example inputs and example out-
puts. They learn to associate each input with each output 
and thus learning a mapping from input to output exam-
ples. The input examples are typically complicated data 
objects like images, natural language sentences, or audio 
waveforms, while the output examples are often relatively 
simple. The most common kind of supervised learning is 
classification, where the output is just an integer code iden-
tifying a specific category (a photo might be recognized as 
coming from category 0 containing cats, or category 1 con-
taining dogs, etc.).
Supervised learning is often able to achieve greater than 
human accuracy after the training process is complete, and 
thus has been integrated into many products and services. 
Unfortunately, the learning process itself still falls far short 
of human abilities. Supervised learning by definition relies 
on a human supervisor to provide an output example for 
each input example. Worse, existing approaches to super-
vised learning often require millions of training examples to 
exceed human performance, when a human might be able 
to learn to perform the task acceptably from a very small 
number of examples.
In order to reduce both the amount of human supervi-
sion required for learning and the number of examples 
required for learning, many researchers today study 
unsupervised learning, often using generative models. In 
this overview paper, we describe one particular approach 
to unsupervised learning via generative modeling called 
generative adversarial networks. We briefly review The original version of this paper is entitled “Generative 
Adversarial Networks” and was published in Advances in 
Neural Information Processing Systems 27 (NIPS 2014).applications of GANs and identify core research problems 
related to convergence in games necessary to make GANs a 
reliable technology.
2. GENERATIVE MODELING
The goal of supervised learning is relatively straightforward 
to specify, and all supervised learning algorithms have 
essentially the same goal: learn to accurately associate new 
input examples with the correct outputs. For instance, an 
object recognition algorithm may associate a photo of a dog 
with some kind of DOG category identifier.
Unsupervised learning is a less clearly defined branch of 
machine learning, with many different unsupervised learn-
ing algorithms pursuing many different goals. Broadly 
speaking, the goal of unsupervised learning is to learn some-
thing useful by examining a dataset containing unlabeled 
input examples. Clustering and dimensionality reduction 
are common examples of unsupervised learning.
Another approach to unsupervised learning is generative 
modeling. In generative modeling, training examples x are 
drawn from an unknown distribution pdata(x). The goal of a 
generative modeling algorithm is to learn a pmodel(x) that 
approximates pdata(x) as closely as possible.
A straightforward way to learn an approximation of pdata is 
to explicitly write a function pmodel(x; θ) controlled by param-
eters θ and search for the value of the parameters that makes 
pdata and pmodel as similar as possible. In particular, the most 
popular approach to generative modeling is probably maxi-
mum likelihood estimation, consisting of minimizing the 
Kullback-Leibler divergence between pdata and pmodel. The 
common approach of estimating the mean parameter of a 
Gaussian distribution by taking the mean of a set of observa-
tions is one example of maximum likelihood estimation. 
This approach based on explicit density functions is illus-
trated in Figure 1.
Explicit density modeling has worked well for traditional 
statistics, using simple functional forms of probability dis-
tributions, usually applied to small numbers of variables. 
More recently, with the rise of machine learning in general 
and deep learning in particular, researchers have become 
interested in learning models that make use of relatively 
complicated functional forms. When a deep neural net-
work is used to generate data, the corresponding density 
function may be computationally intractable. 
Traditionally, there have been two dominant approaches 
to confronting this intractability problem: (1) carefully 
design the model to have a tractable density function 
(e.g., Frey11) and (2) design a learning algorithm based on