research highlights  
 
140     COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM  |  NOVEMBER 2020  |   VOL. 63  |   NO. 11a computationally tractable approximation of an intractable 
density function (e.g., Kingma and Welling15). Both approaches 
have proved difficult, and for many applications, such as gen-
erating realistic high resolution images, researchers remain 
unsatisfied with the results so far. This motivates further 
research to improve these two paths, but also suggests that a 
third path could be useful.
Besides taking a point x as input and returning an esti-
mate of the probability of generating that point, a generative 
model can be useful if it is able to generate a sample from 
the distribution pmodel. This is illustrated in Figure 2. Many 
models that represent a density function can also generate 
samples from that density function. In some cases, generat-
ing samples is very expensive or only approximate methods 
of generating samples are tractable.
Some generative models avoid the entire issue of design-
ing a tractable density function and learn only a tractable 
sample generation process. These are called implicit genera-
tive models. GANs fall into this category. Prior to the intro-
duction of GANs, the state of the art deep implicit generative 
model was the generative stochastic network4 which is capa-
ble of approximately generating samples via an incremental 
process based on Markov chains. GANs were introduced in 
order to create a deep implicit generative model that was 
able to generate true samples from the model distribution 
in a single generation step, without need for the incremen-
tal generation process or approximate nature of sampling 
Markov chains.
Today, the most popular approaches to generative mod-
eling are probably GANs, variational autoencoders,15 and 
fully-visible belief nets (e.g., Frey11, 26). None of these 
approaches relies on Markov chains, so the reason for the 
interest in GANs today is not that they succeeded at their 
original goal of generative modeling without Markov chains, 
but rather that they have succeded in generating high-qual-
ity images and have proven useful for several tasks other 
than straightforward generation, as described in Section 5.3. GENERATIVE ADVERSARIAL NETWORKS
Generative adversarial networks are based on a game, in the 
sense of game theory, between two machine learning models, 
typically implemented using neural networks.
One network called the generator defines pmodel(x) implic-
itly. The generator is not necessarily able to evaluate the den-
sity function pmodel. For some variants of GANs, evaluation of 
the density function is possible (any tractable density model 
for which sampling is tractable and differntiable could 
be trained as a GAN generator, as done by Danihelka  
Learned
modelTraining data
Generated samples
Figure 2. The goal of many generative models, as illustrated 
here, is to study a collection of training examples, then learn to 
generate more examples that come from the same probability 
distribution. GANs learn to do this without using an explicit 
representation of the density function. One advantage of the 
GAN framework is that it may be applied to models for which the 
density function is computationally intractable. The samples 
shown here are all samples from the ImageNet dataset,8 
including the ones labeled “model samples.” We use actual 
ImageNet data to illustrate the goal that a hypothetical perfect 
model would attain.
xp(x)Figure 1. Many approaches to generative modeling are based 
on density estimation: observing several training examples of 
a random variable x  and inferring a density function p (x) that 
generates the training data. This approach is illustrated here, 
with several data points on a real number line used to fit a 
Gaussian density function that explains the observed samples. 
In contrast to this common approach, GANs are implicit models  
that infer the probability distribution p (x) without necessarily 
representing the density function explicitly.