NOVEMBER 2020  |  VOL. 63  |  NO. 11  |   COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM    143spurious Nash equilibria exist,32 whether the learning algo-
rithm converges to a Nash equilibrium,24 and if it does so, 
how quickly.21
In many cases of practical interest, these theoretical 
questions are open, and the best learning algorithms seem 
empirically to often fail to converge. Theoretical work to 
answer these questions is ongoing, as is work to design bet-
ter costs, models, and training algorithms with better con-
vergence properties.
5. OTHER GAN TOPICS
This article is focused on a summary of the core design con-
siderations and algorithmic properties of GANs.
Many other topics of potential interest cannot be consid-
ered here due to space consideration. This article discussed 
using GANs to approximate a distribution p(x) they have also 
been extended to the conditional setting23, 25 where they gen-
erate samples corresponding to some input by drawing sam-
ples from the conditional distribution p(x | y). GANs are 
related to moment matching16 and optimal transport.1 A 
quirk of GANs that is made especially clear through their 
connection to MMD and optimal transport is that they may 
be used to train generative models for which pmodel has sup-
port only on a thin manifold and may actually assign zero 
likelihood to the training data. GANs struggle to generate 
discrete data because the back-propagation algorithm 
needs to propagate gradients from the discriminator 
through the output of the generator, but this problem is 
being gradually resolved.9 Like most generative models, 
GANs can be used to fill in gaps in missing data.34 GANs have 
proven very effective for learning to classify data using very 
few labeled training examples.29 Evaluating the performance 
of generative models including GANs is a difficult research 
area in its own right.29, 31, 32, 33 GANs can be seen as a way for 
machine learning to learn its own cost function, rather than 
minimizing a hand-designed cost function. GANs can be 
seen as a way of supervising machine learning by asking it to approximation to their true underlying task. The only real 
error is the statistical error (sampling of a finite amount of 
training data rather than measuring the true underlying 
data-generating distribution) and failure of the learning 
algorithm to converge to exactly the optimal parameters. 
Many generative modeling strategies would introduce these 
sources of error and also further sources of approximation 
error, based on Markov chains, optimization of bounds on 
the true cost rather than the cost itself, etc.
It is difficult to give much further specific guidance regard -
ing the details of GANs because GANs are such an active 
research area and most specific advice quickly becomes out 
of date. Figure 6 shows how quickly the capabilities of GANs 
have progressed in the years since their introduction.
4. CONVERGENCE OF GANS
The central theoretical results presented in the original GAN 
paper13 were that:
1. in the space of density functions pmodel and discrimina-
tor functions D, there is only one local Nash equilib-
rium, where pmodel = pdata.
2. if it were possible to optimize directly over such den-
sity functions, then the algorithm that consists of opti-
mizing D to convergence in the inner loop, then 
making a small gradient step on pmodel in the outer 
loop, converges to this Nash equilibrium.
However, the theoretical model of local moves directly in 
density function space may not be very relevant to GANs as 
they are trained in practice: using local moves in parameter 
space of the generator function, among the set of functions 
representable by neural networks with a finite number of 
parameters, with each parameter represented with a finite 
number of bits.
In many different theoretical models, it is interesting to 
study whether a Nash equilibrium exists,2 whether any Figure 6. An illustration of progress in GAN capabilities over the course of approximately three years following the introduction of 
GANs. GANs have rapidly become more capable, due to changes in GAN algorithms, improvements to the underlying deep learning 
algorithms, and improvements to underlying deep learning software and hardware infrastructure. This rapid progress means that  
it is infeasible for any single document to summarize the state-of-the-art GAN capabilities or any specific set of best practices;  
both continue to evolve rapidly enough that any comprehensive survey quickly becomes out of date. Figure reproduced with 
permission from Brundage et al.5 The individual results are from Refs. Goodfellow,13 Karras et al.,14 Liu and Tuzel,17 and  
Radford et al.27 respectively.
2014 2015 2016 2017