research highlights  
 
142     COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM  |  NOVEMBER 2020  |   VOL. 63  |   NO. 11as demonstrated by Metz et al.,22 but the argmin operation is 
difficult to work with in this way. The most popular approach 
is to regard this situation as a game between two players. 
Much of the game theory literature is concerned with games 
that have discrete and finite action spaces, convex losses, or 
other properties simplifying them. GANs require use of 
game theory in settings that are not yet well-explored, where 
the costs are non-convex and the actions and policies are 
continuous and high-dimensional (regardless of whether 
we consider an action to be choosing a specific parameter 
vector θ(G) or whether we consider the action to be generating 
a sample x). The goal of a machine learning algorithm in this 
context is to find a local Nash equilibrium28: a point that is a 
local minimum of each player’s cost with respect to that 
player’s parameters. With local moves, no player can reduce 
its cost further, assuming the other player’s parameters do 
not change.
The most common training algorithm is simply to use a 
gradient-based optimizer to repeatedly take simultaneous 
steps on both players, incrementally minimizing each play-
er’s cost with respect to that player’s parameters.
At the end of the training process, GANs are often able to 
produce realistic samples, even for very complicated datas-
ets containing high-resolution images. An example is shown 
in Figure 5.
At a high level, one reason that the GAN framework is suc-
cesful may be that it involves very little approximation. Many 
other approaches to generative modeling must approximate 
an intractable density functions. GANs do not involve any 
The situation is not straightforward to model as an opti-
mization problem because each player’s cost is a function of 
the other player’s parameters, but each player may control 
only its own parameters. It is possible to reduce the situa-
tion to optimization, where the goal is to minimizex
zx
z
(a)
(c) (d)(b)
x
zx
zFigure 4. An illustration of the basic intuition behind the 
GAN training process, illustrated by fitting a 1-D Gaussian 
distribution. In this example, we can understand the goal of the 
generator as learning a simple scaling of the inverse cumulative 
distribution function of the data generating distribution. GANs 
are trained by simultaneously updating the discriminator 
function (D , blue, dashed line) so that it discriminates between 
samples from the data generating distribution (black, dotted 
line) px from those of the generative distribution pmodel (green, 
solid line). The lower horizontal line is the domain from which 
z is sampled, in this case uniformly. The horizontal line above 
is part of the domain of x . The upward arrows show how the 
mapping x = G (z) imposes the non-uniform distribution pmodel on 
transformed samples. G  contracts in regions of high density 
and expands in regions of low density of pmodel. (a) Consider a 
pair of adversarial networks at initialization: pmodel is initialized 
to a unit Gaussian for this example while D  is defined by a 
randomly initialized deep neural network. (b) Suppose that 
D were trained to convergence while G  were held fixed. In 
practice, both are trained simultaneously, but for the purpose of 
building intuition, we see that if G were fixed, D  would converge 
to . (c) Now suppose that we gradually train 
both G and D  for a while. The samples x  generated by G  flow in 
the direction of increasing D  in order to arrive at regions that 
are more likely to be classified as data. Meanwhile the estimate 
of D is updated in response to this update in G . (d) At the Nash 
equilibrium, neither player can improve its payoff because pmodel 
= pdata. The discriminator is unable to differentiate between 
the two distributions, that is, . This constant function 
shows that all points are equally likely to have come from either 
distribution. In practice, G  and D  are typically optimized with 
simultaneous gradient steps, and it is not necessary for D  to 
be optimal at every step as shown in this intuitive cartoon. See 
Refs. Fedus et al.10 and Nagarajan and Kolter24 for more realistic 
discussions of the GAN equilibration process.
Figure 5. This image is a sample from a Progressive GAN14 depicting 
a person who does not exist but was “imagined” by a GAN after 
training on photos of celebrities.