NOVEMBER 2020  |  VOL. 63  |  NO. 11  |   COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM    141et al.6), but this is not required. Instead, the generator is 
able to draw samples from the distribution pmodel. The gen-
erator is defined by a prior distribution p (z) over a vector z 
that serves as input to the generator function G( z; θ(G)) where 
θ(G) is a set of learnable parameters defining the generator’s 
strategy in the game. The input vector z  can be thought of as 
a source of randomness in an otherwise deterministic sys-
tem, analogous to the seed of pseudorandom number gen-
erator. The prior distribution p (z) is typically a relatively 
unstructured distribution, such as a high-dimensional 
Gaussian distribution or a uniform distribution over a 
hypercube. Samples z  from this distribution are then just 
noise. The main role of the generator is to learn the func-
tion G(z) that transforms such unstructured noise z  into 
realistic samples.
The other player in this game is the discriminator. The 
discriminator examines samples x and returns some esti-
mate D(x; θ(D)) of whether x is real (drawn from the training 
distribution) or fake (drawn from pmodel by running the gen-
erator). In the original formulation of GANs, this estimate 
consists of a probability that the input is real rather than 
fake assuming that the real distribution and fake distribu-
tion are sampled equally often. Other formulations (e.g., 
Arjovsky et al.1) exist but generally speaking, at the level of 
verbal, intuitive descriptions, the discriminator tries to pre-
dict whether the input was real or fake.
Each player incurs a cost: J(G)(θ(G), θ(D)) for the generator 
and J(D)(θ(G), θ(D)) for the discriminator. Each player attempts 
to minimize its own cost. Roughly speaking, the discrimina-
tor’s cost encourages it to correctly classify data as real or 
fake, while the generator’s cost encourages it to generate 
samples that the discriminator incorrectly classifies as real. 
Very many different specific formulations of these costs are 
possible and so far most popular formulations seem to per-
form roughly the same.18 In the original version of  
GANs, J(D) was defined to be the negative log-likelihood that 
the discriminator assigns to the real-vs-fake labels given the 
input to the discriminator. In other words, the discriminator 
is trained just like a regular binary classifier. The original 
work on GANs offered two versions of the cost for the gener-
ator. One version, today called minimax GAN (M-GAN) 
defined a cost J(G) = −J(D), yielding a minimax game that is 
straightforward to analyze theoretically. M-GAN defines the 
cost for the generator by flipping the sign of the discrimina-
tor’s cost; another approach is the non-saturating GAN 
(NS-GAN), for which the generator’s cost is defined by flip-
ping the discriminator’s labels. In other words, the genera-
tor is tried to minimize the negative log-likelihood that the 
discriminator assigns to the wrong labels. The later helps to 
avoid gradient saturation while training the model.
We can think of GANs as a bit like counterfeiters and 
police: the counterfeiters make fake money while the 
police try to arrest counterfeiters and continue to allow 
the spending of legitimate money. Competition between 
counterfeiters and police leads to more and more realistic 
counterfeit money until eventually the counterfeiters pro-
duce perfect fakes and the police cannot tell the difference 
between real and fake money. One complication to this 
analogy is that the generator learns via the discriminator’s Real data Fake data
Dataset Generator
Random
latent
variableRandom
index into
datasetDiscriminator DiscriminatorFigure 3. Training GANs involves training both a generator network 
and a discriminator network. The process involves both real data 
drawn from a dataset and fake data created continuously by the 
generator throughout the training process. The discriminator is 
trained much like any other classifier defined by a deep neural 
network. As shown on the left, the discriminator is shown data 
from the training set. In this case, the discriminator is trained to 
assign data to the “real” class. As shown on the right, the training 
process also involves fake data. The fake data is constructed by first 
sampling a random vector z from a prior distribution over latent 
variables of the model. The generator is then used to to produce a 
sample x = G(z). The function G is simply a function represented by a 
neural network that transforms the random, unstructured z vector 
into structured data, intended to be statistically indistinguishable 
from the training data. The discriminator then classifies this fake 
data. The discriminator is trained to assign this data to the “fake” 
class. The backpropagation algorithm makes it possible to use 
the derivatives of the discriminator’s output with respect to the 
discriminator’s input to train the generator. The generator is trained 
to fool the discriminator, in other words, to make the discriminator 
assign its input to the “real” class. The training process for the 
discriminator is thus much the same as for any other binary 
classifier with the exception that the data for the “fake” class comes 
from a distribution that changes constantly as the generator learns 
rather than from a fixed distribution. The learning process for the 
generator is somewhat unique, because it is not given specific 
targets for its output, but rather simply given a reward for producing 
outputs that fool its (constantly changing) opponent.
gradient, as if the counterfeiters have a mole among the 
police reporting the specific methods that the police use 
to detect fakes.
This process is illustrated in Figure 3. Figure 4 shows a 
cartoon giving some intution for how the process works.