IEEE NETWORK MAGAZINE, VOL. XX, NO. YY, MONTH XXXX 6
MNO Core Cloud 
…
…Centralized 
DQN 
Massive 
Training 
Data 
…
dddd
(a) Centralized DRLMNO Core Cloud 
………Distributed 
DQN 
Upload 
Training 
Data 
(b) Distributed DRL
MNO Core Cloud 
… ……Federated 
Learning One Round in FL Download 
Model 
Client Central 
Server Training Process in a Client 
MainNet TargetNet 
Local Replay Memory Loss Function 
Multi-Layer 
Perception Replace 
Local Model 
Periodically 
Environment Gradient 
 (!",#";$)
!%argmax & (!"'*,#;$) (!"'*,
argmax & (!"'*,#;$)
;$+)
( !,"!,#!, !$%)#& &,"&, &$%
 &$%
Local 
Training Data 
1
(c) DRL with Federated Learning
Fig. 4. Centralized DRL v.s. Distributed DRL v.s. DRL with Fe derated Learning over mobile edge system
•Flexible: In FL, additional computation could be used to
decrease the number of communication rounds to train a
model. An effective way to add computation is increasing
computation per UE, i.e., adding more local SGD updates
per round. Hence, a trade-off between computation and
communication existed. Speciﬁcally, powerful (both in
computation and energy) UEs could decide to perform
more mini-batches in training for further decreasing the
communication cost and vice versa.
Certainly, due to the limitation of federated optimization ,
FL could not outperform the centralized DL trained model,
but could still achieve the near best performance, which wil l
demonstrated in Section IV.
C. Practicability Discussion
To some extent, our proposed In-Edge AI is a future-
oriented concept. We envision a near future where most of
the mobile devices, particularly smartphones, are endowed
with the ability of not only inferring but also training the
Deep Learning model. As is well known, even the state-of-
the-art edge chips, such as Edge TPU (brought by Google andpowered by TensorFlow Lite), could only support elementary
training processes in DL. Therefore, the practicability sh ould
be discussed with considering both practical deployment an d
delay requirement.
1) Deploy Challenges: Learning takes long time of train-
ing as well as inferring according to the required accuracy
level. Obviously, the DRL model should not be deployed
directly while setting weights of neural networks at random .
Otherwise, the MEC system will be paralyzed because the
DRL model could only make random decisions at preliminary
exploration.
Nonetheless, this may be solved if the DL model is not
trained from scratch. We are now working on using transfer
learning to boost the training process in MEC systems. The
basic idea is to simulate the wireless environment and reque sts
of UEs. Just as evaluating and adjusting the antenna setting s
in a simulated testbed, the simulated environment is used to
train an off-line Deep Reinforcement Learning agent. Then, the
established DRL model could be distributed to mobile UEs.
2) Delay Requirement: Learning always takes long time of
training as well as inferring according to the required accu racy
level. However, if using transfer learning, there shall be l ess