IEEE NETWORK MAGAZINE, VOL. XX, NO. YY, MONTH XXXX 4
decision denoting the UE chooses to execute the task locally
(c= 0) or to ofﬂoad the task via which wireless, and edenotes
the amount of allocated energy for wireless communication
and locally computation. In the MEC system, our attention in
this section is focus on how to improve the task executing
experience (viz., QoE) of UEs.
High complexities of the MEC system will be introduced
especially when dealing with task ofﬂoading problems and
the difﬁculty of acquiring the global necessary informatio n
when involving massive UEs. Hence, DRL algorithm such
as Deep Q-Leaning is utilized here as the agent, which
handles the joint control action of the UE. The whole problem
could be summarized as that the UE decides a joint wireless
channel selection and energy allocation decision accordin g to
a stationary control policy Φ= (Φc(Υ),Φe(Υ)), while it
keeps observing the network state Υwhich involves the task
queuing state, the cumulative energy consumption of the UE,
the occupying wireless channel of the UE and qualities of all
wireless channels. In addition, we deﬁne an immediate utili ty
function u(Υ,(c,e))to evaluate the QoE of UEs, which is
inversely proportional to the execution delay of tasks (inc lude
the wireless transmission delay and the computation delay) ,
the task queuing delay, the energy consumption of the UE and
the count of task dropping and failing. By taking advantage o f
Deep Q-Learning and its improved version, e.g., Double DQN
[12], the control policy Φ= (Φc(Υ),Φe(Υ))could be trained
and achieves increasing the utility of UEs for the long-term
performance optimization.
III. I N-EDGE AIWITH FEDERATED LEARNING
In Section II, two use cases of DRL in the MEC system
are put forward. However, one key challenge is still pending
in practical, namely the deployment of DRL agent. Taking the
computation ofﬂoading use case in Section II-B as example,
if the DRL agent is trained on edge nodes or remote cloud
servers just as depicted in Fig. 4(a) , due to the wireless
communication characters of the MEC system, three deﬁcien-
cies existed: 1) the training data is large in quantity when
considering massive UEs, and it will increase the burden of
uplink wireless channels; 2) the training data which should be
uploaded to edge nodes or cloud is privacy-sensitive, and it
might cause potential privacy accidents; 3) if training dat a is
transformed for privacy consideration, server-side proxy data
is less relevant than on-device data. And if the DRL agent
is trained on the UE individually , there are still another two
defects: 1) the computation capability of a UE is relatively
weak, and it will consume long time or is even impossible to
train the DRL agent on large-scale data; 2) the training proc ess
of a DRL agent may introduce extra energy consumption of a
UE.
DRL techniques require intensive computation capacity for
ﬁnding the optimal solutions. Particularly, if there are hu ge
amount of data factors, parameters, and criteria for optimi zing
the resource over large-scale MEC systems (an operator’s
network in cities), advanced distributed Deep Learning (DL )
approaches should be utilized. Hence, thinking about train ing
DRL agents in a distributed fashion efﬁciently is natural. A sthe Fig. 3 illustrates, though keeping and training a DRL age nt
in every UE and edge node can achieve the best performance, it
is only practical to apply distributed DRL in the MEC system,
because there shall not have enough time and data for trainin g.
However, most distributed DRL architectures, described by
Fig. 4(b), could not handle unbalanced and non-IID data and
cope with the privacy issues [11]. In addition, they usually
reduce the performance of DRL agents when UEs and network
states are heterogeneous. Therefore, Federated Learning ( FL)
is introduced in this paper for training DRL agents in the MEC
system on account of the fact it could deal with several key
challenges below, which differentiates it from other distr ibuted
DL approaches [11]:
•Non-Independent and Identically Distributed (Non-
IDD): The training data (transition memories in DRL)
on the UE is based on the wireless environment it ex-
perienced and its own computation capability and energy
consumption. Hence, any individual training data of a UE
will not be able to represent the training data of all UEs.
In FL, this challenge could be met by merging the updates
of models with FedAvg in [11].
•Limited communication: UEs are often unpredictably
off-line or allocated with poor communication resources.
Nevertheless, using additional computation could de-
crease the consumption of communication rounds needed
to train a model. In addition, FL only asks a part of
clients, in one round, to upload their updates, which
handles the circumstance where clients are often unpre-
dictably off-line.
•Unbalanced: Some UEs may have more computation
tasks to be handled and some may experience more
states of mobile networks, resulting in varying amounts
of training data among UEs. Also, this challenge could
be coped with the FedAvg algorithm.
•Privacy and Security: The information needs to be up-
loaded for FL is the minimal update necessary to improve
the DRL agent. Further, techniques of secure aggregation
and differential privacy could be applied naturally, which
could avoid that privacy-sensitive data are contained in
local updates. Nonetheless, the privacy and security is
not our focus in this work, more information about these
issues could be found in references of [11]
A. Integration of Federated Learning within Edge for In-Edg e
AI
Between AI in cloud and AI in UEs, there is an “edge”.
With the aid of FL framework, edge nodes equipped with AI
computation in “edge” could combine the cloud and massive
UEs together and form a powerful AI entity with strong
cognitive ability provided by massive UEs and edge nodes.
Throughout this envisioned architecture, each edge node ca n
support AI tasks on system level dynamically, not only for
its own but for the global optimization and balancing of the
whole MEC system.
Use cases of edge caching in Section II-A and computation
ofﬂoading in Section II-B are taken to represent In-Edge AI
of integrating FL.