IEEE NETWORK MAGAZINE, VOL. XX, NO. YY, MONTH XXXX 3
Computation-
Constrained UE Energy-
Constrained UE 
Integrated 
Communication 
and Computing Integrated 
Communication 
and Computing Edge Nodes eNodeB 
Communication 
Computation Resource Cost 
Edge 
Nodes Pool Backhaul 
Network User 
Equipment 
Communication-
Constrained UE 
Internet 
Fig. 1. Framework of AI-supported mobile edge system with co gnitive ability
Channel Quality 
Received Request 
Information 
Communication 
Resources 
Computing Resources …
Sensing Cognitive 
Computing Edge Node Server Scheduling Computing 
Resource 
PDCP 
RLC 
MAC Forwarding 
GTP-U
UDP-IP 
L2 
I/Q Date PHY L1 GTP-UUEs’ 
Requests Cross-layer 
Aware Internet Local 
Network 
Information Collecting Request Handling Cognitive Computing Data 
Fusion 
Fig. 2. Procedure of utilizing cognitive computing in mobil e edge system among protocol stacks
2) Computation Model: In order to portrait the long-
term effects within the MEC system, computation tasks are
generated according to Bernoulli distribution across the t ime
horizon. A computation task is represented by (µ,ν), where
µ,νdenote the size of computation input data (in bits)
and the total number of CPU cycles needed to complete the
computation task, respectively. All these generated tasks are
stored in a task queue and executed sequentially on the UE or
edge node according to a FIFO (First-in First-out) principl e.
When the task is executed locally, the computation executio n
time of it is given as dL=ν/fL, where fLis the the
computation capability (i.e., CPU cycles per second) of theUE and determined by the amount of energy the UE decides
to allocate. And when the task is scheduled to be executed on
the edge node, the execution time of this ofﬂoaded task can
be calculated as dE=ν/fE, wherefEis the computation
capability the edge node allocated to the UE and the formula
fE≫fLholds (the computing performance of edge nodes is
much stronger than the UE’s).
3) Problem Formulation for Computation Ofﬂoading: For
efﬁciently performing computation ofﬂoading over the MEC
system, the UE shall make a joint communication and compu-
tation resource allocation decision in terms of a control ac tion
(c,e), where c∈ {0}/uniontextMis the computation ofﬂoading