arXiv:1809.07857v2  [cs.NI]  19 Jul 2019IEEE NETWORK MAGAZINE, VOL. XX, NO. YY, MONTH XXXX 1
In-Edge AI: Intelligentizing Mobile Edge
Computing, Caching and Communication by
Federated Learning
Xiaofei Wang1, Yiwen Han1, Chenyang Wang1, Qiyang Zhao2, Xu Chen3, Min Chen4∗
1Tianjin Key Laboratory of Advanced Networking (TANK), Scho ol of Computer Science and Technology, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China.
2Huawei Technology, Shenzhen, P. R. China.
3School of Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-sen University , Guangdong, Guangzhou, P. R. China.
4School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong Univer sity of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei, P. R. China.
*Corresponding author.
Abstract —Recently, along with the rapid development of
mobile communication technology, edge computing theory an d
techniques have been attracting more and more attentions
from global researchers and engineers, which can signiﬁcan tly
bridge the capacity of cloud and requirement of devices by th e
network edges, and thus can accelerate the content deliveri es
and improve the quality of mobile services. In order to bring
more intelligence to the edge systems, compared to traditio nal
optimization methodology, and driven by the current deep
learning techniques, we propose to integrate the Deep Reinf orce-
ment Learning techniques and Federated Learning framework
with the mobile edge systems, for optimizing the mobile edge
computing, caching and communication. And thus, we design
the “In-Edge AI” framework in order to intelligently utiliz e
the collaboration among devices and edge nodes to exchange
the learning parameters for a better training and inference
of the models, and thus to carry out dynamic system-level
optimization and application-level enhancement while red ucing
the unnecessary system communication load. “In-Edge AI” is
evaluated and proved to have near-optimal performance but
relatively low overhead of learning, while the system is cog nitive
and adaptive to the mobile communication systems. Finally, we
discuss several related challenges and opportunities for u nveiling
a promising upcoming future of “In-Edge AI”.
Index Terms —Mobile Edge Computing, Artiﬁcial Intelligence,
Deep Learning
I. I NTRODUCTION
With the increasing quantity and quality of rich multimedia
services over mobile networks, there has been a huge increas e
in the trafﬁc and computation for mobile users and devices
over recent years, which imposes a huge amount of workload
on today’s already-congested backbone networks and the mo-
bile networks.
Naturally, the emerging idea of Mobile Edge Computing
(MEC) is proposed [1] as a novel paradigm for easing the bur-
den of backbone networks by pushing the computation/storag e
resources to the proximity of the User Equipments (UEs).
On the other hand, MEC circumvents the long propagation
delays introduced by transmitting data from mobile devices
@ 2019 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Perm ission from
IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or fut ure media,
including reprinting/republishing this material for adve rtising or promotional
purposes, creating new collective works, for resale or redi stribution to servers
or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work i n other works.to remote cloud computing infrastructures, and hence is abl e
to support latency-critical mobile and Internet of Things
(IoT) applications. Speciﬁcally, edge nodes, i.e., base st ations
equipped with computation/storage capability, could deal with
the computation and content requests of UEs, and conse-
quently this scheme improves the Quality-of-Service (QoS)
of Mobile Network Operators (MNOs) and the Quality-of-
Experience (QoE) of UEs and relieves the load of backbone
networks, and pressure of clouds (data centers) [2].
Fulﬁlling the requirement of QoE of UEs is not a trivial
even by virtue of MEC. The key and difﬁcult point lies in that
the computation ofﬂoading requires wireless data transmis sion
and might bring about the congestion of wireless channels, a nd
hence raises the decision making or optimization problem on
the whole communication and computation integrated system ,
i.e., how to jointly allocate communication resources and
computation resources of edge nodes.
Several pioneer works have been proposed and realize quite
good results in their assuming settings based on convex opti -
mization, game theory and so on [3] [4] . Nevertheless, con-
sidering the particular use cases in MEC, these optimizatio n
methods may suffer from the following issues: 1) Uncertain
Inputs: they assume the that some key information factors
are given as inputs, but actually some of them are difﬁcult to
obtain due to variant wireless channels and privacy policie s;
2) Dynamic Conditions: dynamics of the integrated commu-
nication and computation system are not well addressed; 3)
Temporal Isolation: most of them do not consider the long-
term effect of current decision on resource allocation exce pt
for Lyapunov optimization, viz., in a highly time-varying
MEC system, most of proposed optimization algorithms is
optimal or close-to-optimal only for a snapshot of the syste m.
In a word, the problem existed in the resource allocation
optimization of the MEC system is “ lack of intelligence ”.
In view of the increasing complexity of mobile networks,
e.g., a typical 5G node is expected to have 2000 or more
conﬁgurable parameters, a recent new trend is to optimize
wireless communication by Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) tec h-
niques [4] [5], include but not limited to the application of
AI for Physical Layer (PHY), Data Link Layer, and trafﬁc
control [6]. Particularly, related studies on edge computi ng
and caching, such as [7] [8], have shown that reinforcement