IEEE NETWORK MAGAZINE, VOL. XX, NO. YY, MONTH XXXX 2
learning [9] (include Deep Q-Learning [10] in Deep Rein-
forcement Learning) has the potential to be effective in joi nt
resource management. But [7] is based on Q-Learning, which
is not feasible for the practical MEC system where the state-
action space is tremendous and the focus of [8] is on vehicula r
networks. Besides, none of these works has thought over 1)
in what form the training data shall be gathered (whether in a
distributed or a centralized way), 2) where the reinforceme nt
learning agent should be placed and trained (whether in UEs,
edge nodes or remote cloud infrastructures), 3) how the upda te
process of reinforcement learning agents should be proceed ed
and collaborated, and 4) the privacy protection of training data.
Therefore, in this article, we use Deep Reinforcement
Learning (DRL) to jointly manage the communication and
computation resources. And both cases of computation of-
ﬂoading and edge caching among the MEC system (illustrated
in Fig. 1) is discussed. In addition, Federated Learning [11 ]
is introduced as a framework for training DRL agents in
a distributed manner while 1) largely reducing the amount
of data which should be uploaded via the wireless uplink
channel, 2) reacting cognitively to the mobile communicati on
environment and conditions of cellular networks, 3) adapti ng
well with heterogeneous UEs in a practical cellular network ,
and 4) preserving the personal data privacy,
To the best of our knowledge, we are the ﬁrst group to
study the application of DRL coupled with Federated Learnin g
for intelligent joint resource management of communicatio n
and computation in MEC systems. Our contribution can be
summarized as follows:
•1) we discuss the methodology of utilizing DRL (specif-
ically, Deep Q-Learning), and Distributed DRL for opti-
mizing the Edge Caching and Computation;
•2) we propose “In-Edge AI” framework to further utilize
the “Federated Learning” for a better deployment of
intelligent resource management in the MEC system;
•3) we provide proof-of-concept evaluation and verify that
the proposed scheme has advantages on the balance of
performance and cost.
In addition, we also discuss opportunities and challenges t o
hopefully unveil the upcoming future of edge architecture
supporting various AI-based applications.
II. O PTIMIZING THE EDGE BY DRL
We intend to use AI techniques (particularly DRL) as the
method of cognitive computing for building an intelligenti zing
mobile edge computing, caching and communication system.
The cognitive process among protocol stacks of wireless
communication is given as Fig. 2, where we partition the
whole process into three main parts.
•Information Collecting: Sense and collect the indis-
pensable observing data for cognitive computing among
the MEC system, including but not limit on the usage
of communication and computation resources, wireless
environments and intensities of UEs’ requests;
•Cognitive Computing: By making use of the observing
data of the system, cognitive computing is performedto fuse the massive observed data and further give the
decision of scheduling;
•Request Handling: The MEC system deals with the
request of UEs on the basis of the scheduling decision
given by cognitive computing.
In this section, two representative use cases in the MEC
system are investigated.
A. DRL over the MEC System for Caching
Recently, we have observed the emergence of promising
mobile content caching and delivery techniques, by which
popular contents are cached in the intermediate servers (or
middleboxes, gateways or routers) so that demands from user s
for the same content can be accommodated easily without
duplicate transmissions from remote cloud servers, and hen ce
signiﬁcantly reducing redundant trafﬁc.
Thereinafter, we focus on the scenario of caching contents
in edge nodes. In the MEC system depicted by Fig. 1, there is a
library of Fpopular content ﬁles, denoted as F={1,...,F},
that all mobile users may request in the system. The content
popularity is deﬁned as (Pf)F×1, which is the probability dis-
tribution of content requests from all users. Content popul arity
indicates the common interests of all users in the network.
In related works, the content popularity is always describe d
by MZipf distribution. Moreover, for simply asserting the
efﬁciency of DRL in edge caching, we assume that the content
popularity changes slowly and all contents have the same siz e.
For each request, the DRL agent in the edge node can make a
decision to cache or not cache, and if yes, the agent determin es
which local content shall be replaced. We assume that all
content popularity, user preference and average arrival ra te of
requests are static during a relatively long period. We mode l
the cache replacement problem in all edge nodes as a Markov
Decision Process (MDP) and use DRL to solve it, and the
results will be shown in Section IV.
B. DRL over the MEC System for Computation Ofﬂoading
1) Communication Model: As illustrated in Fig. 1, consid-
ering an environment where a set of UEs N={1,...,N}is
covered by a set of base stations B={1,...,B}, UEs could
choose to ofﬂoad their intensive computation tasks to an edg e
node via the wireless channel or execute these tasks locally .
There are Mwireless channels and the set M={1,...,M}
denotes channels of one base station. Speciﬁcally, among th e
decision choice an∈ {0}/uniontextM, UEncould choose to ofﬂoad
the computation to the edge via a wireless channel anor
compute its tasks locally as a decision an= 0. For the purpose
of simulating the variation of wireless channels, the chann el
gain state between a UE and a base station (belongs to an
edge node) is independently picked from a ﬁnite state space,
by which the channel state transitions are modelled as a ﬁnit e-
state discrete-time Markov chain. In this wireless scenari o, the
achievable data rate could be evaluated by Shannon-Hartley
theorem.