IEEE NETWORK MAGAZINE, VOL. XX, NO. YY, MONTH XXXX 5
Deep Learning with Edge 
DRL Distributed DRL Federated Learning 
Small-Scale 
•Caching Policy 
•Traffic Engineering … 
On One UE or Edge Node Medium 
•Resource Allocation 
•Caching Policy 
•Computation Offloading 
Policy 
•Traffic Engineering … Large-Scale 
•Resource Allocation 
•Caching Policy 
•Computation Offloading 
Policy 
•Traffic Engineering … Cons: Impractical in Edge ( 
Massive Redundant Data 
Transmission; Privacy Risk;) Pros: Best Performance Pros: Fast Training; Barely 
Usable in Edge 
Cons: Privacy Risk; Weaker 
Performance; …Cons: Near Best Performance Pros: Minimum Data 
Transmission; Privacy Protection; 
Flexible Training; Robust to 
Unbalanced and non- IID data; … 
Fig. 3. Taxonomy of applying Deep Reinforcement Learning in mobile edge system
1) From Edge to Cloud: Considering edge caching in the
MEC system, the DRL agent employed in an edge node
makes decisions on caching appropriate content according t o
requested contents of UEs dynamically. However, space-tim e
popularity dynamics of requesting contents put forward the
requirement for collaborated edge caching. Thus, the cloud
server belongs to MNOs could be the central server for
coordinating the edge nodes. Among all edge nodes, each
of them keeps a DRL agent and updates it by its own local
training data.
2) From UEs to Edge: In the scenario of computation
ofﬂoading, each UE shall decide whether one computation
task should be ofﬂoaded to edge nodes, ofﬂoading the task via
which wireless channel and the energy consumption accordin g
to the inference result of the DRL agent in it. Though UEs such
as mobile phones, industrial IoT devices, and smart vehicle s
are able to perform some AI computation, the computation
capability and the energy consumption still limit their abi lities
in AI computing (DRL training on large-scale data). Therefo re,
we proposed to use all edge nodes in “edge” as an integral
server for coordinating massive UEs covered by them. By
virtue of this scheme, UEs with relative weak computation
capability could be able to hold a complex DRL agent.
The methodology of tackling two aforementioned scenarios
is similar. For training a general DL model, as depicted in Fi g.
4 (c), FL iteratively solicits a random set of clients (distr ibuted
devices which train DL model) to 1) download parameters of
the DL model from a certain server, 2) perform the training
process on the downloaded model with their own data, and 3)
upload only the new model parameters to the server, which
aggregates uploaded updates of the client to further improv e
the model. The process inside an individual client is also
illustrated in Fig. 4(c), where symbols are taken as the same
version in [9] for accessible reading. Speciﬁcally, the cli ent
trains its model, which is download from the central serverbefore, based on local training data and upload the updated
weight of MainNet backward when it is available.
To summarize, FL enables resource-constrained edge to
compute devices (include UEs and edge nodes) to learn a
shared model, while keeping the training data local.
B. Pros and Cons of Federated Learning for In-Edge AI
The core beneﬁt of FL lies in distributing the quality of
knowledge across a large number of devices without neces-
sarily centralizing the training data. Extended by this cor e
beneﬁt, several particular beneﬁts are brought further in t he
MEC system.
•Cognitive: Server-side proxy data is less relevant than
on-device data. In the MEC system, massive UEs and
edge nodes could act as perceptrons and acquire various,
abundant and personalized data for updating the global
DL model. On the perspective of UEs, these data could
include the quality of the wireless channel, the remanent
battery life and the energy consumption, the immedi-
ate computation capability and so on. Concerning edge
nodes, the cognitive data could include the computation
load, the storage occupation, the number of wireless
communication links, the task queue states waiting for
handling, and etc. Thus, using FL based on these raw
data instead of centralized DL renders the MEC system
more cognitive.
•Robust: FL inherently could address key issues about
the availability of UEs and edge nodes and the unbal-
anced and non-IID data. Consequently, the performance
of In-Edge AI shall not be easily affected by the un-
balanced data and sometimes the poor communication
environment. Further, its ability of handling non-IDD data
allows massive UEs in different wireless environments to
train their own DL model without concerning about the
negative effect.