IEEE NETWORK MAGAZINE, VOL. XX, NO. YY, MONTH XXXX 9
(a) Performance comparison in edge
caching
(b) Performance comparison in computa-
tion ofﬂoading
(c) Detailed performance comparison in
computation ofﬂoading
(d) Comparison of transmission cost
Fig. 6. Performance Evaluation of Double DDQN with and witho ut Federated
Learninginclude game theoretic algorithms for the competition of ed ge
nodes and mobile users over the multi-dimensional resource
for AI acceleration by the edge, and the dynamic and adaptive
splitting of AI tasks becomes quite challenging.
B. Efﬁciency of In-edge AI for Real-time Mobile Communica-
tion System towards 5G
In 5G, the deﬁned Ultra-Reliable Low-Latency Communica-
tions (URLLC) scenarios strongly desire very small delays a nd
high reliability of the mobile system. However, general dee p
learning-based optimization and prediction schemes take q uite
long running time of recursions for converging to the result s,
which is inappropriate for mobile edge systems; particular ly
the system-level edge computing tasks desiring rapid respo nses
in the scale of millisecond. In order to manage the guarantee d
QoS of delays and bandwidth for caching, communication and
computation, In-Edge AI should be able to provide differen-
tiated support for various types of services, and ﬁne-grain ed
collaborative scheduling of the AI tasks (or split ones) ove r the
edge nodes and mobile devices should be accelerated in nearl y
real-time, which is critical but remain unsolved in current
literature. Furthermore, the integration of Federated Lea rning
framework with AI chipset hardware should be explored as
well.
C. Incentive and Business Model of In-Edge AI
In-Edge AI is a tight confederation among mobile operators,
SPs/CPs, and mobile users, while capable entities may con-
tribute more to the overall optimization of the edge caching
and computing tasks, but a large number of UEs may rely on
the AI of edge nodes and other UEs. Also, AI computation
requirements from SPs and CPs should be satisﬁed across
edge nodes of different mobile operators. And hence, more
reliable and accurate design of the incentive framework of
In-Edge AI become interesting, which should further provid e
a loop of the digital copyrights of the content and services.
Blockchain techniques may be integrated into In-Edge AI
framework [15], but how to distribute the huge computation
load of the proof of work over the edge system and how
to evaluate the contribution of In-Edge AI computation on
heterogenous scenarios are still unexplored.
VI. C ONCLUSIONS
In this article, we discussed the potential of integrating
the Deep Reinforcement Learning techniques and Federated
Learning framework with the mobile edge system and optimiz-
ing the mobile edge computing, caching and communication
with it. We perform experiments on investigating the scenar ios
of edge caching and computation ofﬂoading in mobile edge
system, and the “In-Edge AI” is evaluated and proved to
have the abilities to achieve near-optimal performance. Fo r our
future work, we concentrate on not only optimizing learning
computation tasks by the support of edge but also scheduling
the AI tasks over the edge nodes and mobile devices in a
ﬁne-grained and collaborative manner.