IEEE NETWORK MAGAZINE, VOL. XX, NO. YY, MONTH XXXX 8
MNO 
Core Cloud 
……
Computation Offloading Performance 
with DDQN and FL E1E2E3m3
m1
Hit Rate of Clients 
Training Time 
Hit Rate of Clients 
Training Time 
Hit Rate of Clients 
Training Time 
Edge Caching Performance with DDQN and FL 
Training Loss 
Training Time 
Training Loss 
Training Time 
Training Loss 
Training Time E1E2E3
Average Utility 
Training Time Average Utility 
Training Time Average Utility 
Training Time 
Training Loss 
Training Time Training Loss 
Training Time 
Training Loss 
Training Time m1m2m3
m2
m
Fig. 5. Capability of Federated Learning in edge caching and computation ofﬂoading
within a discretized time epoch. As illustrated in Fig.
6(c), the performance of centralized DDQN is better than
that of DDQN with FL at the beginning of training.
However, once the model merging of FL has been pro-
cessed several times, the performance of DDQN with FL
becomes near to that of centralized DDQN. Certainly,
if the client wishes to obtain the expected performance
using DDQN with FL, it must take time to wait for the
model merging, i.e., exploiting training results of other
clients. Nonetheless, this experiment assumes an ideal
wireless environment. In practice, massive training data
are actually unable to be uploaded without any delay.
Therefore, performing DDQN with FL is more practical
in MEC systems, at least for now when the wireless
resource is also the major consideration.
4) We also gather statistics of the total wireless transmis-
sion until the DRL agent is well trained both in the
scenario of edge caching and computation ofﬂoading.
In the framework of FL, every client only needs to
upload the update of its model. Without FL framework,
viz., using centralized DRL, UEs must upload the whole
training data via wireless channels and thus consume
more communication resources, which is demonstrated
by Fig. 6(d).
With no doubt, FL must trade something for its advantages.
Speciﬁcally, due to the fact that the coordinating server in FL
only executes tasks of merging updates instead of taking ove rthe whole training, the computation load of clients is inevi tably
heavier on account of the local training process. This will
cause more energy cost on UEs or burden the computation
of both UEs and edge nodes, and these issues are still open
questions.
V. O PPORTUNITIES AND CHALLENGES
We hereby discuss a few essential promising research direc-
tions of In-Edge AI, and highlight several pending problems
from the perspective of elaborating and widening the usage o f
AI and Edge Computing.
A. Accelerating AI Tasks by Edge Communication and Com-
puting Systems
Aforementioned sections is to optimize the edge of mobile
communication systems by AI techniques, but it is also im-
portant to exploit specialized methods of optimizing learn ing
computation tasks by the support of edge [14]. DRL can
be treated as a type of specialized edge computing task at
the service-level. How to ﬁnd correct edge nodes to collabo-
rate, and how to allocate appropriate resources, for the lar ge
amount of AI tasks with various priorities, deadlines, scal es,
different requirement on CPU, memory and so on are also
indispensable. Interestingly, this is the reverse directi on of
the aforementioned Federated Learning, but also a kind of
application of the “In-Edge AI”. Potential research topics may