IEEE NETWORK MAGAZINE, VOL. XX, NO. YY, MONTH XXXX 7
time or computation consumption on the side of training.
Based on the pre-established DRL, the requirement of
training (not inferring) is alleviated, i.e., the DRL agent could
reach the satisﬁed accuracy level after a small number of
mini-batches or even directly inferring. And when the wirel ess
environment or the pattern of UEs’ requests is changed, the
UE could also take advantage of the established DRL to adjust
neural networks in its DRL model.
Unlike using an enormous number of hidden layers and
neurons in CNN or RNN, the neural network in DRL is merely
a Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP, shown in Fig. 4(c)). And in
our simulated scenarios, the MLP has only one hidden layer
with 200 neurons. Therefore, once the model has been trained ,
the inferring process could be performed quickly due to the
low complexity of the MainNet in DRL agents.
Besides, our work [14] aims to meet the challenge of
running DL on resource-constrained mobile devices. By inco r-
porating this work, the requirement on computation capacit y
of UEs could be relaxed along with decreasing the inferring
delay.
IV. D ATA-DRIVEN EVALUATION OF PROOF -OF-CONCEPT
IN-EDGE AI F RAMEWORK
A. Experiment Settings
For investigating the performance of In-Edge AI with FL,
two simulations on edge caching and computation ofﬂoading
as in Section II-A and Section II-B are presented, respectiv ely.
Among all simulations, the time horizon is discretized into
time epochs.
We capture Xender’s trace for one month (from 01/09/2016
to 30/09/2016), including 9,514 active mobile users, conve ying
188,447 content ﬁles, and 2,107,100 content requests [13], of
which the content popularity distribution can be well ﬁtted
by a Zipf distribution with ∂= 1.58. In edge caching
simulations, we use this mined Zipf distribution as the cont ent
popularity distribution to generate the content request of UEs,
and consider the cooperation of 6edge nodes. Once an edge
node receives a request from UE, the local DRL agent in it
will make a decision to cache which content or not cache, and
then obtain the reward of this action for its own training. In
edge caching, the cloud server belongs to MNOs is the central
server for coordinating the edge nodes.
On investigating the capabilities of DRL coupled with FL
over the MEC system for computation ofﬂoading, we suppose
the whole bandwidth ω= 5 MHz of an edge node is divided
into10wireless channels, and take 10UEs as the clients in FL
framework to individually train their DRL agents and merge
them among edge nodes. The channel gain states between the
UE and the edge node are from a common ﬁnite set, which
quantiﬁes the quality of the wireless channel into 6levels.
Throughout the simulation, the number of tasks generated on
each UE follows Bernoulli distribution with average arriva l
rateλTper time epoch.
As for the DRL settings in UEs, edge nodes, and cloud, we
choose the Double DQN algorithm and select tanh as the ac-
tivation function and Adam optimizer. We used a single-laye r
fully-connected feedforward neural network, which includ es200 neurons, to serve as the target (TargetNet) and the eval
(MainNet) Q network. Other parameter values in Double DQN
are set as follows: replay memory capacity M= 5000 , mini-
batch size B= 200 , discount factor γ= 0.9, exploration
probability ǫ= 0.001, learning rate ζ= 0.005and the period
of replacing the target Q network is φ= 250 . In addition, to
build a baseline for the performance of DRL agent with FL,
we construct a centralized DRL agent for comparison and it is
assumed to be able to receive all data used for reinforcement
learning.
B. Evaluation Results
To elucidate the performance of our In-Edge AI framework,
experiments on edge caching and computation ofﬂoading are
carried out under various settings.
Fig. 5 depicts the performance of DDQN with FL both on
edge caching and computation ofﬂoading. Three edge nodes
(E1,E2andE3) and three UEs ( m1,m2andm3) are chosen
for exhibiting the capabilities of their own DRL agents. On
the perspective of edge caching, E1,E2andE3are chosen
to cache contents, and hit rates of them are improving and
ﬁnally maintain within a certain range along with the proces s
of training DRL agents. In the simulation of computation
ofﬂoading, the average utilities of three UEs m1,m2andm3
are increasing with the decreasing of training loss, and als o
maintain within a certain range at last. This means that the
efﬁciency of handling ofﬂoaded tasks in the MEC system is
improved.
Further, Fig. 6 gives the details of performance comparison
as follows.
1) In Fig. 6(a), the edge caching performance of the DDQN
with FL is compared to the centralized DDQN, and
some other caching policies, such as known LRU (Least
Recently Used), LFU (Least Frequently Used) and FIFO
(First in, First out). It can be easily seen that the speciﬁc
performance of FL is near close to the results of central-
ized DDQN in terms of achieved hit rates of 3clients
(edge nodes), and outperform LRU, LFU, and FIFO.
2) In the experiment on computation ofﬂoading, the per-
formance of the DDQN with FL is compared to the
centralized DDQN, and another three baseline computa-
tion ofﬂoading policies, i.e., mobile execution, edge node
execution, and greedy execution. Here, mobile execution,
edge node execution and greedy execution mean that the
UE processes all computation tasks locally, all compu-
tation tasks are ofﬂoaded from the UE to edge nodes,
and the UE makes decision on executing a computation
task locally or ofﬂoading it to edge nodes with the
aim of maximizing the immediate utility, respectively. In
Fig. 6(b), it can be observed that the DDQN with FL
achieves the near performance of centralized DDQN and
is superior to another three baseline policies;
3) On investigating the detailed performance in training pr o-
cess, we assume that the capability of wireless commu-
nication is not the hinder, i.e., both massive training data
for centralized DDQN and lightweight model updates for
DDQN with FL can be uploaded to the target position