Page 5 of 15
 Smith et al. Plant Methods           (2020) 16:13 
 
computation of any statistics during the model devel -
opment process, which means it can be considered as 
unseen data when evaluating performance. Secondly, from the remaining 40 images we removed two images. One because it didn’t contain any roots and another because a sticker was present on the top of the acrylic. Thirdly, the remaining 38 images were split into split into training and validation datasets.
We used the root pixel count from the annotations to 
guide the split of the images into a train and validation data-set. The images were ordered by the number of root pixels in each image and then 9 evenly spaced images were selected for the validation set with the rest being assigned to the training set. This was to ensure a range of root intensities was present in both training and valida
-
tion sets.
Metrics
To evaluate the performance of the model during devel -
opment and testing we used F1 . We selected F1 as a met -
ric because we were interested in a system which would be just as likely to overestimate as it would underestimate the roots in a given photo. That meant precision and recall were valued equally. In this context precision is the ratio of correctly predicted root pixels to the number of pixels predicted to be root and recall is the ratio of cor
-
rectly predicted root pixels to the number of actual root pixels in the image. Both recall and precision must be high for 
F1 to be high.The F1 of the segmentation output was calculated using 
the training and validation sets during system develop -
ment. The completed system was then evaluated using the test set in order to provide a measure of performance on unseen data. We also report accuracy, defined as the ratio of correctly predicted to total pixels in an image.
In order to facilitate comparison and correlation with 
line-intersect counts, we used an approach similar to [53] to convert a root segmentation to a length estimate. The scikit-image skeletonize function was used to first thin the segmentation and then the remaining pixels were counted. This approach was used for both the baseline and the U-Net segmentations.
For the test set we also measured correlation between 
the root length of the output segmentation and the man
-
ual root intensity given by the line-intersect method. We also measured correlation between the root length of our manual per-pixel annotations and the U-Net output segmentations for our held out test set. To further quan
-
tify the effectiveness of the system as a replacement for the line-intersect method, we obtained the coefficient of determination ( 
r2 ) for the root length given by our seg -
mentations and root intensity given by the line-intersect method for 867 images. Although line-intersect counts were available for 892 images, 25 images were excluded from our correlation analysis as they had been used in the training dataset.(1) F1=2·precision ·recall
precision +recall
Fig. 3 Sub region of one of the photos in the training data. a Roots and soil as seen through the transparent acrylic glass on the surface of one of 
the rhizotrons and b is the corresponding annotation showing root pixels in white and all other pixels in black. Annotations like these were used for 
training the U-Net CNN