Page 6 of 15 Smith et al. Plant Methods           (2020) 16:13 
Frangi vesselness implementation
For our baseline method we built a system using the 
Frangi Vesselness enhancement filter [50]. We selected the Frangi filter based on the observation that the roots look similar in structure to blood vessels, for which the Frangi filter was originally designed. We implemented the system using the Python programming language (ver
-
sion 3.6.4), using the scikit-image [54] (version 0.14.0) version of Frangi. Vesselness refers to a measure of tubu
-
larity that is predicted by the Frangi filter for a given pixel in the image. To obtain a segmentation using the Frangi filter we thresholded the output so only regions of the image above a certain vesselness level would be classified as roots. To remove noise we further processed the seg
-
mentation output using connected component analysis to remove regions less than a threshold of connected pixels. To find optimal parameters for both the thresholds and the parameters for the Frangi filter we used the Covari
-
ance Matrix Adaptation Evolution Strategy (CMA-ES) [55]. In our case the objective function to be minimized was 
1−mean(F 1) where mean(F 1) is the mean of the F1 
scores of the segmentations produced from the thresh -
olded Frangi filter output.
U-Net implementation
Architecture
We implemented a U-Net CNN in Python (version 3.6.4) 
using PyTorch [56] which is an open source machine learning library which utilizes GPU accelerated tensor operations. PyTorch has convenient utilities for defining and optimizing neural networks. We used an NVIDIA TITAN Xp 12 GB GPU. Except for the input layer which was modified to receive RGB instead of a single channel, our network had the same number of layers and dimen
-
sions as the original U-Net [49]. We applied Group norm [57] after all ReLU activations as opposed to Batch norm [58] as batch sizes as small as ours can cause issues due to inaccurate batch statistics degrading the quality of the resulting models [59]. The original U-Net proposed in [49] used Dropout which we avoided as in some cases the combination of dropout and batch normalisation can cause worse results [60]. He initialisation [61] was used for all layers.
Instance selection
The network takes tiles with size 572×572 as input and 
outputs a segmentation for the centre 388×388 region 
for each tile (Fig.  4). We used mirroring to pad the full 
image before extracting tiles. Mirroring in this context means the image was reflected at the edges to make it bigger and provide some synthetic context to allow seg
-
mentation at the edges of the image. In neural network training an epoch refers to a full pass over the training data. Typically several epochs are required to reach good performance. At the start of each epoch we extracted 90 tiles with random locations from each of the training images. These tiles were then filtered down to only those containing roots and then a maximum of 40 was taken from what ever was left over. This meant images with many roots would still be limited to 40 tiles. The removal of parts of the image which does not contain roots has similarity to the work of [62] who made the class imbal
-
ance problem less severe by cropping regions contain -
ing empty space. When training U-Net with mini batch SGD, each item in a batch is an image tile and multiple tiles are input into the network simultaneously. Using tiles as opposed to full images gave us more flexibility during experimentation as we could adjust the batch size depending on the available GPU memory. When train
-
ing the network we used a batch size of 4 to ensure we did not exceed the limits of the GPU memory. Validation metrics were still calculated using all tiles with and with
-
out soil in the validation set.
Preprocessing and augmentation
Each individual image tile was normalised to 
[−0.5, +0.5]  as centering inputs improves the conver -
gence of networks trained with gradient descent [63]. 
Data augmentation is a way to artificially expand a 
Fig. 4 U-Net receptive field input size (blue) and output size (green). 
The receptive field is the region of the input data which is provided 
to the neural network. The output size is the region of the original image which the output segmentation is for. The output is smaller than the input to ensure sufficient context for the classification of each pixel in the output