Page 7 of 15
 Smith et al. Plant Methods           (2020) 16:13 
 
dataset and has been found to improve the accuracy of 
CNNs for image classification [64]. We used color jit -
ter as implemented in PyTorch, with the parameters 0.3, 0.3, 0.2 and 0.001 for brightness, contrast satura
-
tion and hue respectively. We implemented elastic grid deformation (Fig.  5) as described by [65] with 
a probability of 0.9. Elastic grid deformations are parameterized by the standard deviation of a Gauss
-
ian distribution σ which is an elasticity coefficient and 
α which controls the intensity of the deformation. As 
opposed to [65] who suggests a constant value for σ and 
α , we used an intermediary parameter γ sampled from 
[0.0,  1.0) uniformly. γ was then used as an interpola -
tion co-efficient for both σ from [15,  60] and α from 
[200,  2500]. We found by visual inspection that the appropriate 
α was larger for a larger σ . If a too large α 
was used for a given σ then the image would look dis -
torted in unrealistic ways. The joint interpolation of both 
σ and α ensured that the maximum intensity level 
for a given elasticity coefficient would not lead to over distorted and unrealistic looking deformations. We fur
-
ther scaled α by a random amount from [0.4, 1) so that 
less extreme deformations would also be applied. We consider the sampling of tiles from random locations within the larger images to provide similar benefits to the commonly used random cropping data augmenta
-
tion procedure. The augmentations were ran on 8 CPU threads during the training process.
Loss
Loss functions quantify our level of unhappiness with the network predictions on the training set [66]. During training the network outputs a predicted segmentation for each input image. The loss function provides a way to measure the difference between the segmentation output by the network and the manual annotations. The result of the loss function is then used to update the network weights in order to improve its performance on the training set. We used the Dice loss as imple
-
mented in V-Net [67]. Only 0.54% of the pixels in the training data were roots which represents a class imbal
-
ance. Training on imbalanced datasets is challenging because classifiers are typically designed to optimise overall accuracy which can cause minority classes to be ignored [68]. Experiments on CNNs in particular have shown the effect of class imbalance to be detrimental to performance [69] and can cause issues with conver
-
gence. The Dice loss is an effective way to handle class imbalanced datasets as errors for the minority class will be given more significance. For predictions p , ground 
truth annotation g , and number of pixels in an image N , 
Dice loss was computed as:The Dice coefficient corresponds to 
F1 when there are 
only two classes and ranges from 0 to 1. It is higher for better segmentations. Thus it is subtracted from 1 to con
-
vert it to a loss function to be minimized. We combined (2) DL=1−2(p∩g)
p∪g=1−2/summationtextN
ipigi/summationtextN
ipi+/summationtextN
igi
Fig. 5 a Elastic grid applied to an image tile and b corresponding 
annotation. A white grid is shown to better illustrate the elastic grid 
effect. A red rectangle illustrates the region which will be segmented. Augmentations such as elastic grid are designed to increase the likelihood that the network will work on similar data that is not included in the training set