Page 9 of 15
 Smith et al. Plant Methods           (2020) 16:13 
 
Train and validation set metrics
The final model parameters were selected based on the 
performance on the validation set. The best validation results were attained after epoch 73 after approximately 9 h and 34 min of training. The performance on the train
-
ing set was higher than the validation set (Table  2). As 
parameters have been adjusted based on the data in the training and validation datasets these results are unlikely to be reliable indications of the model performance on new data so we report the performance on an unseen test set in the next section.
Test set results
The overall percentage of root pixels in the test data was 0.49%, which is lower than either the training or valida
-
tion dataset. Even on the image with the highest errors the CNN is able to predict many of the roots correctly (Fig.  7). Many of the errors appear to be on the root boundaries. Some of the fainter roots are also missed by the CNN. For the image with the highest (best) 
F1 the 
U-Net segmentation appears very similar to the origi -
nal annotation (Fig.  8). The segmentation also contains 
roots which where missed by the annotator (Fig.  8d) 
which we were able to confirm by asking the annotator to review the results. U-Net was also often able to seg
-
ment the root-soil boundary more cleanly than the anno -
tator (Fig.  9). False negatives can be seen at the top of the 
image where the CNN has failed to detect a small section of root (Fig. 8d).
The performance of U-Net as measured by 
F1 was 
better than that of the Frangi system when computing metrics on all images combined (Table  3). It also had a 
closer balance between precision and recall. The U-Net segmentations have a higher 
F1 for all images with roots 
in the test data (Fig.  10). Some segmentations from the 
Frangi system have an F1 below 0.4 whilst all the U-Net 
segmentations give an F1 above 0.6 with the highest being 
just less than 0.8. The average predicted value for U-Net was over twice that of the Frangi system. This means U-Net predicted twice as many pixels to be root as Frangi did.
The slight over estimation of total root pixels explains 
why recall is higher than precision for U-Net. The accu
-
racy is above 99% for both systems. This is because accu -
racy is measured as the ratio of pixels predicted correctly and the vast majority of pixels are soil that both systems predicted correctly.
For the two images which did not contain roots each 
misclassified pixel is counted as a false positive. The Frangi system gave 1997 and 1432 false positives on these Table 4 Mean and standard deviation of results on images 
containing roots
These are computed by taking the mean of the metrics computed on each of 
the 8 images containing roots. The 2 images without roots are excluded as for 
these F1 , precision and recall are undefinedFrangi U-Net
F1 mean 0.463 0.705
F1 standard deviation 0.085 0.040
Recall mean 0.361 0.749
Recall standard deviation 0.081 0.042
Precision mean 0.660 0.666
Precision standard deviation 0.087 0.043
Fig. 7 Original photo, annotation, segmentation output from U-Net and errors. To illustrate the errors the false positives are shown in red and the 
false negatives are shown in green. This image is a subregion of a larger image for which U-Net got the worst (lowest) F1