296 Informatica  44 (2020 ) 291–302 S. Bozinovski  
 Transfer learning is geometrically represented by the 
position of origin of  the coordinate space  (pi, pj) relat ive 
to the convex cone. That is illustrated in Figure 4.  
               pj  
 
 
                T4 
  
            T2  pi 
             T0 
 
        T-2  
        T-4 
 
Figure 4: A geometric inte rpretation of transfer learning. 
The plane ( pi, p j), the conve x cone, an d various 
coordinate origins representing trans fer learning from a 
previous learning task.   
As Figure 4 shows, if the peak of the convex cone is 
in the coordinate origin (coordinate sy stem T 0), then 
there is no transfer learning . The learner  starts from 
tabula rasa initial conditions . It means that the memory 
values are all equal , for example all zero. However they 
are not necessary zero, they need only to be all eq ual 
(homogenous initi al conditions).  In this condition a 
learning process must take  place for both patterns (or 
lessons) xi and xj in order the learner to correctly 
recognize th ose patterns .  
If the coordinate origin is inside the solution region 
(coordina te system T 4) the lea rner has positi ve transfer 
learning.  There is no need of addit ional lear ning. The 
previous learning is enough for the correct recognition of 
the patterns .  
If the  coordinate origi n is in region sym metrically 
opposite the solution regio n, (negative convex c one), it is 
an example of negative transfer learning . Coordina te 
system T-4 is such a case. Both patterns xi and xj have 
been previously , in Task1 , classified in to classes which 
are incorrect according to the new Task2. So the new 
learning process must inc lude both patte rns. The learning 
process will be longer than i n case of tabula rasa 
condition.  
If the coordinate system is in the area outside the 
positive and negative convex cones (examples T 2 and T -2 
coordinate systems), then there are situations in whi ch 
for one patt ern there is positive transfer learning and for  
the other  is negative.  
5 Defining an index o f transfer 
learning in a neural network  
Based on the geometrical interpretation of transfer 
learning in Fig ure 4 we will now defi ne an index  of 
transf er learning , a numerical representation of transfer 
learning. Measure of  negative transfer as well as 
transferability mea sure are emphasized in contemporary 
transfer learning research (Tan et al. 2018 ). The index 
which we will discuss here is proposed in ( Bozinovski  
and Fulgosi  1976).   The mathematical measure of tra nsfer lear ning was 
introduced using the following reasoning. Observe th e 
segments the lines in Figure 4  define inter cepting with 
ordinate p j. For T 0 coordinate system both l ines have 
intercept 0 . For coordinat e system T 4, one intercept is 
positive (for the  boundary line p j > pi) and the other is 
negative  (for the boundary line p j < p i). For coordinate 
system T 2 one intercept is posit ive and the other is 
negative. For T 1 both intercepts are negati ve. For T 3 both 
intercepts are positive. Note that also in Fig ure 3 abov e, 
it is shown a case of both positive intercepts. So we will 
only observe the sign of the intercepts, positive, negative, 
or zero, and w e will define index of tra nsfer learning.   
Note that the inte rcepts are defined as kq(xi)/aij and 
kq(xj)/ajj  and co nsequently their signs are defined as 
sign(kq(xi)/aij) and sign( kq(xj)/ajj) where sign( ) is a 
function that gives 1 for positive, 0 for zero, and -1 for 
negativ e argument. Now we ca n define a n index, a 
measure of transfer learning on the basis  of signs of 
intercepts of the boundary lines for patterns xi and xj. 
TL(kq(xi), kq(xj)) = 3sign (kq(xi) -sign(kq(xj)       (17) 
According to this index , if both signs a re pos itive 
then TL = 2. That corresp onds to a coordinate system T 2 
in Fig. 4. If both are neg ative, then TL  = -2 and that 
corresponds to the coordinate system T -2 is Fig 4. If both 
are zero, then TL=0, which corresponds to coordinate 
system T 0 in Fig. 4. If sign (kq(xi) =1 an d sign(kq(xj) = -
1, then TL = 4 which corresponds to coordin ate system 
T4 in Fig. 4.  
Note that the index TL considers all the integer 
values in the interval [ -4,+4]. Figure 5 shows the TL 
values and their geometric interpretation.  
 
 
     4 
 
      1    3 
  -2 
   0  
    +2 
  -3    
       - 4     -1 
 
Figure 5: A geometric interpretation of index TL, a 
numerical index of transfer learning . It shows the values 
of the regions of the (p i, pj) plane where a learner finds 
itself af ter the first learning task Task1, and facing the 
second  learning task  Task2 .  
The in troduced index of transfer learning shows 
position of the coordinate origin in the plane (p i, pj) 
relative to the peak of the vertex in side which is a 
solut ion of the patt ern recognition problem. It shows 
where in the (p i, pj) plane is the starting point t o learn 
Task2 by a learner with transfer learning from previous 
Task1. From Fig. 5 we can give following interpretations 
for transfer l earning index TL:  
 If TL = 4 the lea rner correctly classifies both 
patterns, without need fo r additional learning. It is a 
positive transfer  learning  from a previous Task1 .