298 Informatica  44 (2020 ) 291–302 S. Bozinovski  
 columns) equal to number of templat es for that class.  In 
case of inequalities (20 ), the first class contains two 
templates and the second contains one template pattern. 
From this case study we can ge neralize the trans fer 
learning model  for a multi -class and multi -template per 
class case as  
(X/L): Ap > W0X +                   (21) 
where X ={x1,..,xN}is the set of patterns which should be 
learned in the second task with the curriculum sequence 
L.  
Note th at the mathematica l m odel of tran sfer 
learning (21 ) divides the  left side of relation to be a 
teacher's side , and right side a learner's side .  
At the teacher side are similarity matrix A and 
distribution vector p showing how many time s each 
pattern appear ed in a teaching t rial of the cur riculum L. 
Matrix A shows that what  matters in the teach ing process 
are not the patterns themselves but rather their 
correlations, inner products, which can be interpreted as 
similarities.  
At the learner side, W0 represents  difference of 
initial conditions  of the memory due to transfer learning, 
X is the vector  of template vectors, a matrix contain ing 
patterns to be classified, and  represents difference 
between thresholds of neurons representing classes. Note 
that the matrix W0 contains blo cks showing which 
template is assigne d to which class.  
As pointed befo re, the space p  = (p1,..,p N) is an 
integer space. Dealing with neural network learning  is 
actually an integer programming problem . We are 
interested in the most effici ent training, and we are 
looking for a training sequence L of the minimal length. 
So we l ook for a criterion   
p1+p2+...+p N = min                   (22) 
Such a criterion will observe the appearance of 
patterns only in a teaching trial. If we are interested in 
minimal seque nce that includes test trials, then the 
optimality criterion is  
(p1+q1 ) + (p 2+q2) +...+(p N+qN) = min       (23 ) 
where q i is number of appearances of the pattern xi in a 
test trial, which does not change the memory of the 
learner, but affects the length of the training seq uence L.   
8 Experimental investigation on 
transfer learni ng  
Experimental investigation on transfer learning was 
carried out in the period 1976 -1981. Initial experiments 
was with a dataset  containing images of letters A, B, E, 
F, and T taken from the termin al IBM29 card puncher. 
Those experiments were carried ou t on the computer 
IBM 1130. Later experiments were carried out with two 
datasets. One dataset contained 40 images, consisting of 
26 letters, 10 numbers, and 4 special symbols from t he 
terminal IBM29. The other dataset can be described as  
Computer T erminal s dataset, consisting of 3x26= 78 
images, taken from three computer terminals : IBM29 
card puncher, VR14 video screen , and VT5 0 video screen. The experiments were carried out on a co mput er 
VAX/VMS. Figure 7 shows the Computer Terminals 
dataset. As can be se en, the letters of the three terminals 
are mostly identical on an image with resolution 7x5, 
with differences in letters A, B, D, G, J, M, N, O, V, and 
W. 
 
 IBM29   VR14   VT50  
Figure 7: The dataset Co mputer Terminals used in 
experi mental investigation . 
8.1 An experiment in tabula rasa condition , 
showing influence of pattern similarity  
Here we will show an experiment in tabula rasa learning , 
to see the influence of s imilarity (over lapping pattern 
features) on the learning process. Consi der the patterns 
E, T, F, shown in Fig. 7. They are the same for al l 
considered terminals . Figure 8 shows the search through 
the (p E, pT, pF ) space that th e learning process performs.  
 
Figure 8: Learning trajectory in case of tab ula rasa 
learner, learning similar patterns E and F, together with 
the pattern T (Bozinovski  1981, 1985b) . 
As Fig. 8 shows, t he problem is the distinction 
between the patterns  F and E.  The convex con e angle is 
narrow, and it is possible that in some searc h steps the 
cone does not contain an integer point. The search for an 
integer solution is what makes necessary  to repeat 
images E and F several times until they are distinguished 
by the  learner.   
This experiment emphasizes the p roblem of feature 
overlappin g and the problem of one image included in 
another image. To emphasize the image -subimage 
relation, a measure of similarity between patterns  is 
introduced in (Bozinovski and Fulgosi 1976). The 
followi ng index