294 Informatica  44 (2020 ) 291–302 S. Bozinovski  
 a second learnin g task . The second lea rning task will be 
carried out by a s upervised learning (or teaching) process 
represented by a tea ching sequence L. The teaching 
sequence contains both teaching and test (examination) 
trials. However,  the memory of the learner is upda ted 
only during the te aching trials. The test trials demons trate 
the knowledge already stored in the memory  of the 
neura l network  learner . 
Let y k(xi) be the output of S k element of the neural 
network at the completion of the first learning task. It is 
the initial knowledge as d emonstrated by this ne ural 
network be fore the second learning task. We emphasize 
that with notatio n y k0(xi) := y k(xi), pointing out with a 
superscript 0 that it is initial knowledge for the second 
learning task.  So the output  y k0(xi) manifests the transfe r 
learning from the fi rst teaching ta sk about the concept 
class k,  before the second teaching task  with teaching 
sequence L is applied.  
Let y k(xi/L) be the output of S k element representing 
class k when shown pattern xi after the learning in the 
second ta sk with the learning s equence L. So t he second 
learning task will be modeled with the following ou tputs 
from  elements S k and S q 
 yk(xi/L) = y k0(xi)+ a ijpi   (5.1) 
 yq(xj/L) = y q0(xj)+ a jipj   (5.2) 
where  pi is the number of appeara nce of pattern x in a 
teaching trial of the tea ching sequence L, i.e. the number 
of application of the learning rule (4), and aij is the inner 
product between patterns, a ij = xiTxj. 
So, in order a correct pattern classification to be 
achieved in the secon d task, by a neural network  with 
maximum selector  as in Figure 1 , it is necessary and 
sufficient that the following system o f inequalities hold s 
 yk(xi/L) > y q(xi/L)   (6.1) 
 yq(xj/L) >  y k(xj/L)   (6.2) 
which leads to  
 aii pi - aij pj > - yk0(xi) + yq0(xi) (7.1) 
 -aji pi + ajj pj  > y k0(xj) - yq0(xj) (7.2) 
That reason ing leads to the following Theorem : 
Theorem 1. ( Transfer lea rning in case of learning 
arbitrary two patterns  from a set of patterns ) Let xi and xj 
be arbitrary patterns from a set X ={ x1,..,xi,..,xj,..,xN} of 
N patterns , which a maximum sele cting  neural cl assifier 
should learn to classify into given two classes C k and C m 
respectively, from a set C={C 1,..,C k,..,C m,..,C n} of n 
classes . Let a ij = xiTxj. Let the lecture (teaching trial)  !x i 
= C k is presented p i times , and l et !x j = C m  is presen ted p j  
times  in the teaching sequence  L. Then, the problem of 
correct clas sification learning is equivalent to the 
problem of finding p i  and p j  which satisfy the pair of 
inequalities  
      aii  -aji       pi      qk(xi)  
         >    (8) 
      - aij   ajj     pj            kq(xj)   
which in compact form can be written as   
 Ap >      ( 9) where   
        = qk(xi)   =   yq0(xi) -yk0(xi)               (10) 
 kq(xj)        yk0(xj) - yq0(xj) 
is named transfer learning vector . 
Before we present the proof of the Theorem 1 we 
will give interpretation of the variables which appear  in 
the theorem.   
First we point out that the left side of the inequalities 
(8) contain a matrix of all inner products between 
patterns. The inner produ ct a ij  between two pat terns xi 
and xj shows how much their features overlap. It can be 
viewed as c ovariance, a manifestation of pattern 
similarity. We denote that matrix A = [aij], and name it a 
matrix of mutual similarity  between patterns . Note that 
this matrix is invariant to the teaching pr ocess , it simply 
describes relation between the given patter ns.  
The vector p=(p i pj)T  shows how many times 
patterns were shown in a teaching trial in the teaching 
sequence L. It i s a training vector of the second learning 
task.  
The rig ht side of ineq ualities contain the variables 
are due to transfer learning  from a learning task prior to 
this considered task of training using curriculum L. It 
contains differences  of outputs of S -elements for each 
pattern shown in the teaching process, i .e. yqk0(xi) = 
yq0(xi) - yk0(xi) for shown pattern xi, and y kq0(xj) = y k0(xj) 
- yq0(xj) for shown pattern xj.  
So the left side of matrix inequalities, Ap, contains 
all controllable and observable pa rameters of the 
teaching process. If patterns are known, the matrix A is 
known . The teaching sequence L is the one it is looked 
for, an d after it is found, the vector p will be known. 
However, the right side of inequalities, vector  , which 
represents transfer learning , is in general case not 
known. Teaching of a biological br ain does not assume 
that initial values of weights are known. O ften the task is 
to teach a learner regardless the transfer learning. 
However, because of unknown transfer learning teach ing 
process might converge in a lo nger time.  
The proof of  the Theorem ca n be expressed using a 
reasoning flow diagram as shown in Fig ure 2. The 
equations and inequalities used have been already 
described in the text.  
Note that if all thresholds in the network  are equal, 
then the transfer l earning can be expresse d as 
kq(xj) = (wk0-wq0)xj    (11) 
3.3 Modeling positive and negative 
transfer lea rning  
In this section we will address formally the following 
questions.  
Given a neural network that has be en subject to a  
learning Task1 , is it possible to find a teaching sequ ence 
L which wi ll solve the teaching Task2 regardless the 
transfer learning fr om Task1?