292 Informatica  44 (2020 ) 291–302 S. Bozinovski  
 application of transfer learning , in obtaining shorter 
training sequences in learning a data set of images 
represen ting letters.   
In the sequel the paper first reviews the neural 
network used in early research o n tra nsfer learning, 
during 1972 -1981. Then it gives a mathematical model of 
supervised learning , in which it explicitly introduces 
trans fer learning. Then it gives a g eometr ical model of 
transfer learning , including positive , negative , and no 
transfer learning . Then, in Section 5, it defines a 
mathematical index, a measure of transfer learning. In 
Section 6 the paper discusses a search for  a solution of 
pattern  classification  problem in case of negative transfer  
learning . In Section 7 the paper discusses the mu lti-class 
multi -template problem of transfer learning. Section 8  
shows results of experimental investigation in transfer 
learning . It first shows experime nts with small set of low 
resolution images representing lette rs, demonstrating 
experimentally the eff ect of tabula rasa, positive, and 
negative transfer. The paper the n extends to an 
application of transfer learning in case of learni ng a 
dataset of three sets each containing  26 images 
representing letters . The section 9 reviews the related 
work by other authors w hich appeared after 1986, 
influenced by the renewed interest in neural networks 
due to the book of Rumelhart, McClelland , and the PD P 
Group (1986) , includ ing the work of  Pratt et al. (1991) 
and Pratt (1993). The paper ends with a discussion and 
conclusion section . 
2 The neural network  
The neural network used in our study (Bozinovski 1972, 
1974, 1995)  is shown in Figure  1. 
The network co ntains 5 compu tational  stages 
(layers ). The first one, M, is the sens or layer,  with 
sensors arranged according to a need, for example as a 
matrix retina. Sensors are binary giving values 0 or 1.  
Second layer, Z, is a feature extractio n layer . Feature 
is a pattern which is used as input in rec ognition of a 
higher level pattern. Examp les of features might be 
"horizontal line",  "circle" , "upper left corner" , or a rather 
complex feature . Important is that the feature is a first stage in re cognizing a pattern , which is a set of featu res. 
One way of  defining a feature is to pre -wire all sensors in 
a horizontal line and to create an output from Z layer, 
with interpretation "horizontal line". The other way is to 
add a Z -element with trainable w eights and produce an 
output with in terpreta tion "horizonta l line". The number 
of output s from Z -layer is often  larger than the number 
of input sensors. For example each sensor can be 
considered a feature, plus some needed features such as 
"middle horizo ntal line", "left corn er" or "square ".  
The outputs of the layer Z are inputs to the third  
layer, the A -layer . It contains A -elements, or associative 
units, as named originally by Rosenblatt (1958 , 1962) , 
and used in early neural learning research (e.g. Gl ushkov , 
1967) . We will  use that term , but we will also use the 
term associative weights . A weight represents the 
relevance of the feature in creating the concept of a 
pattern. They are divided into subsets A 1, A 2, ..., A n, each 
subset having inputs from th e feature layer  Z. The 
subsets are as sociate d to a cognitiv e concept, a class  to 
which input patterns are classified. If there are n possible 
classes and N s possible features , then each A element can 
be represented by values w is, i=1,..,n; j=1,..,N s. They are 
in gene ral real nu mbers. Each cla ss of A  elements 
repre sent a concept, a cognitive class, that will be learned 
in the pattern classification process. For example, i f a 
task is to classify images, then one set of A elements will 
be devoted to recognize image  "E", another to recognize 
the image  "F" etc.  
Next lay er, S, are elements that perform some 
computation over the subsets of A elements  representing 
cognitive classes . An S element s i comput es some 
function y(w ij) over the elements w ij , i = 1,..,n; j =1,.., 
Ns. Most often these elements compute  a weighted and  
thresholded sum y i = jwij xj - pi where pi  is named 
threshold of the element s i. Further in the text we will use 
the -notation for threshold , i.e. p i = i. There are n S -
elements in this lay er, s 1, s2, ..., s n. A subset of A 
elements and the corresp onding S element i s named a 
neuron of the neural network.  
The next layer, D, is an arbiter layer , which chooses 
an S-element out of n alternative S -elements. Usual way 
is computing a maximum functi on. This layer can be 
comp osed by set of neurons which have  a common  
threshold. Such an Isothreshold Neural Network (e.g . 
Bozinovski 1985 a) has a common threshold value equal 
to maximal value of the individual neuron thresholds. 
Such a network provides a mechanism for computin g 
maximal valu e in neu ral networks. I n addition, the 
maximal value might be normalized to 1, and the 
maximum computing network can be viewed as 
computing fuzzy union if the input values are also 
normalized between 0 and 1 . The output of this layer is 
an integer from 0  to n. For example, outpu t d = 2 means 
that the observed pattern belongs to class 2 out of the 
considered n classes. The output d = 0  means that the 
classification is undecided, possibly there are two S -
elements computing the same largest value , so there is no 
singl e maximal value .  
The next layer E, is output interface layer. It 
activates some device that is controlled by this neural 
 
Figure 1: A 5-layer  neural ne twork used in supervised 
learni ng for pattern recognition in the research 
described here (Bozinovski 1974, 1995) .