Reminder of the First Paper on...   Informatica  44 (2020 ) 291–302 293 
 network. For example if d=2 is computed , then this layer 
may activate a speech device tell ing the sound 
represen tation of the class 2.   
The neural ne twork presented in Figure 1 was the 
one we started our research in neural networks with. The 
first task we considered was distinguishing a horizontal 
vs vertical line on a matrix retina (Bozinovski  1972 ). 
That is not re viewed here. T his pape r is focused on  
modeling transfer learning.  
3 Mathematical modeling of transfer 
learning in a neural network  
For purpose of presenting the concept of transfer 
learning, here we use a simplified version of the 5 -layer 
network on Figure 1. Let the layer M consists of m 
synapses or sensors. Let layer Z does not compute any 
additional feature besides the sensor inputs , so it just 
represents connection s from sensors to A -elements. Let 
each subset of A elements has the s ame connections to 
the sensors as th e other subset of A -elements. The A -
elements will be named synaptic weights, such that the 
weight w is represents the s-th synapse element in the i -th 
class of A elements. Then the S -element s i computes the 
function yi = swisxs - i. Let the layer D is rep resented  
by a maximum s elector function : (di = 1 if yi = max i{yi} 
otherwise d i = 0). Other way of denoting a maximum 
selector is d = indmax{y i} where indmax{ } returns the 
index of the maximal element in the considered s et. In 
the literature this function is usual ly written as d  = 
argmax{ }, but we use our original notation (Bozinovski 
and Fulgosi, 1976).  
3.1 An approach toward modeling 
supervised learning in neural networks  
The principal learning concept of the neural networ k 
approach toward mach ine learning is the co ncept of 
(synap tic) weights  (e.g. Rumelhart et al . 1986 , 
Goodfellow et al . 2016 ). In pattern classification with 
neural networks the principal  representation spaces are 
the pattern feature space  and weights space . However, it 
should b e noted that w hile in artificial neur al nets 
synaptic weights are observable, in real biological 
systems the y are not observable. So it is interesting to use 
a representation of the supervised learning problem 
which will not deal with  synaptic weights as p rimary 
represe ntation concept. Here w e will describe such a 
representation which is a weights -free and we call it 
teaching space  (Bozinovski 1981 , 1985b) . 
Let us not e that in a supervised learning there is a 
system named teacher who h as a reference model o f the 
knowledg e to be transferred in the other system named 
learner or student. The teaching space approach is based 
on the foll owing notation:  
Let x be a body of knowledge to be learned  by the 
student . For example x might be a visua l pattern to be 
classi fied in a clas s. The s upervised learn ing procedure 
(training) contains both teaching trials (where the teacher 
presents the knowledge about x ), and examination trial s 
(where the student presents its knowledge about x ). After the training is completed there  will be many exploita tion 
trials, wh ere the l earner will show its knowledge in an 
application.  
Let !(x) denote s a teaching (or advising) trial , 
representing the teacher’s reference model knowledge 
about x. Let ?(x) denote s a test (or examination) trial , 
representing th e curren t learner’s kno wledge about x.  
Then, the goal of the teaching process becomes  
?(x) =  !(x) for all considered x.   (1) 
The learner we use  is a maximum selector classifier  
(Figure 1) . For each input pattern x in an test trial, the 
learner computes n alterna tives , i.e., co mputes n 
functions y1(x),.., yn(x), and chooses the one with 
maximal value. If there is no maximal value the learner 
gives special answer meaning "undecided ", for example 
value 0.  
Lets define a set X of N objects  (patter ns), 
X={x 1,..,xi,..,xj,..,xN}, to be classified into n classes, 
C1,..,C k,..,C q,..,C n, where N > n. Let , by teachers 
reference model , the i-th pattern belongs to the k -th class 
and j -th pattern belongs to the q -th class. That can be 
written as  
!(xi)= C k;  i=1, …, N; k=1 ,...,n; (2.1) 
!(xj)= C q;  j = 1, …, N, q=1,...,n ; j  i, qk; (2.2) 
In an examination trial it is computed  the maximum  
value , which means that the correct classification is 
achieved if the following pair of inequalities h olds 
?(x i) = !(x i) = C k   yk(xi ) > yq(xi )       (3.1) 
?(xj) = !(x j) = C q   yq(xj ) > yk(xj )       (3.2) 
Further, we assume that the patterns are represented 
as feature vectors x1,..,xN and that the weight  vectors are 
represented with w1,..,wn, where wk is associated with the 
class C k.  
The lea rning process i s governed by a  consequence 
driven teaching process with an error correction learning 
rule  
 if  ?(x i)   is different th an   (!(xi) = C k ) 
 then correct wk toward xi:  wk = wk + cxi  (4) 
where c is a constant . In words , if the classi fier 
erroneously classifies the pattern xi in an test trial, a 
teaching trial is introduced in which the pattern xi is 
added to the weight wk, lecturing that xi belongs to C k.  
Here c is a learning rate which is a constant and we 
use th e value c=1.  
3.2 Introd ucing transfer le arning  
Consider neural network from Fig ure 1 which has 
capability to classify N patterns into n classes , N > n. 
Consider the simplest task,  two patterns xi and xj to be 
classified into two classes  Ck and C q. The proble m is 
stated with relations (3). Howev er let us emphasize that k 
and q are arbitrary  in the set of {1,..., n| kq}, and also i 
and j are arbitrary  in the set {1,...,N | ij}. 
Now we introduce transfer learning . Let assume the 
considered neural network has bee n subject of a learn ing 
task which we call first learning task . After th at first 
learning task the neural network learner is now subject to