EMOTIONAL SPEECH SYNTHESIS WITH RICH AND GRANULARIZED CONTROL
Se-Yun Um1, Sangshin Oh1, Kyungguen Byun1, Inseon Jang2, ChungHyun Ahn2, Hong-Goo Kang1
1Yonsei University, Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Seoul, South Korea
2Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institution, Daejeon, South Korea
ABSTRACT
This paper proposes an effective emotion control method for an end-
to-end text-to-speech (TTS) system. To ﬂexibly control the distinct
characteristic of a target emotion category, it is essential to deter-
mine embedding vectors representing the TTS input. We introduce
an inter-to-intra emotional distance ratio algorithm to the embedding
vectors that can minimize the distance to the target emotion category
while maximizing its distance to the other emotion categories. To
further enhance the expressiveness of a target speech, we also intro-
duce an effective interpolation technique that enables the intensity of
a target emotion to be gradually changed to that of neutral speech.
Subjective evaluation results in terms of emotional expressiveness
and controllability show the superiority of the proposed algorithm to
the conventional methods.
Index Terms —emotional TTS, emotion intensity control, end-
to-end GST-Tacotron2
1. INTRODUCTION
The objective of a text-to-speech (TTS) system is to synthesize
human-like speech signals such that linguistic and paralinguistic
information can be conveyed clearly. Thanks to recent advances
in deep learning-based TTS technologies, understanding the con-
textual meaning of text from synthesized speech is no longer an
issue [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7]. However, it remains difﬁcult to express
paralinguistic information such as emotion through synthesized
speech.
In deep learning-based end-to-end TTS systems (e.g., Tacotron),
the expressiveness of synthesized speech is controlled by condition-
ing additional embedding vectors that implicitly provide prosody-
related latent features typically generated by another neural network
[8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13]. However, because those systems only mim-
icked a generic speaking style of reference audio, it was difﬁcult to
assign user-deﬁned emotion types to synthesized speech. Lee et al.
[8] directly provided an emotion label to the decoder of the Tacotron
system such that it was concatenated with the output of pre-net. Al-
though the method showed a feasibility of presenting emotion to syn-
thesized speech, it was also challenging to control emotional expres-
siveness ﬂexibly.
A better approach was to learn a representative embedding style
of each emotion by analyzing the distribution of an emotion labeled
database. Because the embedding vectors obtained from the same
emotion category contain similar prosodic information, they have a
tendency to form a cluster. Kwon et al. [14] effectively generated
emotional speech using representative condition vectors obtained by
averaging the style embedding vectors belonging to each emotion
category. However, we found out that the approach could not clearly
present the distinctive characteristics of each emotion. Because the
distribution of style embedding vectors in the embedding domainwere highly dispersed, their mean was not a good representative vec-
tor.
The main objective of this work is to develop a TTS system that
not only generates each emotional speech clearly but also ﬂexibly
controls the intensity of emotion representation. To achieve this, we
focus on (i) how to determine representative embedding vectors for
each emotion, and (ii) how to control ﬂexibly the intensity of emo-
tion by adjusting representative vectors. At ﬁrst, we propose an inter-
to-intra distance ratio algorithm that utilizes the ratio of the distance
between intra-cluster embedding vectors and inter-cluster ones. Un-
like the previous approach that only considers a target emotion cat-
egory, the proposed approach considers other emotion categories si-
multaneously. As the representative embedding vector reﬂects the
characteristic of each emotion category well, the emotional clarity is
further enhanced. In addition, we propose an effective interpolation
technique that controls emotion intensity by gradually changing the
prosody of the target emotion to that of neutral speech.
We investigated the effectiveness of the proposed method by
conducting subjective evaluation tasks. The experimental results
show that our system successfully achieves better emotional expres-
siveness and controll-ability than conventional methods.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes
the related works and Section 3 explains the proposed algorithm.
Experiments and conclusion are followed in Section 4 and 5, respec-
tively.
2. RELATED WORKS
The GST-Tacotron,which consists of an end-to-end TTS and a global
style token module ﬂexibly changes the style of synthesized speech
to have characteristics similar to auxiliary input reference audio [9].
It consists of the Tacotron network and a style encoder. The Tacotron
network estimates the mel-spectrogram of the output speech signal
from input text using a sequence-to-sequence with attention mech-
anism [15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20]. To train the style encoder, a mel-
spectrogram of the reference audio is fed into the style encoder mod-
ule to generate a ﬁxed-length prosody embedding [21], then a multi-
head attention method [22] is applied to present the similarity be-
tween prosody embedding and global style tokens (GST). Finally,
style embeddings generated by the weighted sum of GSTs, as well
as hidden features estimated by the text encoder are fed into the de-
coding module of the Tacotron network. The inference step is almost
identical to the training step described above. It generates a mel-
spectrogram using text input and style embedding obtained by either
reference audio or selected by the emotion category, then the gener-
ated mel-spectrogram is fed into the WaveNet vocoder to synthesize
a human-like emotional speech signal.
To generate emotional speech by controlling embedding vec-
tors, however, the GST-Tacotron also requires a hand-crafted pro-
cedure that must identify which dimension of style embedding af-arXiv:1911.01635v2  [eess.AS]  6 Nov 2019