reinforcement 
learning 
supervised 
learning unsupervised 
learning deep 
learning 
artificial 
intelligence machine 
learning deep 
reinforcement 
learning Figure 2: Relationship among deep reinforcement learning, deep learning, reinforcement learn-
ing, supervised learning, unsupervised learning, machine learning, and, artiﬁcial intelligence. Deep
learning and deep reinforcement learning are addressing many classical AI problems.
1989) ”[The automation of] activities that we associate with human thinking, activities such as
decision-making, problem solving, learning ...” (Bellman, 1978)
Deﬁnition 3, ”thinking rationally”, follows the ”law of thought” approach. ”The study of mental
faculties through the use of computational models.” (Charniak and McDermott, 1985) ”The study of
the computation that make it possible to perceive, reason, and act.” (Winston, 1992)
Deﬁnition 4, ”acting rationally”, follows the rational agent approach. ”Computational Intelligence is
the study of the design of intelligent agents.” (Poole et al., 1998) ”AI ... is concerned with intelligent
behavior in artifacts.” (Nilsson, 1998) The rational agent approach is more amenable to scientiﬁc
development than those based on human behavior or human thought. Russell and Norvig (2009)
thus focuse on general principles of rational agents and their building components.
We list the foundations and the questions they attempt to answer as in Russell and Norvig (2009):
philosophy , for questions like, ”Can formal rules be used to draw valid conclusions?”, ”How does
the mind arise from a physical brain?”, ”Where does knowledge come from?”, and, ”How does
knowledge lead to action?”; mathematics , for questions like, ”What are the formal rules to draw valid
conclusions?”, ”What can be computed?”, and, ”How do we reason with uncertain information?”;
economics , for questions like, ”How should we make decisions so as to maximize payoff?”, ”How
should we do this when others may not go along?”, and, ”How should we do this when the payoff
may be far in the future?”; neuroscience , for questions like, ”How do brains process information?”;
psychology , for questions like, ”How do humans and animals think and act?”; computer engineering ,
for questions like, ”How can we build an efﬁcient computer?”; control theory and cybernetics , for
questions like, ”How can artifacts operate under their own control?”; and, linguistics , for questions
like, ”How does language relate to thought?”
Russell and Norvig (2009) present the history of AI as, the gestation of artiﬁcial intelligence (1943-
1955), the birth of artiﬁcial intelligence (1956), early enthusiasm, great expectations (1952 - 1969),
9