Sherstan et al. (2018) propose to accelerate construction of knowledge represented by GVFs with
successor representation in a continual learning setting, so that learning new GVFs are sped up with
previous learned GVFs.
16.4 P OLICY -BASED LEARNING
Levine et al. (2016) propose to train perception and control systems jointly end-to-end, to map raw
image observations directly to torques at the robot’s motors. The authors introduce guided policy
search (GPS) to train policies represented by CNNs, by transforming policy search into supervised
learning to achieve data efﬁciency, with training data provided by a trajectory-centric RL method
operating under unknown dynamics. GPS alternates between trajectory-centric RL and supervised
learning, to obtain the training data coming from the policy’s own state distribution, to address
the issue that supervised learning usually does not achieve good, long-horizon performance. GPS
utilizes pre-training to reduce the amount of experience data to train visuomotor policies. Good
performance is achieved on a range of real-world manipulation tasks requiring localization, visual
tracking, and handling complex contact dynamics, and simulated comparisons with previous policy
search methods. As the authors mention, ”this is the ﬁrst method that can train deep visuomotor
policies for complex, high-dimensional manipulation skills with direct torque control”.
Yahya et al. (2017) propose a distributed and asynchronous guided policy search for a vision-based
door opening task with four robots.
Zhu et al. (2017b) propose target-driven visual navigation in indoor scenes with deep RL by treating
the policy as a function of both the goal and the current state in an actor-critic model, to gener-
alize over targets, similar to general value function. The authors design the house of interactions
(AI2-THOR), a simulation framework with high-quality 3D scenes and physics engine, which al-
lows visual interactions for agents, to generate large amount of training data. The authors qualita-
tively compare AI2-THOR with other simulators, like ALE, VizDoom, UETorch, Project Malmo,
SceneNet, TORCS, SYTHNIA, and, Virtual KITTI.
16.5 M ODEL -BASED LEARNING
Gu et al. (2016) propose normalized advantage functions (NAF) to enable experience replay with
Q-learning for continuous task, and to reﬁt local linear models iteratively. Gu et al. (2017a) propose
asynchronous NAF algorithm, with safety constraints, for 3D manipulation in simulation and door
opening for real robots.
Finn and Levine (2017) propose to combine model predictive control (MPC) with action-conditioned
video prediction, in a self-supervised approach without labeled training data, for physical robotic
manipulation of previously unseen objects.
Chebotar et al. (2017) focus on time-varying linear-Gaussian policies, and integrated a model-based
linear quadratic regulator (LQR) algorithm with a model-free path integral policy improvement algo-
rithm. To generalize the method for arbitrary parameterized policies such as deep neural networks,
the authors combined the proposed approach with guided policy search (GPS) (Levine et al., 2016).
Lee et al. (2017) study visual servoing by combining features learned from object classiﬁcation,
predictive dynamic models, and ﬁtted Q-iteration algorithm.
16.6 A UTONOMOUS DRIVING VEHICLES
Autonomous driving is an important topic of intelligent transportation systems as we discuss
in Chapter 20.4. O’Kelly et al. (2018) propose to test autonomous vehicles rare-event simu-
lation. Fridman et al. (2018) propose DeepTrafﬁc, a micro-trafﬁc simulator, for deep RL. Yu
et al. (2018) release BDD100K, a large-scale diverse driving video database. The data is avail-
able at, http://bdd-data.berkeley.edu . The blog is at, http://bair.berkeley.
edu/blog/2018/05/30/bdd/ . See also Bojarski et al. (2016), Bojarski et al. (2017), Zhou
and Tuzel (2018). See a website for Tesla Autopilot Miles at, https://hcai.mit.edu/
tesla-autopilot-miles/ .
84