Al-Shedivat et al. (2018) propose to use the framework of learning to learn for continuous adapta-
tion in non-stationary and competitive environments, by treating a non-stationary environment as a
sequence of stationary tasks. The authors develope a gradient-based meta-learning algorithm adap-
tive in dynamically changing and adversarial scenarios based on MAML (Finn et al., 2017a), by
anticipating changes in environment and updating policies accordingly. The proposed approach at-
tempt to handle Markovian dynamics on two level of hierarchy: at the upper level for dynamics of
tasks, and at the lower level for MDPs representing particular tasks. The authors evaluate the perfor-
mance of the proposed approach 1) on a single-agent multi-leg robots locomotion task in MuJoCo
physics simulator, with handcrafted nonstationarity, by selecting a pair of legs to scale down the
torques applied to joints, until fully paralyzed, and, 2) on iterated adaptation games in RoboSumo,
which is in a 3D environment, with simulated physics, having pairs of agents to compete, and not
only non-stationary but also adversarial. The authors assume that trajectories from the current task
contain some information about the next task, so that tasks become dependant sequentially. The
proposed algorithm may not take advantage of more data, and it could diverge when there are large
distributional changes from iteration to iteration.
Lake et al. (2015) propose an one-shot concept learning model, for handwritten characters in par-
ticular, with probabilistic program induction. Koch et al. (2015) propose siamese neural networks
with metric learning for one-shot image recognition. Vinyals et al. (2016) design matching networks
for one-shot classiﬁcation. Duan et al. (2017) propose a model for one-shot imitation learning with
attention for robotics. Johnson et al. (2017) present zero-shot translation for Google’s multilingual
neural machine translation system. Kaiser et al. (2017b) design a large scale memory module for
life-long one-shot learning to remember rare events. Kansky et al. (2017) propose Schema Networks
for zero-shot transfer with a generative causal model of intuitive physics. Snell et al. (2017) pro-
pose prototypical networks for few/zero-shot classiﬁcation by learning a metric space to compute
distances to prototype representations of each class. George et al. (2017) propose a generative vision
model to train with high data efﬁciency, breaking text-based CAPTCHA. Liu et al. (2018c) study
generalization of zero-shot learning with deep calibration network.
14.2 T RANSFER /MULTI -TASK LEARNING
Transfer learning is about transferring knowledge learned from different domains, possibly with
different feature spaces and/or different data distributions (Taylor and Stone, 2009; Pan and Yang,
2010; Weiss et al., 2016). As reviewed in Pan and Yang (2010), transfer learning can be induc-
tive, transductive, or unsupervised. Inductive transfer learning includes self-taught learning and
multi-task learning. Transductive transfer learning includes domain adaptation and sample selec-
tion bias/covariance shift. Taylor and Stone (2009) compare RL transfer learning algorithms w.r.t.
the following performance metrics: jumpstart, asymptotic performance, total reward, transfer ratio,
time to threshold, and against the following dimensions: task difference assumption, source task
selection, task mapping, transferred knowledge, and allowed learners. Multitask learning (Caruana,
1997; Zhang et al., 2018a; Ruder, 2017) learns related tasks with a shared representation in paral-
lel, leveraging information in related tasks as an inductive bias, to improve generalization, and to
help improve learning for all tasks. The modular structure of hierarchical RL approaches is usually
conducive to transfer and multi-task learning, which we discussed in Chapter 11.
Whye Teh et al. (2017) propose Distral, distill & transfer learning, for joint training of multiple
tasks, by sharing a distilled policy, trained to be the centroid of policies for all tasks, to capture
common behavioural structure across tasks, and training each task policy to be close to the shared
policy. The design of Distral is to overcome issues in transfer and multi-task learning, that in the
approach of share neural network parameters, gradients from different tasks may interfere each
other negatively, and that one task may dominate the learning of the shared model, due to different
reward functions of different tasks. Whye Teh et al. (2017) design Distral following the techniques
of distillation (Bucila et al., 2006; Hinton et al., 2014), and soft Q-learning (Haarnoja et al., 2017;
Nachum et al., 2017), a.k.a., G-learning (Fox et al., 2016). The authors observe that, the distillation
arises naturally, when optimize task models towards a distilled model, when using KL divergence as
a regularization. Moreover, the distilled model serves as a regularizer for task models training, and it
may help transferability by regularizing neural networks in a space more semantically meaningful,
e.g., for policies, rather than for network parameters. Distral can be instantiated in several forms, and
it outperforms empirically the baseline A3C algorithms in grid world and complex 3D environments.
70