reduced or even removed for some problems. Feature engineering used to be done manually and
is usually time-consuming, over-speciﬁed, and incomplete. Deep distributed representations exploit
the hierarchical composition of factors in data to combat the exponential challenges of the curse of
dimensionality. Generality, expressiveness and ﬂexibility of deep neural networks make some tasks
easier or possible, e.g., in the breakthroughs, and novel architectures, algorithms, and applications
discussed above.
Deep learning, as a speciﬁc class of machine learning, is not without limitations, e.g., as a black-box
lacking interpretability, as an ”alchemy” without clear and sufﬁcient scientiﬁc principles to work
with, with difﬁculties in tuning hyperparameters, and without human intelligence so not being able
to compete with a baby in some tasks. Deep reinforcement learning exacerbates these issues, and
even reproducibility is a problem (Henderson et al., 2018). However, we see a bright future, since
there are lots of work to improve deep learning, machine learning, reinforcement learning, deep
reinforcement learning, and AI in general.
Deep learning and reinforcement learning, being selected as one of the MIT Technology Review 10
Breakthrough Technologies in 2013 and 2017 respectively, will play their crucial roles in achieving
artiﬁcial general intelligence. David Silver, the major contributor of AlphaGo (Silver et al., 2016a;
2017), proposes a conjecture: artiﬁcial intelligence = reinforcement learning + deep learning (Silver,
2016). We will further discuss this conjecture in Chapter 21.
There are several frequently asked questions about deep reinforcement learning as below. We brieﬂy
discuss them in the above, and will further elucidate them in the coming chapters.
Why deep?
What is the state of the art?
What are the issues, and potential solutions?
The book outline follows. First we discuss background of artiﬁcial intelligence, machine learning,
deep learning, and reinforcement learning, as well as benchmarks and resources, in Chapter 2. Next
we discuss RL core elements, including value function in Chapter 3, policy in Chapter 4, reward
in Chapter 5, model in Chapter 6, exploration vs exploitation in Chapter 7, and representation in
Chapter 8. Then we discuss important mechanisms for RL, including attention and memory in
Chapter 9, unsupervised learning in Chapter 10, hierarchical RL in Chapter 11, multi-agent RL in
Chapter 12, relational RL in Chapter 13, and, learning to learn in Chapter 14. After that, we discuss
various RL applications, including games in Chapter 15, robotics in Chapter 16, natural language
processing (NLP) in Chapter 17, computer vision in Chapter 18, ﬁnance and business management
in Section 19, and more applications in Chapter 20, including, healthcare in Section 20.1, education
in Section 20.2, energy in Section 20.3, transportation in Section 20.4, computer systems in Sec-
tion 20.5, and, science, engineering and arts in Section 20.6. We close in Chapter 21, with a brief
summary, discussions about challenges and opportunities, and an epilogue.
Figure 1 illustrates the manuscript outline. The agent-environment interaction sits in the center,
around which are core elements, next important mechanisms, then various applications.
Main readers of this manuscript are those who want to get more familiar with deep reinforcement
learning, in particular, novices to (deep) reinforcement learning. For reinforcement learning experts,
as well as new comers, this book are helpful as a reference. This manuscript is helpful for deep
reinforcement learning courses, with selected topics and papers.
We endeavour to discuss recent, representative work, and provide as much relevant information
as possible, in an intuitive, high level, conceptual approach. We attempt to make this manuscript
complementary to Sutton and Barto (2018), the RL classic focusing mostly on fundamentals in
RL. However, deep RL is by nature an advanced topic; and most part of this manuscript is about
introducing papers, mostly without covering detailed background. (Otherwise, the manuscript length
would explode.) Consequently, most parts of this manuscript would be rather technical, somewhat
rough, without full details. Original papers are usually the best resources for deep understanding.
Deep reinforcement learning is growing very fast. We post blogs to complement this manuscript,
and endeavour to track the development of this ﬁeld , at https://medium.com/@yuxili .
6