guage, with suggestive deﬁnitions, overloading technical terminology, or suitcase words for a variety
of meanings. See NIPS 2018 Workshop on Critiquing and Correcting Trends in Machine Learning.
Henderson et al. (2018) investigate reproducibility, experimental techniques, and reporting proce-
dures for deep RL. The authors show that experimental results are inﬂuenced by hyperparameters,
including network architecture and reward scale, random seeds and trials, environments (like Hopper
or HalfCheetah etc. in OpenAI Baseline), and codebases. This causes difﬁculties for reproducing
deep RL research results. The authors analyze the following reporting evaluation metrics: online
view vs. policy optimization (ofﬂine), conﬁdence bounds (sample bootstrap), power analysis (about
sample size), signiﬁcance (like t-test). Henderson et al. (2018) recommend to report implementation
details, all hyperparameter settings, experimental setup, and evaluation methods for reproducibility.
The authors also recommend to ﬁnd the working set of hyperparameters, match baseline algorithm
implementation with the original codebase, run many trails with different random seeds then average
results, and perform proper signiﬁcance tests to validate better performance.
Khetarpal et al. (2018) discuss evaluation differences in RL and in supervised learning, and propose
an evaluation pipeline.
Levine (2018) discusses challenges with deep RL, including stability, efﬁciency, scalability, hyper-
parameters tuning, sample complexity, model-based learning, generalization, reward speciﬁcation,
prior knowledge, etc.
These papers10discuss various issues with deep learning, machine learning, deep RL, and provide
valuable insights. There are also benchmark papers like Duan et al. (2016). However, we still
lack papers conducting systematic, comparative study of deep RL algorithms, so that we pick one
or more benchmark problems, do a thorough study, report both successes and failures, summarize
advices and lessons, and, give guidelines about how to use deep RL algorithms. Our deep RL
community need such papers. As well, most RL + NLP/computer vision papers use REINFORCE.
A natural question is: how about other (deep) RL algorithms? We can evaluate performance of many
algorithms, like DQN, A3C, DDPG, TRPO, PPO, PCL, Trust-PCL, Retrace, Reactor, interpolated
policy gradient, soft Q-learning, etc. As such, we propose the following research direction.
Research Direction 1: systematic, comparative study of deep RL algorithms
Bellemare et al. (2018) open source Dopamine, aiming for a ﬂexible, stable, and reproducible
Tensorﬂow-based RL framework, as an achievement in this direction.
We have seen exciting results in two-player and multi-agent games recently. AlphaGo (Silver et al.,
2016a; 2017) has achieved super-human performance. DeepStack (Morav ˇc´ık et al., 2017) defeated
professional poker players. Jaderberg et al. (2018) achieve human level performance in the game of
Capture the Flag (Chapter 12). OpenAI Five has beaten human players on 5v5 Dota 2, although with
huge computation ( https://blog.openai.com/openai-five/ ). Zambaldi et al. (2018)
achieve decent results on StarCraft II mini-games (Chapter 13). Sun et al. (2018) and Pang et al.
(2018) have beaten full-game built-in AI in StarCraft II.
However, multi-agent problems are still very challenging, with issues like non-stationarity and even
theoretical infeasibility, as we discuss in Chapter 12. Even so, we can endeavour to achieve decent
results for multi-agent problems, like approximation solutions with high quality, and/or super-human
performance. Multi-agent systems are a great tool to model interactions among agents, with rich
applications in human society; and their advancements can signiﬁcantly push the frontier of AI. We
thus propose the second research direction as below.
Research Direction 2: ”solve” multi-agent problems
10There is a blog titled Deep Reinforcement Learning Doesn’t Work Yet at https://www.alexirpan.
com/2018/02/14/rl-hard.html . It summarizes issues with deep RL, including sample inefﬁciency,
better results with non-RL methods, issues with reward function, local optimal hard to escape, overﬁtting,
and, hard to reproduce due to instability. The blog contains informative discussions; however, the title is
wrong. There is another blog titled Lessons Learned Reproducing a Deep Reinforcement Learning Paper at
http://amid.fish/reproducing-deep-rl .
105