19 F INANCE AND BUSINESS MANAGEMENT
Machine learning naturally has wide applications in ﬁnance, e.g., in fundamental analysis, be-
havioural ﬁnance, technical analysis, ﬁnancial engineering, ﬁnancial technology (FinTech), etc. Re-
inforcement learning is a natural solution to some sequential decision making ﬁnance problems, like
option pricing, trading, and multi-period portfolio optimization, etc. RL also has many applications
in business management, like ads, recommendation, customer management, and marketing, etc.
Financial engineering is a discipline rooting in ﬁnance, computer science and mathematics (Hull,
2014; Luenberger, 1997). Derivative pricing is an essential issue in ﬁnancial engineering. The values
of ﬁnancial derivatives depend on the values of underlying assets. Options are the most fundamental
derivatives. An option gives the holder the right, but not the obligation, to buy or sell an asset at a
certain price by a certain time. Portfolio optimization is about how to allocate assets so as to trade
off between return and risk.
There are two schools in ﬁnance, Efﬁcient Markets Hypothesis (EMH) and Behavioral Finance (Lo,
2004). According to EMH, “prices fully reﬂect all available information” and are determined by
the market equilibrium. However, psychologists and economists have found a number of behav-
ioral biases that are native in human decision-making under uncertainty. For example, Amos Tver-
sky and Daniel Kahneman demonstrate the phenomenon of loss aversion, in which people tend to
strongly prefer avoiding losses to acquiring gains (Kahneman, 2011). Prashanth et al. (2016) inves-
tigate prospect theory with reinforcement learning. Behavioral ﬁnance justiﬁes technical analysis
(Murphy, 1999) to some extend. Lo et al. (2000) propose to use nonparametric kernel regression
for automatic technical pattern recognition. Lo (2004) proposes the Adaptive Market Hypothesis
to reconcile EMH and behavioral ﬁnance, where the markets are in the evolutionary process of
competition, mutation, reproduction and natural selection. RL may play an important role in this
fundamental market paradigm.
Financial technology (FinTech) has been attracting lots of attention, especially after the notion of
big data and data science. FinTech employs machine learning techniques to deal with issues like
fraud detection (Phua et al., 2010), and consumer credit risk (Khandani et al., 2010), etc.
We will discuss applications of deep learning and reinforcement learning to ﬁnance and business
management. We only pick a couple of papers for discussions, and do not include many relevant
papers. Machine learning techniques, like support vector machines (SVM), decision trees, etc, have
also been applied to ﬁnance and business management. We can check them from the reference in
the papers we discuss.
It is nontrivial for ﬁnance and economics academia to accept machine learning methods like neural
networks. One factor is that neural networks, among many machine learning methods, are black box;
however, interpretability is desirable in ﬁnance. Doshi-Velez and Kim (2017) and Lipton (2018) dis-
cuss issues of interpretability. Zhang and Zhu (2018) is a survey about interpretability in computer
vision. National Bereau Economic Research (NBER) organizes a meeting on Economics of Ar-
tiﬁcial Intelligence; see http://conference.nber.org/conferences/2018/AIf18/
summary.html . See Mullainathan (2017) for a lecture in American Finance Association (AFA)
2017 annual meeting about machine learning and prediction in economics and ﬁnance. In 2018
ASSA Annual Meeting, at https://www.aeaweb.org/conference/2018 , AFA as part
of it, we see many sessions with the keywords ”artiﬁcial intelligence” and/or ”machine learning”.
We see this as that AI and machine learning are starting to permeate to the mainstream of the ﬁeld of
ﬁnance and economics. It would be natural for economics and ﬁnance to marry reinforcement learn-
ing, machine learning, and AI, considering that quantitative approaches for economics and ﬁnance
share foundations of optimization, statistics, and probability with RL/ML/AI, and, behavioural ap-
proaches for economics and ﬁnance share foundations of psychology, neuroscience, and cognitive
science with RL/ML/AI. We will see more and more applications of RL/ML/AI in ﬁnance, eco-
nomics, and social sciences in general. See NIPS 2018 Workshop on Challenges and Opportunities
for AI in Financial Services: the Impact of Fairness, Explainability, Accuracy, and Privacy.
Before discussing applications of RL to ﬁnance and business management, we introduce ﬁnance
applications with deep learning. Deep learning has a wide applications in ﬁnance, e.g., company
fundamentals prediction (Alberg and Lipton, 2017), macroeconomic indicator forecasting (Cook
and Hall, 2017), and limit order books (Sirignano, 2016), etc.
93