Relational RL integrates RL with statistical relational learning, and connects RL with classical AI,
for knowledge representation and reasoning. Relational RL is not new. D ˇzeroski et al. (2001) pro-
pose relational RL. Tadepalli et al. (2004) survey relational RL. Guestrin et al. (2003) introduce rela-
tional MDPs. Diuk et al. (2008) introduce objected-oriented MDPs (OO-MDPs). Recently, Battaglia
et al. (2018) propose graph network (GN) to incorporate relational inductive bias, Zambaldi et al.
(2018) propose deep relational RL, Keramati et al. (2018) propose strategic object oriented RL, and
there are also deep learning approaches to deal with relations and/or reasoning, e.g., Battaglia et al.
(2016), Chen et al. (2018a), Hutson (2018), Santoro et al. (2017), and Santoro et al. (2018). We
discuss relational RL in Chapter 13.
CAUSALITY
Pearl (2018) discusses that there are three fundamental obstacles for current machine learning sys-
tems to exhibit human-level intelligence: adaptability or robustness, explainability, and understand-
ing of cause-effect connections. The author describes a three layer causal hierarchy: association,
intervention, and counterfactual. Association invokes statistical relationships, with typical questions
like ”What is?” and ”How would seeing Xchange my belief in Y”. Intervention considers not only
seeing what is, but also changing what we see, with typical questions like ”What if?” and ”What if I
doX?”. Counterfactual requires imagination and retrospection, with typical questions like ”Why?”
and ”What if I had acted differently?”. Counterfactuals subsume interventional and associational
questions, and interventional questions subsume associational questions.
Pearl (2018) proposes structural causal model, which can accomplish seven pillar tasks in automated
reasoning: 1) encoding causal assumptions - transparency and testability, 2) do-calculus and the
control of counfounding, 3) the algorithmization of counterfactuals, 4) mediation analysis and the
assessment of direct and indirect effects, 5) adaptability, external validity and sample selection bias,
6) missing data, and, 7) causal discovery.
See some recent papers using deep learning to treat causality, e.g., Johansson et al. (2016), Hartford
et al. (2017), and Lopez-Paz et al. (2017). Lattimore et al. (2016) discuss causal bandits. Tamar
et al. (2018) discuss learning plannable representations with causal InfoGAN. Liu et al. (2018d)
study off-policy policy evaluation inspired by causal reasoning.
REASONING
Battaglia et al. (2018) propose graph network (GN) to incorporate relational inductive bias, to at-
tempt to achieve combinatorial generalization. GN generalizes graph neural network (GNN), e.g.,
Scarselli et al. (2009). Santoro et al. (2017) propose relation networks (RNs) for relational reason-
ing. Santoro et al. (2018) propose a relational memory core (RMC) with self-attention to handle
tasks with relational reasoning. Hudson and Manning (2018) propose memory, attention, and con-
trol (MAC) recurrent cell for reasoning. Yi et al. (2018) discuss disentangling reasoning from vision
and language understanding. We discuss relational RL in Chapter 13.
HUMAN INTELLIGENCE
Lake et al. (2016) discuss that we should build machines towards human-like learning and think-
ing. In particular, we should build causal world models, to support understanding and explanation,
seeing entities rather than just raw inputs or features, rather than just pattern recognition; we should
support and enrich the learned knowledge grounding in intuitive physics and intuitive psychology;
we should represent, acquire, and generalize knowledge, leveraging compositionality and learning
to learn, rapidly adapt to new tasks and scenarios, recombining representations, without retraining
from scratch.
Lake et al. (2016) discuss that the following are key ingredients to achieve human-like learning
and thinking: a) developmental start-up software, or cognitive capabilities in early development,
including, a.1) intuitive physics, and, a.2) intuitive psychology; b) learning as rapid model build-
ing, including, b.1) compositionality, b.2) causality, and, b.3) learning to learn; c) thinking fast,
including, c.1) approximate inference in structured models, and, c.2) model-based and model-free
reinforcement learning. Watch a video Tenenbaum (2018).
51