Machine Learning for Physics and the Physics of Learning at
http://www.ipam.ucla.edu/programs/long-programs/
machine-learning-for-physics-and-the-physics-of-learning/
NIPS 2018 Workshop Machine Learning for Molecules and Materials at http://www.
quantum-machine.org/workshops/nips2018draft/
NIPS Workshop on Machine Learning for Creativity and Design
in 2018 at https://nips2018creativity.github.io/
in 2017 at https://nips2017creativity.github.io
In this section, we attempt to put reinforcement learning in the wide context of science, engineering,
and art. We have already touched many aspects in previous chapters/sections. Here we only discuss
a small sample of the aspects we have not discussed before.
20.6.1 C HEMISTRY
Retrosynthesis is a chemistry technique to transform a target molecule into simpler precursors re-
cursively. Segler et al. (2018) propose to combine Monte Carlo tree search (MCTS) with symbolic
rules for automatic retrosynthesis. Three deep neural networks, namely, an expansion policy net-
work to guide the search with transformations extracted automatically, a ﬁlter network to feasibility
of the proposed reactions, and a rollout policy network to sample transformations to estimate the
value of a position, are trained with almost all reactions published in organic chemistry. The pro-
posed approach improves previous computer-aided synthesis planning systems signiﬁcantly. Segler
et al. (2018) follow the approach of AlphaGo in Silver et al. (2016a). It is interesting to study if the
approach of AlphaGo Zero (Silver et al., 2017), in particular, generalized policy iteration, self-play,
and a single neural network, can be applied to retrosynthesis.
Popova et al. (2018) apply deep RL for computational de novo drug design, discovering molecules
with desired properties. Jaques et al. (2017) as discussed below for music melody generation also
study computational molecular generation.
20.6.2 M ATHEMATICS
Deep learning has many applications in maths, e.g., neural ordinary differential equations
(ODEs) (Chen et al., 2018), proofs (Irving et al., 2016; Loos et al., 2017; Rockt ¨aschel and Riedel,
2017; Urban et al., 2018). In the following, we discuss a case using deep RL for partial differential
equations (PDEs).
PDEs are mathematical tools for wide applications in science and engineering. It is desirable to
design a PDE controller with minimal assumptions, without knowledge of the PDE, and being data-
driven. Pan et al. (2018) study how to control dynamical systems described by PDEs using RL
methods, with high-dimensional continuous action spaces, having spatial relationship among action
dimensions. The authors propose action descriptors to encode such spatial regularities and to control
such PDEs. The authors show sample efﬁciency of action descriptors theoretically, comparing with
conventional RL methods not considering such regularities. The authors implement action descrip-
tors with Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient (DDPG) (Lillicrap et al., 2016), and experiment with
two high-dimensional PDE control problems.
20.6.3 M USIC
Jaques et al. (2017) propose Sequence Tutor, combining maximum likelihood estimation (MLE)
with RL, to consider both data and task-related goals, to improve the structure and quality of gener-
ated sequences, and to maintain sample diversity and information learned from data, by pre-training
a Reward RNN using MLE, and training another RNN with off-policy RL, to generate sequences
with high quality, considering domain-speciﬁc rewards, and penalizing divergence from the prior
policy learned by Reward RNN. The authors investigate the connection between KL control and se-
quence generation, and relationship among G-learning (Fox et al., 2016), 	-learning (Rawlik et al.,
2012), and Q-learning. The authors evaluate Sequence Tutor on musical melody generation. It is
nontrivial to design a reward function to capture the aesthetic beauty of generated melodies, and a
pure data-driven approach can not yield melodies with good structure. Sequence Tutor incorporates
101