9 A TTENTION AND MEMORY
Attention is a mechanism to focus on the salient parts. Memory provides long term data storage.
Attention can be an approach for memory addressing.
A soft attention mechanism, e.g., Bahdanau et al. (2015), utilizes a weighted addressing scheme to
all memory locations, or a distribution over memory locations, can be trained with backpropagation.
A hard attention mechanism, e.g., Zaremba and Sutskever (2015), utilizes a pointer to address a
memory location, following the way conventional computers accessing memory, and can be trained
with reinforcement learning, in particular, policy gradient. Attention can help with visualization
about where a model is attending to, e.g., in machine translation and image captioning. Most papers
follow a soft attention mechanism. There are endeavours for hard attention (Liang et al., 2017a;
Malinowski et al., 2018; Xu et al., 2015; Zaremba and Sutskever, 2015).
See Olah and Carter (2016) and Britz (2016) for discussions about attention and memory; the former
discusses neural Turing machine (Graves et al., 2014) etc., and the latter discusses sequence-to-
sequence model (Bahdanau et al., 2015), etc.
In the following, we discuss several papers about attention and/or memory.
See also Ba et al. (2014; 2016); Danihelka et al. (2016); Duan et al. (2017); Eslami et al. (2016);
Gregor et al. (2015); Jaderberg et al. (2015); Kaiser and Bengio (2016); Kadlec et al. (2016); Oh
et al. (2016); Oquab et al. (2015); Yang et al. (2016); Zagoruyko and Komodakis (2017); Zaremba
and Sutskever (2015).
ATTENTION
Cho et al. (2014) and Sutskever et al. (2014) propose the sequence to sequence approach by using
two RNNs to encode a sentence to a ﬁx-length vector and then decode the vector into a target
sentence. To address the issues with encoding the whole sentence into a ﬁx-length vector in the
basic sequence to sequence approach, Bahdanau et al. (2015) introduce a soft-attention technique,
i.e., weighted sum of annotations to which an encoder maps the source sentence, to learn to jointly
align and translate, by soft-searching for most relevant parts of the source sentence, and predicting
a target word with these parts and previously generated target words.
Mnih et al. (2014) introduce the recurrent attention model (RAM) to focus on selected sequence of
regions or locations from an image or video for image classiﬁcation and object detection, to reduce
computational cost for handling large video or images. The authors utilize REINFORCE to train
the model, to overcome the issue that the model is non-differentiable, and experiment on an image
classiﬁcation task and a dynamic visual control problem.
Xu et al. (2015) integrate attention to image captioning, inspired by the papers in neural machine
translation (Bahdanau et al., 2015) and object recognition (Mnih et al., 2014; Ba et al., 2014). The
authors utilize a CNN to encode the image, and an LSTM with attention to generate a caption. The
authors propose a soft deterministic attention mechanism and a hard stochastic attention mechanism.
The authors show the effectiveness of attention with caption generation tasks on Flickr8k, Flickr30k,
and MS COCO datasets.
Vaswani et al. (2017) propose Transformer, using self-attention to replace recurrent and convolu-
tional layers, for sequence transduction problems, like language modelling and machine transla-
tion. Transformer utilizes a scaled dot-product attention, to map a query and key-value pairs to
an output, and computes a set of queries as matrices simultaneously to improve efﬁciency. Trans-
former further implements a multi-head attention by transforming queries, keys, and values with
different, learned linear projections respectively, performing the attention function in parallel, then
concatenating results and yielding ﬁnal values. Transformer follows the encoder-decoder archi-
tecture. The encoder is composed of a stack of six identical layers, with two sub-layers, a multi-
head self-attention mechanism, then, a position-wise fully connected feed-forward network, with
residual connection around each sub-layer, followed by layer normalization. The decoder is the
same as the encoder, with an additional multi-head attention sub-layer between the two sub-layers,
which takes inputs from the output of the encoder stack and the output from previous multi-head
attention sub-layer. Transformer implements positional encoding to account for the order of the se-
quence. The authors evaluate Transformer on two machine translation tasks, achieve good results
54