is an estimate of the advantage function, with kupbound by tmax.
In A3C, parallel actors employ different exploration policies to stabilize training, so that experience
replay is not utilized, although experience replay could improve data efﬁciency. Experience replay
uses more memory and computation for each interaction, and it requires off-policy RL algorithms.
Asynchronous methods can use on-policy RL methods. Moreover, different from most deep learning
algorithms, asynchronous methods can run on a single multi-core CPU.
For Atari games, A3C runs much faster yet performs better than or comparably with DQN, Go-
rila (Nair et al., 2015), D-DQN, Dueling D-DQN, and Prioritized D-DQN. A3C also succeeds on
continuous motor control problems: TORCS car racing games and MujoCo physics manipulation
and locomotion, and Labyrinth, a navigating task in random 3D mazes using visual inputs.
Wang et al. (2017c) propose ACER, a stable and sample efﬁcient actor-critic deep RL model us-
ing experience replay, with truncated importance sampling, stochastic dueling network (Wang et al.
(2016b) as discussed in Section 3.1), and trust region policy optimization (Schulman et al. (2015)
as will be discussed in Section 4.3). Babaeizadeh et al. (2017) propose a hybrid CPU/GPU imple-
mentation of A3C. Gruslys et al. (2017) propose Reactor to extend Retrace (Munos et al., 2016)
for the actor-critic scheme. Horgan et al. (2018) propose Apex, a distributed version of actor-critic,
with prioritized experience replay, and improve the performance on Atari games substantially. One
important factor is that Apex can learn on a large amount of data. Espeholt et al. (2018) propose
IMPALA, a distributed actor-critic agent, and show good performance in multi-task settings. Dai
et al. (2018a) propose dual actor-critic, in which the critic is not learned by standard algorithms like
TD but is optimized to help compute gradient of the actor.
4.3 T RUST REGION METHODS
Trust region methods are an approach to stabilize policy optimization by constraining gradi-
ent updates. In the following, we discuss Trust Region Policy Optimization (TRPO) (Schul-
man et al., 2015), and Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) (Schulman et al., 2017b). Nachum
et al. (2018) propose Trust-PCL, and extension of TRPO for off-policy learning, which we will
discuss in Section 4.4. Heess et al. (2017) propose distributed proximal policy optimization.
Wu et al. (2017) propose scalable TRPO with Kronecker-factored approximation to the curva-
ture. Liu et al. (2018a) study proximal gradient TD learning. See a video about TRPO at,
https://sites.google.com/site/trpopaper/ . See a blog about PPO with videos at,
https://blog.openai.com/openai-baselines-ppo/ .
TRUST REGION POLICY OPTIMIZATION (TRPO)
Schulman et al. (2015) introduce an iterative procedure to monotonically improve policies theoret-
ically, guaranteed by optimizing a surrogate objective function, and then make several approxima-
tions to develop a practical algorithm, Trust Region Policy Optimization (TRPO). In brief summary,
TRPO iterates the following steps:
1. collect state action pairs and Monte Carlo estimates of Q values
2. average samples, construct the estimated objective and constraint in the previous optimiza-
tion problem, where, olddenotes previous policy parameters, qdenotes the sampling dis-
tribution, and is the trust region parameter
max
^Eh(ajs)
q(ajs)Qold(s;a)i
subject to ^E[KL(old(js)k(js))] (45)
3. solve the above constrained optimization problem approximately, update the policy param-
eter
Schulman et al. (2015) unify policy iteration and policy gradient with analysis, and show that policy
iteration, policy gradient, and natural policy gradient (Kakade, 2002) are special cases of TRPO. In
the experiments, TRPO methods perform well on simulated robotic tasks of swimming, hopping,
and walking, as well as playing Atari games in an end-to-end manner directly from raw images.
33