To go one step further, we propose the next research direction to automate reinforcement learning,
namely, AutoRL. A successful AutoRL tool would help us choose optimal state representation,
function approximator, learning algorithms, hyperparameters, etc. There are efforts currently for
machine learning tasks, namely, AutoML, as we discuss in Section 14.6.
Research Direction 5: AutoRL
We now talk about the last research direction. Reinforcement learning is very powerful and very
important. Quoted from the authoritative AI textbook (Russell and Norvig, 2009), ”reinforcement
Learning might be considered to encompass all of AI: an agent is placed in an environment and must
learn to behave successfully therein”, and, ”reinforcement learning can be viewed as a microcosm
for the entire AI problem”. Moreover, David Silver proposes a conjecture: artiﬁcial intelligence = re-
inforcement learning + deep learning (Silver, 2016). We attempt to justify this conjecture as follows.
Hornik et al. (1989) establish that multilayer feedforward networks are universal approximators; that
is, a feedback neural network with a single layer is sufﬁcient to approximate any continuous function
to an arbitrary precision. Hutter (2005) proves that tasks with computable descriptions in computer
science can be formulated as RL problems. With deep learning providing mechanisms, and rein-
forcement learning deﬁning the objective and achieving it, their integration can solve computable
tasks, the aim of AI. Note the number of units in the hidden layer may be infeasibly large though,
and, computability may be an issue, unless P = NP.
However, we see that deep learning is used much more widely, in supervised learning, unsupervised
learning, and reinforcement learning. Furthermore, deep learning is also widely used in many appli-
cations, and is the core technique for many commercial products, like those with face recognition,
speech recognition, etc. We enjoy the successes of deep RL, like those in Atari games and computer
Go, which probably have limited commercial value. We see successes of a special RL family of tech-
niques, namely, multi-armed bandits, for applications like news recommendation (Li et al., 2010).
We also see achievements like those for neural architecture design (Zoph and Le, 2017). However,
reinforcement learning still needs more efforts to become more practical, and we are still lacking
of wide and practical applications of reinforcement learning that generate considerable commercial
value. We thus propose the following research direction.
Research Direction 6: develop killer applications for (deep) RL
Successes of this research direction require the maturity of RL algorithms, for efﬁciency, stability,
and robustness, etc. We see a positive feedback loop between algorithms and applications; they will
help each other to make further improvements.
We now discuss a concrete recommendation for this direction: it is promising to invest more on
applying AlphaGo techniques. AlphaGo techniques, in particular, deep learning, reinforcement
learning, MCTS, and self play, are successful techniques, and have many potential applications. In
particular, the elegant algorithm of AlphaGo Zero (Silver et al., 2017) would be straightforwardly
applicable to a big family of problems.
We list potential applications of AlphaGo as suggested by the authors in their papers (Silver et al.,
2016a; 2017), namely, general game-playing (in particular, video games) classical planning, partially
observed planning, scheduling, constraint satisfaction, robotics, industrial control, online recom-
mendation systems, protein folding, reducing energy consumption, and searching for revolutionary
new materials. Although AlphaGo techniques have limitations, like requiring a good or even perfect
simulator, we expect to see more and more application of AlphaGo techniques.
We list six research directions, as both challenges and opportunities of deep RL. Research direc-
tion 1, systematic, comparative study of deep RL algorithms, is about reproducibility, and under
the surface, about stability and convergence properties of deep RL algorithms. Research direction
2, ”solve” multi-agent problems, is usually about sample efﬁciency, sparse reward, stability, non-
stationarity, and convergence in a large-scale, complex setting, a frontier in AI research. Research
direction 3, learn from entities, but not just raw inputs, is about sample efﬁciency, sparse reward,
and interpretability, by incorporating more knowledge, structure, and inductive bias. Research di-
rection 4, design an optimal representation for RL, research direction 5, AutoRL, and, research
108