11 H IERARCHICAL RL
Hierarchical RL (Barto and Mahadevan, 2003) is a way to learn, plan, and represent knowledge
with temporal abstraction at multiple levels, with a long history, e.g., options (Sutton et al., 1999),
MAXQ (Dietterich, 2000), hierarchical abstract machines (Parr and Russell, 1998), and dynamic
movement primitives (Schaal, 2006). Hierarchical RL is an approach for issues of sparse rewards
and/or long horizons, with exploration in the space of high-level goals. The modular structure
of hierarchical RL approaches is usually conducive to transfer and multi-task learning, which we
discussed in Section 14.2. The concepts of sub-goal, option, skill, and, macro-action are related.
Hierarchical planning is a classical topic in AI (Russell and Norvig, 2009).
Here we introduce options brieﬂy. Markov decision process (MDP) is deﬁned by the 5-tuple
(S;A;P;R;
), for the state space, the action space, the state transition probability, the reward
function, and the discount factor. An option oconsists of three components: 1) an initiation set
of statesIoS, 2) a policy o:SA! [0;1], guiding the behaviour of an option, such that
o(ajs)is the probability of taking action ain stateswhen following option o, and, 3) a termina-
tion condition o:S! [0;1], roughly determining the length of an option, such that o(s)is the
probability of terminating the option oupon entering state s. A policy-over-options calls an option
o. During the execution of the option o, the agent selects an action until a termination condition is
met. An option may call another option. P(s0js;o)is the probability of next state s0conditioned
on that option oexecutes from state s.ro(s)is the expected return during the execution of option
o. Introducing options over an MDP constitutes a semi-Markov decision process (SMDP). It can be
shown that learning and planning algorithms from MDPs can transfer to options. It can be shown
that the reward model for options is equivalent to a value function, and a Bellman equation can be
written for it, so RL algorithms can be used to learn it. This also applies to the transition model for
options.
Usually options are learned with provided sub-goals and pseudo-rewards, and good performance
is shown for Atari games, e.g. with hierarchical-DQN (h-DQN) (Kulkarni et al., 2016), and for
MineCraft, e.g., with Tessler et al. (2017). Automatic options discovery receives much atten-
tion recently, e.g., strategic attentive writer (STRAW) (Vezhnevets et al., 2016), feudal network
(FuN) (Vezhnevets et al., 2017), option-critic (Bacon et al., 2017), option discovery with a Lapla-
cian framework (Machado et al., 2017), and, stochastic neural networks (Florensa et al., 2017).
Hierarchical RL follows the general algorithm design principle of divide and conquer, so that hard
goals, e.g. those with sparse long-term rewards are replaced with easy sub-goals, e.g. those with
dense short-term rewards, and RL algorithms, e.g., policy-based or value-based, combined with
representations, are utilized to solve easy sub-goals, and ﬁnally to achieve hard goals.
Watch recent talks on hierarchical RL, e.g., Silver (2017), Precup (2018). See NIPS 2017 workshop
on Hierarchical RL, at https://sites.google.com/view/hrlnips2017 , and videos at
https://goo.gl/h9Mz1a .
We discuss several recent papers in the following. See also Kompella et al. (2017), Le et al. (2018),
Nachum et al. (2018), Peng et al. (2017a), Sharma et al. (2017), Tang et al. (2018a), Tessler et al.
(2017), and Yao et al. (2014).
HIERARCHICAL DQN
Kulkarni et al. (2016) propose hierarchical-DQN (h-DQN) by organizing goal-driven intrinsically
motivated deep RL modules hierarchically to work at different time-scales. h-DQN integrats a top
level action value function and a lower level action value function. The former learns a policy over
intrinsic sub-goals, or options (Sutton et al., 1999). And the latter learns policies over raw actions
to satisfy the objective of each given sub-goal. In particular, h-DQN has a two-stage hierarchy with
a meta-controller and a controller. The meta-controller receives state sand select a goal g. The
controller then selects an action aconditioned on state sand goalg, the goalgdoes not change
until it is achieved or a termination condition is met. The internal critic evaluates if a goal has been
achieved, and produces a reward r(g)to the controller, e.g., a binary internal reward 1 for achieving
the goal, and 0 otherwise. The objectives for the meta-controller and controller are to maximize
cumulative extrinsic and intrinsic rewards, respectively. The authors evaluate h-DQN on a discrete
59