COMPUTER GO
The challenge of solving computer Go comes from not only the gigantic search space of size 250150,
an astronomical number, but also the hardness of position evaluation (M ¨uller, 2002), which was
successfully used in solving many other games, like chess and Backgammon.
AlphaGo (Silver et al., 2016a), a computer Go program, won the human European Go cham-
pion, 5 games to 0, in October 2015, and became the ﬁrst computer Go program to won a hu-
man professional Go player without handicaps on a full-sized 19 19 board. Soon after that
in March 2016, AlphaGo defeated Lee Sedol, an 18-time world champion Go player, 4 games
to 1, making headline news worldwide. This set a landmark in AI. AlphaGo defeated Ke Jie
3:0 in May 2017. AlphaGo Zero (Silver et al., 2017) further improved previous versions by
learning a superhuman computer Go program without human knowledge. Alpha Zero (Silver
et al., 2017) generalized the learning framework in AlphaGo Zero to more domains. See blogs
for AlphaGo at https://deepmind.com/research/alphago/ , and for AlphaGo Zero at
https://deepmind.com/blog/alphago-zero-learning-scratch/ .
Tian and Zhu (2016) also investigate computer Go. See Facebook open source ELF OpenGo,
https://github.com/pytorch/ELF/ , and a blog, https://research.fb.com/
facebook-open-sources-elf-opengo/ .
ALPHA GO: TRAINING PIPELINE AND MCTS
We discuss brieﬂy how AlphaGo works based on Silver et al. (2016a) and Sutton and Barto (2018).
See Sutton and Barto (2018) for an intuitive description of AlphaGo.
AlphaGo is built with techniques of deep convolutional neural networks, supervised learning, rein-
forcement learning, and Monte Carlo tree search (MCTS) (Browne et al., 2012; Gelly and Silver,
2007; Gelly et al., 2012). AlphaGo is composed of two phases: neural network training pipeline
and MCTS. The training pipeline phase includes training a supervised learning (SL) policy network
from expert moves, a fast rollout policy, a RL policy network, and a RL value network.
The SL policy network has convolutional layers, ReLU nonlinearities, and an output softmax layer
representing probability distribution over legal moves. The inputs to the CNN are 19 1948
image stacks, where 19 is the dimension of a Go board and 48 is the number of features. State-
action pairs are sampled from expert moves to train the network with stochastic gradient ascent to
maximize the likelihood of the move selected in a given state. The fast rollout policy uses a linear
softmax with small pattern features.
The RL policy network improves SL policy network, with the same network architecture, and the
weights of SL policy network as initial weights, and policy gradient for training. The reward function
is +1 for winning and -1 for losing in the terminal states, and 0 otherwise. Games are played between
the current policy network and a random, previous iteration of the policy network, to stabilize the
learning and to avoid overﬁtting. Weights are updated by stochastic gradient ascent to maximize the
expected outcome.
The RL value network still has the same network architecture as SL policy network, except the out-
put is a single scalar predicting the value of a position. The value network is learned in a Monte
Carlo policy evaluation approach. To tackle the overﬁtting problem caused by strongly correlated
successive positions in games, data are generated by self-play between the RL policy network and
itself until game termination. The weights are trained by regression on state-outcome pairs, us-
ing stochastic gradient descent to minimize the mean squared error between the prediction and the
corresponding outcome.
In MCTS phase, AlphaGo selects moves by a lookahead search. It builds a partial game tree starting
from the current state, in the following stages: 1) select a promising node to explore further, 2)
expand a leaf node guided by the SL policy network and collected statistics, 3) evaluate a leaf node
with a mixture of the RL value network and the rollout policy, 4) backup evaluations to update the
action values. A move is then selected.
77