Northcutt (2017) present 18 problems, some with solutions, some with ideas.
One problem is representation, which is about how to represent courses as vectors, how to measure
similarity of two courses, videos, and students, how to recommend content to students, and how to
match students with other students, etc.
One approach to obtain representation is to use embeddings, on courses, content, or students. High-
dimensional feature matrices can be used to capture the interactions between courses, content, and
students. Dimension reduction can be done using PCA, SVD, etc. or hidden layers of a neural
network. With such embedded dense low-dimensional representations, we can generate new courses
from existing courses, pair student, make inference, and structure content, etc.
We can employ a recommendation engine for MOOCs using embeddings, with a Siamese neural net-
work architecture, one network to represent students, and another network for content, and produce
representations so that cosine (student;content )measures the goodness of content forstudent .
Northcutt (2017) also discuss the following problems, detect struggling, rampant cheating, stats col-
laboration, how to personalize, independent treatment effect (ITE)/counterfactuals, trajectory pre-
diction, how to order content, adaptive learning, Google Scholar, majority bias in forums, feature
extraction, cognitive state, content likability, points of confusion, cognitive modeling, human intel-
ligence vs. artiﬁcial intelligence, and the next edX. See (Northcutt, 2017) for more details.
There are some recent work in education using RL.
Mandel et al. (2014) propose an ofﬂine policy evaluation method, by combining importance sam-
pling with cross-validation, to investigate generalization of representations. The authors propose
a feature compaction algorithm for high-dimension problems, which beneﬁt from both PCA and
neural networks. Furthermore, the authors apply the method to an educational game, optimizing
engagement by learning concept selection.
Liu et al. (2014) propose UCB-Explore, based on multi-armed bandit algorithm UCB1, to automat-
icaly allocate experimental samples, to balance between learning the effectiveness of each experi-
mental condition and users’ test performances, by explicitly specifying the tradeoff between these
two objectives. The authors compare UCB-Explore with other multi-armed bandit algorithms like
UCB1 and-greedy with simulation on an educational game.
Upadhyay et al. (2018) apply reinforcement learning to marked temporal point processes with an
application in personalized education. See also Li et al. (2018a) for applying RL to temporal point
processes. Oudeyer et al. (2016) discuss theory and applications of intrinsic motivation, curiosity,
and learning in educational technologies.
Watch a video titled Reinforcement Learning with People (Brunskill, 2017). See ACL 2018 Work-
shop on Natural Language Processing Techniques for Educational Applications (NLPTEA 2018)
with a Shared Task for Chinese Grammatical Error Diagnosis (CGED), at https://sites.
google.com/view/nlptea2018/ .
20.3 E NERGY
A smart grid is a power grid utilizing modern information technologies to create an intelligent elec-
tricity delivery network for electricity generation, transmission, distribution, consumption, and con-
trol (Fang et al., 2012). An important aspect is adaptive control (Anderson et al., 2011). Glavic et al.
(2017) review application of RL for electric power system decision and control. See Platt (2017)
for a talk about energy. Here we brieﬂy discuss demand response (Wen et al., 2015; Ruelens et al.,
2016).
Demand response systems motivate users to dynamically adapt electrical demands in response to
changes in grid signals, like electricity price, temperature, and weather, etc. With suitable electricity
prices, load of peak consumption may be rescheduled/lessened, to improve efﬁciency, reduce costs,
and reduce risks. Wen et al. (2015) propose to design a fully automated energy management system
with model-free reinforcement learning, so that it doesn’t need to specify a disutility function to
model users’ dissatisfaction with job rescheduling. The authors decompose the RL formulation
over devices, so that the computational complexity grows linearly with the number of devices, and
conduct simulations using Q-learning. Ruelens et al. (2016) tackle the demand response problem
97