Heaton et al. (2016) introduce deep learning for ﬁnance, in particular, deep portfolios, and argue that
deep learning methods may be more powerful than the current standard methods in ﬁnance., e.g., the
simplistic traditional ﬁnancial economics linear factor models and statistical arbitrage asset manage-
ment techniques. The authors show the power of deep learning with a case study of smart indexing
for the biotechnology IBB index with a four step algorithm: 1) auto-encoding, ﬁnd the market-map
to auto-encode the input variables with itself and to create a more efﬁcient representation of the
input variables; 2) calibrating, ﬁnd the portfolio-map to create a portfolio from the input variables
to approximate an objective; 3) validating, balance the errors in the auto-encoding and calibrating
steps; and 4) verifying, choose market-map and portfolio-map to satisfy the validating step. The
authors make an interesting observation that the univariate activation functions such as ReLU, i.e.,
max(0;x), wherexis a variable, in deep learning can be interpreted as compositions of ﬁnancial
call and put options on linear combination of input assets.
Bao et al. (2017) investigate the problem of stock price forecasting by combining wavelet transforms
(WT), stacked auto-encoders (SAEs) and long-short term memory (LSTM): WT for decomposing
stock price time series to reduce noises, SAEs for generating high-level features for stock price pre-
diction, and LSTM for stock price forecasting by taking the denoised features. The authors evaluate
the performance of the proposed method with six market indices and their corresponding index fu-
tures, together with a buy-and-sell trading strategy, using three performance metrics: Mean absolute
percentage error (MAPE), correlation coefﬁcient (R) and Theil’s inequality coefﬁcient (Theil U),
and show promising results in both predictive accuracy and proﬁtability performance.
19.1 O PTION PRICING
Options are fundamental ﬁnancial instruments, dating back to the ancient time. A challenging prob-
lem is option pricing, especially for American type options, which can be exercised before the
maturity date. For European options, which can only be exercised at the maturity date, prices can
be calculated by the Black-Scholes formula in certain cases. The key to American option pric-
ing (Longstaff and Schwartz, 2001; Tsitsiklis and Van Roy, 2001; Li et al., 2009) is to calculate
the conditional expected value of continuation. This is an optimal stopping problem. Hull (2014)
provides an introduction to options and other derivatives and their pricing methods; and Glasserman
(2004) provides a book length treatment for Monte Carlo methods in ﬁnancial engineering. The
least squares Monte Carlo (LSM) method in Longstaff and Schwartz (2001), following approximate
dynamic programming, is a standard approach in the ﬁnance literature for pricing American options.
19.2 P ORTFOLIO OPTIMIZATION
Mean-variance analysis by Markowitz is a classical approach to portfolio optimization in one pe-
riod (Luenberger, 1997). Dynamic portfolio optimization in multi-period renews its attraction re-
cently (Campbell and Viceira, 2002; Brandt et al., 2005), following the recent empirical evidence
of return predictability (Pastor and Stambaugh, 2009), and with the consideration of practical issues
including parameter and model uncertainty, transaction cost and background risks (Brandt et al.,
2005). Brandt et al. (2005) and Neuneier (1997) deploy the backward dynamic programming ap-
proach in Longstaff and Schwartz (2001) for the dynamic portfolio problem. It is possible to apply
reinforcement learning methods for it.
Moody and Saffell (2001) learns to trade via direct reinforcement, without any forecasting. Deng
et al. (2016) extend it with deep neural networks. It may be beneﬁcial to take advantage of return
predictability in RL methods.
It is critical to control the risk when forming portfolios. Value-at-Risk (VaR) is a popular risk
measure; while conditional VaR (CVaR) has desirable mathematical properties (Hull, 2014). Yu
et al. (2009) provide formulations for VaR and CVaR with relaxed probability distributions by worst-
case analysis. Deep (reinforcement) learning would provide better solutions in some issues in risk
management. The generalization to continuous state and action spaces is an indispensable step for
such methods to be applied to dynamic portfolio optimization.
94