There are new neural network architectures customized for RL problems, e.g., value iteration
networks (VIN) (Tamar et al., 2016), predictron (Silver et al., 2016b), value prediction network
(VPN) (Oh et al., 2017), imagination-augmented agents (IA2) (Weber et al., 2017), TreeQN and
ATreeC (Farquhar et al., 2018), temporal difference models (TDMs) (Pong et al., 2018), MCT-
SnetsGuez et al. (2018), and BBQ-Networks (Lipton et al., 2018). We discuss RL with models in
Chapter 6.
CHALLENGES TO CNN AND RNN
Some recent papers challenge if RNNs are a natural choice for sequence modelling. Bai et al. (2018)
show empirically that CNNs outperform RNNs over a wide range of tasks. See the open source
athttps://github.com/locuslab/TCN . Miller and Hardt (2018) show that feed-forward
networks approximate stable RNNs well, for both learning and inference with gradient descent,
and validate theoretical results with experiments. Vaswani et al. (2017) propose a self-attention
mechanism to replace recurrent and convolutional layers, for sequence transduction problems, like
language modelling and machine translation.
MEMORY
Memory provides long term data storage. LSTM is a classical approach for equipping a neural
network with memory, and its memory is for both storage and computation. Weston et al. (2015)
propose memory networks to combine inference with a long-term memory. Graves et al. (2016)
propose differentiable neural computer (DNC) to solve complex, structured problems. Wayne et al.
(2018) propose memory, RL, and inference network (MERLIN) to deal with partial observabil-
ity. We discuss attention and memory including above papers in Chapter 9. Below we discuss
brieﬂy neural networks equipped with memory to facilitate reasoning, e.g., relational memory core
(RMC) (Santoro et al., 2018), and, compositional attention networks (Hutson, 2018).
GRID-LIKE REPRESENTATION
Banino et al. (2018) study vector-based navigation with grid-like representations. In a process of
vector-based navigation, i.e., planning direct trajectories to goals, animals travel to a remembered
goal, following direct routes by calculating goal-directed vectors with a Euclidean spatial metric pro-
vided by grid cells. Grid cells are also important for integrating self-motion, i.e., path integration.
The authors study path integration with a recurrent network, and ﬁnd emergent grid-like represen-
tations, which help improve performance of navigation with deep RL in challenging environments,
and also help with mammal-like shortcut behaviors. Cueva and Wei (2018) is a concurrent work.
CNNs are popular neural networks for image processing, and induce the representation to achieve
excellent results. CNNs were inspired from visual cortex. A popular representation in NLP is
word2vec (Mikolov et al., 2013; Mikolov et al., 2017), which is inﬂuenced by linguistics, e.g.,
quoting John Rupert Firth, ”You shall know a word by the company it keeps.” The grid cell repre-
sentation, with origin from the brain, boosts performance for navigation tasks.
8.3 K NOWLEDGE AND REASONING
Knowledge and reasoning (Brachman and Levesque, 2004; Russell and Norvig, 2009) are funda-
mental issues in AI. It is thus important to investigate issues about them, e.g., how to represent
knowledge, like the predictive approach with general value function (GVF), or a symbolic approach
with entities, properties and relations, how to incorporate knowledge in the learning system, like an
inductive bias, in particular, using a knowledge base to improve learning tasks (Chen et al., 2018a;
Yang and Mitchell, 2017), and how to design network architectures to help with reasoning, etc.
Bottou (2014) discuss machine learning and machine reasoning, and propose to deﬁne reasoning as
the manipulation of knowledge previously acquired to answer a new question, to cover ﬁrst-order
logical inference, probabilistic inference, and components in a machine learning pipeline. Evans
and Grefenstette (2018) propose a differentiable inductive logic framework to deal with inductive
logic programming (ILP) problems with noisy data. Besold et al. (2017) discuss neural-symbolic
learning and reasoning. There are books about causality (Pearl, 2009; Pearl et al., 2016; Pearl and
49