RELATIONAL RL
Zambaldi et al. (2018) propose to improve sample efﬁciency, generalization capacity, and inter-
pretability of deep RL with relational reinforcement learning (D ˇzeroski et al., 2001). The pro-
posed network architecture consists of FC, CNNs, and a relational module, which uses self-
attention (Vaswani et al., 2017) to reason about interactions between entities, and to facilitate model-
free policy optimization. Zambaldi et al. (2018) construct a navigation and planning task, BOX-
World, to test the capacity of relational reasoning, and show good performance. Zambaldi et al.
(2018) also experiment on StarCraft II mini-games in the the StarCraft II Learning Environment
(SC2LE) (Vinyals et al., 2017), and achieve good performance on six mini-games. Note that Sun
et al. (2018) and Pang et al. (2018) have beaten full-game built-in AI in StarCraft II.
Wang et al. (2018b) propose NerveNet, resembling the neural nervous system to a graph, to
learn structured policy for continuous control. A policy is deﬁned using the graph neural net-
works (GNN) (Scarselli et al., 2009), in which, information is propagated over the agent struc-
ture, and actions are predicted for different parts of the agent. The authors evaluate NerveNet in
OpenAI Gym environment, and on transfer learning and multi-task learning tasks. See http:
//www.cs.toronto.edu/ ˜tingwuwang/nervenet.html for open source and demo.
Keramati et al. (2018) propose strategic object oriented RL (SOORL) for model-learning with auto-
matic model selection, and planning with strategic exploration. The authors achieve positive reward
in Pitfall!, a hard Atari game. However, we note that, concurrently, Aytar et al. (2018) achieve much
better results in Pitfall! and two other hard Atari games with an approach of self-supervision+RL,
albeit relational and object oriented mechanisms are worth more efforts.
Yang et al. (2018) propose planning-execution-observation-RL (PEORL) to integrate hierarchical
RL with symbolic planning for dynamic, uncertain environments.
Zambaldi et al. (2018) utilize pixel feature vectors resulting from CNNs as entities, a problem agnos-
tic approach. Keramati et al. (2018) utilize bounding boxes to detect object. Yang et al. (2018) work
with manually crafted symbolic knowledge. The performance would be further improved with an
advanced reasoning technique about images to ﬁnd entities and relations, e.g., Chen et al. (2018a),
Santoro et al. (2017), Santoro et al. (2018), or, Battaglia et al. (2016), etc.
67