4 P OLICY
A policy maps a state to an action, or, a distribution over actions, and policy optimization is to ﬁnd an
optimal mapping. Value-based methods optimize value functions ﬁrst, then derive optimal policies.
Policy-based methods directly optimize an objective function, usually cumulative rewards.
REINFORCE (Williams, 1992) is a classical policy gradient method, with a Monte Carlo approach
to estimate policy gradients. Policy gradient methods can stay stable when combined with function
approximation, under some conditions. However, sample inefﬁciency is a major issue; and Monte
Carlo sampling with rollouts usually results in high variance in policy gradient estimates.
Incorporating a baseline or critic can help reduce variance. In actor-critic algorithms (Barto et al.,
1983; Konda and Tsitsiklis, 2003), the critic updates action value function parameters, the actor
updates policy parameters, in the direction suggested by the critic, and the value function can help
reduce the variance of policy parameter estimates, by replacing rollout estimates, with the possi-
bility of encountering a higher bias. We discuss policy gradient, actor critic, and REINFORCE in
Section 2.4.10.
On-policy methods, like TD learning, are usually sample inefﬁcient by using data only once, with
estimations based on trajectories from the current policy. Off-policy methods, like Q-learning, can
learn from any trajectories from any policies, e.g., expert demonstrations, from the same environ-
ment. Recently, experience replay regains popularity after DQN, as we discuss in Chapter 3. This
usually makes off-policy methods more sample efﬁcient than on-policy methods. Importance sam-
pling is a variance reduction technique in Monte Carlo methods. Precup et al. (2001) study off-policy
TD learning with importance sampling. Degris et al. (2012) propose off-policy actor-critic with im-
portance sampling. Liu et al. (2018b) propose an off-policy estimation method with importance
sampling to avoid the exploding variance issue.
Kakade (2002) introduce natural policy gradient to improve stability and convergence speed of
policy based methods. This leads to trust region methods, like Trust Region Policy Optimization
(TRPO) (Schulman et al., 2015), and Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) (Schulman et al., 2017b),
two on-policy methods. Trust-PCL (Nachum et al., 2018) is an off-policy trust region method.
It is desirable to improve data efﬁciency of policy gradient, while keeping its stability and unbi-
asedness. Asynchronous advantage actor-critic (A3C) (Mnih et al., 2016) integrates policy gradient
with on-line critic. There are recent work for policy gradient with off-policy critic, like deep de-
terministic policy gradient (DDPG) (Lillicrap et al., 2016), and policy gradient with Q-learning
(PGQL) (O’Donoghue et al., 2017). Interpolated policy gradient (Gu et al., 2017), and Q-Prop (Gu
et al., 2017b) are proposed to combine stability of trust region methods with off-policy sample
efﬁciency. However, the deadly triad issue results from the combination off-policy, function ap-
proximation, and bootstrapping, so that instability and divergence may occur (Sutton and Barto,
2018).
There are efforts to establish theoretical guarantees, tackling the deadly triad, e.g., Retrace (Munos
et al., 2016), path consistency learning (PCL) (Nachum et al., 2017), Trust-PCL (Nachum et al.,
2018), and SBEED (Dai et al., 2018b), etc.
Maximum entropy methods integrate policy gradient with off-policy learning and attempt to bridge
the gap between value- and policy-based methods, e.g., Ziebart et al. (2008), Ziebart et al. (2010),
G-learning (Fox et al., 2016), soft Q-learning (Haarnoja et al., 2017), and several mentioned above,
including PGQL, PCL, and Trust-PCL.
In conventional RL, we are content with deterministic policies (Sutton and Barto, 2018). However,
stochastic policies are desirable sometimes, for reasons like, partial observable environments, han-
dling uncertainty (Ziebart et al., 2008; 2010), convergence and computation efﬁciency (Gu et al.,
2017b), exploration and compositionality (Haarnoja et al., 2017), and optimal solutions for some
games like rock-paper-scissors, etc. Policy gradient methods usually obtain stochastic policies. So
are maximum entropy regularized methods.
Here we focus on model-free policy optimization algorithms. We will discuss model-based ones,
like stochastic value gradients (SVG) (Heess et al., 2015), and normalized advantage functions
(NAF) (Gu et al., 2016), in Chapter 6. we discuss guided policy search (GPS) (Levine et al., 2016)
in Chapter 16.
30