6 M ODEL
A model is an agent’s representation of the environment, including the state transition model and the
reward model. Usually we assume the reward model is known. We discuss how to handle unknown
reward models in Chapter 5.
Model-free RL approaches handle unknown dynamical systems, which usually requires large num-
ber of samples. This may work well for problems with good simulators to sample data, e.g., Atari
games and the game of Go. However, this may be costly or prohibitive for real physical systems.
Model-based RL approaches learn value function and/or policy in a data-efﬁcient way, however, they
may suffer from issues of model identiﬁcation, so that the estimated models may not be accurate,
and the performance is limited by the estimated model. Planning constructs a value function or a
policy usually with a model.
Combining model-free RL with on-line planning can improve value function estimation. Sutton
(1990) proposes Dyna to integrate learning and planning, by learning from both real experiences
and simulated trajectories from a learned model.
Monte Carlo tree search (MCTS) (Browne et al., 2012; Gelly and Silver, 2007; Gelly et al., 2012)
and upper conﬁdence bounds (UCB) (Auer, 2002) applied to trees (UCT) (Kocsis and Szepesv ´ari,
2006) are important techniques for planning. A typical MCTS builds a partial tree starting from
the current state, in the following stages: 1) select a promising node to explore further, 2) expand a
leaf node and collect statistics, 3) evaluate a leaf node, e.g., by a rollout policy, or some evaluation
function, 4) backup evaluations to update the action values. An action is then selected. A prominent
example is AlphaGo (Silver et al., 2016a; 2017) as we will discuss in Section 15.1. Sun et al. (2018)
study dual policy iteration.
Several papers design new deep neural networks architectures for RL problems, e.g., value iteration
networks (VIN), predictron, value prediction network (VPN), TreeQN and ATreeC, imagination-
augmented agents (IA2), temporal difference models (TDMs), MCTSnets, which we will discuss
below, as well as dueling network as we discuss in Chapter 3. VIN, predictron, and, MCTSnets
follow the techniques of learning to learn, which we discuss in Chapter 14.
R-MAX (Brafman and Tennenholtz, 2002) and E3(Kearns and Singh, 2002) achieve guaranteed ef-
ﬁciency for tabular cases. Li et al. (2011) present the ”know what it knows” framework. Deisenroth
and Rasmussen (2011) present probabilistic inference for learning control (PILCO), and McAllis-
ter and Rasmussen (2017) extend PILCO to POMDPs. See papers about model predictive con-
trol (MPC) (Amos et al., 2018; Finn and Levine, 2015; Lenz et al., 2015). See more papers, e.g.,
Berkenkamp et al. (2017), Buckman et al. (2018), Chebotar et al. (2017), Chua et al. (2018), de Avila
Belbute-Peres et al. (2018), Farahmand (2018), Ha and Schmidhuber (2018), Haber et al. (2018),
Henaff et al. (2017), Watter et al. (2015). We will discuss guided policy search (GPS) (Levine et al.,
2016), and, Chebotar et al. (2017) in Chapter 16
Sutton (2018) discusses that ”planning with a learned model” means ”Intelligence is just knowing
a lot about the world, being able to use that knowledge ﬂexibly to achieve goals”, and, mentions
that ”planningreasoningthought”, and ”world model knowledgepropositionsfacts”.
He quotes from Yann LeCun, ”obstacles to AI: learning models of the world, learning to reason and
plan”, and ”predictive learning unsupervised learning model-based RL”. He also quotes from
Yoshua Bengio’s most important next step in AI, ”learning how the world ticks”, and ”predictive,
causal, explanatory models with latent variables ...”. He lists the following as some answers to
the problem of planning with a learned model: function approximation, off-policy learning, Dyna,
linear Dyna, non-linear Dyna, GVFs, Horde, options, option models, prioritized sweeping, intrinsic
motivation, curiosity, recognizers, predictive state representations, TD networks (Sutton and Tanner,
2004), TD networks with options (Sutton et al., 2005), and, propagation with valuableness. LeCun
(2018) also talks about world model, highlighting the role of self-supervised learning.
Geffner (2018) discusses model-free learners and model-based solvers, and planners as particular
solvers. Learners are able to infer behaviour and functions from experience and data, solvers are able
to address well-deﬁned but intractable models like classical planning and POMDPs, and, planners
are particular solvers for models with goal-directed behaviours. Geffner (2018) makes connections
between model-free learners vs. model-based solvers, and the two systems in current theories of
39