on dialogue systems; Neubig (2017) for a tutorial on neural machine translation and sequence-to-
sequence models, Agarwal et al. (2018) for a tutorial on end to-end goal-oriented question answering
systems, and, Monroe (2017) for a gentle introduction to translation.
See three ACL 2018 tutorials: Wang et al. (2018d) for deep reinforcement learning for NLP, Gao
et al. (2018b) for neural approaches to conversational AI (see also Gao et al. (2018a)), and, Anderson
et al. (2018) for connecting language and vision to actions.
See several workshops: NIPS Workshop on Conversational AI: Today’s Practice and
Tomorrow’s Potential, in 2018 at http://alborz-geramifard.com/workshops/
nips18-Conversational-AI/ , and, in 2017 at http://alborz-geramifard.com/
workshops/nips17-Conversational-AI/ ; NIPS 2018 Workshop on Wordplay: Re-
inforcement and Language Learning in Text-based Games; NIPS 2016 Workshop on End-to-
end Learning for Speech and Audio Processing, at https://sites.google.com/site/
nips2016endtoendspeechaudio/ ; and, NIPS 2015 Workshop on Machine Learning for
Spoken Language Understanding and Interactions, at http://slunips2015.wixsite.com/
slunips2015 .
17.1 S EQUENCE GENERATION
A sequence may take the form of text, music, and molecule, etc. Sequence generation techniques
may be applicable to multiple domains, e.g., Jaques et al. (2017) experiment with musical melody
and computational molecular generation. Here we focus on text generation, which is the basis
for many NLP problems, like conversational response generation, machine translation, abstractive
summarization, etc.
Text generation models are usually based on n-gram, feed-forward neural networks, or recurrent
neural networks, trained to predict next word given the previous ground truth words as inputs; then
in testing, the trained models are used to generate a sequence word by word, using the generated
words as inputs. The errors will accumulate on the way, causing the exposure bias issue. Moreover,
these models are trained with word level losses, e.g., cross entropy, to maximize the probability of
next word; however, the models are evaluated on different metrics like BLEU.
Ranzato et al. (2016) propose mixed incremental cross-entropy reinforce (MIXER) for sequence
prediction, with incremental learning and a loss function combining both REINFORCE and cross-
entropy. MIXER is a sequence level training algorithm, aligning training and testing objective, such
as BLEU, rather than predicting the next word as in previous papers.
Bahdanau et al. (2017) propose an actor-critic algorithm for sequence prediction, to improve Ran-
zato et al. (2016). The authors utilize a critic network to predict the value of a token, i.e., the
expected score following the sequence prediction policy, deﬁned by an actor network, trained by the
predicted value of tokens. Some techniques are deployed to improve performance: SARSA rather
than Monter-Carlo method to lessen the variance in estimating value functions; target network for
stability; sampling prediction from a delayed actor whose weights are updated more slowly than the
actor to be trained, to avoid the feedback loop when actor and critic need to be trained based on the
output of each other; and, reward shaping to avoid the issue of sparse training signal.
Yu et al. (2017) propose SeqGAN, sequence generative adversarial nets with policy gradient, inte-
grating the adversarial scheme in Goodfellow et al. (2014).
17.2 M ACHINE TRANSLATION
Neural machine translation (Kalchbrenner and Blunsom, 2013; Cho et al., 2014; Sutskever et al.,
2014; Bahdanau et al., 2015) utilizes end-to-end deep learning for machine translation, and becomes
dominant, against the traditional statistical machine translation techniques. In sequence to sequence
model (Cho et al., 2014; Sutskever et al., 2014), an input sequence of symbol representation is
encoded to a ﬁx-length vector, which is then decoded to symbols one by one, in an auto-regressive
way, using symbols generated previously as additional input. Bahdanau et al. (2015) introduce a
soft-attention technique to address the issues with encoding the whole sentence into a ﬁx-length
vector.
87