have weights on links between units from layer to layer. After computations ﬂow forward from input
to output, at the output layer and each hidden layer, we can compute error derivatives backward, and
backpropagate gradients towards the input layer, so that weights can be updated to optimize some
loss function.
A feedforward deep neural network or multilayer perceptron (MLP) is to map a set of input values
to output values with a mathematical function formed by composing many simpler functions at
each layer. A convolutional neural network (CNN) is a feedforward deep neural network, with
convolutional layers, pooling layers, and, fully connected layers. CNNs are designed to process data
with multiple arrays, e.g., colour image, language, audio spectrogram, and video, beneﬁting from
the properties of such signals: local connections, shared weights, pooling, and, the use of many
layers, and are inspired by simple cells and complex cells in visual neuroscience (LeCun et al.,
2015). ResNets (He et al., 2016d) are designed to ease the training of very deep neural networks
by adding shortcut connections to learn residual functions with reference to the layer inputs. A
recurrent neural network (RNN) is often used to process sequential inputs like speech and language,
element by element, with hidden units to store history of past elements. A RNN can be seen as a
multilayer neural network with all layers sharing the same weights, when being unfolded in time of
forward computation. It is hard for RNN to store information for very long time and the gradient
may vanish. Long short term memory networks (LSTM) (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber, 1997) and
gated recurrent unit (GRU) (Chung et al., 2014) are proposed to address such issues, with gating
mechanisms to manipulate information through recurrent cells. Gradient backpropagation or its
variants can be used for training all deep neural networks mentioned above.
Dropout (Srivastava et al., 2014) is a regularization strategy to train an ensemble of sub-networks
by removing non-output units randomly from the original network. Batch normalization (Ioffe and
Szegedy, 2015; Santurkar et al., 2018) and layer normalization (Ba et al., 2016) are designed to
improve training efﬁciency.
Deep neural networks learn representations automatically from raw inputs to recover the compo-
sitional hierarchies in many natural signals, i.e., higher-level features are composed of lower-level
ones, e.g., in images, the hierarch of objects, parts, motifs, and local combinations of edges. Dis-
tributed representation is a central idea in deep learning, which implies that many features may
represent each input, and each feature may represent many inputs. The exponential advantages of
deep, distributed representations combat the exponential challenges of the curse of dimensionality.
The notion of end-to-end training refers to that a learning model uses raw inputs, usually without
manual feature engineering, to generate outputs, e.g., AlexNet (Krizhevsky et al., 2012) with raw
pixels for image classiﬁcation, Graves et al. (2013) with a Fourier transformation of audio data for
speech recognition; Seq2Seq (Sutskever et al., 2014) with raw sentences for machine translation,
and DQN (Mnih et al., 2015) with raw pixels and score to play games.
There are efforts to design new neural network architectures, like capsules (Sabour et al., 2017;
Hinton et al., 2018). There are also efforts to design deep machine learning architectures without
neural networks, like DeepForest (Zhou and Feng, 2017; Feng and Zhou, 2017).
2.4 R EINFORCEMENT LEARNING
We provide background of reinforcement learning brieﬂy in this section, as a mini tutorial. It is
essential to have a good understanding of reinforcement learning, for a good understanding of deep
reinforcement learning. Deep RL is a particular type of RL, with deep neural networks for state
representation and/or function approximation for value function, policy, transition model, or reward
function. Silver (2015) is a clear introductory material for reinforcement learning.
Sutton and Barto (2018) present Bibliographical and Historical Remarks at the end of each chapter.
Russell and Norvig (2009) present Bibliographical and Historical Notes in Chapter 21 Reinforce-
ment Learning. See Barto (2018) for a talk about a brief history of reinforcement learning.
We ﬁrst explain some terms in RL parlance. These terms would become clearer after reading the
rest of this chapter. We put them collectively here to make it convenient for readers to check them.
The prediction problem, or policy evaluation, is to compute the state or action value function for a
policy. The control problem is to ﬁnd the optimal policy. Planning constructs a value function or a
policy with a model.
12