2 B ACKGROUND
In this chapter, we brieﬂy introduce concepts and fundamentals in artiﬁcial intelligence (Russell
and Norvig, 2009), machine learning, deep learning (Goodfellow et al., 2016), and, reinforcement
learning (Sutton and Barto, 2018).
We do not give detailed background introduction for artiﬁcial intelligence, machine learning and
deep learning; these are too broad to discuss in details here. Instead, we recommend the following
recent Nature/Science survey papers: Jordan and Mitchell (2015) for machine learning, and LeCun
et al. (2015) for deep learning. For reinforcement learning, we cover some basics as a mini tutorial,
and recommend the textbook, Sutton and Barto (2018), two courses, RL course by David Silver at
UCL (Silver, 2015) and Deep RL course by Sergey Levin at UC Berkeley (Levine, 2018), and a
recent Nature survey paper (Littman, 2015). We present some resources for deep RL in Section 2.5.
In Figure 2, we illustrate relationship among several concepts in AI and machine learning. Deep re-
inforcement learning, as the name indicates, is at the intersection of deep learning and reinforcement
learning. We usually categorize machine learning as supervised learning, unsupervised learning, and
reinforcement learning. Deep learning can work with/as supervised learning, unsupervised learning,
reinforcement learning, and other machine learning approaches.3Deep learning is part of machine
learning, which is part of AI. Note that all these ﬁelds are evolving, e.g., deep learning and deep
reinforcement learning are addressing classical AI problems, like logic, reasoning, and knowledge
representation. Reinforcement learning can be important for all AI problems, as quoted from Russell
and Norvig (2009), ”reinforcement learning might be considered to encompass all of AI: an agent
is placed in an environment and must learn to behave successfully therein”, and, ”reinforcement
learning can be viewed as a microcosm for the entire AI problem”.
2.1 A RTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
Artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) is a very broad area. Even an authoritative AI textbook like Russell and
Norvig (2009) does not give a precise deﬁnition. Russell and Norvig (2009) discuss deﬁnitions of
AI from four perspectives in two comparisons: 1) thought process and reasoning vs. behaviour, and,
2) success in terms of ﬁdelity to human performance vs. rationality, an ideal performance measure.
We follow the discussions of Russell and Norvig (2009), list four ways to deﬁne AI, quoting directly
from Russell and Norvig (2009).
Deﬁnition 1, ”acting humanly”, follows the Turing Test approach. ”The art of creating machines
that perform functions that require intelligence when performed by people.” (Kurzweil, 1992) ”The
study of how to make computers do things at which, at the moment, people are better.” (Rich and
Knight, 1991)
A computer passes a Turing Test, if a human interrogator can not tell if the written responses to
some written question are from a computer or a human. The computer needs the following capa-
bilities: natural language processing (NLP) for successful communication in English, knowledge
representation for storage of what it knows or hears, automated reasoning for answering questions
and drawing new conclusions from the stored information, and, machine learning for adaptation to
new scenarios and detection and extrapolation of patterns. In a total Turing Test, video signals are
involved, so that a computer needs more capabilities, computer vision for object perception, and,
robotics for object manipulation and motion control. AI researchers have been devoting most efforts
to the underlying principles of intelligence, mostly covered by the above six disciplines, and less on
passing the Turing Test, since, duplicating an exemplar is usually not the goal, e.g., an airplane may
not simply imitate a bird.
Deﬁnition 2, ”thinking humanly”, follows the cognitive modeling approach. ”The exciting new
effort to make computers think ... machines with minds, in the full and literal sense.” (Haugeland,
3Machine learning includes many approaches: decision tree learning, association rule learning, artiﬁcial
neural networks, inductive logic programming, support vector machines, clustering, Bayesian networks, rein-
forcement learning, representation learning, similarity and metric learning, sparse dictionary learning, genetic
algorithms, and, rule-based machine learning, according to Wikipedia, https://en.wikipedia.org/
wiki/Machine_learning . Also check textbooks like Russell and Norvig (2009), Mitchell (1997), and
Zhou (2016).
8