motivations, one for model uncertainty, and another for acquiring novel experiences new to the
model. The authors conduct empirical study on a simulated domain and a real world robot and show
good results.
Leonetti et al. (2016) propose domain approximation for reinforcement learning (DARLING), taking
advantage of both RL and planning, so that the agent can adapt to the environment, and the agent’s
behaviour is constrained to reasonable choices. The authors perform evaluation on a service robot
for tasks in an ofﬁce building.
PLANNING
We discuss several recent papers about planning.
Guez et al. (2018) propose to learn to search with MCTSnets, a neural network architecture that
incorporates simulation-based search, using a vector embedding for expansion, evaluation, and
backup. The authors propose to jointly optimize in MCTSnets a simulation policy for where to
traverse in the simulation, an evaluation network for what to evaluate in the reached states, and a
backup network for how to backup evaluations, end-to-end with a gradient-based approach. The
authors experiment MCTSnets with a classical planning problem Sokoban.
Tamar et al. (2016) introduce value iteration networks (VIN), a fully differentiable CNN planning
module to approximate the value iteration algorithm, to learn to plan, e.g, policies in RL. In contrast
to conventional planning, VIN is model-free, where reward and transition probability are part of the
neural network to be learned. VIN can be trained end-to-end with backpropagation. VIN can gen-
eralize in a diverse set of tasks: simple gridworlds, Mars Rover Navigation, continuous control and
WebNav Challenge for Wikipedia links navigation (Nogueira and Cho, 2016). VIN plans via value
iteration over the full state space, and with local transition dynamics for states, e.g., 2D domains,
which limits applicability of VIN. Lee et al. (2018) propose gated path planning networks to extend
VIN.
Silver et al. (2016b) propose the predictron to integrate learning and planning into one end-to-end
training procedure with raw input in Markov reward process (MRP), which can be regarded as
Markov decision process without actions. Predictron rolls multiple planning steps of an abstract
model represented by an MRP for value prediction; in each step, predictron applies the model to
an internal state, and generates a next state, reward, discount, and value estimate. The predictron
focuses on evaluation tasks in uncontrolled environments; however, it can be used as Q-network,
e.g., in DQN, for control tasks.
Silver et al. (2012) propose temporal difference search (TD search) to combine TD learning with
simulation based search. TD search updates value function from simulated experience, and general-
izes among states using value function approximation and bootstrapping. Xiao et al. (2018) propose
memory-augmented MCTS. Srinivas et al. (2018) propose universal planning networks.
41