On-policy methods evaluate or improve the behaviour policy, e.g., SARSA ﬁts the action-value
function to the current policy, i.e., SARSA evaluates the policy based on samples from the same
policy, then reﬁnes the policy greedily with respect to action values. In off-policy methods, an
agent learns an optimal value function/policy, maybe following an unrelated behaviour policy. For
instance, Q-learning attempts to ﬁnd action values for the optimal policy directly, not necessarily
ﬁtting to the policy generating the data, i.e., the policy Q-learning obtains is usually different from
the policy that generates the samples. The notion of on-policy and off-policy can be understood as
same-policy and different-policy.
The exploration vs exploitation dilemma is about the agent needs to exploit the currently best action
to maximize rewards greedily, yet it has to explore the environment to ﬁnd better actions, when the
policy is not optimal yet, or the system is non-stationary.
In model-free methods, the agent learns with trail-and-error from experience directly; the model,
i.e., for state transition and reward, is not known. RL methods that use models are model-based
methods; the model may be given, e.g. in the game of computer Go, or learned from experience.
In an online mode, training algorithms are executed on data acquired in sequence. In an ofﬂine
mode, or a batch mode, models are trained on the entire data set.
With bootstrapping, an estimate of state or action value is updated from subsequent estimates.
2.4.1 P ROBLEM SETUP
An RL agent interacts with an environment over time. At each time step t, the agent receives a state
stin a state spaceS, and selects an action atfrom an action space A, following a policy (atjst),
which is the agent’s behavior, i.e., a mapping from state stto actionsat. The agent receives a scalar
rewardrt, and transitions to the next state st+1, according to the environment dynamics, or model,
for reward function R(s;a), and, state transition probability P(st+1jst;at), respectively. In an
episodic problem, this process continues until the agent reaches a terminal state and then it restarts.
The return is the discounted, accumulated reward with the discount factor 
2(0;1],
Rt=1X
k=0
krt+k: (4)
The agent aims to maximize the expectation of such long term return from each state. The problem
is set up in discrete state and action spaces. It is not hard to extend it to continuous spaces. In
partially observable environments, an agent can not observe states fully, but has observations.
When an RL problem satisﬁes the Markov property, i.e., the future depends only on the current state
and action, but not on the past, it is formulated as a Markov decision process (MDP), deﬁned by
the 5-tuple (S;A;P;R;
). When the system model is available, we use dynamic programming
methods: policy evaluation to calculate value/action value function for a policy, value iteration and
policy iteration for ﬁnding an optimal policy. When there is no model, we resort to RL methods. RL
methods also work when the model is available. An RL environment can be a multi-armed bandit,
an MDP, a partially observable MDP (POMDP), a game, etc.
2.4.2 V ALUE FUNCTION
A value function is a prediction of the expected, accumulative, discounted, future reward, measuring
how good each state, or state-action pair, is. The state value,
v(s) =E[Rtjst=s];where,Rt=1X
k=0
krt+k; (5)
is the expected return for following policy from states. The action value,
q(s;a) =E[Rtjst=s;at=a]; (6)
is the expected return for selecting action ain statesand then following policy . Value function
v(s)decomposes into the Bellman equation:
v(s) =X
a(ajs)X
s0;rp(s0;rjs;a)[r+
v(s0)]: (7)
13