See also Amin et al. (2017), Huang et al. (2018), Leike et al. (2018), Merel et al. (2017), Stadie et al.
(2017), Su et al. (2016), Wang et al. (2017), and, Zheng et al. (2018b).
We discuss robotics with imitation learning in Section 16.2, including Duan et al. (2017); Finn et al.
(2017c); Yu et al. (2018); Finn et al. (2016b). Hu et al. (2018d) leverage IRL techniques to learn
knowledge constraints in deep generative models.
REWARD LEARNING
Hadﬁeld-Menell et al. (2016) observe ﬂaws with IRL: a robot may take a human’s reward function
as its own, e.g., a robot may learn to drink coffee, rather than learn to cook coffee; and, by assuming
optimal demonstrations which achieve a task efﬁciently, a robot may miss chances to learn useful
behaviours, e.g., a robot learns to cook coffee by passive observing would miss chances to learn
many useful skills during the process of cooking coffee by active teaching and learning.
The authors then propose a cooperative inverse reinforcement learning (CIRL) game for the value
alignment problem. CIRL is a two-player game of partial information, with a human, knowing the
reward function, a robot, not knowing it, and the robot’s payoff is human’s reward. An optimal
solution to CIRL maximizes the human reward, and may involve active teaching by the human
and active learning by the robot. The authors reduce ﬁnding an optimal policy pair for human and
robot to the solution of a single agent POMDP problem, prove that optimality in isolation, like
apprenticeship learning and inverse reinforcement learning, is suboptimal in CIRL, and present an
approximate algorithm to solve CIRL.
Hadﬁeld-Menell et al. (2017) introduce inverse reward design (IRD), to infer the true reward func-
tion, based on a designed reward function, an intended decision problem, e.g., an MDP, and a set
of possible reward functions. The authors propose approximate algorithms to solve the IRD prob-
lem, and experiment with the risk-averse behaviour derived from planning with the resulting reward
function. Experiments show that IRD reduces chances of undesirable behaviours like misspeciﬁed
reward functions and reward hacking.
Christiano et al. (2017) propose to learn a reward function based on human preferences by compar-
ing pairs of trajectory segments. The proposed method maintains a policy and an estimated reward
function, approximated by deep neural networks. The networks are updated asynchronously with
three processes iteratively: 1) produce trajectories with the current policy, and the policy is opti-
mized with a traditional RL method, 2) select pairs of segments from trajectories, obtain human
preferences, and, 3) optimize the reward function with supervised learning based on human prefer-
ences. Experiments show the proposed method can solve complex RL problems like Atari games
and simulated robot locomotion.
LEARNING FROM DEMONSTRATION
Here we discuss several recent papers without reward learning.
We ﬁrst discuss deep Q-learning from demonstrations. Hester et al. (2018) propose deep Q-learning
from demonstrations (DQfD) to attempt to accelerate learning by leveraging demonstration data, us-
ing a combination of temporal difference (TD), supervised, and regularized losses. In DQfQ, reward
signal is not available for demonstration data; however, it is available in Q-learning. The supervised
large margin classiﬁcation loss enables the policy derived from the learned value function to imitate
the demonstrator; the TD loss enables the validity of value function according to the Bellman equa-
tion and its further use for learning with RL; the regularization loss function on network weights and
biases prevents overﬁtting on small demonstration dataset. In the pre-training phase, DQfD trains
only on demonstration data, to obtain a policy imitating the demonstrator and a value function for
continual RL learning. After that, DQfD self-generates samples, and mixes them with demonstra-
tion data according to certain proportion to obtain training data. Experiments on Atari games show
DQfD in general has better initial performance, more average rewards, and learns faster than DQN.
In AlphaGo (Silver et al., 2016a), as we discuss in Section 15.1, the supervised learning policy
network is learned from expert moves as learning from demonstration; the results initialize the RL
policy network. See also Kim et al. (2014); P ´erez-D’Arpino and Shah (2017); Ve ˇcer´ık et al. (2017).
37