sample complexity”, and experiment with several control tasks. SBEED can be viewed as a de-
biased version of PCL and generalizes PCL.
RECENT WORK
Gu et al. (2017b) propose Q-Prop to take advantage of the stability of policy gradient and the sample
efﬁciency of off-policy learning. Q-Prop utilizes a Taylor expansion of the off-policy critic as a
control variate, which gives an analytical gradient term through critic, and a Monte Carlo policy
gradient term.
O’Donoghue et al. (2017) propose PGQL to combine policy gradient with off-policy Q-learning, to
beneﬁt from experience replay. The authors also show that action value ﬁtting techniques and actor-
critic methods are equivalent, and interprete regularized policy gradient techniques as advantage
function learning algorithms.
Gu et al. (2017) show that the interpolation of off-policy updates with value function estimation and
on-policy policy gradient updates can satisfy performance guarantee. The authors employ control
variate methods for analysis, and design a family of policy gradient algorithms, with several recent
ones as special cases, including Q-Prop, PGQL, and ACER (Wang et al., 2017c). The author study
the correspondence between the empirical performance and the degree of mixture of off-policy gra-
dient estimates with on-policy samples, on several continuous tasks.
4.5 B ENCHMARK RESULTS
Duan et al. (2016) present a benchmark study for continuous control tasks, including classic
tasks like cart-pole, tasks with very large state and action spaces such as 3D humanoid locomo-
tion and tasks with partial observations, and tasks with hierarchical structure. The authors im-
plement and compare various algorithms, including batch algorithms: REINFORCE, Truncated
Natural Policy Gradient (TNPG), Reward-Weighted Regression (RWR), Relative Entropy Policy
Search (REPS), Trust Region Policy Optimization (TRPO), Cross Entropy Method (CEM), Co-
variance Matrix Adaption Evolution Strategy (CMA-ES); and online algorithms: Deep Determin-
istic Policy Gradient (DDPG); and recurrent variants of batch algorithms. See the open source at
https://github.com/rllab/rllab .
Henderson et al. (2018) investigate reproducibility, experimental techniques, and reporting proce-
dures for deep RL. The authors show that hyperparameters, including network architecture and
reward scale, random seeds and trials, environments (like Hopper or HalfCheetah etc. in OpenAI
Baseline), and codebases inﬂuenced experimental results. This causes difﬁculties for reproducing
deep RL results.
Tassa et al. (2018) present the DeepMind Control Suite, a set of continuous tasks, implemented in
Python, based on the MuJoCo physics engine. Tassa et al. (2018) include benchmarks for A3C,
DDPG, and distributed distributional deterministic policy gradients (D4PG) (Barth-Maron et al.,
2018). The open source is at, https://github.com/deepmind/dm_control , and a video
showing the tasks is at, https://youtu.be/rAai4QzcYbs .
35