Busoniu et al. (2008) and Ghavamzadeh et al. (2006) are surveys for multi-agent RL. Parkes and
Wellman (2015) is a survey about economic reasoning and AI.
In the following, we discuss centralized training for decentralized execution, several issues in game
theory, and games.
CENTRALIZED TRAINING FOR DECENTRALIZED EXECUTION
A centralized critic can learn from all available state information conditioned on joint actions, and
each agent learns its policy from its own observation action history. The centralized critic is only
used during learning, and only the decentralized actor is needed during execution. In the follow-
ing, several recently propose approaches use StarCraft as the experimental testbed, e.g., Peng et al.
(2017b), Foerster et al. (2018a), and Rashid et al. (2018).
Foerster et al. (2018a) propose the counterfactual multi-agent (COMA) actor-critic method. In
COMA, policies are optimized with decentralized actors, and Q-function is estimated with a cen-
tralized critic, using a counterfactual baseline to marginalize out one agent’s action, and ﬁxing other
agents’ actions, for the purpose of multi-agent credit assignment.
Some papers propose communication mechanisms in MARL (Foerster et al., 2016; Sukhbaatar et al.,
2016). Peng et al. (2017b) require communication.
Peng et al. (2017b) propose a multiagent actor-critic framework, with a bidirectionally-coordinated
network to form coordination among multiple agents in a team, deploying the concept of dynamic
grouping and parameter sharing for better scalability. In the testbed of StarCraft, without human
demonstration or labelled data as supervision, the proposed approach learns strategies for coordi-
nation similar to the level of experienced human players, like move without collision, hit and run,
cover attack, and focus ﬁre without overkill.
It is desirable to design an algorithm between the two extremes of independent RL and fully central-
ized RL approaches. One way is to decompose Q function. Sunehag et al. (2017) and Rashid et al.
(2018) fall into this category.
Sunehag et al. (2017) propose value-decomposition networks (VDN) to represent the centralized
action value function Q as a sum of value functions of individual agents. In VDN, each agent trains
its value function based on its observations and actions, and a decentralized policy is derived from
its action value function.
Rashid et al. (2018) propose QMIX, so that each agent network represents an individual action
value function, and a mixing network combines them into a centralized action value function, with
a non-linear approach, in contrast to the simple sum in VDN (Sunehag et al., 2017). Such factored
representation allows complex centralized action value function, extraction of decentralized policies
with linear time individual argmax operations, and scalability.
ISSUES IN GAME THEORY
Heinrich and Silver (2016) propose neural ﬁctitious self-play (NFSP) to combine ﬁctitious self-play
with deep RL to learn approximate Nash equilibria for games of imperfect information in a scalable
end-to-end approach without prior domain knowledge. NFSP is evaluated on two-player zero-sum
games. In Leduc poker, NFSP approaches a Nash equilibrium, while common RL methods diverges.
In Limit Texas Hold’em, a real-world scale imperfect-information game, NFSP performs similarly
to state-of-the-art, superhuman algorithms which are based on domain expertise.
Lanctot et al. (2017) observe that independent RL, in which each agent learns by interacting with the
environment, oblivious to other agents, can overﬁt the learned policies to other agents’ policies. The
authors propose policy-space response oracle (PSRO), and its approximation, deep cognitive hier-
archies (DCH), to compute best responses to a mixture of policies using deep RL, and to compute
new meta-strategy distributions using empirical game-theoretic analysis. PSRO/DCH generalizes
previous algorithms, like independent RL, iterative best response, double oracle, and ﬁctitious play.
The authors present an implementation with centralized training for decentralized execution, as dis-
cussed below. The authors experiment with grid world coordination, a partially observable game,
63