human mind (Kahneman, 2011): System 1 with a fast, opaque, and inﬂexible intuitive mind, vs.
System 2 with a slow, transparent, and ﬂexible analytical mind.
See Finn (2017) for a tutorial, and Silver (2015) and Levine (2018) for lectures, about model-based
(deep) RL. See NIPS 2018 Workshop on Modeling the Physical World: Perception, Learning, and
Control at http://phys2018.csail.mit.edu . We discuss Lake et al. (2016) in Section 8.3,
and, scene understanding and physics model learning in Section 18.3.
MODEL -BASED RL
We discuss several recent papers about model-based RL. We may roughly have methods with RL
ﬂavour, e.g., Dyna, VPN, IA2, using TD methods; methods with optimal control ﬂavour, e.g., GPS,
NAF, using local models like linear quadratic regulator (LQR) and MPC; and, methods with physics
ﬂavour, e.g., those with physics models as discussed in Lake et al. (2016).
In policy gradient methods, the gradient can be estimated either by likelihood ratio method as in RE-
INFORCE, or by value gradient methods with backpropagation as in DPG/DDPG. Value gradients
methods are used for deterministic policies. Heess et al. (2015) propose stochastic value gradients
(SVG) for stochastic policies, to combine advantages of model-free and model-based methods, and
to avoid their shortcomings. SVG treats noise variables in Bellman equation as exogenous inputs,
allowing direct differentiation w.r.t. states. This results in a spectrum of policy gradient algorithms,
ranging from model-free ones with value functions, to model-based ones without value functions.
SVG learns model, value function, and policy jointly, with neural networks trained using experience
from interactions with the environment. SVG mitigates compounded model errors by computing
value gradients with real trajectories from the environment rather than those from an inaccurate,
estimated model. SVG uses models for computing policy gradient, but not for prediction. Heess
et al. (2015) experiment with physics-based continuous control tasks in simulation.
Oh et al. (2017) propose value prediction network (VPN) to integrate model-free and model-based
RL into a neural network. VPN learns a dynamic model to train abstract states to predict future
values, rewards, and discount, rather than future observations as in typical model-based methods.
The author propose to train VPN by TD search (Silver et al., 2012) and multi-step Q learning. In
VPNs, values are predicted with Q-learning, rewards are predicted with supervised learning, and
lookahead planning are performed for choosing actions and computing target Q-values. VPN is
evaluate on a 2D navigation collect task and Atari games.
Pong et al. (2018) propose temporal difference models (TDMs) to combine beneﬁts of model-free
and model-based RL. TDMs are general value functions, as discussed in Section 3.3. TDMs can
be trained with model-free off-policy learning, and be used for model-based control. TDM learning
interpolates between model-free and model-based learning, seeking to achieve sample efﬁciency in
model-based learning, and at the same time, avoiding model bias. Pong et al. (2018) evaluate TDMs
on both simulated and real-world robot tasks.
Farquhar et al. (2018) propose TreeQN, using a differentiable, recursive tree structure neural network
architecture to map the encoded state to the predicted action value Q function, for discrete actions.
TreeQN uses such recursive model to reﬁne the estimate of Q function, with the learned transition
model, reward function, and value function, by tree transitioning, and value prediction & backup
steps in the recursive tree structure neural network. TreeQN takes advantage of the prior knowledge
that Q values are induced by MDPs. In contrast, DQN uses fully connected layers, not implementing
such inductive bias. Farquhar et al. (2018) also propose ATreeC, an actor-critic variant. The authors
evaluate TreeQN and ATreeC in a box-pushing environment and on Atari games.
Weber et al. (2017) propose imagination-augmented agents (IA2), a neural network architecture, to
combine model-free and model-based RL. IA2 learns to augment model-free decisions by interpret-
ing environment models.
Gu et al. (2016) propose normalized advantage functions (NAF) to enable experience replay with
Q-learning for continuous task, and propose to reﬁt local linear models iteratively. NAF extends
Dyna to continuous tasks. The authors evaluate NAF on several simulated MuJoCo robotic tasks.
Hester and Stone (2017) propose variance-and-novelty-intrinsic-rewards algorithm (TEXPLORE-
V ANAIR), a model-based RL algorithm with intrinsic motivations. The authors study two intrinsic
40