13 R ELATIONAL RL
Integrating reinforcement learning and relational learning (Getoor and Taskar, 2007) is a promising
approach to problem solving in AI. Relational RL makes connections between RL and classical AI,
for knowledge representation and reasoning, which we discuss brieﬂy in Section 8.3.
Dˇzeroski et al. (2001) propose relational RL. Tadepalli et al. (2004) give an overview of relational
RL, and identify several challenges: suitable function approximation to represent relational knowl-
edge, generalization across objects, transferability across tasks, run-time planning and reasoning,
and, incorporating prior knowledge. Tadepalli et al. (2004) further propose relational RL as a so-
lution to these challenges. Guestrin et al. (2003) introduce relational MDPs. Diuk et al. (2008)
introduce objected-oriented MDPs (OO-MDPs), a close approach to relational RL. See more work,
e.g., Mrowca et al. (2018), Palm et al. (2018), and Santoro et al. (2018).
See NIPS 2018 Workshop on Relational Representation Learning at https://r2learning.
github.io .
We discuss some papers about relational learning and relational RL below.
RELATIONAL LEARNING
Battaglia et al. (2018) ﬁrst discuss ways to incorporate relational inductive bias with deep learning.
In fully connected networks (FC), entities are units, and their relations are all to all, thus have only
weak relational inductive bias. In convolutional neural networks (CNNs), entities are still units, or
grid elements, e.g. pixels in images, and relations are local. CNNs impose locality and translation
invariance as relational inductive bias. In recurrent neural networks (RNN), entities include input
and hidden state at each time step, and relations are the mapping from previous hidden state and
current input to the hidden state of this step. This mapping is reuse over time steps, thus temporal
invariance is the relational inductive bias for RNN.
Battaglia et al. (2018) then propose graph network (GN) to incorporate relational inductive bias, to
attempt to achieve combinatorial generalization, i.e., the capacity to use known elements to build
new inferences, predictions and behaviours. GN can operate on arbitrary relational structure, hav-
ing explicit representation of entities (nodes) and relationships (edges), grounding in data. Node
and edge permutations are invariant in GN. GN generalizes previous graph neural networks, e.g.,
Scarselli et al. (2009).
Santoro et al. (2017) propose relation networks (RNs) for relational reasoning in a plug-and-play
way in neural networks. The authors experiment RN-augmented networks on visual question an-
swering, text-based question answering, and reasoning about dynamic physical systems. Santoro
et al. (2018) propose a relational memory core (RMC), a memory module, to handle tasks with re-
lational reasoning, using self attention (Vaswani et al., 2017) to deal with memory interaction. The
authors test RMC on RL tasks, program evaluation, and language modelling. Battaglia et al. (2016)
propose interaction network to learning about objects, relations and physics, and evaluate it with
n-body problems, rigid-body collision, and non-rigid dynamics.
Chen et al. (2018a) propose a framework for iterative visual reasoning, beyond current recognition
systems with CNNs. It is composed of a local module to store previous beliefs, a global model
for graph reasoning. It reﬁnes estimates by rolling out these models iteratively, and cross-feeding
predictions to each other. The graph model consists of: 1) a knowledge graph, with nodes and edges
to represent classes and their relationships respectively; 2) a region graph of the current image, with
nodes and edges as regions in the images and their spatial relationships; 3) an assignment graph,
assigning regions to classes. An attention mechanism is used to combine both local and global
modules for ﬁnal predictions.
Hudson and Manning (2018) propose memory, attention, and control (MAC) cell, with three units,
namely, control, read, and write units, to construct recurrent compositional attention networks for
reasoning, by imposing structural constraints in the operation of and interaction between cells, for
the purpose of interpretability, generalization, computation efﬁciency, and data efﬁciency. Hud-
son and Manning (2018) evaluate their proposed approach on a visual question answering (VQA)
task with the CLEVR data set. Watch a video at https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=
jpNLp9SnTF8 .
66