He et al. (2016a) propose dual learning mechanism to tackle the data hunger issue in machine trans-
lation, inspired by the observation that the information feedback between the primal, translation
from language A to language B, and the dual, translation from B to A, can help improve both trans-
lation models, with a policy gradient method, using the language model likelihood as the reward
signal. Experiments show, with only 10% bilingual data for warm start and monolingual data, the
dual learning approach perform comparably with previous neural machine translation methods with
full bilingual data in English to French tasks. The dual learning mechanism may be extended to
other tasks, if a task has a dual form, e.g., speech recognition and text to speech, image caption and
image generation, question answering and question generation, search and keyword extraction, etc.
Xia et al. (2018) study model-level dual learning.
See Wu et al. (2016), Johnson et al. (2017) for Google’s Neural Machine Translation System,
Gehring et al. (2017) for convolutional sequence to sequence learning for fast neural machine trans-
lation, Klein et al. (2017) for OpenNMT, an open source neural machine translation system, at
http://opennmt.net , Cheng et al. (2016) for semi-supervised learning for neural machine
translation, Wu et al. (2017c) for adversarial neural machine translation, Vaswani et al. (2017) for
a new approach for translation replacing ConvNets and RNN with self attention and positional en-
coding, open source at https://github.com/tensorflow/tensor2tensor , Dehghani
et al. (2018) for an extension of Vaswani et al. (2017) at https://goo.gl/72gvdq , Artetxe
et al. (2018) for an unsupervised approach to machine translation, and, Zhang et al. (2017) for an
open source toolkit for neural machine translation.
17.3 D IALOGUE SYSTEMS
In dialogue systems, conversational agents, or chatbots, human and computer interacts with a nat-
ural language. We intentionally remove ”spoken” before ”dialogue systems” to accommodate both
spoken and written language user interface (UI). Jurafsky and Martin (2017) categorize dialogue
systems as task-oriented dialog agents and chatbots; the former are set up to have short conversa-
tions to help complete particular tasks; the latter are set up to mimic human-human interactions with
extended conversations, sometimes with entertainment value. As in Deng (2017), there are four
categories: social chatbots, infobots (interactive question answering), task completion bots (task-
oriented or goal-oriented) and personal assistant bots. We have seen generation one dialogue sys-
tems: symbolic rule/template based, and generation two: data driven with (shallow) learning. We are
now experiencing generation three: data driven with deep learning, in which reinforcement learning
usually plays an important role. A dialogue system usually include the following modules: (spoken)
language understanding, dialogue manager (dialogue state tracker and dialogue policy learning),
and a natural language generation (Young et al., 2013). In task-oriented systems, there is usually a
knowledge base to query. A deep learning approach, as usual, attempts to make the learning of the
system parameters end-to-end. See Deng (2017) for more details. See a survey paper on applying
machine learning to speech recognition (Deng and Li, 2013).
Dhingra et al. (2017) propose KB-InfoBot, a goal-oriented dialogue system for multi-turn infor-
mation access. KB-InfoBot is trained end-to-end using RL from user feedback with differentiable
operations, including those for accessing external knowledge database (KB). In previous work, e.g.,
Li et al. (2017) and Wen et al. (2017), a dialogue system accesses real world knowledge from KB by
symbolic, SQL-like operations, which is non-differentiable and disables the dialogue system from
fully end-to-end trainable. KB-InfoBot achieves the differentiability by inducing a soft posterior
distribution over the KB entries to indicate which ones the user is interested in. The authors design
a modiﬁed version of the episodic REINFORCE algorithm to explore and learn both the policy to
select dialogue acts and the posterior over the KB entries for correct retrievals.The authors deploy
imitation learning from rule-based belief trackers and policy to warm up the system.
Su et al. (2016) propose an on-line learning framework to train the dialogue policy jointly with
the reward model via active learning with a Gaussian process model, to tackle the issue that it is
unreliable and costly to use explicit user feedback as the reward signal. The authors show empirically
that the proposed framework reduces manual data annotations signiﬁcantly and mitigates noisy user
feedback in dialogue policy learning.
Li et al. (2016) propose to use deep RL to generate dialogues to model future reward for better
informativity, coherence, and ease of answering, to attempt to address the issues in the sequence
88