e.g., dynamic targets, by adding a third column and proprioceptive features, i.e., features for joint
angles and velocities for arms and ﬁngers.
Sadeghi et al. (2018) propose a convolutional recurrent neural network to learn perception and con-
trol for servoing a robot arm to desired objects, invariant to viewpoints. The proposed method uses
the memory of past movements to select actions to reach the target, rather than assuming known dy-
namics or requiring calibration. The authors propose to learn the controller with simulated demon-
stration trajectories and RL. The supervised demonstration learning usually learns a myopic policy,
with distance to goal as the objective; and RL helps learn a policy consider long term effect, by eval-
uating the action value function to assess if the goal can be reached. The visual layers are adapted
with a small amount of realistic images for better transfer performance. The work assumes that the
robot can move to an object directly, without planning for a sophisticated policy, e.g., with obstacles.
See also Bousmalis et al. (2017), and a blog, https://research.googleblog.com/2017/
10/closing-simulation-to-reality-gap-for.html
16.2 I MITATION LEARNING
Finn et al. (2016b) study inverse optimal cost, or inverse reinforcement learning in control. The
authors propose to utilize nonlinear cost functions, such as neural networks, to impose structures
on the cost for informative features and effective regularization, and approximate MaxEnt (Ziebart
et al., 2008) with samples for learning with unknown dynamics in high-dimensional continuous
environments.
Duan et al. (2017) propose one-shot imitation learning, in the setting with many tasks, as supervised
learning. The authors train a neural network with pairs of demonstrations for a subset of tasks, with
input as the ﬁrst demonstration and a state sampled from the second demonstration, and predicted
the action for the sampled state. The authors utilize the soft attention to process sequence of states
and actions of a demonstration, and vector components for block locations, as in the block stacking
experiments, for better generalization to unseen conditions and tasks in training data. See videos at
https://sites.google.com/view/nips2017-one-shot-imitation/ .
Finn et al. (2017c) and Yu et al. (2018) propose one-shot meta-imitation learning methods to build
vision-based policies ﬁne-tuned end-to-end from one demonstration, using model-agnostic meta-
learning (MAML) (Finn et al., 2017a) for pre-training on a diverse range of demonstrations from
other environments. Usually learning from raw pixels requires a large amount of data. MAML
optimizes an initial representation for a learning algorithm, to build a rich prior in the meta-learning
phase, allowing the parameters to adapt to new tasks with a few examples. We discuss MAML in
Section 14.1. In Finn et al. (2017c), demonstrations come from a teleoperated robot. In Yu et al.
(2018), demonstrations come from a human, posing a challenging issue of domain shift. Yu et al.
(2018) learn how to learn from both human and teleoperated demonstrations, and could adapt to a
new task with one human demonstration. Both Finn et al. (2017c) and Yu et al. (2018) experiment
with both simulation and physical robots. See a blog at http://bair.berkeley.edu/blog/
2018/06/28/daml/ . The open source for Finn et al. (2017c) is at https://github.com/
tianheyu927/mil .
16.3 V ALUE -BASED LEARNING
Here we discuss two papers using successor representation (SR). We introduce that a value function
can be decomposed into environment dynamics (SR) and reward signal in Chapter 8. We discuss
general value function (GVF) in Section 3.3, e.g., Sutton et al. (2011), universal function approx-
imators (UVFAs) (Schaul et al., 2015), and, hindsight experience replay (HER) (Andrychowicz
et al., 2017). Sutton et al. (2011) and Andrychowicz et al. (2017) experiment with robots. Barreto
et al. (2017) extend successor representation to successor features for continuous tasks with function
approximation, as discussed in Section 14.2.
Zhang et al. (2017) propose a deep RL approach with successor features for robot navigation tasks,
for transferring knowledge obtained from previous navigation tasks to new ones, without localiza-
tion, mapping or planning. The authors experiment with both simulation and physical robots.
83