placement as reward signal for REINFORCE algorithm. The proposed method ﬁnds placements of
Tensorﬂow operations on devices for Inception-V3, recurrent neural language model and neural ma-
chine translation, yielding shorter execution time than those placements designed by human experts.
Computation burden is one concern for a RL approach to search directly in the solution space of a
combinatorial problem. We discuss learning combinatorial optimization in Section 14.5. Gao et al.
(2018c) also study the problem of device placement.
Mao et al. (2016) study resource management in systems and networking with deep RL. The authors
propose to tackle multi-resource cluster scheduling with policy gradient, in an online manner with
dynamic job arrivals, optimizing various objectives like average job slowdown or completion time.
The authors validate their proposed approach with simulation.
Liu et al. (2017a) propose a hierarchical framework to tackle resource allocation and power man-
agement in cloud computing with deep RL. The authors decompose the problem as a global tier
for virtual machines resource allocation and a local tier for servers power management. The au-
thors validate their proposed approach with actual Google cluster traces. Such hierarchical frame-
work/decomposition approach was to reduce state/action space, and to enable distributed operation
of power management.
Google deploy machine learning for data centre power management, reducing energy consumption
by 40%. See blogs at http://goo.gl/4PHcos andhttp://goo.gl/N3Aoxm . Lazic et al.
(2018) study data center cooling with model-predictive control (MPC).
Optimizing memory control is discussed in Sutton and Barto (2018).
SECURITY
There is a long history applying machine learning (ML) techniques to system security issues, e.g.,
Chandola et al. (2009) survey ML techniques for anomaly detection, and, Sommer and Paxson
(2010) discuss issues in using ML techniques for network intrusion detection.
Adversarial machine learning is about learning in the presence of adversaries. It is concerned with
the training stage, when facing data poisoning issues, and learning wrong models hard to detect. It
is also concerned with the inference stage, when facing adversarial examples, and making wrong
decisions. Adversarial ML is a critical for some ML applications, like autonomous driving.
Adversarial ML is an emerging ﬁeld, in this wave of deep learning, after researchers ﬁnd adversarial
examples to deep learning algorithms, e.g., Szegedy et al. (2013) show that various images, like a
truck, a building, or a dog, after being added small noises, are all classiﬁed by AlexNet as ”ostrich,
Struthio camelus”. Goodfellow et al. (2015) also show a fast adversarial example generation method,
so that an image of panda, after being added a small vector, is classiﬁed as a gibbon by GoogLeNet.
Eykholt et al. (2018) show that physical images, like stop signs, yield signs, left turn signs etc.,
after being perturbed by adding black or white stickers, are misclassiﬁed by the state of art deep
neural networks as speed limit 45 signs. Evtimov et al. (2017) discuss attacks to physical images,
http://bair.berkeley.edu/blog/2017/12/30/yolo-attack/ . RL algorithms are
also vulnerable to adversarial attacks, e.g., Huang et al. (2017) and Havens et al. (2018), as well as
multi-armed bandit algorithms, e.g., Jun et al. (2018). See a blog at http://rll.berkeley.
edu/adversarial/ .
Adversarial ML is an active area, with ﬁerce competition between the design of attack and de-
fense algorithms. Athalye et al. (2018) show that seven of nine defense techniques, shortly after
their papers being accepted to ICLR 2018, cause the issue of obfuscated gradients and are vul-
nerable to their attacks. See their open source at https://github.com/anishathalye/
obfuscated-gradients for implementations of their attack and the studied defense methods.
Anderson et al. (2018) propose a black-box attack approach against static portable executable (PE)
anti-malware engines with reinforcement learning, which produces functional evasive malware sam-
ples to help improve anti-malware engines. The performance still needs improvements. See the open
source at https://github.com/endgameinc/gym-malware .
See Song (2018) for a tutorial on AI and security. See Kantarcioglu and Xi (2016) for a tutorial
on adversarial data mining. See Yuan et al. (2017) for a survey on attacks and defenses for deep
99