The idea of adding an intelligent component is aligned with incorporating human intelligence as
discussed in Lake et al. (2016). For example, when we study how to play billiard with a com-
puter program, we probably want to incorporate Newton’s law, rather than using deep learning to
rediscover such laws with many video clips. Graves et al. (2013) follows end-to-end training for
speech recognition, with a Fourier transformation of audio data. Self-supervised learning would be
a promising approach for adding this intelligence component, e.g., Jaderberg et al. (2017) and Aytar
et al. (2018).
Adding an intelligence component is abstract. Now we discuss something more concrete, esp. for
tasks with perception, like with visual inputs. We then propose the following research direction.
Research Direction 3: learn from entities, but not just raw inputs
Our goal is to make the learning system more efﬁcient w.r.t. sample, time, and space, to achieve
interpretability and to avoid obvious mistakes like those in adversarial examples. At the same time,
we still strive for end-to-end processing, and being fully differentiable. Our thesis is that, if we could
process the raw input with some principle or knowledge, the resulting representation would be more
convenient for the learning system to make further predictions or decisions.
Take the hard Atari game Montezuma’s Revenge as an example. Suppose there were an intelligent
system, which could identify entities in video frames, like agent, road, ladder, enemy, key, door,
etc., and their attributes and relationships. Then a RL agent working on such representation would
be much more efﬁcient than working on pixels. A question is, if RL, unsupervised learning, or
some machine learning/AI techniques can help identify entities, attributes, and their relationships.
Successes in this direction would hinge on the maturity of computer vision, NLP, and AI.
There are recent progress in this direction. Goel et al. (2018) conduct unsupervised video object
segmentation for deep RL. Eslami et al. (2018) present GQN for discovering representations with
unsupervised learning. Chen et al. (2018a) propose a framework for iterative visual reasoning. For
NLP, word2vec (Mikolov et al., 2013; Mikolov et al., 2017) is probably the most popular represen-
tation. van den Oord et al. (2018) propose to learn representations for multi-modality, including
speech, images, text, and reinforcement learning. There are some recent papers about reasoning,
e.g. (Santoro et al., 2017; Hudson and Manning, 2018; Battaglia et al., 2018), as we discuss in
Chapter 13. We also discuss knowledge and reasoning in Section 8.3.
Malik (2018) discusses that there are great achievements in the ﬁelds of vision, motor control, and
language semantic reasoning, and it is time to investigate them together. This supports our proposal.
Another fundamental, and related issue is about representation for RL problems. In deep learning,
as well as in deep RL, neural network architecture is critical for the performance.
There are classical ways for function approximation, several popular neural network architectures,
mechanisms for temporal abstraction, neural network architectures designed for deep RL and/or for
reasoning, and discussions about causality and human intelligence. We discuss such representation
issues in Chapter 8.
When we talk about computer vision with deep learning, CNNs appear in many people’s minds.
When we talk about RL algorithms, many people think about TD learning, Q-learning, and policy
gradient. However, when we talk about representation or neural network architecture for (deep) RL,
different people may come up with different ideas. It would be great to discover something for RL
like CNNs for computer vision. We thus propose the following research direction.
Research Direction 4: design an optimal representation for RL
RL problems have their own structures and characteristics, e.g., value functions satisfy Bellman
equation, so that they are probably different from those in deep learning, like image recognition and
machine translation. Consequently, RL problems probably have their own optimal representation
and neural network architecture. We conjecture that it is desirable to consider a holistic approach,
i.e., considering perception and control together, rather than separately. Srinivas et al. (2018) and
Tamar et al. (2018) are efforts in this direction.
107