StarCraft and Texas Hold’em Poker are great testbeds for studying multi-agent problems. It is
desirable to see extensions of DeepStack to multi-player settings, with many hands of playing, in
tournament and cash game styles.
StarCraft features many possible actions, complex interactions between players, short term tactics
and long term strategies, etc. Learning strategies for Starcraft following videos with commentary
would be a feasible strategy. There are many videos about StarCraft with excellent commentaries. If
we may be able to extract valuable information, like strategies, from the multi-modality signals, and
apply these to the agent design, we may be able to achieve a human level AI StarCraft agent. Such a
system would be an integration of RL, computer vision, and NLP. Aytar et al. (2018) achieve break-
through results on three hard Atari games with self-supervision techniques by watching YouTube
(Chapter 10). This may give us more motivation and encouragements. As a related work, Branavan
et al. (2012) propose to learn strategy games by reading manuals. With achievements in Sun et al.
(2018) and Pang et al. (2018), it is interesting to watch if hierarchical RL approaches in these papers
can achieve super-human performance.
We now discuss end-to-end learning with raw inputs, a trendy paradigm recently, e.g.,
AlexNet (Krizhevsky et al., 2012) with raw pixels for image classiﬁcation, Seq2Seq (Sutskever
et al., 2014) with raw sentences for machine translation, DQN (Mnih et al., 2015) with raw pixels
and score to play Atari games, AlphaGo Zero (Silver et al., 2017) with piece information and score
to play computer Go, and, Jaderberg et al. (2018) with raw pixels and score to play Quake III Arena
Capture the Flag.
One question is, is such paradigm of end-to-end learning with raw input good? Sample efﬁciency is
usually an issue. For example, as shown in Hessel et al. (2018), Rainbow needs 44 million frames
to exceed the performance of distributional DQN (Bellemare et al., 2017), which needs much less
data than DQN (Mnih et al., 2015). Such huge amount of data require huge computation.
Another issue is adversarial examples, which may be more severe for critical applications. Szegedy
et al. (2013) show that various images, like a truck, a building, or a dog, after being added impercep-
tible noises, are all classiﬁed by AlexNet as ”ostrich, Struthio camelus”. Eykholt et al. (2018) show
that physical images, e.g., stop signs, left turn signs etc., after being perturbed by adding black or
white stickers, are misclassiﬁed by state of the art deep neural networks as speed limit 45 signs.
Some papers propose to learn fully autonomously. AlphaGo Zero (Silver et al., 2017) and Jaderberg
et al. (2018) have achieved such a goal to some extend. However, we have to admit that both
computer Go and Quake III Arena Capture the Flag have perfect simulation models, and unlimited
data can be generated relatively easily. Many practical applications, like robotics, healthcare, and,
education, do not have such luxury. We may or may not ultimately achieve such a goal of fully
autonomous learning in a general sense; and it is not clear for problems with practical concerns.
Consider education. Most of us follow some curricula designed by experts, and learn from experts,
rather than learning tabula rasa. Even we will achieve such a goal, as in most scientiﬁc discoveries,
we may encounter spiral development, rather than going straightforwardly to the goal. We probably
need some hybrid solution in the interim.
We expect that manual engineering reconciles with end-to-end learning, and symbolism reconciles
with connectionism. We thus propose to add an ”intelligence” component in the end-to-end pro-
cessing pipeline, rather than treating the system as an entire blackbox, as most current deep neural
networks do, as shown in Figure 6.
input output update model 
input output update model 
intelligence 
Figure 6: Add An Intelligence Component to End-to-End Pipeline
In the intelligence component, we may incorporate common knowledge like common sense, induc-
tive bias, knowledge base, etc., common principles like Newton’s laws, Bellman equation, etc., and,
common algorithms like gradient descent, TD learning, policy gradient, etc.
106