Vinyals et al. (2015) propose pointer networks to learn the conditional probability of an output se-
quence of discrete tokens, corresponding to positions in an input sequence, by generating output
sequence with attention as a pointer to select an element of the input sequence, and evaluate per-
formance on three combinatorial optimization problems, ﬁnding planar convex hulls, computing
Delaunay triangulations, and the planar Travelling Salesman Problem. Pointer networks are graph-
agnostic, in contrast to the graph embedding in Dai et al. (2017).
14.6 A UTOML
AutoML is about automating the process of machine learning. See a website for AutoML at
http://automl.chalearn.org . See NIPS 2018 AutoML for Lifelong Machine Learning
Competition at https://www.4paradigm.com/competition/nips2018 . See also a us-
able machine learning project Bailis et al. (2017).
Neural network architecture design is one particular task of AutoML. Neural architecture design is
a notorious, nontrivial engineering issue. Neural architecture search provides a promising avenue to
explore. See a survey (Elsken et al., 2018).
Zoph and Le (2017) propose neural architecture search to generate neural networks architectures
with an RNN trained by RL, in particular, REINFORCE, searching from scratch in variable-length
architecture space, to maximize the expected accuracy of the generated architectures on a valida-
tion set. In the RL formulation, a controller generates hyperparameters as a sequence of tokens,
which are actions chosen from hyperparameters spaces. Each gradient update to the policy param-
eters corresponds to training one generated network to convergence. An accuracy on a validation
set is the reward signal. The neural architecture search can generate convolutional layers, with skip
connections or branching layers, and recurrent cell architectures. The authors design a parameter
server approach to speed up training. Comparing with state-of-the-art methods, the proposed ap-
proach achieves competitive results for an image classiﬁcation task with CIFAR-10 dataset, and
better results for a language modeling task with Penn Treebank.
Zoph et al. (2017) propose to transfer the architectural building block learned with the neural archi-
tecture search (Zoph and Le, 2017) on small dataset to large dataset for scalable image recognition.
Baker et al. (2017) propose a meta-learning approach, using Q-learning with -greedy exploration
and experience replay, to generate CNN architectures automatically for a given learning task. Zhong
et al. (2017) propose to construct network blocks to reduce the search space of network design,
trained by Q-learning. See also Liu et al. (2017), Liu et al. (2017), Real et al. (2017), and Real
et al. (2018). Note that Real et al. (2018) show that evolutionary approaches can match or surpass
human-crafted and RL-designed image neural network classiﬁers.
Jin et al. (2018) propose a Bayesian approach for efﬁcient search. See Cai et al. (2018a) for an
approach with limited computation resources (200 GPU hours). See also Chen et al. (2018a), Kan-
dasamy et al. (2018), Luo et al. (2018), and Wong et al. (2018).
There are recent works exploring new neural architectures (manually). Vaswani et al. (2017) pro-
pose a new archichitecture for translation that replaces CNN and RNN with attention and positional
encoding. Kaiser et al. (2017a) propose to train a single model, MultiModel, which is composed of
convolutional layers, an attention mechanism, and sparsely-gated layers, to learn multiple tasks from
various domains, including image classiﬁcation, image captioning and machine translation. Wang
et al. (2016b) propose the dueling network architecture to estimate state value function and associ-
ated advantage function, to combine them to estimate action value function for faster convergence.
Tamar et al. (2016) introduce value iteration networks (VIN), a fully differentiable CNN planning
module to approximate the value iteration algorithm, to learn to plan. Silver et al. (2016b) propose
the predictron to integrate learning and planning into one end-to-end training procedure with raw
input in Markov reward process. These neural architectures were designed manually. It would be
interesting to see if learning to learn can help automate such neural architecture design.
Neural architecture design has already had industrial impact. Google, among others, is working on
AutoML, in particular, AutoML Vision, and extends AutoML to NLP and contact center, etc. See
blogs about Google AutoML at http://goo.gl/ijBjUr ,http://goo.gl/irCvD6 , and,
http://goo.gl/VUzCNt . See Auto-Keras at https://autokeras.com .
73