Iterative policy evaluation is an approach to evaluate a given policy . It iteratively applies Bellman
expectation backup,
vk+1(s) =X
a2A(ajs)[R(s;a) +
X
s02SP(s0js;a)vk(s0)]; (13)
so that at each iteration k+ 1, for all states s2S, updatevk+1(s)from value functions of its
successor states vk(s0). The value function will converge to v, the value function of the policy .
Policy iteration (PI) alternates between policy evaluation and policy improvement, to generate a
sequence of improving policies. In policy evaluation, the value function of the current policy is
estimated to obtain v. In policy improvement, the current value function is used to generate a
better policy, e.g., by selecting actions greedily with respect to the value function v. This policy
iteration process of iterative policy evaluation and greedy policy improvement will converge to an
optimal policy and value function.
We may modify the policy iteration step, stopping it before convergence. A generalized policy
iteration (GPI) is composed of any policy evaluation method and any policy improvement method.
Value iteration (VI) ﬁnds an optimal policy. It iteratively applies Bellman optimality backup,
v(s) = max
aR(s;a) +
X
s02SP(s0js;a)vk(s0): (14)
At each iteration k+ 1, it updates vk+1(s)fromvk(s0), for all states s2S. Such synchronous
backup will converge to the value function of an optimal policy. We may have asynchronous DP,
and approximate DP.
We have Bellman equation for value function in Equation (7). Bellman operator is deﬁned as,
(Tv)(s):=X
a(ajs)X
s0;rp(s0;rjs;a)[r+
v(s0)]: (15)
TD ﬁx point is then,
v=Tv: (16)
We can deﬁne the Bellman expectation backup operator, in matrix forms,
T(v) =R+
Pv; (17)
and the Bellman optimality backup operator,
T(v) = max
a2ARa+
Pav; (18)
We can show that these operators are contractions with ﬁxed points, respectively, which help prove
the convergence of policy iteration, value iteration, and certain general policy iteration algorithms.
See Silver (2015), Sutton and Barto (2018), and Bertsekas and Tsitsiklis (1996) for more details.
2.4.5 M ONTE CARLO
Monte Carlo methods learn from complete episodes of experience, not assuming knowledge of
transition nor reward models, and use sample means for estimation. Monte Carlo methods are
applicable only to episodic tasks.
With Monte Carlo methods for policy evaluation, we use empirical mean return rather than expected
return for the evaluation. By law of large numbers, the estimated value function converges to the
value function of the policy.
On-policy Monte Carlo control follows a generalized policy iteration scheme. For policy evaluation,
it uses Monte Carlo policy evaluation for the action value. For policy improvement, it uses -greedy
policy improvement. It can be shown that Greedy in the limit with inﬁnite exploration (GLIE)
Monte-Carlo control converges to the optimal action-value function (Singh et al., 2000).
In off-policy learning, we evaluate a target policy, following a behaviour policy. With off-policy,
we can learn with observations from humans or other agents, reuse experience from old policies,
15