16 R OBOTICS
Robotics is a classical application area for reinforcement learning. Robots have wide applications,
e.g., manufacture, supply chain, healthcare, etc.
Robotics pose challenges to reinforcement learning, including dimensionality, real world examples,
under-modelling (models not capturing all details of system dynamics) and model uncertainty, and,
reward and goal speciﬁcation (Kober et al., 2013). RL provides tractable approaches to robotics,
through representation, including state-action discretization, value function approximation, and pre-
structured policies; through prior knowledge, including demonstration, task structuring, and direct-
ing exploration; and through models, including mental rehearsal, which deals with simulation bias,
real world stochasticity, and optimization efﬁciency with simulation samples, and approaches for
learned forward models (Kober et al., 2013).
Watch Abbeel (2017a) for a talk on deep learning for robotics. See Kober et al. (2013) for a sur-
vey of RL in robotics, Deisenroth et al. (2013) for a survey on policy search for robotics, and
Argall et al. (2009) for a survey of robot learning from demonstration. See the journal Science
Robotics. It is interesting to note that from NIPS 2016 Invited Talk titled Dynamic Legged Robots
by Marc Raibert, Boston Dynamics robots did not use machine learning. See NIPS 2018 Work-
shop on Imitation Learning and its Challenges in Robotics at https://sites.google.com/
view/nips18-ilr .
Ng et al. (2004) study autonomous helicopter. Reddy et al. (2018) study glider soaring. Mirowski
et al. (2017), Banino et al. (2018), and Wayne et al. (2018) propose methods for learning to navigate.
Liu and Tomizuka (2016; 2017) study how to make robots and people to collaborate to achieve both
ﬂexibility and productivity in production lines. See a blog at http://bair.berkeley.edu/
blog/2017/12/12/corobots/ .
In the following, we discuss sim-to-real, imitation learning, value-based learning, policy-based
learning, and model-based learning for robotics. Then we discuss autonomous driving vehicles,
a special type of robots.
16.1 S IM-TO-REAL
It is easier to train a robot in simulation than in reality. Most RL algorithms are sample intensive.
And exploration may cause risky policies to the robot and/or the environment. However, a simulator
usually can not precisely reﬂect the reality. How to bridge the gap between simulation and reality,
i.e., sim-to-real, is critical and challenging in robotics. Sim-to-real is a special type of transfer
learning, as discussed in Section 14.2.
Peng et al. (2017c) propose to use dynamics randomization to train recurrent policies in simula-
tion, and deploy the policies directly on a physical robot, achieving good performance on an object
pushing task, without calibration. This work does not consider visual observation.
OpenAI (2018) propose to learn dexterity of in-hand manipulation to perform object reorientation
for a physical Shadow Dexterous Hand, using Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO), with dynamics
randomization in simulation, and transferring the learned policy directly to physical hand, sharing
code base with OpenAI Five for playing Dota 2. See a blog with video at https://blog.
openai.com/learning-dexterity/ . Chen et al. (2018b), Popov et al. (2017) and P ´erez-
D’Arpino and Shah (2017) also study dexterity learning. See also https://bair.berkeley.
edu/blog/2018/08/31/dexterous-manip/ .
Rusu et al. (2017) propose to use progressive networks (Rusu et al., 2016) to bridge the reality gap.
In progressive networks, lateral connections connect layers of network columns learned previously
to each new column, to support compositionality, and to support transfer learning and domain adap-
tation. In a progressive network, columns may not have the same capacity or structure, so that the
column for simulation can have sufﬁcient capacity, and the column for reality may have lower ca-
pacity, which can be initialized from the column trained with simulation, to encourage exploration
and fast learning from scarce real data. Rusu et al. (2017) use MuJoCo physics simulator to train the
ﬁrst column, for a reaching task with the modelled Jaco; and use real Jaco to train the second column
with RGB images, to be deployed on a real robot. The authors also propose to handle dynamic tasks,
82