and Leduc Poker (with a six-card deck), a competitive imperfect information game, and show re-
duced joint-policy correlation (JPC), a new metric to quantify the effect of overﬁtting.
Social dilemmas, e.g., prisoner’s dilemma, reveal the conﬂicts between collective and individual
rationality. Cooperation is usually beneﬁcial for all. However, parasitic behaviours like free-riding
may result in the tragedy of the commons, which makes cooperation unstable. The formalism of
matrix game social dilemmas (MGSD) is a popular approach. However, as discussed in Leibo et al.
(2017), MGSD does not consider several important aspects of real world social dilemmas: they
are temporally extended, ”cooperation and defection are labels that apply to policies implementing
strategic decisions”, ”cooperative may be a graded quantity”, cooperation and defection may not
happen fully simultaneously, since information about the starting of a strategy by one player would
inﬂuence the other player, and, decisions are mandatory although with only partial information about
the world and other players.
Leibo et al. (2017) propose a sequential social dilemma (SSD) with MARL to tackle these issues.
The authors conduct empirical game theoretic analyses of two games, fruit gathering and wolfpack
hunting, and show that, when treating cooperation and defection as one-shot decisions as in MGSD,
they have empirical payoff matrices as prisoner’s dilemma. However, gathering and wolfpack are
two different games, with opposite behaviours in the emergence and stability of cooperation. SSDs
can capture the differences between these two games, using a factor to promote cooperation in gath-
ering and to discourage cooperation in wolfpack. The sequential structure of SSDs results in com-
plex model to compute or to learn equilibria. The authors propose to apply DQN to ﬁnd equilibria
for SSDs.
GAMES
Jaderberg et al. (2018) approach Capture the Flag, a 3D multi-player ﬁrst-person video game, in an
end-to-end manner using raw inputs including pixels and game points, with techniques of population
based training, optimization of internal reward, and temporally hierarchical RL, and achieve human-
level performance, for the ﬁrst time for multi-agent RL problems.
Jaderberg et al. (2018) propose to train a diverse population of agents, to form two teams against
each other, and to train each agent independently in a decentralized way, only through interaction
with the environment, without knowledge of environment model, other agents, and human policy
prior, and without communication with other agents. Each agent learn an internal reward signal, to
generate internal goals, such as capturing a ﬂag, to complement the sparse game winning reward.
The authors propose a two-tier optimization process. The inner optimization maximizes agents’
expected discounted future internal rewards. The outer optimization solves a meta-game, to maxi-
mize the meta-reward of winning the match, w.r.t. internal reward functions and hyperparameters,
with meta transition dynamics provided by the inner optimization. The inner optimization is solved
with RL. The outer optimization is solved with population based training (PBT) (Jaderberg et al.,
2017), an online evolutionary method adapting internal rewards and hyperparameters and perform-
ing model selection by agent mutation, i.e., replacing under-performing agents with better ones.
Auxiliary signals (Jaderberg et al., 2017) and differentiable neural computer memory (Graves et al.,
2016) are also used to improve performance. RL agents are trained asynchronously from thousands
of concurrent matches on randomly generated maps.
The authors design an agent to achieve strong capacity and avoiding several common RL issues,
with the integration of learning and evolution. Learning from a diverse population of agents on ran-
dom maps helps achieve skills generalizable to variability of maps, number of players, and choice
of teammates, and stability in partially observable multi-agent environments. Learning an inter-
nal reward signal helps tackle the sparse reward problem and further the credit assignment issue.
The multi-timescale representation helps with memory and long term temporal reasoning for high
level strategies. The authors choose PBT instead of self play, since self play may be unstable in
multi-agent RL environments, and needs more manipulation to support concurrent training for bet-
ter scalability.
Experiments show that an agent can learn a disentangled representation to encode various knowledge
of game situations, like conjunctions of ﬂag status, re-spawn state, and room type, associating with
activation of some individual neurones, and behaving like humans e.g., in navigating, following,
and defending. Such knowledge is acquired through RL training, rather than from explicit models.
64