See Goodfellow (2017) for summary of his NIPS 2016 Tutorial on GANs. GANs have re-
ceived much attention and many work have been appearing after the publication of Goodfel-
low (2017). See CVPR 2018 tutorial on GANs at https://sites.google.com/view/
cvpr2018tutorialongans/ , with several talks by several speakers.
GENERATIVE QUERY NETWORK
Eslami et al. (2018) propose generative query network (GQN) for scene representation, to obtain a
concise description of a 3D scene from 2D visual sensory data, with a representation network and
a generator network trained jointly in an end-to-end fashion, without human semantic labels, e.g.,
object classes, object locations, scene types, or part labels, and domain knowledge.
In GQN, observations from different 2D viewpoints for 3D scenes are fed into the representation
network, to obtain a neural scene representation by summing observations’ representations element-
wise. The neural scene representation is then fed into the generation network, which is a recurrent
latent variable model, to make prediction about the scene from a different viewpoint. GQN is trained
with many scenes, with various number of observations, and with back-propagation. GQN attempts
to obtain a concise scene representation, to capture the scene contents, e.g., the identities, positions,
colors, and object counts, etc., and to make a generator successful for predictions, by maximizing
the likelihood to generate ground-truth images from query viewpoints. Variational approximations
are used to deal with the intractability of latent variables.
Experiments show that representations learned by GQN with the properties of viewpoint invariance,
compositionality, factorization, ”scene algebra”, similar to that of word embedding algebra, and
decreasing Bayesian surprise with more observations for both full and partial observability. Bayesian
surprise refers to the KL divergence between conditional prior and posterior. Robot arm reaching
experiments show that the GQN representation helps with data efﬁciency and robust control.
PLAYING GAMES BY WATCHING YOUTUBE
Aytar et al. (2018) propose to play hard exploration Atari games, including Montezuma’s Revenge,
Pitfall! and Private Eye, by watching YouTube. YouTube videos are usually noisy and unaligned,
without the frame-by-frame alignment between demonstrations, and the information of exact action
and reward sequences in demonstrator’s observation trajectory, which are the properties of demon-
strations required by previous imitation learning, e.g., Hester et al. (2018) as we discuss in Chapter 5.
Aytar et al. (2018) overcome these limitations by a one-shot imitation method in two steps. First,
a common representation is learned from unaligned videos from multiple sources, with two self-
supervised objectives: temporal distance classiﬁcation (TDC) and cross-model temporal distance
classiﬁcation (CMC). In self-supervision, an auxiliary task is proposed to solve among all domains
simultaneously, for a network to attempt to learn a common representation. In TDC, temporal dis-
tances between two frames in a single video sequence are predicted, to help learn a representation
of the environment dynamics. In CMC, a representation is learned to correlate visual and audio ob-
servations, and to highlight critical game events. Furthermore, a new measure of cycle-consistency
is proposed to evaluate the quality of the learned representation. Second, a single YouTube video is
embedded in such representation, and a reward function is built, so that an agent can learn to imitate
human game play.
Experiments using the distributed A3C RL algorithm IMPALA (Espeholt et al., 2018) show break-
through results on these three hard Atari games.
58