10 U NSUPERVISED LEARNING
Unsupervised learning takes advantage of the massive amount of data without labels, and would be
a critical mechanism to achieve artiﬁcial general intelligence.
Unsupervised learning is categorized into non-probabilistic models, like sparse coding, autoen-
coders, k-means etc, and probabilistic (generative) models, where density functions are concerned,
either explicitly or implicitly. Among probabilistic (generative) models with explicit density func-
tions, some are with tractable models, like fully observable belief nets, neural autoregressive dis-
tribution estimators, and PixelRNN, etc; some are with non-tractable models, like Botlzmann ma-
chines, variational autoencoders, Helmhotz machines, etc. For probabilistic (generative) models
with implicit density functions, we have generative adversarial networks (GANs), moment match-
ing networks, etc. See Salakhutdinov (2016) for more details.
LeCun (2018) summarizes the development of deep learning, and outlooks the future of AI, high-
lighting the role of world models and self-supervised learning.5
Self-supervised learning is a special type of unsupervised learning, in which, no labels are given;
however, labels are created from the data. Unsupervised auxiliary learning (Jaderberg et al., 2017;
Mirowski et al., 2017), GANs, and Aytar et al. (2018), as we discuss below, can be regarded as self-
supervised learning. Pathak et al. (2017) propose curiosity-driven exploration by self-supervised
prediction. Watch two talks, Efros (2017) and Gupta (2017), about self-supervised learning.
Goel et al. (2018) conduct unsupervised video object segmentation for deep RL. Mirowski et al.
(2018) study learning to navigate in cities without a map. Hsu et al. (2018) study unsupervised
learning with meta-learning. See also Artetxe et al. (2018), Le et al. (2012), Liu et al. (2017b), Nair
et al. (2018), and van den Oord et al. (2018).
In the following, we discuss unsupervised auxiliary learning (Jaderberg et al., 2017; Mirowski et al.,
2017), which, together with Horde (Sutton et al., 2011), are approaches to take advantages of
possible non-reward training signals in environments. We also discuss generative adversarial net-
works (Goodfellow et al., 2014), generative query network (GQN) for scene representation (Eslami
et al., 2018), and, playing hard exploration games by watching YouTube (Aytar et al., 2018).
UNSUPERVISED AUXILIARY LEARNING
Environments may contain abundant possible training signals, which may help to expedite achieving
the main goal of maximizing the accumulative rewards, e.g., pixel changes may imply important
events, and auxiliary reward tasks may help to achieve a good representation of rewarding states.
This may be even helpful when the extrinsic rewards are rarely observed.
Jaderberg et al. (2017) propose unsupervised reinforcement and auxiliary learning (UNREAL) to
improve learning efﬁciency by maximizing pseudo-reward functions, besides the usual cumula-
tive reward, while sharing a common representation. UNREAL is composed of four components:
base agent, pixel control, reward prediction, and value function replay. The base agent is a CNN-
LSTM agent, and is trained on-policy with A3C (Mnih et al., 2016). Experiences of observations,
rewards and actions are stored in a replay buffer, for being used by auxiliary tasks. The auxil-
iary policies use the base CNN and LSTM, together with a deconvolutional network, to maximize
changes in pixel intensity of different regions of the input images. The reward prediction mod-
ule predicts short-term extrinsic reward in next frame by observing the last three frames, to tackle
the issue of reward sparsity. Value function replay further trains the value function. UNREAL
5LeCun (2018) uses the cake metaphor, as in his NIPS 2016 invited talk titled Predictive Learning. In
this metaphor, ”pure” reinforcement learning, as the single cherry on the cake, ”predicts a scalar reward given
once in a while”, with very low feedback information content; supervised learning, as the icing of the cake,
”predicts a category or a few numbers for each input”, with medium feedback information content; and, self-
supervised learning, as cake genoise, ”predicts any part of its input for any observed part”, or ”predicts future
frames in videos”, with high but stochastic feedback information content (”self-supervised learning” replacing
”unsupervised/predictive learning” in his NIPS 2016 talk). As one response from the RL community, Pieter
Abbeel presents a cake with many cherries in Abbeel (2017a), as a metaphor that RL methods can also have
high information content, e.g., Hindsight Experience Replay (HER) (Andrychowicz et al., 2017) and Universal
Value Function Approximators (UVFAs) (Schaul et al., 2015).
56