21 D ISCUSSIONS
We present deep reinforcement learning in this manuscript in an overview style. We discuss the
following questions: Why deep? What is state of the art? What are the issues, and potential solu-
tions? Brieﬂy, the powerful and ﬂexible representation by deep learning helps deep RL make many
achievements. We discuss state of the art, issues and potential solutions for deep RL in chapters on
six core elements, six important mechanisms, and twelve applications. In the following, we present
a brief summary, discuss challenges and opportunities, and close with an epilogue.
21.1 B RIEF SUMMARY
There are many concepts, algorithms, and issues in (deep) reinforcement learning (RL), as illustrated
in Figure 5. We touch many of them in this manuscript.
Credit assignment, sparse reward, and sample efﬁciency are common issues for RL problems. We
list several approaches proposed to address them in the following. In off-policy learning, both on-
policy and off-policy data can be used for learning. Auxiliary reward and self-supervised learning
are for learning from non-reward signals in the environment. Reward shaping is for providing denser
rewards. Hierarchical RL is for temporal abstraction. General value function, in particular, Horde,
universal function approximator, and hindsight experience replay, is for learning shared representa-
tion/knowledge among goals. Exploration techniques are for learning more from valuable actions.
Model-based RL can generate more data to learn from. Learning to learn, e.g., one/zero/few-shot
learning, transfer learning, and multi-task learning, learns from related tasks to achieve efﬁcient
learning. Incorporating inductive bias, structure, and knowledge can help achieve more intelligent
representation and problem formulation. And so on and so forth.
Finn (2017) and Levine (2018) discuss that sample efﬁciency improves roughly by ten times in each
step from one RL method to another in the following, from gradient-free methods, like CMA-ES,
fully online methods like A3C, policy gradient methods, like TRPO, value estimation methods with
reply buffer, like Q-learning, DQN, DDPG, and NAF, model-based deep RL methods, like guided
policy search (GPS), all the way to model-based ”shallow” RL methods, like PILCO.
Silver (2018) summarizes principles of deep RL: evaluation drives progress, scalability determines
success, generality future-proofs algorithms, trust in the agent?s experience, state is subjective, con-
trol the stream, value functions model the world, planning: learn from imagined experience, em-
power the function approximator, and, learn to learn.
Some issues deserve more discussions, in particular, safety and interpretability. We discuss sev-
eral aspects of AI safety, e.g., reward in Chapter 5, multi-agent RL in Chapter 12, and, adver-
sarial examples in Section 20.5. There are recent work on RL safety, e.g., Chow et al. (2018),
Huang et al. (2018), and Wen and Topcu (2018). See surveys for AI safety (Amodei et al., 2016;
Garc `ıa and Fern `andez, 2015). See a course on safety and control for artiﬁcial general intelligence,
athttp://inst.eecs.berkeley.edu/ ˜cs294-149/ . See blogs about safety, e.g., at
https://medium.com/@deepmindsafetyresearch . Doshi-Velez and Kim (2017), Lage
et al. (2018), Lipton (2018), and Melis and Jaakkola (2018) discuss issues of interpretability. Zhang
and Zhu (2018) survey visual interpretability for deep learning.
21.2 C HALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES
In the following, we discuss issues in deep RL, and propose research directions as both challenges
and opportunities, which are challenging, or even widely open.
Rahimi and Recht (2017b) raise the concern that ”machine learning has become alchemy”. This
alludes in particular to deep learning. See their blogs, Rahimi and Recht (2017c), Rahimi and
Recht (2017a). In Sculley et al. (2018), Ali Rahimi and colleagues discuss productive changes
for empirical rigor, and recommend standards for empirical evaluation: tuning methodology, sliced
analysis, ablation studies, sanity checks and counterfactuals, and at least one negative result.
Lipton and Steinhardt (2018) discuss troubling trends in machine learning, including failure to dis-
tinguish between explanation and speculation, failure to identify the sources of empirical gains,
mathiness, which obfuscates or impresses but not clariﬁes with mathematics, and, misuse of lan-
103