8 R EPRESENTATION
Representation is fundamental to reinforcement learning, machine learning, and AI in general. For
RL, it is relevant not only to function approximation for state/observation, action, value function,
reward function, transition probability, but also to agent (Albrechta and Stone, 2018; Rabinowitz
et al., 2018), environment, and any element in a RL problem. The ”representation” in ”represen-
tation learning” basically refers to the ”feature” in ”feature engineering”. Representation learning
is an approach to automatically ﬁnd good features. Here we discuss ”representation” in a broader
perspective, i.e., about any element in a RL problem. Besides the ”feature” for function approxima-
tion, we also refer ”representation” to problem representation, like Markov decision process (MDP),
partially observable Markov decision process (POMDP), and, predictive state representation (PSR),
and, moreover, for representing knowledge, reasoning, causality, and human intelligence, either in
function approximation, or in discovering new neural network architectures. We attempt to use such
a notion of ”representation” to unify the roles deep learning has played, is playing, and would play
in various aspects of deep reinforcement learning.
When the problem is small, both state and action can be accommodated in a table, we can use a
tabular representation. For large-scale problems, we need function approximation, to avoid curse of
dimensionality. One approach is linear function approximation, using basis functions like polyno-
mial bases, tile-coding, radial basis functions, Fourier basis, and proto-value functions (PVFs), etc.
We also discuss representations for state distributions, in particular, successor representation, which
is related to value function.
Recently, non-linear function approximations, in particular, deep neural networks, show exciting
achievements. Common neural network structures include multiple layer perceptron (MLP), convo-
lutional neural networks (CNNs), recurrent neural networks (RNNs), in particular long short time
memory (LSTM) and gated recurrent unit (GRU), (variational) autoencoder, and capsules, etc. There
are new neural network architectures customized for RL problems, e.g., value iteration networks
(VIN), predictron, and value prediction networks (VPN), etc.
General value function (GVF) is an approach to learn, represent, and use knowledge of the world.
Hierarchical representations, like options, feudal networks, and max-Q, etc. handle temporal ab-
straction. Relational RL integrates statistical relational learning and reasoning with RL to handle
entities and relations.
There are renewed interests in deploying or designing networks for reasoning, including graph neural
networks (GNN), graph networks (GN), relational networks (RNs), and compositional attention net-
works, etc. There are discussions about addressing issues of current machine learning with causality,
and incorporating more human intelligence into artiﬁcial intelligence.
Although there have been enormous efforts for representation, since reinforcement learning is fun-
damentally different from supervised learning and unsupervised learning, an optimal representation
for RL is probably different from generic CNN and RNN, thus it is desirable to search for an optimal
representation for RL. Our hypothesis is that this would follow a holistic approach, by considering
perception and control together, rather than treating them separately, e.g., by deciding a CNN to
handle visual inputs, then ﬁxing the network, and designing some procedure to ﬁnd optimal weights
for value function and/or policy. Learning to learn techniques as we discuss in Chapter 14 may play
an important role here.
8.1 C LASSICS
In this section, we discuss classical methods for representation, as well as several papers for re-
cent progress. We discuss (linear) function approximation, which is usually for value function and
policy approximation. We then discuss representations for an RL problem description, i.e., state,
transitions and reward, including, partially observable Markov decision process (POMDP), predic-
tive state representation (PSR), and, contextual decision process (CDP). We also discuss successor
representation for state visitation, and work for state-action distribution.
46