stochastic decision process, and a hard Atari game, Montezuma’s Revenge. See the open source at
https://github.com/mrkulk/hierarchical-deep-RL
FEUDAL NETWORKS
Vezhnevets et al. (2017) propose feudal networks (FuNs) for hierarchical RL, inspired by feudal
RL (Dayan and Hinton, 1993). In FuNs, a Manager module discovers and sets abstract sub-goals
and operates at a long time scale, and a Worker module selects atom actions at every time step of the
environment to achieve the sub-goal set by the Manager. FuNs decouple end-to-end learning across
multiple levels at different time scales, by separating the Manager module from the Worker module,
to facilitate long time scale credit assignment and emergence of sub-policies for sub-goals set by the
Manager. In FuNs, sub-goals are formulated as directions in the latent space, so that the Manager
selects a subgoal direction to maximize reward, and the Worker selects actions to maximize cosine
similarity to the direction of the subgoal set by the Manager. The authors utilize a dilated LSTM to
design the Manager to allow backpropagation through long time steps, and experiment FuNs with a
water maze and Atari games.
OPTION -CRITIC
Bacon et al. (2017) derive policy gradient theorems for options, and propose an option-critic archi-
tecture to learn both intra-option policies and termination conditions gradually, at the same time
with the policy-over-options, combining options discovery with options learning. The option-
critic architecture works with linear and non-linear function approximations, with discrete or
continuous state and action spaces, and without rewards or sub-goals. The authors experiment
with a four-room domain, a pinball domain, and Atari games. See the open source at https:
//github.com/jeanharb/option_critic .
Harutyunyan et al. (2018) study the dilemma between efﬁciency of long options and ﬂexibility of
short ones in the option-critic architecture. The authors decouple the behaviour and target termina-
tion conditions, similar to off-policy learning for policies, and propose to cast options learning as
multi-step off-policy learning, The authors show beneﬁts of learning short options from longer ones,
by analysis and with experiments.
Riemer et al. (2018) further study the option-critic architecture.
OPTION DISCOVERY WITH A L APLACIAN FRAMEWORK
Machado et al. (2017) propose to discover options with proto-value functions (PVFs) (Mahadevan
and Maggioni, 2007), which are well-known for representation in MDPs and deﬁne options implic-
itly. The authors introduce the concepts of eigen-purpose and eigen-behavior. An eigen-purpose is
an intrinsic reward function, to motivate an agent to traverse in principle directions of the learned
representation of state space. An eigen-behavior is the optimal policy for an intrinsic reward func-
tion. The authors discover task-independent options, since the eigen-purposes are obtained without
reward information. The authors observe that some options are not helpful for exploration, although
they improve the efﬁciency of planning. The authors further show that the options they discover
improve exploration, since these options operate at different time scales, and they can be sequenced
easily. The authors experiment with tabular domains and Atari games.
STRATEGIC ATTENTIVE WRITER
Vezhnevets et al. (2016) propose strategic attentive writer (STRAW), a deep recurrent neural net-
work architecture, for learning high-level temporally abstract macro-actions in an end-to-end man-
ner based on observations from the environment. Macro-actions are sequences of actions commonly
occurring. STRAW builds a multi-step action plan, updated periodically based on observing re-
wards, and learns for how long to commit to the plan by following it without replanning. STRAW
learns to discover macro-actions automatically from data, in contrast to the manual approach in pre-
vious work. Vezhnevets et al. (2016) validate STRAW on next character prediction in text, 2D maze
navigation, and Atari games.
60