MORE WORK
Osband et al. (2016) propose bootstrapped DQN to combine deep exploration with deep neural
networks to achieve efﬁcient learning. The authors use randomized value functions to implement
Thompson sampling, to enable exploration with non-linear function approximation, such as deep
neural networks, and a policy is selected randomly according to its probability being optimal. The
authors implement bootstrapped DQN by building multiple estimates of the action value function in
parallel, and each estimate is trained with its own target network. The authors evaluate the perfor-
mance of bootstrapped DQN with Atari games.
Nachum et al. (2017) propose under-appreciated reward exploration (UREX) to avoid the ineffective,
undirected exploration strategies of the reward landscape, as in -greedy and entropy regularization
policy gradient, and to promote directed exploration of the regions, in which the log-probability of an
action sequence under the current policy under-estimates the resulting reward. UREX results from
importance sampling from the optimal policy, and combines a mode seeking and a mean seeking
terms to tradeoff exploration and exploitation. The authors implement UREX with minor modiﬁca-
tions to REINFORCE, and validate it, for the ﬁrst time with a RL method, on several algorithmic
tasks. UREX is an effort for symbolic deep RL.
Azar et al. (2017) study the problem of provably optimal exploration for ﬁnite horizon MDPs. Fu
et al. (2017) propose novelty detection with discriminative modeling for exploration. Fortunato
et al. (2018) propose NoisyNet for efﬁcient exploration by adding parametric noises to weights
of deep neural networks. Jiang et al. (2017) study systematic exploration for contextual decision
processes (CDPs). See also Dimakopoulou et al. (2018), Dong and Roy (2018), Gupta et al. (2018),
Kumaraswamy et al. (2018), Madhavan et al. (2018), and, Osband et al. (2018).
Also note that maximum entropy RL helps exploration, as discussed in Section 4.4.
45