19.3 B USINESS MANAGEMENT
Li et al. (2010) formulate personalized news articles recommendation as a contextual bandit prob-
lem, to learn an algorithm to select articles sequentially for users based on contextual information
of users and articles, such as historical activities of users and descriptive information and categories
of content, and to take user-click feedback to adapt selection policy to maximize total user clicks in
the long run.
Theocharous et al. (2015) formulate a personalized ads recommendation systems as a RL problem to
maximize life-time value (LTV) with theoretical guarantees. This is in contrast to a myopic solution
with supervised learning or contextual bandit formulation, usually with the performance metric of
click through rate (CTR). As the models are hard to learn, the authors deploy a model-free approach
to compute a lower-bound on the expected return of a policy to address the off-policy evaluation
problem, i.e., how to evaluate a RL policy without deployment.
Jiang and Li (2016) study off-policy value evaluation by extending the doubly robust estimator for
bandits. The proposed method helps safety in policy improvements and applies to both shallow
and deep RL. One experiment is about maximizing lifetime value of customers. Silver et al. (2013)
propose concurrent reinforcement learning for the customer interaction problem. See Cai et al.
(2018b) for mechanism design for fraudulent behaviour in e-commerce, Hu et al. (2018a) for ranking
in e-commerce search engine, Hu et al. (2018c) for incentive mechanism design in crowdsourcing,
Lattimore et al. (2018) for ranking, Nazari et al. (2018) for vehicle routing in operations research,
Shi et al. (2018) for visualization of online retail environment for RL, and, Zhao et al. (2018b), Zhao
et al. (2018c) and Zheng et al. (2018a) for recommendation. See Zhang et al. (2017) for a survey on
recommendation.
See Section 16.7 Personalized Web Services in Sutton and Barto (2018) for a detailed and intuitive
description of some topics discussed here.
95