of AI and machine learning for workforce. There are also many articles, e.g., in Harvard Business
Review, like Agrawal et al. (2017), Ng (2016a), and Ng (2016c). See recent books about the science
and technology of AI and machine learning, and their implications for business and society, e.g.,
Agrawal et al. (2018), Domingos (2015), and Lee (2018).
Nature in May 2015 and Science in July 2015 featured survey papers on machine learning and AI.
Science Robotics was launched in 2016. Science has a special issue on July 7, 2017 about AI on
The Cyberscientist. Nature Machine Intelligence was launched in January 2019. These illustrate the
apparent importance of AI. It is interesting to mention that NIPS 2018 main conference was sold out
in less than 12 minutes after opening for registration; see (Li, 2018) .
Deep learning was among MIT Technology Review 10 Breakthrough Technologies in 2013. We
have been witnessing the dramatic development of deep learning in both academia and industry in
the last few years. Reinforcement learning was among MIT Technology Review 10 Breakthrough
Technologies in 2017. Deep learning has made many achievements, has ”conquered” speech recog-
nition, computer vision, and now NLP, is more mature and well-accepted, and has been validated by
products and market. In contrast, RL has lots of (potential yet promising) applications, yet not many
wide-spread products so far. RL may still need better algorithms, and may still need products and
market validation. Prediction is very difﬁcult, especially about the future. However, it is probably
the right time to nurture, educate and lead the market for reinforcement learning. We will see both
deep learning and reinforcement learning prospering in the coming years and beyond.
Deep learning, in this third wave of AI, will have deeper inﬂuences, as we have already seen from
its many achievements. Reinforcement learning, as a more general learning and decision making
paradigm, will deeply inﬂuence deep learning, machine learning, and artiﬁcial intelligence in gen-
eral. It is interesting to mention that when Professor Rich Sutton started working in the University
of Alberta in 2003, he named his lab RLAI: Reinforcement Learning and Artiﬁcial Intelligence.
110