direction 6, develop killer applications for (deep) RL, are about the whole RL problem, about all
issues in RL, like credit assignment, sparse reward, time/space/sample efﬁciency, accuracy, stabil-
ity, convergence, interpretability, safety, scalability, robustness, simplicity, etc, from different angles
of representation, automation, and application, respectively. We expect all these research directions
to be open, except the ﬁrst one, which is also challenging, and progress in these directions would
deepen our understanding of (deep) RL, and push further frontiers of AI.
21.3 E PILOGUE
It is both the best and the worst of times for the ﬁeld of deep RL, for the same reason: it has
been growing so fast and so enormously. We have been witnessing breakthroughs, exciting new
algorithms, architectures, and applications, and we expect to see much more and much faster. As
a consequence, this manuscript is incomplete, in the sense of both depth and width. However, we
attempt to summarize important achievements and discuss potential directions and applications in
this amazing ﬁeld.
Value function is central to reinforcement learning, e.g., in Deep Q-Network and its many exten-
sions. Policy optimization approaches have been gaining traction, with many new algorithms, and
in many, diverse applications, e.g., robotics, neural architecture design, spoken dialogue systems,
machine translation, attention, and learning to learn, etc. This list is boundless. New learning mech-
anisms have emerged, e.g., using learning to learn, unsupervised learning, self-supervised learning,
etc., to improve the quality and speed of learning, and more new mechanisms will be emerging.
This is the renaissance of reinforcement learning (Krakovsky, 2016). In fact, deep learning and
reinforcement learning have been making steady progress even during the last AI winter.
We have seen breakthroughs about deep RL, including DQN (Mnih et al., 2015), AlphaGo (Silver
et al., 2016a; 2017), and DeepStack (Morav ˇc´ık et al., 2017).
Exciting achievements abound: differentiable neural computer (Graves et al., 2016), unsupervised
reinforcement and auxiliary learning (Jaderberg et al., 2017), asynchronous methods (Mnih et al.,
2016), guided policy search (Levine et al., 2016), generative adversarial imitation learning (Ho and
Ermon, 2016), and neural architecture design (Zoph and Le, 2017), etc. There are also many recent,
novel applications of (deep) RL in many, diverse areas as discussed in previous chapters. Creativity
would push the frontiers of deep RL further with respect to core elements, important mechanisms,
and applications. In general, RL is probably helpful, if a problem can be regarded as or transformed
to a sequential decision making problem, and states, actions, maybe rewards, can be constructed.
Roughly speaking, if a task involves some manual designed ”strategy”, then there is a chance for
reinforcement learning to help to automate and optimize the strategy.
Having a better understanding of how deep learning works is helpful for deep learning, machine
learning, and AI. Poggio et al. (2017) review why and when deep- but not shallow-networks can
avoid the curse of dimensionality. See Stanford STATS 385 course on Theories of Deep Learning at
https://stats385.github.io . See Arora (2018) about theoretical understanding of deep
learning. There are also papers for interpretability of deep learning, e.g. Doshi-Velez and Kim
(2017), Lipton (2018), and Zhang and Zhu (2018).
It is important to investigate comments/criticisms for further progress. A popular criticism about
deep learning is that it is a blackbox, or even an ”alchemy” during the NIPS 2017 Test of Time Award
speech (Rahimi and Recht, 2007). Lake et al. (2016) discuss incorporating machine intelligence
with human intelligence for stronger AI; one commentary, Botvinick et al. (2017), discusses the
importance of autonomy. Jordan (2018) discusses issues with AI. Darwiche (2018) discusses deep
learning in the context of AI. See Peter Norvig’s perspective (Press, 2016). Marcus (2018) criticizes
deep learning, and Dietterich (2018) responds. Watch two debates, LeCun and Marcus (2017),
LeCun and Manning (2018). See Stoica et al. (2017) for systems challenges for AI.
It is worthwhile to envision deep RL considering perspectives from the society, academia and in-
dustry on AI, e.g., Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Automation, and the Economy, Executive Ofﬁce of the
President, USA; Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Life in 2030 - One Hundred Year Study on Artiﬁcial
Intelligence: Report of the 2015-2016 Study Panel, Stanford University (Stone et al., 2016); and AI,
Machine Learning and Data Fuel the Future of Productivity by The Goldman Sachs Group, Inc.,
etc. Brynjolfsson and Mitchell (2017) and Mitchell and Brynjolfsson (2017) discuss implications
109