w.r.t. BLEU score, and show that an attention mechanism has better time efﬁciency and is more
parallelizable than recurrent models. Dehghani et al. (2018) extend Transformer. See open source
athttps://github.com/tensorflow/tensor2tensor , in particular, for Dehghani et al.
(2018) at https://goo.gl/72gvdq . Tang et al. (2018b) study the hypothesis that self-attention
and CNNs, rather than RNNs, can extract semantic features to improve long range dependences in
texts with NLP tasks.
MEMORY
Weston et al. (2015) propose memory networks to combine inference with a long-term memory,
which could be read from and written to, and train these two components to use them jointly. The
authors present a speciﬁc implementation of the general framework on the task of question answer-
ing (QA), where the memory works as a dynamic knowledge base, and evaluate on a large-scale QA
task and a smaller yet complex one.
Sukhbaatar et al. (2015) extend Weston et al. (2015) with a recurrent attention model over a large
external memory, train in an end-to-end way, and experiment with question answering and language
modelling tasks. See open source at https://github.com/facebook/MemNN .
Graves et al. (2016) propose differentiable neural computer (DNC), in which, a neural network
can read from and write to an external memory, so that DNC can solve complex, structured prob-
lems, which a neural network without read-write memory can not solve. DNC minimizes memory
allocation interference and enables long-term storage. Similar to a conventional computer, in a
DNC, the neural network is the controller and the external memory is the random-access memory,
and a DNC represents and manipulates complex data structures with the memory. Differently, a
DNC learns such representation and manipulation end-to-end with gradient descent from data in
a goal-directed manner. When trained with supervised learning, a DNC can solve synthetic ques-
tion answering problems, for reasoning and inference in natural language. Moreover, it can solve
the shortest path ﬁnding problem between two stops in transportation networks and the relation-
ship inference problem in a family tree. When trained with reinforcement learning, a DNC can
solve a moving blocks puzzle with changing goals speciﬁed by symbol sequences. DNC outper-
forms normal neural network like LSTM or DNC’s precursor neural Turing machine (Graves et al.,
2014). With harder problems, an LSTM may simply fail. Although these experiments are rela-
tively small-scale, we expect to see further improvements and applications of DNC. See a blog at
https://deepmind.com/blog/differentiable-neural-computers/ .
Wayne et al. (2018) propose memory, RL, and inference network (MERLIN) to deal with partial
observability, by equipping with extensive memory, and more importantly, formatting memory in
the right way for storing right information trained with unsupervised predictive modelling. The
author evaluate MERLIN on behavioural tasks in psychology and neurobiology, which may have
high dimension sensory input and long duration of experiences.
55