1991), as studied recently in Bellemare et al. (2016). Intrinsic motivation methods do not require
Markov property and tabular representation as count-based methods. Watch a video (Barto, 2017).
See ICML 2018 workshop on Exploration in RL at, https://sites.google.com/view/
erl-2018/home , andhttps://goo.gl/yxf16n for videos.
Levine (2018) discusses three classes of exploration methods in deep RL: 1) optimistic exploration
methods, which estimate state visitation frequencies or novelty, typically with exploration bonuses,
e.g., Bellemare et al. (2016), Fu et al. (2017), Schmidhuber (1991), and Tang et al. (2017); 2)
Thompson sampling methods, which learn distribution over Q-functions or policies, then act ac-
cording to samples, e.g., Osband et al. (2016); 3) information gain methods, which reason about
information gain from visiting new states, e.g., Houthooft et al. (2016). All these three methods
follow the principle of optimism in the face of uncertainty.
In the above, we discuss background of exploration and exploitation largely based on Lecture 9:
Exploration and Exploitation in Silver (2015), as well as, the lecture about exploration in Levine
(2018), Chapter 2 in (Sutton and Barto, 2018) about multi-armed bandits, and, relevant papers. Lat-
timore and Szepesv ´ari (2018) is about bandit algorithms. Li (2012) surveys theoretical approaches
to exploration efﬁciency in RL.
In the following we discuss several recent work about exploration in the setting of large scale RL
problems, in particular deep RL.
COUNT -BASED METHODS
With the count-based exploration, a RL agent uses visit counts to guide its behaviour to reduce un-
certainty. However, count-based methods are not directly useful in large domains. Bellemare et al.
(2016) propose pseudo-count, a density model over the state space, for exploration with function
approximation, to unify count-based exploration and intrinsic motivation, by introducing informa-
tion gain, to relate to conﬁdence intervals in count-based exploration, and to relate learning progress
in intrinsic motivation. The authors establish pseudo-count’s theoretical advantage over previous
intrinsic motivation methods, implement it with a density model, use it as exploration bonuses in
MBIE-EB (Strehl and Littman, 2008), in experience replay and actor-critic settings, and study its
empirical performance with Atari games.
Ostrovski et al. (2017) further study the approach of pseudo-count (Bellemare et al., 2016) w.r.t.
importance of density model selection, modelling assumptions, and role of mixed Monte Carlo
update, and propose to use a neural density model for images, PixelCNN (van den Oord et al., 2016),
for supplying pseudo-count, and combine it with various agent architectures, including DQN (Mnih
et al., 2015) and Reactor (Gruslys et al., 2017). The authors observe that mixed Monte Carlo update
facilitate exploration in settings with sparse rewards, like in the game of Montezuma’s Revenge.
Tang et al. (2017) propose to implement the count-based exploration method by mapping states to
hash codes to count occurrences with a hash table, and the counts are used for reward bonus to guide
exploration. The authors experiment with simple hash functions and a learned domain-dependent
hash code on both Atari games and continuous control tasks.
INTRINSIC MOTIVATION
Houthooft et al. (2016) propose variational information maximizing exploration (VIME), a
curiosity-driven exploration approach to simultaneously optimizing both external reward and intrin-
sic surprise, for continuous state and action spaces. The authors propose to measure the information
gain with variance inference, and to approximate the posterior distribution of an agent’s internal
belief of environment dynamics, represented with Bayesian neural networks. The authors evaluate
VIME with various continuous control tasks and algorithms.
Pathak et al. (2017) study curiosity-driven exploration with intrinsic reward signal for predicting the
result of its actions with self-supervised learning, and experiment with VizDoom and Super Mario
Bros.
44