5 R EWARD
Rewards provide evaluative feedbacks for a RL agent to make decisions. Reward function is a
mathematical formulation for rewards.
Rewards may be sparse so that it is challenging for learning algorithms, e.g., in computer Go, a re-
ward occurs at the end of a game. Hindsight experience replay (Andrychowicz et al., 2017) is a way
to handle sparse rewards, as we discuss in Chapter 3. Unsupervised auxiliary learning (Jaderberg
et al., 2017) is an unsupervised ways to harness environmental signals, as we discuss in Chapter 10.
Reward shaping is to modify reward function to facilitate learning while maintaining optimal policy.
Ng et al. (2000) show that potential-based reward shaping can maintain optimality of the policy.
Reward shaping is usually a manual endeavour. Jaderberg et al. (2018) employ a learning approach
in an end-to-end training pipeline.
Reward functions may not be available for some RL problems. In imitation learning, an agent
learns to perform a task from expert demonstrations, with samples of trajectories from the expert,
without reinforcement signal. Two main approaches for imitation learning are behavioral cloning
and inverse reinforcement learning. Behavioral cloning, or learning from demonstration, maps state-
action pairs from expert trajectories to a policy, maybe as supervised learning, without learning the
reward function (Ho et al., 2016; Ho and Ermon, 2016).
Levine (2018) discusses about imitation learning and RL. Pure imitation learning is supervised learn-
ing, stable and well-studied; however, it encounters the issue of distributional shift, and it can not
perform better than the demonstrations. Pure RL is unbiased, and can improve until optimal, how-
ever, with challenging issues of exploration and optimization. Initialization with imitation learning
then ﬁne-tuning with RL can take advantage of both approaches; however, it can forget initializa-
tion from demonstration due to distributional shift. Pure RL with demonstrations as off-policy data
is still RL, keeping advantages of RL; however, demonstrations may not always help. A hybrid
objective including both RL and imitation objectives, can take advantage of both, do not forget
demonstrations; however, it is not pure RL, may be biased, and may require considerable tuning.
Inverse reinforcement learning (IRL) is the problem of determining a reward function given observa-
tions of optimal behaviour (Ng and Russell, 2000). Abbeel and Ng (2004) approach apprenticeship
learning via IRL. Finn et al. (2016b) study inverse optimal cost. Probabilistic approaches are devel-
oped for IRL with maximum entropy (Ziebart et al., 2008) and maximum causal entropy (Ziebart
et al., 2010) to deal with uncertainty in noisy and imperfect demonstrations. Ross et al. (2010) re-
duce imitation learning and structured prediction (Daum ´e et al., 2009) to no-regret online learning,
and propose DAGGER, which requires interaction with the expert. Syed and Schapire (2007), Syed
et al. (2008), and Syed and Schapire (2010) study apprenticeship learning with linear programming,
game theory, and reduction to classiﬁcation.
A reward function may not represent the intention of the designer. A negative side effect of
a misspeciﬁed reward refers to potential poor behaviours resulting from missing important as-
pects (Amodei et al., 2016). Hadﬁeld-Menell et al. (2017) give an old example about the wish
of King Midas, that everything he touched, turned into gold. Unfortunately, his intention did not
include food, family members, and many more. Russell and Norvig (2009) give an example that a
vacuum cleaner collects more dust to receive more rewards by ejecting collected dust.
Singh et al. (2009) and Singh et al. (2010) discuss fundamental issues like, homeostatic vs. non-
homeostatic (heterostatic) theories, primary rewards vs. conditioned or secondary rewards, internal
vs. external environments, intrinsic vs. extrinsic motivation, and, intrinsic vs. extrinsic reward. The
authors then formulate an optimal reward computational framework. Oudeyer and Kaplan (2007)
present a typology of computational approaches to these concepts.
See Yue and Le (2018) for a tutorial on imitation learning, Rhinehart et al. (2018) for a tutorial on
IRL for computer vision, and, Argall et al. (2009) for a survey of robot learning from demonstration.
See NIPS 2018 Workshop on Imitation Learning and its Challenges in Robotics, at https://
sites.google.com/view/nips18-ilr .
In the following, we ﬁrst discuss RL methods with and without reward learning respectively, when
there is no reward function given. We then discuss an approach to handle complex reward functions.
36