https://doi.org/10.1007/s12559-019-09667-7
HowDeepShouldbetheDepthofConvolutionalNeuralNetworks:
aBackyardDogCaseStudy
AlexanderN.Gorban1,2·EvgenyM.Mirkes1,2·IvanY.Tyukin1,2,3
Received:2October2018/Accepted:3July2019
©TheAuthor(s)2019
Abstract
The work concerns the problem of reducing a pre-trained deep neuronal network to a smaller network, with just few layers,
whilst retaining the network’s functionality on a given task. In this particular case study, we are focusing on the networks
developed for the purposes of face recognition. The proposed approach is motivated by the observation that the aim to deliver
the highest accuracy possible in the broadest range of operational conditions, which many deep neural networks models
strive to achieve, may not necessarily be always needed, desired or even achievable due to the lack of data or technical
constraints. In relation to the face recognition problem, we formulated an example of such a use case, the ‘backyard dog’
problem. The ‘backyard dog’, implemented by a lean network, should correctly identify members from a limited group of
individuals, a ‘family’, and should distinguish between them. At the same time, the network must produce an alarm to an
image of an individual who is not in a member of the family, i.e. a ‘stranger’. To produce such a lean network, we propose
a network shallowing algorithm. The algorithm takes an existing deep learning model on its input and outputs a shallowed
version of the model. The algorithm is non-iterative and is based on the advanced supervised principal component analysis.
Performance of the algorithm is assessed in exhaustive numerical experiments. Our experiments revealed that in the above
use case, the ‘backyard dog’ problem, the method is capable of drastically reducing the depth of deep learning neural
networks, albeit at the cost of mild performance deterioration. In this work, we proposed a simple non-iterative method
for shallowing down pre-trained deep convolutional networks. The method is generic in the sense that it applies to a broad
class of feed-forward networks, and is based on the advanced supervise principal component analysis. The method enables
generation of families of smaller-size shallower specialized networks tuned for specific operational conditions and tasks
from a single larger and more universal legacy network.
Keywords Non-iterative learning ·Principal component analysis ·Convolutional neural networks
/envelopebackIvan Y . Tyukin
I.Tyukin@le.ac.uk
Alexander N. Gorban
a.n.gorban@le.ac.uk
Evgeny M. Mirkes
em322@le.ac.uk
1University of Leicester, Leicester LE1 7RH, UK
2Lobachevsky State University of Nizhny Novgorod, Prospekt
Ganarina 23, Nizhny Novgorod, 603950, Russian Federation
3Saint-Petersburg State Electrotechnical University (LETI),
Prof. Popova 5, Saint-Petersburg, Russian FederationIntroduction
With the explosive pace of progress in computing, availabi-
lity of cloud resources and open-source dedicated software
frameworks, current artificial intelligence (AI) systems are
now capable of spotting minute patterns in large data sets
and may outperform humans and early-generation AIs in
highly complicated cognitive tasks including object detec-
tion [ 1], medical diagnosis [ 2] and face and facial expression
recognition [ 3,4]. At the centre of these successes are deep
neural networks and deep learning technology [ 5,6].
Despite this, several fundamental challenges remain
which constrain and impede further progress. In theCognitiveComputation (2020) 12:388 –397
/Publishedonline:7 2019 August