context of face recognition [ 4], these include the need for
larger volumes of high-resolution and balanced training
and validation data as well as the inevitable presence of
hardware constraints limiting training and deployment of
large models. Consequences of imbalanced training and
testing data may have significant performance implications.
At the same time, hardware limitations, such as memory
constraints, restrict adoption, development and spread
of technology. These challenges constitute fundamental
obstacles for creation of universal data-driven AI systems,
including for face recognition.
The challenge of overcoming hardware limitations whilst
maintaining functionality of the underlying AI received
significant attention in the literature. Heuristic definition
of an efficient neural network was proposed in 1993:
delivery of maximal performance (or skills) with minimal
number of connections (parameters) [ 7]. Various algorithms
of neural networks optimization were proposed in the
beginning of the 1990s [ 8,9]. MobileNet [ 10], SqueezeNet
[11], DeepRebirth [ 12] and EfficientNets [ 13] are more
recent examples of the approaches in this direction.
Notwithstanding, however, the need for developing generic
and flexible universal systems for a wide spectrum of tasks
and conditions, there is a range of practical problems in
which such universality may not be needed or required.
These tasks may require smaller volumes of data and could
be deployed on cheaper and accessible hardware. It is hence
imperative that these tasks are identified and investigated,
both computationally and analytically.
In this paper, we present and formally define such a
task in the remit of face recognition: the ‘backyard dog’
problem. The task, on the one hand, appears to be a
close relative of the standard face recognition problem.
On the other, it is more relaxed which enables us to
lift limitations associated with the availability of data
and computational resources. For this task, we propose
a technology and an algorithm for constructing a family
of the ‘backyard dog’ networks derived from larger pre-
trained legacy convolutional neural nets (CNN). The idea
to exploit existing pre-trained networks is well known in
the face recognition literature [ 14–18]. Our algorithm shares
some similarity to [ 18] in that it exploits existing parts
of the legacy system and uses them in a dedicated post-
processing step. In our case, however, we apply these
steps methodically across all layers; at the post-processing
step, we employ advanced supervised principal component
analysis (PCA) [ 19,20] rather than conventional PCA, and
do not use support vector machines.
Implementation of the technology and performance
of the algorithm is illustrated with a particular network
architecture, VGG net [ 15], and implemented on two
computational platforms. The first platform was Raspberry
Pi 3B with Broadcom BCM2387 chipset, 64-bit CPU1.2 GHz Quad-Core ARM Cortex-A53 and 1 GiB memory
with OS Raspbian Jessie. We will refer to it as ‘Pi’. The
second platform was HP EliteBook laptop with Intel Core
i7-840QM (4 x 1.86 GHz) CPU and 8 GiB of memory
with OS Windows 7. We refer to this platform as ‘Laptop’.
In view of Pi3 memory limitations (1 GiB), we required
that the ‘backyard dog’ occupies no more than than 300
MiB. The overall workflow, however, is generic and should
transfer well to other models and platforms.
The manuscript is organized as follows: in Section
“Preliminaries and Problem Formulation ”, we review the
conventional face recognition problem, formulate the ‘back-
yard dog’ problem, assess several popular deep network archi-
tectures and select a test-bed architecture for implementa-
tion; Section “ The ‘backyard dog’ Generator ” describes the
proposed shallowing technology for creation of the ‘back-
yard dog’ nets and illustrates it with an example; Section
“Conclusion ” concludes the paper.
PreliminariesandProblemFormulation
Face recognition is arguably among the hardest technical
and computational problems. If posed as a conventional
multi-class classification problem, it is ill-defined as acquir-
ing samples from all classes, i.e. all identifies, is hardly
possible. Therefore, state-of-the-art modern face recogni-
tion systems do not approach it as the multi-class classifica-
tion problem. Not at least at the stage of deployment. These
systems are often asked to answer another question: whether
two given images correspond to the same person or not.
The common idea is to map these images into a ‘feature
space’ with some metric (or a similarity measure) ρ.T h e
system is then trained to ensure that if xandyare images
corresponding to the same person then, for some ε> 0,
ρ(x,y) < ε ,a n dρ(x,y) > ε otherwise. At the decision
stage, if ρ(x,y) < ε thenx,y represent the same person,
and if ρ(x,y) > ε then they belong to different identities.
The problem with these generic systems is that validation
and performance quantification for such systems is chal-
lenging; they must work well for all persons and images,
including for identities these systems have never seen before.
It is thus hardly surprising that reports about performance
of neural networks in face recognition tasks are often over-
optimistic, with the accuracy of 98% and above [ 15–17]
demonstrated on few benchmark sets. There is a mounting
evidence that the training set bias, often present in face
recognition datasets, leads to deteriorated performance in
real-life applications [ 23]. If we use a human as a benchmark,
trained experts make 20% mistakes on the faces they
have never seen before [ 24]. Similar performance figures
have been reported for modern face recognition systems
when they assessed identities from populations that wereCognComput (2020) 12:388 –397 389