sults with experiments that aim at (1) quantifying the sensitivity of the performance to
random factors; (2) evaluating the overﬁtting by measuring on a different test set.
4.1 Comparison of training procedures for ResNet-50
Table 1 summarizes the main characteristics of our training procedure. To the best of
our knowledge, our procedure A1 surpasses the current state of the art on ImageNet
with a vanilla ResNet-50 architecture at resolution 224 224. Our other procedures A2
and A3 achieve lower but still high performance with less resources.
Performance comparison with other architectures. In Table 3 we report the perfor-
mance obtained when training different architectures with our training procedures.
This allows us to see how well they generalize to other models. Or procedures im-
proves the performance of several models over results reported in the literature, in
particular older ones and/or those most comparable to ResNet-50 in terms of architec-
ture and size. In some cases like ViT-B, we observe that A2 is better than A1, which
suggests that the hyper-parameters are not adapted to longer schedules (typically re-
quiring more regularization). For instance, the A2 training recipe achieves 81.8% top-1
accuracy when training a ResNet-152, but by increasing a bit the regularization we im-
proved it to 82.4% at resolution 224 224, which translates to 82.7% when evaluated at
resolution 256256.
In Table 3, we compare the performance and resources associated with our 3 train-
ing recipes when using them to train other architectures. We complement these re-
sults with Table 4, where we additionally include the performance and efﬁciency on
ImageNet-1k, ImageNet-V2 and ImageNet-Real for different architectures trained with
our best performing A1 training recipes.
4.2 Signiﬁcance of measurements: seed experiments
For a ﬁxed set of choices and hyper-parameters, there is some inherent variability on
the performance due to the presence of random factors in several stages. It is the case
for the weight initialization, but also for the optimization procedure itself. For instance
the order in which the images are fed to the network through batches depends on a
random generator. This variability raises the question of the signiﬁcance of accuracy
measurements. For this purpose, we measure the distribution of performance when
changing the random generator choices. This is conveniently done by changing the
seed, as previously done by Picard [30], who concludes to the exist of outliers signiﬁ-
cantly outperforming or underperforming the average outcome of a traing procedure.
In Figure 1, we report several statistics on the performance with the A2 training proce-
dure when considering 100 distinct seeds (from 1 to 100, note that we have used seed=0
in all other experiments). In these experiments, we focus on the performance reached
at the end of the training: we do not select the maximum obtained by intermediate
checkpoints in the last epochs. This would have a similar effect as a seed selection, but
the measures would not be IID and less disentangled from the training duration itself.
The standard deviation is typically around 0:1on ImageNet-val, see Figure 1. This
concurs with statistics reported in the literature for ResNet and other convnets [32]. The
variance is higher on ImageNet-V2 (std=0.23), which consists of a smaller set (10000 vs
50000 for -val) of images not present in the validation set. The mean 79.72% shows that
our main weights (seed 0) overestimates the average performance by about +0:13%.
Peak performance and control of overﬁtting To prevent to over-estimate too much
the accuracy on validation, during our exploration process we have selected only the
7