ResNet strikes back: An improved training
procedure in timm
Ross WightmanHugo Touvron?;yHerv ´e J´egou?
Independent researcher?Facebook AIySorbonne University
Abstract
The inﬂuential Residual Networks designed by He et al. remain the gold-standard
architecture in numerous scientiﬁc publications. They typically serve as the default
architecture in studies, or as baselines when new architectures are proposed. Yet
there has been signiﬁcant progress on best practices for training neural networks
since the inception of the ResNet architecture in 2015. Novel optimization & data-
augmentation have increased the effectiveness of the training recipes.
In this paper, we re-evaluate the performance of the vanilla ResNet-50 when
trained with a procedure that integrates such advances. We share competitive train-
ing settings and pre-trained models in the timm open-source library, with the hope
that they will serve as better baselines for future work. For instance, with our more
demanding training setting, a vanilla ResNet-50 reaches 80.4% top-1 accuracy at res-
olution 224224 on ImageNet-val without extra data or distillation. We also report
the performance achieved with popular models with our training procedure.
1 Introduction
In the last decade we have witnessed signiﬁcant advances in image classiﬁcation, as
reﬂected by improvement on benchmarks such as the ILSVRC’2012 challenge [36] or
other image classiﬁcation benchmarks, which are visible on popular websites1. Schemat-
ically, the increase of performance reﬂects the maximization by the community of a
problem of the form
accuracy (model) = f(A;T;N);
whereAis the architecture design, Tis the training setting along with its hyper-
parameters, andNis the measurement noise, in which we also include overﬁtting that
typically occurs when selecting the maximum over a large set of hyper-parameters or
choices of methods. Several good practices exist to mitigate N, like measuring the stan-
dard deviation with different seeds, using a separate evaluation dataset [34] or evalu-
ating models on transfer tasks. Putting aside N, measuring progress on AorTposes
a challenge as both AandTprogress over time. When optimizing jointly over ( A;T),
there is no guarantee that the optimal choice T1for a given architecture A1remains the
best for another model design A2. Therefore even when one compare models under the
same training procedure, one may implicitly favor one model over another. One good
practice to disentangle the improvement resulting from the training procedure from
that of the architecture is to ensure that the baseline incorporates new “ingredients”
1See for instance http://paperswithcode.com/task/image-classification
1arXiv:2110.00476v1  [cs.CV]  1 Oct 2021