noise appears to increase sensitivity of training results to random seed but has often
produced the best result in (so far, limited) sweeps with the same hyper-parameters.
Further analyzing the interplay between learning rate value, schedule, and noise, EMA
decay constant, and random seed is a future objective for reﬁning this training recipe.
This training strategy varies somewhat in effectiveness with batch size. Running ex-
periments for this paper with larger batch sizes in the 1024-2048 range has often come
slightly below (0.1 to 0.3 top-1) prior training runs with smaller sizes in the 256-768
range used for numerous timm pre-trained weights. It is unclear if this can be ad-
dressed with further hyper-parameter adjustments and different learning rate scaling
(linear used by default) across batch sizes.
See Table 11 for a summary of the procedure, including ranges of recommended of
values to search over for applying to different classiﬁcation task and architecture com-
binations. For larger model architectures it is advisable to focus on stronger augmen-
tation and regularization values within the suggested ranges. Looking at Table 3, the
original results for the timm speciﬁc EfﬁcientNetV2-S [42] variant and ECA-ResNet-
269-D were trained using this procedure, but with higher levels of augmentation and
regularization than for ResNet-50.
Training procedure C details (SGD with Nesterov’s momentum and AGC) This
recipe is based on the published procedure for training NFNets [5]: using SGD with
Nesterov’s momentum, Adaptive Gradient Clipping [5] (AGC), and heavy augmenta-
tion and regularization. AGC allows for stable large batch training at higher learning
rates. Stronger default augmentation and regularization make up for the loss of batch
normalization’s regularizing effect when paired with NFNets, but strengths can be re-
laxed when used with other architectures that use batch normalization. With some
adjustments, this procedure has been useful training architectures in timm such as
ECA-NFNet, ResNet, and EfﬁcientNet variants to impressive performance levels. The
original result for the timm EfﬁcientNetV2-M [42] variant in Table 3 was trained with
the C.1 recipe, but with signiﬁcantly higher augmentation and regularization than for
ResNet-50.
The C.1 vs C.2 versions of this procedure seen in Table 10 differ most signiﬁcantly in
the application of Repeated Augmentation. It should be noted that a shorter training
length of 600 epochs also works quite well in both cases, with an expected drop of
roughly 0.15-0.2 top-1 for the same seed. Table 12 includes ranges of the ingredients for
exploring with different tasks and architectures.
Training Procedure D details (AdamP) Late in the process for this report a training
trial using AdamP [16] showed promise. With limited runs so far a recipe based on
AdamP has achieved a 79.8 top-1 on ImageNet-1k. Further experimentation is neces-
sary, the trials so far were run at a comparatively small batch size, but the promising
results warrant exploration. Note that unlike RMSProp or SGD (but similar to Adam
and LAMB), it is recommended to use square root scaling when adjusting the learning
rate for this recipe across different batch sizes.
Table 13 contains the recommended ranges for the ingredients of this recipe. These
ranges have not been explored extensively across different model architectures as with
procedures B and C.
Other Recipes Undoubtedly, other training recipes with different combinations of
optimizer, learning rate schedule, augmentation, and regularization exist that can match
or surpass the performance of the procedures detailed in this report. Ingredients aside,
putting in the time and effort to tune the recipe with the target architecture is key. The
authors already have an AdamW recipe in the works that is looking promising.
21