Supplementary material
This supplemental material provides complementary results referred in the main
document, noticeably a presentation of the augmentation and regularization speciﬁcity
intimm and some alternative training procedures.
A Augmentations and Regularization in timm [50]
Thetimm library includes a variety of image augmentations, regularization techniques,
optimizers, and learning rate schedulers that can be used to produce leading results on
ImageNet classiﬁcation and other 2D image tasks. Many timm training components
have modiﬁcations and improvements from original implementations or papers de-
scribing them. One should be aware of these changes if using them.
Data Augmentation intimm includes implementations of RandAugment [8], Au-
toAugment [7], AugMix [15], Random Erasing [58], and an integrated implementation
of Mixup [56] and CutMix [55]. The base for all augmentations is typically Random
Resized Crop with horizontal ﬂipping.
RandAugment is the most used of the AA (AutoAugment) variants in timm – it also
contains the most signiﬁcant additions from the original paper and Tensorﬂow based
implementations – so we will focus on that implementation. The original RandAug-
ment speciﬁcation has two hyper-parameters, M and N; where M is the distortion mag-
nitude and N is the number of distortions uniformly sampled and applied per-image.
The goal of RandAugment was that both M and N be human interpretable. However,
that ended up not being the case for M. The scales of several augmentations were back-
wards or not monotonically increasing over the range such that increasing M does not
increase the strength of all augmentations.
This is most visible for image enhancement blending operations (color, contrast,
brightness, sharpness) where the argument value deﬁnes the behavior as follows:
0. selects the degenerate image
0.-1.0 interpolates between the degenerate and original image
1.0 returns original image
>1.0 extrapolates the original image way from the degenerate
Taking sharpness as an example, magnitudes of M0, M5, and M10 are mapped in
the original implementation to produce strong blurring (0.1), no-change (1.0), or strong
sharpening (1.9) respectively.
The implementation in timm attempts to improve this situation by adding an ‘in-
creasing’ mode (always enabled for recipes in this paper) where all augmentation strengths
increase with magnitude; solarize and posterize increase with M (instead of decrease),
and interpolation vs extrapolation for the blending operations is randomly chosen with
a strength that increases with M. This makes increasing M more intuitive and allows
an additional hyper-parameter to work well: timm adds a MSTD parameter which
adds gaussian noise with the speciﬁed standard deviation to the M value per distor-
tion application. Additionally, if MSTD is set to ‘-inf’, M is uniformly sampled from
0-M for each distortion. Without correcting the scales, one would often end up with
completely empty or heavily inverted images in ranges of M that are supposed to be
low in strength.
18