Care was taken in timm ’s RandAugment to reduce impact on image mean, the nor-
malization parameters can be passed as a parameter such that all augmentations that
may introduce border pixels can use the speciﬁed mean instead of defaulting to 0 or a
hard-coded tuple as in other implementations. And lastly, Cutout is excluded by de-
fault to favour separate use of timm ’s Random Erasing implementation which has less
impact on mean and standard deviation of the augmented images.
Random Erasing is another commonly used timm augmentation with modiﬁcations
from the original paper. The implementation in timm follows the original but allows
‘erasing’ image regions with per-pixel gaussian noise (mean 0, std 1.0) instead of a
uniform random or constant color (black or image mean) per-region. When applied
to images at the recommended location in the augmentation pipeline – after images
have been normalized (standardized) – this maintains image statistics and allows better
results with stronger application of the augmentation. A count parameter was also
added to timm ’s Random Erasing such that multiple regions can be erased per-image.
Mixup and CutMix are cleanly integrated in timm in a manner not common in other
implementations. Both can be enabled at the same time with a variety of different
mixing strategies:
batchwise CutMix vs Mixup selection, lambda and CutMix region sampling performed
per-batch
pairwise mixing, lambda, and region sampling performed per mixing sample pair
within batch
elementwise mixing, lambda, and region sampling performed per sample within batch
half the same as elementwise but one of each mixing pair is discarded so that each
sample is seen once per epoch
The default is to use either CutMix or Mixup with probability of 0.5 per-batch if
both are enabled – this is the case for all mentioned training procedures in this paper.
Regularization intimm is standard. It allows use of similar regularization for many
of the included models. Weight decay is available via either native PyTorch or timm
optimizers. The ability to enable pre-classiﬁer dropout is included in all model archi-
tectures. Stochastic-Depth has been added as an option to many of the most popular
model architectures (via a layer named DropPath). Label-smoothing is included via a
cross-entropy loss function and possible to use in combination with the label manipu-
lation of CutMix and Mixup.
B Alternative Training Procedures
The main training recipes in this paper uses the LAMB optimizer. Several sets of hyper-
parameter variations with differing training costs were presented with leading results
for the vanilla ResNet-50 architecture. Here, we introduce alternative training recipes
that also produce results matching or exceeding the best existing ResNet-50. The reader
may ﬁnd these are better suited for use or adaptation for their speciﬁc model architec-
ture, dataset, or task. The alternative recipes are:
Procedure B – RMSProp with EMA weight averaging and step LR decay;
19