4182for natural language understanding. In Proceedings
of the 2018 EMNLP Workshop BlackboxNLP: An-
alyzing and Interpreting Neural Networks for NLP ,
pages 353–355.
Wei Wang, Ming Yan, and Chen Wu. 2018b. Multi-
granularity hierarchical attention fusion networks
for reading comprehension and question answering.
InProceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1:
Long Papers) . Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Alex Warstadt, Amanpreet Singh, and Samuel R Bow-
man. 2018. Neural network acceptability judg-
ments. arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.12471 .
Adina Williams, Nikita Nangia, and Samuel R Bow-
man. 2018. A broad-coverage challenge corpus
for sentence understanding through inference. In
NAACL .
Yonghui Wu, Mike Schuster, Zhifeng Chen, Quoc V
Le, Mohammad Norouzi, Wolfgang Macherey,
Maxim Krikun, Yuan Cao, Qin Gao, Klaus
Macherey, et al. 2016. Google’s neural ma-
chine translation system: Bridging the gap between
human and machine translation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1609.08144 .
Jason Yosinski, Jeff Clune, Yoshua Bengio, and Hod
Lipson. 2014. How transferable are features in deep
neural networks? In Advances in neural information
processing systems , pages 3320–3328.
Adams Wei Yu, David Dohan, Minh-Thang Luong, Rui
Zhao, Kai Chen, Mohammad Norouzi, and Quoc V
Le. 2018. QANet: Combining local convolution
with global self-attention for reading comprehen-
sion. In ICLR .
Rowan Zellers, Yonatan Bisk, Roy Schwartz, and Yejin
Choi. 2018. Swag: A large-scale adversarial dataset
for grounded commonsense inference. In Proceed-
ings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) .
Yukun Zhu, Ryan Kiros, Rich Zemel, Ruslan Salakhut-
dinov, Raquel Urtasun, Antonio Torralba, and Sanja
Fidler. 2015. Aligning books and movies: Towards
story-like visual explanations by watching movies
and reading books. In Proceedings of the IEEE
international conference on computer vision , pages
19–27.
Appendix for “BERT: Pre-training of
Deep Bidirectional Transformers for
Language Understanding”
We organize the appendix into three sections:
• Additional implementation details for BERT
are presented in Appendix A;• Additional details for our experiments are
presented in Appendix B; and
• Additional ablation studies are presented in
Appendix C.
We present additional ablation studies for
BERT including:
–Effect of Number of Training Steps; and
–Ablation for Different Masking Proce-
dures.
A Additional Details for BERT
A.1 Illustration of the Pre-training Tasks
We provide examples of the pre-training tasks in
the following.
Masked LM and the Masking Procedure As-
suming the unlabeled sentence is my dog is
hairy , and during the random masking procedure
we chose the 4-th token (which corresponding to
hairy ), our masking procedure can be further il-
lustrated by
• 80% of the time: Replace the word with the
[MASK] token, e.g., my dog is hairy !
my dog is [MASK]
• 10% of the time: Replace the word with a
random word, e.g., my dog is hairy !my
dog is apple
• 10% of the time: Keep the word un-
changed, e.g., my dog is hairy !my dog
is hairy . The purpose of this is to bias the
representation towards the actual observed
word.
The advantage of this procedure is that the
Transformer encoder does not know which words
it will be asked to predict or which have been re-
placed by random words, so it is forced to keep
a distributional contextual representation of ev-
eryinput token. Additionally, because random
replacement only occurs for 1.5% of all tokens
(i.e., 10% of 15%), this does not seem to harm
the model’s language understanding capability. In
Section C.2, we evaluate the impact this proce-
dure.
Compared to standard langauge model training,
the masked LM only make predictions on 15% of
tokens in each batch, which suggests that more
pre-training steps may be required for the model