4178Dev Set
Tasks MNLI-m QNLI MRPC SST-2 SQuAD
(Acc) (Acc) (Acc) (Acc) (F1)
BERT BASE 84.4 88.4 86.7 92.7 88.5
No NSP 83.9 84.9 86.5 92.6 87.9
LTR & No NSP 82.1 84.3 77.5 92.1 77.8
+ BiLSTM 82.1 84.1 75.7 91.6 84.9
Table 5: Ablation over the pre-training tasks using the
BERT BASE architecture. “No NSP” is trained without
the next sentence prediction task. “LTR & No NSP” is
trained as a left-to-right LM without the next sentence
prediction, like OpenAI GPT. “+ BiLSTM” adds a ran-
domly initialized BiLSTM on top of the “LTR + No
NSP” model during ﬁne-tuning.
ablation studies can be found in Appendix C.
5.1 Effect of Pre-training Tasks
We demonstrate the importance of the deep bidi-
rectionality of BERT by evaluating two pre-
training objectives using exactly the same pre-
training data, ﬁne-tuning scheme, and hyperpa-
rameters as BERT BASE :
No NSP : A bidirectional model which is trained
using the “masked LM” (MLM) but without the
“next sentence prediction” (NSP) task.
LTR & No NSP : A left-context-only model which
is trained using a standard Left-to-Right (LTR)
LM, rather than an MLM. The left-only constraint
was also applied at ﬁne-tuning, because removing
it introduced a pre-train/ﬁne-tune mismatch that
degraded downstream performance. Additionally,
this model was pre-trained without the NSP task.
This is directly comparable to OpenAI GPT, but
using our larger training dataset, our input repre-
sentation, and our ﬁne-tuning scheme.
We ﬁrst examine the impact brought by the NSP
task. In Table 5, we show that removing NSP
hurts performance signiﬁcantly on QNLI, MNLI,
and SQuAD 1.1. Next, we evaluate the impact
of training bidirectional representations by com-
paring “No NSP” to “LTR & No NSP”. The LTR
model performs worse than the MLM model on all
tasks, with large drops on MRPC and SQuAD.
For SQuAD it is intuitively clear that a LTR
model will perform poorly at token predictions,
since the token-level hidden states have no right-
side context. In order to make a good faith at-
tempt at strengthening the LTR system, we added
a randomly initialized BiLSTM on top. This does
signiﬁcantly improve results on SQuAD, but theresults are still far worse than those of the pre-
trained bidirectional models. The BiLSTM hurts
performance on the GLUE tasks.
We recognize that it would also be possible to
train separate LTR and RTL models and represent
each token as the concatenation of the two mod-
els, as ELMo does. However: (a) this is twice as
expensive as a single bidirectional model; (b) this
is non-intuitive for tasks like QA, since the RTL
model would not be able to condition the answer
on the question; (c) this it is strictly less powerful
than a deep bidirectional model, since it can use
both left and right context at every layer.
5.2 Effect of Model Size
In this section, we explore the effect of model size
on ﬁne-tuning task accuracy. We trained a number
of BERT models with a differing number of layers,
hidden units, and attention heads, while otherwise
using the same hyperparameters and training pro-
cedure as described previously.
Results on selected GLUE tasks are shown in
Table 6. In this table, we report the average Dev
Set accuracy from 5 random restarts of ﬁne-tuning.
We can see that larger models lead to a strict ac-
curacy improvement across all four datasets, even
for MRPC which only has 3,600 labeled train-
ing examples, and is substantially different from
the pre-training tasks. It is also perhaps surpris-
ing that we are able to achieve such signiﬁcant
improvements on top of models which are al-
ready quite large relative to the existing literature.
For example, the largest Transformer explored in
Vaswani et al. (2017) is (L=6, H=1024, A=16)
with 100M parameters for the encoder, and the
largest Transformer we have found in the literature
is (L=64, H=512, A=2) with 235M parameters
(Al-Rfou et al., 2018). By contrast, BERT BASE
contains 110M parameters and BERT LARGE con-
tains 340M parameters.
It has long been known that increasing the
model size will lead to continual improvements
on large-scale tasks such as machine translation
and language modeling, which is demonstrated
by the LM perplexity of held-out training data
shown in Table 6. However, we believe that
this is the ﬁrst work to demonstrate convinc-
ingly that scaling to extreme model sizes also
leads to large improvements on very small scale
tasks, provided that the model has been sufﬁ-
ciently pre-trained. Peters et al. (2018b) presented