4174Input/Output Representations To make BERT
handle a variety of down-stream tasks, our input
representation is able to unambiguously represent
both a single sentence and a pair of sentences
(e.g.,hQuestion, Answeri) in one token sequence.
Throughout this work, a “sentence” can be an arbi-
trary span of contiguous text, rather than an actual
linguistic sentence. A “sequence” refers to the in-
put token sequence to BERT, which may be a sin-
gle sentence or two sentences packed together.
We use WordPiece embeddings (Wu et al.,
2016) with a 30,000 token vocabulary. The ﬁrst
token of every sequence is always a special clas-
siﬁcation token ( [CLS] ). The ﬁnal hidden state
corresponding to this token is used as the ag-
gregate sequence representation for classiﬁcation
tasks. Sentence pairs are packed together into a
single sequence. We differentiate the sentences in
two ways. First, we separate them with a special
token ( [SEP] ). Second, we add a learned embed-
ding to every token indicating whether it belongs
to sentence Aor sentence B. As shown in Figure 1,
we denote input embedding as E, the ﬁnal hidden
vector of the special [CLS] token asC2RH,
and the ﬁnal hidden vector for the ithinput token
asTi2RH.
For a given token, its input representation is
constructed by summing the corresponding token,
segment, and position embeddings. A visualiza-
tion of this construction can be seen in Figure 2.
3.1 Pre-training BERT
Unlike Peters et al. (2018a) and Radford et al.
(2018), we do not use traditional left-to-right or
right-to-left language models to pre-train BERT.
Instead, we pre-train BERT using two unsuper-
vised tasks, described in this section. This step
is presented in the left part of Figure 1.
Task #1: Masked LM Intuitively, it is reason-
able to believe that a deep bidirectional model is
strictly more powerful than either a left-to-right
model or the shallow concatenation of a left-to-
right and a right-to-left model. Unfortunately,
standard conditional language models can only be
trained left-to-right orright-to-left, since bidirec-
tional conditioning would allow each word to in-
directly “see itself”, and the model could trivially
predict the target word in a multi-layered context.
former is often referred to as a “Transformer encoder” while
the left-context-only version is referred to as a “Transformer
decoder” since it can be used for text generation.In order to train a deep bidirectional representa-
tion, we simply mask some percentage of the input
tokens at random, and then predict those masked
tokens. We refer to this procedure as a “masked
LM” (MLM), although it is often referred to as a
Cloze task in the literature (Taylor, 1953). In this
case, the ﬁnal hidden vectors corresponding to the
mask tokens are fed into an output softmax over
the vocabulary, as in a standard LM. In all of our
experiments, we mask 15% of all WordPiece to-
kens in each sequence at random. In contrast to
denoising auto-encoders (Vincent et al., 2008), we
only predict the masked words rather than recon-
structing the entire input.
Although this allows us to obtain a bidirec-
tional pre-trained model, a downside is that we
are creating a mismatch between pre-training and
ﬁne-tuning, since the [MASK] token does not ap-
pear during ﬁne-tuning. To mitigate this, we do
not always replace “masked” words with the ac-
tual[MASK] token. The training data generator
chooses 15% of the token positions at random for
prediction. If the i-th token is chosen, we replace
thei-th token with (1) the [MASK] token 80% of
the time (2) a random token 10% of the time (3)
the unchanged i-th token 10% of the time. Then,
Tiwill be used to predict the original token with
cross entropy loss. We compare variations of this
procedure in Appendix C.2.
Task #2: Next Sentence Prediction (NSP)
Many important downstream tasks such as Ques-
tion Answering (QA) and Natural Language Infer-
ence (NLI) are based on understanding the rela-
tionship between two sentences, which is not di-
rectly captured by language modeling. In order
to train a model that understands sentence rela-
tionships, we pre-train for a binarized next sen-
tence prediction task that can be trivially gener-
ated from any monolingual corpus. Speciﬁcally,
when choosing the sentences AandBfor each pre-
training example, 50% of the time Bis the actual
next sentence that follows A(labeled as IsNext ),
and 50% of the time it is a random sentence from
the corpus (labeled as NotNext ). As we show
in Figure 1, Cis used for next sentence predic-
tion (NSP).5Despite its simplicity, we demon-
strate in Section 5.1 that pre-training towards this
task is very beneﬁcial to both QA and NLI.6
5The ﬁnal model achieves 97%-98% accuracy on NSP.
6The vector Cis not a meaningful sentence representation
without ﬁne-tuning, since it was trained with NSP.