4175
[CLS] helikesplay## ing[SEP] mydogiscute[SEP]Input 
E[CLS] Ehe Elikes Eplay E## ing E[SEP] Emy Edog Eis Ecute E[SEP] Token 
Embeddings 
EA EB EB EB EB EB EA EA EA EA EASegment 
Embeddings 
E0 E6 E7 E8 E9 E10 E1 E2 E3 E4 E5Position 
Embeddings Figure 2: BERT input representation. The input embeddings are the sum of the token embeddings, the segmenta-
tion embeddings and the position embeddings.
The NSP task is closely related to representation-
learning objectives used in Jernite et al. (2017) and
Logeswaran and Lee (2018). However, in prior
work, only sentence embeddings are transferred to
down-stream tasks, where BERT transfers all pa-
rameters to initialize end-task model parameters.
Pre-training data The pre-training procedure
largely follows the existing literature on language
model pre-training. For the pre-training corpus we
use the BooksCorpus (800M words) (Zhu et al.,
2015) and English Wikipedia (2,500M words).
For Wikipedia we extract only the text passages
and ignore lists, tables, and headers. It is criti-
cal to use a document-level corpus rather than a
shufﬂed sentence-level corpus such as the Billion
Word Benchmark (Chelba et al., 2013) in order to
extract long contiguous sequences.
3.2 Fine-tuning BERT
Fine-tuning is straightforward since the self-
attention mechanism in the Transformer al-
lows BERT to model many downstream tasks—
whether they involve single text or text pairs—by
swapping out the appropriate inputs and outputs.
For applications involving text pairs, a common
pattern is to independently encode text pairs be-
fore applying bidirectional cross attention, such
as Parikh et al. (2016); Seo et al. (2017). BERT
instead uses the self-attention mechanism to unify
these two stages, as encoding a concatenated text
pair with self-attention effectively includes bidi-
rectional cross attention between two sentences.
For each task, we simply plug in the task-
speciﬁc inputs and outputs into BERT and ﬁne-
tune all the parameters end-to-end. At the in-
put, sentence Aand sentence Bfrom pre-training
are analogous to (1) sentence pairs in paraphras-
ing, (2) hypothesis-premise pairs in entailment, (3)
question-passage pairs in question answering, and(4) a degenerate text- ?pair in text classiﬁcation
or sequence tagging. At the output, the token rep-
resentations are fed into an output layer for token-
level tasks, such as sequence tagging or question
answering, and the [CLS] representation is fed
into an output layer for classiﬁcation, such as en-
tailment or sentiment analysis.
Compared to pre-training, ﬁne-tuning is rela-
tively inexpensive. All of the results in the pa-
per can be replicated in at most 1 hour on a sin-
gle Cloud TPU, or a few hours on a GPU, starting
from the exact same pre-trained model.7We de-
scribe the task-speciﬁc details in the correspond-
ing subsections of Section 4. More details can be
found in Appendix A.5.
4 Experiments
In this section, we present BERT ﬁne-tuning re-
sults on 11 NLP tasks.
4.1 GLUE
The General Language Understanding Evaluation
(GLUE) benchmark (Wang et al., 2018a) is a col-
lection of diverse natural language understanding
tasks. Detailed descriptions of GLUE datasets are
included in Appendix B.1.
To ﬁne-tune on GLUE, we represent the input
sequence (for single sentence or sentence pairs)
as described in Section 3, and use the ﬁnal hid-
den vectorC2RHcorresponding to the ﬁrst
input token ( [CLS] ) as the aggregate representa-
tion. The only new parameters introduced during
ﬁne-tuning are classiﬁcation layer weights W2
RKH, whereKis the number of labels. We com-
pute a standard classiﬁcation loss with CandW,
i.e.,log(softmax( CWT)).
7For example, the BERT SQuAD model can be trained in
around 30 minutes on a single Cloud TPU to achieve a Dev
F1 score of 91.0%.
8See (10) in https://gluebenchmark.com/faq .