4172word based only on its context. Unlike left-to-
right language model pre-training, the MLM ob-
jective enables the representation to fuse the left
and the right context, which allows us to pre-
train a deep bidirectional Transformer. In addi-
tion to the masked language model, we also use
a “next sentence prediction” task that jointly pre-
trains text-pair representations. The contributions
of our paper are as follows:
• We demonstrate the importance of bidirectional
pre-training for language representations. Un-
like Radford et al. (2018), which uses unidirec-
tional language models for pre-training, BERT
uses masked language models to enable pre-
trained deep bidirectional representations. This
is also in contrast to Peters et al. (2018a), which
uses a shallow concatenation of independently
trained left-to-right and right-to-left LMs.
• We show that pre-trained representations reduce
the need for many heavily-engineered task-
speciﬁc architectures. BERT is the ﬁrst ﬁne-
tuning based representation model that achieves
state-of-the-art performance on a large suite
of sentence-level andtoken-level tasks, outper-
forming many task-speciﬁc architectures.
• BERT advances the state of the art for eleven
NLP tasks. The code and pre-trained mod-
els are available at https://github.com/
google-research/bert .
2 Related Work
There is a long history of pre-training general lan-
guage representations, and we brieﬂy review the
most widely-used approaches in this section.
2.1 Unsupervised Feature-based Approaches
Learning widely applicable representations of
words has been an active area of research for
decades, including non-neural (Brown et al., 1992;
Ando and Zhang, 2005; Blitzer et al., 2006) and
neural (Mikolov et al., 2013; Pennington et al.,
2014) methods. Pre-trained word embeddings
are an integral part of modern NLP systems, of-
fering signiﬁcant improvements over embeddings
learned from scratch (Turian et al., 2010). To pre-
train word embedding vectors, left-to-right lan-
guage modeling objectives have been used (Mnih
and Hinton, 2009), as well as objectives to dis-
criminate correct from incorrect words in left and
right context (Mikolov et al., 2013).These approaches have been generalized to
coarser granularities, such as sentence embed-
dings (Kiros et al., 2015; Logeswaran and Lee,
2018) or paragraph embeddings (Le and Mikolov,
2014). To train sentence representations, prior
work has used objectives to rank candidate next
sentences (Jernite et al., 2017; Logeswaran and
Lee, 2018), left-to-right generation of next sen-
tence words given a representation of the previous
sentence (Kiros et al., 2015), or denoising auto-
encoder derived objectives (Hill et al., 2016).
ELMo and its predecessor (Peters et al., 2017,
2018a) generalize traditional word embedding re-
search along a different dimension. They extract
context-sensitive features from a left-to-right and a
right-to-left language model. The contextual rep-
resentation of each token is the concatenation of
the left-to-right and right-to-left representations.
When integrating contextual word embeddings
with existing task-speciﬁc architectures, ELMo
advances the state of the art for several major NLP
benchmarks (Peters et al., 2018a) including ques-
tion answering (Rajpurkar et al., 2016), sentiment
analysis (Socher et al., 2013), and named entity
recognition (Tjong Kim Sang and De Meulder,
2003). Melamud et al. (2016) proposed learning
contextual representations through a task to pre-
dict a single word from both left and right context
using LSTMs. Similar to ELMo, their model is
feature-based and not deeply bidirectional. Fedus
et al. (2018) shows that the cloze task can be used
to improve the robustness of text generation mod-
els.
2.2 Unsupervised Fine-tuning Approaches
As with the feature-based approaches, the ﬁrst
works in this direction only pre-trained word em-
bedding parameters from unlabeled text (Col-
lobert and Weston, 2008).
More recently, sentence or document encoders
which produce contextual token representations
have been pre-trained from unlabeled text and
ﬁne-tuned for a supervised downstream task (Dai
and Le, 2015; Howard and Ruder, 2018; Radford
et al., 2018). The advantage of these approaches
is that few parameters need to be learned from
scratch. At least partly due to this advantage,
OpenAI GPT (Radford et al., 2018) achieved pre-
viously state-of-the-art results on many sentence-
level tasks from the GLUE benchmark (Wang
et al., 2018a). Left-to-right language model-