4184•Learning rate (Adam) : 5e-5, 3e-5, 2e-5
•Number of epochs : 2, 3, 4
We also observed that large data sets (e.g.,
100k+ labeled training examples) were far less
sensitive to hyperparameter choice than small data
sets. Fine-tuning is typically very fast, so it is rea-
sonable to simply run an exhaustive search over
the above parameters and choose the model that
performs best on the development set.
A.4 Comparison of BERT, ELMo ,and
OpenAI GPT
Here we studies the differences in recent popular
representation learning models including ELMo,
OpenAI GPT and BERT. The comparisons be-
tween the model architectures are shown visually
in Figure 3. Note that in addition to the architec-
ture differences, BERT and OpenAI GPT are ﬁne-
tuning approaches, while ELMo is a feature-based
approach.
The most comparable existing pre-training
method to BERT is OpenAI GPT, which trains a
left-to-right Transformer LM on a large text cor-
pus. In fact, many of the design decisions in BERT
were intentionally made to make it as close to
GPT as possible so that the two methods could be
minimally compared. The core argument of this
work is that the bi-directionality and the two pre-
training tasks presented in Section 3.1 account for
the majority of the empirical improvements, but
we do note that there are several other differences
between how BERT and GPT were trained:
• GPT is trained on the BooksCorpus (800M
words); BERT is trained on the BooksCor-
pus (800M words) and Wikipedia (2,500M
words).
• GPT uses a sentence separator ( [SEP] ) and
classiﬁer token ( [CLS] ) which are only in-
troduced at ﬁne-tuning time; BERT learns
[SEP] ,[CLS] and sentence A/Bembed-
dings during pre-training.
• GPT was trained for 1M steps with a batch
size of 32,000 words; BERT was trained for
1M steps with a batch size of 128,000 words.
• GPT used the same learning rate of 5e-5 for
all ﬁne-tuning experiments; BERT chooses a
task-speciﬁc ﬁne-tuning learning rate which
performs the best on the development set.To isolate the effect of these differences, we per-
form ablation experiments in Section 5.1 which
demonstrate that the majority of the improvements
are in fact coming from the two pre-training tasks
and the bidirectionality they enable.
A.5 Illustrations of Fine-tuning on Different
Tasks
The illustration of ﬁne-tuning BERT on different
tasks can be seen in Figure 4. Our task-speciﬁc
models are formed by incorporating BERT with
one additional output layer, so a minimal num-
ber of parameters need to be learned from scratch.
Among the tasks, (a) and (b) are sequence-level
tasks while (c) and (d) are token-level tasks. In
the ﬁgure,Erepresents the input embedding, Ti
represents the contextual representation of token i,
[CLS] is the special symbol for classiﬁcation out-
put, and [SEP] is the special symbol to separate
non-consecutive token sequences.
B Detailed Experimental Setup
B.1 Detailed Descriptions for the GLUE
Benchmark Experiments.
The GLUE benchmark includes the following
datasets, the descriptions of which were originally
summarized in Wang et al. (2018a):
MNLI Multi-Genre Natural Language Inference
is a large-scale, crowdsourced entailment classiﬁ-
cation task (Williams et al., 2018). Given a pair of
sentences, the goal is to predict whether the sec-
ond sentence is an entailment ,contradiction , or
neutral with respect to the ﬁrst one.
QQP Quora Question Pairs is a binary classiﬁ-
cation task where the goal is to determine if two
questions asked on Quora are semantically equiv-
alent (Chen et al., 2018).
QNLI Question Natural Language Inference is
a version of the Stanford Question Answering
Dataset (Rajpurkar et al., 2016) which has been
converted to a binary classiﬁcation task (Wang
et al., 2018a). The positive examples are (ques-
tion, sentence) pairs which do contain the correct
answer, and the negative examples are (question,
sentence) from the same paragraph which do not
contain the answer.
SST-2 The Stanford Sentiment Treebank is a
binary single-sentence classiﬁcation task consist-
ing of sentences extracted from movie reviews