1 Introduction
Over the course of the last decade, Deep Learning and Arti-
ﬁcial Intelligence (AI) became the main technologies behind
many breakthroughs in computer vision [1], robotics [2] and
Natural Language Processing (NLP) [3]. They also have a
major impact in the autonomous driving revolution seen to-
day both in academia and industry. Autonomous Vehicles
(A Vs) and self-driving cars began to migrate from labora-
tory development and testing conditions to driving on pub-
lic roads. Their deployment in our environmental landscape
offers a decrease in road accidents and trafﬁc congestions,
as well as an improvement of our mobility in overcrowded
cities. The title of ”self-driving” may seem self-evident,
but there are actually ﬁve SAE Levels used to deﬁne au-
tonomous driving. The SAE J3016 standard [4] introduces
a scale from 0 to 5 for grading vehicle automation. Lower
SAE Levels feature basic driver assistance, whilst higher
SAE Levels move towards vehicles requiring no human in-
teraction whatsoever. Cars in the level 5 category require
no human input and typically will not even feature steering
wheels or foot pedals.
Although most driving scenarios can be relatively simply
solved with classical perception, path planning and motion
control methods, the remaining unsolved scenarios are cor-
ner cases in which traditional methods fail.
One of the ﬁrst autonomous cars was developed by Ernst
Dickmanns [5] in the 1980s. This paved the way for new
research projects, such as PROMETHEUS, which aimed
to develop a fully functional autonomous car. In 1994,
the VaMP driverless car managed to drive 1 ;600km, out
of which 95% were driven autonomously. Similarly, in
1995, CMU NA VLAB demonstrated autonomous driving
on 6;000km, with 98% driven autonomously. Another im-
portant milestone in autonomous driving were the DARPA
Grand Challenges in 2004 and 2005, as well as the DARPA
Urban Challenge in 2007. The goal was for a driverless
car to navigate an off-road course as fast as possible, with-
out human intervention. In 2004, none of the 15 vehicles
completed the race. Stanley, the winner of the 2005 race,
leveraged Machine Learning techniques for navigating the
unstructured environment. This was a turning point in self-
driving cars development, acknowledging Machine Learn-
ing and AI as central components of autonomous driving.
The turning point is also notable in this survey paper, since
the majority of the surveyed work is dated after 2005.
In this survey, we review the different artiﬁcial intelli-
gence and deep learning technologies used in autonomous
driving, and provide a survey on state-of-the-art deep learn-
ing and AI methods applied to self-driving cars. We also
dedicate complete sections on tackling safety aspects, the
challenge of training data sources and the required compu-
tational hardware.2 Deep Learning based
Decision-Making Architectures for
Self-Driving Cars
Self-driving cars are autonomous decision-making systems
that process streams of observations coming from different
on-board sources, such as cameras, radars, LiDARs, ultra-
sonic sensors, GPS units and/or inertial sensors. These ob-
servations are used by the car’s computer to make driving
decisions. The basic block diagrams of an AI powered au-
tonomous car are shown in Fig. 1. The driving decisions are
computed either in a modular perception-planning-action
pipeline (Fig. 1(a)), or in an End2End learning fashion
(Fig. 1(b)), where sensory information is directly mapped to
control outputs. The components of the modular pipeline
can be designed either based on AI and deep learning
methodologies, or using classical non-learning approaches.
Various permutations of learning and non-learning based
components are possible (e.g. a deep learning based object
detector provides input to a classical A-star path planning al-
gorithm). A safety monitor is designed to assure the safety
of each module.
The modular pipeline in Fig. 1(a) is hierarchically decom-
posed into four components which can be designed using ei-
ther deep learning and AI approaches, or classical methods.
These components are:
•Perception and Localization ,
•High-Level Path Planning ,
•Behavior Arbitration, or low-level path planning ,
•Motion Controllers .
Based on these four high-level components, we have
grouped together relevant deep learning papers describing
methods developed for autonomous driving systems. Addi-
tional to the reviewed algorithms, we have also grouped rel-
evant articles covering the safety ,data sources andhardware
aspects encountered when designing deep learning modules
for self-driving cars.
Given a route planned through the road network, the ﬁrst
task of an autonomous car is to understand and localize it-
self in the surrounding environment. Based on this repre-
sentation, a continuous path is planned and the future ac-
tions of the car are determined by the behavior arbitration
system. Finally, a motion control system reactively corrects
errors generated in the execution of the planned motion. A
review of classical non-AI design methodologies for these
four components can be found in [6].
Following, we will give an introduction of deep learning
and AI technologies used in autonomous driving, as well as
surveying different methodologies used to design the hierar-
chical decision making process described above. Addition-
ally, we provide an overview of End2End learning systems
used to encode the hierarchical process into a single deep
learning architecture which directly maps sensory observa-
tions to control outputs.