Figure 4: Object detection and recognition performance
comparison. The evaluation has been performed on the Pas-
cal VOC 2012 benchmarking database. The ﬁrst four meth-
ods on the right represent single stage detectors, while the
remaining six are double stage detectors. Due to their in-
creased complexity, the runtime performance in Frames-per-
Second (FPS) is lower for the case of double stage detectors.
visual based localization.
Visual Localization, also known as Visual Odometry
(VO), is typically determined by matching keypoint land-
marks in consecutive video frames. Given the current frame,
these keypoints are used as input to a perspective- n-point
mapping algorithm for computing the pose of the vehicle
with respect to the previous frame. Deep learning can be
used to improve the accuracy of VO by directly inﬂuenc-
ing the precision of the keypoints detector. In [62], a deep
neural network has been trained for learning keypoints dis-
tractors in monocular VO. The so-called learned ephemeral-
ity mask, acts a a rejection scheme for keypoints outliers
which might decrease the vehicle localization’s accuracy.
The structure of the environment can be mapped incremen-
tally with the computation of the camera pose. These meth-
ods belong to the area of Simultaneous Localization and
Mapping (SLAM). For a survey on classical SLAM tech-
niques, we refer the reader to [63].
Neural networks such as PoseNet [64], VLocNet++ [65],
or the approaches introduced in [66], [67], [68], [69], or [70]
are using image data to estimate the 3D pose of a camera in
an End2End fashion. Scene semantics can be derived to-
gether with the estimated pose [65].
LiDAR intensity maps are also suited for learning a
real-time, calibration-agnostic localization for autonomous
cars [71]. The method uses a deep neural network to build
a learned representation of the driving scene from LiDAR
sweeps and intensity maps. The localization of the vehicle
is obtained through convolutional matching. In [72], laser
scans and a deep neural network are used to learn descrip-
tors for localization in urban and natural environments.
In order to safely navigate the driving scene, an au-
tonomous car should be able to estimate the motion of the
surrounding environment, also known as scene ﬂow . Previ-
ous LiDAR based scene ﬂow estimation techniques mainly
relied on manually designed features. In recent articles, we
have noticed a tendency to replace these classical methods
Figure 5: Semantic segmentation performance compari-
son on the CityScapes dataset [74]. The input samples are
480px320pximages of driving scenes.
with deep learning architectures able to automatically learn
the scene ﬂow. In [73], an encoding deep network is trained
on occupancy grids with the purpose of ﬁnding matching or
non-matching locations between successive timesteps.
Although much progress has been reported in the area
of deep learning based localization, VO techniques are
still dominated by classical keypoints matching algorithms,
combined with acceleration data provided by inertial sen-
sors. This is mainly due to the fact that keypoints detectors
are computational efﬁcient and can be easily deployed on
embedded devices.
4.3 Perception using Occupancy Maps
An occupancy map, also known as Occupancy Grid (OG), is
a representation of the environment which divides the driv-
ing space into a set of cells and calculates the occupancy
probability for each cell. Popular in robotics [72], [75],
the OG representation became a suitable solution for self-
driving vehicles. A couple of OG data samples are shown in
Fig. 6.
Deep learning is used in the context of occupancy maps
either for dynamic objects detection and tracking [76], prob-
abilistic estimation of the occupancy map surrounding the
vehicle [77],[78], or for deriving the driving scene con-
text [79], [80]. In the latter case, the OG is constructed by
accumulating data over time, while a deep neural net is used
to label the environment into driving context classes, such
as highway driving, parking area, or inner-city driving.
Occupancy maps represent an in-vehicle virtual environ-
ment, integrating perceptual information in a form better
suited for path planning and motion control. Deep learning
plays an important role in the estimation of OG, since the
information used to populate the grid cells is inferred from
processing image and LiDAR data using scene perception
methods, as the ones described in this chapter of the survey.