Figure 1: Deep Learning based self-driving car . The architecture can be implemented either as a sequential perception-
planing-action pipeline (a), or as an End2End system (b). In the sequential pipeline case, the components can be designed
either using AI and deep learning methodologies, or based on classical non-learning approaches. End2End learning systems
are mainly based on deep learning methods. A safety monitor is usually designed to ensure the safety of each module.
3 Overview of Deep Learning
Technologies
In this section, we describe the basis of deep learning tech-
nologies used in autonomous vehicles and comment on
the capabilities of each paradigm. We focus on Convolu-
tional Neural Networks (CNN), Recurrent Neural Networks
(RNN) and Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL), which are
the most common deep learning methodologies applied to
autonomous driving.
Throughout the survey, we use the following notations to
describe time dependent sequences. The value of a variable
is deﬁned either for a single discrete time step t, written as
superscript <t>, or as a discrete sequence deﬁned in the
<t;t+k>time interval, where kdenotes the length of the
sequence. For example, the value of a state variable zis de-
ﬁned either at discrete time t, asz<t>, or within a sequence
interval z<t;t+k>. Vectors and matrices are indicated by bold
symbols.
3.1 Deep Convolutional Neural Networks
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) are mainly used for
processing spatial information, such as images, and can be
viewed as image features extractors and universal non-linear
function approximators [7], [8]. Before the rise of deep
learning, computer vision systems used to be implemented
based on handcrafted features, such as HAAR [9], Local Bi-
nary Patterns (LBP) [10], or Histograms of Oriented Gradi-
ents (HoG) [11]. In comparison to these traditional hand-
crafted features, convolutional neural networks are able toautomatically learn a representation of the feature space en-
coded in the training set.
CNNs can be loosely understood as very approximate
analogies to different parts of the mammalian visual cor-
tex [12]. An image formed on the retina is sent to the visual
cortex through the thalamus. Each brain hemisphere has its
own visual cortex. The visual information is received by the
visual cortex in a crossed manner: the left visual cortex re-
ceives information from the right eye, while the right visual
cortex is fed with visual data from the left eye. The infor-
mation is processed according to the dual ﬂux theory [13],
which states that the visual ﬂow follows two main ﬂuxes: a
ventral ﬂux , responsible for visual identiﬁcation and object
recognition, and a dorsal ﬂux used for establishing spatial
relations between objects. A CNN mimics the functioning
of the ventral ﬂux, in which different areas of the brain are
sensible to speciﬁc features in the visual ﬁeld. The earlier
brain cells in the visual cortex are activated by sharp transi-
tions in the visual ﬁeld of view, in the same way in which an
edge detector highlights sharp transitions between the neigh-
boring pixels in an image. These edges are further used in
the brain to approximate object parts and ﬁnally to estimate
abstract representations of objects.
An CNN is parametrized by its weights vector q= [W;b],
where Wis the set of weights governing the inter-neural
connections and bis the set of neuron bias values. The
set of weights Wis organized as image ﬁlters, with coef-
ﬁcients learned during training. Convolutional layers within
a CNN exploit local spatial correlations of image pixels to
learn translation-invariant convolution ﬁlters, which capture