upon ten times more power than FPGAs when processing
algorithms with the same computation complexity, demon-
strating that FPGAs can be a much more suitable solution
for deep learning applications in the automotive ﬁeld.
In terms of ﬂexibility, FPGAs are built with multiple ar-
chitectures, which are a mix of hardware programmable re-
sources, digital signal processors and Processor Block RAM
(BRAM) components. This architecture ﬂexibility is suit-
able for deep and sparse neural networks, which are the state
of the art for the current machine learning applications. An-
other advantage is the possibility of connecting to various
input and output peripheral devices like sensors, network el-
ements and storage devices.
In the automotive ﬁeld, functional safety is one of the
most important challenges. FPGAs have been designed to
meet the safety requirements for a wide range of applica-
tions, including ADAS. When compared to GPUs, which
were originally built for graphics and high-performance
computing systems, where functional safety is not neces-
sary, FPGAs provide a signiﬁcant advantage in developing
driver assistance systems.
10 Discussion and Conclusions
We have identiﬁed seven major areas that form open chal-
lenges in the ﬁeld of autonomous driving. We believe that
Deep Learning and Artiﬁcial Intelligence will play a key
role in overcoming these challenges:
Perception : In order for an autonomous car to safely nav-
igate the driving scene, it must be able to understand its
surroundings. Deep learning is the main technology be-
hind a large number of perception systems. Although great
progress has been reported with respect to accuracy in object
detection and recognition [173], current systems are mainly
designed to calculate 2D or 3D bounding boxes for a couple
of trained object classes, or to provide a segmented image
of the driving environment. Future methods for perception
should focus on increasing the levels of recognized details,
making it possible to perceive and track more objects in real-
time. Furthermore, additional work is required for bridg-
ing the gap between image- and LiDAR-based 3D percep-
tion [32], enabling the computer vision community to close
the current debate on camera vs. LiDAR as main perception
sensors.
Short- to middle-term reasoning : Additional to a ro-
bust and accurate perception system, an autonomous vehi-
cle should be able to reason its driving behavior over a short
(milliseconds) to middle (seconds to minutes) time hori-
zon [82]. AI and deep learning are promising tools that can
be used for the high- and low-level path path planning re-
quired for navigating the miriad of driving scenarios. Cur-
rently, the largest portion of papers in deep learning for self-
driving cars are focused mainly on perception and End2End
learning [81, 124]. Over the next period, we expect deep
learning to play a signiﬁcant role in the area of local trajec-
tory estimation and planning. We consider long-term rea-
soning as solved, as provided by navigation systems. Theseare standard methods for selecting a route through the road
network, from the car’s current position to destination [82].
Availability of training data : ”Data is the new oil” be-
came lately one of the most popular quote in the automo-
tive industry. The effectiveness of deep learning systems is
directly tied to the availability of training data. As a rule
of thumb, current deep learning methods are also evaluated
based on the quality of training data [29]. The better the
quality of the data is, the higher the accuracy of the algo-
rithm. The daily data recorded by an autonomous vehicle
is on the order of petabytes. This poses challenges on the
parallelization of the training procedure, as well as on the
storage infrastructure. Simulation environments have been
used in the last couple of years for bridging the gap between
scarce data and the deep learning’s hunger for training ex-
amples. There is still a gap to be ﬁlled between the accuracy
of a simulated world and real-world driving.
Learning corner cases : Most driving scenarios are con-
sidered solvable with classical methodologies. However, the
remaining unsolved scenarios are corner cases which, un-
til now, required the reasoning and intelligence of a human
driver. In order to overcome corner cases, the generaliza-
tion power of deep learning algorithms should be increased.
Generalization in deep learning is of special importance in
learning hazardous situations that can lead to accidents, es-
pecially due to the fact that training data for such corner
cases is scarce. This implies also the design of one-shot
andlow-shot learning methods, that can be trained a reduced
number of training examples.
Learning-based control methods : Classical controllers
make use of an a-priori model composed of ﬁxed parame-
ters. In a complex case, such as autonomous driving, these
controllers cannot anticipate all driving situations. The ef-
fectiveness of deep learning components to adapt based on
past experiences can also be used to learn the parameters of
the car’s control system, thus better approximating the un-
derlaying true system model [174, 94].
Functional safety : The usage of deep learning in safety-
critical systems is still an open debate, efforts being made to
bring the computational intelligence and functional safety
communities closer to each other. Current safety stan-
dards, such as the ISO 26262, do not accommodate machine
learning software [130]. Although new data-driven design
methodologies have been proposed, there are still opened is-
sues on the explainability, stability, or classiﬁcation robust-
ness of deep neural networks.
Real-time computing and communication : Finally, real-
time requirements have to be fulﬁlled for processing the
large amounts of data gathered from the car’s sensors suite,
as well as for updating the parameters of deep learning sys-
tems over high-speed communication lines [170]. These
real-time constraints can be backed up by advances in semi-
conductor chips dedicated for self-driving cars, as well as by
the rise of 5G communication networks.