Name Problem SpaceNeural network
architectureSensor
inputDescription
ALVINN
[110]Road following3-layer
back-prop.
networkCamera, laser
range ﬁnderALVINN stands for Autonomous Land Vehicle In a Neural
Network). Training has been conducted using simulated
road images. Successful tests on the Carnegie Mellon
autonomous navigation test vehicle indicate that the
network can effectively follow real roads.
DA VE
[111]DARPA challenge6-layer
CNNRaw camera
imagesA vision-based obstacle avoidance system for off-road
mobile robots. The robot is a 50cm off-road truck, with two
front color cameras. A remote computer processes the video
and controls the robot via radio.
NVIDIA PilotNet
[112]Autonomous
driving in real
trafﬁc situationsCNNRaw camera
imagesThe system automatically learns internal representations of
the necessary processing steps such as detecting useful road
features with human steering angle as the training signal.
Novel FCN-LSTM
[113]Ego-motion
predictionFCN-LSTMLarge scale
video dataA generic vehicle motion model from large scale crowd-
sourced video data is obtained, while developing an end-to
-end trainable architecture (FCN-LSTM) for predicting a
distribution of future vehicle ego-motion data.
Novel C-LSTM
[114]Steering angle control C-LSTMCamera frames,
steering wheel
angleC-LSTM is end-to-end trainable, learning both visual and
dynamic temporal dependencies of driving. Additionally, the
steering angle regression problem is considered classiﬁcation
while imposing a spatial relationship between the output
layer neurons.
Drive360
[115]Steering angle and
velocity controlCNN + Fully
Connected +
LSTMSurround-view
cameras, CAN
bus readerThe sensor setup provides data for a 360-degree view of
the area surrounding the vehicle. A new driving dataset
is collected, covering diverse scenarios. A novel driving
model is developed by integrating the surround-view
cameras with the route planner.
DNN policy
[116]Steering angle control CNN + FC Camera imagesThe trained neural net directly maps pixel data from a
front-facing camera to steering commands and does not
require any other sensors. We compare the controller
performance with the steering behavior of a human driver.
DeepPicar
[117]Steering angle control CNN Camera imagesDeepPicar is a small scale replica of a real self-driving car
called DA VE-2 by NVIDIA. It uses the same network
architecture and can drive itself in real-time using a web
camera and a Raspberry Pi 3.
TORCS DRL
[23]Lane keeping and
obstacle avoidanceDQN + RNN
+ CNNTORCS
simulator
imagesIt incorporates Recurrent Neural Networks for information
integration, enabling the car to handle partially observable
scenarios. It also reduces the computational complexity for
deployment on embedded hardware.
TORCS E2E
[118]Steering angle control
in a simulated
env. (TORCS)CNNTORCS
simulator
imagesThe image features are split into three categories (sky-related,
roadside-related, and roadrelated features). Two experimental
frameworks are used to investigate the importance of each
single feature for training a CNN controller.
Agile Autonomous Driving
[106]Steering angle and
velocity control
for aggressive drivingCNNRaw camera
imagesA CNN, refereed to as the learner, is trained with optimal
trajectory examples provided at training time by an MPC controller.
The MPC acts as an expert, encoding the scene dynamics
into the layers of the neural network.
WRC6 AD
[26]Driving in a
racing gameCNN + LSTM
EncoderWRC6
Racing
GameAn Asynchronous ActorCritic (A3C) framework is used to
learn the car control in a physically and graphically realistic
rally game, with the agents evolving simultaneously on
different tracks.
Table 1: Summary of End2End learning methods.
ing have also been reported [123], as well as DRL systems
trained directly on real-world image data [105], [106].
End2End methods have been popularized in the last cou-
ple of years by NVIDIA®, as part of the PilotNet architec-
ture. The approach is to train a CNN which maps raw pixels
from a single front-facing camera directly to steering com-
mands [119]. The training data is composed of images and
steering commands collected in driving scenarios performed
in a diverse set of lighting and weather conditions, as well ason different road types. Prior to training, the data is enriched
using augmentation, adding artiﬁcial shifts and rotations to
the original data.
PilotNet has 250 :000 parameters and approx. 27 mil:con-
nections. The evaluation is performed in two stages: ﬁrst
in simulation and secondly in a test car. An autonomy per-
formance metric represents the percentage of time when the
neural network drives the car: