In [127], Varshney deﬁnes safety in terms of risk, epistemic
uncertainty and the harm incurred by unwanted outcomes.
He then analyses the choice of cost function and the appro-
priateness of minimizing the empirical average training cost.
[128] takes into consideration the problem of accidents
in machine learning systems. Such accidents are deﬁned as
unintended and harmful behaviors that may emerge from a
poor AI system design. The authors present a list of ﬁve
practical research problems related to accident risk, catego-
rized according to whether the problem originates from hav-
ing the wrong objective function ( avoiding side effects and
avoiding reward hacking ), an objective function that is too
expensive to evaluate frequently ( scalable supervision ), or
undesirable behavior during the learning process ( safe ex-
ploration anddistributional shift ).
Enlarging the scope of safety, [129] propose a decision-
theoretic deﬁnition of safety that applies to a broad set of
domains and systems. They deﬁne safety to be the reduction
or minimization of risk and epistemic uncertainty associated
with unwanted outcomes that are severe enough to be seen
as harmful. The key points in this deﬁnition are: i) the cost
of unwanted outcomes has to be sufﬁciently high in some
human sense for events to be harmful, and ii) safety involves
reducing both the probability of expected harms, as well as
the possibility of unexpected harms.
Regardless of the above empirical deﬁnitions and possi-
ble interpretations of safety, the use of deep learning com-
ponents in safety critical systems is still an open question.
The ISO 26262 standard for functional safety of road vehi-
cles provides a comprehensive set of requirements for assur-
ing safety, but does not address the unique characteristics of
deep learning-based software.
[130] addresses this gap by analyzing the places where
machine learning can impact the standard and provides rec-
ommendations on how to accommodate this impact. These
recommendations are focused towards the direction of iden-
tifying the hazards, implementing tools and mechanism for
fault and failure situations, but also ensuring complete train-
ing datasets and designing a multi-level architecture. The
usage of speciﬁc techniques for various stages within the
software development life-cycle is desired.
The standard ISO 26262 recommends the use of a Hazard
Analysis and Risk Assessment (HARA) method to identify
hazardous events in the system and to specify safety goals
that mitigate the hazards. The standard has 10 parts. Our fo-
cus is on Part 6: product development at the software level ,
the standard following the well-known V model for engi-
neering. Automotive Safety Integrity Level (ASIL) refers
to a risk classiﬁcation scheme deﬁned in ISO 26262 for an
item (e.g. subsystem) in an automotive system.
ASIL represents the degree of rigor required (e.g., testing
techniques, types of documentation required, etc.) to reduce
risk, where ASIL D represents the highest and ASIL A the
lowest risk. If an element is assigned to QM (Quality Man-
agement), it does not require safety management. The ASIL
assessed for a given hazard is at ﬁrst assigned to the safetygoal set to address the hazard and is then inherited by the
safety requirements derived from that goal [130].
According to ISO26226, a hazard is deﬁned as ”poten-
tial source of harm caused by a malfunctioning behavior,
where harm is a physical injury or damage to the health
of a person” [131]. Nevertheless, a deep learning compo-
nent can create new types of hazards. An example of such a
hazard is usually happening because humans think that the
automated driver assistance (often developed using learning
techniques) is more reliable than it actually is [132].
Due to its complexity, a deep learning component can
fail in unique ways. For example, in Deep Reinforcement
Learning systems, faults in the reward function can nega-
tively affect the trained model [128]. In such a case, the
automated vehicle ﬁgures out that it can avoid getting pe-
nalized for driving too close to other vehicles by exploiting
certain sensor vulnerabilities so that it can’t see how close it
is getting. Although hazards such as these may be unique to
deep reinforcement learning components, they can be traced
to faults, thus ﬁtting within the existing guidelines of ISO
26262.
A key requirement for analyzing the safety of deep learn-
ing components is to examine whether immediate human
costs of outcomes exceed some harm severity thresholds.
Undesired outcomes are truly harmful in a human sense
and their effect is felt in near real-time. These outcomes
can be classiﬁed as safety issues. The cost of deep learn-
ing decisions is related to optimization formulations which
explicitly include a loss function L. The loss function
L:XYY!Ris deﬁned as the measure of the error
incurred by predicting the label of an observation xasf(x),
instead of y. Statistical learning calls the risk of fas the
expected value of the loss of funder P:
R(f) =Z
L(x;f(x);y)dP(x;y); (21)
where, XYis a random example space of observations
xand labels y, distributed according to a probability distri-
bution P(X;Y). The statistical learning problem consists of
ﬁnding the function fthat optimizes (i.e. minimizes) the
riskR[133]. For an algorithm’s hypothesis hand loss func-
tionL, the expected loss on the training set is called the em-
pirical risk ofh:
Remp(h) =1
mm
å
i=1L(x(i);h(x)(i);y(i)): (22)
A machine learning algorithm then optimizes the empirical
risk on the expectation that the risk decreases signiﬁcantly.
However, this standard formulation does not consider the
issues related to the uncertainty that is relevant for safety.
The distribution of the training samples (x1;y1);:::;(xm;ym)
is drawn from the true underlying probability distribution
of(X;Y), which may not always be the case. Usually the
probability distribution is unknown, precluding the use of
domain adaptation techniques [134] [135]. This is one of
the epistemic uncertainty that is relevant for safety because