training on a dataset of different distribution can cause much
harm through bias.
In reality, a machine learning system only encounters a
ﬁnite number of test samples and an actual operational risk
is an empirical quantity on the test set. The operational risk
may be much larger than the actual risk for small cardinality
test sets, even if his risk-optimal. This uncertainty caused
by the instantiation of the test set can have large safety im-
plications on individual test samples [136].
Faults and failures of a programmed component (e.g. one
using a formal algorithm to solve a problem) are totally dif-
ferent from the ones of a deep learning component. Spe-
ciﬁc faults of a deep learning component can be caused by
unreliable or noisy sensor signals (video signal due to bad
weather, radar signal due to absorbing construction materi-
als, GPS data, etc.), neural network topology, learning algo-
rithm, training set or unexpected changes in the environment
(e.g. unknown driving scenes or accidents on the road). We
must mention the ﬁrst autonomous driving accident, pro-
duced by a Tesla®car, where, due to object misclassiﬁca-
tion errors, the AutoPilot function collided the vehicle into a
truck [137]. Despite the 130 million miles of testing and
evaluation, the accident was caused under extremely rare
circumstances, also known as Black Swans, given the height
of the truck, its white color under bright sky, combined with
the positioning of the vehicle across the road.
Self-driving vehicles must have fail-safe mechanisms,
usually encountered under the name of Safety Monitors .
These must stop the autonomous control software once a
failure is detected [138]. Speciﬁc fault types and failures
have been cataloged for neural networks in [139], [140]
and [141]. This led to the development of speciﬁc and fo-
cused tools and techniques to help ﬁnding faults. [142]
describes a technique for debugging misclassiﬁcations due
to bad training data, while an approach for troubleshooting
faults due to complex interactions between linked machine
learning components is proposed in [143]. In [144], a white
box technique is used to inject faults onto a neural network
by breaking the links or randomly changing the weights.
The training set plays a key role in the safety of the deep
learning component. ISO 26262 standard states that the
component behavior shall be fully speciﬁed and each reﬁne-
ment shall be veriﬁed with respect to its speciﬁcation. This
assumption is violated in the case of a deep learning system,
where a training set is used instead of a speciﬁcation. It is
not clear how to ensure that the corresponding hazards are
always mitigated. The training process is not a veriﬁcation
process since the trained model will be correct by construc-
tion with respect to the training set, up to the limits of the
model and the learning algorithm [130]. Effects of this con-
siderations are visible in the commercial autonomous vehi-
cle market, where Black Swan events caused by data not
present in the training set may lead to fatalities [141].
Detailed requirements shall be formulated and traced to
hazards. Such a requirement can specify how the training,
validation and testing sets are obtained. Subsequently, the
Figure 7: Sensor suite of the nuTonomy®self-driving car
[146] .
data gathered can be veriﬁed with respect to this speciﬁca-
tion. Furthermore, some speciﬁcations, for example the fact
that a vehicle cannot be wider than 3 meters, can be used
to reject false positive detections. Such properties are used
even directly during the training process to improve the ac-
curacy of the model [145].
Machine learning and deep learning techniques are start-
ing to become effective and reliable even for safety criti-
cal systems, even if the complete safety assurance for this
type of systems is still an open question. Current standards
and regulation from the automotive industry cannot be fully
mapped to such systems, requiring the development of new
safety standards targeted for deep learning.
8 Data Sources for Training
Autonomous Driving Systems
Undeniably, the usage of real world data is a key require-
ment for training and testing an autonomous driving com-
ponent. The high amount of data needed in the development
stage of such components made data collection on public
roads a valuable activity. In order to obtain a comprehensive
description of the driving scene, the vehicle used for data
collection is equipped with a variety of sensors such as radar,
LIDAR, GPS, cameras, Inertial Measurement Units (IMU)
and ultrasonic sensors. The sensors setup differs from vehi-
cle to vehicle, depending on how the data is planned to be
used. A common sensor setup for an autonomous vehicle is
presented in Fig. 7.
In the last years, mainly due to the large and increas-
ing research interest in autonomous vehicles, many driving
datasets were made public and documented. They vary in
size, sensor setup and data format. The researchers need
only to identify the proper dataset which best ﬁts their prob-
lem space. [29] published a survey on a broad spectrum of
datasets. These datasets address the computer vision ﬁeld
in general, but there are few of them which ﬁt to the au-
tonomous driving topic.
A most comprehensive survey on publicly available
datasets for self-driving vehicles algorithms can be found