What’s Next for AI Ethics, Policy, and Governance? A Global
Overview
Daniel Schiff
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GeorgiaJustin Biddle
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, Georgia
Jason Borenstein
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GeorgiaKelly Laas
Illinois Institute of Technology
Chicago, Illinois
ABSTRACT
Since 2016, more than 80 AI ethics documents – including codes,
principles, frameworks, and policy strategies – have been produced
by corporations, governments, and NGOs. In this paper, we examine
three topics of importance related to our ongoing empirical study
of ethics and policy issues in these emerging documents. First, we
review possible challenges associated with the relative homogene-
ity of the documents’ creators. Second, we provide a novel typology
of motivations to characterize both obvious and less obvious goals
of the documents. Third, we discuss the varied impacts these docu-
ments may have on the AI governance landscape, including what
factors are relevant to assessing whether a given document is likely
to be successful in achieving its goals.
CCS CONCEPTS
•Computing methodologies →Artificial intelligence ;•So-
cial and professional topics →Codes of ethics ;Government
technology policy.
KEYWORDS
AI ethics, AI policy, corporate social responsibility
ACM Reference Format:
Daniel Schiff, Justin Biddle, Jason Borenstein, and Kelly Laas. 2020. What’s
Next for AI Ethics, Policy, and Governance? A Global Overview. In 2020
AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society (AIES’20), February 7–8,
2020, New York, NY, USA. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 6 pages. https://doi.
org/10.1145/3375627.3375804
Major advances in artificial intelligence (AI) this decade have spurred
intense interest by governments, companies, non-governmental
organizations (NGOs), and the public. Advocates note the potential
for vast economic growth and social benefit, while critics raise con-
cerns about a collection of ethical, legal, and social risks. Such risks
include algorithmic bias, disproportionate harms to vulnerable pop-
ulations, failures of accountability and transparency, technological
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
AIES ’20, February 7–8, 2020, New York, NY, USA
©2020 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-7110-0/20/02. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3375627.3375804unemployment—and even the possibility of existential threats from
“superintelligence.”
In response to this wave of innovation and attention, since 2016,
governments, private sector organizations, and NGOs have rapidly
begun to produce normative documents addressing AI [ 4]. These
documents include ethics codes, principles, guidelines, frameworks,
and policy strategies. To date, more than 80 English language doc-
uments exist [ 7]. At this early stage in the discourse of AI ethics
and policy, these documents provide a rich opportunity to explore
substantive concerns and strategies, emerging consensus and differ-
ences, motivations, and prospects for the future of AI governance.
While the explosion of interest and information may offer an
important opportunity for AI stakeholders, it is also essential to
approach the topic of global AI governance thoughtfully and sys-
tematically. AI includes many technologies that span a number
of sectors, and different stakeholders disagree on the types and
extent of governance that are appropriate. Some favor corporate
self-regulation or collective industry regulation. They usually argue
that governments lack the flexibility or understanding to regulate
effectively, or that premature regulation would stifle innovation
and competitiveness. Others believe that sector-specific laws or
general AI regulation should be pursued.
Further, the AI-related documents themselves exhibit significant
diversity in terms of their topical scope and length. These docu-
ments range from a single page code of ethics to policy strategies
that run over a hundred pages. Some articulate research, innovation,
or industry roadmaps, while others emphasize policy or discuss
critical social and ethical issues.
Our aim, as an interdisciplinary team including a policy scholar,
two philosophers, and an ethics code librarian, is to identify trends
in the global AI ethics and governance conversation and examine
important questions raised by these ethics documents. Within this
document set, our team is seeking to identify the main ethical
themes discussed by each document’s authors as well as the policy
sectors that are identified as most relevant to the AI domain going
forward. Our research is substantively – though not exclusively –
focused on ethics-related issues embedded within the document
collection (henceforth “ethics documents”).
We examined 88 ethics documents published between 2016 (the
beginning point for most documents in this realm) to July 2019,
including documents published by actors from the public, private,
and NGO sectors. Two coders (of a total of four) are in the process
of examining each document to assess the presence or absence of
approximately 25 ethics topics and 15 policy sectors. Additionally,
Paper Presentation
 
AIES ’20, February 7–8, 2020, New York, NY, USA
153