1.3 NGO Sector
The NGO sector (n=18) exhibits the most diversity in terms of the
types of entities that produced a document. This category includes
both established organizations and organizations newly formed to
focus explicitly on AI. There are professional associations like IEEE,
The Japanese Society for Artificial Intelligence, and The Royal Soci-
ety, think tanks and advocacy groups like the Future of Life Institute
and the Partnership on AI, as well as documents formed through
international workshops and collaborations like the Asilomar AI
Principles andThe Montréal Declaration for Responsible AI.
These documents constitute some of the most participatory in
terms of who was involved in a document’s development, some-
times with hundreds of participants and dozens of individual events
featuring individuals from around the world and in different sec-
tors. While some of the documents express deep ethical insight
and breadth, they often stand in an outsider position, appealing to
the private or public sectors to make change. In some cases these
documents are written at an abstract level, without specific plans
for operationalization or even a clear target audience.
This raises the question of to what extent these third-party or-
ganizations will be able to influence the private and public sector
entities arguably responsible for most AI development, implemen-
tation, and governance decisions [ 1]. They may seek to influence
public discourse and accrue signatories, but it remains to be seen
whether these organizations have the power to shape global gov-
ernance. It is notable, however, that many national AI strategies
cite documents and experts or even solicit live testimony from this
third sector.
2 SHINING LIGHT ON MOTIVATIONS
Organizations might develop an AI ethics document for a variety
of reasons. For any given document, it can be difficult to deter-
mine which motivations are operative; stated motivations might
not align with actual ones, and a given entity might be motivated by
a mixture of factors simultaneously. Through our document analy-
sis and discussions, we are developing a typology of six different
motivations we believe characterize the entities who produce ethics
documents. The six motivations are clustered into three pairs, each
pair independent from the others. The first two motivations address
end goals; the middle indicate target audiences, and the last focus
on signaling. Despite the complexities inherent in unpacking un-
derlying motives, a typology can serve as an analytic tool that may
help examine the reasoning of entities behind AI ethics documents.
The first type of motivation is the motive of social responsibility
— that is, the motive to promote social benefits and reduce risks of
harm. We expect that many stakeholders, including longstanding
advocacy and human rights groups, are genuinely motivated by a
concern for the general well-being of society. One likely example is
the IEEE’s Ethically Aligned Design, a 294 page, multi-stakeholder
document that includes extensive discussions of topics such as
human rights, well-being, data agency, transparency, accountability,
and prevention of misuse [ 20]. Similarly, the OECD Principles on
Artifical Intelligence highlight the need for AI stakeholders to work
proactively to promote “inclusive growth, sustainable development,
and well-being” [17].2.0.1 Motivation of Competitive Advantage. A second type of mo-
tivation is competitive advantage, including economic and political
advantage. China’s New Generation of Artificial Intelligence Devel-
opment Plan describes AI as “the new focus of international com-
petition,” while Microsoft agrees that “companies and countries”
that embrace AI “will fare best in the AI era” [ 11,19]. Malta notes
that its AI strategy maps its pursuit of “strategic competitive ad-
vantage in the global economy” while Mexico anticipates “an early
mover advantage if it is among the first countries to announce an
AI strategy” [9, 18].
However, a motive of competitive advantage does not imply the
authors are not genuinely concerned about social responsibility.
Competitive advantage can be part of a broader pro-social strategy,
and securing economic growth and prosperity can itself be a good.
These first two types of motivations are motivations to achieve
particular ends, e.g., to promote social well-being or economic gain.
In contrast, the next two motivations consider target audiences –
internal or external.
2.0.2 Motivation of Strategic Planning. A third type of motivation
is (internal) strategic planning or the production of an ethics docu-
ment to support change within the organization itself. Such strate-
gic planning includes how to incorporate ethical considerations
into the organization’s R&D, how to rethink public engagement,
and how to market one’s organization better. Other examples of this
motive are general frameworks for pursuing AI, such as corporate
ethics principles, and outlines of preliminary governance ideas. For
example, the U.S. National AI R&D Plan recommends the develop-
ment of “an AI R&D implementation framework. . . consistent with”
their plan, while documents from France, Qatar, Mexico explicitly
note their work is a blueprint or starting point for further strategic
planning [15].
2.0.3 Motivation of Strategic Intervention. A fourth type of moti-
vation is (external) strategic intervention—that is, the attempt to
intervene in one’s environment, including legal, political, economic,
and social environments. For example, corporations and industry
organizations may develop and adopt voluntary standards in the
form of a code of ethics or a statement of principles to preempt
regulations, thereby avoiding more restrictive laws being passed.
Microsoft’s [ 11] short book on AI suggests patience, arguing that
“the most effective regulation can be achieved by providing all stake-
holders with sufficient time to identify and articulate key principles. ”
Additionally, ethics documents can impact external environments
through the dissemination of narrative framings of AI ethics, pro-
moting particular ethical concepts as being especially salient. Some
documents focus on AI’s potential for economic growth, while
minimizing the possibility that this growth might exacerbate exist-
ing inequalities or harm vulnerable populations. How one frames
ethics discussions around AI may therefore reflect decisions about
strategic intervention.
While the first two types of motivations are, again, motivations
to achieve particular ends, the second two can be seen as orthogonal
strategies to affect changes that will help to achieve those ends.
One could engage in strategic planning or strategic intervention for
the purposes of promoting well-being or competitiveness (or both).
The final pair of motivations concern signaling and perception of
those signals.
Paper Presentation
 
AIES ’20, February 7–8, 2020, New York, NY, USA
155