Therefore ethics documents can serve as examples of what to do,
or indeed, what not to do. However, while there is already robust
evidence of learning across documents, this is merely a preliminary
form of impact. It remains to be seen if this cross-pollination will
result in consensus or in more significant impacts.
3.0.2 Internal Impacts. A clear form of impact under an organi-
zation’s control is internal organizational change, as might be ex-
pected for documents motivated by strategic planning. A govern-
ment bureaucracy or private corporation could alter its practices
by introducing new ethical review processes, tools for addressing
algorithmic bias, or reporting practices to minimize excessive en-
ergy use. An organization could alter its governance through an
internal advisory board or documentation of AI-related decision-
making. Finally, an organization could alter its workforce hiring
practices, composition, and skill set, such as by hiring a more diverse
workforce to increase representativeness of marginalized groups
or interdisciplinarity. In the private sector, Microsoft, Google, and
SAP are all corporations that have articulated changes in business
practices.
3.0.3 External Impacts. There are also numerous ways an ethics
document can influence external environments. A document could
influence corporate research and development practices in another
entity (as opposed to one-self). It could impact the perception of
customers or citizens by safeguarding or improving one’s reputa-
tion. There is evidence that the documents are well aware of this
possibility. For example, Denmark’s national strategy proposes an
ethics label for responsible businesses to help “consumers. . . choose
the... responsible alternative.” And as Finland’s report on AI and
work notes, “the values guiding companies in the development
and use of artificial intelligence may in the future become highly
important factors affecting companies’ brand value. The leading
companies in the sector have already understood this” [13]
3.0.4 Public Discourse. An ethics document could also influence
public discourse more broadly by how it frames ethical issues, shap-
ing which issues are seen as more (or less) important. Changes in
discourse might minimize the visibility of certain problems associ-
ated with AI, like loss of privacy and labor displacement, or expand
awareness of possible benefits, such as in the health sector. One
example of framing is that some organizations argue that technical
explainability of algorithmic outputs is not feasible or prudent, and
instead emphasize process transparency and communication of less
technical elements that stakeholders might understand better.
Another example of framing concerns inequality and social wel-
fare. The majority of documents highlight risks of inequality and
other harms caused by using AI to promote innovation and eco-
nomic growth. However, very few talk about social welfare policies
to address these problems. Even Finland [ 13], who notes in its re-
port on AI and work that “responsibility for protecting those in
the most vulnerable position must be shifted towards social policy, ”
says that “making proposals related to social policy was not part of
our working group’s mandate.” A frame which emphasizes growth
at the expense of serious consideration of social welfare reform
risks excluding these issues from policy discussions and the set of
solutions that are ultimately considered.3.0.5 Policy. Ethics documents can also inform (or constitute) poli-
cies, laws, and governance strategies. They might shape strategic
funding priorities, national industrial policies, and research agendas.
Both domestic and international governance are widely discussed.
While this is arguably the most sought after change articulated
in the documents, policy agenda setting, adoption, and diffusion
are the result of a complex confluence of factors, of which ethical
discussion in documents is only a part.
As noted previously, there is evidence of influence at the policy
level, for example, illustrated by the U.S. National AI R&D Strategic
Plan when it quotes the Future of Life as a source of inspiration. Sim-
ilarly, Malta [ 18] states that the [ 3] Asilomar AI Principles “which
promote ethics, values, privacy and the common good as core at-
tributes will guide the Strategy that is being developed.” Documents
can therefore influence governance and policy through influencing
political discourse, framing social problems, and identifying policy
solutions. For this reason, our research seeks to assess which ethical
issues are thought most prominent across documents, and what
policy sectors are argued to be most impacted by AI.
3.0.6 Stakeholder Ecosystem. Ethics documents can also shape
the broader stakeholder ecosystem. Numerous documents suggest
strategies for reforming educational priorities and systems, such
as by focusing on STEM skills, or alternatively social-emotional
skills that are harder to computerize. This includes not just K-12
and higher education but also continuing education and life-long
training. The funding and incentives behind academic research
can also change. For example, major investments in China and
the United States are likely to shape research priorities directly in
technical fields as well as indirectly influence researchers in social
sciences and other disciplines.
Other entities in the stakeholder ecosystem include nonprofit or
hybrid organizations like the Partnership on AI or AI Now, some
of which have formed in recent years specifically to address AI
ethics issues. Even the process of creating ethics documents can
provide motivations for collaboration, new partnerships, and new
organizations.
3.1 Factors that Predict Success
What counts as success depends on the kind of document, the sector
of its authors, and its desired goals. However, we can hypothesize
a few characteristics worth observing that might suggest that a
document is more likely to achieve its purposes:
3.1.1 Engagement with Law and Governance. Engagement with law
and governance issues is an indication of seriousness. Documents
in deep dialogue with national and international laws, standards,
and policy strategies may be more likely to translate effectively in
the governance landscape than documents that simply articulate
broad principles without context or specificity. For this reason,
our research considers whether documents reference specific laws
and policies rather than merely mention the general importance of
complying with law.
3.1.2 Specificity. A related issue is specificity, including the level
of detail of recommendations and operationalization strategies con-
tained within the document [ 2]. For example, the UK’s [ 5] national
Paper Presentation
 
AIES ’20, February 7–8, 2020, New York, NY, USA
157