2.0.4 Motivation of Signaling Social Responsibility. The fifth mo-
tivation is to signal social responsibility—that is, to appear to be
socially responsible, whether or not one is actually motivated by
genuine social responsibility. Again, this is orthogonal to the mo-
tive of genuine social responsibility. One could signal pro-social
beliefs in order to counter misconceptions or be fairly recognized
for their costly activities, such as subjecting themselves to increased
scrutiny or lower economic gains. Success in fulfilling this goal can
protect a company’s or government’s reputation, minimize risks
of protest or boycott, or differentiate one’s products or brand as
ethical, responsible, or trustworthy. However, one could also signal
responsibility to cover up for a lack of genuine action or even harms
caused, a version of “ethics washing” [ 21]. We do not attribute this
motivation to any particular stakeholder, but we are not the first to
suggest that it could be operative.
2.0.5 Motivation of Signaling Leadership. The sixth is to signal
leadership, whether or not one actually has a leadership role. Sig-
naling leadership can help a country or organization be invited
to the table, achieve access to expanded audiences or markets, or
improve one’s brand or international reputation. The recent rush to
develop documents itself could be taken as a mark or signal of being
a “player” in the realm. Notably, the strategic plans for Australia,
India, Mexico, Tunisia, and New Zealand all cite the strategic plans
of other countries and describe their own document as an entry
point into this elite group. For example, India’s [ 16] document ob-
serves that, “Governments in USA, UK, France, Japan and China
have released their policy and strategy papers relating to AI. In
order to establish a leadership role, it is important for India to take
the plunge.” Similarly, Finland states its goal to “be a global leader
in applying artificial intelligence” [12]
Signaling leadership can be especially important for entities
that are not already perceived as leaders. As Malta’s [ 18] strategy
argues, “the nature of AI development makes it possible for a single
company or academic lab to put a small country on the map, even
to lead and drive the agenda in one branch of AI.” Mexico’s [ 9]
document emphasizes that it was “one of the first ten countries
in the world to deliver a National Strategy for AI,” and expresses
pride to be “first nation in Latin America to join this elite club.”
Similarly, Malta’s strategy discusses “positioning Malta. . . amongst
the top 10 nations with the highest impact national AI programme, ”
describing itself as “the Ultimate AI launchpad.”
Again, this last pair of motivations is conceptually orthogonal to
the ones above. One can signal leadership and responsibility while
in fact leading responsibly. One can also signal leadership or re-
sponsibility in the interest of advancing ethical goals or competitive
advantage (or both).
This typology is a first effort at characterizing the multilayered
and varied motivations behind ethics documents and the organi-
zations and authors producing them. While in our own study we
lack a systematic method for inferring motivations, it may be pos-
sible to do so. This would involve disentangling stated from actual
motivations as the documents vary in how explicitly they discuss
motivations. The analysis would also involve deciphering tension
between competing motivations for organizations, for documents
produced by multiple authors, and even for multiple documents
produced by the same organization. In short, though all of thesedocuments focus on ethics at least to some degree, the motivational
aspects are far from simple.
3 HOW DO ETHICS DOCUMENTS CHANGE
THE GLOBAL AI LANDSCAPE?
A final topic worthy of exploration is what impacts these documents
might have on the development of global ethics and policy gover-
nance. The role of a given document may vary depending on the
sector, region, state of policy-making in the external environment,
and goals of the authors.
In some cases, the document is itself a concrete impact. A well-
developed internal corporate strategy or government regulation
may have practical utility or legal authority, and may spell out
extant operational changes or new funding priorities. Alternatively,
a document may exist largely to influence other organizations
through persuasion, more typically found with NGO documents.
As such, while many documents discuss similar topics, they may
have more or less authority and capacity to produce change in a
given sector or by a particular actor.
Also, because the role of a document could depend on moti-
vations, it is not always easy to attribute success or failure to a
document without understanding the authors’ underlying motiva-
tions. A document may successfully improve one’s brand without
producing internal change or may influence public discourse with-
out clear instantiation in regulation and law. Nevertheless, it is
useful to review the possible impacts of ethics documents.
3.0.1 Impacts on Other Ethics Documents. It is clear that docu-
ments are already influencing one another across both sectors and
regions. Numerous documents cite one other. Some provide exten-
sive reviews of the issues and priorities identified in other countries,
acquire testimony from experts, or even engage in site visits. To bet-
ter understand these impacts, our ongoing research is attempting
to identify the degree of consensus (or difference) across different
organizations, regions, sectors, and over time. Thus far, dialogue
between documents clearly serves as a way to both build on the
ideas of others (learning or emulation) as well as to differentiate
oneself (competition). In the former case, governments cite ethical
themes developed from NGO-led participatory-style international
AI conferences as inspiration. For example, documents developed
by the European Commission, Australia, UK, and numerous oth-
ers recognize documents like IEEE’s Ethically Aligned Design, the
Asilomar AI Principles, The Montréal Declaration, and the Toronto
Declaration. In other words, the NGO sector is tangibly influencing
ethics documents within the public sector.
Governments are also engaging with documents by learning
how to best differentiate themselves, notably from both political
opponents and allies. Malta’s [ 18] strategy identifies that despite
having a population of only half a million, it could “identify niche
areas that put Malta at the forefront,” in particular by serving as a
regulatory sandbox. Denmark, the U.K, Canada, France, and others
have identified ethical AI as a gap and opportunity for differenti-
ation. Demark’s National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence states
that “Europe and Denmark should not copy the US or China. Both
countries are investing heavily in artificial intelligence, but with
little regard for responsibility, ethical principles and privacy” [ 14].
Paper Presentation
 
AIES ’20, February 7–8, 2020, New York, NY, USA
156