we are evaluating further topics of interest, such as the degree of
participatory engagement in the document’s creation and the level
of discussion of laws and regulations. At the time of this writing,
our analysis is still ongoing.
This paper draws on our study to-date by exploring three issues
and associated implications relevant to AI practitioners, scholars,
policymakers, and other stakeholders: 1) Who is creating these
ethics documents? 2) Why are they being produced? and 3) What
impacts might these documents have on global AI governance? Un-
derstanding these issues is a step towards answering key questions
about the future of formal and informal AI governance.
1 WHO IS LEADING THE CHARGE?
The discussion and debate surrounding AI policy and ethics is lively,
taking place in board rooms and government offices, at international
conferences and workshops, and in physical and online classrooms.
However, a few entities have taken the lead in developing and
publicizing AI ethics codes, principles, frameworks, and policy
strategies.
1.1 Public Sector
Since 2016, public sector actors such as government agencies have
released the largest number of AI-related ethics documents (n=50),
more than half in our sample. The creators include European Union
nations (especially France, Germany, and Italy), the United States,
the United Kingdom, Canada, countries in the Nordic-Baltic region
(such as Finland, Sweden, and Denmark), Japan, China, India, Mex-
ico, Australia, and New Zealand. At the intergovernmental level,
multiple bodies under the European Union have been active along
with the OECD, the G7, and the G20. Many of documents produced
by public sector actors are not solely ethics documents, but broader
policy strategies that include significant ethics discussions.
While there is some regional diversity in this set, the docu-
ments’ authors are primarily entities in the Global North along with
Western-dominated intergovernmental institutions and a few major
emerging economies (i.e., China, India, and Mexico). Other lead-
ing AI countries include Singapore, the Republic of Korea, Poland,
Malta, Qatar, and Tunisia, though some have only begun engaging
in conversation and not all have formalized their strategic thinking
into public documents or policy action.
This apparent dominance by wealthy countries raises several
questions and concerns. First, will low- and middle-income coun-
tries be represented adequately in global AI ethics and policy dis-
course either in terms of being invited to the table or having the
resources to coordinate their own initiatives? Many wealthy coun-
tries — as service economies — are focused on local policy issues
relevant to their contexts, such as healthcare, education, entertain-
ment, and finance. Lack of attention to policy issues important in
the Global South such as agriculture, tourism, and basic infrastruc-
ture could result in a lack of research and investment in AI solutions
in these realms.
The countries who have a voice thus far are also angling for
global economic competitiveness in their AI strategies. In the case
of the United States and China, this means continued AI research
and investment dominance, while countries such as the UK, Canada,
and Denmark have identified special niches, such as ethical AI, tohelp with national branding and product differentiation. However,
there is a risk that AI-driven growth defined and dominated by
wealthy countries could detrimentally impact poorer ones.
The continued competition to recruit high-skill AI researchers
suggests that brain drain will remain a problem for developing
countries. Similarly, competitive efforts by wealthy countries to
implement either labor-saving or capital-saving automation tech-
nologies in developing countries may not be in the latter’s best
interest. In its national AI strategy, #AIFORALL, India notes that its
customer service and technical support workers may be displaced
as their work is automated and brought back to wealthier countries,
while Mexico’s AI strategy notes the same for its manufacturing
workers [ 9,16]. Even more concerning, automating the work of
teachers or healthcare workers via telehealth or intelligent tutoring
systems could reduce investment in those countries’ educational
and health infrastructures, foreclosing on more appropriate devel-
opment pathways in the interest of short-term improvements or
profit.
To the extent that global AI and policy discourse is formulated
based on a limited set of national or even supra-regional (i.e., the
European Union) perspectives, it risks placing the benefit of those
parties above that of the regions and communities most vulnerable
around the world. Under this possible future, global inequalities
and power asymmetries could be magnified, despite the attention
to ethical and social issues emphasized by the leading AI players.
1.2 Private Sector
The private sector (n=20) produces about a quarter of the ethics doc-
uments we found. In the private sector, the pattern of AI leadership
appears similar to that of the public sector. The private organiza-
tions producing AI ethics documents or statements are typically
large and influential multinational corporations in the technology
sector, including Microsoft, Google, IBM, Baidu, Tencent, Intel, Sony,
Workday, SAP, and Sage. These corporations, along with a few oth-
ers, are responsible for many of the world’s major online, software,
and hardware platforms, manage massive amounts of data, and lead
AI research and development in several areas.
These corporations discuss standards for professional conduct
(such as ethical principles for developers), internal governance
strategies (such as advisory boards), and the role of external gover-
nance, sometimes promoting self-regulation or collective industry
regulation while cautioning against government regulation they
view as premature [ 11]. Some of these recommendations could
shape and even narrow the range of normative policy responses,
such as expanding anti-trust efforts or changing the privacy and
data governance regime.
As in the public sector, there is a risk that small and medium
businesses, consumers, and even governments face a power im-
balance against these multinationals. Compounding network and
platform effects and the sheer quantity of data favor an increased
concentration of power for these few organizations. As noted in the
UK’s AI strategy, smaller-to-medium enterprises (SMEs), including
startups, and even large corporations outside of these privileged
few may have less access and therefore less opportunity to shape
AI discourse and policy to their advantage [5].
Paper Presentation
 
AIES ’20, February 7–8, 2020, New York, NY, USA
154