4 
 the prominent techniques of sentiment analysis , this study derives sentiments from a large corpus 
of publicly available movie reviews using four of the more widely used techniques: (1) 
unsupervised lexicon -based models  e.g., Sent WordNet ; (2) traditional supervised machine 
learning models  e.g., logistic regression ; (3) supervised deep learning models e.g., Long Short -
Term Memory (LSTM ); and, (4) advanced supervised deep learning models e.g., Bidirectional 
Encoder Representations from Transforme rs (BERT) . Based on sentiment analysis of this corpus 
of big data, we present output quality ratings of the  above -mentioned  techniques of assessing 
sentiments from text.  To the best of our knowledge, no single comprehensive repository of 
information exists  today which covers all the techniques mentioned above. Therefore, the paper 
would serve as a source of reference for relative eff ectiveness of some of the most advanced 
techniques of conducting sentiment analysis . 
Sentiment analysis techniques: A review  
Consumer sentiments are a precursor to consumer intentions and decisions. The sentiments are 
hidden in the text uploaded onto various social media platforms by consumers in the form of 
reviews. This unstructured text data can be analyzed using senti ment analysis techniques to derive 
a qualitative as well as quantitative interpretation of the underlying sentiments. While a qualitative 
interpretation entails assessment on a positive to negative scale, a quantitative interpretation 
facilitates calculati on of sentiment polarity and subjectivity vis -à-vis objectivity proportions. The 
primary target of analysis is the body of text comprising of all reviews called as corpora. The 
corpora is made of a large number of individual text sentences or paragraphs ca lled as documents. 
It is the analysis of corpora made up of documents that leads to derivation of sentiments. Over a 
period of time there has been a gradual increase in the number and types of approaches for 
undertaking sentiment analysis.