7 
 model uses a sigmoidal function and takes values between -∞ to +∞. It is a useful supervised 
machine learning algorithm because it doesn’t have to assume linearity.  
Supervised deep learning model : LSTM  
The supervised deep learning models based on neural network architecture are being increasingly 
used to solve complicated problems and provide intelligent solutions (Metaxiotis and Psarras, 
2004).  Its nonparametric nature, capability  to train and build complex non -linear model s, and its 
ability to handle missing data makes it a sought after technique (Venugopal and Baets, 1994).  The 
most widely used neural network algorithm is the one based on feed forward mechanism and 
backward propagation of error which facilitates analysis ov er input, output, and multiple hidden 
layers (Shmueli  et al. , 2007). A variant of the deep neural network is the long short -term memory  
(LSTM ) displaying a recurrent neural network (RNN) architecture which has applications in 
sentiment analysis of text dat a. In recent times, the standard LSTM architecture networks “have 
become the state -of-the-art models for a variety of machine learning problems” (Greff  et al. , 2016, 
p. 2222). LSTM units generally comprise of a cell, an input gate, an output gate, and a forget gate.  
LSTMs are bidirectional networks that have been found to be more accurate in comparison to the 
traditional multilayer perceptrons as well as standard RNNs (Graves and Schmidhuber, 2005).  
Advanced supervised deep learning model:  BERT  
Sentiment  analysis from text data has undergone a colossal transformation with the arrival of pre -
trained transformer models such as Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers 
(BERT). Developed by Devlin  et al.  (2018) of Google AI Language , BERT is “designed to pretrain 
deep bidirectional representations from unlabeled text by jointly conditioning on both left and right 
context in all layers.” The state -of-the-art BERT is pre -trained on two unsupervised tasks – masked 
language modeling and next sentence prediction , thus making it an effective technique for