9 
 BERT was altered due to two reasons: (1) pos sibility of overfitting since BERT is a pre -trained 
model; and, (2) requirement of greater computational power for a larger training data. The 
classification performance of the models is assessed based on their accuracy, precision, recall , and 
F1 score obt ained for sentiment classification of validation data  or test data, in case of BERT .  
 The accuracy or hit -ratio of the model  is the total number of documents correctly classified. 
It provides the overall predictive accuracy of the model in classifying the  reviews  into positive and 
negative sentiments . The precision of the model is determined from the ratio of correctly classified 
documents out of all the documents that have been predicted  as having a positive sentiment. It 
suggests success in classification within the predicted reviews belonging to important class – 
reviews having  a positive sentiment. The recall or sensitivity is the true positive ratio. It indicates 
the proportion of actual documents belonging to the important clas s that have been correctly 
classified.  Recall  is a measure of the robustness of the model because it reflects the ability of the 
model to correctly predict the reviews having a positive sentiment. While recall  gives the ability 
of the model to correctly pr edict the documents that actually belong to important class, precision 
portrays the model’s success rate out of all documents predicted to belong to the important class – 
in our case, the positive sentiment class. The F1 score of the model provides a balan ce between 
the two and is an amalgamation of both these measures. A high F1 score indicates a model that not 
only has high predictive ability of the important class but also has high success rate within the 
predictions of the important class. For all four measures of model robustness, a value closer to 1 
is considered as better. The F1 score is obtained using the formula:  
F1 score = 2 * ((precision * recall)/(precision + recall) ) 
  The classification performance of all the four techniques on the four output measures was 
derived based on their ability to classify the sentiments expressed in the reviews in validation data.