3 
 (Archak  et al. , 2011). For example, a movie review might read, “lackluster script saved by star 
power.” Such a dichotomous statement puts a question m ark on its valence. Third , unlike survey 
data, text data is not readily available for data analysis. It requires substantial preprocessing before 
it can be subjected to statistical analysis  (Tirunillai and Tellis, 2014). An exhaustive description of 
the va rious steps involved in preprocessing of text prior to its statistical can be found in Bird  et 
al.’s (2009) Natural Language Tool Kit (NLTK) book. Given the enormity of text mining task, 
over a period of time multiple algorithms have been made available by  programming enthusiast, 
data scientists, and even leading corporate houses such as Amazon.  
 The intent of this paper is to offer a comparative analysis of the various algorithm options 
available for an important application of text analytics - sentiment  analysis. Sentiment analysis has 
been cited as one of the most popular applications of text analytics (Sarkar, 2019). Pang and Lee 
(2008, p. 10), in one of the early attempts to summarize research on consumer sentiments, have 
defined sentiment analysis as a n “automatic analysis of evaluative text and tracking of the 
predictive judgments therein.”  A more elaborate definition has been given by Liu and Zhang 
(2012 , p. 415 ) who define sentiment analysis as “the computational study of people’s opinions, 
appraisals, attitudes, and emotions toward entities, individuals, issues, events, topics, and their 
attributes.”  Assessment of stakeholder sentiments has always been an important parameter for an 
organization’s sustenance and excellence. It is in complete alignment with the very foundational 
concepts of marketing such as market orientation (Kohli and Jaworski, 1990) . The significance of 
sentiment analysis has increased manifold since the availability of social media platforms to vent 
opinions (Liu and Zhang , 2012). However, keeping pace with the explosion in availability of text 
reflecting sentiments, multiple tools and techniques have inundated the analytics ecosystem. 
Therefore, in order to offer analytics enthusiasts a one -stop source on relative efficacy  of some of