6 
 Unsupervised lexicon -based model : Sent WordNet  
These set of techniques are unsupervised and based on a lexicon or dictionary  created and curated 
specifically for sentiment analysis. The lexicons contain information on words ; related positive or 
negative sentiment ; polarity as described by magnitude of positivity or negativity in the words ; 
parts of speech (POS) tag; subjectivit y classification in terms of strong, weak, or neutral etc.  
Sentiment analysis using this technique involves associating  the words in the corpus with the 
corresponding information provided in the lexicon along with contextual information in order to 
derive sentiment scores of documents constituting the corpora. Some of the popular lexicons in 
use are TextBlob, AFINN, VADER , and Sent WordNet . 
Supervised machine learning model : Logistic regression  
The traditional supervised machine learning predictive algorith m can also be  used to train the 
model into classifying sentiments . The sentiments undergo a classification into positive or negative 
based on the review content.  This is followed by model validation. One of the more popular 
technique for undertaking such a binary classification is logistic regression  (logit) . The logit model 
is based on the theory of utility maximization incorporating a random factor (Nijkamp  et al., 1992). 
Sentiment  analysis using logistic regression is based on bag of words model wherein each 
document in the corpora is considered to be a bag of unstructured words irrespective of its context , 
order, or grammar . This results i s a term-document matrix wherein each document is a row and 
each unique word is a distinct column. Thus, a corpus comprising of d documents (reviews)  and 
t unique terms (words) results in a ( d X t) matrix  which is subjected to logistic regression. The 
logit model calculates the odds of a document having a positive sentiment and based on its 
comparison with a cut -off value, is classified as either a positive or a negative sentiment. The logit