14 
 a machine that reflects the depth characteristics of human intelligence; (b) Human intelligence: 
Promote s the use of human intelligence augmentation (IA) technology, and use AI technology, 
psychology, neurotechnology, biotechnology and other multidisciplinary methods to jointly 
promote human intelligence augmentation  (see 5.3 for details ); (c) Human -machine hybrid 
intelligence: Promotes a strategy for the development of AI techno logy by integrating human  
functions and roles into human -machine systems  and by taking complementary advantages  of 
machine intelligence and human intelligence , so that we can develop a more powerful form of 
human -centered hybrid intelligence  (see 5.4 for details).  The design  goal is to develop scalable, 
powerful, and human -controlled AI , ensuring it augment s human abilities, rather than replac ing 
humans.  
(3) "Ethic s": We must  guarantee fairness , justice , privacy, human decision -making 
authority, and accountability  in developing AI systems  as ethical issues are much more significant 
in AI systems than conventional non -AI systems. The design goal is to develop ethical and 
responsible AI  by leveraging HCI interdiscipl inary approach and meaningful human control (see 
Section 5.7 for details)  and the approaches already proposed  by others . From the macro 
perspective of the sociotechnical systems, the goal of the ethical design will be achieved with 
multiple disciplinary methods through system  and HCI  design, development  practice (e.g., 
process , developer skillset), standards  & governance , organizational culture, etc.   
             We need to meet all the design goals  across t he three aspects of work , then we can 
achieve the overall goal of HCAI: Reliable, safe , and trustworthy AI ( Shneiderman , 2020a ; Xu, 
2019 a).  Furthermore, the HCAI approach are characteri zed as follows.   
(1) Placing humans at the center . All the three primary aspects of work in the HCAI approach 
place humans at the center . Specifically, the “technology’ work ensures that humans are 
kept at the center of the human -machine hybrid AI systems through a deep integration 
between AI and human intelligence. The “human” work ensures that AI systems are 
human -controllable by keepin g humans as the ultimate decision makers, useful by meeting 
user needs, usable by providing effective interaction design, and explainable by providing 
transparent and understandable output to humans. The “ethic s” work  aims to address the 
specific ethical i ssues in AI systems and  guarantees that AI systems are humanistic and 
ethical by protecting human privacy  and miniating fairness  etc.   
(2) The complementarity between human intelligence and machine intelligence . People in the 
AI community start to recognize that machines at any level of intelligence cannot 
completely emulate human’s intelligence and advancing AI technology in isolation has 
encountered challenge s (Zheng et al., 2017). The HCAI approach emphasizes 
complementarity to overcome the limitation of AI development. The deficiencies of AI 
can be compensated by the integration of augmented human intelligence. The HCAI 
framework promotes the strategic approach that is to leverage the strength of both human 
and machine intelligence, so that we can build a hybrid augmented intelligence to 
maximize the intelligence level of AI systems. The HCAI approach offers a strategy for