12 
 across many aspects, ranging from behavior, role, relationship, interaction, and user interface to a 
variety of abilities between humans and machines.  
As AI technology be comes increasingly ubiquitous in people’s work and lives, the 
machine being used by us is no longer the “conventional” computer, but intelligent and AI -based 
systems.  The HCI community must seriously consider the technology and its impacts. 
Specifically, these significant differences raise many questions to us , such as :  
• What do these differences mean for future HCI research  and applications ? 
• Is the scope of current HCI approach (e.g., human -centered design, HCI methods ) that 
focuses on the human interaction with non -AI systems broad enough to cover the 
unique challenges and issues raised by AI systems?  
• What and how can HCI contribute to the research and application  of AI systems in 
order to deliver human -centered AI systems ? 
3  From human -centered design approach to a human -centered AI approach  
 Norman (1999) initially define d the human -centered design approach . The International 
Organization for Standardization (ISO) has published several ISO standards to standardi ze the 
approach, process, and methods for human -centered design, such as ISO 9241 -210, 9241 -220 
(ISO 2010).  The h uman -centered ap proach has been in use by the HCI community for four 
decades  now.  
Human -centered AI is not a new concept . While the technology -centered approach is 
dominating the development of AI technology, researchers have individually explored a range of 
human -centered approaches to address the unique issues introduced by AI technology . For 
examples, t hese include humanis tic design research ( Auernhammer, 2020) , participatory design 
(Neuhauser & Kreps, 2011), inclusive design (Spencer et al., 2018), interaction design 
(Winograd, 1996), human -centered computing (Brezillon, 2003; Ford et al., 2015; Hoffman et al., 
2004 ), and social responsibility ( Riedl, 2019). Each approach provides a specific perspective and 
allows examination of specific aspects of an AI system design.  
In response to the possible negative ethical and moral impacts of AI systems, in 2018 
Stanford Univers ity established a “human -centered AI” research institution primarily driven by 
the computer science department. The strategy emphasizes on two aspects of work: technology 
and ethical design. They have realized that the next frontier for the development of AI systems 
cannot be just technology, it must also be ethical and beneficial to humans; AI is to augment 
human capabilities rather than replace them (Li, 2018; Donahoe , 2018).  
However, the proposed frameworks have not specifically called out for the needs in 
developing AI systems from a n HCI perspective. For instance, without an effective interaction 
design mechanism, the design cannot guarantee that humans remain the ultimate decision makers, 
cannot avoid potentially biased outcomes in human -centered  ML, and eventually violating the 
goals of ethical design. To address the gaps and the unique challenges brought in by AI 
technology, Xu (2019a) proposed a comprehensive approach for developing human -centered AI