35 
 rat experimental platform to perform learning, memory, and cognition tasks , and proposed a 
series of brain -to-machine and machine -to-brain circuit information models  based on their initial 
empirical results . Their f uture work proposes to verify the superposition of artificial intelligence 
on higher cognitive processes , such as learning and memory , in rodents  and then proceed with 
human s.  
The second type of human -machine hybrid intelligence involves  embed ding the human 
cognitive model into an AI system to form a hybrid intelligence based on cognitive computing 
(Zheng et al., 2017) . This type of AI system introduces a variety of biologically inspired  
computing intelligence technologies. Elements include intuitive reasoning, causal models, 
memory and knowledge evolution, etc. According to the HCAI approach , this type of hybrid 
intellig ence is not in the true sense of human -machine hybrid intelligence, because such systems 
are not based on human -machine systems and cannot be effective to realize the central decision -
making role of human operators in the system. Of course, the introductio n of human cognitive 
models into machine intelligence, and reaching the level of human -like intelligence in reasoning, 
decision -making, memory, etc. is very important for the development of machine intelligence . 
Obviously, future HCI work need to support the research from the perspective of human cognitive 
modeling . 
There will be a lot of opportunities for HCI professionals to play a role in developing 
human -machine hybrid intelligence  systems . First, future HCI work needs to explore cognitive 
computing based on human cognitive abilities ( e.g., intuitive reasoning, memory and knowledge 
evolution) to develop human -machine hybrid intelligent systems. An example includes  cognitive 
computing of audiovisual information , such as  the extraction, expression and integration of 
perceptual characteristics . Combining cognitive computing with multi -model deep neural 
networks may solve the c omplex planning and reasoning problems  in the current AI research 
(Zheng et al., 2017; Zheng, 2019) . Future HCI work should help accelerate the conversion of 
existing psychological research results to support the work of cognitive computing and define 
cognitive architecture  for AI research  (Salvi et al., 2016) . This is essential because  the existing 
hybrid intelligent system based on cognitive computing does not fully consider the central role 
and decision -making function of human operators in the system. Therefore, HCI professionals 
should collaborate with AI professionals to explore the approach of i ntegrati ng the cognitive 
computing method with the human -in-the-loop method , either at both system and/or at biological 
levels  (e.g., brain -computer interface technology ), developing HCAI -based human -machine 
hybrid intelligent system s. 
Second, the control mechanism (who is in control) of human -machine hybrid intelligent 
systems  is an important research topic. T here are currently two basic schemes: "human -in-loop 
control" and "human -machine collaborative control" (Wang, 2019). The effecti ve handover 
between humans and machines for AI systems in an emergency state is an important topic. The 
loss of control in autonomous  systems ( e.g., decision tracking after launch of autonomous weapon 
systems, and man -machine co -driving of autonomous vehicles) has become a widely concerned