55 
 the center  when developing AI systems and ensuring that they are the ultimate decision makers in 
all AI systems , developing reliable, safe, and trustworthy AI.    
To further enable the implementation of the HCAI approach, we formally promote the 
research and application of human -AI interaction (HAII), an emerging i nterdisciplinary area, as a 
collaboration platform across disciplines . HAII research and application will enable us to  address 
the unique issues more effectively  in AI system s by unifying all of the disciplines of professionals 
working on AI systems  to promote, collaborate, and develop human -centered AI systems driven 
by the human -centered AI (HCAI) approach .  
There are a multitude of unique opportunities for HCI professionals to play a key role to 
make (or continue to make) unique contributions to these  HAII areas , eventually enabling the 
development of human -centered AI systems. These key HAII areas include unique machine 
behavior of AI systems, human -AI collaboration, human intelligence augmentation , human -
machine hybrid intelligence, explainable AI, human -controlled autonomy, ethical design , and 
intelligent inter action .  
We also conducted an assessment of the current HCI methods  and the results show the 
limitations in designing AI systems . We propose and identify the alternative methods that most 
likely can overcome these limitations . These methods can provide potential contributions to the 
development of AI systems by specifically addressing the unique issues in AI systems.  
Finally, we discuss the challenges in current HCI practices for HAII work . We offer 
strategic recommendations. HCI professionals need to integrate HCI methods into the 
development of AI systems to maximize the interdisciplinary collaboration . The HCI communit y 
should take the initiative to promote the HAII research and application . Also, HCI professionals 
must update our skillset s and knowledge in AI so that we can fully understand the design 
implications of the unique characteristics of AI systems . Universities needs to proactively 
cultivate interdisciplinary HAII talents for society. HCI professionals need to proactively conduct 
applied research related to AI systems through  cross -industry and cross -disciplinary collaboration. 
Finally, we need to foster a mature organizational environment for the implementation of the 
HCAI approach and the HAII  work . The history has proved our initial success in promoting HCI  
in the computer era  over the last 40 years . The HCI community needs to take the leading role 
again.   
Acknowledgements  
The authors appreciate the insightful comments from Professor Ben Shneiderman on an earlier 
draft of this paper. Any opinion herein is those of the authors and does not reflect the views of 
any other individuals or corporation.