43 
 always the ultimate decision makers th rough “human meaningful control” design  to address the 
“out-of-the-loop"  problem , based on collected empirical data  (de Sio & den Hoven, 2018; 
Navarro, 2018 ). when defining the levels of “automation” for autonomous vehicles, SAE J3016 
(2018) seems to be ignoring the differences between automation and autonomy, and SAE J3016 
takes a system -centered approach classifying the “automation” level ( Hancock, 2019 ). HCI 
professionals need to obtain empirical data to help improve the classification of autonomous 
driving levels from a human -centered perspective, which may help standardize the way of 
defining product requirements, measurement for certification of autonomous driving technology, 
and the need for driver training.  
Finally , as an interdisciplinary  area, HCI professionals are in a unique position to address 
emerging HAII issues from a broad perspective of sociotechnical systems, including the impacts 
of autonomous systems on human expectations, operational roles, ethics, privacy, and so on. As 
compared with automation, initial studies also show that autonomy may also lead to a highly 
emotiona l reaction of the operator, some social factors are more likely to affect the operator's 
cognitive ability , personality traits and communication attributes (Clare et al., 2015; de Visser et 
al., 2018; Mou & Xu, 2017). While we have an established process o f certifying humans as 
autonomous agents, there is no industry consensus as to how to certify computerized autonomous 
systems with human -AI interaction ( Cummings, 2019; Cummings & Britton, 2020 ). More 
research is needed to further assess the impacts of aut onomy across a variety of context.    
 
5.7 Integrating HCI approach  to ethical AI design  
As one of the major challenges presented by AI technology , ethical AI design has   
received a lot of attentions in research and application . Multiple sets of ethical guidelines from 
various organizations around the world are currently available , large high -tech companies have 
publish ed internal ethical guidelines for development of AI systems (IEEE, 2019; Jobin et al., 
2019; Hagendorff, 2020) . Shneiderman (2021) proposes 15 recommendations at three levels of 
governance: team, organization, and industry , aiming at increas ing the reliability, safety, and 
trustworthiness of HCAI system s. Research  also shows that the effectiveness of the practic al 
application of these guidelines is currently far from satisfact ory (Mittelstadt, 2019).  Herein, w e 
approach the ethical AI issues from the HCI design perspective with the hope that ethical AI 
issues can only be successfully addressed in the frontline of system design  and development.   
First of all, t he concept of “meaningful human  control ”, which has recently gained more  
attention,  is one of the approaches being studied , (van Diggelen  et al., 2020;  Horowitz & Scharre, 
2015; Beckers  et al., 2019 ; Beckers et al., 2019) . In alignment with HCAI, van Diggelen  et al. 
(2020 ) define meaningful human control as having three essential components: (1) human 
operators are making informed  and conscious decisions about the use of autonomous technology; 
(2) human operators have sufficient information to ensure the lawfulness of the action they are 
taking; (3) the system is designed and tested, and human operators are properly trained, to ensure