31 
 to a human  in specific domains such as autonomous vehicles  (Kistan et al., 2018 ; Muslim & Itoh , 
2018 ; Shively  et al., 2017) . In the context of d istributed AI (DAI) and multi-agent systems , we 
need to figure out the collaborative relationship b etween at least one human and the collective 
system of agents , where and how multiple agents communicate and interact with primitives such 
as common  goals , shared  beliefs , joint intentions , and joint commitments , as well 
as conventions  to manage any changes to plans and actions ( Wooldridge, 2009 ; Hurts et al., 
1994 ).  
  
5.3 HCI as a collaborative bridge between h uman intelligence augmentation  and AI  
Intelligence augmentation (IA) refers to the use of effective technologies to augment 
human intelligence. Broadly speaking, PC, smart phones, and PC software fall into the category 
of intelligence augmentation . Intelligence augmentation technology can be implemented by AI 
and non -AI technology. Although AI technology provides  additional support for intelligence 
augmentation, it also creates challenges and opportunities for HCI professionals .  
Almost at the beginning of AI development, scholars have been committed to another 
path: human  intelligence augmentation  (Engelbart, 1962) . As an interdisciplinary field , 
intelligence augmentation includes perception augmentation  (e.g., smart glasses ); mobility 
augmentation (e.g., remote operation s); cognitive augmentation  (e.g., implant able artificial , 
biological chip , genetic intervention ) (Raisamo et al., 2019; Mark et al., 2004; Stanney et al., 
2009; Fuchs et al., 2007) . In the AI era, researchers are using innovative technologies to carry out 
intelligence  augmentation research , jointly promoted by genetic technology, AI technology, 
psychology, cranial nerve enhancement technology, and microbial technology . Examples include  
brain -computer interface and  virtual reality  (Valeriani  et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2019 ). From the 
perspective of the HCAI approach , the HAII work  and the intelligence augmentation field share 
the same goal: making better use of AI technology and enhancing human capabilities rather than 
replac ing humans.   
There is a classic dispute between AI and intelligence augmentation . The AI community 
believes that AI can emu late and replace human cognitive functions, pursuing a goal to replace 
humans , whereas the intelligence augmentation community believes  that current AI era is actually 
the era of intelligence augmentation because AI technology is merely used to help develop new 
technologies of  intelligence augmentation  (Hassani et al., 2020 ; Lavenda, 2016 ; Rui, 2017 ). 
Experts often cite Google search as an example. I t is based on an algorithm that efficiently 
collects human knowledge, and people will use it as a tool to find information to enhance their 
ability. It is no longer possible to tel l whether it is an intelligence augmentation  or an AI system. 
Most of the current AI applications are primarily used to augment human intelligence ( Rastogi, 
2016 ). For example : AI-based automobile collision avoidance systems , AI-based manufacturing 
robots, intelligent sorting robots in the logistics industry, and intelligent data analysis systems.