30 
 (e.g., social responsibility  and skills, computational morality) in the context of human -machine 
teaming . Additionally, we need to know how to allow the  machine agent s to take the roles  and 
make them less as tools and more as peers (Brill et al., 2018; Prada & Paiva, 2014 ). We are also 
confronted with the new challenge of i nteraction dynamics  and need to figure out h ow to 
effectively design long-term collaborative interaction  (e.g., patient with smart robot) , so that the 
AI agent can adapt the style of interaction, develop a good collaborative relationship  between 
human and machine  (e.g., trust, emotional support)  (Prada & Paiva, 2014 ).  
Third, there is a need for HCI professionals to explore the human cognitive mechanisms for 
modeling the interaction in the context of human -machine teaming  (Liu et al., 2018). The goal is 
to design interfaces of AI systems for facilitating collaboration. Conventional models (e.g., MHP, 
GOMS) can no longer meet the needs of complex interactions in the AI era (e.g., Card et al., 
1983). Some theoretical issues that pose challenges to HCI modeling should be considered , such 
as, distributed cognitive theory, context -based knowledge representation (Fan et al., 2018). 
Cognitive modeling of social and emotional interaction of human -machine teaming is also a 
challenge for AI systems.  
Fourth, beyond the convention al HCI, a new and important question for design ers of 
human -AI collaboration is the design -center for the mutual collaboration; that is, who are the 
ultimate decision makers ? There are debates about whether human s and AI agent s can be a true 
collaborative teammate v ersus an AI agent serving merely as a super tool (Shneiderman , 2020b ); 
as a peer versus  a supervisor ( Ötting, 2020) , or AI agents working a s leaders ( Wesche & 
Sonderegger, 2019 ). From the HCAI perspective , we believe that humans should not be required 
to adapt to non -human teammates; instead , designers should create technology to serve as a good 
team player alongside humans  (Cooke, 2018 ). Cooke ( 2018 ) cautions  that when machines mimic 
human social behavior, they may lead humans to hav e unrealistic  expectations  (Kwon  et al., 
2016 ). HCI professionals need to fully understand what the machines can do.  Future HCI research 
needs to investigate how we can ensure that when in complex or life -changing decision -making, 
humans retain  a critical and meaningful  role, while creating and maintaining an enjoyable user 
experience  (Inkpen  et al., 2019 ).  
Fifth,  HCI professionals should  not only leverage current HCI approach but do much more . 
For example, Computer -Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW) has long been an active subfield 
of HCI, and its g oal is to use the computer as a facilitator to mediate communication between 
people . AI brings to the picture a collaboration between the user and the computer taking a more 
active collaborative role, rather than simply a conduit for collaboration between people  
(Lieberman, 2009 ). We need to assess what current HCI theories and methods we can leverage to 
help the work here and what innovative approach we need to take to close a gap.  
Finally, future HCI work also need s to explore innovative design through collaborative 
interaction , adaptive control strategy, human directed authority  from the perspective of human -
machine teaming. For instance, future HCI work need s to model under what conditions (e.g., 
based on a threshold of mutual trust) an AI agent will take over or hand off the control of system