15 
 considering the growth direction of AI technology: "human -machine hybrid intelligence" 
(Johnson & Vera, 2019 ) 
(3) The interdependency of human, technology, and ethic s. The HCAI approach advocates 
synergy across the three aspects of work. For example, if the impact of AI on humans 
(e.g., ethics) is not considered in design, it is impossible for AI systems to achieve the 
human -centered goal and may eventually harm humans even though the AI technology  
deployed is technically made "more like humans." On the other hand, ethically designed 
AI systems emphasize augmenting human capabilities rather than replacing humans. AI 
systems, such as autonomous vehicles , need to provide human drivers with enough 
situation awareness and an effective human -controllable interface through human factors 
design to ensure that the driver can quickly and effectively take over the control of AV in 
an emergency  
(4) Systematic design thinking . From a technical point of view, the HCAI approach considers 
humans and machines as a system and  seeks to develop the complementarity of machine 
intelligence and human intelligence within the framework of human -machine systems. 
From the HCI perspective , the HCAI approach e mphasize s the perspective of human -
machine -environment system. An effective AI system should be the optimal match 
between human (needs, physiology, psychology, etc.), AI technology, and environment 
(physics, culture, organization, society , etc.). From the perspective of ethical design, the 
HCAI approach systematically considers factors such as ethics, morality, law, and 
fairness. Therefore, the HCAI approach emphasizes that the development of AI systems is 
not just a technological project,  but a systems project that collaboration across disciplines.  
 
Table 4 further highlights  the differences between the conventional human -centered 
design approach  and the human -centered AI (HCAI) approach. As listed in Table 4, although 
HCAI is rooted in the human -centered design approach, HCAI is an enhanced version of the 
conventional human -centered design approach in the AI era  which aims to address the specific 
challenges and issues introduced by AI technology. In the computer era, HCI research and 
applications enabled the implementation of the human -centered design approach . Similarly, we 
need to promote the research and application of human  interaction with AI systems, eventually 
enabling the implementation of the HCAI  approach .   
 
Table 4  Comparison between the conventional human -centered design approach                                 
and human -centered AI approach  
 
 Technology -
centered AI 
approach  Conventional 
human -centered 
approach  Human -centered AI  (HCAI)  approach