44 
 effective control over its use (e.g., autonomous weapon s). Currently there are many perspectives 
for consideration of meaningful human control . People believe that the real problem is creating 
the social and political will to assign and maintain accountability and propose to address 
meaningful human control through accountability and system transparency design (Bryson and 
Winfield, 2017; Theodorou et al., 2017)  as well as governance and regulation ( Bryson & 
Theodorou, 2019 ; Gur ses & van Hoboken ; 2018). Delegation in meaningful human control is also 
considered to be a possible solution for meaningful human control (van Diggelen  et al., 2020 ). 
There is a general consensus that the human must always remain in control of ethically sensitive 
decisions. ( van Diggelen  et al., 2020 ; de Sio & den Hoven, 2018; Horowitz & Scharre, 2015) . In 
addition, Cummings (2019)  believes that the key is meaningful human certification of 
autonomous systems (e.g., weapons ).  
From an HCI design perspective, c oncerning that current forms of control are not  
sufficient on autonomous systems  in a long run , Salmon, Hancock, & Carden (2019)  believe that 
meaningful human control is required to prevent the potential harm to humans from Artificial 
General Intelligence (AGI)  and propose three sets of controls:  (1) ensure AGI system designers 
create safe AGI systems ; (2) controls need to be built into the AGIs  (e.g., operating procedures, 
decision -rules ); (3) the controls need to be added to the broader systems  (e.g., monitoring 
systems ). To address the immediate needs, t hey believe that HCI methods can be used to identify, 
design and test such  controls well before AGI systems arrive , such as current Artificial  Narrow 
Intelligence  (ANI)  (e.g., autonomous vehicles) . HCAI advocates that humans remain as the 
ultimate decision makers, future HCI work need s to answer questions, such as, how we 
effectively design delegation of tasks between humans and AI systems, how we address 
meaningful human control from a perspective of human -machine teaming , how we can contribute 
to meaningful human control solutions from a broad sociotechnical systems perspective.  
HCI professionals  need to leverage exist ing knowledge from research on automation. One 
of the key requirements for meaningful human control is allowing human operators to make 
informed a nd conscious decisions about the use of autonomous technology . To achieve this 
design goal, HCI professionals need to partner with system designers to ensure a transparent 
system design and effective interaction design, keeping human operators in the loop with 
sufficient situation awareness . For life -critical autonomous systems (e.g., autonomous vehicles 
and weapons), we advocate the implementation of the design concepts of “tracking” and “tracing”  
mechanisms  (de Sio & den Hoven, 2018) , so that we can trace back the error  data to identify the 
accountability of system  versus  human operators if the  autonomous system fails, and be able to 
use the data for improvement of the design.   
The HCI community also needs to incorporate HCI approach i nto the AI development 
process.  Although multiple sets of ethical guidelines are currently available , the AI community 
lacks common aims, professional norms, methods to translate principles into practice . In some 
cases, e thical design was considered after the technology is developed ra ther than during 
development  (Mittelstadt, 2019) . Current ethical guidelines lack technical detail  or detailed