45 
 example s of ML ethical design options . How then can we embed ethical AI design principles 
within AI itself , increase the effectiveness of ethical codes with respect to behavior of AI 
engineers , and enhance AI engineers’ skillset in ethical design  without appropriate guidelines and 
examples?  HCI professionals may have opportunities to offer  support. For example, we can 
leverage current human -centered HCI methods (e.g., iterative design and testing with end users) 
to translate user needs into data needs and understand how to generate, train, optimize, and test 
AI-generated behaviors during development , continuously improve the design to avoid biased 
outcomes .   
Finally, a s an interdisciplinary field of HCI, we need help AI professionals in ethi cal AI 
design. AI engineers typically lack formal training in applying ethics to design in their 
engineering courses and tend to view ethical decision making as another form of solving technical 
problems. The AI community now recognizes that the ethical AI  design requires wisdom and 
cooperation from a multidisciplinary field extending beyond computer science ( Li & 
Etchemendy, 2018 ). The HCI community can leverage their interdisciplinary skills to assess the 
ethical related issues and help propose solutions by adopting methods of social and behavioral 
science from a broader sociotechnical systems perspective.  
 
5.8 From conventional in teraction to i ntelligent interactions  
 In the AI era, as we transition from conventional  interaction with non -AI computing 
systems to the natural and intelligent interaction with AI systems  driven by AI technology, such 
as voice input  and facial recognition , HCI professionals face new challenges in design , but there 
are also opportunities.  
First of all , the interaction design for HAII requires new interaction paradigms and 
models. In the realization of multi -modality, natural UI, and pervasive computing, hardware 
technology is no longer an obstacle, but the user's interaction capabilities have not been 
correspondingly supported . How to design effective multi -modal integration of visual, audio, 
touch, gestures,  and parallel interaction paradigms for AI systems is an important topic for future 
HCI work . Historically, inter action paradigms have guided UI development , e.g., the WIMP 
(window, icon, menu, pointing) paradigm. However, WIMP's limited sensing channels and 
unbalanced input/output bandwidth restrict the human -machine  interaction (Fan et al., 2018). 
Researchers are exploring the concepts of Post -WIMP and Non -WIMP, e.g., the PIBG paradigm 
(physical object, icon, button, gesture) for pen interaction  (Dai et al., 2004) , and RBI ( reality -
based interaction ) for virtual reality (Jacob et al., 2008) , but the effectiveness requires verification  
(Fan et al., 2018).  To further analyze the interaction  paradigm for AI systems , Fan et al. (2018) 
proposed a software research framework , including interface paradigms, interaction design 
principles, and psychological models. Zhang et al. (2018) proposed a RMCP paradi gm that 
includes roles (role), interactive modal (modal), interactive commands (commands), and 
information presentation style (presentation style) for AI systems . This work  is mainly carried out