37 
 learning. This "black box" phenomenon causes users to question the decision s from AI systems : 
why do you do this, why is this the result, when did you succeed or fail, when can I trust you? 
The "black box" phenomenon has become one of the major concerns in developing AI system s 
(Muelle  et al., 2019 ; Hoffman  et al., 2018 ; Bathaee, 2018 ; Ehsan & Riedl, 2020; Theodorou et al., 
2017 ; Gunning, 2017; Doshi -Velez & Kim, 2017 ). The "black box" phenomenon may occur in 
various AI systems , including the application of AI in financial stocks, medical diagnosis, 
security testing, legal judgments, and other fields , causing decreased performance , inefficiency in 
decision -making , and loss of public trust in AI. 
As a solution, e xplainable AI intends to provide the user what the machine is thinking and 
can explain to the user why (PwC, 2018). Explainable AI is getting more and more attention. The 
most representative research is the f ive-year research plan for explainable AI launched by 
DARPA in 2016 (Gunning, 2017). The program covers three aspects of work : (1) develop a series 
of new or improved ML technologies to obtain explainable ML algorithms; (2) develop 
explainable UI model with advanced HCI technology and design strategies; (3) evaluate existing 
psychological theories on explanation to assist explainable AI .  
Existing psycholog ical theories on explanation may help the explainable AI work . 
Psychological research has been carried out in the aspects of mechanisms, measurements, and 
modeling. For example, inductive reasoning, causal reasoning, self -explanation, comparative  
explanation , counterfactual reasoning (Lombrozo, 2012; Hoffman, et al ., 2017; Broniatowski, 
2021 ). Although many hypotheses were v erified in laboratory studies (Mueller, et al., 2019) , 
much work is still needed to build computational models for explainable AI  work . HCI 
professionals can help the work and establish a framework for evaluating the effectiveness of 
proposed explainable AI solutions . Researchers have realize d the importance of non-AI 
disciplines such as HCI in explainable AI research  (Ehsan & Riedl ; Baumer, 2017 ; Bond  et al., 
2019; Hoffman  et al., 2018 ; Hois et al., 2019 ). For instance, t he survey of Miller et al. (2017) 
indicate s that most explainable AI projects  were only conducted within the AI discipline . AI 
professionals used to build explainable AI for themselves rather than target users ; most 
explainable AI publications do not follow a human -centered approach  (Kaluarachchi et al., 2021 ).  
Miller et al. (2017) believe that if explainable AI adopts appropriate models in behavioral science , 
and these evaluations focus more on users rather than technology, explainable AI research is more 
likely to be successful . These findings show the relevance of the HCAI approach and why HCI 
professionals should support explainable AI research.  
 While r esearch on explainable AI is currently underway , some researchers have realized 
that t he ultimate purpose of explainable AI should ensure that target users can understand the 
output by AI systems  (Kulesza et al. 2015 ; Broniatowski, 2021 ). For example, an "explainable 
AI" version of data scientists is not understandable to most people. Chowdhury (2018) believes 
that understandable AI requires the collaborations across disciplines besides AI and  data science.  
The solution should meet target user needs ( e.g., knowledge level), and ultimately achiev ing an 
understandable AI, which is aligned with HCAI . For instance, Zhu et al. (2018) adopted a HCAI -