24 
 human factors, to address the challenges from new technologies, recommending three steps: (1) 
focus on unique problem s from the human -artifact interaction perspective; (2) take a systems 
approach; and (3) collaborate with other disciplines. Promoting the HAII research and application 
echoes Cooke’s call very well (Cooke 2017). First, the HAII work focuses on the uniq ue 
problems introduced by AI technology. Secondly, the HAII work enables a systems approach 
(i.e., the HCAI approach ) by promoting the three aspects of work defined in the HCAI approach  
to systematically address the unique challenges of AI systems . Lastly, the HAII work encourages 
interdisciplinary  collaboration.  We believe that promoting the HAII work will help enable the 
implementation of the HCAI  approach , eventually developing human -centered AI systems . 
5  Unique HAII issues and opportunities for H CI professionals      
 
The HCI community has recognized that n ew technologies present both challenges and 
opportunities to HCI (e.g., Stephanidis, Salvendy  et al., 2019; Shneiderman  et al., 2016 ). 
Specifically, Stephanidis, Salvendy et al.  (2019 ) provide comprehensive recommendations on the 
research priorities to address the seven grand challenges with intelligent interactive systems . Our 
approach is to focus on a deep understanding of  the unique issues in the HAII  area compared to 
the human interaction with non AI -computing systems , then we further identify the opportunities 
in the HAII research and application for HCI professionals to make contributions  in order to 
enable the implementation of the HCAI approach . We beli eve that HCI professionals need to 
drive the HAII work as identified in collaboration with other professionals, which will further 
enable the implementation of the HCAI approach to develop human -centered AI systems.   
Based on a literature review , this section is organized as follows : (1) identification of eight 
main HAII areas (as highlighted in Figure 3) with unique issues  in developing AI systems  and 
challenges for achieving the HCAI goals ; (2) highlight of the unique issues and challenges in each 
area as compared to the human interaction with non -AI computing systems; (3) review of the 
overall status of current research in each area; ( 4) highlight of the future HAII work where HCI 
professionals can make (or cont inue to make) unique contributions .  
 
5.1 From conventional machine output to u nique m achine behavior  
Differing from the machine behavior (system output) of conventional non-AI computing 
systems , the behavioral outcome of AI systems could be non-deterministic and unexpected. 
Scholars are raising the alarm about the unintended consequences, which can produce negative 
societal effects (e.g., Yampolskiy, 2019; Scott & Yampolskiy, 2019; Dressel & Farid, 2018 ; 
McGregor  et al., 2021 ). The HAII work can help ensure  that we avoid generating extreme or 
unexpected behaviors and reduce biase s generated from AI technologies such as ML (Pásztor, 
2018; Zhang  et al., 2020; Leibo et al., 2018).  This is  aligned with the "ethical design" advocated 
by the HCAI approach .