32 
 Therefore, the HAII work may help understand the relationship between AI and intelligence 
augmentation  from the perspective of co llaborative partnership , rather than comp etition .   
From the HAII perspective, we acknowledge that b oth AI and intelligence augmentation  
are the two main forces in the AI era  (Hassani et al., 2020) . It is expected that the integration 
between AI and intelligence augmentation  will become a main theme for AI systems (Kamar, 
2016; Johnson & Vera, 2019 ; Dellermann  et al., 2019). Future HCI work may build a bridge 
between the two.  HCI professionals may help both sides work together and achieve the 
integration and complementary advantages of the two (Hassani et al., 2020) , such as the 
advantages of human intelligence (intuition, reasoning, creativity, etc.) with the advantages of 
machines (accuracy, memory, speed, logic, etc.) . Even in the case of so -called powerful AI, 
machine intelligence may not be able to emulate certain dimensions of human intelligence. 
Intelligence augmentation technology enhances the ability and efficiency of humans to use AI 
systems, and performs more and more complex tasks quickly and effectively. The s tudies  done in 
the medical diagnosis domain  have shown that the performance (e.g., diagnostic accuracy  and 
speed ) when using AI and intelligence augmentation technologies in combination is better than 
when using these two methods alone (Topol , 2019; Patel et al., 2019) . Therefore, intelligence 
augmentation can be regarded as a collaborative connection between humans and AI systems 
according to the concept of the HCAI  approach , and jointly promo ting the enhancement of human 
capabilities  (Sicular & Aron, 2019).  
There are key areas where HCI professionals can play a n important role. First, f uture HCI 
work need s to help achieve the collaboration between intelligence augmentation and AI, and help 
determine what kinds of  intelligence augmentation technology could provide a n effective  way to 
complement AI such that the inherent weaknesses of AI  are compensated for (Braga & Logan, 
2017).  Future HCI work needs  to study the optimal combination of AI and intelligence 
augmentation technologies that can effectively support human interactions with AI systems across 
various scenarios  in terms of interaction modality and compatibility, level of cognitive process, 
and the autonomy level of AI systems. What kind of research designs or problems are most 
amenable to and would benefit the most from combining artificial and human intelligenc e (Inkpen 
et al., 2019 )? How can we harness the best of humans and algorithms to make better decisions 
than either alone? According to the HCAI approach,  future HCI work needs to ensure that 
interaction design of these applications is usable,  and humans are the ultimate decision makers in 
these solutions .  
Second , intelligence augmentation research advocates placing humans at the center of 
human -computer interaction, which is in line with the HCAI approach . HCI professionals should 
actively pa rticipate in these studies from the HCI perspectives. For example, based on the 
plasticity mechanism, the research of building a new human -computer interaction system with 
controllable cognitive work load, timely physiological feedback, and two -way body -brain 
interaction may effectively  support the augmentation  and training of human intelligence (Wang et 
al., 2018).  Future HCI work needs to help understand the plasticity mechanism of human brain