54 
 challenges. Also, the human -machine hybrid augmented intelligence , as advocated by the HCAI  
approach , needs collaborative work between academia and industry.  
Finally, we need to foster a mature environment  for the HAII practice , including 
government policy, management commitment, organizational culture, development process, 
design standards  and guidelines, governance structure , and process.  While the research and 
application of HAII are being promoted , some strategic and tactical approaches are also initially  
being developed  across academia and in dustry (e.g., IEEE, 2019; Li, 2018; Xu, 2019a; 
Shneiderman, 2020a; Google PAIR, 2019 ). Lau et al. (2018) believe that the human factors/HCI  
community also need s to seek to improve the adoption of AI technology by the public and 
regulators. The adoption process most likely needs to address cultural anxiet ies concerning AI 
technology (O'Neil, 2016). From the perspective of promoting well -designed and appropriate use 
of technology, the HCI community  should be ready for new responsibilities , particu larly how HCI 
can help promote the knowledge of AI/ML , thereby encourag ing appropriate adoption , and how 
HCI can support the regulation of AI/ML technology for safety critical systems. We firmly 
believe that a mature HAII culture will eventually come  in, the history has proved our initial 
success in promoting HCI  and user experience  the computer era.  The HCI community needs to 
take the leading role  again.     
8  Conclusions  
 
While AI technology has created benefits to humans, it may harm humans if not 
appropriately developed. The current third wave of IA can be characterized as “technology 
enhancement + application development + human -center ed approach .” Third wave of AI does not 
only pose new challenges of considering various “human factors” in developing AI systems, but 
also calls for a broader human -centered approach , which provides a great opportunity for the HCI 
community .  
From an HCI perspective, AI systems demonstrate unique characteristics  different from 
non-AI computing systems . AI systems can exhibit unique machine behavior and evolve to gain 
certain levels of human -like cognitive, self -executing, and self-adaptive abilities, and t heir output 
may be indetermin istic and unexpected . Driven by the unique characteristics of AI technology, AI 
systems may evolve fr om an assistive tool that primarily supports human operations to a 
collaborative teammate, forming a new form  of human -machine collaborative relationship as AI 
technology advances. Furthermore, our analysis shows that there are significant differences 
betw een non -AI and AI systems across many aspects , which compels HCI professionals to 
reassess  the scope and effectiveness of our current HCI approach which is primarily defined for 
non-AI computing systems.  
We advocate the human -centered AI (HCAI) approach to address the unique issues of AI 
systems strategically and tactically. The HCAI approach has three primary elements working 
interdependently : human, technology, and ethics. The HCAI approach calls for p lacing humans at