6 
 2.2 Autonomous c hara cteristics of AI technology from a HCI perspective   
Automation and autonomy respectively represent the typical characteristics of non -AI and 
AI technologies;  thus,  a comparative analysis of these characteristics can clearly reveal the key 
differences between non-AI and AI systems  (Kaber, 2018 ; Xu, 2021 ).  
Automation represent s the typical characteristics of non -AI computing systems.  
Automation  is the ability of a system to perform well -defined tasks and to produce deterministic 
results , typically relying on a fixed set of rules or algorithms  based  on mechanic al or computing 
technolog y, but without AI -based autonomous  technology . Automation cannot perform the tasks 
that were not designed for, in which operators must manual ly take over the automated system. 
Automation does not usually replace the human; instead, it changes the nature of the human’s 
work from direct operations to a more supervisory role  in complex domains . For example, the 
autopilot on a civil aircraft flight deck can carry out certain flight tasks previously undertaken by 
pilots, moving them away from their traditional role of directly controlling the aircraft to a more 
supervisory role managing the airborne automation. However, in abnormal situations  which the 
autopilot was not designed for, pilots must immediately inte rvene to take over manual control of 
the aircraft.  
AI-based autonomy  specifically refers to the ability of an AI -based autonomous system to 
perform specific tasks independently. They can exhibit unique machine behaviors and evolve to 
gain certain levels of  human -like cognitive, self -executing, and self-adaptive abilities (Rahwan et 
al., 2019 ; Xu & Ge, 2020 ). As AI technolog y advances , these autonomous systems can be 
developed to have these capabilities over time . They may successfully operate under some 
situations that are possibly not fully anticipated, and  the results may not be deterministic  (den 
Broek et al. , 2017 ; Kaber, 2018) . Current AI technolog y only allows us to develop autonomous 
systems that typically perform limited tasks in specific situations.  There  will be situations that the 
designers had never considered and which the system cannot handle. For example, no current 
autonomous vehicles can “solve” all driving  scenarios  without human intervention.   
Table 2 compares the characteristics between automation and autonomy from a n HCI 
perspective. The fundamental difference in capabilities between the two is that autonomous 
systems can be built with certain levels of human -like intelligent abilities. On the other hand, both  
automation and autonomy  require human intervention in operations for safety. The se differences 
and similarities between the two are of great significance for HCI solutions in developing AI  
systems .  
 
Table 2 Comparative analysis between non-AI-based automation and AI-based autonomy  
(adapted from Xu, 20 21) 
Characteristics  Non-AI Based Automated 
Systems  AI-Based Autonomous Systems  
(with varied degrees of autonomy)