53 
 discipline . Over the past 40 years, the participation of the professionals from HCI, human factors , 
computer science , psychology and other disciplines into the field s of HCI is the embodiment of 
the “shared philosophy” model. In the early days of the AI era, it is even more necessary for HCI 
professionals to actively share the HCAI design philosophy with the AI community. Although the 
HCAI approach and the HAII  area may not be fully accepted by all  in the initial stage, but we 
need to minimize this time -lagging effect. HCAI’s promotion needs to target to the whole of 
society for acceptance. Influence ultimately determines our continuing efforts , just as we jointly 
have been promoting user experience  to society over the last 40 years  and user experience  has 
finally become the consensus  model for society .  
Third, the research and application of HAII inevitably put forward new requirements for 
HCI methods.  As discussed earlier, m ost of the existing HCI methods were primarily created for 
non-AI systems and may not effectively address the unique issues in AI systems. Consequently, 
there is a  lack of effective methods for HCI professionals to design AI systems. To effectively 
address the unique challenges a nd issues of AI systems, there is an urgent need to enhance 
existing methods and leverage effective methods  (Xu & Ge, 2020) .   
Fourth, HCI professionals must update  their skillset and knowledge in AI so that they can 
fully understand the design implications of the unique characteristics  of AI systems  to overcome 
the weakness of lacking the ability to influence on AI systems  (Yang, 2018) . Some HCI 
professionals have already raised their concerns . One question is the issue of how we train our 
next-generation  of developers and designers to create a human -centered AI system . AI/ML 
demands new research  competence ; another is how HCI professionals should interpret and assess 
the relationships in the data  as well the complex relationship models from AI/ML  (Lau et al., 
2018) . We may take the lessons from the past. Over the past 40 years, HCI, human factors, and 
psychology disciplines have provided  an extensive array of professional capabilities. These 
capabilities have emerged into a relatively mature user experience  culture (Xu, 2005).   For this to 
occur for HAII, new measures at the level of university education are required.  Relevant 
departments  or programs (e.g., HCI, Human Factors, Computer Science , Informatics, Psychology ) 
need to proactively cultivate interdisciplinary talents doing HAII work for society. More 
specifically, it is necessary to provide students with multiple options to learn interdisciplinary 
knowledge , such as , hybrid curriculum s of “HCI  + AI or HAII ,” “AI major + social science 
minor ,” or “social science major + AI minor ,” and establish  master and doctorate  programs 
targeting the HAII area. 
Fifth , HCI professionals need to proactively conduct applied research  through  cross -
industry and cross -disciplinary collaboration s in order to increase their influences . Scholars in 
academia should actively participate in AI related collaborative projects across disciplines and 
collaboration between industry and academia. The development of autonomous vehicles is a good 
example. Many companies currently have heavily invested in develop ing autonomous vehicles . 
As discussed earlier, there are opportunities for academia to partner with industry to overcome the