1 
 From Human -Computer Interaction to Human -AI Interaction :  
New Challenges and Opportunities for Enabling Human -Centered AI   
 
Wei Xu  a *, Marvin J. Dainoff  b, Liezhong Ge  a,  Zaifeng Gao  c 
 
a Center for Psychological Sciences, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China; b Dept. of 
Psychology, Miami University, Oxford, Ohio ; c Zhejiang University, Department of Psychology, 
Hangzhou, China   
 
Abstract  
While AI has benefited humans, it may  also harm humans if not appropriately developed . We 
conducted a literature review of current related work in developing AI systems from an HCI 
perspective. Different from other approaches, our focus is on the unique characteristics of AI 
technology and th e differences between non -AI computing systems and AI systems. We further 
elaborate on the human -centered AI (HCAI) approach that we propose d in 2019. Our review and 
analysis highlight unique issues in developing AI systems which HCI professionals have not 
encountered in non-AI computing systems. To further enable the implementation of HCAI, we 
promote the research and application of human -AI interaction (HAII) as a n interdisciplinary 
collaboration . There are many opportunities for HCI professionals to play a key role to make 
unique contributions to the main HAII areas as we identified. To support future HCI practice in 
the HAII area, we also offer enhanced HCI methods and strategic recommendations. In 
conclusion, we believe that promoting the HAII research and application will further enable the 
implementation of HCAI , enabling HCI professionals to address the unique issues of AI systems  
and develop human -centered AI systems . 
Keywords :  artificial intelligence; human -artificial intelligence interaction; human -centered 
artificial intelligence, human -computer interaction, human factors, autonomy    
Corresponding author:  Wei Xu; weixu6@yahoo.com  
 
1. Introduction  
When the personal computers (PC) first emerged in the 1980s, the development of its 
applications basically adopted a “technology -centered approach,” ignoring the needs of ordinary 
users. With the popularity of PC, the problems of user experience were  gradually exposed. With 
the initiative  primarily driven by human factors , psychology , and computer science, the field of 
 
* Address correspondence to Wei Xu, email : weixu6@yahoo.com