36 
 issue from the perspective of the “ ethical design ” defined in the HCAI approach . The HCAI 
approach  requires humans  to have the ultimate control. HCI needs to carry out this work from the 
HCI perspectives. Human -in-loop control ( a perspective  of system architecture ) and human -
machine collaborative control ( a functional perspective) may not be two mutually exclusive forms 
of control , but r esearche rs used to address the control mechanism issue from a single point of 
view (humans or machines ) (Wang, 2019). Future HCI work needs to seek solutions from an 
integrated p erspectives of system  design , human -machine collaboration , and ethical design .  
Third, future HCI work needs to lay the foundation for developing effective human -
machine hybrid intelligent systems in terms of theory and methods , such as the theories and 
methods for the research on machine behavior, human -machine teaming . For example, we may 
apply the joint cognitive systems theory  (Hollnagel & Woods, 2005 ) and consider human -
machine intelligent hybrid system as a joint cognitive system with two cognitive agents : human 
and machine. Research work needs to explore how to use the two cognitive agents to support the 
design of autonomous systems based on the concept of human -machine teaming through a deep 
integration between human biological  intelligence and machine intelligence.  
Finally, a s early as 1960 Licklider proposed the concept of human -computer symbiosis, 
pointing out that the human brain could be tightly coupled with computers to form a collaborative 
relationship (Licklider, 1960). In the long run, the human -machine hybrid intelligence will form 
an effective productive partnership to achieve a true human -machine symbiosis at both systemic 
and biological levels, eventually enabling a merge r between humans and machines ( Pacaux -
Lemoine  et al., 2019; Gerber  et al., 2020; Sandini et al., 2018; Boff, 2006; Grigsby, 2018 ；
Gamberini et al., 2017; Jacucci et al., 2014; Sun, 2017). Such a human -machine symbiosis will 
deliver the most value to humans  and fully ensure that human functions and roles are seamlessly 
integrated into AI systems as the ultimate decision makers without harming humans , eventually 
moving towards a “human -machine symbiosis world” with humans at the center ( Gerber  et al., 
2020), i nstead of a “machine world” . This may be the vision that the Joint Cognitive Systems 
framework defines : both humans and machines collaborate as cognitive agents to form joint 
cognitive systems (Hollnagel & Woods, 2005) . With the further advances of AI technology and 
implementation of  the HCAI  approach , the “hybrid intelligent” paradigm may shift to a “hybrid 
teamwork” paradigm, such a human -machine collaborative partnership will help build human -
centered AI  systems (Kamar, 2016; Zheng et al., 2017) .  
 
5.5 From UI usability to AI explainability and interpretability   
Designing a n effective and accessible user interface  for a computing system is the core 
task for HCI professionals. We encounter new challenges in d esigning the user interface s for AI 
systems besides usability.  As the core technology of AI, ML and the learning process are opaque, 
and the output of AI -based decisions is not intuitive. For many non -technical users, an ML -based 
intelligent system is like a "black box", especially neural ne tworks for pattern recognition in deep