42 
 control authority ( Stanton et al., 2020; Bazzano et al., 2017 ), training ( Cummings  et al., 2017), 
team coordination and pe rformance ( Marathe  et al., 2018; Demir & Cooke, 2018;  Demir  et al., 
2017;  McNeese et al., 2018;  Klein et al., 2019 ).   
Overall, t he research on autonomy is currently in its infancy. New challenges and 
opportunities co -exist  as we enter the AI -based autonomous world , requiring HCI professionals 
go beyond current design thinking of the traditional automation technology and develop 
innovative approaches to address the unique issues in autonomy  brought about AI technology.  
First, there are many basic questions for HCI professionals to explore. We need to fully 
understand the impacts of the autonomous characteristics of AI system s from  an HCI perspective , 
what are the implications for HCI design? and so on. We also need to further empirically assess 
the “automation surprise” effect and t he "lumberjack" effect  for AI systems with a varied degree 
of autonomy . The effort to address the classic “ironies of automation” issue has existed over 30 
years, but is still not completely solved ( Bainbridge, 1983; Strauch, 2017 ). Today, we encounter 
new ironies , requiring us go beyond current design thinking. The potentially amplified impacts of 
autonomy plus its unique characteristics compels us to take the lessons lea rned from automation 
and explore new approaches to address the issues, driving towards human -controlled autonomy 
based on the HCAI  approach .  
Second , we need to explore alternate paradigms to optimize the design of autonomous 
systems. Although HCI professionals have participated in the development of autonomous 
systems (e.g., autonomous vehicles), recent accidents have sounded an alarm, compelling us to 
rethink the current approach (Xu, 2021). By leveraging the new form of human -machine 
collaborative relationship, we can explore the design for autonomy that emulates the interactions 
between people by considering mutual trust, shared situation awareness , and  shared control 
authority in a reciprocal relationship between human and autonomous systems. Thus, we can 
maximize design opportunities to minimize the potential risk caused by autonomous systems.  We 
may consider an autonomous vehicle as a “mobile autonomous system” instead of being 
conventionally automated. Future HCI work may explore applying the paradigm of human -
machine teaming and human -machine hybrid intelligence (e.g., brain -computer interface -based  
technology) to develop innovative solutions for effective human -machine co -driving and take -
over/handoff (J eong, 2019 ; Novitzky  et al., 2020; Clancy , 2019). A design strategy of human -
machine collaboration may help optimize the design of system architecture and interactions.  For 
interaction design, we need to take innovative approaches beyond traditional HCI design . By 
applying the HCAI approach, we need to develop  an effective human control mechanism with 
well-designed UIs  to enable human operators to monitor and quickly take over control of 
autonomous systems in emergencies.  
Third, we need a data -driven approach in developing autonomous systems by applying the 
HCAI approach.  For instance, SAE J3016 (2018) regulations presume  that when autonomous 
vehicles are equipped with high -level (L4 -L5) automatic driving functions, driver monitoring,  and 
manual intervention are not required. HCI professionals need to step in to ensure that humans are