46 
 in the computer science community . HCI should support for defining the paradigms , metaphors, 
and experimental verification  to address the unique issues in AI systems . 
The new c ollaborati ve relationship between humans and AI systems will change the way 
we design interface s. How HCI can design effective interfaces to facilitat e the collaboration is one 
of big opportunities for us. Conventional non-AI interfaces tend to be rigid in the order in which 
they accept instructions and the level of detail which they require  (Lieberman, 2009 ). AI-based 
technologies such as gesture recognition, motion recognition, speech recognition,  and 
emotion/intent/context detection, can let systems accept a broader range of human input. Many of 
the collaboration issues that arise in human collaboration also appear in AI when trying to model 
mach ine problem solving. A better understanding of these issues can help us improve interfaces  
for collaboration. HCI professionals need to support AI professionals ’ effort s by developing 
cognition models and knowledge  graphs  representing these (e.g., user intentions, 
affecti ve/emotional models) . 
Human limited cognitive resources become a bottleneck of HCI design in the pervasive 
computing environment. As early as 2002, Carnegie University's Aura project research showed 
that the most precious resource in pervasive computing is not computer technology, but human 
cognitive resources (Garlan  et al., 2002). In an implicit int eraction scenario initiated by ambient 
intelligent systems, intelligent system s may cause competition between human cognitive 
resources in different modalities, and users will face a high cognitive work load.  In addition, 
implicit , multi -modal, and pervasive interactions are anticipated to be not only conscious and 
intentional, but also subconscious and even unintentional  or incidental (Bakker & 
Niemantsverdriet, 2016; Dix, 2002). Thus, HCI design must consider the “bandwidth” of human 
cognitive processing and their resource allocation while develop ing innovative approach es to 
reduce user cognitive workload through appropriate interaction technology .  
Intelligent interaction design also calls for enhanced H CI methods . We need an innovative 
design approach which should not just focus on a single user -artifact interaction  as we do today 
for non -AI computing systems  but account for entire environments and eco systems of artifacts, 
services, and data (Brown et al., 2017) . Also,  we need to  assess the unique dynamic machine 
behavior of AI systems as evolved over time and the ir joint performance of human -machine 
system as a whole  by leveraging a longitudinal study approach , instead of the short -term HCI 
approach as we do today .  
Finally, w e also need interaction design standards  to guide HCI work  for HAII design . 
Current HCI design standards were primarily developed for non -AI systems , there is a lack of 
design standards and guidelines that specifically support HCAI -based systems . The design 
standards and guidelines for AI systems need to fully consider the unique characteristics of AI 
systems. Examples include , designing for transparency, unpredictability, learning, evolution, and 
shared contro l (Holmquist, 2017 ); design for engagement, decision -making, discovery, and 
uncertainty  (Girardin & Lathia, 2017) . There are initial design guidelines available: “Google AI + 
People Guidebook ” (Google PAIR , 2019) ; Microsoft ’s 18 design guidelines (Amershi et al.,