26 
 developing autonomous capabilities (e.g., labeling that a pedestrian is in the scene) ( Lau et al., 
2018 ; Dudley  et al., 2018; A cuna  et al., 2018; K im, 2018;  Amershi et al., 2014 ). For instance, 
classification algorithms for image s and text are trained to optimize accuracy on a specific set of 
human -labeled datasets. The choice /labeling of the dataset and those features represent ed can 
substantially influence the behavior  (Bolukbasi et al., 2016 ; Buolamwini  et al., 2018 ). HCI 
profes sionals need to figure out an effective approach that can bring in users’ expectations to tune 
the algorithm for prevent ing bad responses.  
Second, HCI needs  to study the evolution of the AI -based machine behavior . For instance , 
after being released to the market, algorithm s, learning, and training data will all affect the 
evolution of an AI systems ’ behavior s. An auton omous vehicle  will change its behavior s over 
time by software and hardware up grades ; a product recommendation algorithm make s 
recommendations based on continuous input from u sers, updating their recommendations 
accordingly. HCI professionals can help define a n approach on how to improve the design 
through re -training based on user feedback  and how to co llect training data and define the 
expected results that users hope to obtain from AI systems  (Pásztor, 2018) . It is not easy to define 
the expected result  due to user’s subjective expectation s, HCI professionals need to find a 
collaborati ve method that can effectively to train algorithms, build early prototypes, and evaluate 
the trained model with users , eventually improv ing the design of AI systems .  
Third, HCI needs to help enhance the test methodology in current practice . For instance, t he 
existing testing methods in software engineering are based on predictable software output, and 
there is a set of mature verification and testing methods. However, th e output s of AI system s are 
dynamic as the system s learn  over t ime. HCI professionals need to collaborate with AI and 
computer science professionals to find ways to improve the test methodologies from HCI and 
behavioral sciences . Due to the existence of the unique machine behavior , how to effectively test 
the output performance of AI systems is  an important area for exploration . Furthermore, as AI 
technology matures, it will be critical to study its influence on humans and society, on a long -term 
basis  (e.g., a longitudinal perspective ), which requires engagement with interdisciplinary groups, 
including social scientist, psychologists (Horvitz, 2017 ; Stephanidis, Salvendy et al., 2019 ). 
 Fourth, HCI can partner with AI professionals to improve their current appro ach by 
following . For instance,  for the interactive machine learning approach, the system displays the 
current model and corresponding results (such as classification results, clustering results, 
prediction results, etc.) to users through the user interfaces of AI systems , HCI pro fessionals  can 
support the design from the perspectives  of visualization design, interactive technology and 
mental modeling of target users. Also, many human -centered ML related work made ML 
engineers the ‘human’ at the center, targeting software engineers working in the ML domain , 
instead of target end users (Kaluarachchi  et al., 2021 ). HCI should advocate to expand the 
research to other non -AI-experts  and target end users . Therefore, collaborations between HCI and 
ML research must produce H CAI-based results .