4 
 • How the unique issues introduced by AI technology present both challenges and 
opportunities  to us as  we transition our focus from conventional HCI to human 
interaction with AI s ystems   
• Whether the current HCI methods and practices are effectively addressing the unique 
issues in AI systems  
• What we can do to further promote the HCAI approach from an HCI research and 
application perspective besides what have been proposed  
If we keep these and other points that may arise, in collaboration with other disciplines as 
we did in the past , we may jointly and effectively address the new challenges of AI systems to 
maximize the benefits of AI technology and minimize its potential ri sks. 
To answer these questions , we conducted a n analysis that focuses on a further 
understand ing of the unique issues that arise when human interaction with AI systems  is 
compared to the human interaction with non AI -computing systems . Through a literature review 
and our recent work in promoting the HCAI approach, we further elaborate the HCAI approach 
(Xu, 2019).  We have also identified key research and application areas where we believe HCI 
professionals can make (or continue to make)  unique contributions by leveraging the 
interdisciplinary nature of HCI, which will further enable the implementation of the HCAI 
approach from an HCI research and application perspective  beyond the recommendations already 
proposed .  
To investigate issues such as those mentioned above, this paper is organized as follows : 
(1) analyses of  the new challenges introduced by AI technology  and the initial work in search of a 
human -centered AI (HCAI) approach to address these challenges ; (2) formal promoti on of the 
HCI research and application in the emerging human -AI interaction (HAII)  area to further enable 
the HCAI  approach ; (3) highlight  of the current work on the key issues in the HAII area, and 
identif ication  of the future work agenda for HCI professionals ; (4) analyses  of the gaps in HCI 
methodology for future HAII work and propos als of enhanced  or alternative methods; (5) 
analyses  of the challenges in current HCI practices for future HAII work and our strategic 
recommendations. Our overall goal is to promote the research and application in the HAII area in 
order to further enable the development of human -centered AI systems based on an HCAI  
approach.  
 
2. The c hallenges introduced by AI technology  
2.1 Characteristics of the three AI waves   
It is commonly recognized that AI technology has mainly experienced three waves of 
development. Table 1 summarizes the characteristics presented in these three waves . The first two 
AI waves  mainly focused on scientific exploration and academic dominance . In 2006, the third 
wave of AI emerged thanks to the new technolog ies such as machine deep learning. During the