3 
 must take action .” Hancock (2019) further described the current boom in the development of AI -
based autonomous technologies as “a horse has left the stables” while Salmon ( 2019) believes 
that “we find ourselves in a similar situation: chasing a horse that has really started to run wild."  
Stephanidis, Salvendy et al. (2019) have conducted a comprehensive review that identifie s seven 
grand challenges with intelligent  interactive systems  and proposed the research priorities to 
address the challenges. Finally, twenty -three scholars from MIT, Stanford, Harvard and other 
universities jointly published a paper on machine behavior in Nature  (Rahwan et al., 2019),  
urging that society should fully understand unique AI-based machine behavior and its impacts  to 
humans and society .  
To respond to the challenges, Stanford University ha s established  a "Human -Centered AI" 
research institution : focusing on “ethically aligned design”  (Li, 2018; Donahoe , 2018) . 
Shneiderman and Xu have moved forward further proposing a human -centered AI (HCAI) 
approach  (Shneiderman, 2020a, 2020b, 2020c ; Xu, 2019a, 2019b; Xu & Ge, 2020; ).   To 
reinforce the transformative nature of a human -centered approach,  Shneiderman (2020c) 
describe s HCAI  as a Second Copernican Revolution , promoting the idea of putting  humans  at the 
center with algorithms with AI orbiting nearby , instead of putting algorithms and AI at the center . 
Shneiderman (2020 a, 2020d) further proposes a design framework and a governance structure of 
ethical AI for implementation of the HCAI approach . Cerejo (2021) prompts HCAI from a design 
process perspective.   
Like the HCI field that was brought about by PC technology 40 years ago, history has 
brought HCI professionals to a juncture. This time the conseque nce of ignoring the “ human -
centered design  philosophy ” is obviously more severe . As AI technology becomes increasingly 
ubiquitous in people’s work and lives, the machines being used by humans is no longer the 
“conventional” computer s as we have known  them . From the work focus perspective as  HCI 
professionals, we are witnessing the transition from “conventional” human -computer interaction 
to human interaction with AI-based computing systems  that exhibit new qualities such as 
individual machine behavior (Rahwan et al., 2019) and autonom y (Kaber, 2018; Xu , 2021) . While 
the HCI community has contributed to the development of AI systems, what else does  it need to do  
to enable  the implementation of the HCAI approach and offer HCI solutions to address the unique 
challenges posted to humans and society by AI technology ?   
This vision of work further challenges the HCI community to prepare for a future that 
requires the design of AI systems whose behaviors we cannot fully anticipate and for work that 
we do not know enough about (Stephanidis, Salvendy et al. , 2019; Hancock, 2020 ; Lau et al ., 
2018) . There are many questions requiring answers :  
• What new characteristics have been introduced by AI technology  
• How these new characteristics would impact humans in a way different from 
conventional non -AI computing systems