33 
 nerves and promote the application of new human -computer interaction paradigms, interactive 
technologies in the domains of personalized education, neurorehabilitation, and cognitive 
augmentation . 
Third , when applying AI technology to augment human intelligence for human -machine 
collaboration, it is important to determine  the needs of the macro -cognitive capabilities like 
situation awareness  and decision making.  Intelligence augmentation promotes machine’s 
understanding of humans (e.g., cognitive state  and emotion detection, intention projection) and 
human’s understanding of machines (e.g., shared situation awareness and trust) to support the 
mutual collaboration (Grigsby 2018) . Future HCI work can define effective approaches to help 
such promotion through research such as cognitive modeling  and behavioral measurements.  
Finally, in partnership with professionals from other fields such as cognitive neuroscience  
and brain imaging technology , future HCI work should collaborate with brain -computer interface  
researchers to explore the interaction between humans and AI systems for optimal team 
performance between AI and intelligence augmentation at a neurocognitive level , developing 
HCAI -based solutions to help people with disabilit ies (Valeriani  et al., 2019).   
 
5.4 From siloed machine intelligence to h uman -machine hybrid intelligence   
With the development of AI technology, the AI community has begun to realize that 
machines of any degree of intelligence cannot completely replace human intelligence (e.g., 
intuition, consciousness, reasoning, abstract thinking), and the path of developing AI technology 
in isolation has encountered challenges  (Zhe ng et al., 2017) . It is necessary to introduce the role 
of human or human cognitive model into the AI system to form a hybrid intelligence 
(Shneiderman, 2020a; Wang et al., 2019; Zheng  et al., 2017; Wu et al., 2016; Zheng  et al., 2015 ). 
This new form of hybrid intelligence is not a fresh idea. For instance, Stanford 
University’s (2016) AI Life Report lists “ Collaborative systems that utilize the complementary 
strengths of humans and machines” as one of the future AI trends (Stone et al., 2016). The U.S. 
National AI R & D Strategy Plan (2016) lists "De velop effective methods for human -AI 
collaboration " as one of the seven strategies ( Plan, S , 2016) . Researchers also have explored the 
hybrid intelligence by leveraging the strengths from both  human intelligence and AI (Zheng et al., 
2017; Dellermann et al., 2019, 2020; Kamar, 2016; Johnson & Vera, 2019 ). Recent work has 
initially found the significant potential of augmentation through integration of both kinds of  
intelligence . The applications of hybrid augmented intelligence help achieve collaborative 
decision -making in complex problems, thereby gaining superior excellent results that can be 
achieved separately (e.g., Carter & Nielsen, 2017; Shirado & Christakis, 2017; Crandall  et al., 
2018 ; Dellermann , et al., 2019 ).  
From the perspective of the HCAI approach , the hybrid intelligence must be developed in 
a context of “human -machine” systems by leveraging the complementary advantages of AI  and 
human intelligence  to produce more powerful intelligence form: human -machine hybrid