19 
 human intelligence, instead of replacing it, building a “machine world” that may harm humans  
must not be the ultimate goal of AI technology .  
Finally , HAII will provide a  collaboration platform across disciplines and will enable 
these professional s to effectively implement the HCAI  approach by unify ing all the work  related 
to developing AI systems under the same umbrella . AI technology itself is a result of the 
collabo ration across disciplines. As a “universal” label , HAII  will help the professionals 
collaborate to identify the commonality and the needs from the specific perspective of individual 
disciplines (e.g., computer science, AI, psychology , HCI, human factors, engineering, design, 
neuroscience) in developing AI systems , jointly address ing the challenges the society is facing, 
and maximize the influences on the development of AI systems.  
The emergence of the HAII  area is inevitable  as technology advances , just like the 
emergence of HCI in the 1980’s , when HCI was relabeled  from the traditional human -machine 
interaction  as traditional machines were being computerized . All of this have been naturally 
driven by the human -machine relationship  and the unique issues of emerging technologies faced 
by humans and society, as technology advances over time  (see Tables 1, 2, &  3, Figure 1) . Today, 
we are just facing a new type of “machines” - AI systems that present unique characteristics and 
challenges to us, urging us to take action.  
What are the relationships between HCI and HAII? The discussions about the relationship 
between HCI and AI are not new  (Choudhury et al., 2020) . Activities in the field of HCI and AI 
have been intertwined  (Grudin, 2010 ; Lieberman, 2009 ). The goal of HCI is to make computing 
systems easier to their users. The goal of AI is to model human intelligence and to embody those 
mechanisms in computers. For many AI professionals developing AI systems, their main interest 
is on the development of a l earning algorithm rather than the users and interaction itself, resulting 
in many AI  sysytems  do suffer from poor usage  scenarios  and interaction design  (Choudhury et 
al., 2020 ). Through the developing histories of HCI and AI, the relation ship between HCI and AI 
has changed from competit ion (in the past) to mutual promotion (in the present) state  (Fan et al., 
2019 ). People have argued that AI and HCI can team up to fulfill the promise of both fields, 
neither field must  go it alone  (Lieberman, 2009 ). For instance, HCI provides research ideas and 
usages for application usages for AI (natural interactions, emotional computing, etc.)  while AI 
delivers the technology for more effective interaction for HCI  (Fan et al., 2019 ).  
Now we are witnessing a marriage of HCI and AI  (Choudhury et al., 2020) . Researchers 
have begun to be more vocal about the need for a stronger relationship  between HCI and AI.  The 
AI community has recently made investments in the topics of fairness, accountability, and 
transparency of AI systems1, as discussed earlier. There are more and more journals and 
conferences on HCI + AI, and the number and influence of papers continue to increase  (Fan et al., 
2019 ). Thus, we expect the emerging  area of HAII to revive and extend prior attempts to bridge 
HCI and AI , which provides a great opportunity for HCI professionals.  
Instead of proposing a new  sperate interdisciplinary filed for HAII , our overall goal in 
promoting the HAII work is to further enable implementation of the HCAI approach  through the