29 
 machines to understand  and adapt to each other in a dynamic environment , future HCI work 
needs to help de velop computational situation awareness model s, such as, understanding AI-based 
agent ’s intention  and operating c ontext ( Prada & Paiva, 2014 ; Brill et al., 2018 ). 
Future AI systems need to dynamically adapt to the human s’ states and redistribute 
functions accordingly , which relies on the mutual trust between the two  sides . Current machine 
agents still lack human -like "thinking" (values, etc.), and cannot explain their reasoning and 
decision -making processes, which brings difficulties  in trust research  (Mercado et al., 2016; 
Azevedo  et al., 2017 ; Xu & Dudek , 2016; Xu, 2019b; ). Actively carrying out trust restoration 
after an error occurs should be the basic requirement for human -machine teaming  design  (de 
Visser et al. , 2018.)  These authors  proposed some strategies. Future HCI work is needed for trust 
measurement, trust modeling, repair, corrections  of violation s, and how to quantify the trust level 
to support effective take -over/hand off between humans and machines  (Kistan et al., 2018; Baker 
et al., 2018;  Chen et al. , 2017 ).  
The research on shared mental model s between humans and machines (e.g., intelligent 
robots ) is also one of the current research  foci. Intelligent robots already have some special 
abilities ( e.g., social  interaction), and it is possible to construct a "mental model" that understands 
human intentions (Prada & Paiva, 2014; Chen & Barnes, 2014), which helps become human 
partner. Scheutz et al. (2017) initially proposed a cognitive computing framework to build  a 
shared mental model for human -computer cooperation. Following this, Kaur, Williams, and 
Lasecki (2019) proposed a basic method for building shared mental models between human s and 
machines in complex fields such as healthcare and autonomous driving. Ramaraj  et al.  (2019) 
conducted experiments to study the factors that influence users to construct a robot mental model, 
and the results confirmed that good interface transparency can effectively improve accuracy in 
establishing a mental model. At present, there is still a lack of in -depth research on the 
relationship between mental models and social/emotional interactions in human -machine teaming , 
requiring further HCI work.    
Besides the research on the mental constructs as discussed above, there are needs for 
future HCI work in the area of human -machine teaming / collaboration.  
First, overall, HCI professionals need to understand what to model and the associated data 
needs  (e.g., situation awareness , behaviors, intention , trust ) (Prada & Paiva, 2014 ; Brill et al., 
2018 ), We will need to devise a new way to assess and predict the performance of human -
machine teaming  in terms of effective metrics . We also need to develop theories, models, and 
framework s in human -machine teaming. The topics include the models of teaming relationships 
(e.g., peer, teammate, and mentor/mentee), teaming processes (e.g., interactions, communications, 
and coordination), and applications of human -machine teaming in different work domains.  
Second, we nee d to further understand the human -AI interaction in the context of human -
machine teaming and collaboration. Humans may collaborate with machines on a social level and  
be influenced by the social dynamics of the machines. These behaviors may manifest within  
human -machine teaming , and we need to understand the behavioral implications of social factors