27 
 Fifth, HCI needs to study machine behavior in the context of social interaction in the real 
environment  (Krafft et al., 2017 ; Wang  et al., 2016) . Lab studies have shown that the interaction 
with simple intelligent machines (e.g., robots ) can enhance human coordination  (Shirado et al., 
2017 ), and robots can directly cooperate with humans like human -to-human cooperation  
(Crandall et al., 2018 ). However, it is necessary to further verify the impact of AI  technology on 
the way of human social  interaction in th e real social environment ( Pentland, 2015 ). These 
interventions may change the overall behavior s of the system and minimize potential  adverse 
effects.  
Finally, HCI need s to study the behavioral interaction between multi ple agents  for 
complex AI systems (e.g., smart city, smart factory ). Multiple AI systems  will operate in the same 
social environment . Each AI system  may optimize its own behavior according to the rules of the 
development organization  (Earthy & Downs, 2018 ; ISO, 2020 ). Multiple AI systems  designed 
with different rules should be able to interact with each other effectively. How should the 
design er consider t he compatibility issues across AI systems to avoid adverse behaviors ? How 
can a design effectively support t he interaction between multiple AI systems ? How should a 
design put humans to work as a bridge across i ncompatible systems  to avoid unexpected 
behavior s? Other challenges faced by HCI include  fully considering the human operator’s 
understanding of the system status es of multiple AI systems , identifying and mitigating errors, so 
that the user can effectively regain control ability  of AI systems  (Earthy & Downs, 2018 ).  
 
5.2 From human -computer interaction to human -AI collaboration   
As discussed earlier, the human -machine relationship in the AI era has added a new type 
of human -machine collaboration : human -AI/machine teaming . A significant amount of work has 
been invested in human -machine teaming across multiple work domains . Initial research suggests 
that humans and AI systems can be more effective when working together as a combined unit 
rather than as individual entities ( Bansal et al., 2019a, 2019b ; Walliser  et al., 2019 ; Demir  et al., 
2018 ). The more intelligent the AI system, the greater the need for collaborative capabilities  
(Johnson & Vera , 2019 ). Designing for such mutual cooperation suggests a radical shift from the 
current HCI thinking to a more sophisticated strategy based on teaming  (Johnson & Vera, 2019 ). 
While HCI traditionally studie d the interaction between humans and non -AI computing system, 
the human interactions with AI systems should be focused on understanding of how humans and 
AI systems interact, collaborate, negotiate,  and even work as teammate s, where AI systems do not 
only work as a supportive tool as we have known in the context of the conventional HCI work .  
A variety of topic s are being explored in the research and application of human -machine 
teaming : research strategy , architecture and conceptual framework of human -machine teaming 
(Madni & Madni, 2018;  Berberian, 2019; Johnson & Vera, 2019;  Azevedo et al., 2017 ; O’Neill et 
al., 2020; Prada & Paiva, 2014;  Shively et al., 2017) , metrics benchmark framework ( Damacharla  
et al., 2018 a), and team performance ( Bansal  et al., 2019a, 2019b; Walliser et al., 2019 ;  Demir et