8 
 Kaber (2018) differentiates the concepts of automation and autonomy with a new 
framework. Key requirements of design for autonomy include  agent viability in a target context, 
agent self -governance in  goal formulation and fulfilment of roles, and independence in defined 
tasks performance. Kaber (2018) auges that Sheridan and Verplank’s (1978) taxonomy were not 
referring to autonomous agents capable of formulating objectives and determining courses of 
action and make no mention of, for example, self -sufficiency  or self -governance  in context.  
As Table 2 shows, we believe that automation and autonomy are not differentiated in 
terms of level of automation , whether there is a certain level of human -like intelligent capabilities 
on AI technology is the essential difference between the two. With the help of algorithms, 
machine learning ( ML) and training with big data, a n AI system can autonomously complete 
certain tasks that cannot be done by previous automation technolog y in certain scenarios ( Kaber, 
2018; Madni & Madni, 2018 ; Xu. 2021 ). These unique autonomous characteristics of AI 
technology are the starting point for considering how to effectively develop AI systems  from a  
HCI perspective .  
 
2.3 An emerging form of the human -machine relationship in the AI era  
Historically speaking, the evolution of human -machine relationship has been driven by 
technology  (Wickens  et al., 2015 ). The characteristics of the human -machine relationship in a 
specific technological period  determines the focus of human -machine interaction related work 
(e.g., human factors) during that period. As shown in Figure 1, the human -machine relationship 
has evolved from the "humans adapt to machines" paradigm before World War II to the 
"machines adapt to humans" paradigm after World War II. Since entering the co mputer era, it has 
evolved into the human -computer interaction (HCI) , that is, the interaction between humans and 
non-AI computing systems . The computing  products (e.g., automated machines) primarily work 
as an assistive tool , supporting human ’s monitoring and execution tasks.