47 
 2019) ; Endsley ’s guidelines for the design of human -autonomy systems  (Endsley, 2017) ; 
Shneiderman’s 2-D HCAI design framework (Shneiderman, 2020a ). The International 
Organization for Standardization (ISO) also sees this urgency. The ISO Human -System 
Interaction SC4 Work Group 6 (ISO TC 159/SC4/WG6) is drafting a document on AI systems, 
titled “ Ergonomics of Human -System Interaction - Part 810: Robotic, Intelligent and Autonomous 
Systems ” (ISO, 2020).  This document will provide the basis for ISO to determine the need for 
publishing ISO standards in this area. The HAII community needs to put forwa rd a series of 
design standards  based on empirical studies , helping play a  key role in optimizing the design of 
AI systems.  
6  Challenges  and opportunities of current HCI methodology for HAII work  
 
Future HCI work inevitably put s forward new requirements on methods  if we want to 
effectively address the unique issues discussed earlier . Existing  HCI methods were primarily 
created for non -AI computing systems and may not effectively address the unique issues in AI 
systems. For instan ce, recent research reported that many challenges have been encountered in the 
process  of developing AI systems for HCI professionals (Yang  et al., 2020). There is a lack of 
effective methods for designing AI systems. Designers had difficulty perform ing the typical HCI 
activities of conceptualization, rapid prototyping, and testing ( Yang  et al., 2020; Kuniavsky et al., 
2017  Holmquist , 2017; Dove et al., 2017; Kayacik et al., 2019; van Allen. , 2018; Yang et al. , 
2018 ).  
How will conventional HCI methods need to be modified in contexts where AI is a core 
technology component? Driven  by the unique characteristics of AI technology  as discussed 
earlier, there are new needs that pose challenges to the existing HCI methods. For example, the 
unique machine behavior of AI systems and the evol ving collaborative relationship between 
humans -AI systems have challenge d HCI methods that assess , design,  and test system s and 
interfaces in the short -term. Also, the pervasive computing environment and eco systems of 
artifacts, services, and data has challenged the existing HCI methods that fo cus on single user -
artifact interaction  (Brown et al., 2017) .    
The HCI community has realized the need to enhance exi sting methods (Stephanidis, 
Salvendy et al., 2019; Palvend o, 2019). T o effectively address the unique issues of AI  systems, 
we must  enhance existing methods and leverage the methods from other disciplinaries. To this 
end, we have assessed  the existing methods of HCI, human factors, and other related disciplines. 
Table 6 summarizes the outcome s showing a comparison between the conventional HCI methods 
(i.e., typical HCI methods being used in designing non -AI systems) and the alternative met hods 
that are presented by enhancing existing methods and leveraging the methods from other 
disciplines.