25 
 Machine behavior in AI systems has a special ecological form  (Rahwan et al. , 2019) . 
Currently, the majority of people studying machine behavior are AI and computer science 
professionals without formal training in behavioral science  (Epstein et al., 2018;  Leibo et al., 
2018).  The leading researchers in the AI community call for other disciplines  to join  (Rahwan et 
al., 2019) . Obviously,  the multi -disciplinary HCI should play a significant role here  (Bromham et 
al., 2016) . Machine  behavior  is one of the unique characteristics that distinguishes  the HAII work 
from the conventional HCI work . HCI professionals must fully understand the design implications 
of machine behavior  in developing AI systems  and find effective ways to manage the unique 
behaviors of AI systems in order to deliver HCAI -based systems. Driven by the HCAI  approach , 
HCI need s to put human s and their needs first  in the development process  (e.g., data collection, 
algorithm data training, test)  and to partner with AI professionals to manage  the development of 
machine behavior .  
With many of today’s AI systems being derived from ML methods, study of the 
mechanism behind a machine’s behavior will require assessment of how ML methods/processes 
impact machine behavior (Doshi -Velez & Kim, 2017; Ribeiro et al., 2016). Many AI systems are 
based on supervised, reinforced, and inter active learning approaches that  require work done by 
humans, such as, providing an enormous amount of labeled data for algorithm training. Ini tial 
work has started. As an example of HCAI -aligned design thinking, based on a "human -centered 
ML" approach (Fie brink et al., 2018; G oogle PAIR , 2019 ; Kaluarachchi  et al., 2021) , Interactive 
Machine Learning (IML) aims to avoid concerns over fairness, accountability and transparency 
(Fiebrink et al., 2018; Dudley & Kristensson, 2018 ). The i nteractive machine learning approach 
allows users to participate in the ML training iteratively by selecting, mark ing, and/or generating 
training examples to interact with required functions of the system, supported by HCI design and 
evaluation methods.  The interactive machine learning approach also pays special attention to the 
interaction between humans and the ML p rocess. From the HCAI perspective, the interactive 
machine learning approach emphasizes on human’s roles in the development with human goals 
and capabilities, so that an AI system can deliver better results than humans or algorithms 
working alone (Amershi et al., 2014).   
The unique m achine behavior creates challenges for developing AI systems, but also 
opportunities for HCI professionals to play a role in future HAII work (Lau et al., 2018; Rahwan 
et al., 2019; Amershi et al., 2014; Ledford, 2015 ).  
First, a machine acquire s its behavior  during the development with AI technology , shaping 
the behavior is affected by many factors , like algorithm s, architectur e (e.g., learning parameter, 
knowledge representation ), training , and data. HCI professionals may leverage the current HCI 
methods ( e.g., iterative design and evaluation with end users) to continuously improve the design 
until no undesirable results. For instance, HCI professionals may translat e user needs into data 
needs and understand how to generate, train, optimize, and test AI -generated behaviors during 
development . Machine behavior can be shaped by exposing it to particular training data. 
Substantial human effort is necessary to annotate or characterize the data in the process of