52 
 7  Challenges and opportunities in current HCI practice for HAII work  
 
As an emerging research and application area, HCI professionals must face challenges  in 
HAII practice. Effective strategies must be developed and applied to overcome the challenges. 
Unfortunately,  HCI professionals  still join AI project s only after  requirements are define d; a 
typical phenomenon  when HCI was an emerging new field  (Yang, Steinfeld et al., 2020). 
Consequently , the HCAI approach  and design  recommendations from HCI professionals could be 
easily declined  (Yang, 2018) . AI professionals often claim that many problems that HCI  could not 
solve  in the past  have been solved through AI technology  (e.g., voice and gesture input ), and they 
are able to design the interaction by themselves. A lthough some of the designs are innovative, 
studies have shown that the outcome may not be acceptable from user experience perspective 
(e.g., Budiu & Laubheimer, 2018 ). Also,  some HCI professionals find it challenging to 
collaborate effectively with AI professionals due to lack of a shared workflow and a common 
language (Girardin & Lathia, 2017 ). Recent studies have shown that HCI professionals do not 
seem to be prepared themselves for provid ing effective design support for AI systems  (Yang, 
2018) . We propose that the HCI community need s to reassess our approach in developing AI 
systems and offer several strategic recommendations on how HCI professionals can make 
contributions to the HAII area.   
First, HCI professionals need to integrate the existing and enhanced methods into the 
development process of AI systems to maximize the interdisciplinary collaboration  across AI and 
HCI professionals . A multi -disciplinary team, including AI, data, computer science , and HCI, 
may bring various frictions and opportunities for misunderstandings , which must be overcome  
through process  optimization  (Kuniavsky  et al., 2017; Girardin & Lathia , 2017;  Holmquist, 2017 ). 
For instance, in order for understanding the similarities and differences in practices between HCI 
professionals and the professionals from other disciplines , researchers summarize a series of 
touch points and principles  (Girardin & Lathia, 2017). Within  the HCI community, people have 
pointed out how the HCI process should be integrated into the development of autonomous 
capabilities built on AI and ML  and the  role th at HCI professionals should play in the 
development of AI (Lau et al., 2018) . For instance, Cerejo (2021) pro poses a “pair design” 
process that put s two people (one HCI professional and one AI professional) working together 
across the development stages of AI systems. While AI professionals should understand the HAII 
area and its approach, HCI professionals also need to fully understand and apply knowledge of AI 
to facilitate the process integration and collaborati on.  
Second , the HCI communit y should take a leading role to promote the HAII  area as we did 
40 years ago for promoting HCI . In response to the challenge faced by the interdisciplinary 
communities such as human factors  and HCI , past president of the Human Factors and 
Ergonomics (HFES) society , William Howell, put forward a model of “shared philosophy ” by 
sharing the human -centered design philosophy with other disciplines  (Howell, 2001), instead of a 
"unique discipline " model  by claiming the sole ownership of the human -centered design by a