17 
 4. Transition  to an emerging interdisciplinary area : Human -AI Interaction (HAII)  
4.1 Motivation s for promoting the research and application of HAII  within the HCI 
community  
As discussed previously , the third wave of AI is becoming more  human -centered, the AI 
technology as represented by autonomy can exhibit  unique machine behavior with certain levels 
of human -like intelligent capabilities  with possible non-deterministic and unexpected output , and 
AI-based machine s can evolve and play the dual roles of "assistive tool + collaborative teammate"  
when interacted by humans.  Furthermore, the comparative analysis shows  such significant 
differences between non-AI and AI systems  across a variety of aspects . All of these are new 
issues that we have not  encountered when we address HCI issues in the computer era. 
Furthermore, researchers have initially proposed a human -centered AI  (HCAI)  approach to 
address these unique issues of AI systems.  
To respond to these changes  and the call for a HCAI approach ,  the HCI community must: 
(1) reassess the current scope of our HCI practices to ensure we expand our view beyond the 
boundary of our conventional focus of non -AI computing systems; (2) rethink our current 
approach at a paradigmatic level to ensure that we can effectively address the unique issues in AI 
systems; (3) reexamine our HCI practices that were originally created to suit non -AI systems so 
that we will be better to ad dress the issues of AI systems . By doing all of these, we can effective ly 
enable the implementation of the HCAI approach  to maximize the benefits and minimize the risks 
of AI technology.   
The “technology -centered” approach had dominated the beginning stage of the computer 
era in the 1980s until a wake -up call was made to promote the human -centered design approach. 
Today, we are witnessing the “time lagging effect” again (Hancock , 2019, 2020 ; Xu, 2019a; 
Shneiderman, 2020a, 2020c). The practice of the  human -centered design approach in the AI era 
(i.e., the HCAI approach) has once again historically fallen on the shoulders of the HCI 
professionals and other related disciplines (e.g., human factors , AI, computer science ). With the 
HCAI approach as a weapon, we just need to find a platform as an appropriate battlefield to win 
the war that aims for any potential harms and risks when humans interact with AI systems. 
Researchers have proposed to enable the implementation of the HCAI approach from a variety of 
perspectives, such as design framework ( Shneiderman ,  2020 a), ethically aligned design ( Li, 
2018; Donahoe , 2018 ), governance of ethical AI (Shneiderman, 2020d), and design process 
(Cerejo , 2021) , we believe that promoting the research and application of human interaction with 
AI systems will al so provide a collaborative platform for HCI professionals  to address the unique 
issues introduced by AI technology , which will further enable the implementation of the HCAI 
approach .    
Research and application of h uman interactions with AI systems are not new research 
agenda, and many avenues have been investigated by researchers over the past several years  
(Prada & Paiva, 2014 ; Shively et al., 201 7; Berberian, 2019; Johnson & Vera, 2019 ; Brill et al.,