38 
 like concept and focused on the needs of specific user groups  by working with game designers 
and AI/ML experts to find understandable AI  systems  for domain users ( i.e., game designers). 
The current work on understandable AI focuses on UI modeling, applications of psycholog ical 
theories , and validation of related experiments  (Zhou et al., 2018; Paudyal & Wong, 2018; 
Hoffman et al., 2018; DARPA, 2017).  
Future work cannot rely solely on technical methods  and requires the participation of HCI. 
Future  HCI work can be mainly considered as follows . First, research on the interaction design of 
AI systems  needs to continue , ranging from co-adaptive dialog -based  interface, visualization, user 
interface modeling, to natural interactive dialogue , etc.  Most previous explainable AI research 
was based on static, one -way interpretation  from AI system s. Future HCI work need s to continue 
to develop effective human -centered solutions, such as : user exploratory and interactive dialogues 
with AI systems  (Abdul et al., 2018) , visualization approach (Chatzimparmpas  et al., 2020; Yang 
et al., 2019) , human -in-the-loop explainable AI (Chittajallu et al, 2019),  and collaborative task -
driven (e.g., error detection) to support adaptation between humans and machines  (i.e., 
"exploratory interpretation ”) (Mueller et al., 2019 ; Kulesza ’s at al. , 2015) . 
Second, HCI professionals can leverage our own interdisciplinary backgrounds to act as 
intermedia ries, accelerating the tran sfer of the knowledge from other disciplines . For example, 
many of the existing psychological theories and models have not generated valuable results 
(Abdul et al., 2018; Muelle et al., 2019 ; Broniatowski, 2021 ). Also, t here is a large body of 
human factors research work on automation transparency /surprise  and situation awareness (e.g., 
Sarter & Woods, 1995 ; Endsley , 2017 ), their comprehensive mitigation solutions may offer 
possible solutions to explainable AI.  
Third , future HCI work need to further explore user-participatory solutions based on the 
HCAI approach , such as user exploratory, collaborative task -driven, and user -participation 
approaches (Mueller et al., 2019) . This is to ensure that AI is understandable to target users 
beyond explainability, which  AI professionals have previously neglected . In addition, there is a 
lack of user -participated experimental validation in many existing studies, along with a lack of 
rigorous behavioral science -based methods (Abdul et al., 2018; Mueller et al., 2019 ). HCI should 
give full play to its expertise to support validation methods. When adopting user -participated 
experimental evaluation, it is necessary to overcome the unilateral evaluation methods in some 
existing studies that only evaluate the performance of AI systems , HCI should promote the 
evaluation of the AI systems as a whole human -machine system  (Muelle et al., 2019 ; Hoffman, et 
al., 2018 ; Mercado  et al., 2016) .  
Finally, from the soci otechn ical system s perspective , the relationship s among user 
(including organization s), trust, acceptance, and explainability /comprehensi bility of AI should be 
further explored  (Ehsan & Riedl, 2020 ; Klein, et al., 2019 ). HCI professionals need to consider 
the influence of other factors, such as culture, user knowledge, skills, decision -making behaviors, 
user skill growth , users’ personality and cognitive style.  HCI can apply  its multidisciplinary 
expertise in this regard.