Survey on pruning and quantization
Network Model Target  LocatingNetwork
PruningTraining/Tuning
Network ModelPruning
StrategyDecision
ComponetsRuntime PruningStatic Pruning
Dynamic Pruning
Figure 8: Pruning Categories: Static pruning is performed oﬄine prior to inference while Dynamic pruning is performed at runtime.
ther combination of them.
Recently,newnetworkpruningtechniqueshavebeencre-
ated. Modernpruningtechniquesmaybeclassiﬁedbyvarious
aspectsincluding: 1) structured andunstructured pruning de-
pendingiftheprunednetworkissymmetricornot,2) neuron
andconnection pruning depending on the pruned element
type,or3) staticanddynamic pruning . Figure8showsthe
processingdiﬀerencesbetweenstaticanddynamicpruning.
Static pruning hasallpruningstepsperformedoﬄineprior
to inference while dynamic pruning is performed during run-
time. Whilethereisoverlapbetweenthecategories,inthis
paper we will use static pruning anddynamic pruning for
classiﬁcation of network pruning techniques.
Figure 9 shows a granularity of pruning opportunities.
Thefourrectanglesontherightsidecorrespondtothefour
brown ﬁlters in the top of Figure 2. Pruning can occur
onanelement-by-element,row-by-row,column-by-column,
ﬁlter-by-ﬁlter, or layer-by-layer basis. Typically element-by-
element has the smallest sparsity impact, and results in a
unstructured model. Sparsity decreases from left-to-right in
Figure 9.
channel -wise element -wise filter -wise shape -wise layer -wise
Figure 9: Pruning Opportunities: Diﬀerent network sparsity
results from the granularity of pruned structures. Shape-wise
pruning was proposed by Wen [241].
arg min
pL=N.x;W/ *Np.x;Wp/
whereNp.x;Wp/ =P.N.x;W//(4)
Independent of categorization, pruning can be described
mathematicallyasEquation4. Nrepresentstheentireneuralnetworkwhichcontainsaseriesoflayers(e.g.,convolutional
layer, pooling layer, etc.) with xas input.Lrepresents the
prunednetworkwith Npperformancelosscomparedtothe
unprunednetwork. Networkperformanceistypicallydeﬁned
as accuracy in classiﬁcation. The pruning function, P./,
results in a diﬀerent network conﬁguration Npalong with
theprunedweights Wp. Thefollowingsectionsareprimarily
concernedwiththeinﬂuenceof P./onNp. Wealsoconsider
how to obtain Wp.
3.1. Static Pruning
Staticpruningisanetworkoptimizationtechniquethat
removes neurons oﬄine from the network aftertraining and
before inference. During inference, no additional pruning
ofthenetworkisperformed. Staticpruningcommonlyhas
threeparts: 1)selectionofparameterstoprune,2)themethod
of pruning the neurons, and 3) optionally ﬁne-tuning or re-
training [ 92]. Retraining may improve the performance of
the pruned network to achieve comparable accuracy to the
unpruned network but may require signiﬁcant oﬄine compu-
tation time and energy.
3.1.1. Pruning Criteria
As a result of network redundancy, neurons or connec-
tionscanoftenberemovedwithoutsigniﬁcantlossofaccu-
racy. AsshowninEquation1,thecoreoperationofanetwork
is a convolution operation. It involves three parts: 1) input
features as produced by the previous layer, 2) weights pro-
ducedfromthetrainingphase,and3)biasvaluesproduced
from the training phase. The output of the convolution op-
erationmayresultineitherzerovaluedweightsorfeatures
that lead to a zero output. Another possibility is that similar
weights or features may be produced. These may be merged
for distributive convolutions.
Anearlymethodtoprunenetworksisbrute-forcepruning.
Inthismethodtheentirenetworkistraversedelement-wise
andweightsthatdonotaﬀectaccuracyareremoved. Adisad-
vantageofthisapproachisthelargesolutionspacetotraverse.
A typical metric to determine which values to prune is given
bythelp-norm, s.t.pË ^N;Ø`,whereNisnaturalnumber.
Thelp-norm of a vector xwhich consists of nelements is
T Liang et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 7 of 41