Figure 3: Evolution of simulated graph topology through time.
Figure 4: Latent representations of the simulated graph in different time steps in 2-d space using VGRNN.
4.2 Interpretable latent representations
To show that VGRNN learns more interpretable latent representations, we simulated a dynamic graph
with three communities in which a node (red colored node) transfers from one community into another
in two time steps (Figure 3). We embedded the node into 2-d latent space using VGRNN (Figure 4)
and DynAERNN (the best performed baseline; Figure S1 in the supplementary material). While the
advantages of modeling uncertainty for latent representations and its relation to node labels (classes)
for static graphs have been discussed in Bojchevski and Günnemann [ 2], we argue that the uncertainty
is also directly related to topological evolution in dynamic graphs.
More speciﬁcally, the variance of the latent variables for the node of interest increases in time (left to
right) marked with the red contour. In time steps 2 and 3 (where the node is moving in the graph),
the information from previous and current time steps contradicts each other; hence we expect the
representation uncertainty to increase. We also plotted the variance of a node whose community
doesn’t change in time (marked with the green contour). As we expected, the variance of this
node does not increase over time. We argue that the uncertainty helps to better encode non-smooth
evolution, in particular abrupt changes, in dynamic graphs. Moreover, at time step 2, the moving node
have multiple edges with nodes in two communities. Considering the inner-product decoder, which is
based on the angle between the latent representations, the moving node can be connected to both of
the communities which is consistent with the graph topology. We note that DynAERNN (Figure S1)
fails to produce such an interpretable latent representation. We can see that VGRNN can separate the
communities in the latent space more distinctively than what DynAERNN does.
5 Conclusion
We have proposed VGRNN and SI-VGRNN, the ﬁrst node embedding methods for dynamic graphs
that embed each node to a random vector in the latent space. We argue that adding high level latent
variables to graph recurrent neural networks not only increases its expressiveness to better model
the complex dynamics of graphs, but also generates interpretable random latent representation for
nodes. SI-VGRNN is also developed by combining VGRNN and semi-implicit variational inference
for ﬂexible variational inference. We have tested our proposed methods on dynamic link prediction
tasks and they outperform competing methods substantially, specially for very sparse graphs.
6 Acknowledgments
The presented materials are based upon the research supported by the National Science Foundation
under Grants ENG-1839816, IIS-1848596, CCF-1553281, IIS-1812641 and IIS-1812699. We also
thank Texas A&M High Performance Research Computing and Texas Advanced Computing Center
for providing computational resources to perform experiments in this work.
9