Variational Graph Recurrent Neural Networks
Ehsan Hajiramezanaliy, Arman Hasanzadehy, Nick Dufﬁeldy, Krishna Narayanany,
Mingyuan Zhouz,Xiaoning Qiany
yDepartment of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Texas A&M University
{ehsanr, armanihm, duffieldng, krn, xqian}@tamu.edu
zMcCombs School of Business, The University of Texas at Austin
mingyuan.zhou@mccombs.utexas.edu
Abstract
Representation learning over graph structured data has been mostly studied in static
graph settings while efforts for modeling dynamic graphs are still scant. In this
paper, we develop a novel hierarchical variational model that introduces additional
latent random variables to jointly model the hidden states of a graph recurrent
neural network (GRNN) to capture both topology and node attribute changes in
dynamic graphs. We argue that the use of high-level latent random variables in
this variational GRNN (VGRNN) can better capture potential variability observed
in dynamic graphs as well as the uncertainty of node latent representation. With
semi-implicit variational inference developed for this new VGRNN architecture (SI-
VGRNN), we show that ﬂexible non-Gaussian latent representations can further
help dynamic graph analytic tasks. Our experiments with multiple real-world
dynamic graph datasets demonstrate that SI-VGRNN and VGRNN consistently
outperform the existing baseline and state-of-the-art methods by a signiﬁcant
margin in dynamic link prediction.
1 Introduction
Node embedding maps each node in a graph to a vector in a low-dimensional latent space, in which
classical feature vector-based machine learning formulations can be adopted [ 5]. Most of the existing
node embedding techniques assume that the graph is static and that learning tasks are performed
on ﬁxed sets of nodes and edges [ 19,23,12,20,14,1]. However, many real-world problems are
modeled by dynamic graphs, where graphs are constantly evolving over time. Such graphs have been
typically observed in social networks, citation networks, and ﬁnancial transaction networks. A naive
solution to node embedding for dynamic graphs is simply applying static methods to each snapshot of
dynamic graphs. Among many potential problems of such a naive solution, it is clear that it ignores
the temporal dependencies between snapshots.
Several node embedding methods have been proposed to capture the temporal graph evolution for
both networks without attributes [ 10,26] and attributed networks [ 24,16]. However, all of the
existing dynamic graph embedding approaches represent each node by a deterministic vector in
a low-dimensional space [ 2]. Such deterministic representations lack the capability of modeling
uncertainty of node embedding, which is a natural consideration when having multiple information
sources, i.e. node attributes and graph structure.
In this paper, we propose a novel node embedding method for dynamic graphs that maps each node to
a random vector in the latent space. More speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst introduce a dynamic graph autoencoder
model, namely graph recurrent neural network (GRNN), by extending the use of graph convolutional
Both authors contributed equally.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.