the criss-cross path are still absent. To tackle this problem,
we innovatively and simply introduce a RCCA operation
based on the criss-cross attention. The RCCA module can
be unrolled into Rloops. In the ﬁrst loop, the criss-cross
attention takes the feature maps Hextracted from a CNN
model as the input and output the feature maps H′, where
HandH′are with the same shape. In the second loop, the
criss-cross attention takes the feature maps H′as the input
and output the feature maps H′′. As shown in Fig. 2, the
RCCA module is equipped with two loops (R=2) which is
able to harvest full-image contextual information from all
pixels to generate new feature maps with dense and rich
contextual information.
We denote AandA′as the attention maps in loop 1
and loop 2, respectively. Since we are interested only in
contextual information spreads in spatial dimension rather
than in channel dimension, the convolutional layer with 1×
1ﬁlters can be view as the identical connection. In addition,
the mapping function from position x′,y′to weight Ai,x,y
is deﬁned as Ai,x,y=f(A,x,y,x′,y′). For any position
uat the feature maps H′′and any position θat the feature
mapsH, there is actually a connection in the case of R= 2.
For the case that uandθare in the same row or column:
H′′
u←[f(A,u,θ)+1]·f(A′,u,θ)·Hθ (3)
where←donates the add-to operation. For the other case
thatuandθare not in the same row and column, Fig. 4
shows the propagation path of context information in spatial
dimension:
H′′
u←[f(A,ux,θy,θx,θy)·f(A′,ux,uy,ux,θy)+
f(A,θx,uy,θx,θy)·f(A′,ux,uy,θx,uy)]·Hθ(4)
In general, our RCCA module makes up for the deﬁ-
ciency of criss-cross attention that cannot obtain the dense
contextual information from all pixels. Compared with
criss-cross attention, the RCCA module ( R= 2) does not
bring extra parameters and can achieve better performance
with the cost of a minor computation increment.
4. Experiments
To evaluate the effectiveness of the CCNet, we carry out
comprehensive experiments on the Cityscapes dataset [ 10],
the ADE20K dataset [ 44], and the COCO dataset [ 23]. Ex-
perimental results demonstrate that CCNet achieves state-
of-the-art performance on Cityscapes and ADE20K. Mean-
while, CCNet can bring constant performance gain on
COCO for instance segmentation. In the following sub-
sections, we ﬁrst introduce the datasets and implementa-
tion details, then we perform a series of ablation experi-
ments on Cityscapes dataset. Finally, we report our results
on ADE20K and COCO dataset.4.1. Datasets and Evaluation Metrics
We adopt Mean IoU (mIOU, mean of class-wise inter-
section over union) for Cityscapes and ADE20K and the
standard COCO metrics Average Precision (AP) for COCO.
•Cityscapes is tasked for urban segmentation, Only the
5,000 ﬁnely annotated images are used in our experi-
ments and are divided into 2,975/500/1,525 images for
training, validation, and testing.
•ADE20K is a recent scene parsing benchmark contain-
ing dense labels of 150 stuff/object categories. The
dataset includes 20K/2K/3K images for training, vali-
dation and test.
•COCO is a very challenging dataset for instance seg-
mentation that contains 115K images over 80 cate-
gories for training, 5K images for validation and 20k
images for testing.
4.2. Implementation Details
Network Structure For semantic segmentation, we choose
the ImageNet pre-trained ResNet-101 [ 17] as our backbone
and remove the last two down-sampling operations and em-
ploy dilated convolutions in the subsequent convolutional
layers following the previous work [ 4], resulting in the out-
put stride as 8. For instance segmentation, we choose Mask-
RCNN [ 16] as our baseline.
Training settings SGD with mini-batch is used for train-
ing. For semantic segmentation, the initial learning rate
is 1e-2 for Cityscapes and ADE20K. Following the prior
works [ 5,39], we employ a poly learning rate policy where
the initial learning rate is multiplied by 1−(iter
maxiter)power
withpower = 0.9. We use the momentum of 0.9 and a
weight decay of 0.0001. For Cityscapes, the training im-
ages are augmented by randomly scaling (from 0.75 to 2.0),
then randomly cropping out the high-resolution patches
(769×769) from the resulting images. Since the images
from ADE20K are with various sizes, we adopt an augmen-
tation strategy of resizing the short side of input image to
the length randomly chosen from the set {300, 375, 450,
525, 600}. For instance segmentation, we take the same
training settings as that of Mask-RCNN [ 16].
4.3. Experiments on Cityscapes
4.3.1 Comparisons with state-of-the-arts
Results of other state-of-the-art semantic segmentation so-
lutions on Cityscapes validation set are summarized in
Tab. 1. We provide these results for reference and em-
phasize that these results should not be simply compared
with our method, since these methods are trained on dif-
ferent (even larger) training sets or different basic net-
work. Among these approaches, Deeplabv3 [ 6] and CCNet
607