softmax
HQ
K
VA1x1 Conv 1x1 Conv 1x1 Conv
Affinity
AggregationH’Figure 3. The details of criss-cross attention module.
the subsequent convolutional layers, leading to enlarge the
width/height of the output feature maps Xto 1/8 of the in-
put image.
Given the X, we ﬁrst apply a convolutional layer to ob-
tain the feature maps Hof dimension reduction, then, the
feature maps Hare fed into the criss-cross attention mod-
ule to generate new feature maps H′which aggregate con-
textual information together for each pixel in its criss-cross
path. The feature maps H′only aggregate the contextual
information in horizontal and vertical directions which are
not powerful enough for semantic segmentation. To obtain
richer and denser context information, we feed the feature
mapsH′into the criss-cross attention module again and
output feature maps H′′. Thus, each position in feature
mapsH′′actually gathers the information from all pixels.
Two criss-cross attention modules before and after share the
same parameters to avoid adding too many extra parame-
ters. We name this recurrent structure as recurrent criss-
cross attention (RCCA) module.
Then, we concatenate the dense contextual feature H′′
with the local representation feature X. It is followed by
one or several convolutional layers with batch normaliza-
tion and activation for feature fusion. Finally, the fused fea-
tures are fed into the segmentation layer to predict the ﬁnal
segmentation result.
3.2. Criss­Cross Attention
To model full-image dependencies over local feature rep-
resentations using lightweight computation and memory,
we introduce a criss-cross attention module. The criss-
cross attention module collects contextual information in
horizontal and vertical directions to enhance pixel-wise rep-
resentative capability. As shown in Fig. 3, given a lo-
cal feature maps H∈RC×W×H, the module ﬁrstly ap-
plies two convolutional layers with 1×1ﬁlters on Hto
generate two feature maps QandK, respectively, where
{Q,K}∈RC′×W×H.C′is the number of channel, which
is less than Cfor dimension reduction.
After obtaining feature maps QandK, we further gen-
(𝜽𝒙,𝜽𝒚)
(u𝒙,u𝒚) (𝜽𝒙,u𝒚)(u𝒙,𝜽𝒚)
𝒇(𝑨, u𝒙,𝜽𝒚, 𝜽𝒙,𝜽𝒚)
𝒇(𝑨, 𝜽𝒙,u𝒚, 𝜽𝒙,𝜽𝒚)(𝜽𝒙,𝜽𝒚)
(u𝒙,u𝒚) (𝜽𝒙,u𝒚)(u𝒙,𝜽𝒚)
𝒇( 𝑨′ ,u𝒙,u𝒚, 𝜽𝒙,u𝒚)𝒇( 𝑨′ ,u𝒙,u𝒚,u𝒙,𝜽𝒚)
Loop 1 Loop 2Figure 4. An example of information propagation when the loop
number is 2.
erate attention maps A∈R(H+W−1)×W×HviaAfﬁnity
operation. At each position uin the spatial dimension of
feature maps Q, we can obtain a vector Qu∈RC′. Mean-
while, we can also obtain the set Ωu∈R(H+W−1)×C′by
extracting feature vectors from Kwhich are in the same row
or column with position u.Ωi,u∈RC′is theith element
ofΩu. The Afﬁnity operation is then deﬁned as follows:
di,u=QuΩi,u⊺(1)
wheredi,u∈Dis the degree of correlation between feature
QuandΩi,u,i= [1,...,|Ωu|],D∈R(H+W−1)×W×H.
Then, we apply a softmax layer on Dover the channel di-
mension to calculate the attention map A.
Another convolutional layer with 1×1ﬁlters is ap-
plied onHto generate V∈RC×W×Hfor feature adap-
tion. At each position uin the spatial dimension of fea-
ture maps V, we can obtain a vector Vu∈RCand a set
Φu∈R(H+W−1)×C. The set Φuis a collection of fea-
ture vectors in Vwhich are in the same row or column with
positionu. The contextual information is collected by the
Aggregation operation:
H′
u=/summationdisplay
i∈|Φu|Ai,uΦi,u+Hu (2)
whereH′
uis a feature vector in output feature maps H′∈
RC×W×Hat position u.Ai,uis a scalar value at channel i
and position uinA. The contextual information is added to
local feature Hto enhance the local features and augment
the pixel-wise representation. Therefore, it has a wide con-
textual view and selectively aggregates contexts according
to the spatial attention map. These feature representations
achieve mutual gains and are more robust for semantic seg-
mentation.
3.3. Recurrent Criss­Cross Attention (RCCA)
Despite a criss-cross attention can capture contextual in-
formation in horizontal and vertical directions, the connec-
tions between one pixel and its around ones that are not in
606