ing module with multi-scale dilation convolutions for con-
textual information aggregation. Zhao et al . [41] further
introduced PSPNet with pyramid pooling module to cap-
ture contextual information. However, the dilated convo-
lution based methods [ 6,5,12] collect information from
a few surrounding pixels and can not generate dense con-
textual information actually. Meanwhile, the pooling based
methods [ 41,39] aggregate contextual information in a non-
adaptive manner and the homogeneous contextual informa-
tion is adopted by all image pixels, which does not satisfy
the requirement that different pixels need different contex-
tual dependencies.
To generate dense and pixel-wise contextual informa-
tion, PSANet [ 42] learns to aggregate contextual infor-
mation for each position via a predicted attention map.
Non-local Networks [ 31] utilizes a self-attention mecha-
nism [ 9,29], which enables a single feature from any po-
sition to perceive features of all the other positions, thus
harvesting full-image contextual information, see Fig. 1(a).
However, these attention-based methods need to generate
huge attention maps to measure the relationships for each
pixel-pair, whose complexity in time and space are both
O((H×W)×(H×W)), whereH×Wdonates the spatial
dimension of input feature maps. Since the input feature
maps are always with high resolution in semantic segmen-
tation task, self-attention based methods have high compu-
tation complexity and occupy a huge number of GPU mem-
ory. Thus, is there an alternative solution to achieve such a
target in a more efﬁcient way?
To address the above mentioned problem, our motiva-
tion is to consecutive sparse attention to replace the single
layer dense attention in the non-local networks. Without
loss of generality, we use two consecutive criss-cross at-
tention modules, in which each one only has sparse connec-
tions (H+W−1) for each position in the feature maps. The
criss-cross attention module aggregates contextual informa-
tion in horizontal and vertical directions. By serially stack-
ing two criss-cross attention modules, it can collect contex-
tual information from all pixels. The above decomposition
strategy greatly reduces the complexity in time and space
fromO((H×W)×(H×W))toO((H×W)×(H+W−1)).
We compare the differences between the non-local mod-
ule [ 31] and our criss-cross attention module in Fig. 1.
Concretely, both non-local module and criss-cross attention
module feed the input feature maps with spatial size H×W
to generate attention maps (upper branch) and adapted fea-
ture maps (lower branch), respectively. Then, the weighted
sum is adopted to collecting contextual information. Dif-
ferent from the dense connections adopted by the non-local
module, each position ( e.g., blue color) in the feature maps
is sparsely connected with other ones which are in the same
row and the same column in our criss-cross attention mod-
ule, leading to the predicted attention map only has H+W−1weights rather than H×Win non-local module. To achieve
the target of capturing the full-image dependencies, we then
innovatively and simply take a recurrent operation for the
criss-cross attention module. In particular, the local features
are ﬁrstly passed through one criss-cross attention mod-
ule to collect the contextual information in horizontal and
vertical directions. Then, by feeding the produced feature
maps from the ﬁrst criss-cross attention module to the other
one, the additional contextual information obtained from
the criss-cross path is ﬁnally enable the full-image depen-
dencies to be captured by each pixel. As demonstrated in
Fig. 1(b), each position ( e.g. red color) in the second fea-
ture maps ﬁnally collects information from all others to aug-
ment the pixel-wise representations. We share parameters
of the recurrent criss-cross module to reduce extra parame-
ters. Our criss-cross attention module can be easily plugged
into any fully convolutional neural network, named CCNet,
for leaning to segment in an end-to-end manner.
We have carried out extensive experiments on multiple
large-scale datasets. Our proposed CCNet achieves top per-
formance on two most competitive semantic segmentation
datasets, i.e., Cityscapes [ 10] and ADE20K [ 44]. In ad-
dition, the proposed criss-cross attention even improves the
state-of-the-art instance segmentation method, i.e., Mask R-
CNN with ResNet-101 [ 17]. These results well demonstrate
that our criss-cross attention module is generally beneﬁcial
to the dense prediction tasks. In summary, our main contri-
butions are two-fold:
•We propose a novel criss-cross attention module in this
work, which can be leveraged to capture contextual in-
formation from full-image dependencies in a more ef-
ﬁcient and effective way.
•We propose CCNet by taking advantages of recurrent
criss-cross attention module, achieving leading perfor-
mance on segmentation-based benchmarks, including
Cityscapes, ADE20K and COCO.
2. Related work
Semantic segmentation The last years have seen a renewal
of interest on semantic segmentation. FCN [ 26] is the ﬁrst
approach to adopt fully convolutional network for semantic
segmentation. Later, FCN-based methods have made great
progress in image semantic segmentation. Chen et al. [4]
and Yu et al. [37] removed the last two downsample layers
to obtain dense prediction and utilized dilated convolutions
to enlarge the receptive ﬁeld. Unet [ 28], Deeplabv3+ [ 8],
MSCI [ 21], SPGNet [ 2], ReﬁneNet [ 22] and DFN [ 36]
adopted encoder-decoder structures that fuse the informa-
tion in low-level and high-level layers to predict segmenta-
tion mask. SAC [ 40] and Deformable Convolutional Net-
works [ 11] improved the standard convolutional operator
604