A
A
A
ABBBBConst 4×4×512
AdaIN
AdaIN
AdaIN
AdaINUpsample
Conv 3×3
Conv 3×3Conv 3×3
4×4style
style
style
styleNoiseGenerator network G
8×8ω
C
Conv 3×3
4×4Encoder network E
8×8IN
Downsample
IN
Conv 3×3
C
C
Conv 3×3IN
Downsample
IN
Conv 3×3
Cstyle
style
style
styleFigure 2: StyleALAE Architecture. The StyleALAE en-
coder has Instance Normalization (IN) layers to extract mul-
tiscale style information that is combined into a latent code
wvia a learnable multilinear map.
the expected coding reconstruction error, as follows
∆(F/ba∇dblE◦G◦F) =Ep(z)/bracketleftbig
/ba∇dblF(z)−E◦G◦F(z)/ba∇dbl2
2/bracketrightbig
(8)
Imposing reciprocity in the latent space gives the signiﬁcant
advantage that simple ℓ2,ℓ1or other norms can be used ef-
fectively, regardless of whether they would be inappropri-
ate for the data space. For instance, it is well known that
element-wise ℓ2norm on image pixel differences does not
reﬂect human visual perception. On the other hand, when
used in latent space its meaning is different. For instance,
an image translation by a pixel could lead to a large ℓ2dis-
crepancy in image space, while in latent space its represen-
tation would hardly change at all. Ultimately, using ℓ2in
image space has been regarded as one of the reasons why
autoencoders have not been as successful as GANs in re-
constructing/generating sharp images [ 31]. Another way to
address the same issue is by imposing reciprocity adversar-
ially, as it was shown in [ 6,9]. Table 1reports a summary
of the main characteristics of most of the recent generator-
encoder architectures.
5. StyleALAE
We use ALAE to build an autoencoder that uses a Style-
GAN based generator. For this we make our latent space W
play the same role as the intermediate latent space in [ 24].
Therefore, our Gnetwork becomes the part of StyleGAN
depicted on the right side of Figure 2. The left side is a
novel architecture that we designed to be the encoder E.
Since at every layer, Gis driven by a style input, we
designEsymmetrically, so that from a corresponding layer
we extract style information. We do so by inserting Instance
Normalization (IN) layers [ 21], which provide instance av-
erages and standard deviations for every channel. Speciﬁ-
cally, ifyE
iis the output of the i-th layer of E, the IN mod-ule extracts the statistics µ(yE
i)andσ(yE
i)representing the
style at that level. The IN module also provides as output
the normalized version of the input, which continues down
the pipeline with no more style information from that level.
Given the information ﬂow between EandG, the archi-
tecture is effectively mimicking a multiscale style transfer
fromEtoG, with the difference that there is not an extra
input image that provides the content [ 21,22].
The set of styles that are inputs to the Adaptive Instance
Normalization (AdaIN) layers [ 21] inGare related linearly
to the latent variable w. Therefore, we propose to combine
the styles output by the encoder, and to map them onto the
latent space, via the following multilinear map
w=N/summationdisplay
i=1Ci/bracketleftbiggµ(yE
i)
σ(yE
i)/bracketrightbigg
(9)
where the Ci’s are learnable parameters, and Nis the num-
ber of layers.
Similarly to [ 23,24] we use progressive growing. We
start from low-resolution images ( 4×4pixels) and progres-
sively increase the resolution by smoothly blending in new
blocks to EandG. For the FandDnetworks we imple-
ment them using MLPs. The ZandWspaces, and all layers
ofFandDhave the same dimensionality in all our experi-
ments. Moreover, for StyleALAE we follow [ 24], and chose
Fto have 8 layers, and we set Dto have 3 layers.
6. Implementation
Adversarial losses and regularization. We use a non-
saturating loss [ 13,36], which in ( 1) we introduce by setting
f(·)to be a SoftPlus function [ 11]. This is a smooth ver-
sion of the rectiﬁer activation function, deﬁned as f(t) =
softplus( t) = log(1 + exp( t)). In addition, we use gradi-
ent regularization techniques [ 8,36,43]. We utilize R1[44,
Algorithm 1 ALAE Training
1:θF,θG,θE,θD←Initialize network parameters
2:while not converged do
3: Step I. Update E, andD
4:x←Random mini-batch from dataset
5:z←Samples from prior N(0,I)
6:LE,D
adv←softplus( D◦E◦G◦F(z)))+softplus(−D◦E(x))+
γ
2EpD(x)/bracketleftbig
/ba∇dbl∇D◦E(x)/ba∇dbl2/bracketrightbig
7:θE,θD←ADAM(∇θD,θELE,D
adv,θD,θE,α,β1,β2)
8: Step II. Update F,andG
9:z←Samples from prior N(0,I)
10:LF,G
adv←softplus(−D◦E◦G◦F(z)))
11:θF,θG←ADAM(∇θF,θGLF,G
adv,θF,θG,α,β1,β2)
12: Step III. Update E, andG
13:z←Samples from prior N(0,I)
14:LE,G
error←/ba∇dblF(z)−E◦G◦F(z)/ba∇dbl2
2
15:θE,θG←ADAM(∇θE,θGLE,G
error,θE,θG,α,β1,β2)
16:end while
14107