Adversarial Latent Autoencoders
Stanislav Pidhorskyi Donald A. Adjeroh Gianfranco Doretto
Lane Department of Computer Science and Electrical Engineering
West Virginia University, Morgantown, WV 26506
{stpidhorskyi, daadjeroh, gidoretto }@mix.wvu.edu
Abstract
Autoencoder networks are unsupervised approaches
aiming at combining generative and representational prop-
erties by learning simultaneously an encoder-generator
map. Although studied extensively, the issues of whether
they have the same generative power of GANs, or learn dis-
entangled representations, have not been fully addressed.
We introduce an autoencoder that tackles these issues
jointly, which we call Adversarial Latent Autoencoder
(ALAE) . It is a general architecture that can leverage re-
cent improvements on GAN training procedures. We de-
signed two autoencoders: one based on a MLP encoder,
and another based on a StyleGAN generator, which we
call StyleALAE. We verify the disentanglement properties
of both architectures. We show that StyleALAE can not only
generate1024×1024 face images with comparable quality
of StyleGAN, but at the same resolution can also produce
face reconstructions and manipulations based on real im-
ages. This makes ALAE the ﬁrst autoencoder able to com-
pare with, and go beyond the capabilities of a generator-
only type of architecture.
1. Introduction
Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) [ 13] have
emerged as one of the dominant unsupervised approaches
for computer vision and beyond. Their strength relates to
their remarkable ability to represent complex probability
distributions, like the face manifold [ 33], or the bedroom
images manifold [ 53], which they do by learning a gener-
ator map from a known distribution onto the data space.
Just as important are the approaches that aim at learning an
encoder map from the data to a latent space. They allow
learning suitable representations of the data for the task at
hand, either in a supervised [ 29,46,40,14,52], or unsuper-
vised [ 37,58,19,25,4,3] manner.
Autoencoder (AE) [ 28,41] networks are unsupervised
approaches aiming at combining the “generative” as well
as the “representational” properties by learning simultane-
ously an encoder-generator map. General issues subject ofinvestigation in AE structures are whether they can: (a) have
the same generative power as GANs; and, (b) learn disen-
tangled representations [ 1]. Several works have addressed
(a) [35,31,6,9,20]. An important testbed for success has
been the ability for an AE to generate face images as rich
and sharp as those produced by a GAN [ 23]. Progress has
been made but victory has not been declared. A sizable
amount of work has addressed also (b) [ 19,25,10], but not
jointly with (a).
We introduce an AE architecture that is general, and has
generative power comparable to GANs while learning a less
entangled representation. We observed that every AE ap-
proach makes the same assumption: the latent space should
have a probability distribution that is ﬁxed a priori and the
autoencoder should match it . On the other hand, it has been
shown in [ 24], the state-of-the-art for synthetic image gen-
eration with GANs, that an intermediate latent space, far
enough from the imposed input space, tends to have im-
proved disentanglement properties.
The observation above has inspired the proposed ap-
proach. We designed an AE architecture where we allow
the latent distribution to be learned from data to address en-
tanglement (A). The output data distribution is learned with
an adversarial strategy (B). Thus, we retain the generative
properties of GANs, as well as the ability to build on the
recent advances in this area. For instance, we can seam-
lessly include independent sources of stochasticity, which
have proven essential for generating image details, or can
leverage recent improvements on GAN loss functions, regu-
larization, and hyperparameters tuning [ 2,30,38,34,36,3].
Finally, to implement (A) and (B) we impose the AE reci-
procity in the latent space (C). Therefore, we can avoid us-
ing reconstruction losses based on simple ℓ2norm that op-
erate in data space, where they are often suboptimal, like
for the image space. We regard the unique combination of
(A), (B), and (C) as the major techical novelty and strength
of the approach. Since it works on the latent space, rather
than autoencoding the data space, we named it Adversarial
Latent Autoencoder (ALAE) .
We designed two ALAEs, one with a multilayer per-
ceptron (MLP) as encoder with a symmetric generator, and
14104