a)2=4
 b)2=6
 c)2=8
Figure 1: Stationary points of pPCA. Two zero-columns of Ware perturbed in the directions of two
orthogonal principal components ( 5and7) and the optimization landscape around zero-columns is shown,
where the goal is to maximize log marginal likelihood. The stability of the stationary points depends critically
on2(the observation noise). Left: 2is too large to capture either principal component. Middle: 2is too
large to capture one of the principal components. Right: 2is able to capture both principal components.
Posterior collapse. A dominant issue with V AE optimization is posterior collapse, in which the
learned variational distribution is close to the prior. This reduces the capacity of the generative
model, making it impossible for the decoder network to make use of the information content of all
of the latent dimensions. While posterior collapse is widely acknowledged, formally deﬁning it has
remained a challenge. We introduce a formal deﬁnition in Section 6.2 which we use to measure
posterior collapse in trained deep neural networks.
3 Related Work
Dai et al. [14] discuss the relationship between robust PCA methods [ 8] and V AEs. They show that
at stationary points the V AE objective locally aligns with pPCA under certain assumptions. We study
the pPCA objective explicitly and show a direct correspondence with linear V AEs. Dai et al. [14]
showed that the covariance structure of the variational distribution may smooth out the loss landscape.
This is an interesting result whose interactions with ours is an exciting direction for future research.
He et al. [17] motivate posterior collapse through an investigation of the learning dynamics of deep
V AEs. They suggest that posterior collapse is caused by the inference network lagging behind the
true posterior during the early stages of training. A related line of research studies issues arising from
approximate inference causing a mismatch between the variational distribution and true posterior
[12,22,19]. By contrast, we show that posterior collapse may exist even when the variational
distribution matches the true posterior exactly.
Alemi et al. [2]used an information theoretic framework to study the representational properties of
V AEs. They show that with inﬁnite model capacity there are solutions with equal ELBO and log
marginal likelihood which span a range of representations, including posterior collapse. We ﬁnd that
even with weak (linear) decoders, posterior collapse may occur. Moreover, we show that in the linear
case this posterior collapse is due entirely to the log marginal likelihood.
The most common approach for dealing with posterior collapse is to anneal a weight on the KL term
during training from 0to1[7,38,30,18,20]. Unfortunately, this means that during the annealing
process, one is no longer optimizing a bound on the log-likelihood. Also, it is difﬁcult to design these
annealing schedules and we have found that once regular ELBO training resumes the posterior will
typically collapse again (Section 6.2).
Kingma et al. [25] propose a constraint on the KL term, termed "free-bits", where the gradient of the
KL term per dimension is ignored if the KL is below a given threshold. Unfortunately, this method
reportedly has some negative effects on training stability [ 33,11]. Delta-V AEs [ 33] instead choose
prior and variational distributions such that the variational distribution can never exactly recover the
prior, allocating free-bits implicitly. Several other papers have studied alternative formulations of the
V AE objective [ 34,13,2,29,41]. Dai and Wipf [13] analyzed the V AE objective to improve image
ﬁdelity under Gaussian observation models and also discuss the importance of the observation noise.
Other approaches have explored changing the V AE network architecture to help alleviate posterior
collapse; for example adding skip connections [30, 15]
3