Don’t Blame the ELBO!
A Linear V AE Perspective on Posterior Collapse
James Lucasz, George Tuckery, Roger Grossez, Mohammad Norouziy
zUniversity of Toronto yGoogle Brain
Abstract
Posterior collapse in Variational Autoencoders (V AEs) arises when the variational
posterior distribution closely matches the prior for a subset of latent variables. This
paper presents a simple and intuitive explanation for posterior collapse through
the analysis of linear V AEs and their direct correspondence with Probabilistic
PCA (pPCA). We explain how posterior collapse may occur in pPCA due to
local maxima in the log marginal likelihood. Unexpectedly, we prove that the
ELBO objective for the linear V AE does not introduce additional spurious local
maxima relative to log marginal likelihood. We show further that training a linear
V AE with exact variational inference recovers an identiﬁable global maximum
corresponding to the principal component directions. Empirically, we ﬁnd that
our linear analysis is predictive even for high-capacity, non-linear V AEs and helps
explain the relationship between the observation noise, local maxima, and posterior
collapse in deep Gaussian V AEs.
1 Introduction
The generative process of a deep latent variable model entails drawing a number of latent factors from
the prior and using a neural network to convert such factors to real data points. Maximum likelihood
estimation of the parameters requires marginalizing out the latent factors, which is intractable for
deep latent variable models. The inﬂuential work of Kingma and Welling [24] and Rezende et al.
[35] on Variational Autoencoders (V AEs) enables optimization of a tractable lower bound on the
likelihood via a reparameterization of the Evidence Lower Bound (ELBO) [ 21,6]. This has led to a
surge of recent interest in automatic discovery of the latent factors of variation for a data distribution
based on V AEs and principled probabilistic modeling [18, 7, 10, 16].
Unfortunately, the quality and the number of the latent factors learned is inﬂuenced by a phenomenon
known as posterior collapse , where the generative model learns to ignore a subset of the latent
variables. Most existing papers suggest that posterior collapse is caused by the KL-divergence
term in the ELBO objective, which directly encourages the variational distribution to match the
prior [ 7,25,38]. Thus, a wide range of heuristic approaches in the literature have attempted to
diminish the effect of the KL term in the ELBO to alleviate posterior collapse [ 7,33,38,20]. While
holding the KL term responsible for posterior collapse makes intuitive sense, the mathematical
mechanism of this phenomenon is not well understood. In this paper, we investigate the connection
between posterior collapse and spurious local maxima in the ELBO objective through the analysis of
linear V AEs. Unexpectedly, we show that spurious local maxima may arise even in the optimization
of exact marginal likelihood, and such local maxima are linked with a collapsed posterior.
While linear autoencoders [ 37] have been studied extensively [ 4,26], little attention has been given to
their variational counterpart from a theoretical standpoint. A well-known relationship exists between
linear autoencoders and PCA – the optimal solution of a linear autoencoder has decoder weight
Intern at Google Brain
Code available at https://sites.google.com/view/dont-blame-the-elbo
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.