Q A′ Q′  A′′
Question Consistency 
Loss
VQA Loss AAnswer 
Consistency 
LossF: VQA
G: VQGF: VQA
LSTM
A′ Attention I
      Ɲ(0, 1)
 Answer Encoder  Image Encoder
      (a)       (b)
Q′Figure 2. (a) Abstract representation of the proposed cycle-consistent training scheme: Given a triplet of image I, question Q, and
ground truth answer A, a VQA model is a transformation F: (Q,I)/mapsto→A′used to predict the answer A′. Similarly, a VQG model
G: (A′,I)/mapsto→Q′is used to generate a rephrasing Q′ofQ. The generated rephrasing Q′is passed through Fto obtainA′′and consistency
is enforced between QandQ′and between A′andA′′. ImageIis not shown for clarity. (b) Detailed architecture of our visual question
generation module G. The predicted answer A′and image Iare embedded to a lower dimension using task-speciﬁc encoders and the
resulting feature maps are summed up with additive noise and fed to an LSTM to generate questions rephrasings Q′.
answering. Unlike [24], our method is not restricted to gen-
erating questions only for speciﬁc question types. Different
from previous works, the goal of our VQG component is to
automatically generate question rephrasings that make the
VQA models more robust to linguistic variations. To the
best of our knowledge, we are the ﬁrst to demonstrate that
the VQG module can be used to improve VQA accuracy in
a cycle-consistent setting.
Cycle-Consistent Learning. Using cycle-consistency to
regularize the training of models has been used extensively
in object tracking [36], machine translation [10], unpaired
image-to-image translation [43] and text-based question an-
swering [37]. Consistency enables learning of robust mod-
els by regularizing transformations that map one intercon-
nected modality or domain to the other. While cycle con-
sistency has been used vastly in the domains involving a
single modality (text-only or image-only), it hasn’t been ex-
plored in the context of multi-modal tasks like VQA. Cycle-
consistency in VQA can be also thought of as an online
data-augmentation technique where the model is trained on
several generated rephrasings of the same question.
3. Approach
We now introduce our cycle-consistent scheme to train
robust VQA models. Given a triplet of image I, question
Q, and ground truth answer A, a generic VQA model can
be formulated as a transformation F: (Q,I)/mapsto→A′, where
A′is the answer predicted by the model as in Fig. 2(a). Sim-
ilarly, a generic VQG model can be formulated as a trans-
formation G: (A,I)/mapsto→Q′as in Fig. 2(b). For a given
(I,Q,A)triplet, we ﬁrst obtain an answer prediction A′us-
ing the VQA model Ffor the original question Q. We then
use the predicted answer A′and the image Ito generate aquestion Q′which is semantically similar to Qusing the
VQG model G. Lastly, we obtain a answer prediction A′′
for the generated question Q′.
Our design of consistency components is inspired by two
beliefs. Firstly, a model which can generate a semantically
and syntactically correct question given a answer and an im-
age, has a better understanding of the cross-modal connec-
tions among the image, the question and the answer, which
make them a valid (I,Q,A)triplet. Secondly, assuming the
generated question Q′is a valid rephrasing of the original
question, a robust VQA model should answer this rephras-
ing with the same answer as the original question Q. In
practice, however, there are several challenges that inhibit
enforcement of cycle-consistency in VQA. We discuss these
challenges and describe the key components of our frame-
work geared to tackle them in the following sections.
3.1. Question Generation Module
Since VQA is a setting where there is high disparity in
the information content of involved modalities (a question
and answer pair is a very lossy compressed representation of
the image), learning transformations that map one modality
to another is non-trivial. In cycle-consistent models dealing
with single-modalities, transformations need to be learned
across different domains of the same modality (image or
text) with roughly similar information contents. However
in a multi-modality transformation like VQG, learning a
transformation from a low information modality (such as
answer) to high information modality (question) needs ad-
ditional supervision. We provide this additional supervision
to the VQG model in the form of attention. To generate a
rephrasing Q′, the VQG is guided to attend at regions of the
image which were used by the VQA model to answer the
original question Q. Unlike [24], this enables our models
36651