where the VQG model uses unattended image features (un-
like the default setting which uses image features with at-
tention from the VQA model). We found that with this con-
ﬁguration, our approach still shows improved performance
over the baseline. However, the question generation qual-
ity is relatively poor, and the overall gain is smaller (3.58%
in consistency CS(k= 4) and 0.2% in VQA accuracy)
compared to when using attention (8.08% and 0.5% respec-
tively) – likely because attention helps in generating more-
focused rephrasings.
5.3. Visual Question Generation Performance
Recall that our model also includes a VQG component
which generates questions conditioned on an answer and
image. Since the overall performance of our framework re-
lies highly on the performance of question generation mod-
ule, we evaluate our VQG component performance as well
on commonly used image captioning metrics. We compare
our VQG component to several answer-conditional VQG
models on the VQA v2.0 dataset. We use standard image
captioning metrics CIDEr [38], BLEU [31], METEOR [6]
and ROUGE-L [25] as used in [26]. We compare our ap-
proach to two recently proposed visual question generation
approaches. iVQA [26] uses a variational LSTM model
trained with reinforcement learning to generate answer-
speciﬁc questions for an image. Syntactic correctness, di-
versity and intent of the generated question are used to allo-
cate rewards. iQAN [24] generates answer-speciﬁc ques-
tions by modelling question generation as a dual task of
question answering and sharing parameters between ques-
tion answering and question generation modules. Since
iQAN can only generate a speciﬁc type of questions, for
a fair comparison, we compare to iQAN only on a subset of
the dataset containing questions from these speciﬁc types.
As shown in Table 3, we observe that our question gen-
eration module trained with cycle-consistency consistently
outperforms iVQA [26] and iQAN [24] on all metrics. A
few qualitative examples of answer conditioned questions
generated by our VQG model can be seen in Fig. 3(b).
5.4. Failure Prediction Performance
In previous results, we show that by training models
to generate and answer questions while being consistent
across both tasks leads to improvement in performance and
robustness. Another way of testing robustness of these mod-
els is to see if models can predict their own failures. A ro-
bust model is less conﬁdent about an incorrect answer and
vice versa. Motivated by this, we seek to verify if mod-
els trained with our cycle-consistent framework can iden-
tify their own failures i.e. correctly identify if they’re wrong
about a prediction. To this end, we use two failure predic-
tions schemes. First, we naively threshold the conﬁdence
of the predicted answer. All answers above a particularModel Precision Recall F1
BUTD [3] 0.71 0.78 0.74
+ FP 0.74 0.85 0.79
BUTD + CC 0.73 0.79 0.76
+ FP 0.78 0.83 0.80
Pythia [41] 0.74 0.79 0.76
+ FP 0.76 0.88 0.82
Pythia + CC 0.77 0.81 0.77
+ FP 0.82 0.84 0.83
Table 4. Failure prediction performance on VQA v2.0 valida-
tion dataset . Each row in blocks represents a component added
to the previous row. CC represents models trained with our cycle-
consistent framework and FP represents models with an additional
binary classiﬁcation Failure Prediction submodule to predict if the
predicted answer A′is correct given a question and image pair ( Q,
I). For models trained without the FP module, scores are obtained
by thresholding the answer conﬁdences.
threshold are marked as correctly answered and vice versa.
Second, we design a failure prediction binary classiﬁcation
module (FP), which predicts for a given image I, question
Qand answer A′(predicted by the base VQA model F),
whether the predicted answer is correct for the given (I,Q)
pair. The FP module is trained keeping the parameters
of the base VQA model frozen. In Table 4, we show the
failure prediction performance of the baseline VQA models
and models trained with our proposed framework. It shows
that the cycle consistency framework, even without an ex-
plicit failure predictor module, makes the models more cal-
ibrated – more capable of detecting their own failures. In
both settings: (a) when using naive conﬁdence thresholding
(not marked as “+ FP” in the Table) and (b) using a specif-
ically designed submodule to detect failures (marked as “+
FP”), models trained with our cycle-consistent training have
higher F1 scores than their corresponding baselines. We see
similar improvements in detecting failures for both BUTD
and Pythia models, which shows that our cycle-consistency
framework is model agnostic. This also shows that not only
does cycle-consistent training make models robust to lin-
guistic variations, but also allows them to be failure-aware.
6. Conclusion
In this paper, we propose a novel model-agnostic training
strategy to incorporate cycle consistency in VQA models to
make them robust to linguistic variations and self-aware of
their failures. We also collect a large-scale dataset, VQA-
Rephrasings and propose a consensus metric to measure ro-
bustness of VQA models to linguistic variations of a ques-
tion. We show that models trained with our training strategy
are robust to linguistic variations, and achieve state-of-the-
art performance in VQA and VQG on VQA v2.0 dataset.
86656