Cycle-Consistency for Robust Visual Question Answering
Meet Shah1, Xinlei Chen1, Marcus Rohrbach1, Devi Parikh1,2
1Facebook AI Research,2Georgia Institute of Technology
{meetshah, xinleic, mrf }@fb.com, dparikh@gatech.edu
Abstract
Despite signiﬁcant progress in Visual Question Answer-
ing over the years, robustness of today’s VQA models leave
much to be desired. We introduce a new evaluation protocol
and associated dataset (VQA-Rephrasings) and show that
state-of-the-art VQA models are notoriously brittle to lin-
guistic variations in questions. VQA-Rephrasings contains
3 human-provided rephrasings for 40k questions spanning
40k images from the VQA v2.0 validation dataset. As a
step towards improving robustness of VQA models, we pro-
pose a model-agnostic framework that exploits cycle con-
sistency. Speciﬁcally, we train a model to not only answer
a question, but also generate a question conditioned on the
answer, such that the answer predicted for the generated
question is the same as the ground truth answer to the orig-
inal question. Without the use of additional annotations, we
show that our approach is signiﬁcantly more robust to lin-
guistic variations than state-of-the-art VQA models, when
evaluated on the VQA-Rephrasings dataset. In addition,
our approach outperforms state-of-the-art approaches on
the standard VQA and Visual Question Generation tasks on
the challenging VQA v2.0 dataset.
1. Introduction
Visual Question Answering (VQA) applications allow a
human user to ask a machine questions about images – be it
a user interacting with a visual chat-bot or a visually im-
paired user relying on an assistive device. As this tech-
nology steps out of the realm of curated datasets towards
real-world settings, it is desirable that VQA models be ro-
bust to and consistent across reasonable variations in the
input modalities. While there has been signiﬁcant progress
in VQA over the years [1, 17, 2, 9, 19, 41, 3, 4], today’s
VQA models are, however, far from being robust.
VQA is a task that lies at the intersection of language
and vision. Existing works have studied the robustness and
sensitiveness of VQA models to meaningful semantic vari-
ations in images [9], changing answer distributions [2] and
adversarial attacks [39] to images. However, to the best of
our knowledge, no work has studied the robustness of VQA
        Prediction 
What is in the basket?
             What does the basket mainly contain?
 banana
remote     What is contained in the basket?
                   What can be seen inside the basket?
   paper        pizza        
Is it safe to turn left?
   Would turning left considered safe in this picture?   Yes
   No         Can one safely turn left?
                    Would it be safe to turn left?
    Yes         No        Figure 1. Existing VQA models are brittle . Shown above are ex-
amples from our new large-scale VQA-Rephrasings dataset that
enables systematic evaluation of robustness of VQA models to lin-
guistic variations in the input question. Also shown are answers
predicted by a state-of-the-art VQA model [41]. We see that the
model predicts different answers for different reasonable rephras-
ings of the same question. We propose a novel model-agnostic
framework that exploits cycle consistency in question answering
and question generation to make VQA models more robust, with-
out using additional annotation. Moreover, it outperforms state-
of-the-art models on the standard VQA and Visual Question Gen-
eration tasks on the VQA v2.0 dataset.
models to linguistic variations in the input question. This is
important both from the perspective of VQA being a bench-
mark to test multi-modal AI capabilities (do our VQA mod-
els really “understand” the question when answering it?)
and for applications (human users are likely to phrase the
same query in a variety of different linguistic forms). How-
ever, today’s state-of-the-art VQA models are brittle to such
linguistic variations as can be seen in Fig. 1.
One approach to make VQA models more robust is to
collect a dataset with diverse rephrasings of questions to
train VQA models. Alternatively, an automatic approach
that does not require additional human intervention but re-
sults in a VQA model that is robust to linguistic variations
observed in the natural language questions is desirable.
We propose a novel model-agnostic framework that re-
lies on cycle consistency to learn robust VQA models with-
out requiring additional annotation. Speciﬁcally, we train
1
6649