to generate questions more similar to the original question
from answers like “yes”, which could possibly have a large
space of plausible questions.
We model the question generation module Gin a fash-
ion similar to a conditional image captioning model. The
question generation module consists of two linear encoders
that transform attended image features obtained from VQA
model and the distribution over answer space to lower di-
mensional feature vectors. We sum these feature vectors
with additive noise and pass them through an LSTM which
is trained to reconstruct the original question and optimized
by minimizing the negative log likelihood with teacher-
forcing. Note that unlike [26, 24] we do not pass the one-
hot vector representing the answer obtained, or an embed-
ding of the answer obtained to the question generation, but
rather the predicted distribution over answers. This enables
the question generation module to learn to map the model’s
conﬁdence over answers to the generated question.
Throughout the paper, Q-consistency implies addition
of a VQG module Gon top of the base VQA model
Fto generate rephrasings Q′from the image Iand the
predicted answer A′with an associated Q-consistency
lossLG(Q,Q′). Similarly, A-consistency implies pass-
ing all questions generated Q′by the VQG Model Gto
the VQA model Fand an associated A-consistency loss
Lcycle(A,A′′). The overall loss can be written as:
Ltotal=LF(A,A′)+λGLG(Q,Q′)
+λCLcycle(A,A′′)(1)
whereLF(A,A′)andLcycle(A,A′′)(i.e. A-Consistency
Loss) are cross-entropy losses, LG(Q,Q′)(i.e. Q-
Consistency Loss) is sequence generation loss [28] and λG,
λCare tunable hyperparameters.
3.2. Gating Mechanism
One of the assumptions of our proposed cycle-consistent
training scheme is that the generated question is always se-
mantically and syntactically correct. However, in practice
this is not always true. Previous attempts [18] at naively
generating questions conditioned on the answer and using
them without ﬁltering to augment the training data have
been unsuccessful. Like the visual question answering
module, the visual question generation module is also not
perfect. Therefore not all questions generated by the ques-
tion generator are coherent and consistent with the image,
the answer and the original question. To overcome this is-
sue, we propose a gating mechanism, which automatically
ﬁlters undesirable questions generated by the VQG model
before passing them to the VQA model for A-consistency.
The gating mechanism is only relevant when used in con-
junction with A-consistency. We retain only those ques-
tions which either the VQA model Fcan answer correctlyor have a cosine similarity with the original question encod-
ing greater than a threshold Tsim.
3.3. Late Activation
One key component of designing cycle consistent mod-
els is to prevent mode collapse. Learning cycle-consistent
models in complex settings like VQA needs a carefully
chosen training scheme. Since cycle-consistent models
have several interconnected sub-networks learning differ-
ent transformations, it is important to ensure that each of
these sub-networks are working in harmony. For example,
if the VQA model Fand VQG model Gare jointly trained
and consistency is enforced in early stages of training, it
is possible that both models can just “cheat” by both pro-
ducing undesirable outputs. We overcome this by activating
cycle-consistency at later stages of training, to make sure
both VQA and VQG models have been sufﬁciently trained
to produce reasonable outputs. Speciﬁcally, we enable the
loss associated with cycle-consistency after a ﬁxed Aiterit-
erations in the training process.
We ﬁnd these design choices for question generation
module, gating mechanism and late activation to be crucial
for effectively training our model. We demonstrate this em-
pirically via ablation studies in Table 2. As we want to in-
crease the robustness of the VQA model to all generated
variations, the weights between VQA models which an-
swer the original question and the generated rephrasing are
shared. Our formulation of cycle-consistency in VQA can
be also thought of as an online data-augmentation technique
where the model is trained on several generated rephras-
ings of the same question and hence is more robust to such
anomalies during inference. We show that with clever train-
ing strategy, coupled with attention and carefully chosen ar-
chitecture for question generation, incorporating cycle con-
sistency for VQA is possible and not only leads to models
that are better performing, but also more robust and consis-
tent. In addition, we show that this robustness also imparts
VQA models the ability to better predict their own failures.
4. VQA-Rephrasings Dataset
In this section, we introduce the VQA-Rephrasings
dataset, which is the ﬁrst dataset that enables evaluation
of VQA models for robustness and consistency to different
rephrasings of questions with the same meaning.
We use the validation split of VQA v2.0 [9] as our base
dataset which contains a total of 214,354 questions span-
ning over 40,504 images. We randomly sample 40,504
questions (one question per image) from the base dataset
to form a sampled subset. We collect 3 rephrasings of
each question in the sampled subset using human annota-
tors in two stages. In the ﬁrst stage, humans were primed
with the original question and the corresponding true an-
swer and asked to rephrase the question such that answer
46652