the model to not just answer a question, but also to generate
diverse, semantically similar variations of questions condi-
tioned on the answer. We enforce that the answer predicted
for a generated question matches the ground truth answer
to the original question. In other words, the model is being
trained to predict the same (correct) answer for a question
and its (generated) rephrasing.
Advantages of our proposed approach are two-fold.
First, enforcing consistent correctness across diverse
rephrasings allows models to generalize to unseen seman-
tically equivalent variations of questions at test time. The
model achieves this by generating linguistically diverse
rephrasings of questions on-the-ﬂy and training with these
variations. Second, a model trained generatively to generate
a valid question given a candidate answer and image has a
stronger multi-modal understanding of vision and language.
Questions tend to have less learnable biases [26]. As a re-
sult, models that can jointly perform the task of question
generation and question answering are less prone to taking
“shortcuts” and exploiting linguistic priors in questions. In-
deed, we ﬁnd that models trained with our approach out-
perform existing state-of-the-art models on both VQA and
Visual Question Generation (VQG) tasks on VQA v2.0 [9].
We also observed that one reason for limited devel-
opment of VQA models robust to linguistic variations
in input questions is due to the lack of a benchmark to
measure robustness. A lack of such a benchmark makes
it hard to quantitatively realize the inﬂated capabilities
and limited multi-modal understanding of modern VQA
models . To enable quantitative evaluation of robustness
and consistency of VQA models across linguistic variations
in input questions, we collect a large-scale dataset –
VQA-Rephrasings (Section 4) based of the VQA v2.0
dataset [9]. VQA-Rephrasings contains 3 human-provided
rephrasings for ∼40k questions on ∼40k images from the
validation split of the VQA v2.0 dataset. We also propose
metrics to measure the robustness of VQA models across
different question rephrasings. Further, we benchmark
several state-of-the-art VQA models [3, 5, 19, 41] on
our proposed VQA-Rephrasings dataset to highlight the
fragility of VQA models to question rephrasings. We
observe a signiﬁcant drop when VQA models are required
to be consistent in addition to being correct (Section 5),
which reinforces our belief that existing VQA models do
not understand language ”enough”. We show that VQA
models trained with our approach are signiﬁcantly more
robust across question rephrasings than their existing
counterparts on the proposed VQA-Rephrasings dataset.
In this paper, our contributions are the following:
•We propose a model-agnostic cycle-consistent training
scheme that enables VQA models to be more robust
to linguistic variations observed in natural languageopen-ended questions.
•To evaluate the robustness of VQA models to lin-
guistic variations, we introduce a large-scale VQA-
Rephrasings dataset and an associated consensus
score. VQA-Rephrasings consists of 3 rephrasings for
∼40k questions on ∼40k images from the VQA v2.0
validation dataset, resulting in a total of ∼120k ques-
tion rephrasings by humans.
•We show that models trained with our approach out-
perform state-of-the-art on the standard VQA and
Visual Question Generation tasks on the VQA v2.0
dataset and are signiﬁcantly more robust to linguistic
variations on VQA-Rephrasings.
2. Related Work
Visual Question Answering. There has been tremen-
dous progress in building models for VQA using LSTMs
[13] and convolutional networks [22]. VQA models span-
ning paradigms like attention networks [40, 19], module
networks [14, 4, 17], relational networks [32] and multi-
modal fusion [5] have been proposed. Our method is model-
agnostic and is applicable with any VQA architecture.
Robustness. Robustness of VQA models has been stud-
ied in several contexts [2, 39, 9]. For example, [2] studies
the robustness of VQA models to changes in the answer dis-
tributions across training and test settings; [42] analyzes the
extent of visual grounding in VQA models by studying ro-
bustness of VQA models to meaningful semantic changes
in images; [39] shows that despite the use of an advanced
attention mechanism, it is easy to fool a VQA model with
very minor changes in the image. Our work, however,
aims to complete the study in robustness by benchmark-
ing and improving robustness of VQA models to linguis-
tic and compositional variations in questions in the form
of rephrasings. Robustness has also been studied in natu-
ral language processing (NLP) systems [7, 12] in contexts
of bias [35, 34], domain-shift [23] and syntactic variations
[15]. We study this in the context of visual question an-
swering which is a multi-modal task which grounds lan-
guage into the visual world.
(Visual) Question Generation. Generating questions
conditioned on an image was introduced in [29] and a large-
scale VQG dataset was collected by [30] to evaluate visually
grounded question generation capabilities of models. More
recently, there has been work on generating questions that
are diverse [16, 40]. While these techniques generate ques-
tions about an image in an answer-agnostic manner, tech-
niques like [26] propose a variational LSTM based model
trained with reinforcement learning to generate answer-
speciﬁc questions for an image. More recently, [24] gen-
erates answer-speciﬁc questions for speciﬁc question-types
by modelling question generation as a dual task of question
26650