● Does this harbor cater to luxury 
yachts or fishing boats?
● Are there more yachts or fishing 
boats?
● What type of boats are mainly in 
the harbour?
● Would this harbour be better for 
yachts or fishing boats?
● Do the pillows match the 
bedspread?
● Does the bedspread match the 
pillows?
● Is the pattern on pillows and 
bedspread similar?
● Are the pillows matching the 
bedspread?
● How many parking meters do 
you see?
● Do you know how many parking 
meters are there?
● What number of parking meters 
are seen in the photo.
● What is the quantity of parking 
meters present?
How many birds are there? (2)
Is the bird looking at the camera? (no)
What kind of birds are there? (crane)
Is the man wearing a backpack? (yes)
What is the dog doing? (sleeping)
How many people in the picture? (2)
What is the name of the airline? (lufthansa)
What is the plane doing? (landing)
Is it a cloudy day? (yes)
What is the name of the computer? (toshiba)
Is the computer on? (yes)
How many books are on the table? (1)
(a) (b)Figure 3. (a) Qualitative examples from our VQA-Rephrasings dataset . The ﬁrst question (shown in gray) in each block is the
original question from VQA v2.0 validation set, the questions that follow (shown in black) are rephrasings collected in VQA-Rephrasings.
(b) Qualitative examples of answer conditioned question generation (input answer ) by our VQG module
to the rephrased question remains the same as the original
answer. To ensure rephrasings from ﬁrst stage are syntacti-
cally correct and semantically inline with the original ques-
tion, we ﬁlter the collected responses in the next stage.
In the second stage, humans were primed with the orig-
inal question and it’s rephrasing and were asked to label
the rephrasing invalid if: (a) the plausible answer to the
original question and it’s rephrasing is different ( i.e. if the
question and it’s rephrasing have different intents) or (b)
if the rephrasing is grammatically incorrect. We collected
121,512 rephrasings from the original 40504 questions in
the ﬁrst stage. Of these, 1320 rephrasings were ﬂagged as
invalid in the second stage and were rephrased again in the
ﬁrst stage. The ﬁnal dataset consists of 162,016 questions
(including the original 40,504 questions) spanning 40,504
images with an average of ∼3 rephrasings per original ques-
tion. A few qualitative examples from the collected dataset
can be seen in Fig. 3(a). Additional details about the data
collection, interfaces used and exhaustive dataset statistics
can be found in supplementary materials.
Consensus Score. Intuitively, for a VQA model to be
consistent across various rephrasings of the same question,
the answer to all rephrasings should be the same. We mea-
sure this by a Consensus Score CS(k). For every group Q
consisting of nrephrasings, we sample all subsets of size
k. The consensus score CS(k)is deﬁned as the ratio of the
number of subsets where allthe answers are correct and the
total number of subsets of size k. The answer to a question
is considered correct if it has a non-zero VQA Accuracy θ
as deﬁned in [1]. CS(k) is formally deﬁned as:
CS(k) =/summationdisplay
Q′⊂Q,|Q′|=kS(Q′)
nCk(2)S(Q′) =/braceleftBigg
1if∀q∈Q′θ(q)>0,
0otherwise .(3)
WherenCkis number of subsets of size ksampled from
a set of size n. As consensus score is a all-or-nothing score,
to achieve a non-zero consensus score at kfor a group of
questions Q, the model has to answer at least kquestions
correctly in a group of questions Q. Whenk=|Q|(e.g.
whenk= 4 in VQA-Rephrasings), the model needs to an-
swer all rephrasings of a question and the original question
correctly in order to get a non-zero consensus score. It is
evident that a model with higher average consensus score at
high values of kis quantitatively more robust to linguistic
variations in questions than a model with a lower score.
5. Experiments
5.1. Consistency Performance
We start by benchmarking a variety of existing VQA
models on our proposed VQA-Rephrasings dataset.
MUTAN [5]1parametrizes bilinear interactions be-
tween visual and textual representations using a multi-
modal low-rank decomposition. MUTAN uses skip-thought
[20] sentence embeddings to encode the question and
Resnet-152 [11] to encode images. MUTAN achieves
63.20% accuracy on VQA v2.0 test-dev. Among all models
we analyze, MUTAN is the only model which uses sentence
embeddings to encode questions.
Bottom-Up Top-Down Attention (BUTD) [3]2in-
corporates bottom-up attention in VQA by extracting fea-
tures associated with image regions proposed by Faster-
RCNN [33] pretrained on Visual Genome [21]. BUTD
1https://github.com/Cadene/vqa.pytorch
2https://github.com/hengyuan-hu/bottom-up-attention-vqa
56653