99:18 R. Dabreet al.
Fig.6. AnoverviewofMNMTforunseenlanguagespairs.Therearethreebroadapproaches:pivot,zero-shot,
and zero-resourceapproaches.
has to be run twice. Sometimes, more than one pivot may be required to translate between the
source and pivot language. Increased pipeline length exacerbates the above-mentioned problems.
Thequalityofthesource-pivottranslationisabottlenecktothesystem.Avariantofthisapproach
extractsn-besttranslations fromtheS-Psystem.Foreachpivottranslation,theP-Tsystemcan
generatem-besttranslations.The n×mtranslationcandidatescanbere-rankedusingscoresfrom
both systems and external features to generate the final translation. This approach improves the
robustnessofthepipelineto translationerrors.
5.2 Zero-shot Translation
Multilingual NMT models offer an appealing possibility. Even if the MNMT system has not been
trainedfortheunseenlanguagepair,Johnsonetal.[ 70]showedthatthesystemisabletogenerate
reasonable target-language translations for the source sentence. Along with the source sentence,
the desired output language’s language tag is provided as input. This is sufficient for the system
to generate output in the target language. Note that the MNMT system was exposed to zero
bilingualresourcesbetweenthesourceandtargetlanguagesduringtrainingandencounteredthe
unseen language pair only at test-time. Hence, this translation scenario is referred to as zero-shot
translation .
Theappealofzero-shottranslationistwo-fold:
•Translation between any arbitrary language pair can be done in a single decoding step,
without any pivoting, irrespective of the number of implicit pivots required to bridge the
source and target language in the multilingual training corpus. The MNMT system can be
conceivedasan implicitpivoting system.
•GivenamultilingualparallelcorpusspanningNlanguages,onlyasinglemultilingualNMT
modelisrequiredto translatebetween N×(N−1)languages.
ChallengesofZero-shotTranslation. IthasbeenarguedthattraininganMNMTsystemincor-
porating multiple languages could benefit zero-shot translation due to better interlingual repre-
sentationsandeliminationofcascadingerrors[ 70].Thesimplezero-shotsystemdescribedabove,
thoughpromising,beliestheseexpectationsanditsperformanceisgenerallylowerthanthepivot
translationsystem[ 4,56,70,113].
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 53,No. 5,Article 99.Publicationdate:September2020.