A Survey of Multilingual Neural MachineTranslation 99:3
Fig. 1. MNMT research categorized according to use-cases, core-issues, and the challenges involved. Note
thatthefocusisonuse-casesandanapproachforoneuse-casecanbenaturallyadaptedtoanotheruse-case
and thuscan face similar coreissues.
Multi-source Translation. Documents that have been translated into more than one language
might, in the future, be required to be translated into another language. In this scenario, existing
multilingual complementary content on the source side can be exploited for multi-source trans-
lation[168].Multilingualcomplementarycontentcanhelpinbetterdisambiguationofcontentto
betranslated,leading toan improvement intranslationquality.
WebelievethatthebiggestbenefitofdoingMNMTresearchbyexploringthesescenariosisthat
we might gain insights and an answer to an important question in natural language processing
(NLP):
Q.How can we leverage multilingual data effectively to learn distributions across multiple lan-
guagesto improve MT (NLP)performanceacrossall languages?
Thisquestioncanbedecomposedintoanumberofsmallerquestions,andinthisarticle,wetry
toanswertwo of themasfollows:
Q1.Is itpossibletohave a one-model-for-all-languagessolutiontoMT (NLP)applications?
Q2.CansharedmultilingualdistributedrepresentationshelpMT(NLP)forlow-resourcelanguages?
Given these benefits, scenarios, and the tremendous increase in the work on MNMT in recent
years, we write this survey article on MNMT to systematically organize the work in this area. To
the best of our knowledge, no such comprehensive survey on MNMT exists. Our goal is to shed
lightonvariousMNMTscenarios,fundamentalquestionsinMNMT,basicprinciples,architectures,
anddatasetsforMNMTsystems.Theremainderofthisarticleisstructuredasfollows:Wepresent
asystematiccategorizationofdifferentapproachestoMNMTineachoftheabove-mentionedsce-
narios to help understand the array of design choices available while building MNMT systems
(Sections 3,4,5,a n d6). The top-level organization of the survey is use-case-scenario-based:mul-
tiway NMT (Section 3), low-resource NMT (Sections 4and5), and multi-source NMT (Section 6).
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 53,No. 5,Article 99.Publicationdate:September2020.