99:4 R. Dabreet al.
Fig. 2. A standard NMT model based on theencode-attend-decode modelingapproach.
Although zero-shot/zero-resource is a special case of low-resource NMT, we dedicate a separate
section(5)givenitsgrowingimportanceandinterest.Foreachscenario,weaddressthechallenges,
considerations, and multilingual NMT-based solutions. Note that a model or technique proposed
for one scenario may be used in another scenario. We have mentioned proposed solutions in the
context of the scenario in which they have been discussed in the literature. Their applicability to
otherscenariosmaybesubjecttofurtherinvestigation.WeputtheworkinMNMTintoahistorical
perspective with respect to multilingual MT in older MT paradigms (Section 7). We also describe
most commonly used multilingual datasets and the shared tasks that focus on multilingual NMT
(Section8). In addition, we compare MNMT with domain adaptation for NMT, which tackles the
problemofimprovinglow-resourcein-domaintranslation(Section 9).Finally,weshareouropin-
ions onfutureresearchdirectionsin MNMT(Section 10)and concludethisarticle(Section 11).
2 NEURAL MACHINE TRANSLATION
Givenaparallelcorpus Cconsistingofasetofparallelsentencepairs (x,y),thetrainingobjective
for NMTismaximize thelog-likelihood Lw.r.tθ:
Lθ=/summationdisplay
(x,y)∈Clogp(y|x;θ), (1)
where x={x1,...,xn}is an input sentence, y={y1,...,ym}is its translation, and θis a set of
parameterstobelearned.Theprobabilityof a targetsentencegiven thesourcesentenceis:
p(y|x;θ)=m/productdisplay
j=1p(yj|y<j,x;θ),
wheremis the number of words in y,yjis the current generated word, and y<jare the previ-
ously generated words. At inference time, beam search is typically used to find the translation
thatmaximizes theabove probability.
The most commonly used NMT approach is the Embed - Encode - Attend - Decode paradigm.
Figure2showsanoverviewofthisparadigm.Theencoderfirstconvertswordsinthesourcesen-
tence into word embeddings. These word embeddings are then processed by neural layers and
convertedtorepresentationsthatcapturecontextualinformationaboutthesewords.Wecallthese
contextual representations as the encoder representations . The decoder uses an attention mecha-
nism, the encoder representations, and previously generated words to generate what we call the
decoder representations (states), which in turn are used to generate the next target word. The
encoder and decoder can be RNN [ 8], CNN [52], or self-attention and feed-forward [ 148] layers.
Among these, the self-attention layers are the most widely used. It is a common practice to stack
multiple layers, which leads to an improvement in translation quality. The attention mechanism
is calculatedcrossthedecoderand encoderas:
eji=a(sj−1,hi), (2)
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 53,No. 5,Article 99.Publicationdate:September2020.