A Survey of Multilingual Neural MachineTranslation 99:27
Code-mixed Language. Addressing intra-sentence multilingualism, i.e., code-mixed input and
output, creoles, and pidgins, is an interesting research direction, as it is a variation of related-
languagestranslation.ThecompactMNMTmodelscanhandlecode-mixedinput,butcode-mixed
output remains an open problem [ 70]. Code-mixed languages are gradually evolving into lan-
guageswiththeirownuniquegrammar,andjustlikedialects,avastmajorityofpeoplefeelmore
comfortable with code-mixing. For this, we believe that researchers should first focus on identi-
fying code-mixing phenomena (either linguistically or statistically) and then design multilingual
solutionstoaddressthem.
Visualization and Model Inspection. Most works focus on an extrinsic evaluation of multilin-
gual models. While the visualization of the embeddings of NMT models in multilingual settings
hasrevealedsomeinterestingbehaviors[ 70,83],wefeelthatmoreresearchersshouldpursuethis.
Furthermore, we believe that visualization that relies on down-projecting high-dimensional vec-
tors to 2-D and 3-D might not reveal actual phenomenon and lead to certain biases that affect
MNMT modeling. It will be interesting to have works that perform analyses of high-dimensional
representationsand revealtheimpactof multilingualism.
Learning Effective Language Representations. A core question that still needs further inves-
tigation is: What is the degree of language awareness that needs to be considered to learn task-
effective continuous space representations? Particularly, the questions of word-order divergence
betweenthesourcelanguagesandvariablelengthencoderrepresentationshavereceivedlittleat-
tention. Addressing this issue will eliminate the need to deal with language divergence issues for
transferlearning.Mostworkstendtoagreethatlanguage-agnosticencodersandlanguage-aware
decoderstend toworkwellbuta deeperinvestigation isstillneeded.
MultipleTargetLanguageMNMT. Mostcurrenteffortsaddressmultiplesourcelanguages.Mul-
tiwaysystemsfocusingonmultiplelow-resourcetargetlanguagesareimportantnotonlybecause
it is a significantly harder challenge, but because it can help shed more light on language diver-
genceanditsimpactontranslationquality.Therightbalancebetweensharingrepresentationsvs.
maintaining the distinctiveness of the target language for generation needs exploring. Further-
more, depending on the similarity between languages or lack thereof, it might be important to
considerahybridarchitecture(mixing RNN,CNN,and FFN)for bestperformance.
Representation Bottleneck. Recent works on massively multilingual NMT have shown that
existing approaches are unable to successfully incorporate more than 100 language pairs and at
thesametimeimprovetranslationquality,especiallyfortheresource-richlanguages(whichtend
tosuffer).Thisisnotaproblemofthenumberoflayers,encoders,ordecodersintheNMTmodel
butratheraproblemofthewaytheMNMTmodeliscurrentlydesigned.Currentapproachesthat
focus on either separate encoders or decoders lead to a large unwieldy model or shared encoders
and decoders with a large number of parameters, both of which are hard to train. Works that
leverage incrementallearningor knowledge distillationseemto bepromising.
Joint Multilingual and Multi-domain NMT. Jointly tackling multilingual and multi-domain
translation is an interesting direction with many practical use cases. When extending an NMT
system to a new language, the parallel corpus in the domain of interest may not be available.
Transferlearninginthiscasehastospanlanguagesanddomains.Itmightbeworthwhiletoexplore
adversarial approaches where domain and language-invariant representations can be learned for
thebesttranslations.
Multilingual Speech-to-speech NMT. Most work on MNMT, and NMT in general, has fo-
cussed on translating text. Recently, progress has been made in speech translation as well as in
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 53,No. 5,Article 99.Publicationdate:September2020.