A Survey of Multilingual Neural MachineTranslation 99:7
Fig. 4. Part (a) of the figure shows an X sources (X encoders) and Y targets (Y decoders) MNMT model.
The encoders contain N layers ( L1toLN) and decoders contain M layers (( L1toLM)) that can be stacked.
Each layer can be recurrent, convolutional, or feed-forward. The decoders contain a softmax layer (S) to
predicttargetlanguagewords.Asingleattentionmechanismissharedamongallencodersanddecoders.In
the figure, the blue arrows indicate the flow of processing to translate an English sentence into its Italian
translation. Given the vast number of components, they can be initialized by pre-trained models such as
BERT to perform transfer learning. Post-training, this model can be decomposed into individual bilingual
models. Part (b) of the figure shows a fully shared MNMT model for all language pairs. The “language
tag” trick where a token like “ <2xx>” is prefixed to each source sentence to indicate the desired target
language. All existing MNMT models are adaptations of these two fundamental architectures. Depending
onthelanguagepairsinvolved,thesizeofthedata,thelanguagesoffocus,anddeploymentconditions,one
shouldconsider choosingthecomponents that shouldbeshared.
[70]. Analyzing multiway NMT systems could also provide an understanding of the relationship
betweenlanguages from astatisticalandlinguistic pointof view [ 36,105].
Multiway translation systems follow the standard embed-encode-attend-decode paradigm that
is common for existing NMT systems. However, the architecture is adapted to support multiple
languages.Thisinvolvesaddressingissuesrelatedtovocabulariesandassociatedembeddings,net-
worklayers(RNN/CNN/Feed-Forward),parametersharing,trainingprotocolsandlanguagediver-
gence.We addresseachissuein thissection.
3.1 Parameter Sharing
There are a wide range of architectural choices in the design of MNMT models. The choices are
primarilydefined bythedegree ofparametersharingamongvarioussupportedlanguages.
Minimal Parameter Sharing. F i r a te ta l .[ 48] proposed a model comprised of separate embed-
dings, encoders and decoders for each language that all shared a single attention mechanism.
Additionally there are two shared components: a layer for all encoders for initializing the initial
decoderstatebyusingthefinalencoderstateandanaffinelayerforalldecoderstoprojectthefinal
decoderstatebeforecomputingsoftmax.However,thefocusisonthesharedattentionlayerasit
hastobearmostoftheburdenofconnectingallsourceandtargetlanguages.Figure 4(a)depictsa
simplified view of this model. Different from the attention score calculated for a single language
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 53,No. 5,Article 99.Publicationdate:September2020.