A Survey of Multilingual Neural MachineTranslation 99:11
models.Thisworkwasconductedinamassivelymultilingualsetting,andwebelievethatfurther
studiesandinnovation arerequired.
The Nature of Multilingual Representations. Since MNMT systems share network compo-
nents across languages, they induce a relationship among representations of sentences across
languages. Understanding the nature of these multilingual representations can help get insights
into the working of multilingual models. Some works that visualize multilingual model embed-
dings suggest that the encoder learns similar representations for similar sentences across lan-
guages[36,70].Sincethesevisualizationsaredoneinverylowdimensions(2–3dimensions),they
mightnotconveytherightpictureaboutthelanguage-invarianceofmultilingualrepresentations.
Kudugunta et al. [ 83] do a systematic study of representations generated from a massively mul-
tilingual system using SVCCA [ 118], a framework for comparing representations across different
languages,models,andlayers.Theirstudybringsoutthefollowingobservationsonthenatureof
multilingual embeddingsfrom acompactMNMTsystem:
•While encoder representations for similar sentences are similar across languages, there is
afine-grainedclusteringbasedonlanguagesimilarity.Thisexplainswhytransferlearning
worksbetterwithrelatedlanguages (asdiscussedin Section 4).
•The boundary between the encoder and decoder is blurry and the source language repre-
sentationsdependon thetargetlanguage and viceversa.
•Representationsimilarityvariesacrosslayers.Theinvarianceincreasesinhigherlayerson
the encoder side. However, the invariance decreases in higher layers on the decoder side.
This is expected, since the decoder is sensitive to the target language to be generated. The
decoder has to achieve the right balance between language-agnostic and language-aware
representations.
Language-invariant representations seem like a nice abstraction, drawing comparisons to in-
terlingual representations [ 70]. It has been a major goal of most MNMT research, as discussed
in the subsequent sections. They have been shown to be beneficial for building compact models
and transfer learning. Given these empirical observations from multiple sources, we think that
language-invariant representations in appropriate parts of the multilingual model is a desirable
property.
Encoder Representation. There are two issues that might make encoder representations
language-dependent. Parallel sentences, from different source languages, can have a different
number of tokens. Hence, the decoder’s attention mechanism sees a variable number of encoder
representations for equivalent sentences across languages. To overcome this, an attention bridge
network generates a fixed number of contextual representations that are input to the attention
network[ 94,149].Byminimizingthediversityofrepresentations,thedecoder’staskissimplified
and it becomes better at language generation. The choice of a single encoder for all languages is
also promoted by Hokamp et al. [ 64], who opt for language-specific decoders. Murthy et al. [ 101]
pointed out that the sentence representations generated by the encoder are dependent on the
word order of the language and are, hence, language-specific. They focused on reordering input
sentences to reduce the divergence caused due to different word orders to improve the quality of
transferlearning.
DecoderRepresentation. Thedivergenceindecoderrepresentationneedstobeaddressedwhen
multiple target languages are involved. This is a challenging scenario, because a decoder should
generate representations that help it generate meaningful and fluent sentences in each target
language. Therefore, a balance between learning language-invariant representations and being
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 53,No. 5,Article 99.Publicationdate:September2020.