A Survey of Multilingual Neural MachineTranslation 99:13
3.3 Training Protocols
MNMTmodeltrainingisacriticalissuethatrequiressophisticatedmethods.Thecoreofallmeth-
ods is the minimization of the negative log-likelihood of the translation for all language pairs.
Conceptually, the negative log-likelihood of the MNMT model is the average of the negative log-
likelihoods of multiple bilingual models. As we have mentioned before, minimizing the negative
log-likelihoodcanbedoneusingoneormoregradient-descent-basedoptimizationalgorithmssuch
as SGD, ADAM, ADAGRAD, and so on [ 122]. There are two main types of training approaches:
single stage or parallel or joint training and sequential or multi-stage training. Depending on the
use-case, multi-stage training can be used for model compression ( knowledge distillation ) or fine-
tuning,addition of dataand/orlanguages ( incrementaltraining ).
Single Stage Parallel/Joint Training. We simply pre-process and concatenate the parallel cor-
poraforalllanguagepairsandthenfeedthemtothemodelbatch-wise.Formodelswithseparate
encoders and decoders, each batch consists of sentence pairs for a specific language pair [ 48];
whereasforfullysharedmodels,asinglebatchcancontainsentencepairsfrommultiplelanguage
pairs[70,93].Assomelanguagepairsmighthavemoredatathanotherlanguages,themodelmay
bebiasedtotranslatethesepairsbetter.Toavoidthis,sentencepairsfromdifferentlanguagepairs
are sampled to maintain a healthy balance. The most common way of maintaining balance is to
oversample smaller datasets to match the sizes of the largest datasets, but Arivazhagan et al. [ 5]
workedontemperature-basedsamplingandshoweditscost-benefitanalysis.
KnowledgeDistillation .KnowledgedistillationwasoriginallyproposedbyHintonetal.[ 63]for
tasks that do not involve generating sequences such as image classification. The underlying idea
is to train a large model with many layers and then distill its knowledge into a small model with
fewer layers by training the small model on the softmax generated by the large model instead of
the actual labels. This approach does not work well for sequence generation and, hence, Kim and
Rush[73]proposedsequencedistillationwheretheysimplytranslatethetrainingdatausingapre-
trained model. They then use this pseudo-data to train smaller models. These smaller models are
abletolearnfasterandbetterbecauseofthereducedburdenfordecisionmaking.Followingthis,
Tan et al. [ 142] trained bilingual models for all language pairs involved and then these bilingual
modelsareusedas teachermodels totrainasingle studentmodel foralllanguagepairs.Thestudent
model is trained using a linear interpolation of the standard likelihood loss as well as distillation
lossthatcapturesthedistancebetweentheoutputdistributionsofthestudentandteachermodels.
Thedistillationlossisappliedforalanguagepaironlyiftheteachermodelshowsbettertranslation
accuracy than the student model on the validation set. This approach shows better results than
joint training of a black-box model, but training time increases significantly, because bilingual
models alsohaveto betrained.
Incremental Training . These approaches aim to decrease the cost of incorporating new lan-
guages or data in multilingual models by avoiding expensive retraining. This is because not all
language pairs may be available when the initial MNMT model is trained. It will be expensive to
re-train the multilingual model from scratch when a language pair has to be added. A practical
concernwithtrainingMNMTinan incremental fashionisdealingwithvocabulary.Someworks
alterapre-trainedmodel’scapacitytoaccommodatenewlanguages.Lakewetal.[ 90]updatedthe
vocabulary of the parent model with the low-resource language pair’s vocabulary before trans-
ferring parameters. Embeddings of words that are common between the low- and high-resource
languagesareleftuntouchedandrandomlyinitializedembeddingsmaybeusedforasyetunseen
words. A simpler solution would be to consider a universal romanized script so incorporating a
new language can be a matter of resuming training or fine-tuning. Escolano et al. [ 45] focused
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 53,No. 5,Article 99.Publicationdate:September2020.