A Survey of Multilingual Neural MachineTranslation 99:5
aji=exp (eji)/summationtextm
k=1exp (eki),
whereejiis an alignment score, ais an alignment model that scores the match level of the inputs
around position iand the output at position j,sj−1is the decoder hidden state of the previous
generatedword, hiistheencoderhiddenstateatposition i.Thecalculatedattentionvectoristhen
usedtoweight theencoderhidden statestoobtaina context vectoras:
cj=n/summationdisplay
i=1ajihi.
Thiscontextvector,isfedtothedecoderalongwiththepreviouslygeneratedwordanditshidden
state to produce a representation for generating the current word. A decoder hidden state for the
currentword sjiscomputedby:
sj=д(sj−1,yj−1,cj),
whereдisanactivationdecoderfunction, sj−1isthepreviousdecoderhiddenstate, yj−1istheem-
beddingofthepreviousword.Thecurrentdecoderhiddenstate sj,thepreviouswordembedding,
andthecontextvectorarefedtoafeedforwardlayer fandasoftmaxlayertocomputeascorefor
generatingatarget wordas output:
P(yj|y<j,x)=softmax (f(sj,yj−1,cj)).
Training NMT models. The parallel corpus used to train the NMT model is first subjected to
pre-processing, where it is sufficiently cleaned to remove noisy training examples. A vocabulary
of theNmost frequent words is then created and the remaining words are treated as unknown
words mapped to a single token designated by “UNK.” To overcome the problem of unknown
words,themostcommonpracticeinvolvessubwordtokenizationusingmethodssuchasbyte-pair
encoding (BPE) [ 131], word-piece model (WPM) [ 127], or sentence-piece model (SPM) [ 82]. This
enables the use of an open vocabulary. To train an NMT model, we typically minimize the cross-
entropy3(loss) between the predicted target words and the actual target words in the reference.
This loss minimization is an optimization problem and gradient descent methods such as SGD,
ADAM, ADAGRAD, Adafactor, and so on, can be used [ 122]. ADAM is widely used in MT due to
itsabilitytoquicklytrainmodelsbutsuffersfromtheinabilitytosufficientlyconverge.However,
SGD is known to converge better but requires long training times. Designing a learning schedule
that combines several optimizers can help train a model with high performance [ 161]. However,
followingthepopularworkontheTransformermodel[ 148],mostrecentresearchfocusesonus-
ing a single optimizer with a learning rate schedule where the learning rate is altered depending
on the training iteration. Training is either done for a large number of iterations or till the model
convergessufficiently.Typically,amodelissaidtoconvergewhenitsevaluationonadevelopment
set does not change by a significant amount over several iterations. We refer readers to previous
worksonNMTregardingthistopic.Anotherconsiderationduringtrainingisthetuningofhyper-
parameterssuchaslearningrate,hiddendimensionsize,numberoflayers,andsoon.Researchers
often train a wide variety of models, an approach known as hyperparameter search, and choose
amodelwiththebestperformance.Peoplewhoarefamiliarwithdeeplearningmightnoticethat
thisbasicmodel canbenaturally extendedto involve multiple language pairs.
Decoding NMT models. Once an NMT model has been trained, it can be used to translate a
sentenceintoanotherlanguage.Thisprocessisalsoknownastranslation,decoding,orinference.
3This also impliesmaximizingthelikelihood of the predictedsequence of words inthe targetlanguage.
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 53,No. 5,Article 99.Publicationdate:September2020.