99:6 R. Dabreet al.
Fig.3. AnoverviewofmultiwayNMTfromtheperspectiveofthelevelofsharingandthefeaturesandlimi-
tationseachsharingapproach.AlltypesofMNMTmodelshavetodealwithcomplextrainingissuesranging
from batching to language grouping to knowledge distillation. Additionally, it is important to address lan-
guagedivergenceandfindingtherightbalanceoflanguage-specificandlanguage-agnosticrepresentations.
The simplest decoding algorithm is beam search decoding. Typically, the development set source
sentences are decoded using combinations of beam size and a length penalty (also referred to as
alpha) and the combination that gives the best automatic evaluation metric score is chosen to
decodethetestset.
3 MULTIWAY NMT
The primary goal of MNMT is a model that can support translation between more than one lan-
guage pair. Refer to Figure 3for an overview of the multiway NMT paradigm. We use the term
multiway NMT models to denote such models. Formally, a single model can support translation
forllanguage pairs (srcl,tдtl)∈L (l=1t oL),w h e r e L⊂S×T,a n dS,Tare sets of Xsource
andYtargetlanguages,respectively. SandTneednotbemutuallyexclusive.Parallelcorporaare
available for allof thesellanguage pairs as C(srcl)andC(tдtl). Note that our objective in this
specific scenario is to train a translation system between all language pairs. Refer to Figure 4for
thetwoprototypicalMNMTapproacheswithminimalandcompletesharingofcomponents.Most
existing works are variations of these models. Particularly, one-to-many [ 42], many-to-one [ 93]
and many-to-many [ 48]NMTmodelsarespecificinstancesofthisgeneralframework.Thetrain-
ing objective for multiway NMT is maximization of the log-likelihood of all training data jointly
for all language pairs(differentweightsmay beassignedto thelikelihoodsof differentpairs:):
Lθ=1
LL/summationdisplay
l=1LC(src l),C(tдt l)(θ),
whichcanbe calculatedin thesame wayasEquation( 1).
MultiwayNMTsystemsareofgreatinterest,sinceitisbelievedthattransferlearningbetween
languagescantakeplacethatwillhelpimprovetheoveralltranslationqualityformanytranslation
directions [ 170] and at the same time enable translations between language pairs with no data
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 53,No. 5,Article 99.Publicationdate:September2020.