99:16 R. Dabreet al.
4.2 Lexical Transfer
Zoph et al. [ 170]randomly initialized the word embeddings of the child source language,
because those could not be transferred from the parent. However, this approach does not map
the embeddings of similar words across the source languages ap r i o r i.G ue ta l .[ 54]i m p r o v e d
on this simple initialization by mapping pre-trained monolingual word embeddings of the
parent and child sources to a common vector space. This mapping is learned via the orthogonal
Procrustesmethod[ 125]usingbilingualdictionariesbetweenthesourcesandthetargetlanguage
[61].Kimetal.[ 71]proposedavariantofthisapproachwheretheparentmodelisfirsttrainedand
monolingualword-embeddingsofthechildsourcearemappedtotheparentsource’sembeddings
priortofine-tuning.WhileGuetal.[ 54]requirethechildandparentsourcestobemappedwhile
training the parent model, the mapping in Kim et al. [ 71]’s model can be trained after the parent
model hasbeentrained.
4.3 Syntactic Transfer
It is not always possible to have parent and child languages from the same language family and,
hence, blindly fine-tuning a parent model on the child language data might not take into account
the syntactic divergence between them. Although it is important to address this issue there are
surprisingly few works that address it. Murthy et al. [ 101] showed that reducing the word order
divergence betweensourcelanguagesby reordering theparentsentencestomatchchildwordor-
derisbeneficialinextremelylow-resourcescenarios.Sincereorderingispartofthepre-processing
pipeline, it is referred to as pre-ordering . Pre-ordering has been widely used in phrase-based MT
[31]andexploredinNMT[ 165]toovercomesource-targetsyntacticdivergence.Pre-orderingcan
be done via hand-written rules [ 87,120] or learnt rules/models [ 151,162]. We expect that future
workwillfocusonsyntacticdivergencebetweenlanguagesviaNMTmodelsthathandlereorder-
ing implicitly rather than rely on pre-ordering. Kim et al. [ 71] took a different approach to mit-
igate syntactic divergence. They trained the parent encoder with noisy source data introduced
viaprobabilisticinsertionanddeletionofwordsaswellaspermutationofwordpairs.Thisensures
that the encoder is not over-optimized for the parent source language syntax. Gu et al. [ 54]p r o -
posedtoachievebettertransferofsyntax-sensitivecontextualrepresentationsfromparentsusing
a mixture oflanguageexperts network .
4.4 Language Relatedness
Resultsfromtheabove-mentionedapproachesshowthat,inmanycases,transferlearningbenefits
the child language pair even if the parent and child languages are not related. These benefits are
also seen even when the languages have different writing systems. These are interesting findings
and can be attributed to the ability of the NMT models to learn cross-lingual representations, as
discussedinprevioussections.Itisnaturaltoaskiflanguagerelatednesscanimpacttheeffective-
nessoflexicalandsyntactictransfer.Learningcross-lingualembeddings,usedforlexicaltransfer,
is difficultfordistantlanguages [ 114,137].
Zophetal.[ 170]andDabreetal.[ 40]empiricallyshowedthat arelatedparentlanguageben-
efits the child language more than an unrelated parent . Maimaiti et al. [ 95] further showed
thatusingmultiplehighlyrelatedhigh-resourcelanguagepairsandapplyingfine-tuninginmulti-
pleroundscanimprovetranslationperformancemore,comparedtoonlyusingonehigh-resource
language pair for transfer learning. Kocmi and Bojar [ 76] presented a contradictory result in the
case of Estonian (related Finnish vs. unrelated Czech/Russian parent) and suggest that size of the
parent is more important. Another factor that may have aided transfer using Russian/Czech is
their contact relationship with Estonian, since Russian and Czech are spoken in geographically
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 53,No. 5,Article 99.Publicationdate:September2020.