99:22 R. Dabreet al.
using each individual source and then averaged. A combination of late and early averaging was
shownto give thebestresults.
A simpler approach concatenated multiple source sentences and fed them to a standard NMT
model [36], with performance comparable to Zoph and Knight [ 168]. This model was obviously
inspired by the success of fully shared MNMT models [ 70]. A single encoder is responsible for
encodingalongmultilingualsentence.9Interestingly,thismodelcouldautomaticallyidentifythe
boundariesbetweendifferentsourcelanguagesandsimplifythetrainingprocessformulti-source
NMT. Dabre et al. [ 36] also showed that it is better to use linguistically similar source languages,
especially in low-resource scenarios. Both studies showed that the attention mechanisms tend
to prefer some languages over others. Especially, linguistically distant languages are practically
ignoredwithcomputingcontextfordecoding.Itispossibletospeedupencodingbyparallellizing
theencoders.
Ensembling of individual source-target models is another beneficial approach, for which
Garmash and Monz [ 51] proposed several methods with different degrees of parameterization.
They proposed to learn an ensembling function to combine the softmaxes of several bilingual
models. This approach requires a smaller N-lingual corpus, but training an ensembling function
can be costly in terms of parameters. However, Dabre et al. [ 36] have shown that it is possible
to perform naive ensembling10and still get reasonable improvements in translation quality. Note
that the ensembling method used by Dabre et al. [ 36] is the same as the late averaging technique
proposed by Firat et al. [ 49]. Although the black-box method by Dabre et al. [ 36] is significantly
simpler and more elegant than the method in Reference [ 168], most works on multi-source NMT
usethelattermethod.
Missing Source Sentences. There can be missing source sentences in multi-source corpora and
duringtranslation.Nishimuraetal.[ 108]extendedReference[ 168]byrepresentingeach“missing”
sourcelanguagewitha dummytoken .TheNMTmodelmanagestoadapttomissingsentencesand
thus manages to give improved translations when all source sentences are available. Choi et al.
[25] and Nishimura et al. [ 107] proposed to use MT-generated synthetic sentences , instead of a
dummytokenforthemissingsourcelanguages.NMTmodelsareusedtotranslatesentencesfrom
the available source languages into the missing ones. When sentences for all source languages
are ready, any standard multi-source approach may be used. The fact that such a simple “trick”
workssowellmeans thatcombiningallthesemethodsallowsthetrainingofa singlemodel with
both single as well as multi-source capabilities. Therefore, a single model can be used in different
deploymentconditions.Iflow-latencytranslationservicesaredesired,thenthemodelcanbeused
insingle-sourcemode.Inmoderate-latencyscenarios,onlyafewsourcelanguagescouldbeused.
In offline translation scenarios, all source languages could be used. Future work could focus on
dynamically determining which source languages are useful and which are not. Furthermore, a
multiway,multi-source modelmight bean interestingchallengeto tackle.
Post-editing. Insteadofhavingatranslatortranslatefromscratch,multi-sourceNMTcanbeused
to generate high-quality translations. The translations can then be post-edited, a process that is
lesslabor-intensiveandcheapercomparedtotranslatingfromscratch.Multi-sourceNMThasbeen
usedforpost-editingwherethetranslatedsentenceisusedasanadditionalsource,leadingtoim-
provements[ 18].Multi-sourceNMThasalsobeenusedforsystemcombination,whichcombines
NMTand SMToutputsto improve translationperformance[ 166].
9Notethatthe order of theinputsentences should bethe sameduring trainingand testing.
10This meansuniform avergagingof softmaxesof different modelsas opposed toweightedaveraging.
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 53,No. 5,Article 99.Publicationdate:September2020.