99:12 R. Dabreet al.
able to generate language-specific translations is crucial. If several parallel corpora for different
language pairs are simply concatenated and then fed to a standard NMT model, then the NMT
model might end up generating a mixed language translation as a result of vocabulary leakage
due to language-invariant representations. The language tag trick has been very effective in
preventingvocabularyleakage[ 70],becauseitenablesthedecodertoclearlydistinguishbetween
different languages.6Further, Blackwood et al. [ 13] added the language tag to the beginning
as well as end of sequence to enhance its effect on the sentence representations learned by a
left-to-right encoder. This shows that dedicating a few parameters to learn language tokens can
help a decoder maintain a balance between language-agnostic and language-distinct features.
Hokamp et al. [ 64] showed that more often than not, using separate decoders and attention
mechanisms gives better results as compared to a shared decoder and attention mechanism. This
work implies that the best way to handle language divergence would be to use a shared encoder
for source languages and different decoders for target languages. We expect that the balance
betweenlanguage-agnosticandlanguage-specificrepresentationsshoulddependonthelanguage
pairs. Prasanna [ 117], Tan et al. [ 141] are some of the works that cluster languages into language
families and train separate MNMT models per family. Language families can be decided by
using linguistic knowledge7[117] or by using embedding similarities where the embeddings are
obtained from a multilingual word2vec model [ 141]. Comparing language-family-specific models
and mixed-language-family models shows that the former models outperform the latter models.
In the future, when training a model on a large number of languages, researchers could consider
different decoders for different language families and each decoder in turn can use the language
tokentrickto generatespecificlanguages in thelanguage family assignedtothedecoder.
ImpactofLanguageTag. Therearesomeworksthatexploretheeffectsofthe languagetag trick
ontheshareddecoder,itslanguage-agnostic(orlackthereof)representations,andthefinaltransla-
tionquality.Wangetal.[ 156]exploredmultiplemethodsforsupportingmultipletargetlanguages:
(a) target language tag at beginning of the decoder, (b) target language dependent positional em-
beddings, and (c) divide hidden units of each decoder layer into shared and language-dependent
ones. Each of these methods provides gains over Johnson et al. [ 70], and combining all methods
gave the best results. Hokamp et al. [ 64] showed that in a shared decoder setting, using a task-
specific (language pair to be translated) embedding works better than using language tokens. We
expectthatthisisbecauselearningtask-specificembeddingsneedsmoreparametersandhelpsthe
decoder learn better features to distinguish between tasks. In the related sub-area of pre-training
using MASS [ 138], mBERT/XLM [ 32] it was shown that using language or task tags is sufficient
for distinguishing between the languages used for pre-training large models. Given that massive
pre-trainingis relatively new,furtherexplorationis muchneeded.
Intheabovediscussion,wehavenotconsideredthepossibilityoftaskinterferenceandnegative
language transfer. Previous research has shown that certain languages help improve translation
qualitywhengroupedtogether[ 36,170].Thisimpliesthepossibilityoflanguagepairsthatmayin-
terferewitheachother(taskinterferenceinthemulti-tasksetting)andcauseunhelpfulknowledge
to betransferred(negative transfer).Deeperresearchon thisispending.
6Our own experiments in extremely low-resource scenarios show that it is impossible to completely avoid vocabulary
leakage, especially when the same word is present in different languages. Employing a special bias vector helps mitigate
this issue.
7https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_language_families .
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 53,No. 5,Article 99.Publicationdate:September2020.