estimated by calculating the percentage of 500 test case response values contained in their
prediction intervals. Type I coverage for each simulation scenario and interval method is
estimated by averaging over the 200 Type II coverage estimates obtained from the 200
simulated datasets for each simulation scenario. Because results for scenarios involving
uncorrelated predictors lead to the same conclusions as results for correlated predictors,
ﬁgures for the former are displayed in the Supplemental Materials.
Figure 1 and Figure S.1 summarize the Type I and II coverage rate estimates for OOB,
SC and QRF intervals for all training sample sizes and data-generating models. Each
circle is the average of the 200 Type II coverage estimates summarized in a boxplot. This
average represents the empirical Type I coverage rate for any given scenario. Estimates
of the Type I coverage rates of OOB and SC prediction intervals are very close to 0.9
(the nominal level). In contrast, QRF prediction intervals are more likely to over-cover or
under-cover target response in terms of Type I coverage. As the sample size nincreases,
the OOB and SC Type II coverage rate estimates show decreased variation and become
more concentrated around 0 .9. Additionally, the coverage rates of OOB and SC prediction
intervals are stable across the mean functions, predictor correlations, and measurement
error distributions in our simulation study.
Given the random forest for any simulated dataset, OOB interval width is the same
for all test cases. Similarly, the SC method produces intervals of constant width across
test cases. On the other hand, the width of QRF intervals varies across test cases. Thus,
for each simulated dataset, we record one OOB interval width, one SC interval width,
and 500 QRF interval widths. To compare the interval widths of these three methods, we
average the 500 QRF interval widths for each simulated dataset. Boxplots summarizing
the distributions of interval widths are provided in Figure S.2 and Figure S.3. To provide
ac l e a r e rc o m p a r i s o no fi n t e r v a lw i d t h s ,w ec o m p u t et h er a t i oo ft h eS Ci n t e r v a lw i d t h
relative to the OOB interval width and the ratio of the average QRF interval width to the
OOB interval width for each simulated dataset. Boxplots of the log2transformation of the
ratios are presented in Figure 2 and Figure S.4. Figure S.2 and Figure S.3 show that the
interval widths shrink as sample size increases. Figure 2 and Figure S.4 indicate that OOB
prediction intervals tend to be narrower than intervals produced by competing methods.
18