conditional mean of a response given the predictor variable values in a vector x.O u rw o r k
di↵ers from the random forest interval approach presented as a special case of SC inference
by Lei et al. (2018). Rather than relying on a single random partitioning of the training
setCninto two subsets to obtain cross-validated prediction errors as in SC inference, we
use OOB prediction errors that can be naturally obtained from a single random forest con-
structed from all training observations. Just as SC inference can serve as a general method
for interval construction, our OOB-based approach could also be applied with conditional
mean estimation techniques other than random forests. We leave investigation of such
generalizations to future work and maintain the focus of this paper on random forests.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we provide some basic
background on the mechanics of random forests, explain some by-products of random
forests, and deﬁne our approach to random forest prediction interval construction. Section 3
introduces four coverage probability types and explains the asymptotic properties of the
proposed out-of-bag random forest prediction intervals. In Section 4, we describe competing
approaches for constructing random forest prediction intervals. In Section 5, we compare
the ﬁnite-sample performance of our prediction intervals to other methods in a simulation
study, in terms of four types of coverage rates and interval widths. In Section 6, we
evaluate the performance of our approach and others on 60 real datasets. The R code and
datasets used in Section 5 and Section 6 are publicly available at https://github.com/
haozhestat/RFIntervals . The paper concludes with a discussion in Section 7. Proofs of
main results and some additional ﬁgures are included in the Supplemental Materials.
2 Constructing Random Forest Prediction Intervals
Our proposed OOB prediction interval, deﬁned in Section 2.3, is based on a single random
forest and its by-products. We use the random forest algorithm implemented in the R
package randomForest (Liaw et al., 2002) and summarized in Section 2.1.
4