Other variations on residual plots – e.g., plots of OOB prediction errors vs. important
predictors, plots of absolute OOB prediction errors vs. estimated mean values, etc. – may
also be used to identify discrepancies between assumptions and data. As in traditional
multivariate linear regression, a transformation of the response variable may be useful
for variance stabilization. In some cases, such transformations may be unavailable or
undesirable. In these situations, simple modiﬁcations to our approach as in Lei et al. (2018)
can be made to account for nonconstant error variance. More speciﬁcally, Lei et al. (2018)
provide an extension to SC inference, known as Locally Weighted Conformal Inference,
that yields prediction intervals with good empirical coverage properties when the error
variance is a function of the predictor vector. A completely analogous technique can be
used to improve the performance of OOB intervals when error variance changes across the
predictor space.
Our comparison of OOB and SC inference shows that these methods produce intervals
that behave similarly with respect to coverage probability. However, OOB intervals tend
to be narrower, and thus more informative, than SC intervals. The SC intervals come with
ag u a r a n t e eo fﬁ n i t e - s a m p l eT y p eIc o v e r a g ep r o b a b i l i t ya to ra b o v ea n ys p e c i ﬁ e dl e v e lo f
conﬁdence under very general conditions. Although this marginal coverage guarantee is
very appealing, our numerical results in simulations and in the analysis of 60 real datasets
provide compelling evidence in favor of OOB intervals. We recommend that an OOB
interval be used alongside a random forest point prediction to provide a range of plausible
response values for those drawing conclusions from data.
References
Biau, G. and Scornet, E. (2016). A random forest guided tour. Test,2 5 ( 2 ) : 1 9 7 – 2 2 7 .
Breiman, L. (2001). Random forests. Machine learning ,4 5 ( 1 ) : 5 – 3 2 .
Breiman, L. et al. (2001). Statistical modeling: The two cultures (with comments and a
rejoinder by the author). Statistical science ,1 6 ( 3 ) : 1 9 9 – 2 3 1 .
32