repeat steps (a) through (d) with eNin place of N. Any newly created subnode
with no more than nodesize cases or no variation in either response or predictor
vector values is split no further and is known as a terminal node of the tree T⇤.
3.Independently repeat steps 1 and 2 a total of Btimes to produce trees T⇤
1,...,T⇤
B
that constitute a random forest denoted as RF. (Note Bmay be chosen as a func-
tion of the training dataset Cn[i.e., B⌘B(Cn)] so that Monte Carlo variation in
the random forest construction process is not an important source of variation in RF
predictions. Put simply, B⌘B(Cn)s h o u l db el a r g ee n o u g hs ot h a tt w or a n d o m
forests constructed from the same training dataset Cndo not yield practically impor-
tant di↵erences in predictions for any target xvectors. See Section 2.4 of Biau and
Scornet (2016) for a summary of past work on the choice of B.)
TheRFpoint prediction of the response Yfor any speciﬁed value of the predictor Xis
bY=1
BPB
b=1bY⇤
b,w h e r e bY⇤
bis the prediction of Yprovided by tree T⇤
b(b=1,...,B )i nRF.
Thus, the RFprediction is simply an average of the predictions for Yprovided by the trees
inRF.F o r e a c h b=1,...,B ,t h ep r e d i c t i o no f Yby tree T⇤
b(i.e., bY⇤
b)i sd e t e r m i n e da s
follows. Tree T⇤
bis deﬁned by the splitting rules selected for each split in step 2(c) of tree
construction and by the collection of cases that reside in each terminal node of the tree.
By examining the values of the predictor variables in Xand applying the splitting rules
to those values, exactly one terminal node of tree T⇤
bis identiﬁed. (Breiman et al. (2001)
referred to the process of identifying the terminal node associated with Xas “dropping
anXdown a tree,” a phrase that evokes a useful conceptualization when the root node
of the tree is pictured at the top of a tree diagram with the bifurcations associated with
splitting rules ﬂowing down to terminal nodes at the bottom of the tree diagram.) Once
the terminal node associated with Xis identiﬁed, the average of the responses for cases in
that terminal node provide bY⇤
b.
In the construction of each regression tree (step 2), there are two important tuning
parameters that can impact performance. First, mtry determines how many variables are
considered when deﬁning the splitting rule at each node in a tree. Second, nodesize controls
the termination of the tree construction process by deﬁning the maximum terminal node
size. If the number of cases in a tree node is greater than nodesize (and variation among
6