OBJECTIVE MISMATCH IN MODEL -BASED REINFORCEMENT LEARNING
−10
−8
−6
−4
−2
0
2
4
0
50
100
150
200
Log Likelihood
Episode Reward
(a) CP LL from trajectory based loss ( =:36).
−10
−8
−6
−4
−2
0
2
4
Log Likelihood (b)CP LL for standard loss formulation ( =
:34)
Figure 14: There is a slight increase in the correlation between LL and reward when training on
cartpole trajectories rather than random samples. This could be one small step in the
right direction of solving objective mismatch.
To test this, we re-ran experiments from Sec. 4.1 with the LL being calculated on trajectories
rather than random batches. Fig. 14 shows an improved trend (less variance in the relationship in
the form of a tighter grouping, and increased ) for cartpole likelihood versus reward in the new
data (Fig. 14( a)subﬁgure) over the original experiments (Fig. 14( b)subﬁgure). For halfcheetah, the
trajectories are substantially longer ( 1000 timesteps) than the batch size ( 64), so we verify that
increasing the batch size of validation is not the only effect in improving the trend of likelihood
versus reward. Fig. 15( b)subﬁgure shows a tighter relationship between likelihood and reward than
the exploration using default PETS values in Fig. 15( c)subﬁgure. Finally, by validating on trajectories
versus large batches, the trend of likelihood versus reward is again improved in Fig. 15( a)subﬁgure.
Appendix D. Using simple reward as re-weight
r
Figure 16: re-weight the
loss of the dy-
namics model
w.r.t. the reward.An alternative to re-weighting w.r.t. the optimal trajectory could be re-
weighting w.r.t. the reward of each state. The compelling advantage
of this would be the easy availability of the reward without access
to additional information (e.g., the optimal trajectory). However, the
simple reward does not topologically has the desired shape compared
to the optimal trajectory. In fact, for many rewards (e.g., distance
to the target) the isocurves of reward are orthogonal to the optimal
trajectory. This means that the resulting re-weighting would concen-
trate the dynamics to model accurately the part of the state-action
space closer to the target, but it would ignore the dynamics that lead
us to the reward in the ﬁrst space (e.g., along the optimal trajectory).
Intuitively, this is undesirable, as it might decrease performance in
the initial stages of the trajectory. More research will be necessary
to fully study alternatives forms of re-weighting.
14