OBJECTIVE MISMATCH IN MODEL -BASED REINFORCEMENT LEARNING
latent space that is locally linear, e.g., in Embed to Control and related methods (Watter et al., 2015),
by enforcing that the model makes long-horizon predictions (Ke et al., 2019), ignoring uncontrollable
parts of the state space (Ghosh et al., 2018), detecting and correcting when a predictive model steps
off the manifold of reasonable states (Talvitie, 2017), adding reward signal prediction on top of
the latent space Gelada et al. (2019), or adding noise when training transitions Mankowitz et al.
(2019). Farahmand et al. (2017); Farahmand (2018) also attempts to re-frame the transitions to
incorporate a notion of the downstream decision or reward. Finally, Singh et al. (2019) proposes
stabilizability constraints to regularize the model and improve the control performance. None of
these paper formalize or explore the underlying mismatch issue in detail.
Continuing Experiments Our experiments represent an initial exploration into the challenges of
objective mismatch in MBRL. Sec. 4.2 is limited to cartpole due to computational challenges of
training with large dynamics datasets and Sec. 4.3 could be strengthened by deﬁning quantitative
comparisons in controller performance. Additionally, these effects should be quantiﬁed in other
MBRL algorithms such as MBPO (Janner et al., 2019) and POPLIN (Wang and Ba, 2019).
7. Conclusion
This paper identiﬁes, formalizes and analyzes the issue of objective mismatch in MBRL. This
fundamental disconnect between the likelihood of the dynamics model, and the overall task reward
emerges from incorrect assumptions at the origins of MBRL. Experimental results highlight the
negative effects that objective mismatch has on the performance of a current state-of-the-art MBRL
algorithm. In providing a ﬁrst insight on the issue of objective mismatch in MBRL, we hope future
work will deeply examine this issue to overcome it with a new generation of MBRL algorithms.
Acknowledgments
We thank Rowan McAllister and Kurtland Chua for useful discussions.
9