OBJECTIVE MISMATCH IN MODEL -BASED REINFORCEMENT LEARNING
of these two optimization problems, but, for simplicity, we do not consider the interactions added by
the changes in the dynamics-data distribution during the learning process. In addition, we discuss
potential solutions, but do not make claims about the best way to do so, which is left for future work.
Training: arg max
NX
i=1logp(s0
ijsi;ai);Control: arg max
at:t+TE(st)t+TX
i=tr(si;ai) (1a,b)
4. Identifying Objective Mismatch
We now experimentally study the issue of objective mismatch to answer the following: 1) Does the
distribution of models obtained from running a MBRL algorithm show a strong correlation between
LL and reward? 2) Are there signs of sub-optimality in the dynamics models training process that
could be limiting performance? 3) What model differences are reﬂected in reward but not in LL?
Experimental Setting In our experiments, we use two popular RL benchmark tasks: the cartpole
(CP) and half cheetah (HC). For more details on these tasks, model parameters, and control properties
see Chua et al. (2018). We use a set of 3 different datasets to evaluate how assumptions in MBRL
affect performance. We start with high-reward, expert datasets (cartpole r > 179, half cheetah
r >10000 ) to test if on-policy performance is linked to a minimal, optimal exploration. The two
other baselines are datasets collected on-policy with the PETS algorithm and datasets of sampled
tuples representative of the entire state space. The experiments validate over a) many re-trained
models and b) many random seeds, to account for multiple sources of stochasticity in MBRL.
Additional details and experiments can be found at: https://sites.google.com/view/mbrl-mismatch.
4.1. Exploration of Model Loss vs Episode Reward Space
The MBRL framework assumes a clear correlation between model accuracy and policy performance,
which we challenge even in simple domains. We aggregated Mcp= 1000 cartpole models and
Mhc= 2400 half cheetah models trained with PETS. The relationships between model accuracy and
reward on data representing the full state-space (grid or sampled) show no clear trend in Fig. 3c,f.
The distribution of rewards versus LL shown in Fig. 3a-c shows substantial variance and points
of disagreement overshadowing a visual correlation of increased reward and LL. This bi-model
distribution on the half cheetah expert dataset, shown in Fig. 3( d)subﬁgure, relates to a unrecoverable
failure mode in early half cheetah trials. The contrast between Fig. 3( e)subﬁgure and Fig. 3d,f shows
a considerable per-dataset variation in the state-action transitions. The grid and sampled datasets,
Fig. 3c,f, suffer from decreased likelihood because they do not overlap greatly with on-policy data
from PETS.
If the assumptions behind MBRL were fully valid, the plots should show a perfect correlation
between LL and reward. Instead these results conﬁrm that there exists an objective mismatch which
manifests as a decreased correlation between validation loss and episode reward. Hence, there is no
guarantee that increasing the model accuracy (i.e., the LL) will also improve the control performance.
4.2. Model Loss vs Episode Reward During Training
This section explores how model training impacts performance at the per-epoch level. These
experiments shed light onto the impact of the strong model assumptions outlined in Sec. 3. As a
dynamics model is trained, there are two key inﬂection points - the ﬁrst is the training epoch where
4