Proceedings of Machine Learning Research vol 120:1–16, 2020 2nd Annual Conference on Learning for Dynamics and Control
Objective Mismatch in Model-based Reinforcement Learning
Nathan Lambert NOL@BERKELEY .EDU
University of California, Berkeley
Brandon Amos BDA@FB.COM
Omry Yadan OMRY @FB.COM
Roberto Calandra RCALANDRA @FB.COM
Facebook AI Research
Editors: A. Bayen, A. Jadbabaie, G. J. Pappas, P. Parrilo, B. Recht, C. Tomlin, M. Zeilinger
Abstract
Model-based reinforcement learning (MBRL) is a powerful framework for data-efﬁciently learning
control of continuous tasks. Recent work in MBRL has mostly focused on using more advanced
function approximators and planning schemes, with little development of the general framework.
In this paper, we identify a fundamental issue of the standard MBRL framework – what we call
objective mismatch . Objective mismatch arises when one objective is optimized in the hope that a
second, often uncorrelated, metric will also be optimized. In the context of MBRL, we characterize
the objective mismatch between training the forward dynamics model w.r.t. the likelihood of the
one-step ahead prediction, and the overall goal of improving performance on a downstream control
task. For example, this issue can emerge with the realization that dynamics models effective for
a speciﬁc task do not necessarily need to be globally accurate, and vice versa globally accurate
models might not be sufﬁciently accurate locally to obtain good control performance on a speciﬁc
task. In our experiments, we study this objective mismatch issue and demonstrate that the likelihood
of one-step ahead predictions is not always correlated with control performance. This observation
highlights a critical limitation in the MBRL framework which will require further research to be
fully understood and addressed. We propose an initial method to mitigate the mismatch issue by
re-weighting dynamics model training. Building on it, we conclude with a discussion about other
potential directions of research for addressing this issue.
1. Introduction
Model-based reinforcement learning (MBRL) is a popular approach for learning to control nonlinear
systems that cannot be expressed analytically (Bertsekas, 1995; Sutton and Barto, 2018; Deisenroth
and Rasmussen, 2011; Williams et al., 2017). MBRL techniques achieve the state of the art perfor-
mance for continuous-control problems with access to a limited number of trials (Chua et al., 2018;
Wang and Ba, 2019) and in controlling systems given only visual observations with no observations
of the original system’s state (Hafner et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2019). MBRL approaches typically
learn a forward dynamics model that predicts how the dynamical system will evolve when a set of
control signals are applied. This model is classically ﬁt with respect to the maximum likelihood of
a set of trajectories collected on the real system, and then used as part of a control algorithm to be
executed on the system (e.g., model-predictive control).
In this paper, we highlight a fundamental problem in the MBRL learning scheme: the objective
mismatch issue. The learning of the forward dynamics model is decoupled from the subsequent
© 2020 N. Lambert, B. Amos, O. Yadan & R. Calandra.arXiv:2002.04523v3  [cs.LG]  19 Apr 2021