OBJECTIVE MISMATCH IN MODEL -BASED REINFORCEMENT LEARNING
Appendix A. Effect of Dataset Distribution when Learning
Number of random transitions:
200, 2000, 4000, 20000
0
5
10
15
20
0
50
100
150
Trial Num
Cumulative Reward
Figure 10: Cartpole (Mujoco simulations) learn-
ing efﬁciency is suppressed when ad-
ditional data not relevant to the task is
added to the dynamics model training
set. This effect is related to the issue
of objective mismatch because model
training needs to account for potential
off-task data.Learning speed can be slowed by many factors
in dataset distribution, such as adding additional
irrelevant transitions. When extra transitions
from a speciﬁc area of the state space are in-
cluded in the training set, the dynamics model
will spend increased expression on these transi-
tions. LL of the model will be biased down as
it learns this data, but it will reduce the learn-
ing speed as new, more relevant transitions are
added to the training set.
Running cartpole random data collection
with a short horizon of 10 steps (while forc-
ing initial babbling state to always be 0), for 20,
200,400 and 2000 babbling roll-outs (that sums
up to 200, 2000, 4000 and 20000 transitions in
the dataset ﬁnally shows some regression in the
learning speed for runs with more useless data in
the motor babbling. This data highlights the im-
portance of careful exploration vs exploitation
trade-offs, or changing how models are trained
to be selective with data.
Appendix B. Task Generalization in Simple Environments
Validation Error Episode Reward
Figure 11: Learning curve for the standard Cart-
pole task used in this paper ( Xgoal=
0). The median reward from 10 trials
is plotted with the mean NLL of the dy-
namics models at each iteration. The
reward reaches maximum (180) well
before the NLL is at it’s minimum.In this section, we compare the performance of
a model trained on data for the standard cartpole
task (x position goal at 0) to policies attempting
to move the cart to different positions in the x-
axis. Fig. 11 is a learning curve of PETS with
a PE model using the CEM optimizer. Even
though performance levels out, the NLL con-
tinues to decrease as the dynamics models ac-
crue more data. With more complicated systems,
such as halfcheetah, the reward of different tasks
verses global likelihood of the model would
likely be more interesting (especially with in-
cremental model training) - we will investigate
this in future work. Below, we show that the
dynamics model generalizes well to tasks close
to zero (both positive in (Fig. 12( b)subﬁgure)
and negative positions (Fig. 12( a)subﬁgure), but
performance drops off in areas the training set
does not cover as well.
12