OBJECTIVE MISMATCH IN MODEL -BASED REINFORCEMENT LEARNING
(a) HC traj. loss ( = 0:63)
(b) HC large batch ( = 0:54)
(c) HC on-policy ( = 0:49)
Figure 15: Validation of model LL versus reward with different types of validation of the half cheetah
models. ( left) Is a new method for training, where each batch of the validation set is a
complete subsection of a trajectory in the aggregated dataset. ( center ) We compare the
trajectory loss to the regularization that would be provided when just validating with
larger batches, which would reduce variance from outliers. ( right ) Copied from ﬁgure
Fig. 3e where validation is done on small batches randomly sampled.
Appendix E. Ways model
mismatch can harm the performance of a controller
Model mismatch between ﬁtting the likelihood and optimizing the
task’s reward manifests itself in many ways. Here we highlight two of them and in Sec. 6 we discuss
how related work connects in with these issues.
Long-horizon roll-outs of the model may be unstable and inaccurate. Time-series or dynamics
models that are unrolled for long periods of time easily diverge from the true prediction and can
easily step into predicting future states that are not on the manifold of reasonable trajectories. Taking
these faulty dynamics models and using them as a smaller part of a controller that optimizes some
cost function under a poor approximation to the dynamics. Issues can especially manifest if, e.g., the
approximate dynamics do not properly capture stationarity properties necessary for the optimality of
the true physical system being modeled.
Non-convex and non-smooth models may make the control optimization problem challenging
The approximate dynamics might have bad properties that make the control optimization problem
much more difﬁcult than on the true system, even when the true optimal action sequence is optimal
under the approximate model. This is especially true when using neural network as they introduce
non-linearities and non-smoothness that make many classical control approaches difﬁcult.
Sampling models with similar LLs, different rewards To better understand the objective mis-
match, we also compared how a difference of model loss can impact a control policy. We sampled
models with similar LL’s and extremely different rewards from Fig. 3d-e and visualized the chosen
optimal action sequences along an expert trajectory. The control policies and dynamics models
appear to be converging to different regions of state spaces. In these visualizations, there is not a
emphatic reason why the models achieved different reward, so further study is needed to quantify the
15