OBJECTIVE MISMATCH IN MODEL -BASED REINFORCEMENT LEARNING
generate (optimal) elicitation trajectories to ﬁt a dynamics model (typically analytical), and
subsequently we apply this model to a speciﬁc task. This particular scheme has several assumptions:
Start
Goal
StartGoal
Figure 2: Sketches of state-action spaces. ( Left) In
system identiﬁcation, the elicitation trajec-
tories are designed off-line to cover the en-
tire state-action space. ( Right ) In MBRL
instead, the data collected during learning
is often concentrated in trajectories towards
the goal, with other parts of the state-action
space being largely unexplored (grey area).1) the elicitation trajectories collected cover
the entire state-action space; 2) the presence
of virtually inﬁnite amount of data; 3) the
global and generalizable nature of the model
resulting from the SI process. With these as-
sumptions, the theme of system identiﬁcation
is effectively to collect a large amount of data
covering the whole state-space to create a suf-
ﬁciently accurate, global model that we can
deploy on any desired task, and still obtain
good performance. If these assumptions are
true, using the closed-loop of MBRL should
further improve performance over traditional
open-loop SI (Hjalmarsson et al., 1996).
When adopting the idea of learning the
dynamics model used in optimal control for
MBRL, it is important to consider if these
assumptions still hold. The assumption of
virtually inﬁnite data is visibly in tension with
the explicit goal of MBRL which is to reduce
the number of interactions with the environment by being “smart” about the sampling of new
trajectories. In fact, in MBRL the ofﬂine data collection performed via elicitation trajectories is
largely replaced by on-policy sampling to explicitly reduce the need to collect large amount of
data (Chua et al., 2018). Moreover, in the MBRL setting the data will not usually cover the entire
state-action space, since they are generated by optimizing one task. In conjunction with the use of
non-parametric models, this results in learned models that are strongly biased towards capturing
the distribution of the locally accurate, task-speciﬁc data. Nonetheless, this is not an immediate
issue since the MBRL setting rarely tests for generalization capabilities of the learned dynamics.
In practice, we can now see how the assumptions and goals of system identiﬁcation are in contrast
with the ones of MBRL. Understanding these differences and the downstream effects on algorithmic
approach is crucial to design new families of MBRL algorithms.
Objective Mismatch During the MBRL process of iteratively learning a controller, the reward
signal from the environment is diluted by the training of a forward dynamics model with a independent
metric, as shown in Fig. 1. In our experiments, we highlight that the minimization of some network
training cost does not hold a strong correlation to maximization of episode reward. As dynamic
environments becoming increasingly complex in dimensionality, the assumptions of collected data
distributions become weaker and over-ﬁtting to different data poses an increased risk.
Formally, the problem of objective mismatch appears as two de-coupled optimization problems
repeated over many cycles of learning, shown in Eq. (1a,b) , which could be at the cost of minimizing
the ﬁnal reward. This loop becomes increasingly difﬁcult to analyze as the dataset used for model
training changes with each experimental trial – a step that is needed to include new data from
previously unexplored states. In this paper we characterize the problems introduced by the interaction
3