OBJECTIVE MISMATCH IN MODEL -BASED REINFORCEMENT LEARNING
Dynamics 𝑓"Policy 𝜋"(𝑥)EnvironmentState TransitionsRewardTrajectoriesTraining: Maximum LikelihoodObjective MismatchControlInteractsResponses
Figure 1: Objective mismatch in MBRL arises when a model is trained to maximize the likelihood
but then used for control to maximize a reward signal not considered during training.
controller through the optimization of two different objective functions – prediction accuracy or loss
of the single- or multi-step look-ahead prediction for the dynamics model, and task performance
for the policy optimization. While the use of log-likelihood (LL) for system identiﬁcation is an
historically accepted objective, it results in optimizing an objective that does not necessarily correlate
to controller performance. The contributions of this paper are to: 1) identify and formalize the
problem of objective mismatch in MBRL; 2) examine the signs of and the effects of objective
mismatch on simulated control tasks; 3) propose an initial mechanism to mitigate objective mismatch;
4) discuss the impact of objective mismatch and outline future directions to address this issue.
2. Model-based Reinforcement Learning
We now outline the MBRL formulation used in the paper. At time t, we denote the state st2Rds,
the actionsat2Rda, and the reward r(st;at). We say that the MBRL agent acts in an environment
governed by a state transition distribution p(st+1jst;at). We denote a parametric model fto
approximate this distribution with p(st+1jst;at). MBRL follows the approach of an agent acting
in its environment, learning a model of said environment, and then leveraging the model to act.
While iterating over parametric control policies, the agent collects measurements of state, action,
next-state and forms a dataset D=f(sn;an;s0
n)gN
n=1. With the dynamics data D, the agent learns
the environment in the form of a neural network forward dynamics model, learning an approximate
dynamicsf. This dynamics model is leveraged by a controller that takes in the current state stand
returns an action sequence at:t+Tmaximizing the expected reward E(st)Pt+T
i=tr(si;ai), whereT
is the predictive horizon and (st)is the set of state transitions induced by the model p.
In our paper, we primarily use as probabilistic neural networks designed to maximize the LL
of the predicted parametric distribution p, denoted as P, or ensembles of probabilistic networks
denotedPE, and compare to deterministic networks minimizing the mean squared error (MSE),
denotedDorDE. Unless otherwise stated we use the models as in PETS (Chua et al., 2018) with
an expectation-based trajectory planner and a cross-entropy-method (CEM) optimizer.
3. Objective Mismatch and its Consequences
The Origin of Objective Mismatch: The Subtle Differences between MBRL and System Iden-
tiﬁcation Many ideas and concepts in model-based RL are rooted in the ﬁeld of optimal control
and system identiﬁcation (Sutton, 1991; Bertsekas, 1995; Zhou et al., 1996; Kirk, 2012; Bryson,
2018). In system identiﬁcation (SI), the main idea is to use a two-step process where we ﬁrst
2