Page 11 of 20
 Wen et al. BMC Bioinformatics          (2022) 23:387 
 
Chronic kidney disease (CKD) severity can be assessed using urine protein con -
centration, but it can be inconvenient to collect 24-h urine for follow-up. 9 models 
were developed and compared using 13 routine blood test indexes and five demo -
graphic characteristics. These models as non-uretic clinical variables combine sta -
tistical, machine learning, and neural network methods to predict urinary protein 
progression in patients with chronic kidney disease. Their results showed that linear 
models including Elastic Net, lasso regression, ridge regression and logistic regres -
sion have overall predictive power, with an average AUC and precision above 0.87 
and 0.8, respectively. Among them, LR obtained the highest AUC value of 0.873 [77].
Clinlabomics is also extremely important for detecting COVID-19 [78]. Based on 
hematochemical values from routine blood tests, Brinati developed two machine-
learning classification models whose accuracy ranges between 82 and 86%, and 
sensitivity ranges between 92 and 95% [79]. Besides, Domínguez-Olmedo also devel -
oped a model to predict the mortality of patients with COVID-19, which can assess 
mortality from laboratory values with a high degree of accuracy [80].
In addition, Clinlabomics also plays a vital role in the diagnosis of some can -
cers. Simon used the routine blood tests from 15,176 neurological patients via the 
smart blood analytics (SBA) ML algorithm to build a machine learning predictive 
model for brain tumor diagnosis. Moreover, they validated the model by retrospec -
tive analysis of 68 consecutive brain tumors and 215 control patients presenting to 
the neurological emergency service. The sensitivity and specificity of the adapted 
tumor model in the validation group were 96% and 74%, respectively [81]. That 
result demonstrated the feasibility of brain tumor diagnosis by routine blood tests 
combined with machine learning. At the same time, it proved that the application 
of Clinlabomics can compensate for the low accuracy and expensive disadvantage of 
computed tomography (CT) imaging in the diagnosis of brain tumors. Similarly, Wu 
used a random forest machine-learning algorithm to build an identification model 
between routine blood indexes and lung cancer. A correlation between 19 regular 
blood indexes and lung cancer patients was found, and lung cancer patients could 
be identified from other patients, especially those with tuberculosis (which has simi -
lar symptoms to lung cancer), with a sensitivity of 96.3%, specificity of 94.97%, and 
accuracy of 95.7% for the cross-validation results, respectively [82]. Li also used 
laboratory data, including liver enzymes, lipid profiles, complete blood counts, and 
tumor biomarkers to develop five machine learning models to identify colorectal 
cancer (CRC). The results showed that the logistic regression model achieved the 
highest performance in identifying CRC (AUC: 0.865, sensitivity: 89.5%, specificity: 
83.5%, PPV: 84.4%, NPV: 88.9%) [83]. Studies of Clinlabomics in diagnosing disease 
have increased, both in general and severe diseases, and have achieved remarkable 
diagnostic results. In addition to facilitating more convenient and accurate diagnos -
tic methods, it also decreases the cost of diagnosing related diseases. In the age of 
big data, we can see that Clinlabomics is becoming more and more important for 
precision medicine. The routine blood test results contained much more informa -
tion than is usually recognized even by the most experienced clinicians.