Page 6 of 20 Wen et al. BMC Bioinformatics          (2022) 23:387 
renal cancer patients [38], urothelial carcinoma [39], and metastatic renal cell carcinoma 
[40]. The combined neutrophil-to-lymphocyte ratio (NLR) also has been confirmed that 
is an adverse prognostic factor in many diseases at present, especially malignant tumors, 
including gastric cancer [41], and colorectal cancer [42], and non-small cell lung cancer 
[43, 44]. And the score of clinical evaluation of disease development composed of some 
routine test items is also widely used. The modified Glasgow prognostic score (mGPS) is 
an inflammation-based prognostic score that consists of CRP and albumin (ALB). The 
score is not only an independent prognostic factor in early esophageal cancer patients 
[45] but is considered an essential prognostic indicator in a study on prognostic factors 
in colon cancer [46]. The control nutritional status (CONUT) score consists of serum 
albumin, cholesterol, and total lymphocyte count. It is associated with the postoperative 
survival of patients undergoing hepatectomy [47] and gastric cancer resection [48], and 
can predict the survival of patients with hypertension over 80 years old [49]. It is not dif -
ficult to find that the combination of inexpensive, available and routine clinical test items 
seems to play an increasingly important role in clinical diagnosis and treatment.
Combining AI with clinical laboratory
AI is a field of computer science that is designed to mimic human thinking processes, 
learning abilities, and knowledge storage [50]. In the age of big data, AI technology can 
use sizeable clinical data sets to support clinical decisions, uncover occult disease sub -
types, associations, and prognostic indicators, and generate new testable hypotheses. AI 
is gradually changing the way that doctors make clinical decisions and diagnoses. AI has 
now been applied to several aspects of medicine, from diagnostic applications in radiol -
ogy and pathology [51, 52] and the classification of various eye diseases in ophthalmol -
ogy [53] to more therapeutic and interventional applications in cardiology and surgery 
[54, 55].
Machine learning (ML), is a significant branch of AI, and one of its advantages is learn -
ing from data [56, 57]. ML and deep learning (DL) techniques can handle large, com -
plex, nonlinear, and multidimensional data better than conventional statistical methods 
[58, 59]. The development of clinical laboratory automation and the unification of data 
standardization have gradually transformed the clinical laboratory department into a 
large and credible clinical database in medicine. In addition, in the clinical laboratory 
department and the potential diagnostic value of clinical testing data and the value of 
the joint diagnosis of clinical testing items are gradually explored [60]. Therefore, the 
multifaceted development of clinical laboratories and the development of AI provide the 
conditions for their combination in the era of big data [61].
From routine blood or body fluid test data, Clinlabomics extracts, analyzes, screens, 
and identifies certain reproducible and prominent clinical laboratory test indexes for 
patients with clinically relevant diseases. A relationship is then analyzed between the 
selected characteristic test items and the diagnosis and treatment results. Through 
in-depth ML of a large amount of data and the establishment of predictive models for 
related diseases, the aim is to provide accurate disease diagnosis, risk stratification, and 
prognosis (Fig.  4). Analysis of clinical laboratory test data can provide additional infor -
mation not currently available. Furthermore, Clinlabomics can evaluate the added value 
of routine laboratory test items to common predictors of related diseases. The use of