Page 13 of 20
 Wen et al. BMC Bioinformatics          (2022) 23:387 
 
percentage of total white blood cells. In addition, gating time was dramatically reduced 
to 12 s/case by DNN from 15 min/case by the manual process. The proposed DNN dem -
onstrated high accuracy in CLL MRD detection and significantly improved workflow 
efficiency [92].
In addition, reference intervals are critical for the interpretation of laboratory results 
and Clinlabomics also can help to establish the reference interval [93, 94]. Ma validated 
five data mining algorithms using thyroid-related hormones test data from clinical 
laboratories to establish reference intervals of thyroid hormones for older adults. The 
results showed that the transformed Hoffmann, transformed Bhattacahrya, Kosmic, and 
refineR algorithms were the more suitable algorithms to establish reference intervals for 
thyroid-related hormones in older adults and an Expectation maximization (EM) algo -
rithm combined with Box-Cox transformation was recommended for data with obvi -
ous skewness [95]. Poole developed LIMIT, an unsupervised learning method to extract 
reference intervals from the electronic medical record. Results showed that LIMIT 
produces usable reference intervals for sodium, potassium and hemoglobin laboratory 
results. From the above research, we conclude that Clinlabomics represents a fast and 
inexpensive solution for calculating reference intervals, and showed that it is possible to 
establish reference intervals by using laboratory results and AI [96].
The urine samples from patients suspected of urinary tract infection (UTI) generate 
the highest workload in routine clinical microbiology diagnostic laboratories [97]. How -
ever, the actual situation was that many urine samples produce negative culture results. 
There were no significant bacterial isolates or mixed culture results indicating sample 
contamination [98]. The reduction in the number of suspect samples that must be cul -
tured will allow diagnostic services to focus on actual microbial infections, which will 
reduce the workload in the laboratory. Burton retrospectively analyzed a total of 212,554 
urine microscopy, culture, and sensitivity urine reports. He compared the two classifi -
cation methods: a heuristic model using a combination of white blood cell count and 
bacterial count and a machine learning approach testing three algorithms (Random For -
est (RF), Neural Network (NN), and Extreme Gradient Boosting (XGboost)). The clini -
cal laboratory items included in the machine learning approach include urine items of 
microscopic analysis, and biochemical dip-stick testing such as NIT, WBCUF, EC, 
and haematuria. Based on their initial findings, the machine learning algorithms out -
performed the heuristic model in terms of relative workload reduction at a classifica -
tion sensitivity above 95%. Using this method has a potential decrease of about 41% in 
the cultivation workload. XGboost achieved the highest AUC of 0.910among the three 
machine learning approaches [99].
From the above research, we concluded that Clinlabomics can help with clinical labo -
ratory management and improve the efficiency of clinical diagnosis. Besides, Clinlabom -
ics also may improve service efficiency when demand exceeds the resources of public 
health service providers.
The challenge and opportunity of clinlabomics
The 2016 World Economic Forum listed the open AI ecosystem as one of the top 10 
most important emerging technologies [100]. Since 2017, China, the United States, and 
the European Union have successively issued national-level artificial intelligence (AI)