Page 12 of 20 Wen et al. BMC Bioinformatics          (2022) 23:387 
Clinlabomics and clinical laboratory management
Clinlabomics also correctly conducts laboratory management to some extent, includ -
ing laboratories formulate reference ranges, clinical laboratory quality control, and 
automated interpretation of laboratory testing results. Clinlabomics has the poten -
tial to improve laboratory efficiency and quality in a setting of limited staff resources 
[84]. One concerning the type of preanalytic error in laboratory medicine is the wrong 
blood in the tube (WBIT) error because blood specimens collected from one patient 
occasionally get mislabeled with identifiers from another patient. Continuous monitor -
ing of specimen acceptability, collection and transport can result in the prompt identi -
fication and correction of problems, leading to improved patient care and a reduction 
in unnecessary redraws and delays in reporting results [85–88]. Rosenbaum simulated 
WBIT errors within sets of routine inpatient chemistry test results to develop, train, and 
evaluate five machines learning based WBIT detection algorithms. The results showed a 
best-performing WBIT detection algorithm based on a support vector machine to iden -
tify WBIT errors before test reporting. This algorithm achieved an area under the curve 
of 0.97 and considerably outperformed traditional single-analyte delta checks [85]. For 
evaluating the performance of identifying mislabeled samples, Farrell developed eight 
different machine learning models using different algorithms: artificial neural networks, 
extreme gradient boosting, support vector machines, random forests, logistic regression, 
k-nearest neighbors, and two decision trees (one complex and one simple). Moreover, it 
was compared with the ability to manually identification of mislabeled samples. The best 
performing machine learning model, the artificial neural network (92.1% accuracy), out -
distanced human performance for identifying mislabeled samples(77.8% accuracy) [86]. 
Serum quality is also a key consideration in the pre-analytical phase of a laboratory anal -
ysis [89]. Fang retrospectively retrieved the coagulation test results (Activated partial 
thromboplastin time (APTT), Prothrombin time (PT), Thrombin time (TT), Fibrinogen 
(Fbg), and D-dimer) of 192 clot samples and 2889 clot-free test (NCD) samples to form 
a training and test dataset. Standard and momentum back-propagation neural networks 
(BPNNs) were trained and validated using training datasets and five-fold cross-valida -
tion methods to verify the feasibility of identifying clot specimens through machine 
learning. Surprisingly, the result confirmed that the standard and momentum BPNNs 
could identify the sample status (clotted and NCD) with areas under the ROC curves of 
0.966 (95% CI 0.958–0.974) and 0.971 (95% CI 0.9641–0.9784), respectively [90].
Auto verification and auto-explanation systems might have greatly improved labora -
tory efficiency. Wilkes retrospectively collected 4619 urine steroid profile data to train 
and test various ML classifiers’ abilities to differentiate profiles. The results showed 
the best performing binary classifier could predict the interpretation of profiles with a 
mean area under the ROC curve of 0.955 (95% CI 0.949–0.961). In addition, the best 
performing multiclass classifier could predict the individual abnormal profile interpreta -
tion with a mean balanced accuracy of 0.873 (0.86–0.880) [91]. This provided a proof-
of-concept application of ML algorithms to complex clinical laboratory data. Salama 
developed deep neural networks (DNN) to improve the efficiency of clinical laboratories 
in detecting minimal residual disease (MRD) in chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) 
by flow cytometric immunophenotyping. The result showed that there was an excellent 
correlation between their DNN and expert analysis when CLL cells were reported as a