Page 15 of 20
 Wen et al. BMC Bioinformatics          (2022) 23:387 
 
prediction, diagnosis, and monitoring of disease status. Besides, it also is very con -
ducive to laboratory management. Therefore, our proposed Clinlabomics is a new 
concept aimed at collecting valuable information obtained from routine laboratory 
tests. Although the research of combining AI and clinical laboratory data is still in 
its infancy, most studies focus on details information on routine testing items in the 
blood. From some research we summarized, combining blood-related testing items 
data and AI have achieved some results in the diagnosis, monitoring, and prognosis 
evaluation of clinical diseases and their conclusions. Many authors presented oppor -
tunities related to combining clinical laboratory data and AI methods, and some also 
made their algorithms available. However, extensive data clinical trials are still lack -
ing to verify and the establishment of standardization. On the other hand, there are 
few studies combining AI with body fluid-related detection items (such as urine, and 
cerebrospinal fluid) in the clinical laboratory. In the future, we can carry out dis -
ease diagnosis and treatment-related research on body fluid-related detection items 
through the deep learning method. In addition, there are many studies combining AI 
and other medical fields, especially imaging and pathology. Therefore, using patient 
clinical information and laboratory data, combining data from other diagnostic facili -
ties (such as pathology and radiology) and pharmacies) has the potential to further 
improve the accuracy and reliability of the diagnostic model.
As seen in the previous section, many studies use different models for comparison, 
the best model or algorithm used in combining AI and clinical laboratory data is dif -
ferent whether in disease prediction and diagnosis or laboratory management. Clini -
cal laboratory data must be analyzed with appropriate models and algorithms to solve 
different problems. Logistic regression (LR) is one of the traditional models, its clar -
ity, simplicity and great interpretability of the model are the reasons why LR was fre -
quently chosen [63]. However, due to the simple form of the LR model (very similar 
to the linear model), it is difficult to fit the real distribution of data, so the accuracy 
is not high. Therefore, the LR model is currently widely used to predict the factors of 
disease pathogenesis [77, 83]. We can use the LR model to analyze and predict disease 
risk through clinical laboratory testing items. We also found that the Random Forest 
(RF) model was frequently used in studies we reviewed [73, 79, 82]. From a techni -
cal point of view, RF is an ensemble algorithm that relies on a collection of decision 
trees that are trained on mutually independent subsets of the original data to obtain 
a classifier with lower variance and/or lower bias [79]. This class of models also has 
generally high accuracy as well as interpretable output [63]. These are some reasons 
why RF is chosen. As a result of its merits, especially high accuracy, we think the RF 
model may be suitable for some applications related to disease diagnosis. A support 
vector machine (SVM) is a dichotomous model that is supported by strict mathemat -
ical theory and has strong explanatory power. It does not rely on statistical meth -
ods, thus simplifying the usual classification and regression problems. SVM has been 
applied to myriad classification tasks and has been demonstrated to be particularly 
effective for medical diagnosis [72]. Studies have reported that NN models (such as 
ANNs and DNNs) are widely used in control and optimization, prediction and man -
agement, pattern recognition and image processing [63, 65]. Since NN models extract 
features automatically, they require more training resources (time and data volume)