Page 14 of 20 Wen et al. BMC Bioinformatics          (2022) 23:387 
strategic development plans, in the field of clinical laboratory testing, the explosive 
growth of AI theories and technologies also provides a new direction for the develop -
ment of medical testing theory, methods and applications [101–104].
By reviewing some recent studies of ML applications in the field of clinical laboratory 
medicine. It was not difficult to find that Clinlabomics in the clinical laboratory can con -
duct more rapid and efficient analytical processing of complex detection data. Not only 
that, Clinlabomics can correctly conduct laboratory management to some extent, which 
can play an important role in the future development and construction of laboratory 
medicine. Besides, Clinlabomics will certainly go further beyond its current boundaries 
in the field of clinical laboratory medicine. Just as during the global period of COVID-19 
spread, Clinlabomics can further expand the scope of disease diagnostic tools, which is 
particularly promising to make up for the lack of skilled laboratory staff and adequate 
testing instruments in developing countries [32, 35, 79, 80, 105].
It is undeniable that the development of artificial intelligence has brought opportu -
nities to the development of Clinlabomics but there are still a series of challenges and 
problems in the development process of Clinlabomics [106, 107].
On the one hand, although the current Clinlabomics to improve the efficiency of 
clinical laboratory testing and supplementary diagnosis of clinical diseases has great 
potential [108], a lot of clinical laboratory technicians for big data age and AI com -
bined with clinical laboratory test data understanding is not deep [109]. In addition, the 
replacement of human labor with technological development has caused panic in the 
whole society, and clinical laboratory personnel also have the same concern [14, 109]. 
The clinical laboratory staff has not willing to further study and develop Clinlabom -
ics resulting laboratory’s lack of bioinformatics professional knowledge, leading to this 
field is limited and the development slow. On the other hand, ML models rely on the 
type and quality of the data used for training, and often tend to perform better on data 
from the same cohort than on the new data. Different regions, different people, and 
even different hospitals’ laboratory equipment, and methods may result in instability in 
Clinlabomics-related diagnosis models. The development of Clinlabomics requires the 
standardization of testing methods and data for each region, each country, each species, 
and each laboratory. Biological variation data and external validation is a necessary prac -
tice in Clinlabomics evaluation [110–113]. Besides, laboratory medicine, like other areas 
of medicine, is obliged to adhere to high ethical standards [114–117]. Informed consent 
is essential to maintaining patient autonomy [118]. However, it is sometimes difficult to 
balance patient autonomy with the idea of contributing to the development of medicine 
[119]. The use of remaining or stored samples is essential for research and the develop -
ment of Clinlabomics, but it creates problems with consent. There is no doubt that this 
is a huge project for the current situation.
Discussion and conclusion
In general, routine clinical laboratory test results usually contain more information 
than is usually recognized. Even the most expert clinicians are challenged to extract 
all the information contained in routine clinical laboratory tests [60, 63]. According 
to the relevant representative research reports in this review, it is not difficult to see 
that combining AI and clinical laboratory data has been applied, including disease