Page 5 of 20
 Wen et al. BMC Bioinformatics          (2022) 23:387 
 
ISO15189 is still the internationally accepted standard that has high credibility in qual -
ity management systems for all fields of laboratory medicine [18, 19]. The standardiza -
tion of clinical laboratory test methods and the unified quality control standards make 
the clinical laboratory test results of different clinical laboratories more comparable [20]. 
A correct diagnosis and treatment decision is based on accurate clinical laboratory test 
results.
New clinical significance of traditional test items
The sensitivity and specificity of different clinical laboratory test indexes for diagnos -
ing a particular disease are different, so each item has its default clinical significance. 
In addition to the further study of various diseases and a deeper understanding of the 
physiological and pathological changes caused by diseases, some conventional clinical 
laboratory items have been found to possess more undiscovered clinical significance. 
For example, platelets were widely known to play a key role in hemostasis and throm -
bosis disorders [21, 22]. But now, it is known that platelets also contribute to immune 
and inflammatory activities in health and disease, including cancer progression [23–25]. 
For many years, prealbumin has been used as a measure of body nutritional status [26]. 
Now, the prognostic role of prealbumin in some tumor patients is recognized. A Study 
proved that for early relapse lung cancer patients, perioperative serum prealbumin lev -
els were significantly lower than those in non-recurrence lung cancer patients and the 
serum prealbumin level can be used as a biomarker to predict early recurrence of lung 
cancer [27]. Besides, serum prealbumin level has also been confirmed as an independent 
prognostic factor for the patients of postoperative esophageal squamous cell carcinoma 
[28], liver cancer[29], and gastric cancer [30]. Notably, the practical markers cannot 
be found in time during the global outbreak of Coronavirus (COVID-19) infection in 
2020. Many researchers have had to shift their focus to routine blood tests in the hope 
of finding cheap and accessible tests [31–33]. Brandon et al. found that some hemato -
logic, biochemical, and immunologic biomarkers have discriminative ability. These clini -
cal laboratory test items include interleukins 6 (IL-6) and 10 (IL-10) and serum ferritin 
which all potential aid in predicting severe and fatal COVID-19 were identified [34]. 
Moreover, other clinical studies also have shown significant changes in blood parameters 
in patients with COVID-19. These clinical laboratory items, include lactate dehydroge -
nase (LDH), white blood cell (WBC), C reactive protein (CRP), aspartate transaminase 
(AST), and alanine transaminase (ALT), which  can play a crucial role in COVID-19 
diagnosis and prognosis [35].
Clinical significance of combined blood test items
Over the past several decades, the combinations of clinical laboratory test data also have 
gradually been applied to clinical diagnosis and treatment choices. Clinical evaluations 
of disease progression have even used combinations of test items as a score. For exam -
ple, many studies found that the change of the ratio of AST/ALT is not only an item of 
hepatocyte injury but suitable for more diseases. Zhou et al. have shown that the high 
AST/ALT ratio can increase the pathogenetic risk of prostate cancer [36]. Besides, stud -
ies have reported a significant association between the pre-treatment AST/ALT ratio 
and survival in oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma patients [37], non-metastatic