Page 7 of 20
 Wen et al. BMC Bioinformatics          (2022) 23:387 
 
Clinlabomics can reduce unnecessary expenses and the time for diagnosing and treating 
clinical diseases. However, with a lack of such definitions as transcriptomics, metabo -
lomics, radiomics, and other complete keywords, many research projects cannot be 
classified very well, which does not support the development of the field. We propose 
a concept of Clinlabomics to summarize some of these studies for diagnosing, treating, 
and predicting diseases by using clinical laboratory data along with AI.
At present, using clinical laboratory testing data combined with AI to perform disease 
diagnosis, prediction, monitoring, and prognosis research is booming [62, 63]. In the 
following sections, we summarized some relevant studies obtained using Clinlabomics 
(Table 1).
The application of clinlabomics
Clinlabomics and clinical prediction
The prediction of biological aging has been widely concerned. However, there are cur -
rently no informative tests to assess the impact of smoking on biological aging rates. 
Researchers collected data from 149,000 fully anonymized individual records. They 
trained a set of supervised feed-forward deep neural networks (DNNs) on the non-
smokers to predict their chronological age. Then, they included smoking status as one of 
the input features and performed a feature importance analysis. Eventually they trained 
a set of supervised feed-forward deep neural networks to predict the smoking status of 
patients using only their sex and blood feature, including 66 kinds of blood biochem -
istry items and cell count markers. The model demonstrated that smoking accelerates 
human aging, and that smoking status could also be predicted from blood biochemical 
and cell count results. Although this blood aging clock model proved to be less accurate 
than predictors based on DNA methylation, it is cheaper and more practical, and only 
Fig. 4 The Clinlabomics workflow. Collecting blood or body fluid sample and testing. From this clinical 
laboratory data to extract the features e.g. features based on range of clinical test data from healthy or patient 
with various diseases. These features are used for analysis, e.g. the features are assessed for their diagnostic 
prognostic power or linked with stage. Ultimately, it could lead to precision medicine and personalized 
medicine