Page 10 of 20 Wen et al. BMC Bioinformatics          (2022) 23:387 
selection strategy was combined with XGBoost. Finally, they created a diabetes risk 
assessment model with high accuracy in detecting diabetes (AUC = 0.8763)[71]. This 
study result showed that the application of Clinlabomics could help the high-risk group 
take medicine or change lifestyle timely and reasonably so they can effectively reduce 
the risk of diabetes and prevent diabetes effectively. Besides, Chen developed a method 
based on a support vector machine combined with the blood routine indexes feature 
selection technique to accurately predict toxic paraquat (PQ) poisoning risk status. The 
results showed that there are significant differences in blood routine indexes between 
dead and living PQ-poisoned individuals (p value < 0.01) and the most important corre -
lated indexes are WBCs and neutrophils [72]. Therefore, the toxicity or prognosis of PQ 
poisoning can be preliminarily predicted by blood routine testing. Finally, a simple deci -
sion tree model was constructed by applying the Minimum Redundancy-Maximum Rel -
evance feature selection method to the 235 patients’ data (89 benign ovarian tumors and 
146 ovarian cancer samples). The results demonstrated that the decision tree model had 
strong predictive power for distinguishing ovarian cancer from benign ovarian tumors, 
and human epididymis protein 4 (HE4) and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) were val -
uable markers for ovarian cancer prediction [73]. Clinlabomics has good potential for 
providing predictive models for complex diseases, using the cheaper and more practical 
standard blood tests to support some clinical predictions.
Clinlabomics and clinical diseases diagnosis
Clinlabomics not only plays a great role in clinical prediction, but also plays a significant 
role in clinical diagnosis. Recently, the research on the application of Clinlabomics in the 
diagnosis of clinical diseases has gradually increased. Muhsen summarized the applica -
tion of ML in the field of hematology diagnosis, including Clinlabomics [74]. Azarkh -
ish developed an artificial neural network (ANN) and an adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference 
system (ANFIS) to diagnose iron deficiency anemia (IDA) and to predict serum iron 
levels based on four accessible laboratory data (Mean corpuscular volume (MCV), 
Mean corpuscular hemoglobin (MCH), Mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration 
(MCHC), Hemoglobin /red-blood-cell (Hb/RBC)) [75]. The ANN was the best model 
for diagnosing IDA with an accuracy of 97% for patients with IDA and 96% for patients 
without it.
Zhan used 14 routine blood test data (basophil count, eosinophil count, lymphocyte 
ratio, lymphocyte count, mean corpuscular hemoglobin, mean corpuscular hemoglobin 
concentration, monocyte ratio, monocyte count, mean platelet volume, platelet distribu -
tion width, platelet count, red blood cell count, red blood cell distribution width, and 
white blood cell count) from healthy individuals to construct a Mahalanobis space (MS). 
To ensure the efficiency of MS, they calculated Mahalanobis distances of blood data 
from 355 asthma patients and 1480 healthy individuals. Orthogonal arrays and signal-
to-noise ratios were used to optimize blood biomarker variables the receiver operat -
ing characteristic (ROC) curve was used to determine the threshold value. Ultimately 
Mahalanobis-Taguchi system (MTS) correctly classified 94.15% of patients. In addition, 
97.20% of healthy individuals were correctly classified [76]. Due to there being no gold 
standard for asthma diagnosis currently, we can see that the use of Clinlabomics offers 
the potential to simplify diagnostic complexity and optimize clinical efficiency.