Phasic Policy Gradient
Figure 7. A comparison between the default implementation of
PPG which trains two separate networks, and a single-network
variant that mimics the same training dynamics by detaching the
gradient when necessary. PPO shown for reference.
auxiliary phase. We note that our implementation of Single-
Network PPG has a similar wall-clock training time to PPO,
while the wall-clock training time for PPG is roughly twice
as long.
4. Related Work
Igl et al. (2020 ) recently proposed Iterative Relearning
(ITER) to reduce the impact of non-stationarity during RL
training. ITER and PPG share a striking similarity: both
algorithms alternate between a standard RL phase and a
distillation phase. However, the nature and purpose of the
distillation phase varies. In ITER, the policy and value func-
tion teachers are periodically distilled into newly initialized
student networks, in an effort to improve generalization. In
PPG, the value function network is periodically distilled
into the policy network, in an effort to improve sample
efﬁciency.
Bejjani et al. (2021 ) used an objective similar to Ljointto
perform additional value function training with a shared
network architecture, in order to train a more accurate value
function baseline while minimizing interference with the
policy. In PPG, we further emphasize the usefulness of this
value function training as an auxiliary task, and we show that
it is best to optimize this objective relatively infrequently,
for the sake of stability.Other prior work has considered the role the value function
plays as an auxiliary task. Bellemare et al. (2019 ) investigate
using value functions to train useful representations, speciﬁ-
cally focusing on a special class of value functions called
Adversarial Value Functions (A VFs). They ﬁnd that A VFs
provide a useful auxiliary objective in the four-room domain.
Lyle et al. (2019 ) suggest that the beneﬁts of distributional
RL ( Bellemare et al. ,2017 ) can perhaps be attributed to
the rich signal the value function distribution provides as
an auxiliary task. We ﬁnd that the representation learning
performed by the value function is indeed critical in Procgen
environments, although we consider only the value function
of the current policy, and we do not model the full value
distribution.
Off-policy algorithms like Soft Actor-Critic (SAC)
(Haarnoja et al. ,2018 ), Deep Deterministic Policy Gradi-
ent (DDPG) ( Lillicrap et al. ,2015 ), and Actor-Critic with
Experience Replay (ACER) ( Wang et al. ,2016 ) all employ
replay buffers to improve sample efﬁciency via off-policy
updates. PPG also utilizes a replay buffer, speciﬁcally when
performing updates during the auxiliary phase. However,
unlike these algorithms, PPG does not attempt to improve
the policy from off-policy data. Rather, this replay buffer
data is used only to better ﬁt the value targets and to better
train features for the policy. SAC also notably uses separate
policy and value function networks, presumably, like PPG,
to avoid interference between their respective objectives.
Although we use the clipped surrogate objective from PPO
(Schulman et al. ,2017 ) throughout this work, PPG is in
principle compatible with the policy objectives from any
actor-critic algorithm. Andrychowicz et al. (2020 ) recently
performed a rigorous empirical comparison of many rele-
vant algorithms in the on-policy setting. In particular, AWR
(Peng et al. ,2019 ) and V-MPO ( Song et al. ,2019 ) propose
alternate policy objectives that move the current policy to-
wards one which weights the likelihood of each action by
the exponentiated advantage of that action. Such objectives
could be used in PPG, in place of the PPO objective.
There are also several trust region methods, similar in spirit
to PPO, that would be compatible with PPG. Trust Region
Policy Optimization (TRPO) ( Schulman et al. ,2015a ) pro-
posed performing policy updates by optimizing a surrogate
objective, whose gradient is the policy gradient estimator,
subject to a constraint on the KL-divergence between the
original policy and the updated policy. Actor Critic us-
ing Kronecker-Factored Trust Region (ACKTR) ( Wu et al. ,
2017 ) uses Kronecker-factored approximated curvature (K-
FAC) to perform a similar trust region update, but with
a computational cost comparable to SGD. Both methods
could be used in the PPG framework.