Phasic Policy Gradient
Karl Cobbe1Jacob Hilton1Oleg Klimov1John Schulman1
Abstract
We introduce Phasic Policy Gradient (PPG), a re-
inforcement learning framework which modiﬁes
traditional on-policy actor-critic methods by sepa-
rating policy and value function training into dis-
tinct phases. In prior methods, one must choose
between using a shared network or separate net-
works to represent the policy and value function.
Using separate networks avoids interference be-
tween objectives, while using a shared network
allows useful features to be shared. PPG is able
to achieve the best of both worlds by splitting
optimization into two phases, one that advances
training and one that distills features. PPG also en-
ables the value function to be more aggressively
optimized with a higher level of sample reuse.
Compared to PPO, we ﬁnd that PPG signiﬁcantly
improves sample efﬁciency on the challenging
Procgen Benchmark.
1. Introduction
Model free reinforcement learning (RL) has enjoyed remark-
able success in recent years, achieving impressive results
in diverse domains including DoTA ( OpenAI et al. ,2019b ),
Starcraft II ( Vinyals et al. ,2019 ), and robotic control ( Ope-
nAI et al. ,2019a ). Although policy gradient methods like
PPO ( Schulman et al. ,2017 ), A3C ( Mnih et al. ,2016 ), and
IMPALA ( Espeholt et al. ,2018 ) are behind some of the most
high proﬁle results, many related algorithms have proposed
a variety of policy objectives ( Schulman et al. ,2015a ;Wu
et al. ,2017 ;Peng et al. ,2019 ;Song et al. ,2019 ;Lillicrap
et al.,2015 ;Haarnoja et al. ,2018 ). All of these algorithms
fundamentally rely on the actor-critic framework, with two
key quantities driving learning: the policy and the value
function. In practice, whether or not to share parameters
between the policy and the value function networks is an im-
portant implementation decision. There is a clear advantage
to sharing parameters: features trained by each objective
1OpenAI, San Francisco, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Karl
Cobbe <karl@openai.com >.
Proceedings of the 38thInternational Conference on Machine
Learning , PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).can be used to better optimize the other.
However, there are also disadvantages to sharing network
parameters. First, it is not clear how to appropriately balance
the competing objectives of the policy and the value function.
Any method that jointly optimizes these two objectives with
the same network must assign a relative weight to each.
Regardless of how well this hyperparameter is chosen, there
is a risk that the optimization of one objective will interfere
with the optimization of the other. Second, the use of a
shared network all but requires the policy and value function
objectives to be trained with the same data, and consequently
the same level of sample reuse. This is an artiﬁcial and
undesirable restriction.
We address these problems with Phasic Policy Gradient
(PPG), an algorithm which preserves the feature sharing
between the policy and value function, while otherwise de-
coupling their training. PPG operates in two alternating
phases: the ﬁrst phase trains the policy, and the second
phase distills useful features from the value function. More
generally, PPG can be used to perform any auxiliary opti-
mization alongside RL, though in this work we take value
function error to be the sole auxiliary objective. Using PPG,
we highlight two important observations about on-policy
actor-critic methods:
•Interference between policy and value function op-
timization can negatively impact performance when
parameters are shared between the policy and the value
function networks.
•Value function optimization often tolerates a signiﬁ-
cantly higher level of sample reuse than policy opti-
mization.
By mitigating the interference between the policy and value
function objectives while still sharing representations, and
by optimizing each with the appropriate level of sample
reuse, PPG signiﬁcantly improves sample efﬁciency.
2. Algorithm
In PPG, training proceeds in two alternating phases: the
policy phase , followed by the auxiliary phase . During the
policy phase, we train the agent with Proximal Policy Opti-