Phasic Policy Gradient
Figure 2. Sample efﬁciency of PPG compared to a PPO baseline. Mean and standard deviation shown across 3 runs.
increase sample reuse for value function training. For a
detailed discussion on the relationship between Eauxand
EV, see Appendix C. Default values for all hyperparameters
can be found in Appendix A. Code for PPG can be found at
https://github.com/openai/phasic-policy-gradient .
3. Experiments
We report results on the environments in Procgen Bench-
mark ( Cobbe et al. ,2019 ). This benchmark was designed
to be highly diverse, and we expect improvements on this
benchmark to transfer well to many other RL environments.
In each Procgen environment, we train and evaluate agents
on the full distribution of levels. Throughout all experi-
ments, we use the hyperparameters found in Appendix A
unless otherwise speciﬁed. When feasible, we compute and
visualize the standard deviation across 3 separate runs. Each
experiment required between 10 and 50 GPU-hours per run
per environment, depending on hyperparameters.
3.1. Comparison to PPO
We begin by comparing our implementation of PPG to
the highly tuned implementation of PPO from Cobbe et al.
(2019 ). We note that this implementation of PPO uses a near
optimal level of sample reuse and a near optimal relativeweight for the value and policy losses, as determined by
a hyperparameter sweep. Results are shown in Figure 2.
We can see that PPG achieves signiﬁcantly better sample
efﬁciency than PPO in nearly every environment.
We have noticed that the importance of representation shar-
ing between the policy and value function does seem to
vary between environments. While it is critical to share
parameters between the policy and the value function in
Procgen environments (see Appendix B), this is often un-
necessary in environments with a lower dimensional input
space ( Haarnoja et al. ,2018 ). We conjecture that the high
dimensional input space in Procgen contributes to the impor-
tance of sharing representations between the policy and the
value function. We therefore believe it is in environments
such as these, particularly those with vision-based observa-
tions, that PPG is most likely to outperform PPO and other
similar algorithms.
3.2. Policy Sample Reuse
In PPO, choosing the optimal level of sample reuse is not
straightforward. Increasing sample reuse in PPO implies per-
forming both additional policy optimization and additional
value function optimization. This leads to an undesirable
confounding of effects, making it harder to analyze the im-
pact of policy sample reuse alone. Empirically, we ﬁnd that