Phasic Policy Gradient
Figure 3. Performance with varying levels of policy sample reuse
performing 3 epochs per rollout is best in PPO, given our
other hyperparameter settings (see Appendix D).
In PPG, policy and value function training are decoupled,
and we can train each with different levels of sample reuse.
In order to better understand the impact of policy sample
reuse, we choose to vary the number of policy epochs ( E⇡)
without changing the number of value function epochs ( EV).
Results are shown in Figure 3.
As we can see, training with a single policy epoch is almost
always optimal or near-optimal in PPG. This suggests that
the PPO baseline beneﬁts from greater sample reuse only
because the extra epochs offer additional value function
training. When value function and policy training are prop-
erly isolated, we see little beneﬁt from training the policy
beyond a single epoch. Of course, various hyperparame-
ters will inﬂuence this result. If we use an artiﬁcially low
learning rate, for instance, it will become advantageous to
increase policy sample reuse. Our present conclusion is
simply that when using well-tuned hyperparameters, per-
forming a single policy epoch is near-optimal.
3.3. Value Sample Reuse
We now evaluate how performing additional epochs during
the auxiliary phase impacts performance. We expect there
to be a trade-off: using too many epochs runs the risk of
overﬁtting to recent data, while using fewer epochs will lead
to slower training. We vary the number of auxiliary epochs
Figure 4. Performance with varying levels of value function sample
reuse
(Eaux) from 1to9and report results in Figure 4.
We ﬁnd that training with additional auxiliary epochs is
generally beneﬁcial, with performance tapering off around
6 auxiliary epochs. We note that training with additional
auxiliary epochs offers two possible beneﬁts. First, due to
the optimization of Ljoint, we may expect better-trained
features to be shared with the policy. Second, due to the op-
timization of Lvalue, we may expect to train a more accurate
value function, thereby reducing the variance of the policy
gradient in future policy phases. In general, which beneﬁt is
more signiﬁcant is likely to vary between environments. In
Procgen environments, the feature sharing between policy
and value networks appears to play the more critical role.
For a more detailed discussion of the relationship between
these two objectives, see Appendix C.
3.4. Auxiliary Phase Frequency
We next investigate alternating between policy and auxiliary
phases at different frequencies, controlled by the hyperpa-
rameter N⇡. As described in Section 2, we perform each
auxiliary phase after every N⇡policy updates. We vary this
hyperparameter from 2to32and report results in Figure 5.
It is clear that performance suffers when we perform auxil-
iary phases too frequently. We conjecture that each auxiliary
phase interferes with policy optimization, and that perform-
ing frequent auxiliary phases exacerbates this effect. It’s
possible that future research will uncover more clever opti-