ZHANG et al. : A SURVEY ON NEURAL NETWORK INTERPRETABILITY 5
interpretability . And if a rule set or decision tree is extracted
from the original network, it explains the general function of
the whole network and thus provides global interpretability .
(Row 2) When it comes to explaining the hidden semantics , a
typical example ( global ) is to visualize what pattern a hidden
neuron is mostly sensitive to. This can then provide clues about
the inner workings of the network. We can also take a more
pro-active approach to make hidden neurons more interpretable.
As a high-layer hidden neuron may learn a mixture of patterns
that can be hard to interpret, Zhang et al. [70] introduced a
loss term that makes high-layer ﬁlters either produce consistent
activation maps (among different inputs) or keep inactive (when
not seeing a certain pattern). Experiments show that those
ﬁlters are more interpretable (e.g., a ﬁlter may be found to be
activated by the head parts of animals). (Row 3) Attribution as
explanation usually provides local interpretability . Thinking
about an animal classiﬁcation task, input features are all the
pixels of the input image. Attribution allows people to see
which regions (pixels) of the image contribute the most to
the classiﬁcation result. The attribution can be computed e.g.,
by sensitivity analysis in terms of the input features (i.e. all
pixels) or some variants [71], [72]. For attribution for global
interpretability , deep neural networks usually cannot have as
straightforward attribution as e.g., coefﬁcients win linear
modelsy=w>x+b, which directly show the importance of
features globally. Instead of concentrating on input features
(pixels), Kim et al. [63] were interested in attribution to a
“concept” (e.g., how sensitive is a prediction of zebra to the
presence of stripes). The concept (stripes) is represented by
the normal vector to the plane which separates having-stripes
and non-stripes training examples in the space of network’s
hidden layer. It is therefore possible to compute how sensitive
the prediction (of zebra) is to the concept (presence of stripes)
and thus have some form of global interpretability. (Row 4)
Sometimes researchers explain network prediction by showing
other known examples providing similar network functionality.
To explain a single input x(i)(local interpretability ), we can
ﬁnd an example which is most similar to x(i)in the network’s
hidden layer level. This selection of explanation examples
can also be done by testing how much the prediction of x(i)
will be affected if a certain example is removed from the
training set [73]. To provide global interpretability by showing
examples , a method is adding a (learnable) prototype layer to
a network. The prototype layer forces the network to make
predictions according to the proximity between input and the
learned prototypes. Those learned and interpretable prototypes
can help to explain the network’s overall function.
With the three dimensions introduced above, we can visualize
the distribution of the existing interpretability papers in a 3D
view (Figure 2 only provides a 2D snapshot, we encourage
readers to visit the online interactive version for better presen-
tation). Table III is another representation of all the reviewed
interpretability approaches which is good for quick navigation.
In the following the sections, we will scan through Table III
along each dimension. The ﬁrst dimension results in two
sections, passive methods (Section III) and active methods
(Section IV). We then expand each section to several subsec-
tions according to the second dimension (type of explanation).
Fig. 2. The distribution of the interpretability papers in the 3D space of
our taxonomy. We can rotate and observe the density of work in certain
areas/planes and ﬁnd the missing parts of interpretability research. (See https:
//yzhang-gh.github.io/tmp-data/index.html)
Under each subsection, we introduce (semi-)local vs. global
interpretability methods respectively.
III. P ASSIVE INTERPRETATION OF TRAINED NETWORKS
Most of the existing network interpreting methods are passive
methods. They try to understand the already trained networks.
We now introduce these methods according to their types of
produced explanations (i.e. the second dimension).
A. Passive, Rule as Explanation
Logic rules are commonly acknowledged to be interpretable
and have a long history of research. Thus rule extraction is
an appealing approach to interpret neural networks. In most
cases, rule extraction methods provide global explanations as
they only extract a single rule set or decision tree from the
target model. There are only a few methods producing (semi-
)local rule-form explanations which we will introduce below
(Section III-A 1), followed are global methods (Section III-A 2).
Another thing to note is that although the rules and decision
trees (and their extraction methods) can be quite different, we
do not explicitly differentiate them here as they provide similar
explanations (a decision tree can be ﬂattened to a decision rule
set). A basic form of a rule is
IfP, thenQ:
wherePis called the antecedent, and Qis called the
consequent, which in our context is the prediction (e.g., class
label) of a network. Pis usually a combination of conditions
on several input features. For complex models, the explanation
rules can be of other forms such as the propositional rule,
ﬁrst-order rule or fuzzy rule.
1) Passive, Rule as Explanation, (Semi-)local :According
to our taxonomy, methods in this category focus on a trained
neural network and a certain input (or a small group of inputs),
and produce a logic rule as an explanation. Dhurandhar et
al. [69] construct local rule explanations by ﬁnding out features