ZHANG et al. : A SURVEY ON NEURAL NETWORK INTERPRETABILITY 13
Besides performing attribution on individual input ( locally
in input space), Dual-net [122] was proposed to decide feature
importance population-wise, i.e., ﬁnding an ‘optimal’ feature
subset collectively for an input population. In this method,
aselector network is used to generate an optimal feature
subset, while an operator network makes predictions based
on that feature set. These two networks are trained jointly.
After training, the selector network can be used to rank feature
importance.
D. Active, Explanations by Prototypes (global)
Li et al. [76] incorporated a prototype layer to a network
(speciﬁcally, an autoencoder). The network acts like a pro-
totype classiﬁer, where predictions are made according to
the proximity between (the encoded) inputs and the learned
prototypes. Besides the cross-entropy loss and the (autoencoder)
reconstruction error, they also included two interpretability
regularization terms, encouraging every prototype to be similar
to at least one encoded input, vice versa. After the network is
trained, those prototypes can be naturally used as explanations.
Chen et al. [123] add a prototype layer to a regular CNN rather
than an autoencoder. This prototype layer contains prototypes
that are encouraged to resemble parts of an input. When asked
for explanations, the network can provide several prototypes
for different parts of the input image respectively.
V. E VALUATION OF INTERPRETABILITY
In general, interpretability is hard to evaluate objectively as
the end-tasks can be quite divergent and may require domain
knowledge from experts [58]. Doshi-Velez and Kim [18]
proposed three evaluation approaches: application-grounded,
human-grounded, and functionally-grounded. The ﬁrst one
measures to what extent interpretability helps the end-task
(e.g., better identiﬁcation of errors or less discrimination).
Human-grounded approaches are, for example, directly letting
people evaluate the quality of explanations with human-subject
experiments (e.g., let a user choose which explanation is of
the highest quality among several explanations). Functionally-
grounded methods ﬁnd proxies for the explanation quality (e.g.,
sparsity). The last kind of approaches require no costly human
experiments but how to properly determine the proxy is a
challenge.
In our taxonomy, explanations are divided into different types.
Although the interpretability can hardly be compared between
different types of explanations, there are some measurements
proposed for this purpose. For logic rules and decision trees,
the size of the extracted rule model is often used as a
criterion [85], [119], [127] (e.g., the number of rules, the
number of antecedents per rule, the depth of the decision
tree etc.). Strictly speaking, these criteria measure more about
whether the explanations are efﬁciently interpretable. Hidden
semantics approaches produce explanations on certain hidden
units in the network. Network Dissection [21] quantiﬁes the
interpretability of hidden units by calculating their matchiness
to certain concepts. As for the hidden unit visualization
approaches, there is no a good measurement yet. For attribution
approaches, their explanations are saliency maps/masks (orfeature importance etc. according to the speciﬁc task). Samek et
al. [149] evaluate saliency maps by the performance degradation
if the input image is partially masked with noise in an order
from salient to not salient patches. A similar evaluation method
is proposed in [75] and Hooker et al. [150] suggest using
a ﬁxed uninformative value rather than noise as the mask
and evaluating performance degradation on a retrained model.
Samek et al. also use entropy as another measure in the belief
that good saliency maps focus on relevant regions and do not
contain much irrelevant information and noise. Montavon et
al. [58] would like the explanation function (which maps an
input to a saliency map) to be continuous/smooth, which means
the explanations (saliency maps) should not vary too much
when seeing similar inputs.
VI. D ISCUSSION
In practice, different interpretation methods have their own
advantages and disadvantages. Passive (post-hoc) methods have
been widely studied because they can be applied in a relatively
straightforward manner to most existing networks. One can
choose methods that make use of a network’s inner information
(such as connection weights, gradients), which are usually
more efﬁcient (e.g., see Paragraph III-C 1a). Otherwise there
are also model-agnostic methods that have no requirement of
the model architecture, which usually compute the marginal
effect of a certain input feature. But this generality is also a
downside of passive methods, especially because there is no
easy way to incorporate speciﬁc domain knowledge/priors.
Active (interpretability intervention) methods put forward
ideas about how a network should be optimized to gain
interpretability. The network can be optimized to be easily
ﬁt by a decision tree, or to have preferred feature attribution,
better tailored to a target task. However, the other side of the
coin is that such active intervention requires the compatibility
between networks and interpretation methods.
As for the second dimension, the format of explanations,
logical rules are the most clear (do not need further human
interpretation). However, one should carefully control the
complexity of the explanations (e.g., the depth of a decision
tree), otherwise the explanations will not be useful in practice.
Hidden semantics essentially explain a subpart of a network,
with most work developed in the computer vision ﬁeld.
Attribution is very suitable for explaining individual inputs.
But it is usually hard to get some overall understanding about
the network from attribution (compared to, e.g., logical rules).
Explaining by providing an example has the lowest (the most
implicit) explanatory power.
As for the last dimension, local explanations are more useful
when we care more about every single prediction (e.g., a credit
or insurance risk assessment). For some research ﬁelds, such
as genomics and astronomy, global explanations are more
preferred as they may reveal some general “knowledge”. Note,
however, there is no hard line separating local and global
interpretability. With the help of explanation fusing methods
(e.g., MAME), we can obtain multilevel (from local to global)
explanations.