8 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON XXXX, VOL. X, NO. X, MM YYYY
One of the earliest methods is the KT algorithm [81]. KT
algorithm ﬁrst divides the input attributes into two groups,
pos-atts (short for positive attributes) and neg-atts, according to
the signs of their corresponding weights. Assuming activation
function is sigmoid, all the neurons are booleanized to true
(if close enough to 1) or false (close to 0). Then, all
combinations of pos-atts are selected if the combination can on
its own make ybetrue (larger than a pre-deﬁned threshold 
without considering the neg-atts), for instance, a combination
fx1;x3gand(P
i2f1;3gwixi+b)>. Finally, it takes into
account the neg-atts. For each above pos-atts combination, it
ﬁnds combinations of neg-atts (e.g., fx2;x5g) that when absent
the output calculated from the selected pos-atts and unselected
neg-atts is still true . In other words, (P
i2Iwixi+b)>,
whereI=fx1;x3g[f neg-attsgnfx2;x5g. The extracted
rule can then be formed from the combination Iand has the
output class 1. In our example, the translated rule is
Ifx1(istrue )^x3^:x2^:x5;theny= 1:
Similarly, this algorithm can generate rules for class 0(search-
ing neg-atts ﬁrst and then adding pos-atts). To apply to the
multi-layer network situation, it ﬁrst does layer-by-layer rule
generation and then rewrites them to omit the hidden neurons.
In terms of the complexity, KT algorithm reduces the search
space toO(2n)by distinguishing pos-atts and neg-atts (pos-
atts will be either true or absent, and neg-atts will be either
false or absent). It also limits the number of attributes
in the antecedent, which can further decrease the algorithm
complexity (with the risk of missing some rules).
Towell and Shavlik [82] focus on another kind of rules of
“M-of-N” style. This kind of rule de-emphasizes the individual
importance of input attributes, which has the form
IfMof theseNexpressions are true;thenQ:
This algorithm has two salient characteristics. The ﬁrst one
is link (weight) clustering and reassigning them the average
weight within the cluster. Another characteristic is network
simplifying (eliminating unimportant clusters) and re-training.
Comparing with the exponential complexity of subset searching
algorithm,M-of-Nmethod is approximately cubic because of
its special rule form.
NeuroRule [83] introduced a three-step procedure of ex-
tracting rules: (1) train the network and prune, (2) discretize
(cluster) the activation values of the hidden neurons, (3) extract
the rules layer-wise and rewrite (similar as previous methods).
NeuroLinear [84] made a little change to the NeuroRule method,
allowing neural networks to have continuous input. Andrews
et al. [126] and Tickle et al. [127] provide a good summary
of the rule extraction techniques before 1998.
b) Pedagogical approaches: By treating the neural net-
work as a black-box, pedagogical methods (or hybrids of
both) directly learn rules from the examples generated by
the network. It is essentially reduced to a traditional rule
learning or decision tree learning problem. For rule set learning,
we have sequential covering framework (i.e. to learn rules
one by one). And for decision tree, there are many classic
algorithms like CART [128] and C4.5 [129]. Example work ofdecision tree extraction (from neural networks) can be found
in references [89]–[91].
Odajima et al. [85] followed the framework of NeuroLinear
but use a greedy form of sequential covering algorithm to
extract rules. It is reported to be able to extract more concise
and precise rules. Gyan method [86] goes further than extracting
propositional rules. After obtaining the propositional rules by
the above methods, Gyan uses the Least General Generalization
(LGG [130]) method to generate ﬁrst-order logic rules from
them. There are also some approaches attempting to extract
fuzzy logic from trained neural networks [87], [88], [131]. The
major difference is the introduction of the membership function
of linguistic terms. An example rule is
If(x1=high )^:::;theny=class1:
where high is a fuzzy term expressed as a fuzzy set over the
numbers.
Most of the above “Rule as Explanation, Global” methods
were developed in the early stage of neural network research,
and usually were only applied to relatively small datasets
(e.g., the Iris dataset, the Wine dataset from the UCI Machine
Learning Repository). However, as neural networks get deeper
and deeper in recent applications, it is unlikely for a single
decision tree to faithfully approximate the behaviour of deep
networks. We can see that more recent “Rule as Explanation”
methods turn to local or semi-local interpretability [80], [118].
B. Passive, Hidden Semantics as Explanation
The second typical kind of explanations is the meaning
of hidden neurons or layers. Similar to the grandmother cell
hypothesis3in neuroscience, it is driven by a desire to associate
abstract concepts with the activation of some hidden neurons.
Taking animal classiﬁcation as an example, some neurons may
have high response to the head of an animal while others
neurons may look for bodies, feet or other parts. This kind of
explanations by deﬁnition provides global interpretability.
1) Passive, Hidden Semantics as Explanation, Global :
Existing hidden semantics interpretation methods mainly focus
on the computer vision ﬁeld. The most direct way is to show
what the neuron is “looking for”, i.e. visualization. The key to
visualization is to ﬁnd a representative input that can maximize
the activation of a certain neuron, channel or layer, which
is usually called activation maximization [93]. This is an
optimization problem, whose search space is the potentially
huge input (sample) space. Assuming we have a network
taking as input a 2828pixels black and white image (as
in the MNIST handwritten digit dataset), there will be 22828
possible input images, although most of them are probably
nonsensical. In practice, although we can ﬁnd a maximum
activation input image with optimization, it will likely be
unrealistic and uninterpretable. This situation can be helped
with some regularization techniques or priors.
We now give an overview over these techniques. The
framework of activation maximization was introduced by Erhan
et al. [93] (although it was used in the unsupervised deep
3https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Grandmother cell