2 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON XXXX, VOL. X, NO. X, MM YYYY
TABLE I
SOME INTERPRETABLE “TERMS ”USED IN PRACTICE .
Field Raw input Understandable terms
Computer vision Images (pixels)Super pixels (image patches)a
Visual conceptsb
NLP Word embeddings Words
Bioinformatics Sequences Motifs (position weight matrix)c
aimage patches are usually used in attribution methods [20].
bcolours, materials, textures, parts, objects and scenes [21].
cproposed by [22] and became an essential tool for computational motif
discovery.
Our deﬁnition enables new perspectives on the interpretabil-
ity research: (1)We highlight the form of explanations rather
than particular explanators . After all, explanations are expressed
in a certain “language”, be it natural language, logic rules
or something else. Recently, a strong preference has been
expressed for the language of explanations to be as close as
possible to logic [19]. In practice, people do not always require
a full “sentence”, which allows various kinds of explanations
(rules, saliency masks etc.). This is an important angle to
categorize the approaches in the existing literature. (2)Domain
knowledge is the basic unit in the construction of explanations.
As deep learning has shown its ability to process data in the raw
form, it becomes harder for people to interpret the model with
its original input representation. With more domain knowledge,
we can get more understandable representations that can be
evaluated by domain experts. Table I lists several commonly
used representations in different tasks.
We note that some studies distinguish between interpretabil-
ityandexplainability (orunderstandability ,comprehensibility ,
transparency ,human-simulatability etc. [17], [23]). In this
paper we do not emphasize the subtle differences among those
terms. As deﬁned above, we see explanations as the core
of interpretability and use interpretability, explainability and
understandability interchangeably. Speciﬁcally, we focus on
the interpretability of (deep) neural networks (rarely recurrent
neural networks), which aims to provide explanations of their
inner workings and input-output mappings. There are also
some interpretability studies about the Generative Adversarial
Networks (GANs). However, as a kind of generative models,
it is slightly different from common neural networks used as
discriminative models. For this topic, we would like to refer
readers to the latest work [24]–[29], many of which share the
similar ideas with the “hidden semantics” part of this paper (see
Section II), trying to interpret the meaning of hidden neurons
or the latent space.
Under our deﬁnition, the source code of Linux operating
system is interpretable although it might be overwhelming for
a developer. A deep decision tree or a high-dimensional linear
model (on top of interpretable input representations) are also
interpretable. One may argue that they are not simulatable [17]
(i.e. a human is able to simulate the model’s processing from
input to output in his/her mind in a short time). We claim,
however, they are still interpretable.
Besides above conﬁned scope of interpretability (of a trained
neural network), there is a much broader ﬁeld of understandingthe general neural network methodology, which cannot be
covered by this paper. For example, the empirical success of
DNNs raises many unsolved questions to theoreticians [30].
What are the merits (or inductive bias) of DNN architec-
tures [31], [32]? What are the properties of DNNs’ loss
surface/critical points [33]–[36]? Why DNNs generalizes so
well with just simple regularization [37]–[39]? What about
DNNs’ robustness/stability [40]–[45]? There are also studies
about how to generate adversarial examples [46], [47] and
detect adversarial inputs [48].
B. The Importance of Interpretability
The need for interpretability has already been stressed by
many papers [17], [18], [49], emphasizing cases where lack of
interpretability may be harmful. However, a clearly organized
exposition of such argumentation is missing. We summarize
the arguments for the importance of interpretability into three
groups.
1) High Reliability Requirement: Although deep networks
have shown great performance on some relatively large test
sets, the real world environment is still much more complex.
As some unexpected failures are inevitable, we need some
means of making sure we are still in control. Deep neural
networks do not provide such an option. In practice, they have
often been observed to have unexpected performance drop in
certain situations, not to mention the potential attacks from the
adversarial examples [50], [51].
Interpretability is not always needed but it is important
for some prediction systems that are required to be highly
reliable because an error may cause catastrophic results (e.g.,
human lives, heavy ﬁnancial loss). Interpretability can make
potential failures easier to detect (with the help of domain
knowledge), avoiding severe consequences. Moreover, it can
help engineers pinpoint the root cause and provide a ﬁx
accordingly. Interpretability does not make a model more
reliable or its performance better, but it is an important part
of formulation of a highly reliable system.
2) Ethical and Legal Requirement: A ﬁrst requirement is to
avoid algorithmic discrimination. Due to the nature of machine
learning techniques, a trained deep neural network may inherit
the bias in the training set, which is sometimes hard to notice.
There is a concern of fairness when DNNs are used in our daily
life, for instance, mortgage qualiﬁcation, credit and insurance
risk assessments.
Deep neural networks have also been used for new drug
discovery and design [52]. The computational drug design ﬁeld
was dominated by conventional machine learning methods such
as random forests and generalized additive models, partially
because of their efﬁcient learning algorithms at that time,
and also because a domain chemical interpretation is possible.
Interpretability is also needed for a new drug to get approved by
the regulator, such as the Food and Drug Administration (FDA).
Besides the clinical test results, the biological mechanism
underpinning the results is usually required. The same goes
for medical devices.
Another legal requirement of interpretability is the “right to
explanation” [53]. According to the EU General Data Protection