ZHANG et al. : A SURVEY ON NEURAL NETWORK INTERPRETABILITY 17
[133] A. Radford, L. Metz, and S. Chintala, “Unsupervised representation
learning with deep convolutional generative adversarial networks,” ICLR ,
2016.
[134] C. Ledig, L. Theis, F. Husz ´ar, J. Caballero, A. Cunningham, A. Acosta,
A. Aitken, A. Tejani, J. Totz, Z. Wang et al. , “Photo-realistic single
image super-resolution using a generative adversarial network,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition , 2017.
[135] T. Minematsu, A. Shimada, and R.-i. Taniguchi, “Analytics of deep
neural network in change detection,” in 2017 14th IEEE International
Conference on Advanced Video and Signal Based Surveillance (AVSS) ,
2017.
[136] T. Minematsu, A. Shimada, H. Uchiyama, and R.-i. Taniguchi, “Ana-
lytics of deep neural network-based background subtraction,” Journal
of Imaging , 2018.
[137] D. Baehrens, T. Schroeter, S. Harmeling, M. Kawanabe, K. Hansen,
and K.-R. M ˜Aˇzller, “How to explain individual classiﬁcation decisions,”
Journal of Machine Learning Research , vol. 11, 2010.
[138] B. Zhou, A. Khosla, A. Lapedriza, A. Oliva, and A. Torralba, “Learning
deep features for discriminative localization,” in Proceedings of the
IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , 2016.
[139] M. Ancona, E. Ceolini, C. ¨Oztireli, and M. Gross, “Towards better
understanding of gradient-based attribution methods for deep neural
networks,” in International Conference on Learning Representations ,
2018.
[140] A. Ghorbani, A. Abid, and J. Zou, “Interpretation of neural networks is
fragile,” in Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence ,
vol. 33, 2019.
[141] A.-K. Dombrowski, M. Alber, C. Anders, M. Ackermann, K.-R. M ¨uller,
and P. Kessel, “Explanations can be manipulated and geometry is to
blame,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol. 32,
2019.
[142] J. Heo, S. Joo, and T. Moon, “Fooling neural network interpretations
via adversarial model manipulation,” in Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems , 2019.
[143] P.-J. Kindermans, S. Hooker, J. Adebayo, M. Alber, K. T. Sch ¨utt,
S. D ¨ahne, D. Erhan, and B. Kim, “The (un)reliability of saliency
methods,” in Explainable AI: Interpreting, Explaining and Visualizing
Deep Learning , 2019.
[144] T. Mikolov, I. Sutskever, K. Chen, G. S. Corrado, and J. Dean, “Dis-
tributed representations of words and phrases and their compositionality,”
inAdvances in neural information processing systems , 2013.
[145] L. S. Shapley, “A value for n-person games,” Contributions to the
Theory of Games , vol. 2, 1953.
[146] R. Caruana, H. Kangarloo, J. Dionisio, U. Sinha, and D. Johnson, “Case-
based explanation of non-case-based learning methods.” in Proceedings
of the AMIA Symposium , 1999, p. 212.
[147] J. Bien, R. Tibshirani et al. , “Prototype selection for interpretable
classiﬁcation,” The Annals of Applied Statistics , vol. 5, 2011.
[148] B. Zhou, D. Bau, A. Oliva, and A. Torralba, “Interpreting deep visual
representations via network dissection,” IEEE Transactions on Pattern
Analysis and Machine Intelligence , 2018.
[149] W. Samek, A. Binder, G. Montavon, S. Lapuschkin, and K.-R. M ¨uller,
“Evaluating the visualization of what a deep neural network has learned,”
IEEE transactions on neural networks and learning systems , vol. 28,
2016.
[150] S. Hooker, D. Erhan, P.-J. Kindermans, and B. Kim, “A benchmark
for interpretability methods in deep neural networks,” in Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems , 2019.
Yu Zhang received the B.Eng. degree from the
Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
Southern University of Science and Technology,
China, in 2017. He is currently pursuing the Ph.D.
degree in the Department of Computer Science
and Engineering, Southern University of Science
and Technology, jointly with the School of Com-
puter Science, University of Birmingham, Edgbaston,
Birmingham, UK. His current research interest is
interpretable machine learning.
Peter Tino (M.Sc. Slovak University of Technology,
Ph.D. Slovak Academy of Sciences) was a Fulbright
Fellow with the NEC Research Institute, Princeton,
NJ, USA, and a Post-Doctoral Fellow with the Aus-
trian Research Institute for AI, Vienna, Austria, and
with Aston University, Birmingham, U.K. Since 2003,
he has been with the School of Computer Science,
University of Birmingham, Edgbaston, Birmingham,
U.K., where he is currently a full Professor—Chair
in Complex and Adaptive Systems. His current re-
search interests include dynamical systems, machine
learning, probabilistic modelling of structured data, evolutionary computation,
and fractal analysis. Peter was a recipient of the Fulbright Fellowship in 1994,
the U.K.–Hong-Kong Fellowship for Excellence in 2008, three Outstanding
Paper of the Year Awards from the IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks in
1998 and 2011 and the IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation in
2010, and the Best Paper Award at ICANN 2002. He serves on the editorial
boards of several journals.
Aleˇs Leonardis is Chair of Robotics at the School
of Computer Science, University of Birmingham.
He is also Professor of Computer and Information
Science at the University of Ljubljana. He was a
visiting researcher at the GRASP Laboratory at the
University of Pennsylvania, post-doctoral fellow at
PRIP Laboratory, Vienna University of Technology,
and visiting professor at ETH Zurich and University
of Erlangen. His research interests include computer
vision, visual learning, and biologically motivated
vision—all in a broader context of cognitive systems
and robotics. Ale ˇs Leonardis was a Program Co-chair of the European
Conference on Computer Vision 2006, and he has been an Associate Editor of
the IEEE PAMI and IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, an editorial board
member of Pattern Recognition and Image and Vision Computing, and an
editor of the Springer book series Computational Imaging and Vision. In 2002,
he coauthored a paper, Multiple Eigenspaces, which won the 29th Annual
Pattern Recognition Society award. He is a fellow of the IAPR and in 2004
he was awarded one of the two most prestigious national (SI) awards for his
research achievements.
Ke Tang (Senior Member, IEEE) received the B.Eng.
degree from the Huazhong University of Science
and Technology, Wuhan, China, in 2002 and the
Ph.D. degree from Nanyang Technological University,
Singapore, in 2007. From 2007 to 2017, he was with
the School of Computer Science and Technology,
University of Science and Technology of China,
Hefei, China, ﬁrst as an Associate Professor from
2007 to 2011 and later as a Professor from 2011 to
2017. He is currently a Professor with the Department
of Computer Science and Engineering, Southern
University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen, China. He has over 10000
Google Scholar citation with an H-index of 48. He has published over 70
journal papers and over 80 conference papers. His current research interests
include evolutionary computation, machine learning, and their applications.
Dr. Tang was a recipient of the Royal Society Newton Advanced Fellowship
in 2015 and the 2018 IEEE Computational Intelligence Society Outstanding
Early Career Award. He is an Associate Editor of the IEEE Transactions on
Evolutionary Computation and served as a member of Editorial Boards for a
few other journals.