ZHANG et al. : A SURVEY ON NEURAL NETWORK INTERPRETABILITY 3
Regulation (GDPR) [54], Article 22, people have the right not
to be subject to an automated decision which would produce
legal effects or similar signiﬁcant effects concerning him or
her. The data controller shall safeguard the data owner’s right
to obtain human intervention, to express his or her point of
view and to contest the decision. If we have no idea how the
network makes a decision, there is no way to ensure these
rights.
3) Scientiﬁc Usage: Deep neural networks are becoming
powerful tools in scientiﬁc research ﬁelds where the data
may have complex intrinsic patterns (e.g., genomics [55],
astronomy [14], physics [56] and even social science [57]).
The word “science” is derived from the Latin word “scientia”,
which means “knowledge”. When deep networks reach a better
performance than the old models, they must have found some
unknown “knowledge”. Interpretability is a way to reveal it.
C. Related Work and Contributions
There have already been attempts to summarize the tech-
niques for neural network interpretability. However, most of
them only provide basic categorization or enumeration, without
a clear taxonomy. Lipton [17] points out that the term inter-
pretability is not well-deﬁned and often has different meanings
in different studies. He then provides simple categorization
of both the need (e.g., trust, causality, fair decision-making
etc.) and methods (post-hoc explanations) in interpretability
study. Doshi-Velez and Kim [18] provide a discussion on the
deﬁnition and evaluation of interpretability, which inspired
us to formulate a stricter deﬁnition and to categorize the
existing methods based on it. Montavon et al. [58] conﬁne the
deﬁnition of explanation to feature importance (also called
explanation vectors elsewhere) and review the techniques
to interpret learned concepts and individual predictions by
networks. They do not aim to give a comprehensive overview
and only include some representative approaches. Gilpin et
al. [59] divide the approaches into three categories: explaining
data processing, explaining data representation and explanation-
producing networks. Under this categorization, the linear proxy
model method and the rule-extraction method are equally
viewed as proxy methods, without noticing many differences
between them (the former is a local method while the latter is
usually global and their produced explanations are different,
we will see it in our taxonomy). Guidotti et al. [49] consider
all black-box models (including tree ensembles, SVMs etc.)
and give a ﬁne-grained classiﬁcation based on four dimensions
(the type of interpretability problem, the type of explanator, the
type of black-box model, and the type of data). However, they
treat decision trees, decision rules, saliency masks, sensitivity
analysis, activation maximization etc. equally, as explanators. In
our view, some of them are certain types of explanations while
some of them are methods used to produce explanations. Zhang
and Zhu [60] review the methods to understand network’s mid-
layer representations or to learn networks with interpretable
representations in computer vision ﬁeld.
This survey has the following contributions:
We make a further step towards the deﬁnition of inter-
pretability on the basis of reference [18]. In this deﬁnition,we emphasize the type (orformat )of explanations (e.g,
rule forms, including both decision trees and decision
rule sets). This acts as an important dimension in our
proposed taxonomy. Previous papers usually organize
existing methods into various isolated (to a large extent)
explanators (e.g., decision trees, decision rules, feature
importance, saliency maps etc.).
We analyse the real needs for interpretability and summa-
rize them into 3 groups: interpretability as an important
component in systems that should be highly-reliable,
ethical or legal requirements, and interpretability providing
tools to enhance knowledge in the relevant science ﬁelds.
In contrast, a previous survey [49] only shows the
importance of interpretability by providing several cases
where black-box models can be dangerous.
We propose a new taxonomy comprising three dimensions
(passive vs. active approaches, the format of explanations,
and local-semilocal-global interpretability). Note that
although many ingredients of the taxonomy have been
discussed in the previous literature, they were either
mentioned in totally different context, or entangled with
each other. To the best of our knowledge, our taxonomy
provides the most comprehensive and clear categorization
of the existing approaches.
The three degrees of freedom along which our taxonomy
is organized allow for a schematic 3D view illustrating how
diverse attempts at interpretability of deep networks are related.
It also provides suggestions for possible future work by ﬁlling
some of the gaps in the interpretability research (see Figure 2).
D. Organization of the Survey
The rest of the survey is organized as follows. In Section II,
we introduce our proposed taxonomy for network interpretation
methods. The taxonomy consists of three dimensions, passive
vs. active methods, type of explanations and global vs. local
interpretability. Along the ﬁrst dimension, we divide the
methods into two groups, passive methods (Section III) and
active methods (Section IV). Under each section, we traverse
the remaining two dimensions (different kinds of explanations,
and whether they are local, semi-local or global). Section V
gives a brief summary of the evaluation of interpretability.
Finally, we conclude this survey in Section VII.
II. T AXONOMY
We propose a novel taxonomy with three dimensions (see
Figure 1): (1) the passive vs. active approaches dimension,
(2) the type/format of produced explanations, and (3) from
local to global interpretability dimension respectively. The
ﬁrst dimension is categorical and has two possible values,
passive interpretation andactive interpretability intervention .
It divides the existing approaches according to whether they
require to change the network architecture or the optimization
process. The passive interpretation process starts from a trained
network, with all the weights already learned from the training
set. Thereafter, the methods try to extract logic rules or extract
some understandable patterns. In contrast, active methods
require some changes before the training, such as introducing