4 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON XXXX, VOL. X, NO. X, MM YYYY
Dimension 1 — Passive vs. Active Approaches
Passive
ActivePost hoc explain trained neural networks
Actively change the network architecture or training process for better interpretability
Dimension 2 — Type of Explanations (in the order of increasing explanatory power)
To explain a prediction/class by
Examples
Attribution
Hidden semantics
RulesProvide example(s) which may be considered similar or as prototype(s)
Assign credit (or blame) to the input features (e.g. feature importance, saliency masks)
Make sense of certain hidden neurons/layers
Extract logic rules (e.g. decision trees, rule sets and other rule formats)
Dimension 3 — Local vs. Global Interpretability (in terms of the input space)
Local
Semi-local
GlobalExplain network’s predictions on individual samples (e.g. a saliency mask for an input image)
In between, for example, explain a group of similar inputs together
Explain the network as a whole (e.g. a set of rules/a decision tree)
Fig. 1. The 3 dimensions of our taxonomy.
extra network structures or modifying the training process.
These modiﬁcations encourage the network to become more
interpretable (e.g., more like a decision tree). Most commonly
such active interventions come in the form of regularization
terms.
In contrast to previous surveys, the other two dimensions
allow ordinal values. For example, the previously proposed
dimension type of explanator [49] produces subcategories like
decision trees ,decision rules ,feature importance ,sensitivity
analysis etc. However, there is no clear connection among
these pre-recognised explanators (what is the relation between
decision trees and feature importance). Instead, our second
dimension istype/format of explanation . By inspecting various
kinds of explanations produced by different approaches, we can
observe differences in how explicit they are. Logic rules provide
the most clear and explicit explanations while other kinds of
explanations may be implicit. For example, a saliency map
itself is just a mask on top of a certain input. By looking
at the saliency map, people construct an explanation “the
model made this prediction because it focused on this highly
inﬂuential part and that part (of the input)”. Hopefully, these
parts correspond to some domain understandable concepts.
Strictly speaking, implicit explanations by themselves are not
complete explanations and need further human interpretation,
which is usually automatically done when people see them. We
recognize four major types of explanations here, logic rules ,
hidden semantics ,attribution andexplanations by examples ,
listed in order of decreasing explanatory power. Similar
discussions can be found in the previous literature, e.g.,
Samek et al. [61] provide a short subsection about “type of
explanations” (including explaining learned representations,
explaining individual predictions etc.). However, it is mixed
up with another independent dimension of the interpretability
research which we will introduce in the following paragraph.
A recent survey [62] follows the same philosophy and treatssaliency maps and concept attribution [63] as different types of
explanations, while we view them as being of the same kind,
but differing in the dimension below.
The last dimension , from local to global interpretability
(w.r.t. the input space), has become very common in recent
papers (e.g., [18], [49], [58], [64]), where global interpretability
means being able to understand the overall decision logic of a
model and local interpretability focuses on the explanations of
individual predictions. However, in our proposed dimension,
there exists a transition rather than a hard division between
global and local interpretability (i.e. semi-local interpretability).
Local explanations usually make use of the information at the
target input (e.g., its feature values, its gradient). But global
explanations try to generalize to as wide ranges of inputs as
possible (e.g., sequential covering in rule learning, marginal
contribution for feature importance ranking). This view is also
supported by the existence of several semi-local explanation
methods [65], [66]. There have also been attempts to fuse local
explanations into global ones in a bottom-up fashion [19], [67],
[68].
To help understand the latter two dimensions, Table II
lists examples of typical explanations produced by different
subcategories under our taxonomy. (Row 1) When considering
rule as explanation for local interpretability , an example is to
provide rule explanations which only apply to a given input
x(i)(and its associated output ^y(i)). One of the solutions is to
ﬁnd out (by perturbing the input features and seeing how the
output changes) the minimal set of features xk:::xlwhose
presence supports the prediction ^y(i). Analogously, features
xm:::xncan be found which should not be present (larger
values), otherwise ^y(i)will change. Then an explanation rule
forx(i)can be constructed as “it is because xk:::xlare
present and xm:::xnare absent that x(i)is classiﬁed as
^y(i)” [69]. If a rule is valid not only for the input x(i), but
also for its “neighbourhood” [65], we obtain a semi-local