IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON XXXX, VOL. X, NO. X, MM YYYY 1
A Survey on Neural Network Interpretability
Yu Zhang, Peter Ti ˇno, Ale ˇs Leonardis, and Ke Tang
Abstract —Along with the great success of deep neural net-
works, there is also growing concern about their black-box
nature. The interpretability issue affects people’s trust on deep
learning systems. It is also related to many ethical problems,
e.g., algorithmic discrimination. Moreover, interpretability is a
desired property for deep networks to become powerful tools
in other research ﬁelds, e.g., drug discovery and genomics. In
this survey, we conduct a comprehensive review of the neural
network interpretability research. We ﬁrst clarify the deﬁnition
of interpretability as it has been used in many different contexts.
Then we elaborate on the importance of interpretability and
propose a novel taxonomy organized along three dimensions:
type of engagement (passive vs. active interpretation approaches),
the type of explanation, and the focus (from local to global
interpretability). This taxonomy provides a meaningful 3D view
of distribution of papers from the relevant literature as two
of the dimensions are not simply categorical but allow ordinal
subcategories. Finally, we summarize the existing interpretability
evaluation methods and suggest possible research directions
inspired by our new taxonomy.
Index Terms —Machine learning, neural networks, inter-
pretability, survey.
I. I NTRODUCTION
OVER the last few years, deep neural networks (DNNs)
have achieved tremendous success [1] in computer
vision [2], [3], speech recognition [4], natural language process-
ing [5] and other ﬁelds [6], while the latest applications can
be found in these surveys [7]–[9]. They have not only beaten
many previous machine learning techniques (e.g., decision
This work was supported in part by the Guangdong Provincial Key
Laboratory under Grant 2020B121201001; in part by the Program for
Guangdong Introducing Innovative and Entrepreneurial Teams under Grant
2017ZT07X386; in part by the Stable Support Plan Program of Shenzhen
Natural Science Fund under Grant 20200925154942002; in part by the
Science and Technology Commission of Shanghai Municipality under Grant
19511120602; in part by the National Leading Youth Talent Support Program of
China; and in part by the MOE University Scientiﬁc-Technological Innovation
Plan Program. Peter Tino was supported by the European Commission Horizon
2020 Innovative Training Network SUNDIAL (SUrvey Network for Deep
Imaging Analysis and Learning), Project ID: 721463. We also acknowledge
MoD/Dstl and EPSRC for providing the grant to support the UK academics
involvement in a Department of Defense funded MURI project through EPSRC
grant EP/N019415/1.
Y . Zhang and K. Tang are with the Guangdong Key Laboratory of Brain-
Inspired Intelligent Computation, Department of Computer Science and
Engineering, Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen 518055,
P.R.China, and also with the Research Institute of Trust-worthy Autonomous
Systems, Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen 518055,
P.R.China (e-mail: zhangy3@mail.sustech.edu.cn, tangk3@sustech.edu.cn).
Y . Zhang, P. Ti ˇno and A. Leonardis are with the School of Computer Science,
University of Birmingham, Edgbaston, Birmingham B15 2TT, UK (e-mail:
fp.tino, a.leonardisg@cs.bham.ac.uk).
Manuscript accepted July 09, 2021, IEEE-TETCI. ©2021 IEEE. Personal
use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be obtained for
all other uses, in any current or future media, including reprinting/republishing
this material for advertising or promotional purposes, creating new collective
works, for resale or redistribution to servers or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted
component of this work in other works.trees, support vector machines), but also achieved the state-
of-the-art performance on certain real-world tasks [4], [10].
Products powered by DNNs are now used by billions of people1,
e.g., in facial and voice recognition. DNNs have also become
powerful tools for many scientiﬁc ﬁelds, such as medicine [11],
bioinformatics [12], [13] and astronomy [14], which usually
involve massive data volumes.
However, deep learning still has some signiﬁcant disadvan-
tages. As a really complicated model with millions of free
parameters (e.g., AlexNet [2], 62 million), DNNs are often
found to exhibit unexpected behaviours. For instance, even
though a network could get the state-of-the-art performance
and seemed to generalize well on the object recognition task,
Szegedy et al. [15] found a way that could arbitrarily change
the network’s prediction by applying a certain imperceptible
change to the input image. This kind of modiﬁed input is called
“adversarial example”. Nguyen et al. [16] showed another way
to produce completely unrecognizable images (e.g., look like
white noise), which are, however, recognized as certain objects
by DNNs with 99.99% conﬁdence. These observations suggest
that even though DNNs can achieve superior performance on
many tasks, their underlying mechanisms may be very different
from those of humans’ and have not yet been well-understood.
A. An (Extended) Deﬁnition of Interpretability
To open the black-boxes of deep networks, many researchers
started to focus on the model interpretability. Although this
theme has been explored in various papers, no clear consensus
on the deﬁnition of interpretability has been reached. Most
previous works skimmed over the clariﬁcation issue and left it
as “you will know it when you see it”. If we take a closer look,
the suggested deﬁnitions and motivations for interpretability
are often different or even discordant [17].
One previous deﬁnition of interpretability is the ability to
provide explanations in understandable terms to a human [18],
while the term explanation itself is still elusive. After reviewing
previous literature, we make further clariﬁcations of “explana-
tions” and “understandable terms” on the basis of [18].
Interpretability is the ability to provide explana-
tions1inunderstandable terms2to a human.
where
1)Explanations , ideally, should be logical decision rules
(if-then rules) or can be transformed to logical rules.
However, people usually do not require explanations to
be explicitly in a rule form (but only some key elements
which can be used to construct explanations).
2)Understandable terms should be from the domain
knowledge related to the task (or common knowledge
according to the task).
1https://www.acm.org/media-center/2019/march/turing-award-2018arXiv:2012.14261v3  [cs.LG]  15 Jul 2021