Deep Hierarchical Semantic Segmentation
Liulei Li1;5, Tianfei Zhou2, Wenguan Wang3y, Jianwu Li1, Yi Yang4
1Beijing Institute of Technology2ETH Zurich3ReLER, AAII, University of Technology Sydney4CCAI, Zhejiang University5Baidu Research
https://github.com/0liliulei/HieraSeg
Abstract
Humans are able to recognize structured relations in ob-
servation, allowing us to decompose complex scenes into
simpler parts and abstract the visual world in multiple lev-
els. However, such hierarchical reasoning ability of human
perception remains largely unexplored in current literature
of semantic segmentation. Existing work is often aware of
ﬂatten labels and predicts target classes exclusively for each
pixel. In this paper, we instead address hierarchical seman-
tic segmentation (HSS), which aims at structured, pixel-wise
description of visual observation in terms of a class hierar-
chy. We devise HSSN, a general HSS framework that tackles
two critical issues in this task: i)how to efﬁciently adapt ex-
isting hierarchy-agnostic segmentation networks to the HSS
setting, and ii)how to leverage the hierarchy information to
regularize HSS network learning. To address i),HSSNdire-
ctly casts HSS as a pixel-wise multi-label classiﬁcation task,
only bringing minimal architecture change to current seg-
mentation models. To solve ii),HSSNﬁrst explores inherent
properties of the hierarchy as a training objective, which en-
forces segmentation predictions to obey the hierarchy stru-
cture. Further, with hierarchy-induced margin constraints,
HSSNreshapes the pixel embedding space, so as to generate
well-structured pixel representations and improve segmen-
tation eventually. We conduct experiments on four seman-
tic segmentation datasets ( i.e., Mapillary Vistas 2.0, City-
scapes, LIP , and PASCAL-Person-Part), with different class
hierarchies, segmentation network architectures and back-
bones, showing the generalization and superiority of HSSN.
1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation, which aims to identify semantic
categories for pixel observations, is viewed as a vital step to-
wards intelligent scene understanding [82]. The vast major-
ity of modern segmentation models simply assume that all
the target classes are disjoint and should be distinguished ex-
clusively during pixel-wise prediction. This fails to capture
Work done during an internship at Baidu Research.
yCorresponding author: Wenguan Wang .
Vehicle
Huma n
Large -
vehicle
Two-
wheels
Person
Rider
BusCar
Truck  
Motorcycle 
Person -groupBicycle
Individual
Motorcyclist  
BicyclistFigure 1. Hierarchical semantic segmentation explains visual
scenes with multi-level abstraction ( left), by considering structured
class relations ( right ). The class taxonomy is borrowed from [58].
the structured nature of the visual world [53]: complex scenes
arise from the composition of simpler entities. Walking city,
vehicles and pedestrian ﬁll our view (Fig. 1). After focusing
on the vehicles, we identify cars, buses, and trucks, which
consist of more ﬁne-grained parts like wheel and window.
On the other hand, structured understanding of our world in
terms of relations and hierarchies is a central ability in hu-
man cognition [68,95]. We group chair and bed as furniture,
while cat and dog as pet. We understand this world over
multiple levels of abstraction, in order to maintain stable,
coherent percepts in the face of complex visual inputs [37].
The ubiquity of hierarchical decomposition serves as a core
motivation behind many structured machine learning mod-
els [20, 85], which have shown wide success in document
classiﬁcation [39,55] and protein function prediction [8,75].
In semantic segmentation literature, surprisingly little is
understood about how to accommodate pixel recognition
into semantic hierarchies. [43, 45, 56, 80, 81, 83, 89] are rare
exceptions that exploit class hierarchies in segmentation
networks. Nevertheless, they either focus speciﬁcally on
the structured organization of human body parts [80,81,83],
or introduce hierarchy-induced architectural changes to the
1246