segmentation network [43, 45, 56, 89], both hindering gen-
erality. More essentially, these methods are more aware of
making efﬁcient information propagation over the hierar-
chies ( e.g., graph message passing [43, 83, 109], multi-task
learning [89]), without imposing tree-structured label de-
pendencies/constraints into prediction and learning.
To mimic human hierarchical visual perception, we pro-
pose a novel approach for hierarchical semantic segmen-
tation (HSS). In HSS, classes are not arranged in a “ﬂat”
structure, but organized as a tree-shaped hierarchy. Thus
each pixel observation is associated to a root-to-leaf path of
the class hierarchy ( e.g.,human!rider!bicyclist ),
capturing general-to-speciﬁc relations between classes. Our
algorithm, called H SSN, addresses two core issues in HSS,
yet untouched before. First , instead of previous structured
segmentation models focusing on sophisticated network de-
sign, H SSN directly formulates HSS as a pixel-wise multi-
label classiﬁcation task. This allows to easily adapt exist-
ing segmentation models to the HSS setting, densely link-
ing the ﬁelds of classic hierarchy-agnostic segmentation and
HSS together. Second , HSSN makes full use of the class
hierarchy in HSS network learning. To make pixel pre-
dictions coherent with the class hierarchy, H SSN explores
two hierarchy constraints ,i.e.,i)a pixel sample belong-
ing to a given class must also belong to all its ancestors
in the hierarchy, ii)a pixel sample not belonging to a given
class must also not belong to all its descendants, as opti-
mization criterion. This leads to a pixel-wise hierarchical
segmentation learning strategy, which enforces segmenta-
tion predictions to obey the hierarchy structure during train-
ing. H SSN further encodes the structured knowledge in-
troduced by the class hierarchy into the pixel embedding
space. This leads to a pixel-wise hierarchical representa-
tion learning strategy, which inspires tree-induced margin
separation for embedding space reshaping. As the hierarchy
characterizes the underlying relationships between classes,
HSSNis able to enrich pixel embeddings by pulling seman-
tically similar pixels ( e.g.,bicycle andmotorcycle )
closer, while pushing semantically dissimilar pixels ( e.g.,
pedestrian andlamppost ) farther away. This leads to
more efﬁcient learning by discovering and reusing common
patterns [27], facilitating hierarchical segmentation eventu-
ally. This also allows our model to take different levels of
mistakes into consideration. This is essential for some crit-
ical systems [7]. Take autonomous driving as an example:
mistaking a bicycle for amotorcycle is less of a prob-
lem than confusing a pedestrian with a lamppost .
This work represents a solid step towards HSS. Our ap-
proach is elegant and principle; it is readily incorporated
to arbitrary previous hierarchy-agnostic segmentation net-
works, with only marginal modiﬁcation on the segmenta-
tion head. We train and test H SSN over four public bench-
marks ( i.e., Mapillary Vistas 2.0 [58], Cityscapes [18], LIP[44], PASCAL-Person-Part [87]), with different class hier-
archies for urban street scene parsing and human semantic
parsing. Extensive experimental results with different seg-
mentation network architectures ( i.e., DeepLabV3+ [13],
OCRNet [98], MaskFormer [16]) and backbones ( i.e.,
ResNet-101 [34], HRNetV2-W48 [79], Swin-Small [49])
verify the generalization and effectiveness of H SSN.
2. Related Work
(Hierarchy-Agnostic) Semantic Segmentation. Semantic
segmentation is to partition an image into regions with dif-
ferent semantic categories, which can be viewed as a pixel-
wise classiﬁcation task. Typical solutions for semantic seg-
mentation follow a hierarchy-agnostic setting, where each
pixel is assigned to a single label from a set of disjoint se-
mantic categories. In 2015, Long et al. proposed fully con-
volutional networks (FCNs) [50], which are advantageous
in end-to-end dense representation modeling, laying the
foundation for modern semantic segmentation algorithms.
As FCNs suffer from limited visual context with local re-
ceptive ﬁelds, how to effectively capture cross-pixel rela-
tions became the main focus of follow-up studies. Scholars
devised many promising solutions, by enlarging receptive
ﬁelds [10, 13, 19, 93, 97, 105], building image pyramids
[33,46], exploring encoder-decoder architectures [3,13,62],
utilizing boundary clues [23,41,99], or incorporating neural
attention [25, 32, 35, 40, 42, 73, 84, 106, 108, 113]. Recently,
a new family of semantic segmentation models [16, 69, 90,
107], built upon the full attention (Transformer [76]) archi-
tecture, yielded impressive performance, as it overcomes
the issues in long-range cross-pixel dependency modeling.
Though impressive, existing semantic segmentation so-
lutions rarely explore the structures between semantic con-
cepts. We take a further step towards class relation aware
semantic segmentation, which better reﬂects the structured
nature of our visual world, and echoes the hierarchical rea-
soning mode of human visual perception. An appealing ad-
vantage of our hierarchical solution is that, it can adapt ex-
isting class hierarchy-agnostic segmentation architectures,
no matter FCN-based or Transformer-like, to the structured
setting, in a simple and cheap manner.
Scene Parsing/Hierarchical Semantic Segmentation. Our
work is, at a high level, relevant to classical image parsing
algorithms [31, 70, 71, 74, 96]. Image parsing has been ex-
tensively studied in the pre-deep learning era, dating back
to [74]. Image parsing seeks a parse graph that explains vi-
sual observation following a “divide-and-conquer”strategy:
a football game image is ﬁrst parsed into person, sports
ﬁeld, and spectator, which are further decomposed, e.g.,
person consists of face and body patterns. In the deep learn-
ing era, human parsing , as a sub-ﬁeld of scene parsing, be-
came active. Some recent human parsers explored human
part relations, based on the human hierarchy [36, 56, 80, 83,
1247