Introduction
Artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) strives to emulate the human mind
and to solve complex tasks by learning from available data. Formany complex tasks, AI already surpasses humans in terms of
accuracy, speed, and cost. Recently, the rapid adoption of AI
and its sub ﬁelds, speci ﬁcally machine learning and deep
learning, has led to substantial progress in applications such
as autonomous driving,
1text translation,2and voice assis-
tance.3At the same time, AI is becoming essential in biomedi-
cine, where big data in health care necessitates techniques that
help scientists to gain understanding from it.4
Success stories such as acquiring the compressed repre-
sentation of drug-like molecules,5modeling the hierarchical
structure and function of a cell6and translating magnetic
resonance images to computed tomography7using deep
learning models illustrate the remarkable performance of
these AI approaches. AI has not only achieved remarkable
success in analyzing genomic and biomedical data,8–18but
has also surpassed humans in applications such as sepsis
prediction,19malignancy detection in mammography,20and
mitosis detection in breast cancer.21
Despite these AI-fueled advancements, important privacy
concerns have been raised regarding the individuals who
contribute to the datasets. While taking care of the con ﬁ-
dentiality of sensitive biological data is crucial,22several
studies showed that AI techniques often do not maintain dataprivacy.
23–26For example, attacks known as membership
inference can be used to infer an individual ’s membership by
querying over the dataset27or the trained model,23or by
having access to certain statistics about the dataset.28–30
Homer et al28showed that under some assumptions, an
adversary (an attacker who attempts to invade data privacy)can use the statistics published as the result of genome-wide
association studies (GWAS) to ﬁnd out if an individual was a
part of the study. Another example of this kind of attack wasdemonstrated by attacks on Genomics Beacons,
27,31in which
an adversary could determine the presence of an individual
in the dataset by simply querying the presence of a particularallele. Moreover, the attacker could identify the relatives of
those individuals and obtain sensitive disease informa-
tion.
27,32Besides targeting the training dataset, an adversary
may attack a fully trained AI model to extract individual-level
membership by training an adversarial inference model that
learns the behavior of the target model.23
As a result of the aforementioned studies, health research
centers such as the National Institutes of Health (NIH) as well
as hospitals have restricted access to the pseudonymizeddata.22,33,34Furthermore, data privacy laws such as those
enforced by the Health Insurance Portability and Accountabil-
ity Act (HIPAA), and the Family Educational Rights and Privacy
Act (FERPA) in the U.S. as well as theEU General Data ProtectionRegulation (GDPR) restrict the use of sensitive data.
35,36
Consequently, getting access to these datasets requires alengthy approval process, which signi ﬁcantly impedes collab-
orative research. Therefore, both industry and academia ur-
gently need to apply privacy-preserving techniques to respect
individual privacy and comply with these laws.
This paper provides a systematic overview over various
recently proposed privacy-preserving AI techniques in bio-
medicine, which facilitate the collaboration between healthresearch institutes. Several efforts exist to tackle the privacy
concerns in several domains, some of which have been
examined in a couple of surveys.
37–39Aziz et al37investigat-
ed previous studies which employed differential privacy and
cryptographic techniques for human genomic data. Kaissis
et al39brieﬂy reviewed federated learning, differential pri-
vacy and cryptographic techniques applied in medical imag-
ing. Xu et al38surveyed general solutions to challenges in
federated learning including communication ef ﬁciency, op-
timization, as well as privacy and discussed possible appli-
cations including a few examples in health care. Compared
with Aziz et al and Kaissis et al,37,39this paper covers a
broader set of privacy preserving techniques including fed-
erated learning and hybrid approaches. In contrast with Xuet al
38we additionally discuss cryptographic techniques and
differential privacy approaches and their applications in
biomedicine. Moreover, this survey covers a wider range ofstudies that employed different privacy-preserving techni-
ques in genomics and biomedicine and compares the
approaches using different criteria such as privacy, accuracy,and ef ﬁciency. It is notable that there are some hardware-
based privacy-preserving approaches such as Intel Software
Guard Extensions
40–42and AMD memory encryption,43
which allow for secure computation via secure hardware
which are beyond the scope of this study.
The presented approaches are divided into four catego-
ries: cryptographic techniques, differential privacy, federat-
ed learning, and hybrid approaches. First, we describe how
cryptographic techniques —in particular, homomorphic en-
cryption (HE) and secure multiparty computation (SMPC) —
ensure secrecy of sensitive data by carrying out computa-
tions on encrypted biological data. Next, we illustrate thedifferential privacy approach and its capability in quantify-
ing individuals ’privacy in published summary statistics of,
for instance, GWAS data and deep learning models trained onConclusion As the most promising direction, we suggest combining federated
machine learning as a more scal able approach with other additional privacy-preserving
techniques. This would allow to merge the advantages to provide privacy guarantees ina distributed way for biomedical applicati ons. Nonetheless, more research is necessary
as hybrid approaches pose new challenges such as additional network or computation
overhead.
Methods of Information in Medicine Vol. 61 No. S1/2022 © 2022. The Author(s).Privacy-Preserving Artificial Intelligence Techniques in Biomedicine Torkzadehmahani et al. e13