clinical data. Then, we elaborate on federated learning, which
allows health institutes to train AIs locally and to share onlyselected parameters without sensitive data with a coordina-
tor, who aggregates them and builds a global model. Follow-
ing that, we discuss hybrid approaches which enhance dataprivacy by combining federated learning with other privacy-
preserving techniques. We elaborate on the strengths and
drawbacks of each approach as well as its applications inbiomedicine. More importantly, we provide a comparison
among the approaches with respect to different criteria such
as computational and communication ef ﬁciency, accuracy,
and privacy. Finally, we discuss the most realistic approaches
from a practical viewpoint and provide a list of open prob-
lems and challenges that remain for the adoption of thesetechniques in real-world biomedical applications.
Our review of privacy-preserving AI techniques in bio-
medicine yields the following main insights: First, crypto-graphic techniques such as HE and SMPC, which follow the
paradigm of “bring data to computation “, are not computa-
tionally ef ﬁcient and do not scale well to large biomedical
datasets. Second, federated learning follows the paradigm
of “bring computation to data “is a more scalable
approach. However, its network communication ef ﬁciency
is still an open problem and it does not provide privacy
guarantees. Third, hybrid approaches that combine crypto-
graphic techniques or differential privacy with federatedlearning are the most promising privacy-preserving AI tech-
niques for biomedical applications, because they promise tocombine the scalability of federated learning with the priva-
cy guarantees of cryptographic techniques or differential
privacy.
Cryptographic Techniques
In biomedicine and GWAS in particular, cryptographic tech-
niques have been used to collaboratively compute result
statistics while preserving data privacy.40,44 –56These cryp-
tographic approaches are based on HE57–59or SMPC.60There
are different HE-based techniques such as partially HE (PHE)
58and fully HE (FHE).57PHE allows either addition or
multiplication operations to be performed on the encrypted
data while using FHE both addition and multiplication
operations can be applied. All HE-based approaches sharethree steps (
►Fig. 1A ):
1. Participants (e.g., hospitals or medical centers) encrypt
their private data and send the encrypted data to a
computing party.
2. The computing party calculates the statistics over the
encrypted data and shares the statistics (which are
encrypted) with the participants.
3. The participants access the results by decrypting them.
Fig. 1 Different privacy-preserving AI techniques: ( A)homomorphic encryption , where the participants encrypt the private data and share it with
a computing party, which computes the aggregated results over the encrypted data from the participants; ( B)secure multiparty computation in
which each participant shares a separate, different secret with each compu ting party; the computing parties cal culate the intermediate results,
secretly share them with each other, and aggr egate all intermediate results to obtain the ﬁnal results; ( C)differential privacy ,w h i c he n s u r e st h e
models trained on datasets including and excluding a speci ﬁc individual look statistically indistinguishable to the adversary; ( D)federated
learning , where each participant downloads the global model from the server, computes the local model given its private data and the global
model, and ﬁnally sends its local model to the server for aggregation and for updating the global model. ( A). Homomorphic encryption. ( B).
Secure multiparty computation. ( C). Differential privacy. ( D). Federated learning.
Methods of Information in Medicine Vol. 61 No. S1/2022 © 2022. The Author(s).Privacy-Preserving Artificial Intelligence Techniques in Biomedicine Torkzadehmahani et al. e14