In SMPC, there are multiple participants as well as a
couple of computing parties which perform computationson secret shares from the participants. Given Mparticipants
and Ncomputing parties, SMPC-based approaches follow
three steps (
►Fig. 1B ):
1. Each participant sends a separate and different secret to
each of the Ncomputing parties.
2. Each computing party computes the intermediate results
on the Msecret shares from the participants and shares
the intermediate results with the other N/C01 computing
parties.
3. Each computing party aggregates the intermediate results
from all computing parties including itself to calculate theﬁnal (global) results. In the end, the ﬁnal results computed
by all computing parties are the same and can be shared
by the participants.
To clarify the concepts of secret sharing
61and multiparty
computation, consider a scenario with two participants P1
and P2and two computing parties C1and C2.46P1and P2
possess the private data Xand Y, respectively. The aim is to
compute XþY, where neither P1norP2reveals its data to the
computing parties. To this end, P1and P2generate random
numbers RXand RY, respectively; P1reveals RXtoC1and
(X/C0RX)t oC2; likewise, P2shares RYwith C1and Y/C0RYwith
C2;RX,RY,(X/C0RX) and ( Y/C0RY) are secret shares. C1computes
(RXþRY) and sends it to C2and C2calculates ( X/C0RX)þ(Y/C0
RY) and reveals it to C1. Both C1and C2add the result they
computed to the result each obtained from the other com-puting party. The sum is in fact ( XþY), which can be shared
with P
1and P2.
Notice that to preserve the data privacy, the computing
parties C1and C2must be non-colluding. That is, C1must not
send RXand RYtoC2and C2must not share ( X/C0RX)a n d
(Y/C0RY) with C1. Otherwise, the computing parties can
compute Xand Y, revealing the participants ’data. In general,
in an SMPC with Ncomputing parties, data privacy is
protected as long as most N/C01 computing parties collude
with each other. The larger the N, the stronger the privacy but
higher the communication overhead and processing time.Another point is that, in addition to secret sharing, there are
other transfer protocols in SMPC such as oblivious transfer
62
and garbled circuit63which is a two-party computation
protocol in which each of the parties hold its private input
and they jointly learn the output function describing the
relation between their private inputs. Moreover, thresholdcryptography combines a secret sharing scheme with cryp-
tography to secretly share a key across distributed parties
such that multiple parties (more than a threshold) mustcoordinate to encrypt/decrypt a message.
59,64That is,
threshold cryptography can be considered as the combina-
tion of the HE and SMPC methods.
Most studies use HE or SMPC to develop secure, privacy-
aware algorithms applicable to GWAS data. Kim and Lauter47
and Lu et al49implemented a secure2test and Lauter et al48
developed privacy-preserving versions of common statisti-cal tests in GWAS, such as the Pearson goodness of ﬁt test,
tests for linkage disequilibrium, and the Cochran Armitagetrend test using HE. Kim et al
65and Morshed et al66pre-
sented HE-based secure logistic and linear regression algo-rithms for medical data, respectively. Zhang et al,
53Constable
et al,52and Kamm et al51developed a SMPC-based secure χ2
test. Shi et al67implemented a privacy-preserving logistic
regression and Bloom68proposed a secure linear regression
based on SMPC for GWAS data. Cho et al44introduced a
SMPC-based framework to facilitate quality control andpopulation strati ﬁcation correction for large-scale GWAS
and argued that their framework is scalable to one million
individuals and half million single nucleotide polymor-phisms (SNPs).
There are also other types of encryption techniques such
as somewhat homomorphic encryption (SWHE),
57which are
employed to address privacy issues in genomic applications
such as outsourcing genomic data computation to the cloud,
and are not the main focus of this review. The main drawbackof SWHE is that the number of successive addition and
multiplication operations it can perform on the data are
limited.
47For more details, we refer to the comprehensive
review by Mittos et al.69
Despite the promises of HE/SMPC-based privacy-preserv-
ing algorithms ( ►Table 1 ), the road for the wide adoption of
HE/SMPC-based algorithms in genomics and biomedicine is
long.70The major limitations of HE are few supported
operations and computational overhead.71HE supports
only addition and multiplication operations, and as a result,
developing complex AI models with non-linear operations
such as deep neural networks (DNNs) using HE is verychallenging. Moreover, HE incurs remarkable computational
overhead since it performs operations on encrypted data.
Although SMPC is more ef ﬁcient than HE from a computa-
tional perspective, it still suffers from high computational
overhead,
72which comes from processing secret shares from
a large number of participants or large amount of data by a
few computing parties.
Differential Privacy
One of the state-of-the-art concepts for eliminating and
quantifying the chance of information leakage is differential
privacy .73–75Differential privacy is a mathematical model
that encapsulates the idea of injecting enough randomnessor noise to sensitive data to camou ﬂage the contribution of
each single individual. This is achieved by inserting uncer-
tainty into the learning process so that even a strong adver-sary with arbitrary auxiliary information about the data will
still be uncertain in identifying any of the individuals in the
dataset. This has become standard in data protection and hasbeen effectively deployed by Google
76and Apple77as well as
agencies such as the United States Census Bureau. Further-
more, it has drawn the attention of researchers in privacy-sensitive ﬁelds such as biomedicine and health care
78–93.
Differential privacy ensures that the model we train does
not over ﬁt the sensitive data of a particular user. The model
trained on a dataset containing information of a speci ﬁc
individual should be statistically indistinguishable from a
model trained without the individual ( ►Fig. 1C ). As an
Methods of Information in Medicine Vol. 61 No. S1/2022 © 2022. The Author(s).Privacy-Preserving Artificial Intelligence Techniques in Biomedicine Torkzadehmahani et al. e15