learning and hybrid approaches share only the model param-
eters with the server. In HE, if the server has the key to decryptthe traf ﬁc from the clients, the whole private data of the clients
will be revealed. The same holds if the computing parties in
SMPC collude with each other. This might or might not be thecase for the other approaches (e.g., federated learning)
depending on the exchanged model parameters and whether
they can be abused to infer the underlying private data.
Privacy of the exchanged traf ﬁc indicates how much the
trafﬁc is kept private from the server. In HE/SMPC, the data
are encrypted ﬁrst and then shared with the server, which
is reasonable since it is the clients ’private data. In feder-
ated learning, the traf ﬁc (model parameters) is directly
shared with the server assuming that it does not reveal anydetails regarding individual samples in the data. The aim
of the hybrid approaches is to hide the real values of the
model parameters from the server to minimize the possi-bility of inference attacks using the model parameters.
FLþHE is the best among the hybrid approaches from this
viewpoint.
Privacy guarantee is a metric which quanti ﬁes the degree
to which the privacy of the clients ’data can be preserved.
Differential privacy and the corresponding hybrid approach(FLþDP) are the only approaches providing a privacy guar-
antee, whereas all other approaches can only protect the
privacy under a set of certain assumptions. In HE, the servermust not have the decryption key; in SMPC, not all comput-
ing parties must collude with each other; in federated
learning, the model parameters should not give any detailabout a sample in the clients ’data.
Discussion and Open Problems
In HE, a single computing party carries out computation
over the encrypted data from the clients. In SMPC, multiple
computing parties perform operations on the secret shares
from the clients. In federated learning, a single serveraggregates the local model parameters shared by the cli-
ents. From a practical point of view, HE and SMPC that
follow the paradigm of “move data to computation “do not
scale as the number of clients or data size in clients become
large. This is because they put the computational burden on
a single or a few computing parties. Federated learning, onthe other hand, distributes the computation across the
clients (aggregation on the server is not computationally
heavy) but the communication overhead between the serv-er and clients is the major challenge to scalability of
federated learning. The hybrid approaches inherit this issue
and it is exacerbated in FL þSMPC. Combining HE with
federated learning (FL þHE) adds another obstacle (compu-
tational overhead) to the scalability of federated learning.
There is a growing body of literature on communication-efﬁcient approaches to federated learning that can dramat-
ically improve the scalability of federated learning and
make it suitable for large-scale applications including thosein biomedicine.
Given that federated learning is the most promising
approach from the scalability viewpoint, it can be used asa standalone approach as long as inferring the clients ’data
from the model parameters is practically impossible. Other-wise, it should be combined with differential privacy to avoid
possible inference attacks and exposure of clients ’private
data and to provide privacy guarantee. The accuracy of themodel will be satisfactory in federated learning but it might
be deteriorated in FL þDP. A realistic trade-off needs to be
considered depending on the application of interest.
Moreover, differential privacy can have many practical
applications in biomedicine as a standalone approach. It
works very well for low-sensitivity queries such as countingqueries (e.g., number of patients with a speci ﬁcd i s e a s e )o n
genomic databases and their generalizations (e.g., histo-
grams) since the presence or absence of an individualchanges the query ’s response by at most one. Moreover, it
can be employed to release summary statistics of GWAS such
asχ
2and p-values in a differentially private manner while
keeping the accuracy acceptable. A novel promising research
direction is to incorporate differential privacy in deep gen-
erative models to generate synthetic genomic and biomedi-cal data.
Future studies can investigate how to reach a compromise
between scalability, privacy, and accuracy in real-worldsettings. The communication overhead of federated learning
is still an open problem since although state-of-the-art
approaches considerably reduce the network overhead,they adversely affect the accuracy of the model. Hence, novel
approaches are required to preserve the accuracy, which is of
great importance in biomedicine, while making federatedlearning communication ef ﬁcient.
Adopting federated learning in non-IID settings, where
genomic and biomedical datasets across different hospitals/medical centers are heterogeneous, is another important
challenge to address. This is because typical aggregation
procedures such as simple averaging do not work well for
these settings, yielding inaccurate models. Hence, new ag-
gregation procedures are required to tackle non-IID scenari-os. Moreover, current communication-ef ﬁcient approaches
which were developed for an IID setting might not be
applicable to heterogeneous scenarios. Consequently, newtechniques are needed to reduce network overhead in these
settings, while keeping the model accuracy satisfactory.
Combining differential privacy with federated learning to
enhance privacy and to provide a privacy guarantee is still a
challenging issue in the ﬁeld. It becomes even more challeng-
ing for health care applications, where accuracy of the model isof crucial importance. Moreover, the concept of privacy guar-
antee in differential privacy has been de ﬁned for local settings.
In distributed scenarios, a dataset might be employed multipletimes to train different models with various privacy budgets.
Therefore, a new formulation of privacy guarantee should be
proposed for distributed settings.
Conclusion
For AI techniques to succeed, big biomedical data needs to be
available and accessible. However, the more AI models are
trained on sensitive biological data, the more the awareness
Methods of Information in Medicine Vol. 61 No. S1/2022 © 2022. The Author(s).Privacy-Preserving Artificial Intelligence Techniques in Biomedicine Torkzadehmahani et al. e22