absent or if communication is interrupted. Li et al presented
VERTIGO,128a vertical grid logistic regression algorithm
designed for vertically distributed biological datasets such
as breast cancer genome and myocardial infarction data.
Nasirigerdeh et al129developed a horizontally federated
tool set for GWAS, called sPLINK , which supports Chi-square
test, linear regression, and logistic regression. Notably,
federated results from sPLINK on distributed datasets are
the same as those from aggregated analysis conducted with
PLINK .131Moreover, they showed that sPLINK is robust
against heterogeneous (imbalanced) data distributionsacross clients and does not lose its accuracy in such
scenarios.
There are also studies that combine federated learning
with other traditional AI modeling techniques such as en-
semble learning, support vector machines (SVMs), and prin-
cipal component analysis (PCA).
132 –136Brisimi et al132
presented a federated soft-margin support vector machine
(sSVM) for distributed electronic health records. Huang
et al133introduced LoAdaBoost, a federated adaptive boost-
ing method for learning biomedical data such as intensive
care unit data from distinct hospitals137while Liu et al134
trained a federated autonomous deep learner to this end.
There have also been a couple of attempts at incorporating
federated learning into multitask learning and transfer
learning in general.138 –140However, to the best of our
knowledge, FedHealth135is the only federated transfer learn-
ing framework speci ﬁcally designed for health care applica-
tions. It enables users to train personalized models for theirwearable health care devices by aggregating the data from
different organizations without compromising privacy.
One of the major challenges for adopting federated learn-
ing in large scale genomics and biomedical applications is the
signiﬁcant network communication overhead, especially for
complex AI models such as DNNs that contain millions of
model parameters and require thousands of iterations to
converge. A rich body of literature exists to tackle thischallenge, known as communication-ef ﬁcient federated
learning.
141 –144
Another challenge in federated learning is the possible
accuracy loss from the aggregation process if the data
distribution across the clients is heterogeneous (i.e., not
independent and identically distributed [IID]). More speci ﬁ-
cally, federated learning can deal with non-IID data while
preserving the model accuracy if the learning model is
simple such as ordinary least squares linear regression(sPLINK
129). However, when it comes to learning complex
models such as DNNs, the global model might not converge
on non-IID data across the clients. Zhao et al145showed that
simple averaging of the model parameters in the server
signiﬁcantly diminishes the accuracy of a convolutional
neural network model in highly skewed non-IID settings.Developing the aggregation strategies which are robust
against non-IID scenarios is still an open and interesting
problem in federated learning.
Finally, federated learning is based on the assumption that
the centralized server is honest and not compromised, which
is not necessarily the case in real applications. To relax thisassumption, differential privacy or cryptographic techniques
can be leveraged in federated learning, which is covered inthe next section. For further reading on further directions of
federated learning in general, we refer the reader to compre-
hensive surveys.
110,146,147
Hybrid Privacy-Preserving Techniques
The hybrid techniques combine federated learning with the
other paradigms (cryptographic techniques and differential
privacy) to enhance privacy or provide privacy guarantees(
►Table 2 ). Federated learning preserves privacy to some
extent because it does not require the health institutes to
share the patients ’data with the central server. However, the
model parameters that participants share with the server
might be abused to reveal the underlying private data if the
coordinator is compromised.148To handle this issue, the
participants can leverage differential privacy and add noise
to the model parameters before sending them to the server
(FLþDP)149 –153or they employ HE (FL þHE),55,154,155SMPC
(FLþSMPC) or both DP and HE (FL þDPþHE)103,156,157to
securely share the parameters with the server.51,158
In the genomic and biomedical ﬁeld, several hybrid
approaches have been presented recently. Li et al149pre-
sented a federated deep learning framework for magnetic
resonance brain image segmentation in which the client sideprovides differential privacy guarantees on selecting and
sharing the local gradient weights with the server for imbal-
anced data. A recent study
150extracted neural patterns from
brain functional magnetic resonance images by developing a
privacy-preserving pipeline that analyzes image data of
patients having different psychiatric disorders using feder-ated domain adaptation methods. Choudhury et al
159devel-
oped a federated differential privacy mechanism for
gradient-based classi ﬁcation on electronic health records.
There are also some studies that incorporate federate
learning with cryptographic techniques. For instance, Con-stable et al
52implemented a privacy-protecting structure
for federated statistical analysis such as χ2statistics on
GWAS while maintaining privacy using SMPC. In a slightlydifferent approach, Lee et al
158presented a privacy-pre-
serving platform for le arning patient similarity in multiple
hospitals using a context-speci ﬁc hashing approach which
employs HE to limit the privacy leakage. Moreover, Kim
et al156presented a privacy-preserving federated logistic
regression algorithm for horizontally distributed diabetesand intensive care unit datasets. In this approach, the
logistic regression ensures privacy by making the aggregat-
ed weights differentially private and encrypting the localweights using HE.
Incorporating HE, SMPC, and differential privacy into
federated learning brings about enhanced privacy but itcombines the limitations of the approaches, too. FL þHE
puts much more computational overhead on the server,
since it requires to perform aggregation on the encryptedmodel parameters from the clients. The network communi-
cation overhead is exacerbated in FL þSMPC, because clients
need to securely share the model parameters with multiple
Methods of Information in Medicine Vol. 61 No. S1/2022 © 2022. The Author(s).Privacy-Preserving Artificial Intelligence Techniques in Biomedicine Torkzadehmahani et al. e20