small value (e.g., 10/C05) indicating the probability of an
uncontrolled breach, where the algorithm produces a specif-ic output only in the presence of a speci ﬁc individual and not
otherwise. εrepresents the worst case privacy breach in the
absence of any such rare breach. If you assume
d¼0, you will
have a pure ( ε)-differentially private algorithm, while if you
consider d>0 to approximate the case in which pure
differential privacy is broken, you will have an approximate(ε,
d)-differentially private algorithm.
Two important properties of differential privacy are com-
posability94and resilience to post-processing. Composability
means that combining multiple differentially private algo-
rithms yields another differentially private algorithm. More
precisely, if you combine k(ε,d)-differentially private algo-
rithms, the composed algorithm is at least ( kε,kd)-differen-
tially private. Differential privacy also assures the resistance
to post-processing theorem which states passing the outputof a ( ε,
d)-differentially private algorithm to any arbitrary
randomized algorithm will still uphold the ( ε,d)-differential
privacy guarantee.
The community efforts to ensure the privacy of sensitive
genomic and biomedical data using differential privacy can
be grouped into four categories according to the problemthey address (
►Table 1 ):
1. Approaches to querying biomedical and genomics
databases.78,79,93,95
2. Statistical and AI modeling techniques in genomics and
biomedicine.80–84,92,96
3. Data release, i.e., releasing s ummary statistics of a GWAS
such as p-values and χ2contingency tables.85–88
4. Training privacy-preserving generative models.97–99
Studies in the ﬁrst category proposed solutions to reduce
the privacy risks of genomics databases such as GWAS
databases and genomics beacon service.100The Beacon
Network31is an online web service developed by the Global
Alliance for Genomics and Health (GA4GH) through whichthe users can query the data provided by owners or research
institutes, ask about the presence of a genetic variant in the
database, and get a YES/NO as response. Studies have shownthat an attacker can detect membership in the Beacon or
GWAS by querying these databases multiple times and
asking different questions.
27,101 –103Very recently, Cho
et al95proposed a theoretical differential privacy mechanism
to maximize the utility of count query in biomedical systems
while guaranteeing data privacy. Johnson and Shmatikov78
developed a differentially private query-answering frame-
work. With this framework an analyst can retrieve statistical
properties such as the correlation between SNPs and get analmost accurate answer while the GWAS dataset is protected
against privacy risks. In another study, Aziz et al
79proposed
two algorithms to make the Beacon ’s response inaccurate by
controlling a bias variable. These algorithms decide when to
answer the query correctly/incorrectly according to speci ﬁc
conditions in the bias variable so that it gets harder for theattacker to succeed.
Some of the efforts in the second category addressed the
privacy concerns in GWAS by introducing differentiallyprivate logistic regression to identify associations between
SNPs and diseases
80or associations among multiple SNPs.81
Honkela et al82improve drug sensitivity prediction by effec-
tively employing differential privacy for Bayesian linear
regression. Moreov er, Simmons et al83presented a differen-
tially private EIGENSTRAT (PrivSTRAT)104and linear mixed
model (PrivLMM)105to correct for population strati ﬁcation.
In another paper, Simmons et al84tackled the problem of
ﬁnding signi ﬁcant SNPs by modeling it as an optimization
problem. Solving this problem provides a differentially pri-
vate estimate of the neighbor distance for all SNPs so thathigh scoring SNPs can be found.
The third category focused on releasing summary statis-
tics such as p-values, χ
2contingency tables, and minor allele
frequencies in a differentially private fashion. The common
approach in these studies is to add Laplacian noise to the
true value of the statistics, so that sharing the perturbedstatistics preserves privacy of the individuals. They vary in
the sensitivity of the algorithm (that is, the maximum
change on the output of an algorithm in presence orabsence of a speci ﬁc data point) and hence require different
injected noise.
85,86,88
The fourth category proposed novel privacy-protecting
methods to generate synthetic health care data leveraging
differentially private generative models ( ►Fig. 2 ). Deep
generative models, such as generative adversarial networks(GANs),
106can be trained on sensitive genomics and bio-
medical data to capture its properties and generate arti ﬁcial
data with similar characteristics as the original data.
Abay et al97presented a differentially private deep gener-
ative model, DP-SYN, a generative autoencoder that splits the
input data into multiple partitions, then learns and simulatesthe representation of each partition while maintaining the
privacy of input data. They assessed the performance of DP-
SYN on sensitive datasets of breast cancer and diabetes.
Beaulieu et al
98trained an auxiliary classi ﬁer GAN (AC-
GAN) in a differentially private manner to simulate theparticipants of the SPRINT trial (Systolic Blood Pressure
Trial), so that the clinical data can be shared while respecting
participants ’privacy. In another approach, Jordon et al
99
introduced a differentially private GAN, PATE-GAN, and
evaluated the quality of synthetic data on Meta-Analysis
Global Group in Chronic Heart Failure (MAGGIC) and theUnited Network for Organ Transplantation (UNOS) datasets.
Despite the aforementioned achievements in adopting dif-
ferential privacy in the ﬁeld, several challenges remain to be
addressed. Although differential privacy involves less net-
work communication, memory usage, and time complexity
compared with cryptographic techniques, it still struggleswith giving highly accurate results within a reasonable
privacy budget, namely, intended εand
d, on large-scale
datasets such as genomics datasets.37,107In more detail,
since genomic datasets are huge, the sensitivity of the
applied algorithms on these datasets is large. Hence, the
amount of distortion required for anonymization increasessigniﬁcantly, sometimes to the extent that the results will
not be meaningful anymore.
108Therefore, to make differen-
tial privacy more practical in the ﬁeld, balancing a tradeoff
Methods of Information in Medicine Vol. 61 No. S1/2022 © 2022. The Author(s).Privacy-Preserving Artificial Intelligence Techniques in Biomedicine Torkzadehmahani et al. e17