between privacy and utility demands more attention than it
has received88,90 –92.
Federated Learning
Federated learning109is a type of distributed learning where
multiple clients (e.g., hospitals) collaboratively learn a model
under the coordination of a central server while preservingthe privacy of their data. Instead of sharing its private data
with the server or the other clients, each client extracts
knowledge (that is, model parameters) from its data andtransfers it to the server for aggregation (
►Fig. 1D ).
Federated learning is an iterative process in which each
iteration consists of the following steps110:
1. The server chooses a set of clients to participate in the
current iteration of the model.
2. The selected clients obtain the current model from the
server.
3. Each selected client computes the local parameters using
the current model and its private data (e.g., runs gradient
descent algorithm initialized by the current model on its
local data to obtain the local gradient updates).
4. The server collects the local parameters from the select-
ed clients and aggregates them to update the current
model.
The data of the clients can be considered as a table,
where rows represent samples (e.g., individuals) and col-umns represent features or labels (e.g., age, case vs. control).
We refer to the set of samples, features, and labels of the
data as sample space ,feature space ,a n d label space , respec-
tively. Federated learning can be categorized into three
types based on the distribution characteristics of the cli-
ents ’data:
•Horizontal (sample-based) federated learning
111:D a t a
from different clients shares similar feature space butis very different in sample space. As an example,
consider two hospitals in two different cities whichcollected similar information such as age, gender, and
b l o o dp r e s s u r ea b o u tt h ei n d i v i d u a l s .I nt h i sc a s e ,t h e
feature spaces are similar; but because the individualswho participated in the hospitals ’data collections are
from different cities, their intersection is most proba-
bly very small, and the sample spaces are hence verydifferent.
•Vertical (feature-based) federated learning
111: Clients ’data
are similar in sample space but very different in featurespace. For example, two hospitals with different expertise
in the same city might collect different information
(different feature space) from almost the same individuals(similar sample space).
•Hybrid federated learning : Both feature space and sample
space are different in the data from the clients. Forexample, consider a medical center with expertise in
brain image analysis located in New York and a research
center with expertise in protein research based in Berlin.Their data are completely different (image vs. protein
data) and disjoint groups of individuals participated in
the data collection of each center.
To illustrate the concept of federated learning, consider a
scenario with two hospitals Aand B.Aand Bpossess lists X
and Y, containing the age of their cancer patients, respec-
tively. A simple federated mean algorithm to compute theaverage age of cancer patients in both hospitals without
revealing the real values of Xand Yworks as follows: For the
sake of brevity, we assume that both hospitals are selected intheﬁrst step and that the current global model parameters
(average age) in the second step are zero (see federated
learning steps).
•Hospital Acomputes the average age ( M
X) and number of
its cancer patients ( NX). Hospital Bdoes the same,
Fig. 2 Differentially private deep generative models: The sensitive data hold er (e.g., health institutes) train a differentially private generative
model locally and share just the trained data generator with the outside world (e.g., researchers). The shared data generator can then be used to
produce arti ﬁcial data with the same character istics as the sensitive data.
Methods of Information in Medicine Vol. 61 No. S1/2022 © 2022. The Author(s).Privacy-Preserving Artificial Intelligence Techniques in Biomedicine Torkzadehmahani et al. e18