computing parties instead of one. FL þDP might result in
inaccurate models because of adding noise to the modelparameters in the clients.
Comparison
We compare the privacy-preserving techniques (HE, SMPC,differential privacy, federated learning, and the hybridapproaches) using various performance and privacy criteria
such as computational/communication ef ﬁciency, accuracy,
privacy guarantee, and exchanging sensitive traf ﬁc through
network and privacy of exchanged traf ﬁc(
►Fig. 3 ). We
employ a generic ranking (lowest ¼1 to highest ¼6)37for
all comparison criteria except for privacy guarantee and
exchanging sensitive traf ﬁc through network , which are bina-
ry criteria. This comparison is made under the assumption of
applying a complex model (e.g., DNN with a huge number ofmodel parameters) on a large sensitive genomics dataset
distributed across dozens of clients in IID con ﬁguration.
Additionally, there are a few computing parties in SMPC(practical con ﬁguration).
Computational ef ﬁciency is an indicator of the extra
computational overhead an approach incurs to preserveprivacy. According to
►Fig. 3 , federated learning is best
from this perspective because it follows the paradigm of
“bringing computation to data “, distributing computational
overhead among the clients. HE and SMPC are based on the
paradigm of moving data to computation. In HE, encryption
of the whole private data in the clients and carrying outcomputation on encrypted data by the computing party
causes a huge amount of overhead. In SMPC, a couple of
computing parties process the secret shares from dozens ofclients, incurring considerable computational overhead.
Among the hybrid approaches, FL þDP has the best compu-
tational ef ﬁciency given the lower overhead of the two
approaches whereas FL þHE has the highest overhead be-
cause the aggregation process on encrypted parameters iscomputationally expensive.
Network communication ef ﬁciency indicates how ef ﬁ-
cient an approach utilizes the network bandwidth. The lessdata traf ﬁc is exchanged in the network, the more commu-nication ef ﬁcient is the approach. Federated learning is the
least ef ﬁcient approach from the communication aspect
since exchanging a large number of model parameter values
between the clients and the server generates a huge amount
of network traf ﬁc. Notice that network bandwidth usage of
federated learning is independent of the clients ’data because
federated learning does not move data to computation but
depends on the model complexity (i.e., the number of modelparameters). The next approach in this regard is SMPC,
where not only each participant sends a large traf ﬁc (almost
as big as its data) to each computing party but also eachcomputing party exchanges intermediate results (which
might be large) with the other computing parties through
the network. Although recent research has shown that thereis still potential for reducing the communication overhead in
SMPC,
160many limitations cannot be fully overcome. The
network overhead of HE comes from sharing the encrypteddata of the clients (assumed to be almost as big as the data
itself) with the computing party, which is small compared
with network traf ﬁc generated by federated learning and
SMPC. The best approach is differential privacy with no
network overhead. Accordingly, FL þDP and FL þSMPC are
the best and worst among the hybrid approaches from acommunication ef ﬁciency viewpoint, respectively.
Accuracy of the model in a privacy-preserving approach is
a crucial factor in whether to adopt the approach. In theassumed con ﬁguration, SMPC and federated learning are the
most accurate approaches incurring little accuracy loss in the
ﬁnal model. Next is differential privacy where the added
noise can considerably affect the model accuracy. The worst
approach is HE whose accuracy loss is due to approximating
the non-linear operations using addition and multiplication(e.g., least squares approximation
65). In the hybrid
approaches, FL þSMPC is the best and FL þDP is the worst
considering the accuracy of SMPC and differential privacy
approaches.
The rest of the comparison measures are privacy related.
The traf ﬁc transferred from the clients (participants) to the
server (computing parties) is highly sensitive if it carries the
private data of the clients. HE and SMPC send the encryptedform of the clients ’private data to the server. Federated
Fig. 3 Comparison radar plots for all ( A)a n de a c ho f( B–H) the privacy preserving approaches including homomorphic encryption (HE), secure
multiparty computation (SMPC), differential privacy (D P), federated learning (FL) and hybrid techniques (FL þDP, FLþHE and FL þSMPC). ( A)A l l .
(B)H E .( C)S M P C .( D)D P .( E)F L .( F)F LþDP. ( G)F LþHE. ( H)F LþSMPC.
Methods of Information in Medicine Vol. 61 No. S1/2022 © 2022. The Author(s).Privacy-Preserving Artificial Intelligence Techniques in Biomedicine Torkzadehmahani et al. e21