Electronics 2023 ,12, 1020 15 of 40
XAI methodologies with digital twins brings interface and optimization challenges [ 95].
The XAI-based digital twin systems are at an initial stage and cannot handle massive data
processing and self-optimization in digital twin systems [116].
3.6. XAI for AR/VR
Augmented reality (AR) can use sounds, digital visual elements, sound, or other
sensors to enhance the physical world. The main aim of AR is to highlight some essential
features of the real world, understand those features better, and come up with smart
insights that can be applied to the applications in real-world [ 117,118]. Virtual reality
(VR) generates a virtual environment with objects and scenes, making users feel as if they
are physically immersed in the virtual environment. The virtual environment created
by VR can be perceived using a VR headset [ 119]. AR/VR coupled with AI/ML are
key enablers of the smart city through the urban planners and the general public can
view the virtual urban planning and simulations of events in a smart city. The AI/ML
algorithms’ lack of reasoning/justiﬁcation by the AI/ML algorithms on predictions of
some of the events, such as disasters/accidents, makes it difﬁcult for the concerned to
make decisions solely based on the predictions from the AI/ML algorithms in AR/VR
applications in smart cities [ 118]. XAI can address these issues by providing interpretability
and justiﬁcation for the prediction results of the AI/ML algorithms. For instance, 5G
and AR/VR-enabled recommender systems use explanation-enabled recommendation
methodology (XARSSA). The XARSSA methodology can address the inﬂuence of customer
demographics, extracting customer demands and choices using AR/VR-based shopping
assistant applications. The XARSSA methodology uses a design science approach to attract
a large customer base towards AR/VR-enabled shopping assistant applications and gain
more insights about their needs [120].
Furthermore, combining XAI methodologies with AR/VR techniques will assist in
smooth functioning and interfacing; however, achieving complete transparency and trust
between the human brain and machine interface has remained an open research prob-
lem [ 19]. In addition, XAI-based AR/VR systems have to deal with massive data processing
and high-performance computing challenges.
3.7. XAI for Computer Vision
Computer vision is an application of AI that enables the systems to understand mean-
ingful information from videos, digital images and closed-circuit television (CCTV) footage
and make recommendations based on the information extracted from these sources [121,122] .
Computer vision has many applications in smart cities, such as object detection in au-
tonomous vehicles that can avoid collisions/accidents, reduction in traffic, monitoring
of suspected criminals [ 123] that will, in turn, reduce the crimes, structural monitoring,
combating disasters [ 124,125]. The 5G and computer vision integrated multi-agent systems
use reinforcement learning methodology to analyze traffic congestion situations. Such
systems are integrated with interpretations techniques such as SHAP , LIME and gradient-
weighted class activation mapping (Grad-CAM) for explaining various traffic situations to
a driver and assisting in making driving-related decisions in dense traffic situations [ 126].
The applications mentioned above are very sensitive as the lives of the citizens are at stake
if wrong decisions are taken. Traditional computer vision applications do not explain or
justify the classification of images/videos. Hence, making real-time decisions based on
the classifications given by computer vision-based applications in scenarios in smart cities,
such as collision avoidance, traffic monitoring and crime prevention, may incur severe costs,
such as loss of lives and ethical issues. XAI can solve the issues related to computer vision-
based applications in smart cities through explainability, interpretability, and justification of
classification results.
Combining XAI with computer vision methods also brings a few challenges, such as
data exploration and measuring the complexity of black-box models. XAI with computer
vision can easily work with text, image, and audio data [ 127]. However, it cannot interpret