Electronics 2023 ,12, 1020 6 of 40
2. Deﬁnitions and Key Technologies of XAI
XAI is a method that helps humans understand how the output is created by the
machine/deep learning algorithm. It contributes to quantifying model correctness, fairness,
and transparency and results in AI-assisted decision-making. XAI is critical for organiza-
tions’ trust and conﬁdence when using AI models. Additionally, AI explainability enables
organizations to take a responsible approach to AI development [23].
Figure 2 shows the difference between the working methodology of AI and XAI. As AI
becomes more sophisticated, humans face difﬁculty comprehending and retracing the
algorithm’s steps. The entire calculating process is transformed into what is often referred
to as a “black box” that is impenetrable. These black-box models are constructed using
the data directly, and not even the algorithm’s developers or data scientists understand or
can describe what is occurring inside them or how the AI algorithm arrived at a particular
conclusion [ 24]. As machine learning models improve performance, explainable and inter-
pretable predictions become increasingly hard to create. Black-box models may be deﬁned
as deep learning [ 25] or ensembles [ 26–28]. On the other hand, white-box or glass-box mod-
els are known as open-source models because it is straightforward to create understandable
results using explainable examples, like the reference [ 14] and decision tree models. It is
possible to make the new models more understandable and interpretable. However, these
models still need state-of-the-art performance compared to the earlier models. It boils
down to their frugal design; when they perform poorly or are well-interpreted and quickly
explained, it is due to them having a frugal design [ 29]. Interpretability, as mentors remark,
is beneﬁcial for accomplishing other model goals, which may include establishing user
conﬁdence, recognizing the effect of certain factors, comprehending how a model would
behave given inputs and ensuring that models are fair and impartial [30].
Training Data ML Process Learned Function UserDecision/
Recommendation AI
XAI
Explainable
ModelExplanation
Interface Why did you do that?
Why not something else 
When do you succeed
When do you fail?
When can i trust you?
How do i correct an
error?   
I understand why
I understand why not  
I know when you succeed
I know when you fail
I know when to trust you
I know why you got error  
T ask
T ask
User
Training Data New ML
Process
Figure 2. Difference between the working methodology of AI and XAI.
1. Understandability : It denotes that the goal of a model is to allow a human to com-
prehend how the model works, and a model is considered to be excellent if the model
allows a human to gain understanding without being dependent on understanding
the model’s internal structure or algorithmic techniques by which the model processes
data [ 31]. Descriptions should be composed of little pieces of information, which
humans and computer algorithms can interpret and should connect quantitative and
qualitative ideas [32].
2. Comprehensibility: The capacity of a learning system to express its learned infor-
mation in a human-comprehensible manner is known as comprehensibility [ 33].
Computability is typically related to model complexity when comprehensibility is
considered [34].
3. Explainability: As an interface between people and a decision-maker, an explainabil-
ity is understandable to humans while also providing a close approximation of the
decision-maker [34].