Electronics 2023 ,12, 1020 27 of 40
systems. Moreover, the project focuses on training 11 Early-Stage Researchers (ESRs) in the
domain of XAI.
XMANAI
Explainable Manufacturing Artiﬁcial Intelligence (XMANAI) [ 189] is an EU-funded
project under the H2020 funding framework. XMANAI applies XAI for manufacturing by
promoting the concept that “our AI is only as good as we are.” To demonstrate the beneﬁts
of using xAI for manufacturing, XMANAI considers four real-life pilot use cases at CNH
Industrial, Ford, UNIMETRIK, and Whirlpool plants.
DEEPCUBE
XAI Pipelines for Big Copernicus Data (DEEPCUBE) [ 190] is a EU funded project under
the H2020 funding framework. European Union’s Earth observation program manages
Copernicus Space Programme [ 191], which observes the earth and its environment. It
collects a great amount of data and DEEPCUBE aims to analyze the big Copernicus data by
utilizing AI technologies efﬁciently.
AI4EU
In 2019, the AI4EU [ 192] project was started to build the ﬁrst European AI on-demand
platform to share AI resources developed by EU-funded projects. AI4EU is also an EU-
funded project under the H2020 funding framework. AI4EU focuses on ﬁve main intercon-
nected AI domains, i.e., XAI, Collaborative AI, Physical AI, Integrative AI and Veriﬁable AI.
Moreover, AI4EU is developing a comprehensive strategic AI research innovation agenda
for Europe.
Research activities in ﬁve key interconnected AI scientiﬁc areas (XAI, Physical AI,
Veriﬁable AI, Collaborative AI, Integrative AI), which arise from the application of AI in
real-world scenarios;
STAR-AI
Safe and Trusted Human Centric Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Future Manufacturing Lines
(STAR) [ 193] project is an EU-funded project under the H2020 funding framework. It
focuses on implementing secure, safe, reliable, and trusted human-centric AI systems
in manufacturing environments. In the STAR project, XAI boosts the transparency of
manufacturing-related AI systems to improve user trust in AI systems. In this regard,
the STAR-AI project focuses on three main use cases, i.e., human–robot collaboration for
robust quality inspection, human-centered AI for agile manufacturing 4.0 and human
behavior prediction, and safe zone detection for routing.
FeatureCloud
FeatureCloud project [ 194] aims to integrate security-by-design and privacy-by-
architecture concepts on medical health systems to reduce the possibility of cybercrime
and facilitate safe cross-border collaborative data-mining efforts. It is got funded project
under the H2020 funding framework. FeatureCloud integrates blockchain and federated
learning techniques to eliminate sharing sensitive mining data via any communication
channels and centralized data storage. Moreover, the FeatureCloud project incorporates
“supervised machine learning” with XAI to improve compatibility with legal considerations
and international policies.
GECKO
Building Greener and more sustainable societies by ﬁlling the Knowledge gap in
social science and engineering to enable responsible artiﬁcial intelligence co-creation
(GECKO) [ 195] is an EU-funded project under the H2020 Marie Skłodowska-Curie funding
European Training Networks (ETN) framework. GECKO contributes to developing Ac-
countable, Responsible, and Transparent AI (ART AI) designs considering technological,