Electronics 2023 ,12, 1020 25 of 40
studies that can work on practical use cases to expand the current XAI research. Addition-
ally, various case studies can be presented to investigate the advantages (i.e., reasoning)
associated with the combination of ontologies [174].
5.4. Trusting Machine Learning Models
Several issues and questions still need to be addressed despite extensive exploration.
What if trust and explainability are missing while measuring both within a model? Are there
potential smart city scenarios for raising trust in the model? Can more trust be offered just in
time in a real-time smart city environment? There is a signiﬁcant gap in this ﬁeld, especially
in user-centered experiments, that future researchers can ﬁll. A quantitative measure exists
in the literature for measuring trust in ML decisions [ 175]. Two methods were studied in the
experiment of [ 176]. These methods are LIME, a black-box method, and COVAR, a glass-
box method. According to their ﬁndings, COVAR gave more interpretable explanations
than the others. The simple method’s usefulness was highlighted in this regard. As per [ 35],
to pursue meaningful progress in this area, exploring what explainability is, in reality, is
vital for addressing the root of the problem.
5.5. User Training on Explainability Features Explicitly
The literature on algorithmic solving of explainability problems is a challenge for stake-
holders in smart cities. There remains a gap in giving attention to user-based studies due
to their relevance to real-world problems. Though few studies exist on user experiments,
there remains room for more experiments to give the topic holistic coverage addressing all
aspects by determining the differences between the participant’s prediction and prediction
of the model; [ 177] measured trust in this regard. For example, in smart cities, housing
prices can be predicted [ 178]. Similarly, the study was conducted for users trusting the
prediction model in [ 179]. Authors in [ 180] evaluated three types of explanation approaches
based on user trust using a within-subject design. Ref. [ 181] measured the frequency of
revising predictions to match them with the self-reported trust levels and model predic-
tions. Similarly, a user study can be found in [ 182] research where human-interpretable
explanations were studied as properties of explanations were varied systematically.
The impact of these variations was seen in various tasks’ performance. These tasks
include simulation of the response from the system, veriﬁcation of the suggested response
and counterfactual queries showing low accuracy. The difference between persuasive
and descriptive explanation generation tasks was studied by [ 183]. While persuasive
explanations added user preferences, cognitive functions and expertise, the other types
only described explanations within features created by an explainable approach.
5.6. Visualization
After a complete XAI-based system overview, the subsequent issue is how to present
the system’s decision to the end-users and proper explainability, which is still a big chal-
lenge for researchers. Most end-users in smart cities are a layman. They need simple
explanations of all smart city decisions. Therefore, visualization is one more problem for
those considering implementing XAI systems. Research communities must balance the
transparency and secrecy that target user groups need to maintain their users’ trust and
the security of their conﬁdential data by using privacy preservation techniques such as
federated learning.
5.7. Security and Assurance
With the advancement of AI technology, the protection of smart cities-based au-
tonomous systems has become a signiﬁcant challenge since a cyberattack can disrupt them.
An important application of smart cities is the need to drive self-driving cars worldwide,
whether commercial or military, to ensure self-driving. The idea of using XAI to ensure
vehicle operational autonomy while monitoring system security is an important area of
research. An XAI-based system monitoring framework is required to ensure the natural