Electronics 2023 ,12, 1020 8 of 40
plied for image classiﬁcation, trafﬁc congestion, and autonomous driving vehicle-related
problems [ 49,50]. However, most machine learning models depend highly on training data
sets, pre-processing data methodologies, and ﬁne-tuning non-transparent machine learning
models. The current data-driven methodologies cannot understand, interpret, and explain
complex decision-making-related tasks [ 51]. Such black box-like methodologies cannot
identify and explain decision-making in smart cities. XAI algorithms can be applied to
computer vision problems, trafﬁc congestion, self-driving cars, intrusion detection systems
(IDS) [ 52–54], etc., to address the above issues. It is also essential to monitor and validate
the behavior of the smart city application before deploying advanced machine and deep
learning models.
3.1. XAI for Blockchain
Blockchain is an immutable ledger that can process various transactions and carry
out asset management and tracking. Blockchain is widely known for tracking and trading
physical assets, such as houses, cars, and real estate properties and virtual assets such as
patents, copyrights, and many more [ 51]. Furthermore, blockchain technology is suitable
for providing real-time information in a completely transparent and secure environment.
Blockchain technology can be implemented using smart contracts. Smart contracts are
predetermined constraint-based programs that are executed on a blockchain network. It
enables the automation of agreements without any interruptions.
Blockchain technology is one of the essential solutions to drive cloud-based data
centers. Moreover, blockchain technology brings reliability and trustworthiness aspects
in designing and developing secure engineering solutions [ 55]. However, the merits
of blockchain technology also bring two critical challenges: (i) cross-layer implementa-
tion of blockchain technology in cloud computing environments and (ii) the need for a
control mechanism due to the automation of tasks in most blockchain-based solutions.
Blockchain technology systematically organizes data to prevent intruders from manipu-
lating or hacking the system. The increasing complexity of data-driven AI methodologies
and their non-transparent behavior presents numerous security challenges to smart city
problems [ 56]. XAI methodologies have extended and improved the explainability of AI
models. Especially in decentralized AI applications, integrating blockchain with AI models
guarantees data privacy and security. It also provides data accessibility and traceability. In-
tegrating AI and blockchain architecture can implement a secure decentralized framework
for storing and retrieving data generated with AI models.
As every coin has two sides, combining blockchain with XAI methodologies will also
bring numerous future challenges which need to be tackled smartly. Firstly, the validation
of explanations given by XAI methodologies is a huge challenge due to the minimization of
humans in the loop. Secondly, achieving the real-timeliness of applications is a big concern,
which requires an immediate resolution [57].
Applications of XAI for Blockchain
Integrating XAI with blockchain can support diverse trusted, non-transparent, secure,
decentralized and undisputed systems and application domains.
a. Customer Proﬁle Assessment: Integrating XAI with blockchain will massively affect
banking and ﬁnance operations. The banking and ﬁnance applications are jointly
integrated with blockchain technology (BCT) and XAI-based multi-agent systems
(MAS). The XAI and blockchain-based multi-agent systems comprise various in-
telligent expert agents. The expert agents analyze bank customers’ proﬁles, credit
history, demographic information and health history. The blockchain-based multi-
agent systems also enable effective decision-making and minimize risk probabilities
in investments by fostering trust and transparency [ 57]. Furthermore, the integra-
tion of XAI with blockchain also assists in identifying creditworthy customers and
decision-making about load allotment, providing business ﬁnance, or empowering
start-ups.