Electronics 2023 ,12, 1020 2 of 40
management, trafﬁc management, payments and ﬁnance, smart parking, and trash manage-
ment [ 5–7]. A smart, AI-powered city will use energy and resources more efﬁciently, protect
the environment, improve its citizens’ lives, and enable them to adopt current ICT more
quickly. Speciﬁcally, (i) technology and data availability and reliability, the dependency on
third parties and the lack of skills are limiting factors; (ii) ethical issues when using AI are
complicated; and (iii) regulatory issues when attempting to interconnect infrastructures
and data are complex.
Explainable AI (XAI) in smart city development plays a crucial part. Recent appli-
cations based on deep learning, big data, and IoT architectures need intensive use of
complicated computational solutions. Since these systems are closed to users, they are
called “black boxes.” People will fear that their tools may be untrustworthy if this is
true. In the last few years, attempts have been made to solve this problem using XAI
methodologies to make things more transparent.
1.1. Clinical Decision Support Systems
Clinical decision support systems (CDSS) are computerized systems that help health-
care providers use information more intelligently, helping to improve both patient health
and the healthcare process. In order to accomplish many goals, CDSSs are developed
with the following capabilities: diagnosis, prediction of treatment response, the suggestion
of treatments (personalization), prognosis and the prioritizing of patient care based on
risk [ 8]. In addition, CDSS can be beneﬁcial in areas with limited resources, such as the
number of healthcare facilities, equipment and physicians. CDSS may be categorized
as knowledge-based or non-knowledge-based. While non-knowledge-based CDSS are
usually based on AI, knowledge-based CDSS rely on medical guidelines and knowledge
(https://www.limswiki.org/index.php/Clinical_decision_support_system accessed date:
14 December 2022)). The AI-based CDSS examines past clinical data to produce predic-
tion models to assess new input variables. When these results are used as guidance for
doctors, these recommendations can aid them in their practices. There is tremendous
promise for AI-based CDSS in clinical practice. Using a CDSS increases clinical choices
while reducing medical mistakes since it is objective and relies only on input data and
decision-making logic.
Nonetheless, their use of data depends on the amount and quality. Bias in training
data results in skewed or inaccurate predictions for AI models. Biased or erroneous human
decisions are likely to occur if this practice is widespread [9–11].
1.2. The Need for XAI: Fair and Ethical Decision-Making
Understanding the mathematical underpinnings of existing machine learning archi-
tectures may only provide insights into how and why a result was obtained, not into the
inner workings of the models. One must use explicit modeling and reasoning techniques to
answer questions like “How did that happen?” One also knows that contextual adaptation,
e.g., systems that aid in developing explanatory models for tackling real-world issues, will
be a crucial difﬁculty for future AI. Human expertise should not be excluded, but AI should
supplement it. When classiﬁcation ﬁndings may lead to dangerous incidents for people, it
is necessary to comprehend the mechanism that is at work behind such outcomes. Complex
machine learning models are an essential focus of XAI research. Machine learning models
may be classiﬁed according to their interpretability or opacity.
1.3. Motivation
XAI has already risen to the top of research and development in the ﬁeld of smart
cities [ 1]. Large-scale decision-making will be required to carry out daily activities in smart
cities. Since these decisions are made in black boxes, people need to know how a particular
decision is made, as well as there is a developing situation amongst policymakers in smart
cities with this loss of explainability of AI-based black-box models, which is a primary
problem in the acceptability of AI-based decisions. Here, XAI comes into play to explain