Electronics 2023 ,12, 1020 24 of 40
possible to achieve global model behavior using Bayesian rule learning (BRL) or a simple
decision tree. There are no variations in approach for the rule or the tree itself. Decision
trees must have a high level of understanding to make lay users understand the reason
for a prediction. Decision trees identify relationships when the model learns only a few
signiﬁcant features. A decision tree maintains a preferred situation requiring little training.
As a result, both rule and decision trees have reproducibility properties and can be referred
to as human-simulatable [170].
A wide selection of training models can allow the users to guess correctly. For “lay
users,” the explanation generation methods such as Partial Dependence Plots (PDPs) do
not possess signiﬁcant importance. Meanwhile, model evaluation based on features can be
roughly approximated when knowledge of relevant techniques is absent among the users.
Therefore, LIME and SHAP were applied regarding local surrogate explanations. Both of
them follow a similar approach to explanation, and there is no real difference among users
except for the actual graphical representation. This results in marginal differences among
the values for single features.
The users likely focus on the most signiﬁcant contributions and general direction, so
the underlying methods are unimportant. The literature mentions feature reduction meth-
ods when explainability comes to light, in particular, [ 171]. However, in explainability, one
needs to be careful with dimension reduction approaches as they can conceal explainability.
The importance of preprocessing data can be accepted due to the more understandable
model that may result. Whether the aim is to achieve accuracy or interpretability for the
model, considering the quality of the input data for the model is always a good practice.
As various explainability approaches are illustrated, it becomes evident that the intrinsic
quality of explanations also tends to experience an inﬂuence from what was done by [ 172].
Numerous explanations consider feature importance, giving statisticians an intuitive sense,
but a “lay user” would unlikely comprehend the process. This is one of many problems.
Many other things need to be done in the future.
5.1. Black-Box versus Interpretable Models—Reconsideration of the Problem from the Beginning
Before training models to address the smart cities problem, one should address what
is being sought and whether there is a real need for a black-box model. According to [ 168],
it is a problem that the ﬁeld of XAI is exploding with research into prediction models for
precise decisions. They argued that the accuracy of black-box models is worth considering
in building interpretable models. Hence, there is a signiﬁcant gap (i.e., lack of under-
standability, comprehensibility, explainability and transparency) in the literature regarding
competing black boxes and an interpretable model. It is worth exploring if there would
still be a need to use interpretable models when proven to be as reliable as a black box.
5.2. Comparison and Measuring of Explainability
This research establishes that standard measurement, quantiﬁcation, and comparison
procedures for enhancing approaches to explainability need to be developed to make
smart cities reliable. Such procedures can then enable researchers to compare different
approaches. However, despite some research work, there remains a massive gap (i.e.,
trustworthiness) in the standardized procedure to be covered in future studies. Evaluation
measures such as accuracy, recall and F1-score are required to evaluate the classiﬁer’s
performance. It is important to emphasize that there is a need for similar metrics to
evaluate explainability. According to authors in [ 173], XAI can be evaluated based on the
four measures. The ﬁrst difference between the explanation’s logic and the agent’s actual
performance is the number of rules resulting from the explanation, the number of features
used to generate that explanation and the stability of the explanation [173].
5.3. Enhancement of Explanations with Ontologies
Combining explanations with ontologies presents another area of exploration for
future research. Enhancement of explanations with ontologies is a challenge for future