Electronics 2023 ,12, 1020 31 of 40
7.1.3. 24 7 Availability
The availability and access of real-time and near-real-time data and XAI-based decision-
making of smart city applications such as targeted healthcare, connected restaurants, con-
nected cars and smart manufacturing are paramount. Furthermore, performing pervasive
computing and providing robust real-time decisions in smart city applications is chal-
lenging and demands high-performance computing-intensive applications. To provide
247availability, devices with long battery life and a lightweight machine learning model
may be introduced. Furthermore, dead devices or sensor nodes can be identiﬁed by their
readings using machine learning to keep the system up and running [1].
7.1.4. Monitoring and Audit
The XAI integrated smart cities applications demand regular monitoring and main-
tenance of all the smart city stakeholders using audit-log management and preventive
maintenance mechanisms [ 197]. To address this issue, AI-based auditing can be performed
where data is acquired from smart devices. Two types of auditing/forensics can be per-
formed: software-based and hardware-based [ 201]. Data is acquired in two modes in
software-based auditing: root and no root mode. In rooting mode, most of the data can be
acquired. However, in non-rooting mode, data loss can occur due to required permissions.
Various approaches, such as “JTGA” and “chip-off,” can be used in the hardware-based
acquisition. However, it can result in permanent device damage. After data acquisition, AI
is applied to classify or predict any output labels [201].
7.2. Ethical and Privacy Issues of XAI for Smart Cities
All the applications of smart cities depend on various AI algorithms and methodolo-
gies such as reinforcement learning, collaborative and networking nodes, conﬁdential data
and logs [ 202]. So it is essential to maintain the conﬁdentiality of various smart city stake-
holders. Therefore, an XAI-integrated blockchain framework must ensure stakeholders’
data and controlled information exchange over a third-party network. The XAI-integrated
smart cities applications overcome the disadvantages of black-box AI systems, such as
lack of transparency and trust; however, the XAI-integrated smart cities applications need
solutions for issues such as unreasonableness and injustice.
Unreasonableness and Injustice
The XAI-integrated smart city applications can make decisions based on data availabil-
ity. However, as the decisions are based on AI systems, it is challenging to conﬁrm that they
are fair and non-biased [ 203]. As a solution, XAI can ensure that the AI system provides
enough explanation about how a model made a decision and can be evaluated using the
difference between the logic and the models’ actual performance, the number of rules
resulting from the explanation, the number of features used to generate that explanation
and the stability of the explanation. The decisions made using XAI integrated smart cities
applications and systems should be evaluated based on ethical and moral behaviors [68].
7.3. Scalability
Scalability is a cardinal feature in assessing any system’s performance and through-
put [ 202]. The dynamic XAI integrated smart city system functions are based on machines,
various AI algorithms and methodologies, sensing data, and third-party networks. It
is important to ensure ﬂexibility and responsiveness among various collaborative and
networking nodes and AI methodologies. In the future, XAI architecture can be combined
with Responsive AI to achieve scalability in smart city applications and systems [204].
7.4. Regulatory Compliance for Implementing XAI for Smart Cities
Regulatory compliance means formulating guidelines, regulations and laws [ 205].
Formulating appropriate rules and regulations is essential to avoid misuse of the latest
technologies, such as XAI. Furthermore, smart city applications and systems blend the latest