Electronics 2023 ,12, 1020 7 of 40
4. Transparency: For a model to be transparent, it must be comprehensible by itself.
Simulatable, decomposable and algorithmically transparent models are all types of
transparent models [35].
2.1. Ante Hoc Methods
Predictive models and explainability techniques have two fundamental connections
between them. An illustration of ante hoc is using the same model to predict and explain,
such as using feature weights to predict a linear regression. It is critical to point out
that there are assumptions associated with these approaches and they must be met if
the explanation is to operate as expected [ 36,37]. Clear indications about the underlying
prediction algorithm and data, whether transparent or opaque, should be used to have an
explainable approach. Can someone describe the workings of a predictive model without
knowing how it works? When explaining data or forecasts, is it necessary to make data
characteristics intelligible to humans ﬁrst? For example, while describing a forecast, think
of how it may be stated in terms of the temperature in a room compared to calculating
a squared sum of the room temperature and the height. Sometimes the system designer
wants to provide a list of data transformations or an example-based explanation in instances
when the input domain is not intelligible to humans [35,38].
2.2. Trade-Off between Performance and Interpretability
As with any other bold statement, the issue of interpretability versus performance
becomes bogged down in myths and misconceptions. It might be true that the more compli-
cated the model is, the better it is for predictions, but it is only sometimes true [ 39]. In such
circumstances, the prediction is wrong. This phenomenon is quite prevalent in several
industries. For example, because features must be tested in conﬁned physical settings
where all of the characteristics are closely linked and no wide range of potential values
is represented in the data, many issues have just a limited subset of features [ 40]. More
predictive models allow for more complex functions to make a prediction. Predictability
involves having speciﬁc complexity and the data is widely distributed across the world of
suitable values for each variable. There is also sufﬁcient data available to use a complex
model. Therefore, “more complex models are more accurate” appears correct. The trade-
off between performance and interpretability may be seen in this circumstance. Also, it
is essential to remember that, while attempting to resolve problems that do not follow
the abovementioned principles, an organization will risk ﬁxing too simplistic (variance)
problems. A key difference between a complicated model and a sophisticated one is that
a complicated one makes the prediction process more complicated, whereas a sophisti-
cated one keeps the model simple but accurate. The performance brings complexity with
it and as a result, interpretability confronts itself on a downhill slope. However, when
these newer techniques of explainability arise, this would ﬂip or nullify the increase in
explainability [16].
3. XAI for Smart City Enabling Technologies
In general, smart cities are deﬁned as technology-enabled, socially intensive and envi-
ronmentally friendly urban areas. This section discusses key enabling technologies of smart
cities such as blockchain, IoT, big data, 5G and beyond technologies, digital twins, AR/VR,
and computer vision. Researchers have recently attempted to address smart city problems
using predictive and advanced analytics, smart environmental monitoring and smart mo-
bility. Still, the design and development of smart cities have remained an open research
problem [ 41]. With the advancements in technologies such as computer vision, IoT, and
big data and AI, it has become feasible to address smart cities-related challenges [ 42–44].
Recently, numerous machine learning and deep learning methodologies have been applied
to applications related to smart cities. For instance, ﬁne k-nearest neighbors (KNN) [ 45],
decision tree [ 46], medium KNN [ 47], You only look once (YOLO) v4 and YOLOv5 [ 48]
and mass region-based convolutional neural networks (R-CNN) methodologies are ap-