Electronics 2023 ,12, 1020 9 of 40
b. Medical Imaging: Integrating XAI with blockchain technology can implement a
secure decentralized medical diagnosis framework for medical image-based diagno-
sis. The XAI and blockchain-based medical diagnosis framework uses block-wise
encryption and histogram shifting methodology to ensure secure transmission of
historical patient data and provide trustable information about patient history, such
as how, who, when, and where the patient proﬁle data is created. This methodology
can also assist radiologists in making decisions by explaining critical patient con-
ditions. The combination of medical imaging technology, XAI and blockchain can
assist doctors in making transparent, trustable, unbiased and effective decisions for
critical patients [58].
c. Auditing: The XAI with blockchain applications can protect organizations from
money laundering, bank transaction fraud, and income and sales tax fraud. The in-
tegration of BCT and MAS uses a widely known consensus algorithm with the
SHA-256 secure hashing algorithm to ensure the safety of banking and ﬁnancial
transactions. In addition, a joint integration of BCT and XAI-based multi-agent
systems can analyze biased and disputed decisions, explain them, and assist gov-
ernment ofﬁcials, judges, and lawyers in identifying and detecting various frauds.
Furthermore, the integration of XAI with blockchain can also detect election-related
frauds, such as manipulating votes and election results. [59].
d. Real-time Decisions: Based on the intelligent sensing units connected to smart ve-
hicles, XAI with blockchain solutions can assist in making real-time decisions such
as fatal accidents and trafﬁc congestions [ 60]. The XAI and blockchain-integrated
systems contain deterministic and non-deterministic predictors. The deterministic
predictors assist in making accurate decisions based on the inputs and data of the
XAI methodology. For inexact decisions, the non-deterministic predictors produce
inexact decisions. The deterministic or probabilistic predictors can make all types of
AI-related decisions, such as frequent pattern mining, optimization-related decisions,
clustering, classiﬁcation-related decisions, and many more [ 57]. In non-real-time
situations, XAI with blockchain solutions can be a blessing in identifying fatal ac-
cidents and handling trafﬁc congestion solutions by diverting vehicles in the right
direction. Figure 3 demonstrates a use case of XAI with blockchain for smart cities.
As shown in Figure 3, XAI-based multi-agent systems integrated with blockchain
methodology in applications, such as banking and ﬁnance, medical imaging and ac-
counting, assist in identifying credit-worthy customers, and making decisions about
their loans and ﬁnance. The blockchain methodology contains block-wise encryp-
tion, histogram shifting methodology, and SHA-256 cryptography. The XAI-based
multi-agent systems integrated with blockchain methodology can explain the reasons
for customers’ credit and health history, banking, and ﬁnance transactions to make
critical real-time decisions.
+1. Banking & Finance Applications
2. Medical Imaging Applications
3. Finance & Accounting Audit
4. Real-time Decisions
XAI Models &
Interface
XAI based Multi-
Agent Systems
Blockchain
Technology
Block-Wise Encryption &
Histogram Shifting
SHA-256 Secure Hash Encryption
Predictors
Identification of credit worthy
customers and making decisions
about loan and financeMaking case base,
Textual, Patient History
based DecisionsIdentification of biased disputed decisions
frauds such as manipulation of votes,
election results, money launderingIdentification of Fatal Accidents &
Traffic ManagementXAI GOALS
Explain Customer  Requir ement
Explanation & Interpr etation of Health History of
Customers
Explain How , When, Wher e, Who Cr eated Patient Data
Explanation about Emergency Health Conditions to
Radiologist
XAI Explanation of Banking & Finance Transactions
and its History to Bank Pr ofessionals
XAI Explanation of Biased & Disputed Decisions to Govt
Officials
XAI Explanation of Realtime Decisions, Optimization
XAI Explanation of Patient Health History to Doctors
Figure 3. A Usecase of XAI with Blockchain for Smart Cities.