Electronics 2023 ,12, 1020 28 of 40
ethical, and social science angles to support the European green deal ambition. The GECKO
project focuses on training 15 Early-Stage Researchers (ESRs) who will explore interpretabil-
ity and XAI models to mitigate unintentionally harmful and poorly designed AI models.
6.2. Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARP A) Projects
In 2016, Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) Information Inno-
vation Ofﬁce (I2O) launched the XAI program (Explainable Artiﬁcial Intelligence (XAI)
https://www.darpa.mil/program/explainable-artiﬁcial-intelligence). Under this program,
DARPA has funded several projects focusing on different aspects of XAI.
6.2.1. Driving-X
This project is conducted by the University of California, Berkeley (UCB) and the
University of Amsterdam. This project focuses on using XAI for self-driving vehicles to
improve user acceptance.
6.2.2. Retrieval: Saliency Driven Retrieval
This project is conducted by the University of California, Berkeley (UCB). This project
focuses on using XAI to improve the accuracy of exemplar-based image retrieval.
6.2.3. RISE: High-Fidelity Salience for Black-Box Networks
This project is conducted by the University of California, Berkeley (UCB) and Boston
University. This project focuses on high-ﬁdelity saliency maps to indicate each pixel level’s
salient for the model’s prediction, mainly for black-box models.
6.2.4. Rollouts: Informative Rollouts and the Critical States
This project is conducted by the University of California, Berkeley (UCB). This project
focuses on explaining a robot’s policy and how that robot acts in different scenarios to offer
safe and comfortable human–robot interaction.
6.2.5. SNMN: Transparent Multi-Step Reasoning with Stack Neural Module Networks
This project is conducted by the University of California, Berkeley (UCB) and Boston
University. This project focuses on reasoning procedures in the UCB-developed SNMN
model-generated explanations. It studies how this SNMN model improves users’ satisfac-
tion with the explanation and improves truthful beliefs about the model’s behavior.
6.2.6. StarCraft: Heterogeneous Hierarchical Policies
This project is conducted by the University of California, Berkeley (UCB) and Boston
University. This project focuses on developing an AI model to play the StarCraft II game.
This AI model should be capable of automatically explaining its behavior.
6.2.7. Textual: Textual Justiﬁcation with Grounding
This project is run by the University of California, Berkeley (UCB) and the University of
Amsterdam. This project combines explanation language generation and natural language
grounding models to provide textual output to explain the image classiﬁcation.
6.2.8. CAMEL: Causal Models to Explain Learning
This project (CAMEL https://cra.com/projects/camel/) is run by Charles River An-
alytics, the University of Massachusetts and Brown University. And develops Causal
Models to Explain Learning (CAMEL) which offer humans understandable and trusted
explanations based on causality to manage machine learning (ML) techniques of AI systems.