Electronics 2023 ,12, 1020 3 of 40
these decisions. XAI converts black-box to white box to make understandable, interpretable,
transparent, and explainable decisions [12].
There are a few surveys on XAI for smart cities; however, only a few go into more
depth, look at the beneﬁts of XAI for smart cities, key technologies of XAI and open research
problems, and ongoing projects in XAI for smart cities. Authors in [13] provided a survey
on explainable deep learning models for smart city solutions such as ﬂood detection and
drainage monitoring. The authors in [ 14] have broadly described the rapidly-growing ﬁeld
of XAI-related research. Authors in [ 15] provided thorough research on XAI related to
medical applications. Authors in [ 16] suggested a taxonomy and classifying the XAI ap-
proaches based on their breadth of explanations, methodology used behind the algorithms,
and explanation level of utilization.
Table 1 concisely presents a comparison of the important survey papers and also
highlights the gap in existing surveys, which is the need for a comprehensive analysis
of XAI for smart city decision-making that is trustworthy, responsible, and transparent.
Keeping in mind the limitations and gaps of existing surveys, there is a high need for
research focusing on XAI for smart cities.
Table 1. Summary of important surveys on XAI.
Ref.
XAI Driving Trends
Applications/Use Cases
Requirements/Vision
Technical Challenges
Enabling Technologies
Ongoing Activities
Research DirectionsRemarks
[13] L H L M M L M This study provides a survey on explainable deep learning for smart cities
solutions such as ﬂood detection and drainage monitoring.
[14] L M L H M L M This study serves as a stepping stone for academics and practition-
ers who want to grasp the details of the rapidly-growing ﬁeld of
XAI-related research.
[15] M M L M H M M A thorough research on XAI related to medical usage and its branches.
[16] M L M H M H H This study suggested a taxonomy and classifying the XAI approaches based
on their breadth of explanations, methodology used behind the algorithms
and explanation level of utilization.
[17] H L M H H M M By exploring different application ﬁelds, such as medical informatics, law,
the semantic web, security, robotics, and certain general-purpose systems,
the researchers elucidate how XAI Argumentation aids in the construction
of explainable systems.
[18] L L M H H M G This article shares XAI design and evaluation framework experiences from
many ﬁelds. Supporting different design goals and assessment techniques
is another purpose of this research project.
[19] L M L H H L L A survey of AI explainability research and techniques is presented in the lit-
erature. Initially, we surveyed the CS research community to locate the most
relevant studies on AI explainability, or “XAI.” Then, we researched HCI.
[20] H M H H H L M In this review, they examine and overview several XAI techniques devel-
oped utilizing approaches derived from computational argumentation.
[21] L M L H H L L This article goes into great detail on current XAI approaches of possible
importance for pathological imaging deep learning algorithms and orga-
nizes them based on three key facets. By including uncertainty analysis
methodologies as an inherent component of the XAI environment, they
provide their clients with more assurance in predictions.
[22] L M L H H L H They provide a cutting-edge, browser-based system, called XNLP , that
showcases new and relevant research in XAI through a dynamic survey
of recently published state-of-the-art work in the ﬁeld of natural language
processing (NLP).
This paper H H H H H H H This study addresses current, projected and future developments and
use cases in XAI for smart cities.
L Low Coverage M Medium Coverage H High Coverage
1.4. Contributions
As the XAI concept in smart cities is transforming with the advances in complementary
technologies, a paradigm shift is needed to drive and transform AI-driven projects into XAI-