Electronics 2023 ,12, 1020 20 of 40
From the perspective of law enforcement, the use of XAI to support preliminary inves-
tigations may be restricted. Traditional ways of criminal forensics are changing dimensions
into more technology-oriented investigations [ 152]. DF police ofﬁcers emphasized that they
were theoretically unjudgmental and did not provide objective reports, but most of DF’s
analysis showed that the suspect had been arrested and executed.Ref. [ 152] proposed the
forensic analysis method to identify the communicating parties for suspecting communica-
tion for later generation and evaluation of the evidence. In this case, the investigator wants
the DF expert to recover the data from the targeted devices and submit it to the court in a
reportable format so that XAI can perform this operation automatically. Integrating XAI
into DF space is a real challenge, but XAI offers the prospect of solving older issues that
are increasingly challenging to solve. The increased amount of data essential for analysis,
the difﬁculty of IT crimes and the diversity of evidence slow the transfer of valuable DF
information, rely on data processing, and consume many resources.
4.8. XAI for Smart Grids
Smart grids combine advanced measurement, control, and communication technolo-
gies to collect large amounts of multidimensional data related to network performance. Due
to the rapid changes in advanced power systems, more scattered smart grid components
such as distributed energy, electric vehicles, telecommunications infrastructure and smart
metering infrastructure are tightly cohesive into advanced power systems [ 153]. These com-
ponents generate a large quantity of data to improve and automate smart grid performance
and support various applications such as network security [ 154], system prediction [ 155],
distributed generation control [ 156] and FD [ 157]. XAI technologies are gaining widespread
attention because traditional computing technologies cannot handle the large amounts of
data ﬂowing into smart grid systems. However, the application of AI technology in smart
grids is becoming more evident due to the many limitations of traditional technologies for
optimization, modeling, and control in data processing [ 158]. As these XAI technologies use
large amounts of data to further improve the performance of smart grids, much research is
being done to study these AI technologies and solve these problems.
4.9. XAI for Smart Governance
The continuous development exacerbates the government’s need to control the scale
and speed of AI and the increasing application of XAI in autonomous, robotics, and deadly
weapons systems. There are many research works on changing aspects of XAI, but the
management of XAI is underdeveloped. While new AI programs offer opportunities to
improve proﬁtability and quality of life, they can also have unintended consequences and
new forms of risk that need to be considered [ 159]. To maximize the beneﬁts of XAI while
mitigating risks, governments worldwide need to understand the depth and extent of
risk, the regulatory and governance processes to address these challenges, and the need
to design the structure. The autonomy of XAI solutions decreases human control over
these solutions, creating new problems for other people and human operators in terms of
liability and legal damages caused by AI. However, XAI depends heavily on ML to adapt
and learn its own rules, leaving humans out of control and only sometimes responsible for
intelligent behavior.
4.10. XAI for Smart Industry
Smart manufacturing and intelligent machines in today’s industry are being developed
with the help of AI, ML and big data exchange technologies [ 160,161]. Figure 8 presents
the role of XAI in Industry 4.0. In the smart Industry, manufacturing comprises data-
driven decision creation to improve current manufacturing processes and the latest robots
are used to solve complex problems increase [ 162–164]. With the IoT and other assistive
technologies, Industry 4.0 and 5.0 have a long way to go to support these latest trends,
but smart factories and smart manufacturing are picking up performance. Following
Industry 4.0 and 5.0, smart enterprises offer smarter solutions for predicting machine