Electronics 2023 ,12, 1020 4 of 40
driven mode. To assist researchers in initiating their research work in the domain of XAI
for smart cities, a rigorous and informative study is required to provide current, projected,
and future insights. The presented study provides in-depth insights and analysis of various
XAI technologies for Smart cities. The presented survey discusses use cases, standard
practices, challenges, the latest trends, and future research directions. The contributions of
the presented study are:
• The presented study on XAI for smart cities is a ﬁrst-of-its-kind, rigorous, and detailed
study to assist future researchers in implementing XAI-driven systems, architectures
and applications.
• To assist readers, this paper discusses concise deﬁnitions and key technologies of XAI
and its explanation using various smart city-driven use cases (see Section 2).
• In previous studies, more focus has been given to XAI applications for smart cities.
The undertaken study discussed the concept of XAI for smart cities, various XAI tech-
nology use cases, challenges, applications, possible alternative solutions and current
and future research enhancements (see Sections 2–7).
• The core contribution of the conducted study is to discuss open research problems
and challenges (see Section 5).
• Furthermore, It also discusses ongoing smart city-driven XAI projects (see Section 6).
• Finally, security, privacy, ethical issues and regular compliance for implementing XAI
in smart cities are discussed and future directions are provided (see Section 7).
1.5. Organization
Figure 1 depicts the taxonomy of the survey paper. Table 2 provides the list of
abbreviations. The paper is further organized as follows: Section 2 deﬁnes key aspects and
technologies of XAI. Section 3 explains the XAI technologies and their implementation in
current and emerging smart cities. Section 4 identiﬁes the applications of XAI in smart
cities. Section 5 discusses the open research issues and challenges. Section 7 presents XAI’s
future development and research direction in smart cities. Finally, Section 8 concludes this
paper. Section 6 presents the ongoing XAI projects for smart cities.
Taxonomy of 
Future Smart Cities
Introduction
MotivationThe Need for XAI: Fair and
Ethical Decision-Making
Section 3
XAI for Smart City
Enabling T echnologies
XAI for Blockchain
XAI for Big DataXAI for IoT
Section 5
Open Issues and
Research Challenges 
Black-Box versus Interpretable Models-
Reconsideration of the Problem from
the Beginning
Enhancement of Explanations with
OntologiesComparison and Measuring of
ExplainabilitySection 2 
Definitions and Key
Technologies of XAI
Section 4
XAI for Smart City
Applications/Use
CasesXAI for Smart Healthcare
XAI for T ransportationXAI for Intrusion Detection Systems
Section 7
Lessons Learnt, Future
Development and Direction
of XAI in Smart CitiesSecurity Issues of XAI for Smart
Cities
Industrial W aste ManagementOrganizationContributions
XAI for 5G and BeyondXAI for Digital
Twins
XAI for Computer
VisionXAI for AR/VRXAI for A viation System
XAI for FinanceXAI for Legal Issues
XAI for Digital Forensics
XAI for Smart GovernanceXAI for Smart Grids
XAI for Smart Industry
Section 8
ConclusionTrade-of f between
Performance and
InterpretabilityAnte-Hoc MethodsSection 1 
Definitions and Key
Technologies of XA
User T raining on Explainability
Features ExplicitlyTrusting Machine Learning Models
Visualization
Security and Assurance
PrivacyEthical and Privacy issues of XAI
for Smart Cities
Scalability
Regulatory Compliance for
Implementing XAI for Smart Cities
Standard Specifications for
Implementing XAI for Smart CitiesSection 6
Ongoing XAI Projects
for Smart Cities
Figure 1. Taxonomy diagram of the explainable artiﬁcial intelligence for smart cities.