Electronics 2023 ,12, 1020 30 of 40
6.2.17. Model Explanation by Optimal Selection of Teaching Examples
This project is conducted by Rutgers University and analyzes the Explanation-by-
Examples system to improve the user understanding of the inference of black-box machine
learning models.
6.3. Other Projects
In South Korea, the XAI Center [ 196] is focusing on developing XAI models by devel-
oping new or modiﬁed ML techniques. This XAI center aims to support research projects
that use XAI to offer sufﬁcient human-understandable explanations about the results and
decision-making ML model. In this regard, the XAI center primarily focuses on to Med-
ical and Financial industry, where adaptation of AI is a high risk without explainability.
Moreover, the Austrian Science Fund has funded a project titled “Reference Model of XAI
for the Medical Domain” (https://www.aholzinger.at/austrian-science-fund-project-on-
explainability-granted/).
The Christ-Era organization had a funding call on Explainable Machine Learning-
based Artiﬁcial Intelligence (XAI) (https://www.chistera.eu/projects-call-2019). It has
funded 12 projects in different domains, including digital medicine, robotics,
and manufacturing.
7. Lessons Learned, Future Development, and Direction of XAI in Smart Cities
This section discusses the lessons learned from surveying the state-of-the-art in XAI
for smart cities. Based on the detailed analysis, it synthesizes future research directions to
enable XAI for smart cities.
7.1. Security Issues of XAI for Smart Cities
From the above discussion, it can be found that XAI has the potential to revolutionize
smart cities by rendering justiﬁcation/explanation to the decision-makers/governments,
through which better decisions can be made. However, due to the sensitive nature of the
data generated from smart cities, the deployment of XAI-integrated smart cities applications
will face critical security issues, such as authentication and authorization, integrity, 24 7
availability, and monitoring and audit of explanatory and interpretable processes [ 197].
The security challenges faced by the applications of XAI-enabled smart cities, along with
the possible solutions, are discussed below:
7.1.1. Authentication and Authorization
Several stakeholders, such as intelligent agents, sensing nodes, IoT sensor nodes,
and machines involved in smart cities, should be authenticated and authorized to ensure
that they do not misuse or expose the AI model to malicious users. If the details of the
training of AI models are exposed, malicious users can tamper with the training data to
change the decision of AI models. To address these issues, blockchain can be used in smart
city applications to ensure that the stakeholders participating in smart city applications are
authentic [198].
7.1.2. Integrity
Integrity is a signiﬁcant concern in XAI-integrated smart city applications due to real-
time data monitoring and decision-making based on the explainability and interpretability
of LIME, SHAP , and Grad-CAM methodologies. Furthermore, emergency notiﬁcations,
such as making decisions about a patient’s health diseases, are sent over third-party
networks that demand a secure and ﬂawless communication channel [ 199]. Blockchain and
federated learning can be used in smart city applications to preserve integrity. Even the
combination of these two techniques can be used to preserve integrity [200].