Electronics 2023 ,12, 1020 12 of 40
operations, and critical healthcare decisions. Finally, the service layer is responsible for
notifying the real-time updates and explaining a particular event.
However, integrating XAI with big data technologies also challenges future directions.
For instance, in applications such as healthcare, XAI can visualize the AI model and assist
healthcare experts in decision-making. However, generating accurate medical diagnosis
reports, deriving conclusions from them, and validating these reports is a major concern
for healthcare experts [82].
Applications of XAI for Big Data
Integrating XAI with big data can support diverse, decentralized, risk-oriented, unbi-
ased systems and application domains.
a. Customer Segmentation and Management: The big data-based XAI integrated deci-
sion support systems can assist organizations in geographical segmentation, under-
standing, and interpretation of various types of customers. Such systems consist of
belief-rule-base (BRB) and factual and heuristic rules. Furthermore, it can understand,
analyze, extract, and interpret historical data using supervised machine learning and
deep learning methodologies. The big data-based XAI integrated decision support
systems also assist in managing customer relationships and offering them various
customer-centric products, their explanation and beneﬁts [ 83]. Furthermore, XAI
methodologies can also assist in understanding the needs and requirements of regular
customers in offering suitable products to customers.
b. Stock Prediction and Management: The XAI integrated multi-agent stock predic-
tion systems can assist stakeholders in picking the right stocks concerning the cur-
rent know-how. Such systems are integrated with gradient boosting decision trees
methodology, which can interpret and predict stock price inclines and declines [ 84].
It can also assist ﬁnance portfolio managers in making the right decisions about
stock selection, purchase, and selling for their esteemed customers [ 85]. Furthermore,
the XAI integrated Big data systems can better understand customer ﬁnance history,
current needs, and aspirations to gain more proﬁts and make future stock decisions.
c. Health Analytic of the Elderly: The big data-enabled XAI integrated healthcare
systems can analyze activities of daily living (ADLs) of the elderly, their daily lifestyle
monitoring status and anomalies in routine activities; such systems use the concept of
data-driven AI to identify the cognitive decline of activities of daily living in a smart
home. It analyses cognitive decline and explains why a sudden decline has happened
in routine ADLs. The data-driven big data-enabled XAI systems also identify the
possibility of health diseases such as Dementia and Parkinson’s [ 86]. Furthermore,
such systems can assist healthcare experts in understanding the elderly’s mental
health conditions, cardiac conditions, blood pressure, and oxygen levels to predict
the probability of critical health conditions and diseases in advance [87].
d. Business Analytics for Supply Chain Management: The big data-integrated-XAI
supply chain systems can plan and organize supply chain operations, gain real-
time insights into customer feedback and build cost-effective business strategies for
ﬁnance and marketing. Such systems use a robust meta-heuristics base that can
analyze customers’ and vendors’ histories and formulate a cost-effective business
strategy [ 88]. Furthermore, big data-integrated-XAI supply chain systems can also
provide further recommendations for improving supply chain strategies based on
customer necessities and feedback using meta-heuristics [89].