Electronics 2023 ,12, 1020 13 of 40
1. Customer  Segmentation
2. State information of Various customers
3. Health and Personal History of Customers
4. Order  and Pr oduct Info of Customers
XAI Models &
Interface
BRB(Belief Rule Baes)
GBDT(Gradient Boosting Decision Tree)
Map r educe and Informatica
Meta-heuristic methodology
Identification of cr edit worthy customers,
managing good r elationship and offering
customer  centric pr oductsExplanation of geographical segmentation of customers
Explanation about corr ect stocks and assistance in pr ediction
Explanation of anomalies in life style and mental health 
of elderlies
Explanation of supply chain operations and plan
Making decisions about stock
selection, pur chase and sellIdentification of anomalies in daily
routine activities of elderliesMaking decision about supply chain
strategy and automationXAI GOALS
Multi-Agent Systems
Decision Support
System
Health Care Systems
Figure 5. A Usecase of XAI with Big Data for Smart Cities.
3.4. XAI for 5G and Beyond
Recently, 5G technologies have faced challenges such as connection density, network
access issues in basements, underwater, and space, 247availability, delay in communica-
tion, quality of service (QoS), and many more. Several research works have discussed 6G
technologies, beneﬁts, and standards [ 90]. However, their practical usage and applications
still need to be completed. Standard machine and deep learning methodologies integrated
with 5G and beyond technologies can implement technologies such as remote healthcare
monitoring, telemedicine, Industry 4.0 and digital twin, but fail to understand, interpret,
and assist in real-time decision-making [91–93].
However, by integrating XAI methodologies with 5G and beyond technologies, edge-
AI-enabled smart devices can facilitate humans with various intelligent applications such
as connected robots, collaborative autonomous driving, smart and interpretable health,
remote surgery, connected restaurants, connected cars, connected assembly, and many
more [ 94]. However, XAI for 5G and beyond technologies also brings challenges and
research directions. In applications such as precision manufacturing and autonomous
vehicles, a human-computer interface-driven interface is required for smooth functioning
and communication for smart city applications [95,96].
Applications of XAI for 5G and Beyond
The integration of XAI with 5G and beyond technologies can change accessing real-
time updates, bringing humans and machines together on a trusted platform and automat-
ing information delivery. As a result, it can play a vital role in smart city design and
development and global societal development.
a. Precision Manufacturing: The 5G and XAI-enabled manufacturing systems with hu-
man and machine participation in smart factories can increase productivity, organize
production processes, automate factory operations, and increase ﬂexibility [ 97,98].
Such systems consist of a gradient-boosting decision tree methodology to identify
machine errors or any errors made by tools/soft-wares. Furthermore, the 5G and
XAI-enabled manufacturing systems can perform focused analytics using a reliable
AI-integrated prediction model for maintenance tasks. It can develop a ﬂexible
production environment for future product trends and customer needs [99].
b. Connected Robotics: The 5G-enabled explainable agents and robots can automate
restaurant operations (connected restaurants), drive and control autonomous ve-
hicles, automate and control cooking tasks and connect assembly systems [ 100].
The explainable agents and robots can explain their behavior to humans and carry
out intra-agent explanations for a particular task [ 101]. Furthermore, the 5G enabled
explainable agents and robots can understand, interpret and explain the allotted
tasks to robots and provide real-time status to the humans [102].
c. Collaborative Autonomous Driving: The vision-based autonomous driving systems,
along with 5G and beyond technologies, can enable collaborative autonomous driv-
ing, inter-vehicle, vehicle-to-infrastructure and vehicle-to-vehicle communications in
near real-time using technologies such as LoRa. The combination of behavior cloning
and reinforcement learning methodology can carry out imitation-based learning from