Electronics 2023 ,12, 1020 18 of 40
4.4. XAI for Aviation Systems
A repair card is used in the aviation maintenance management system to report
anomalies or a failure in aviation maintenance. The incorrect maintenance may result
from an incomplete or incorrect repair card, making the maintenance data hard to analyze.
This incomplete reporting has several different reasons. Firstly, when the crew ﬁlls out
maintenance of the card, some valuable information is frequently unknown. The ﬁndings
mentioned on the card are usually written in the form of free-form text, making it hard
to interpret the card ﬁndings automatically [ 139]. The failure assessed automatically will
describe the repair cards as more consistent and complete. The automatically assessed
failure would increase troubleshooting efﬁciency and add more diagnosis information that
may otherwise be unavailable to the manual maintenance crew. Ref. [ 140] proposed an
automatically diagnosed model for aviation failure. The proposed model combines usage
and maintenance data and utilizes a data-driven approach. XAI plays an essential role in
the aviation industry. The inclusion of XAI will provide interpretability and transparency
of the identiﬁed and assessed diagnosis. With the help of XAI, the diagnosis is explained
by comparing failure with the expected new values of different diagnoses.
4.5. XAI for Legal Issues
In the criminal justice scenario, AI can better evaluate the risk of reoffending and
decrease the expenses related to incarceration and crime. However, to predict the risk
of reoffending using a criminal decision-making framework in court, it must be ensured
that the framework acts reasonably, non-discriminatorily, and honestly. This critical area
requires transparency in decision-making methods, but there needs to be more work
that can explain automatic decision-making in the legal system [ 141–143]. For example,
in [144], the case questioned the use of proprietary risk assessment software in the decision.
The case supposed that the software “created an alternative case to deal with sanctions
for inmates: COMPASS” [ 141] despoiled the right to judge based on race and gender.
However, the Judge is still determining the causal veriﬁcation process and the program
used measured trade secrets.
4.6. XAI for Finance
Using AI tools includes asset management activities, improving customer service,
and obtaining investment advice in ﬁnancial services. However, AI tools also raise ques-
tions about fair lending and data security. The ﬁnancial sector is strictly regulated, and the
law requires credit institutions to make the right decisions. Therefore, when AI systems
are used in rating and loan models, the main challenge is making it more challenging to
provide the valid code lenders need. For instance, an explanation of why the borrower
was denied credit. Especially when the basis of the negation is the result of the opaque
ML algorithm, some credit organizations, such as Experian and Equifax, have carried out
valuable research projects to produce unconscious incentive codes to make it easier for
auditors to interpret and use XAI-based credit rating decisions [ 145]. Figure 7 presents the
role of XAI in ﬁnancial services, including natural language processing (NLP), cognitive
computing (CC), chatbot, anti-money laundering (AML) & Fraud detection, robot, cus-
tomer recommendations, algorithmic trading, robot advice and machine learning [ 146].
XAI is useful in understanding the decisions made by chatbots [ 147] since chatbots are
now being used in every ﬁeld of life to interact with customers, entertain requests and
respond to decisions. Authors in [ 148] used XAI to explain the role of AI in fraud detection.
The authors state that using AI-based systems in ﬁnance is risky due to its nature (Black
box). Therefore, XAI can be used to explain on what grounds did learning model made
this prediction.