Electronics 2023 ,12, 1020 23 of 40
Table 3. Cont.
Ref DescriptionApplication Technical AspectSmart Transportation
Smart Industry
Smart Healthcare
Smart Governance
Aviation System
Intrusion Detection
Smart Grids
UA Vs and drones
IoT
Scalability
Dynamacity
Recursion
Adaptivity
Security
Privacy
Communication
Resource Management
[140]The author developed a novel
model to automatically diagnose
an aviation system’s failure.
The developed model used the
data-driven technique with usage
data and maintenance data.X X X X X
[158]The research survey reviewed
common AI approaches used in
security problems, load
forecasting, faults detection,
power grid stability assessment in
the power systems and smart grid.X X X X X
[154]The study aims to design and
develop a scalable IDS for smart
grids. The developed model will
differentiate between a
disturbance and an actual
cyber attack.X X X X X
[1]The study surveys future smart
cities, their requirements,
emerging technologies,
Applications, challenges
and future aspects.X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X
[166]The study focused on developing
human-centered smart cities. They
also focused on critical analysis of
smart city security, data
management, and ethical
challenges.X X X X X X X X X X X X
[167]The study focused on AI and
XAI-based methods adopted in
the Industry 4.0 scenarios.X X X X X X X X
5. Open Issues and Research Challenges
Machine learning’s decision explainability has been one of the important research areas
in recent years in smart cities. According to some XAI researchers, the understandability
of models for reliability is essential. Meanwhile, some believe that explainability is not
required in reality for every purpose because human reasoning is considered a black
box [ 168]. For example, in the daily life activities of smart cities, someone would be
more interested in why a loan was approved than a doctor who prefers a speciﬁc medical
treatment. A recent real-life application where explainability is a crucial need is as detection
of COVID patients [ 169]. Either the individual is COVID-positive or negative. Since it is a
crucial decision to be made by the model, an explanation is required on which parameter
this model predicts the patient COVID positive or negative. Despite the disagreement,
both sides of XAI agree that understandable models are critical in regulated areas. It is