Electronics 2023 ,12, 1020 26 of 40
autonomy of autonomous systems and the security status of computer and sensor data.
Extracting information from the systems used to explain navigation autonomy is also an
important future area for research. The newly developed security monitor should assist
autonomous navigation in decision-making during an attack. The new framework should
enable an XAI-Monitor to explain its capability to ﬁnd unproductive or false decisions
generated by autonomous systems and ﬁnd cybersecurity barriers that lead to unexpected
navigation [184].
5.8. Privacy
Nowadays, privacy is a signiﬁcant concern and a challenge for all stakeholders of
smart cities. The following are some examples of how privacy can be violated. The authors
of [1] show that smart homes in a smart city environment are a growing market that
requires privacy sensors and reliable, interpretable, and explainable control systems. AI’s
recent advancement has been integrated into all aspects of human life, including the home,
and is becoming increasingly resilient. This rise in AI has sparked mutual concern about
the impact of conﬁdentiality and resilience in adopting various sensors, such as home
cameras. AI explainability and transparency are becoming more responsive as a result.
Despite their high accuracy, current black-box AI models could be more trustworthy due
to ambiguous solutions. XAI requires a short-range radar sensor with privacy protection
and an intuitive AI system to solve privacy issues and organize gestures indoors in a
smart home environment. Many traditional encryption concepts and products can be
modiﬁed and reused to ensure the conﬁdentiality and security of scenarios such as smart
homes [ 185]. XAI is needed to ensure that the AI system adheres to privacy policies deﬁned
by organizations such as EU GDPR, etc.
6. Ongoing XAI Projects for Smart Cities
This section presents some of the key research projects in the context of XAI and their
relevance to smart city applications and technologies.
6.1. European Union (EU) Projects
EU has several funding programs and projects in the context of XAI.
SPATIAL
Security and Privacy Accountable Technology Innovations, Algorithms and Machine
Learning (SPATIAL) [ 186] is an EU-funded project under the Horizon 2020 (H2020) funding
framework. The SPATIAL project focuses on developing accountable, resilient, and trust-
worthy AI-based security and privacy-preserving methods for future ICT systems. Thus,
the SPATIAL project focuses on using XAI to ensure the security and privacy of the 5G and
6G networks. Several beyond 5G and 6G use cases are considered in this project.
XAI
The Explanation of AI for decision making (XAI) [ 187] project is an EU-funded project
under the H2020 European Research Council (ERC) funding framework. XAI project
aims to construct useful explanations of opaque AI/ML systems using a local-to-global
framework to offer a black-box explanation. Moreover, the project will focus on developing
an explanation infrastructure that can benchmark AI methods’ explainability. The XAI
project considers use cases such as health and fraud detection to introduce an explanation-
by-design approach.
NL4XAI
Interactive Natural Language Technology for XAI (NL4XAI) [ 188] is an EU-funded
project under the H2020 Marie Skłodowska-Curie funding European Training Networks
(ETN) framework. NL4XAI makes AI self-explanatory by utilizing natural language
generation and processing, argumentation technology, and interactive technology for XAI