Electronics 2023 ,12, 1020 16 of 40
spatiotemporal quantities, matrices and vectors. Furthermore, the complexity of inter-
pretability highly depends on black-box models, such as the depth of trees, the presence of
non-zero weights in neural network models, etc.
4. XAI for Smart City Applications/Use Cases
Currently, AI is playing the leading role in several domains, such as healthcare, enter-
tainment, and business, regarding progress and innovations. From the current solutions
point of view, the inﬂuence of deep learning (DL) is based on machine learning (ML) and ar-
tiﬁcial neural networks (ANN) have shown good robustness and excellent performance.
Still, from the decisions and human-understandable perspectives, they lack the abilities.
Therefore, the need for more abilities in the more sensitive domain is crucial. Some of the
applications of smart cities that can beneﬁt from XAI integration are discussed below.
4.1. XAI for Smart Healthcare
Advanced technologies like AI, the IoT and cloud computing refer to smart healthcare
systems in the existing health system. Figure 6 presents smart healthcare systems in smart
cities. The advanced technologies enable the healthcare system to be more personalized,
convenient, and efﬁcient [ 128]. Furthermore, advanced technologies help in health moni-
toring in real-time through available applications of healthcare on wearable or smartphone
devices. Thus, it motivates individuals to take care of and control their health issues.
Furthermore, the collected health data at the individual level may be shared with doctors
and clinicians through cloud computing for other diagnoses [128].
  
Smart Health 
SystemNurse  
Pharmacist
Clinical 
Laboratory  Radiologist  PatientEmer gency
Medical
Services  
Update
the data  Analyze
the data  
Research
Center  
Doctor  
PrescriptionEnter clinical 
test reportPrescription Sensor based 
patients dataSensor based 
patients data
Test from 
decision support system
Enter diagnostic 
test reportDecision
support 
AI 
Test from 
decision support
system
Enter data
to systemPrescription  
Decision
support AI
Update patients 
status  Sensor based 
patients data
Figure 6. Smart Health Care System in Smart Cities.
Moreover, in health screening, AI may be used for the disease’s early diagnosis and the
selection of the treatment plan [ 129]. Ref. [ 130] presented the ethical issues of trust in the
operation of block boxes in AI systems and transparency related to AI frameworks and