Electronics 2023 ,12, 1020 11 of 40
QARMA methodologies can also identify intruders, interpret, and explain the theft
to the police, make autonomous decisions, and notify the house members about the
status and actions taken against thefts [72].
c. Accident Prevention: The XAI and IoT integrated frameworks, such as the local inter-
pretable model-agnostic explanations (LIME) framework, can easily be integrated
with LoRA and the LIME framework can explain the classiﬁcation results generated
by XAI algorithms. For example, The LIME integrated XAI and IoT-based systems
can provide real-time accident updates to neighboring cars and protect against fa-
tal accident possibilities. It also assists in navigating to unknown destinations by
informing about dangers and risks in advance [73].
d. Trafﬁc Management: Based on the intelligent sensing units connected to smart vehi-
cles, XAI with IoT solutions can assist in smart vehicle management [ 74]. The XAI,
supply chain management (SCM) and blockchain-integrated heuristic search method-
ology can assist in avoiding trafﬁc congestion situations and identifying trafﬁc condi-
tions in advance. The XAI-enabled SCM system stores the information and time of
every service provider (SP). The XAI-enabled SCM system is connected with smart
networks such as vehicular ad-hoc networks (VANET). Every service provider has an
open location key against the trafﬁc information gathered by the XAI-enabled SCM
system; ﬁnally, the stored information is integrated to identify trafﬁc conditions in
advance, assist vehicles in navigation, and reduce trafﬁc congestion situations [75].
+
XAI Models &
Interface
Explanation of theft, intrusion activities,
lighting, ventilation, heating.
Explanation about r eal-time health
information of patients such as cardiac
conditions, oxygen levels, blood pr essur e,
diabetes, and pr ovide emergency health alerts
Explanation about r eal time accident updates
to neighbouring cars and assist in pr otection
against fatal accident possibilities. Assists in
navigating to unknown destinations by
informing about dangers and risks in advance
Explanation about traffic conditions in
advance, assist vehicles in navigation and
reduce traffic congestion situations
1. QARMA Algorithm
2. CDSS System
3. LIME Framework
4. Supply Chain ManagementIdentify intruders, interpr et and explain the theft
to the police, make autonomous decisions, and
notify the house members about the status and
actions taken against thefts
Making ML  decisions about patients critical health
conditions
Protection against fatal accidents and ML  decisions
about traffic management and risk
Identification of traffic conditions and making ML
decisions about traffic congestionXAI GOALS
IoT Sensors
Preventive
Healthcar eSmart
BuildingAccident
PreventionTraffic
Management
Figure 4. A use case of XAI with IoT for Smart Cities.
3.3. XAI for Big Data
Big data is a collection of structured, unstructured and semi-structured data, informa-
tion and knowledge [ 76–79]. Integrating AI and big data-enabled systems collect, interpret,
process and store large amounts of data. It also applies advanced analytics that can be used
for predictive modeling and analytics [ 80]. However, due to the black box-like behavior
of most AI methodologies, machine, and deep learning methodologies fail to interpret
and explain large volumes of data resulting in poor decision-making. Integrating XAI
algorithms with big data can assist big data systems in understanding, interpreting, and
processing diverse and large volumes of data [ 81]. It can also assist in identifying complex
patterns, categorization, dimensionality adjustments, and maintaining transparency and
accountability of data [ 15]. The big-data-based XAI integrated decision support systems,
multi-agent systems, and healthcare systems can assist organizations in explaining and
making decisions about customer’s geographical segmentation, health and personal his-
tory, selection and prediction of stocks, identiﬁcation of anomalies in lifestyles of elderlies
and planning and formulating supply chain strategies. Figure 5 represents a use case of
integrated XAI and big data applications for smart cities. Furthermore, the knowledge layer
is responsible for the timely generation of processed information to assist various big data
systems and tools in decision-making. For example, healthcare experts and clinicians can
apply medical approaches with caution based on the inputs received from XAI-integrated
big data systems, which will assist them in selecting appropriate medical practices, medical