Electronics 2023 ,12, 1020 29 of 40
6.2.9. Learning and Communicating Explainable Representations for Analytics
and Autonomy
This project is run by the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA), Oregon State
University and Michigan State University and develops an XAI framework for multi-model
analytics and autonomous recognition, reasoning, and planning domains.
6.2.10. xACT: Explanation-Informed Acceptance Testing of Deep Adaptive Programs
This project is run by Oregon State University (OSU). This project develops a new
paradigm of explanation-informed acceptance testing (xACT) tools that can observe and
evaluate machine-learned systems’ behavior and explain the decisions leading to
that behavior.
6.2.11. COmmon Ground Learning and Explanation (COGLE)
This project (COGLE https://www.marksteﬁk.com/?page_id=2262) is run by Palo
Alto Research Center, Inc. (PARC), Carnegie Mellon University, Florida Institute for Human
and Machine Cognition and the United States Military Academy. This project develops
an interactive sense-making system called COGLE (COmmon Ground Learning and Ex-
planation). The COGLE system can explain the learned performance capabilities of an
autonomous system.
6.2.12. XAI for Assisting Data Scientists
This project is run by Carnegie Mellon University (CMU) and experimentally analyzes
the effectiveness of the XAI system in debugging standard ML models.
6.2.13. Deep Attentional Representations for Explanations (DARE)
This project is run by SRI International, the University of Toronto and the University
of California, San Diego, and focuses on augmenting several explainable deep learning
models to enable multiple modes of explanation to improve accuracy.
6.2.14. Explainable Question Answering System (EQUAS)
This project (https://www.raytheonintelligenceandspace.com/news/feature/trust-
machine) is run by Raytheon BBN Technologies (Raytheon BBN), Georgia Tech Research
Corporation, the University of Texas Austin and Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
This project develops a new Explainable Question Answering System (EQUAS) based
on pedagogical and argumentation theories. It can analyze the important explanation
elements, the behavior of explanation space, and user expectations. The above two theories
help deﬁne the foundation of EQUAS “explanation space,” which provides analytics,
visualization, cases and rejected alternatives.
6.2.15. Tractable Probabilistic Logic Models: A New Deep Explainable Representation
This project (https://www.eng.uﬂ.edu/ai-university/research/tractable-probabilistic-
logic-models-a-new-deep-explainable-representation/) is conducted by The University
of Texas at Dallas (UTD), University of California, Los Angeles, the University of Florida
and Indian Institute of Technology Delhi. It studies new explainable systems for fake news
detection and videos’ automatic action and object detection. These systems can explain the
reasons for produced results.
6.2.16. Transforming Deep Learning to Harness the Interpretability of Shallow Models: An
Interactive End-to-End System
This project is conducted by Texas A&M University (TAMU) and the University of
Florida and develops and analyzes an explainable system named XFake, on fake news
detection. This is an XFake system with three different frameworks, i.e., MIMIC, ATTN,
and PERT, which can analyze the news from different perspectives.