Citation: Javed, A.R.; Ahmed, W.;
Pandya, S.; Maddikunta, P .K.R.;
Alazab, M.; Gadekallu, T.R. A Survey
of Explainable Artiﬁcial Intelligence
for Smart Cities. Electronics 2023 ,12,
1020. https://doi.org/10.3390/
electronics12041020
Academic Editor: Gwanggil Jeon
Received: 14 January 2023
Revised: 9 February 2023
Accepted: 17 February 2023
Published: 18 February 2023
Copyright: © 2023 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
electronics
Review
A Survey of Explainable Artiﬁcial Intelligence for Smart Cities
Abdul Rehman Javed1,2,*
, Waqas Ahmed1, Sharnil Pandya3,4
, Praveen Kumar Reddy Maddikunta5
,
Mamoun Alazab6
and Thippa Reddy Gadekallu2,5
1Department of Cyber Security, Air University, Islamabad 44000, Pakistan
2Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Lebanese American University,
Byblos P .O. Box 36, Lebanon
3Department of Computer Science and Media Technology, Faculty of Technology, Linnaeus University,
351 95 Vaxjo, Sweden
4Faculty of Technology, Symbiosis Institute of Technology, Symbiosis International Deemed University,
Maharashtra 412115, India
5School of Information Technology and Engineering, Vellore Institute of Technology, Tamil Nadu 632014, India
6College of Engineering, IT and Environment, Charles Darwin University, Casuarina, NT 0810, Australia
*Correspondence: abdulrehman.cs@au.edu.pk
Abstract: The emergence of Explainable Artiﬁcial Intelligence (XAI) has enhanced the lives of humans
and envisioned the concept of smart cities using informed actions, enhanced user interpretations
and explanations, and ﬁrm decision-making processes. The XAI systems can unbox the potential of
black-box AI models and describe them explicitly. The study comprehensively surveys the current
and future developments in XAI technologies for smart cities. It also highlights the societal, industrial,
and technological trends that initiate the drive towards XAI for smart cities. It presents the key to
enabling XAI technologies for smart cities in detail. The paper also discusses the concept of XAI
for smart cities, various XAI technology use cases, challenges, applications, possible alternative
solutions, and current and future research enhancements. Research projects and activities, including
standardization efforts toward developing XAI for smart cities, are outlined in detail. The lessons
learned from state-of-the-art research are summarized, and various technical challenges are discussed
to shed new light on future research possibilities. The presented study on XAI for smart cities is a
ﬁrst-of-its-kind, rigorous, and detailed study to assist future researchers in implementing XAI-driven
systems, architectures, and applications for smart cities.
Keywords: Explainable Artiﬁcial Intelligence (XAI); smart cities; artiﬁcial intelligence; machine
learning; future cities; Internet of Things (IoT); data mining; smart health; real-time systems
1. Introduction
Information and communication technologies (ICT) and the Internet of Things (IoT) are
essential components of smart cities, which may boost operational efﬁciency and improve
services while helping residents lead sustainable lives [ 1,2]. Viably, the administration of
accessible resources beneﬁts from information and communication advances. There is a
critical purpose for developing smart technologies to enable people to experience new and
better things in their everyday lives [ 3,4]. In addition to making these technologies more
efﬁcient, increasing their efﬁciency may make them eco-friendly, more productive, and more
ﬂexible. While the digital revolution was important in many ways, it was also crucial for
businesses to think about how easy and efﬁcient it would be to run their businesses.
ICT is essential to the smart cities idea. It is not only crucial in policy formulation,
decision-making, implementation and the provision of valuable services, but it is also
essential in all other stages of the strategy. Artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) can help make cities
more efﬁcient in many areas of life, including their use in energy management, tempera-
ture management, education, health and human services, water management, air quality
Electronics 2023 ,12, 1020. https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics12041020 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/electronics