Electronics 2023 ,12, 1020 10 of 40
3.2. XAI for IoT
In the development of innovative smart city solutions, Internet of things (IoT) technolo-
gies has played a vital role in shaping the life of citizens by addressing issues such as trafﬁc
congestion, theft detection, geospatial farming, telemedicine, remote healthcare monitoring,
and many more [ 61,62]. In recent times, smart city problems have been addressed using
various data sensed via smart sensing devices. Furthermore, the introduction of intelligent
edge computing and edge-AI-enabled devices and their integration with IoT technologies
have envisioned the future directions of smart city concepts [ 63,64]. Edge-AI-enabled
devices have been integrated with powerful machine and deep learning methodologies to
analyze and predict smart city-related issues, such as the air quality index (AQI), weather
prediction, accident prevention, and trafﬁc monitoring.
However, Edge-AI-enabled devices and robust machine learning methodologies can
not assist in real-time or near-real-time decision-making. To achieve this objective, XAI
methodologies can be integrated with intelligent IoT, the Internet of medical things (IoMT),
the AI of medical things (AIoMT), and edge AI-enabled smart devices to identify, interpret,
and explain a particular situation which helps in making critical decisions. Figure 4 repre-
sents a use case of integrated XAI and IoT-enabled architecture for smart cities. As shown
in Figure 4, edge-level XAI is responsible for collecting sensing information from Edge-
AI-enabled smart devices and sending it to the application servers for processing via a
cloud gateway [ 65,66]. Furthermore, the application server also notiﬁes individuals of
emergency alerts via network operators. The XAI-enabled IoT systems use methodologies
such as QARMA, CDSS, LIME, etc. Thus, for example, XAI and IoT-integrated devices can
notify the family members and explain the whole situation to them after a fatal accident,
make critical decisions based on the critical health condition of patients, provide real-time
notiﬁcation and explain trafﬁc congestion situations.
Combining XAI with blockchain and IoT infrastructure brings economic and scala-
bility challenges. The scalability issue comes from the overall size of each block and its
adaptability with the increase in the number of transactions. Along with the increase in
the number of transactions, the handling and maintenance costs will also increase due to
increased trafﬁc. Furthermore, the increase in the number of users and transactions will
also increase the latency time for processing. Still, the challenges of combining XAI with
blockchain and IoT have remained open research issues [ 67]. Researchers have introduced
methodologies such as Segwit, Sharding, Plasma, etc.
Applications of XAI for IoT
Integrating XAI with IoT can support various critical, trusted, decentralized and undis-
puted systems and application domains.
a. Preventive Healthcare: The XAI integrated clinical decision support systems (CDSS)
explain the relevance of XAI methodologies from various perspectives: (i) medical, (ii)
technological, (iii) legal, and (iv) end-user (patient) perspectives. The XAI-integrated
CDSS system uses the analysis ﬁndings to conduct a detailed ethical assessment
of patients’ proﬁles with appropriate explanations [ 68]. Integrating XAI, CDSS
and edge, and edge AI-enabled smart devices can provide real-time information
about patients, such as cardiac conditions, oxygen levels, blood pressure, diabetes,
and many more; it also assists caretakers and healthcare experts and family members
in making critical healthcare decisions. In addition, XAI and IoT-enabled frameworks
can also be applied to advanced analytics on patients’ vital health information and
can predict health diseases in advance [69].
b. Smart Building Management: XAI and IoT-enabled smart building/home archi-
tectures can autonomously control building operations [ 70,71]. The XAI systems
integrated with QARMA algorithms and models monitor smart building operations.
The QARMA methodologies can formulate quantitative rules for creating, updat-
ing, and managing smart building operations such as protection against thefts and
intrusion activities, lighting, ventilation, heating, etc. Furthermore, XAI-integrated