Electronics 2023 ,12, 1020 14 of 40
human driving lessons and make safety-critical decisions [ 103]. Furthermore, vision-
based autonomous driving systems can also provide background insights about road
accidents, geographical conditions, alternative routes, smart car parking, platooning,
assistance for changing and merging lanes, and managing intersections [104].
d. Targeted Healthcare: The 5G enabled EMR systems connected with clinicians and
medical experts can perform feature interpretability analysis of health patients and
provide essential information, quantitative and qualitative assessment of patient
health history using methodologies such as local explanations, global explanations,
local interpretable model-agnostic explanations (LIME), SHapley additive exPla-
nations (SHAP), Example-based Techniques, and Feature-based Techniques [ 105].
Furthermore, such intelligent methodologies, integrated with 5G-enabled smart
and connected health systems, can also assist healthcare experts in combating fatal
diseases such as COVID-19 [106].
3.5. XAI for Digital Twins
A virtual replica spans a physical system or object’s lifecycle called a digital twin (DT).
A DT is updated frequently with real-time data and uses ML simulation and reasoning
for decision-making. DT is a highly complex virtual model and replica of its physical
counterpart, which can be anything ranging from a car to a person to a building to a city
to a bridge. The data from the physical assets are collected from the sensors connected to
them and are mapped to the virtual model. The behavior of the real-world object/thing
can be understood or visualized by looking at the DT. Using DT, we can understand
how the objects are behaving presently and predict how they will behave in the future
by analyzing the data from the sensors [ 107]. Even though DTs were originally designed
to improve the manufacturing process using simulations, they are now being used in
several application domains, such as healthcare and smart cities, due to the increase in
big data generated from several IoT-based applications [ 108]. The potential applications
of DT in building/designing effective smart city services are increasing every year due to
the increased connectivity by IoT devices [ 109]. The potential applications of DTs in the
smart city include planning and developing smart cities and energy saving in smart cities.
The data from the utilities in smart buildings gives insights into the usage patterns and
distribution of the utilities, through which decisions can be taken based on the predictions
made by ML algorithms and big data analytics [ 110]. DTs can facilitate the growth of a
smart city by creating testbeds inside a virtual twin. A smart city DT can achieve two
objectives; the ﬁrst thing is that DTs can act as a testbed for testing the scenarios and the
other one is that DTs can analyze the changes in the collected data and learn from the
environment that can be used for monitoring and data analytics [ 111]. For instance, DT-
integrated clinical decision support systems can set a threshold for doctors using patient
history and meta-heuristics. The decision thresholds can assist doctors in recommending
medicines and deciding tests and treatments based on patient conditions.
A smart city DT can be created by integrating building information models with
the big data generated by sensors from IoT devices in a smart city. The public can walk
around the city’s accurate 3D model created by the DT. It can observe the proposed changes
in the policies and urban planning that will pave the way for public opinion before the
decisions come into practice [ 112,113]. AI-enabled smart city DTs can be used effectively
to plan for preparation, mitigation, and response during natural disasters and calamities
during ﬂoods and earthquakes [ 114,115]. Even though AI can help DTs simulate smart
cities, through which the authorities can take necessary actions, due to the black-box
nature of AI/Ml algorithms, it is challenging for the authorities to understand the reason
for the predictions/classiﬁcations. In mission-critical applications such as trafﬁc control
and disaster management, wrong decisions taken by authorities can affect millions of
lives and properties in urban areas. Through the transparency and justiﬁcation of the
predictions, XAI can alleviate these problems faced by the authorities in making decisions
based on the predictions given by AI algorithms in the smart city DTs. Moreover, combining