Electronics 2023 ,12, 1020 17 of 40
applications. The techniques of AI used in explaining the AI framework and the predictions
of AI are known as XAI techniques [ 129]. Ref. [ 129] proposed the XAI techniques in the
existing AI techniques to increase predictions in AI-based models in healthcare. Following
are some of the beneﬁts of the XAI in healthcare:
• Result Tracing: The factors that may affect the AI-based system’s outcome can be
traced with the help of explanations generated by XAI techniques.
• Increased Transparency: XAI can be used to improve trust levels and help in-
crease AI system transparency; it also explains the arrival of the AI system at the
speciﬁc decision.
• Model Improvement: For making an outcome AI framework learned from the pro-
vided dataset. The erroneous predictions may be because of the faulty rules of AI.
To improve the model accuracy and identify the errors in the learning process, expla-
nations generated by XAI are useful.
4.2. XAI for Intrusion Detection Systems
Deep neural networks (DNNs) are becoming popular because of their exact predic-
tions [ 131]. These types of models are hard to interpret but useful. For instance, through
the model of DNN, a self-driving care control requires several thousands of tuning param-
eters [ 132]. From the perspective of IDS, it is tough for a network administrator if such
models of DNN are implemented to comprehend the cognition provided using ML methods.
Therefore, the DNN method is also considered a black box method [ 133]. The black-box
method retains its decision-making process stimulating to construe until ﬁnding the best
solution. DNN mainly modiﬁes several parameters using a trial-and-error method [ 134].
To increase the known attack classiﬁcation accuracy, several studies used ML techniques in
the IDS, automated model construction, and recognized anomalous network packets [ 135].
However, some of these frameworks emphasize output interpretation as an understanding
of predicting attacks and how ML techniques conclude.
Attacks can be interpreted easily if clariﬁed in rule forms, such as simple construed
rules in the if, Then statement. To impose security policies for recognized attacks, some
of the challenges include: linking the IDS with the network, analyzing the network trafﬁc,
explaining network trafﬁc, and deliver explanations to the network administrators. The ex-
planation is required to understand (i) the parts of violated security policies, (ii) the target
parts of the attack, and (iii) the network feature parts. For the logically construed outputs,
crucial pillar models for the processes are required. A decision tree (DT) is the best solution
for such tasks. DTs are the most suitable models where the scenario requires explaining the
output. DTs do not need any assumptions on data distribution like other supervised ML
techniques. In the context of IDS, the interpretative approach is necessary.
4.3. XAI for Transportation
Self-driving cars are expected to reduce deaths and provide greater mobility, but they
also question the explainability of AI decisions. Self-driving cars must make immediate
decisions to categorize objects in real-time. If a car suddenly behaves abnormally due to
misclassiﬁcation issues, it may result in casualties. The signiﬁcance of misclassiﬁcation
may be unsafe. It is not a prospect; it has previously happened. Recently, an Uber killed a
female in Arizona. This is the ﬁrst identiﬁed accident relating to an entirely autonomous
vehicle. Now, the question is, how does this misclassiﬁcation occur? XAI can answer this
question. An XAI-based model can be trained to get an insight into the decision made
by the model. It was reported that the car’s software searched objects in front of the car
but interpreted them as plastic bags or windblown weeds [ 136]. An explainable system
can only simplify the uncertainty of this situation and prevent it from happening. In XAI,
transportation is an important application area. The explanation of car behavior has even
now begun, [137,138], but there is still a long way to go.