1551-3203 (c) 2018 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TII.2019.2902878, IEEE
Transactions on Industrial Informatics
 5 
 
  ( ) ( , )
1S
E E b E b dsen tx iji i i
                    (3)                                              
 
1()SS
E C Tleak ONiBatteryLifetime DC   
             (4) 
IV. DATA RELIABILITY MODEL FOR HYBIRD  TPC  AND 
DUTY-CYCLE NETWORKS  
  A novel data reliability model for the AI-based industrial 
applications over hybird TPC and duty-cycle network is 
proposed. In these networks, received signal strength indicator 
(RSSI) and packet loss ratio (PLR) are the key performance 
indicators for examining the entire system. 
                                                                                                      
     
1, 1
Re , 11
,11RSSI TPCth
liability RSSI RSSI TPCi th
RSSI RSSI TPCi th  
  
  

              (5)
( ) ( )
11Renn
RSSI TP RSSI TPth thiiliability DC
n   


 (6) 
  Fig. 4 reveals the framework of the reliability optimization in 
the AI based edge comuting platform for indusrial application 
by adopting case1 (static:product processing) and case2 
(dynamic:vibration and fault diagnosis) self-adaptive 
mechanisms. In addition, TPC and RSSI level are taken at the 
physical layer while duty-cycle is considered at the MAC layer. 
TPC is adapted according to the variation in the wireless 
channel which impacts a lot on the RSSI level, PLR, and hence 
the reliability.  The case 1 and case 2 are given as the inputs to 
the wireless channel, which feeds to the adaptive TPC 
techniques from where signal’s level is examined and then 
transmission is started to monitor and manage the power by 
adopting the IEEE 802.15.4. Besides, Case 1 and Case 2 in 
Fig.4 are very vital for accuretly analyzing the behavior of the 
IoT-based portable devices in industrial platform..Relationship 
between modulation level, duty-cycle and energy drain is drawn 
in Fig.5 (a) and (b) accordingly for proposed FCDAA, PTPC 
and Baseline by adopting AI based edge computing mechanism 
in industrial applications. Modulation level or data rate varies 
with respect to the requirement of sensors and static, dynamic 
industrial scenarios  then there will be change in the energy 
dissipation level. Increase of data rate  makes the power draina 
and battery lifetime in IoT based portable devices for industrial 
applications as a critical challenge. In industrial applications 
large data rate consumes significant amount of power in both 
processing and transmission phases as shown in Table III. 
While Fig. 5 (b), shows the interconnection between the duty-
cycle and the energy drain for the proposed FCDAA and the 
traditional methods i.e., Baseline and PTPC. Fig. 6 (a) reveals 
the trade-off between the time and the standard deviation of 
proposed FCDAA, and conventional i.e., PTPC and Baseline 
methods. It is observed that there is more deviation in the later 
than the former due to unstable nature of the wireless channel 
which affects a lot to the overall performance of the industrial 
environment . Fig. 6 (b) reveals the relationship between sensor nodes and the energy drain for the proposed FCDAA and the 
conventional i.e. PTPC and Baseline. It is examined that as the 
number of sensor nodes are increasing the energy dissipation 
increases too, which is higher for the traditional methods and 
less for the proposed FCDAA. Besides, it is analyzed that 
network congestion is linearly related to the delay and hence the 
energy drain in the traditional techniques unlike the proposed 
FCDAA. 
V.     EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND DISCUSSION  
  An extensive experimental test-bed for AI based industrial 
applications is established with the support of IoT devices. 
Adopted industrial data sets show the impact power and battery 
lifetime of the IoT-driven portable devices product monitoring 
and process with high reliability. There are several 
experimental parameters as shown in Table II. 
TABLE II. E XPERIMENTAL PARAMETERS   
 
TABLE III. R ELATIONSHIP BETWEEN PERFORMNCE METRICS  
 
Several  key issues are examined during industrial process  and 
monitoring by gathering large data sets  [25] and developing 
novel mechanisms to manage the power and extend the battery 
lifetime of portable  industrial devices. Moreover, overall test -
bed consists of transmitter sensor node and BS with static  and Parameter  Value  
RSSIth  -85 dBm  
Standard deviation (
 ) 5dBm  
Harvesting rate (
 ) 
Dutycycle  1000 Hz  
1% 
Carrier frequency  5 GHz  
 Bandwidth  5 MHz  
TP levels  {-5,-4, -3, 2, 1,0,1,2,3,4,5}  
Maximum Transmission Power  0 dBm  
Minimum Transmit power  -20 dBm  
Operation time (T)   5 mints  
 Delay  300 sec  
Data packet length  200 bytes  
Data packet  interval  100 sec  
Data Rate  250 Kbps  
Noise figure  7 dB  
Noise PSD  -174 dBm/Hz  
Wireless Channel  IEEE 802.15.4 (PHY and MAC)  
Processing delay  2 mints  
X/Y Axis  Standard 
Deviation(dBm)  Energy 
Consumption(mJ)  
FCDAA  PTPC  Baseline  FCDAA  PTPC  Baseline  
Sensor Nodes  low moderate  high low high high 
Modulation 
Level  low high high low moderate  high 
Duty -cycle  low high high low high high 
Time  low high high low high high