1551-3203 (c) 2018 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TII.2019.2902878, IEEE
Transactions on Industrial Informatics
 2 
the miniaturized and resource-confined nature of the IoT-based 
edge AI devices results in a significant proportion of energy 
dissipation during sensing and transmission phases, and it is 
apparently impossible to neglect energy depletion of these tasks. 
Traditional sensor networks cannot be re-energized due to static 
node distribution mechanism and battery’s empty level, thus 
huge amendment is needed to bring these up to current needs of 
the industrial world [15]. Thus, to meet the required needs of 
each application, a hybird adaptive TPC and duty-cycle has become potential candidate for AI-based edge computing in 
industrial applications. Our proposed FCDAA optimizes the 
power , extedn the battery lifetime with high reliability in AI 
based edge computing industrial application for the first time as 
per author’s knowledg e. The proposed FCDAA tunes 
transmission power level and duty-cycle of IoT devices in 
industrial applications by adopting static (product processing) 
and dynamic (vibration and fault diagnosis) platform at 
acceptable reliability or packet loss ratio (PLR). 
Adaptive Power Controller Connectors
Adaptive Duty-cycle 
OptimizerMicrocontroller and 
ADCAdaptive Edge Node
Adaptive Network Node  
Service NodeAdaptive Application Node  Adaptive Reliability 
OptimizerSensors & Actuators
RouterWLANAccess pointWireless Router SatelliteGatewayRepeater
Industrial Data Cloud
Data process and 
control
Data AnalysisData 
MonitoringEdge 
Intelligence
Duty-cycle Energy Reliability
 
Fig. 1. Proposed Architecture of  AI based Edge computing platform for Industrial Applications                        
  The contribution of this paper is three-fold.  
 First, a foraward central dynamic and avilable approach 
(FCDAA)  is proposed for managing the execution time 
of sensing and transmission tasks in AI-based IoT   
devices for industrial applications. 
 Second, system-level battery model of edge AI-enabled 
IoT devices for industrial applications is proposed by 
examining the duty-cycle and energy optimization.  
 Third, data reliability model of IoT based hand-held 
devices over hybird TPC and duty-cycle network is 
proposed to effectively monitor the industrial IoT.  The rest of the paper is arranged as follows. Section 2 rigorously 
reviews the existing works . Forward Central Dynamic and 
Available Approach and battery model are developed in Section 
3. Data reliability model is proposed for hybird TPC and duty-
cycle industrial networks in section 4. Experimental test-bed is 
developed in Section 5. Section 6 concludes the paper. 
II. EXISTING WORKS  
 This section provides the rigorous literature about duty-cycle 
based techniques, and power-aware algorithms, architectures, 
reliability models for AI-based industrial applications.