1551-3203 (c) 2018 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TII.2019.2902878, IEEE
Transactions on Industrial Informatics
 1 
Abstract—Due to various limitations i.e., computational 
complexity and more delay in cloud computing is overtaken by 
edge computing for efficient and fair resource allocation such as, 
power and battery lifetime in internet of things (IoT) base d 
industrial applications. In the meantime intelligent and accurate 
resource management by artificial intelligence (AI) has become the 
center of attention especially in industrial applications. With the 
coordination of AI at the edge will remarkably enhance the range 
and computational speed of IoT based devices in industries. But 
the challenging issue in these power hungry, short battery lifetime 
and delay intolerant portable devices is inappropriate and 
inefficient classical trends of fair resource allotment. Also, it is 
interpreted through extensive industrial data sets that dynamic 
wireless channel could not be supported by the typical power 
saving and battery lifetime techniques for example, predictive 
transmission power control (PTPC) and Baseline. Thus, this paper 
proposes i) a forward central dynamic and available approach 
(FCDAA) by adapting the running time of sensing and 
transmission processes in IoT-based portable devices ii) a system-
level battery model by evaluating the energy dissipation in IoT 
devices iii) a data reliability model for edge artificial intelligence 
based IoT devices over hybird TPC and duty-cycle network. Two 
important cases for instance, sta tic (i.e.,product processing) and 
dynamic (i.e., vibration and fault diagnosis) are introduced for 
proper monitoring of industrial platform . Experimental test-bed 
reveals that proposed FCDAA enhances energy efficiency and 
battery lifetime at acceptable reliability (~ 0.95)  by appropriately 
tuning duty-cycle and TPC unlike conventional methods.  
 
Index Terms —Industrial IoT, Edge Computing,  AI,  Duty-cycle, 
Mobile devices , PTPC, FCDAA, Battery Model 
 
I. INTRODUCTION  
ndustrial revolution has caught the attention of IoT-enabled 
smart world by integrating edge AI mechanism with  mobile 
technologies while transmitting multimedia (i.e., text, 
images and video, etc) content. An integration of the 
heterogeneous networks and wearable devices on the one hand 
can facilitate the each and every corner of the world, while on 
the other-hand several challenges are faced by customers or 
users. With the advancement in mobile devices industrial  
sector is revolutionized at large extent. At present the AI driven 
edge computing mechanism for industrial applications is very 
vital for the entire world to solve most the relevant issues at 
global level. 
   Ali Hassan Sodhro is with IDA-Computer and Information Science 
Department, Linkoping University, Linkoping, SE-58183, Sweden. 
Email: ali.hassan.sodhro@liu.se  
   *Sandeep Pirbhulal is with the CAS Key Laboratory of Human-Machine 
Intelligence-Synergy Systems, Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology 
(SIAT), Shenzhen, 518055, China. He is also with Institute of Biomedical and 
Health Engineering, SIAT, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), Shenzhen 
518055, China. Email: sandeep @siat.ac.cn . 
   Victor Hugo C. de Albuquerque is with the University of Fortaleza , Brazil, 
Email: victor.albuquerque@unifor.br Main  challenging problem which most of the industrial 
applications are facing is the resource -constr ained  (i.e., power 
hungry and short battery lifetime) nature of the IoT enabled 
portable devices in the integrated platform . Artifiical 
Intelligence (AI) has become the center of attention to several 
applications [1].  In industrial platforms IoT  devices continuously 
monitor event triggered  information which is further transmitted 
to a remote server, so apprehending monitoring of the industrial 
outcome  [3]. However, for providing ease and comfort through  
IoT enabled portable devices , there are  problem s high energy 
drain,  shorter battery lifetime and complex computational 
process  [4,5]. There is a requirement for conventional batteries to 
be regularly recharged/replaced in IoT  based sensor devices. One 
of the examples is that in the fault diagnosi s and recovery se nsors, 
it is very cumbersome to frequently change their batteries. 
Therefore, energy drain optimization and battery lifetime 
extension in IoT based sensor devices are the challenging task to 
be focused [1]. Fig.1, shows the proposed AI -enab led 
framework for industrial applicaations. It comprises four 
sections with different functionaliteis such as, adaptive edge 
node, adaptive network node, adaptive application node and 
service node. First, Edge node which contains six key blocks 
(power cont roller, dudy -cycle optimizer, reliability optimizer, 
sensors & actuators, microcontroller & ADC, and connectors) 
collects data, stores in cloud, process, analysis and monitors 
with the help of edge intelligence which is based on cognotive 
knowledge of the entire industrial mechanism. Second, 
Adaptive network node gets information from adaptive node 
and manages that data with router, repeater, satellite system, 
access point, router and wireless local area networks. Third, 
adaptive application node gets infor mation from upper layers 
by hnadling the fault diagnosis and monitoring of the entire 
platform to the last service node. Forth, service node deals with 
the duty -cycle  and energy optimization in the overall industrial 
system. Currently, most of the research ers show their concerns 
over the energy depletion in edge AI based IoT devices due to 
power hungry , tiny size, and poor performance of conventional 
approaches [7 ][6][1]. Nevertheless, few researchers 
comprehend optimization of duty-cycle and energy  drain  in 
industrial sector  via energy harvesting. In general, energy in the 
IoT based industrial platforms  is scavenged by different 
methods such as, wireless power transfer, wind -turbines, and 
vibration etc [1][8].But due to their unsteady , random results  
and  inappropriate load cannot be used for real -time industrial 
applications [9][10]. Wireless power transfer benfits to industrial 
application by  scavenging  energy from wind, RF sources [11]. 
Also, the  simultaneous wireless information and power transfer 
(SWI PT) is not the viable solution to fix the issues of fair resource 
allocation  and energy drain optimization. It is discussed and 
examined by [12][13] that wireless power transfer (WPT) can be 
suitable option for the current industrial applications due t o 
emerging wireless technological trends and practices . Actually , Artificial Intelligence  Driven Mechanism for 
Edge Computing based Industrial Applications    
                  Ali Hassan Sodhro , Member , IEEE , Sandeep Pirbhulal *,  Victor Hugo C. de Albuquerque , Member , IEEE 
 
I