1551-3203 (c) 2018 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TII.2019.2902878, IEEE
Transactions on Industrial Informatics
 3 
 
Because of the high inspiration from every domain sensor 
networks have caught the attention in the industrial corner to 
examine and observe the processing, monitoring and outcome . 
But these heterogeneous networks are facing the critical 
challenges due to the power hungry and limited battery lifetime, 
hence are not offering accurate and timely services at 
economical level. Energy harvesting has been employed t o 
increase the lifetime of nodes as a substitute to supplement 
batteries.  Hybird TPC and duty-cycle based approach plays the 
critical role for energy-aware industrial system with distinct 
methods. For example, modulation level control, duty-cycle 
optimization, network scheduling at physical, MAC and 
network layers accordingly. Energy neutral operation (ENO) is 
widely accepted mechanism during harvesting the energy and 
manages the power by typically adjusting the duty-cycle or 
wake-up duration of the sensor nodes.   
In this paper, for the first time a  FCDAA and data reliability 
models are proposed for AI-based industrial application over 
hybird TPC and duty-cycle network to save energy . TPC levels 
and duty-cycle i.e., wake-up and sleep periods of IoT based 
devices are adapted while taking into account the deviations of  
  
the wireless channel i.e., static (product processing) and 
dynamic (vibration and fault diagnosis) cases. 
III. PROPOSED FORWARD CENTRAL DYNAMIC AND 
AVAILABLE APPROACH  
This section describes in detail the two key parts first 
proposed FCDAA and second system level battery model by 
integrating both TPC and duty-cycle   for AI driven industrial 
applications . One of the vital energy and battery lifecycle 
management methods in IoT based industrial applications is 
presented in [14]. The key purpose of the proposed FCDAA is 
to extend the battery lifetime and save the power in AI based 
edge computing platforms for industrial application. Besides, 
the transmission power control and duty-cycle entities of the 
IoT based portable devices are optimized by properly following 
energy neutral operation during sensing, processing and 
transmission of industrial data. Assume that,
()txTP and 
FC
are the battery charge depletion at adopted power levels and 
CPU’s extra energy drain by forward central consequently  as 
depicted in Fig. 2. Besides, the duty-cycle management 
mechanism is presented in Fig. 3. In duty-cycle analysis 
harvesting energy from access point to nodes is playing 
remarkable role in examining the overall network performance. TABLE I. RELATED WORK 
Ref. No   Applications  Proposed Solution  Merits        Demerits  
[1,3,4]  AI, Energy Energy optimization, delay  TPC based   Energy and Charge efficient  Complex and inefficient  
[2,5,8]  IoT signal for industrial system  TPC, Channel and battery -aware   Duty -cycle, data rate  High  energy and battery 
drain during media 
transmission  
[6,7]  Edge and AI based industrial platforms  Cloud and battery enabled    Fairy and battery efficient   Less power -aware and 
battery -efficient  
[9,10]  Energy -aware IoT for Industrial 
platform  Frameworks  and protocols  Extensive survey for AI -based 
industrial application  Not focused on Industrial 
applications  
[11,12]  AI based edge computing and WSN    Energy -aware and routing protocols  Energy optimization and 
efficient routing  Complex and less battery -
efficient  
[13] WPT and Industrial WSN  Energy harvesting and duty -cycle 
enabled  Battery and energy -aware  Inappropriate for industrial 
platform  
[14] IIoT , AI, Adaptive methods  QoS optimization based  Efficient QoS management  Less Battery and energy -
efficient for Industrial IoT  
[15] Machine Learning and Cellular 
networks  TPC and relay selection based  Novel Architecture and resource 
allocation method  High battery and energy 
drain in industrial system  
[16] WSN and communication systems   TPC and resource allocation  Energy optimization in wireless 
and sensor networks  Complex and less reliable 
for dynamic industrial 
platform  
[17] Industrial IoT, WSN  Energy and battery -based frameworks 
and method  Efficient resource allocation  Complex and less battery -
aware for Industrial  
services  
[18] WPT and Radio networks   TPC and radio -aware  Intelligent resource monitoring 
in radio networks  Unsuitable for IIoT system  
[19] Future Networks, WSN  QoS and Energy Scavenging  Novel energy and QoS efficient   Complex and less reliable 
for Industrial system  
[20] WPT  for IIoT  TPC and QoS -aware framework  Detailed survey  Not focus at joint duty -
cycle and TPC  
[21] IoT for Edge computing  Energy and battery -oriented  Novel Physical layer and 
framework for industrial 
applications   Complex, less reliable 
without duty cycle  
[22] Industrial platforms  Fuzzy based secure  Secure home monitoring  High energy drain  
[23] Energy -aware and secure WSN  TPC and battery -based  Efficient media transmission  More battery drain  
[24] IoT based edge platform  Framework and battery -aware  Efficient lifecycle management  Less energy saving  
[25] QoS-aware IIoT and CPS  Optimal resource allocation  QoS monitoring and 
management  More energy  and battery 
drain  
[26] Ubiquitous and Smart IIoT  TPC based and framework  Novel process monitoring 
algorithm and framework  More battery drain  
[27] AI, QoS, IoT,  Routing protocols and framework  Routing and battery -based  More energy dissipation  
[28] Power allocation in Industrial systems  AI-aware  Novel Framework and methods  High energy drain