1551-3203 (c) 2018 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TII.2019.2902878, IEEE
Transactions on Industrial Informatics
 6 
dydamic mechanisms, operation time 
T  
of 5 minutes, and delay
0t of 200 ms. 
Fig.7 reveals the relationship between 
time (in sec) and the RSSI (in dBm) 
value or reliability of proposed FCDAA 
and conventional methods i.e., Baseline 
and PTPC over hybird TPC and duty-
cycle network. It is examined that there 
is less variation in the RSSI level of the 
proposed FCDAA unlike the traditional 
methods at the pre-defined RSSI target 
value. Stable RSSI level shows high 
reliability and reasonable energy drain. 
It must be noted that RSSI deviation is 
linearly proportional to the channel 
characteristics i.e., case 1:static (product 
processing) and case 2: dynamic 
(vibration and fault diagnosis) cases . 
Faster the vibration and fault diagnosis 
process, higher the channel deviation 
and less stable the RSSI values, hence 
less reliability and vice versa. Hence, it 
can be said that proposed FCDAA 
shows high reliability unlike orthodox 
methods i.e., Baseline and PTPC..In 
addition, the connection between data 
packet size w and energy depletion rate 
is established for different sensor 
platforms with clear representation . 
Besides, high deviation and unstable nature of the  channel 
dissipates more energy in Baseline and PTPC than the proposed 
FCDAA. We observed that with the increase of the duty-cycle 
more energy is depleted for the conventional methods unlike 
the proposed FCDAA. In addition, the high sleep time of the 
sensor nodes strengthen the energy saving but the large wakeup 
time leads to more energy consumption for the traditional methods than the proposed FCDAA in industrial environment. 
Moreover, duty-cycle or wireless channel utilization, is merely 
concerned with the data traffic generation i.e., discrete or 
continuous mechanism in the industrial applications. With the 
increase of the duty-cycle PLR will increase at large extent in 
the conventional methods unlike in the proposed FCDAA. We 
analyzed that distance and energy drain are linearly Fig. 4.  Framework of Reliable data transmission in AI based edge computing platform  over hybird TPC and duty -cycle network  
(a) 
Fig. 6.a) Number of sensor nodes vs.Energy Consumption , b) Relationship between time and standard 
deviation  
(b) 
Fig. 5. a) Duty-cycle vs.Energy depletion , b) Tradeoff between M odulation level and Energy drain  
(a) 
 (b) 
Dynamic Channel Self-adaptive Mechanism TPC IEEE 802.15.4RSSI Transmission
InputsO/P
Static Sceanrio
Adaptive ScenarioCase 1:
Case 2:Production 
Processing
Vibration and Fault 
Diagnosis