1551-3203 (c) 2018 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TII.2019.2902878, IEEE
Transactions on Industrial Informatics
 4 
When harvesting energy rate is greater than the threshold 
amount (
th ) than next active period can be predicted by 
using (4) and Fig. 2. 
 
     Fig.2.  Proposed forward central dynamic and available approach 
 
 Otherwise, negative energy state will be obtained by proposed 
FCDAA when sufficient energy is not harvested . Besides, 
FCDAA’s key functionality is to optimize the sleeping time, 
transmission power level at zero-energy interval time duration. 
Also, a deviation factor (
 ) is introduced for achieving the 
targeted threshold by rectifying the problem during battery 
lifetime  maximization. A transmission time is then calculated 
and be suitable for full-cycle as in Fig. 3. The running time of 
the forward central control (
FCT ) is adopted according to the 
next transmission task and
n  accordingly. The tradeoff between 
forward central control , CPU’s overhead bits and sensitivity 
will be established by tuning associated parameters [14]. In the 
last node will be in sleep mode before the FCDAA’s new 
assignment with active duration (
ONT ) appears. Energy drain 
can be rectified with the use of duty-cycle and dynamic 
transmission power. With efficient and accurate energy 
scavenging mechanism less transmission power is used with 
acceptable PLR. It is analyzed that 
ONT  is non-linearly related 
to battery lifetime. The proposed system level battery model 
comprises two periodic functions such as, sensing and 
transmission in industrial applications . In each task IoT 
device’s active time is represented by 
ONT . Various tasks lies 
in the active duration such as, processing, sensing and 
transmission, while more energy is saved and hence less battery 
charge consumed during inactive i.e., sleep mode . Battery charge dssipation (
 ) and 
ONT of the nodes provides Current 
(
i) value as presented in (1). 
i
i
ONT
          (1) 
Average Current value is obtained either by monitoring task 
load (
i ) or execution time (
ONT ). Hence, duty-cycle of  IoT 
based sensor devices 
S is given in (2) and Fig. 3.  
                                
TONDCSTTON OFF

        (2) 
Time(sec)Energy Consumption(mJ)
OFF StateON State
OFF StateON State
TOFF TON
TD
  
Fig.3. Dutycycle management in IoT devices for Industrial Applications 
 Whereby,
ONT , and 
TOFF are the active and sleep time of 
nodes acordingly. The energy deletion of sensing and 
transmission tasks  of IoT devices in industrial applications is 
analysed by operation of transmitter and base station . Industrial 
data is measured, recorded and communicated to the intende d 
destination with the help of the sensor eanbled devices, but the 
key problem is their power hungry and resource-constrained 
nature. To remedy these issues the duty-cycle of the transciever 
must be properly managed and monitored. For instance, the 
time- period of sensor ‘
i ’ where 
1, 2,......,iS  is computed 
merely during the sensing and transmission tasks. Energy 
dissipation of former and later tasks while transmitting 
b bits at 
distance 
dij for sensor 
j is 
() Ebseni and 
( , )E b dtx iji
consequently. So battery charge level or state of charge (SoC) 
of these miniaturized sensor nodes is measured according to the 
energy (sensing and transmission) depletion level as in eq. (4). 
Besides, SoC heavily depends upon the current consumption 
during sensing (
sense ) and transmission (
tx ) respectively 
and the energy scavenging (
 ) entities. Battery SoC for the 
next active slot (
ONT ) can be predicted according to the (4).