Vol.:(0123456789)1 3AI & SOCIETY (2023) 38:1239–1240 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00146-022-01433-y
CURMUDGEON CORNER
Will AI end privacy? How do we avoid an Orwellian future
Toby Walsh1
Received: 3 August 2021 / Accepted: 10 March 2022 / Published online: 7 April 2022 
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag London Ltd., part of Springer Nature 2022
Vince Cerf told the Federal Trade Commission in 2013 that 
“privacy may actually be an anomaly”. He justified this bold 
claim with the observation that “Privacy is something which 
has emerged out of the urban boom coming from the indus-
trial revolution.” 
There is a certain truth to his claims. Our conception of 
privacy has changed greatly across time and space. Even 
limited to a single culture, we see significant differences 
in privacy across history. Back in medieval England, for 
example, life was a lot less private. Most people could not 
afford to live in houses with separate living and bedrooms. 
The Industrial Revolution lifted the standard of living and 
made privacy more possible. However, privacy is more than 
having a room of one’s own. It is also about having the pri-
vacy to discuss political change and dangerous thoughts in 
private. To vote anonymously. To practice the religion of 
our choosing. To live the lifestyle we wish. And many other 
privacies that we have grown to expect.
A vital question then is how do we stop AI from tak -
ing away many of these privacies, much as George Orwell 
predicted in “1984”. In 2013, Abhishek Mehta, the CEO of 
Tresata noted “Just like oil was a natural resource powering 
the last industrial revolution, data is going to be the natu-
ral resource for this industrial revolution. Data is the core 
asset, and the core lubricant, for not just the entire economic 
models built around every single industry vertical but also 
the socioeconomic models.”
Artificial Intelligence has been and will continue to be 
a major consumer of that data. Machine learning methods 
like Deep Learning currently require millions, if not billions, 
of training examples. If data is the new oil, machine learn-
ing is the refinery. The analogy between data and oil is one 
that should not be taken too literally. There are some fun-
damental differences between data and oil. Oil is a precious and limited resource. Data is neither very precious nor very 
scarce. Oil can only be used once. Data can be re-used with-
out limit. Indeed, unlike oil, data can often be used to gener -
ate more data.
1  AI and privacy
But perhaps the biggest difference between oil and data is in 
ownership. Countries quickly claimed ownership of the oil 
beneath our feet and under our seas. But much data today 
is privately owned. Indeed, a few private data monopolies 
like Google and Facebook increasingly own most of our 
data. And whilst they are generating wealth from it, we the 
producers of that data are receiving little of the value. In 
addition, all this data is putting our privacy under increas-
ing threat.
There appear to be few boundaries on the data that tech-
nology companies are willing to collect. Bruce Schneier, a 
privacy and security expert observed that “Surveillance is 
the business model of the Internet”. Al Gore put it even more 
succinctly when he called it “the stalker economy”.
Why did Google think it should track your Android phone 
when you turned off your location and even removed your 
SIM card? Or Uber think it should track your location five 
minutes after your ride was over? Or Pokémon Go think it 
should have access to your entire Google account on iOS, 
including your email and browsing history? And George 
Orwell would likely have been surprised that it wasn’t the 
government that was putting surveillance devices into our 
homes but consumers paying their own money to tech com-
panies like Amazon to do so. Alexa, are you listening?
Of course, it’s not just technology companies that are 
starting to invade people’s privacy. States are also adopting 
new technologies to pry into our lives. The US State of Dela-
ware has put “smart” cameras into police cruisers to detect 
vehicles carrying fugitives, abducted children or missing 
seniors. Such uses might be unproblematic but what hap -
pens when a state starts using the same technology to track 
political activists or refugees? In China, police in Zhengzhou  * Toby Walsh 
 t.walsh@unsw.edu.au
1 School of Computer Science and Engineering, University 
of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia