2= 0 when we add the target monolingual cor-
pus, and1= 0and2= 0:1for source monolin-
gual corpus incorporation. The threshold of gra-
dient clipping is set to 0:05. The parameters of
our model are initialized by the model trained on
parallel corpus.
3.2 Effect of Sample Size k
As the inference of our approach is intractable, we
propose to approximate the full search space with
the top-klist of candidate translations to improve
efﬁciency (see Eq. (9)).
Figure 2 shows the BLEU scores of various set-
tings ofkover time. Only the English mono-
lingual corpus is appended to the training data.
We observe that increasing the size of the approx-
imate search space generally leads to improved
BLEU scores. There are signiﬁcant gaps between
k= 1 andk= 5. However, keeping increas-
ingkdoes not result in signiﬁcant improvements
and decreases the training efﬁciency. We ﬁnd that
k= 10 achieves a balance between training efﬁ-
ciency and translation quality. As shown in Fig-
ure 3, similar ﬁndings are also observed on the
English-to-Chinese validation set. Therefore, we
setk= 10 in the following experiments.
3.3 Effect of OOV Ratio
Given a parallel corpus, what kind of monolingual
corpus is most beneﬁcial for improving transla-
tion quality? To answer this question, we investi-
gate the effect of OOV ratio on translation quality,
which is deﬁned as
ratio =P
y2yJy =2VDtK
jyj; (10)
where yis a target-language sentence in the mono-
lingual corpusT,yis a target-language word in y,
VDtis the vocabulary of the target side of the par-
allel corpus D.
Intuitively, the OOV ratio indicates how a sen-
tence in the monolingual resembles the parallel
corpus. If the ratio is 0, all words in the mono-
lingual sentence also occur in the parallel corpus.
Figure 4 shows the effect of OOV ratio on
the Chinese-to-English validation set. Only En-
glish monolingual corpus is appended to the par-
allel corpus during training. We constructed four
monolingual corpora of the same size in terms of
sentence pairs. “0% OOV” means the OOV ra-
tio is 0% for all sentences in the monolingual cor-
pus. “10% OOV” suggests that the OOV ratio isno greater 10% for each sentence in the mono-
lingual corpus. We ﬁnd that using a monolingual
corpus with a lower OOV ratio generally leads to
higher BLEU scores. One possible reason is that
low-OOV monolingual corpus is relatively easier
to reconstruct than its high-OOV counterpart and
results in better estimation of model parameters.
Figure 5 shows the effect of OOV ratio on the
English-to-Chinese validation set. Only English
monolingual corpus is appended to the parallel
corpus during training. We ﬁnd that “0% OOV”
still achieves the highest BLEU scores.
3.4 Comparison with SMT
Table 2 shows the comparison between M OSES
and our work. M OSES used the monolingual
corpora as shown in Table 1: 18.75M Chinese
sentences and 22.32M English sentences. We
ﬁnd that exploiting monolingual corpora dramat-
ically improves translation performance in both
Chinese-to-English and English-to-Chinese direc-
tions.
Relying only on parallel corpus, RNN SEARCH
outperforms M OSES trained also only on par-
allel corpus. But the capability of making
use of abundant monolingual corpora enables
MOSES to achieve much higher BLEU scores than
RNN SEARCH only using parallel corpus.
Instead of using all sentences in the monolin-
gual corpora, we constructed smaller monolingual
corpora with zero OOV ratio: 2.56M Chinese sen-
tences with 47.51M words and 2.56M English
English sentences with 37.47M words. In other
words, the monolingual corpora we used in the
experiments are much smaller than those used by
MOSES .
By adding English monolingual corpus, our
approach achieves substantial improvements over
RNN SEARCH using only parallel corpus (up to
+4.7 BLEU points). In addition, signiﬁcant im-
provements are also obtained over M OSES using
both parallel and monolingual corpora (up to +3.5
BLEU points).
An interesting ﬁnding is that adding English
monolingual corpora helps to improve English-to-
Chinese translation over RNN SEARCH using only
parallel corpus (up to +3.2 BLEU points), sug-
gesting that our approach is capable of improving
NMT using source-side monolingual corpora.
In the English-to-Chinese direction, we ob-
tain similar ﬁndings. In particular, adding Chi-