Semi-Supervised Learning for Neural Machine Translation
Yong Cheng#, Wei Xu#, Zhongjun He+, Wei He+, Hua Wu+, Maosong Sunyand Yang Liuy
#Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
yState Key Laboratory of Intelligent Technology and Systems
Tsinghua National Laboratory for Information Science and Technology
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
+Baidu Inc., Beijing, China
chengyong3001@gmail.com weixu@tsinghua.edu.cn
fhezhongjun,hewei06,wu huag@baidu.com
fsms,liuyang2011 g@tsinghua.edu.cn
Abstract
While end-to-end neural machine transla-
tion (NMT) has made remarkable progress
recently, NMT systems only rely on par-
allel corpora for parameter estimation.
Since parallel corpora are usually limited
in quantity, quality, and coverage, espe-
cially for low-resource languages, it is
appealing to exploit monolingual corpora
to improve NMT. We propose a semi-
supervised approach for training NMT
models on the concatenation of labeled
(parallel corpora) and unlabeled (mono-
lingual corpora) data. The central idea is
to reconstruct the monolingual corpora us-
ing an autoencoder, in which the source-
to-target and target-to-source translation
models serve as the encoder and decoder,
respectively. Our approach can not only
exploit the monolingual corpora of the
target language, but also of the source
language. Experiments on the Chinese-
English dataset show that our approach
achieves signiﬁcant improvements over
state-of-the-art SMT and NMT systems.
1 Introduction
End-to-end neural machine translation (NMT),
which leverages a single, large neural network to
directly transform a source-language sentence into
a target-language sentence, has attracted increas-
ing attention in recent several years (Kalchbren-
ner and Blunsom, 2013; Sutskever et al., 2014;
Bahdanau et al., 2015). Free of latent structure
design and feature engineering that are critical in
conventional statistical machine translation (SMT)
(Brown et al., 1993; Koehn et al., 2003; Chi-
ang, 2005), NMT has proven to excel in model-
Yang Liu is the corresponding author.ing long-distance dependencies by enhancing re-
current neural networks (RNNs) with the gating
(Hochreiter and Schmidhuber, 1993; Cho et al.,
2014; Sutskever et al., 2014) and attention mecha-
nisms (Bahdanau et al., 2015).
However, most existing NMT approaches suf-
fer from a major drawback: they heavily rely
on parallel corpora for training translation mod-
els. This is because NMT directly models the
probability of a target-language sentence given a
source-language sentence and does not have a sep-
arate language model like SMT (Kalchbrenner and
Blunsom, 2013; Sutskever et al., 2014; Bahdanau
et al., 2015). Unfortunately, parallel corpora are
usually only available for a handful of resource-
rich languages and restricted to limited domains
such as government documents and news reports.
In contrast, SMT is capable of exploiting abundant
target-side monolingual corpora to boost ﬂuency
of translations. Therefore, the unavailability of
large-scale, high-quality, and wide-coverage par-
allel corpora hinders the applicability of NMT.
As a result, several authors have tried to use
abundant monolingual corpora to improve NMT.
Gulccehre et al. (2015) propose two methods,
which are referred to as shallow fusion and deep
fusion, to integrate a language model into NMT.
The basic idea is to use the language model to
score the candidate words proposed by the transla-
tion model at each time step or concatenating the
hidden states of the language model and the de-
coder. Although their approach leads to signiﬁ-
cant improvements, one possible downside is that
the network architecture has to be modiﬁed to in-
tegrate the language model.
Alternatively, Sennrich et al. (2015) propose
two approaches to exploiting monolingual corpora
that is transparent to network architectures. The
ﬁrst approach pairs monolingual sentences with
dummy input. Then, the parameters of encoderarXiv:1606.04596v3  [cs.CL]  10 Dec 2016