Sebastien Jean, Kyunghyun Cho, Roland Memisevic,
and Yoshua Bengio. 2015. On using very large tar-
get vocabulary for neural machine translation. In
Proceedings of ACL .
Nal Kalchbrenner and Phil Blunsom. 2013. Recur-
rent continuous translation models. In Proceedings
of EMNLP .
Alexandre Klementiev, Ann Irvine, Chris Callison-
Burch, and David Yarowsky. 2012. Toward statisti-
cal machine translation without paralel corpora. In
Proceedings of EACL .
Philipp Koehn, Franz J. Och, and Daniel Marcu. 2003.
Statistical phrase-based translation. In Proceedings
of NAACL .
Philipp Koehn, Hieu Hoang, Alexandra Birch, Chris
Callison-Burch, Marcello Federico, Nicola Bertoldi,
Brooke Cowan, Wade Shen, Christine Moran,
Richard Zens, Chris Dyer, Ondrej Bojar, Alexandra
Constantin, and Evan Herbst. 2007. Moses: Open
source toolkit for statistical machine translation. In
Proceedings of ACL (demo session) .
Minh-Thang Luong, Ilya Sutskever, Quoc V . Le, Oriol
Vinyals, and Wojciech Zaremba. 2015. Addressing
the rare word problem in neural machine translation.
InProceedings of ACL .
Franz Och. 2003. Minimum error rate training in sta-
tistical machine translation. In Proceedings of ACL .
Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-
Jing Zhu. 2002. Bleu: a methof for automatic eval-
uation of machine translation. In Proceedings of
ACL.
Sujith Ravi and Kevin Knight. 2011. Deciphering for-
eign language. In Proceedings of ACL .
Rico Sennrich, Barry Haddow, and Alexandra Birch.
2015. Improving nerual machine translation models
with monolingual data. arXiv:1511.06709 [cs.CL].
Richard Socher, Jeffrey Pennington, Eric Huang, An-
drew Ng, and Christopher Manning. 2011. Semi-
supervised recursive autoencoders for predicting
sentiment distributions. In Proceedings of EMNLP .
Andreas Stolcke. 2002. Srilm - am extensible lan-
guage modeling toolkit. In Proceedings of ICSLP .
Ilya Sutskever, Oriol Vinyals, and Quoc V . Le. 2014.
Sequence to sequence learning with neural net-
works. In Proceedings of NIPS .
Nicola Uefﬁng, Gholamreza Haffari, and Anoop
Sarkar. 2007. Trasductive learning for statistical
machine translation. In Proceedings of ACL .
Pascal Vincent, Hugo Larochelle, Isabelle Lajoie,
Yoshua Bengio, and Pierre-Autoine Manzagol.
2010. Stacked denoising autoencoders: Learning
useful representations in a deep network with a local
denoising criterion. Journal of Machine Learning
Research .Jiajun Zhang and Chengqing Zong. 2013. Learning
a phrase-based translation model from monolingual
data with application to domain adaptation. In Pro-
ceedings of ACL .