Shreshth Tuli, Giuliano Casale, and Nicholas R. Jennings
also unable to model long-term trends effectively [ 4,14,62]. This is
because, at each timestamp, a recurrent model needs to first perform
inference for all previous timestamps before proceeding further. Re-
cent developments of the transformer models allow single-shot in-
ference with the complete input series using position encoding [ 51].
Using transformers allows much faster detection compared to re-
current methods by parallelizing inference on GPUs [ 19]. However,
transformers also provide the benefit of being able to encode large
sequences with accuracy and training/inference times nearly ag-
nostic to the sequence length [ 51]. Thus, we use transformers to
grow the temporal context information sent to an anomaly detector
without significantly increasing the computational overheads.
Our contributions. This work uses various tools, including
Transformer neural networks and model-agnostic meta learning,
as building blocks. However, each of these different technologies
cannot be directly used and need necessary adaptations to cre-
ate a generalizable model for anomaly detection. Specifically, we
propose a transformer-based anomaly detection model (TranAD),
that uses self-conditioning and an adversarial training process. Its
architecture makes it fast for training and testing while maintain-
ing stability with large input sequences. Simple transformer-based
encoder-decoder networks tend to miss anomalies if the deviation
is too small, i.e., it is relatively close to normal data. One of our
contributions is to show that this can be alleviated by an adversarial
training procedure that can amplify reconstruction errors. Further,
using self-conditioning for robust multi-modal feature extraction
can help gain training stability and allow generalization [ 32]. This,
with model-agnostic meta learning (MAML) helps keep optimum
detection performance even with limited data [ 15], as we show later
in the validation that methods with simple transformers underper-
form by over 11% compared to TranAD. We perform extensive
empirical experiments on publicly available datasets to compare
and analyze TranAD against the state-of-the-art methods. Our ex-
periments show that TranAD is able to outperform baselines by
increasing prediction scores by up to 17%while reducing training
time overheads by up to 99%.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 overviews
related work. Section 3 outlines the working of the TranAD model
for multivariate anomaly detection and diagnosis. A performance
evaluation of the proposed method is shown in Section 4. Section 5
presents additional analysis. Finally, Section 6 concludes.
2 Related Work
Time series anomaly detection is a long-studied problem in the
VLDB community. The prior literature works on two types of time-
series data: univariate and multivariate. For the former, various
methods analyze and detect anomalies in time-series data with a
single data source [ 34], while for the latter multiple time-series
together [14, 45, 62].
Classical methods. Such methods for anomaly detection typi-
cally model the time-series distribution using various classical tech-
niques like k-Mean clustering, Support Vector Machines (SVMs)
or regression models [ 10,28,43,52]. Other methods use wavelet
theory or various signal transformation methods like Hilbert trans-
form [ 25]. Other classes of methods use Principal Component Anal-
ysis (PCA), process regression or hidden Markov chains to modeltime-series data [ 41]. The GraphAn technique [ 9] converts the
time-series inputs to graphs and uses graph distance metrics to
detect outliers. Another technique, namely isolation forest, uses an
ensemble of several isolation trees that recursively partition the
feature space for outlier detection [ 5,31]. Finally, classical meth-
ods use variants of Auto-Regressive Integrated Moving Average
(ARIMA) to model and detect anomalous behaviour [ 56]. However,
auto-regression based approaches are rarely used for anomaly de-
tection in high-order multivariate time series due to their inability
to efficiently capture volatile time-series [ 1]. Other methods like
SAND [ 10], CPOD [ 47] and Elle [ 28] utilize clustering and database
read-write history to detect outliers.
Time-series discord discovery is another recently proposed method
for fault prediction [ 16,37,58,59]. Time series discords refer to
the most unusual time series subsequences, i.e., subsequences that
are maximally different from all other subsequences in the same
time series. A sub-class of methods uses matrix profiling or its vari-
ants for anomaly and motif discovery by detecting time series dis-
cords [ 16,35,63]. Many advances have been proposed to make ma-
trix profiling techniques data and time efficient [ 21]. Other efforts
aim to make matrix profiling applicable to diverse domains [ 64].
However, matrix profiling has many more uses than just anomaly
detection and is considered to be slower than pure discord dis-
covery algorithms [ 37]. A recent approach, MERLIN [ 37], uses a
parameter-free version of time series discord discovery by itera-
tively comparing subsequences of varying length with their imme-
diate neighbors. MERLIN is considered to be the state-of-the-art
discord discovery approach with low overheads; hence, is regarded
as one of the baselines in our experiments.
Deep Learning based methods. Most contemporary state-of-
the-art techniques employ some form of deep neural networks. The
LSTM-NDT [ 20] method relies on an LSTM based deep neural net-
work model that uses the input sequence as training data and, for
each input timestamp, forecasts data for the next timestamp. LSTMs
are auto-regressive neural networks that learn order dependence
in sequential data, where the prediction at each timestamp uses
feedback from the output of the previous timestamp. This work
also proposes a non-parametric dynamic error thresholding (NDT)
strategy to set a threshold for anomaly labeling using moving aver-
ages of the error sequence. However, being a recurrent model, such
models are slow to train in many cases with long input sequences.
Further, LSTMs are often inefficient in modeling long temporal
patterns, especially when the data is noisy [62].
The DAGMM [ 65] method uses a deep autoencoding Gaussian
mixture model for dimension reduction in the feature space and
recurrent networks for temporal modeling. This work predicts an
output using a mixture of Gaussians, where the parameters of each
Gaussian are given by a deep neural model. The autoencoder com-
presses an input datapoint into a latent space, that is then used
by a recurrent estimation network to predict the next datapoint.
The decoupled training of both networks allows the model to be
more robust; however, it still is slow and unable to explicitly utilize
inter-modal correlations [ 14]. The Omnianomaly [ 45] uses a sto-
chastic recurrent neural network (similar to an LSTM-Variational
Autoencoder [ 39]) and a planar normalizing flow to generate re-
construction probabilities. It also proposes an adjusted Peak Over