TranAD: Deep Transformer Networks for Anomaly Detection in Multivariate Time Series Data
Algorithm 1 The TranAD training algorithm
Require:
Encoder𝐸, Decoders𝐷1and𝐷2
Dataset used for training W
Evolutionary hyperparameter 𝜖
Iteration limit 𝑁
1:Initialize weights 𝐸,𝐷 1,𝐷2
2:𝑛←0
3:do
4: for(𝑡=1to𝑇)
5:𝑂1,𝑂2←𝐷1(𝐸(𝑊𝑡,®0)),𝐷2(𝐸(𝑊𝑡,®0))
6: ˆ𝑂2←𝐷2(𝐸(𝑊𝑡,∥𝑂1−𝑊𝑡∥2))
7:𝐿1=𝜖−𝑛∥𝑂1−𝑊𝑡∥2+(1−𝜖−𝑛)∥ˆ𝑂2−𝑊𝑡∥2
8:𝐿2=𝜖−𝑛∥𝑂2−𝑊𝑡∥2−(1−𝜖−𝑛)∥ˆ𝑂2−𝑊𝑡∥2
9: Update weights of 𝐸,𝐷 1,𝐷2using𝐿1,𝐿2
10:𝑛←𝑛+1
11: Meta-Learn weights 𝐸,𝐷 1,𝐷2using a random batch
12:while𝑛<𝑁
3.4 Offline Two-Phase Adversarial Training
We now describe the adversarial training process and the two-
phase inference approach in the TranAD model, summarized in
Algorithm 1.
Phase 1 - Input Reconstruction. The Transformer model en-
ables us to predict the reconstruction of each input time-series win-
dow. It does this by acting as an encoder-decoder network at each
timestamp. However, traditional encoder-decoder models often are
unable to capture short-term trends and tend to miss anomalies
if the deviations are too small [ 29]. To tackle this challenge, we
develop an auto-regressive inference style that predicts the recon-
structed window in two-phases. In the first phase, the model aims
to generate an approximate reconstruction of the input window.
The deviation from this inference, referred to as the focus score
mentioned previously, facilitates the attention network inside the
Transformer Encoder to extract temporal trends, focusing on the
sub-sequences where the deviations are high. Thus, the output of
the second phase is conditioned on the deviations generated from
the first phase. Thus, in the first stage, the encoders convert the
input window 𝑊∈I R𝐾×𝑚(with focus score 𝐹=[0]𝐾×𝑚) to a com-
pressed latent representation 𝐼3
2using context-based attention as
in a common transformer model. This compressed representation
is then converted to generate outputs 𝑂1and𝑂2via Eq. (6).
Phase 2 - Focused Input Reconstruction. In the second phase,
we use the reconstruction loss for the first decoder as a focus score.
Having the focus matrix for the second phase 𝐹=𝐿1, we rerun
model inference to obtain the output of the second decoder as ˆ𝑂2.
The focus score generated in the first phase indicates the devia-
tions of the reconstructed output from the given input. This acts as a
prior to modify the attention weights in the second phase and gives
higher neural network activation to specific input sub-sequences
to extract short-term temporal trends. We refer to this approach as
“self-conditioning” in the rest of the paper. This two-phase auto-
regressive inference style has a three-fold benefit. First, it amplifies
the deviations, as the reconstruction error acts as an activation in
the attention part of the Encoder in Figure 1, to generate an anomalyscore, simplifying the fault-labeling task (discussed in Section 3.5).
Second, it prevents false positives by capturing short-term temporal
trends in the Window Encoder in Figure 1. Third, the adversarial
style training is known to improve generalizability and make the
model robust to diverse input sequences [4].
Evolving Training Objective. The above-described model is
bound to suffer from similar challenges as in other adversarial
training frameworks. One of the critical challenges is maintaining
training stability. To tackle this, we design an adversarial training
procedure that uses outputs from two separate decoders (Decoders
1 and 2 in Figure 1). Initially, both decoders aim to independently
reconstruct the input time-series window. As in [ 45] and [ 39], we
define the reconstruction loss for each decoder using the L2-norm
using the outputs of the first phase:
𝐿1=∥𝑂1−𝑊∥2,
𝐿2=∥𝑂2−𝑊∥2.(7)
We now introduce the adversarial loss that uses outputs of the
second phase. Here, the second decoder aims to distinguish between
the input window and the candidate reconstruction generated by
the first decoder in phase 1 (using the focus scores) by maximizing
the difference||ˆ𝑂2−𝑊||2. On the other hand, the first decoder
aims to fool the second decoder by aiming to create a degenerate
focus score (a zero vector) by perfectly reconstructing the input
(i.e.,𝑂1=𝑊). This pushes the decoder 2, in this phase, to generate
the same output as 𝑂2which it aims to match the input in phase 1.
This means the training objective is
min
Decoder1max
Decoder2∥ˆ𝑂2−𝑊∥2. (8)
Thus, the objective of the first decoder is to minimize the reconstruc-
tion error of this self-conditioned output, whereas the objective of
the second one is to maximize the same. We realize this by using
the loss as:
𝐿1=+∥ˆ𝑂2−𝑊∥2,
𝐿2=−∥ˆ𝑂2−𝑊∥2.(9)
Now that we have loss functions for both phases, we need to
determine the cumulative loss for each decoder. We thus use an
evolutionary loss function that combines the reconstruction and
adversarial loss functions from the two phases as
𝐿1=𝜖−𝑛∥𝑂1−𝑊∥2+(1−𝜖−𝑛)∥ˆ𝑂2−𝑊∥2,
𝐿2=𝜖−𝑛∥𝑂2−𝑊∥2−(1−𝜖−𝑛)∥ˆ𝑂2−𝑊∥2,(10)
where𝑛is the training epoch and 𝜖is a training parameter close
to one (lines 7-8 in Alg. 1). Initially, the weight given to the re-
construction loss is high. This is to ensure stable training when
the outputs of the decoders are poor reconstructions of the input
window. With poor reconstructions, the focus scores used in the
second phase would be unreliable; and hence, cannot be utilized
as a prior to indicating reconstructions that are far from the input
sequence. Thus, the adversarial loss is given a low weight in the
initial part of the process to avoid destabilizing model training. As
reconstructions become closer to the input windows, and focus
scores become more precise, the weight to the adversarial loss is
increased. As loss curves in the neural network training process
typically follow exponential function, we use weights of the form