Shreshth Tuli, Giuliano Casale, and Nicholas R. Jennings
Figure 1: The TranAD Model.
3.3 Transformer Model
Transformers are popular deep learning models that have been
used in various natural language and vision processing tasks [ 51].
However, we use insightful refactoring of the transformer architec-
ture for the task of anomaly detection in time-series data. Just like
other encoder-decoder models, in a transformer, an input sequence
undergoes several attention-based transformations. Figure 1 shows
the architecture of the neural network used in TranAD. The encoder
encodes the complete sequence until the current timestamp 𝐶with
a focus score (more details later). The window encoder uses this to
create an encoded representation of the input window 𝑊, which is
then passed to two decoders to create its reconstruction.
We now provide details on the working of TranAD. A multivari-
ate sequence like 𝑊or𝐶is transformed first into a matrix form
with modality 𝑚. We define scaled-dot product attention [ 51] of
three matrices 𝑄(query),𝐾(key) and𝑉(value):
Attention(𝑄,𝐾,𝑉)=softmax𝑄𝐾𝑇
√𝑚
𝑉. (2)
Here, the softmax forms the convex combination weights for the
values in𝑉, allowing us to compress the matrix 𝑉into a smaller
representative embedding for simplified inference in the down-
stream neural network operations. Unlike traditional attention op-
eration, the scaled-dot product attention scales the weights by a√𝑚term to reduce the variance of the weights, facilitating stable
training [ 51]. For input matrices 𝑄,𝐾and𝑉, we apply Multi-Head
Self Attention [ 51] by first passing it through ℎ(number of heads)
feed-forward layers to get 𝑄𝑖,𝐾𝑖and𝑉𝑖for𝑖∈{1,...,ℎ}, and then
applying scaled-dot product attention as
MultiHeadAtt(𝑄,𝐾,𝑉)=Concat(𝐻1,...,𝐻ℎ),
where𝐻𝑖=Attention(𝑄𝑖,𝐾𝑖,𝑉𝑖).(3)
Multi-Head Attention allows the model to jointly attend to informa-
tion from different representation sub-spaces at different positions.
In addition, we use position encoding of the input matrices as de-
fined in [51].
As GAN models have been shown to perform well in character-
istic tasks of whether an input is anomalous or not, we leverage a
time-efficient GAN style adversarial training method. Our model
consists of two transformer encoders and two decoders (Figure 1).
We consider the model inference in two phases. We first take the 𝑊
and𝐶pair as an input and a focus score 𝐹(initially a zero matrix
of the dimension of 𝑊, more details in the next subsection). Webroadcast𝐹to match the dimension of 𝑊, with appropriate zero-
padding and concatenate the two. We then apply position encoding
and obtain the input for the first encoder, say 𝐼1. The first encoder
performs the following operations
𝐼1
1=LayerNorm(𝐼1+MultiHeadAtt(𝐼1,𝐼1,𝐼1)),
𝐼2
1=LayerNorm(𝐼1
1+FeedForward(𝐼1
1)).(4)
Here, MultiHeadAtt(𝐼1,𝐼1,𝐼1)denotes the multi-head self attention
operation for the input matrix 𝐼1and+denotes matrix addition. The
above operations generate attention weights using the input time-
series windows and the complete sequence to capture temporal
trends within the input sequences. These operations enable the
model to infer over multiple batches of the time-series windows in
parallel as the neural network, at each timestamp, does not depend
on the output of a previous timestamp, significantly improving the
training time of the proposed method. For the window encoder,
we apply position encoding to the input window 𝑊to get𝐼2. We
modify the self-attention in the window encoder to mask the data
at subsequent positions. This is done to prevent the decoder from
looking at the datapoints for future timestamp values at the time
of training as all data 𝑊and𝐶is given at once to allow parallel
training. The window encoder performs the following operations
𝐼1
2=Mask(MultiHeadAtt(𝐼2,𝐼2,𝐼2)),
𝐼2
2=LayerNorm(𝐼2+𝐼1
2),
𝐼3
2=LayerNorm(𝐼2
2+MultiHeadAtt(𝐼2
1,𝐼2
1,𝐼2
2)).(5)
The encoding of the complete sequence 𝐼2
1is used as value and
keys by the window encoder for the attention operation using the
encoded input window as the query matrix. The motivation behind
the operations in (5)is similar to the one for (4); however, here we
apply masking of the window input to hide the window sequences
for future timestamps in the same input batch. As the complete
input sequence up to the 𝑡-th timestamp is given to the model as
an input; it allows the model to encapsulate and leverage a larger
context compared to a bounded, limited one as in prior art [ 4,45,62].
Finally, we use two identical decoders which perform the operation
𝑂𝑖=Sigmoid(FeedForward(𝐼3
2)), (6)
where𝑖∈{1,2}for the first and second decoder respectively. The
Sigmoid activation is used to generate an output in the range [0,1],
to match the normalized input window. Thus, the TranAD model
takes the inputs 𝐶and𝑊to generate two outputs 𝑂1and𝑂2.