Shreshth Tuli, Giuliano Casale, and Nicholas R. Jennings
(6)Secure Water Treatment (SWaT) dataset : This dataset is collected
from a real-world water treatment plant with 7 days of normal
and 4 days of abnormal operation [ 33]. This dataset consists of
sensor values (water level, flow rate, etc.) and actuator opera-
tions (valves and pumps).
(7)Water Distribution (WADI) dataset : This is an extension of the
SWaT system, but had more than twice the number of sensors
and actuators than the SWaT model [ 3]. The dataset is also
collected for a longer duration of 14 and 2 days of normal and
attack scenarios.
(8)Server Machine Dataset (SMD) : This is a five-week long dataset
of stacked traces of the resource utilizations of 28 machines
from a compute cluster [ 45]. Similar to MSL, we use the non-
trivial sequences in this dataset, specifically the traces named
machine-1-1 ,2-1,3-2and3-7.
(9)Multi-Source Distributed System (MSDS) Dataset : This is a re-
cent high-quality multi-source data composed of distributed
traces, application logs, and metrics from a complex distributed
system [ 38]. This dataset is specifically built for AI operations,
including automated anomaly detection, root cause analysis,
and remediation.
We eschew comparisons on the Yahoo [ 53] dataset that has been
claimed to suffer from mislabeling and run-to-failure bias [55].
4.2 Evaluation Metrics
4.2.1 Anomaly Detection We use precision, recall, area under the
receiver operating characteristic curve (ROC/AUC) and F1 score to
evaluate the detection performance of all models [ 14,62]. We also
measure the AUC and F1 scores by training all models with 20%of
the training data (again using the 80:20 split for validation dataset
and the rest as the test set), and call these AUC* and F1* respectively,
to measure the performance of the models with limited data. We
train on the five sets of 20% training data and report average results
for statistical significance.
4.2.2 Anomaly Diagnosis We use commonly used metrics to mea-
sure the diagnosis performance of all models [ 62].HitRate@P%
is the measure of how many ground truth dimensions have been
included in the top candidates predicted by the model [ 45].𝑃%is
the percentage of the ground truth dimensions for each timestamp,
which we use to consider the top predicted candidates. For instance,
if at timestamp 𝑡, if 2 dimensions are labeled anomalous in the
ground truth, HitRate@100% would consider top 2 dimensions and
HitRate@150% would consider 3 dimensions (100 and 150 are cho-
sen based on prior work [ 62]). We also measure the Normalized
Discounted Cumulative Gain (NDCG) [ 24].NDCG@P% considers
the same number of top predicted candidates as HitRate@P% .
4.3 Results
Anomaly Detection. Tables 2 and 3 provide the precision, recall,
AUC, F1, AUC* and F1* scores for TranAD and baseline models for
all datasets. On average, the F1 score of the TranAD model is 0.8802
and F1* is 0.8012. TranAD outperforms the baselines (in terms of F1
score) for all datasets except MSL when we consider the complete
dataset for model training. TranAD also outperforms baselines for
all datasets except the WADI dataset with 20%of the dataset used
Figure 4: Critical difference diagrams for F1 and AUC scores
using the Wilkoxon pairwised signed rank test (with 𝛼=
0.05) on all datasets. Rightmost methods are ranked higher.
for training (F1* score). For MSL, the GDN model has the highest
F1 score ( 0.9591) and for the WADI dataset, OmniAnomaly has the
highest F1* score ( 0.1017). Similarly, TranAD outperforms baselines
in terms of AUC scores for all datasets except MSDS, where GDN
has the highest AUC ( 0.9105). All models perform relatively poorly
on WADI due to its large-scale in terms of sequence lengths and
data modality. Specifically, TranAD achieves improvement of up to
17.06%in F1 score, 14.64%in F1* score, 11.69%in AUC and 11.06%
in AUC* scores over the state-of-the-art baseline models.
The MERLIN baseline is a parameter free approach that does
not require any training data; hence, we report F1* and AUC* as
F1 and AUC scores, respectively. MERLIN performs relatively well
only on the univariate datasets, i.e.NAB and UCR, and is unable
to scale effectively to multivariate data in our traces. The baseline
method LSTM-NDT has a good performance on MSL and SMD, but
performs poorly on other datasets. This is due to its sensitivity to
different scenarios and poor efficiency of the NDT thresholding
method [ 62]. The POT technique used in TranAD and other models
like OmniAnomaly helps set more accurate threshold values by also
considering the localized peak values in the data sequence. DAGMM
model performs very well for short datasets like UCR, NAB, MBA
and SMAP, but its scores drop significantly for other datasets with
longer sequences. This is because it does not map the temporal
information explicitly as it does not use sequence windows but
only a single GRU model. The window encoder in TranAD, with
the encoding of the complete sequence as a self-condition, allows
it to perform better even with long high-dimensional sequences.
The OmniAnomaly, CAE-M and MSCRED models use sequential
observations as input, allowing these methods to retain the tempo-
ral information. Such methods perform reconstruction regardless
of anomalous data, which prevents them from detecting anomalies
close to the normal trends [ 4]. TranAD tackles this by using adver-
sarial training to amplify errors. Hence, in datasets like SMD, where
anomalous data is not very far from normal data, it can detect even
mild anomalies.
Recent models such as USAD, MTAD-GAT and GDN use atten-
tion mechanisms to focus on specific modes of the data. Moreover,
these models try to capture the long-term trends by adjusting the
weights of their neural network and only use a local window as an