TranAD: Deep Transformer Networks for Anomaly Detection in Multivariate Time Series Data
Threshold (POT) method for automated anomaly threshold selec-
tion that outperforms the previously used NDT approach. This
work led to a significant performance leap compared to the prior
art, but at the expense of high training times.
The Multi-Scale Convectional Recursive Encoder-Decoder (MS-
CRED) [ 60] converts an input sequence window into a normalized
two-dimensional image and then passes it through a ConvLSTM
layer. This method is able to capture more complex inter-modal cor-
relations and temporal information, however is unable to generalize
to settings with insufficient training data. The MAD-GAN [ 29] uses
an LSTM based GAN model to model the time-series distribution
using generators. This work uses not only the prediction error, but
also the discriminator loss in the anomaly scores. MTAD-GAT [ 62]
uses a graph-attention network to model both feature and temporal
correlations and pass it through a lightweight Gated-Recurrent-
Unit (GRU) network that aids detection without severe overheads.
Traditionally, attention operations perform input compression us-
ing convex combination where the weights are determined using
neural networks. GRU is a simplified version of LSTM with a smaller
parameter set and can be trained in limited data settings. The CAE-
M [61] uses a convolutional autoencoding memory network, similar
to MSCRED. It passes the time-series through a CNN with the out-
put being processed by bidirectional LSTMs to capture long-term
temporal trends. Such recurrent neural network-based models have
been shown to have high computation costs and low scalability for
high dimensional datasets [4].
More recent works such as USAD [ 4], GDN [ 14] and open-
Gauss [ 30] do not use resource-hungry recurrent models, but only
attention-based network architectures to improve training speeds.
The USAD method uses an autoencoder with two decoders with
an adversarial game-style training framework. This is one of the
first works that focus on low overheads by using a simple autoen-
coder and can achieve a several-fold reduction in training times
compared to the prior art. The Graph Deviation Network (GDN)
approach learns a graph of relationships between data modes and
uses attention-based forecasting and deviation scoring to output
anomaly scores. The openGauss approach uses a tree-based LSTM
that has lower memory and computational footprint and allows
capturing temporal trends even with noisy data. However, due
to the small window as an input and the use of simple or no re-
current models, the latest models are unable to capture long-term
dependencies effectively.
The recently proposed HitAnomaly [ 19] method uses vanilla
transformers as encoder-decoder networks, but is only applicable
to natural-language log data and not appropriate for generic con-
tinuous time-series data as inputs. In our experiments, we compare
TranAD against the state-of-the-art methods MERLIN, LSTM-NDT,
DAGMM, OmniAnomaly, MSCRED, MAD-GAN, USAD, MTAD-
GAT, CAE-M and GDN. These methods have shown superiority in
anomaly detection and diagnosis, but complement one another in
terms of performance across different time-series datasets. Out of
these, only USAD aims to reduce training times, but does this to a
limited extent. Just like reconstruction based prior work [ 4,29,45,
60,61], we develop a TranAD model that learns broad level trends
using training data to find anomalies in test data. We specifically
improve anomaly detection and diagnosis performance with also
reducing the training times in this work.3 Methodology
3.1 Problem Formulation
We consider a multivariate time-series, which is a timestamped
sequence of observations/datapoints of size 𝑇
T={𝑥1,...,𝑥𝑇},
where each datapoint 𝑥𝑡is collected at a specific timestamp 𝑡and
𝑥𝑡∈I R𝑚,∀𝑡. Here, the univariate setting is a particular case where
𝑚=1. We now define the two problems of anomaly detection and
diagnosis.
Anomaly Detection: Given a training input time-series T, for any
unseen test time-series ˆTof length ˆ𝑇and same modality as the
training series, we need to predict Y={𝑦1,...,𝑦 ˆ𝑇}, where we use
𝑦𝑡∈{0,1}to denote whether the datapoint at the 𝑡-th timestamp
of the test set is anomalous (1 denotes an anomalous datapoint).
Anomaly Diagnosis: Given the above training and test time-series,
we need to predict Y={𝑦1,...,𝑦 ˆ𝑇}, where𝑦𝑡∈{0,1}𝑚to denote
which of the modes of the datapoint at the 𝑡-th timestamp are
anomalous.
3.2 Data Preprocessing
To make our model more robust, we normalize the data and con-
vert it to time-series windows, both for training and testing. We
normalize the time-series as:
𝑥𝑡←𝑥𝑡−min(T)
max(T)− min(T)+𝜖′, (1)
where min(T)andmax(T)are the mode wise minimum and max-
imum vectors in the training time-series. 𝜖′is a small constant
vector to prevent zero-division. Knowing the ranges a-priori, we
normalize the data to get it in the range [0,1).
To model the dependence of a data point 𝑥𝑡at a timestamp 𝑡, we
consider a local contextual window of length 𝐾as
𝑊𝑡={𝑥𝑡−𝐾+1,...,𝑥𝑡}.
We use replication padding for 𝑡<𝐾and convert an input time
seriesTto a sequence of sliding windows W={𝑊1,...,𝑊𝑇}.
Replication padding, for each 𝑡<𝐾, appends to the window 𝑊𝑡a
constant vector{𝑥𝑡,...,𝑥𝑡}of length𝐾−𝑡to maintain the window
length of𝐾for each𝑡. Instead of usingTas training input, we
useWfor model training and ˆW(corresponding to ˆT) as the test
series. This is a common practice in prior work [ 4,45] as it allows
us to give a datapoint with its local context instead of a standalone
vector, and hence is used in our model. We also consider the time
slice until the current timestamp 𝑡of a seriesTand denote it as 𝐶𝑡.
Now, instead of directly predicting the anomaly label 𝑦𝑡for each
input window 𝑊𝑡, we shall first predict an anomaly score 𝑠𝑡for
this window. Using anomaly scores for the past input windows,
we calculate a threshold value 𝐷, above which we label the input
window as anomalous, thus 𝑦𝑡=1(𝑠𝑡≥𝐷). To calculate the
anomaly score 𝑠𝑡, we reconstruct the input window as 𝑂𝑡and use
the deviation between 𝑊𝑡and𝑂𝑡. For the sake of simplicity and
without loss of generality, we shall use 𝑊,𝐶,𝑂and𝑠for the rest
of the discussion.