TranAD: Deep Transformer Networks for Anomaly Detection in
Multivariate Time Series Data
Shreshth Tuli
Imperial College London
London, UK
s.tuli20@imperial.ac.ukGiuliano Casale
Imperial College London
London, UK
g.casale@imperial.ac.ukNicholas R. Jennings
Loughborough University
London, UK
n.r.jennings@lboro.ac.uk
Abstract
Efficient anomaly detection and diagnosis in multivariate time-
series data is of great importance for modern industrial applications.
However, building a system that is able to quickly and accurately
pinpoint anomalous observations is a challenging problem. This is
due to the lack of anomaly labels, high data volatility and the de-
mands of ultra-low inference times in modern applications. Despite
the recent developments of deep learning approaches for anomaly
detection, only a few of them can address all of these challenges.
In this paper, we propose TranAD, a deep transformer network
based anomaly detection and diagnosis model which uses attention-
based sequence encoders to swiftly perform inference with the
knowledge of the broader temporal trends in the data. TranAD uses
focus score-based self-conditioning to enable robust multi-modal
feature extraction and adversarial training to gain stability. Addi-
tionally, model-agnostic meta learning (MAML) allows us to train
the model using limited data. Extensive empirical studies on six pub-
licly available datasets demonstrate that TranAD can outperform
state-of-the-art baseline methods in detection and diagnosis perfor-
mance with data and time-efficient training. Specifically, TranAD
increases F1 scores by up to 17%, reducing training times by up to
99% compared to the baselines.
1 Introduction
Modern IT operations generate enormous amounts of high dimen-
sional sensor data used for continuous monitoring and proper func-
tioning of large-scale datasets. Traditionally, data mining experts
have studied and highlighted data that do not follow usual trends
to report faults. Such reports have been crucial for system man-
agement models for reactive fault tolerance and robust database
design [ 47]. However, with the advent of big-data analytics and
deep learning, this problem has become of interest to data mining
researchers and to aid experts in handling increasing amounts of
data. One particular use case is in artificial intelligence for Industry-
4.0 databases, with a specific focus on service reliability [ 38] that
has automated fault detection, recovery and management of mod-
ern systems. Detecting data-faults, or any type of behavior not
conforming to the expected trends, is an active research discipline
referred to as anomaly detection in multivariate time series [ 11].
Many data-driven industries, including ones related to distributed
computing, Internet of Things (IoT), robotics and urban resource
management [ 4,46] are now adopting machine learning based
unsupervised methods for anomaly detection.
Challenges. The problem of anomaly detection is becoming
increasingly challenging in large-scale databases due to the in-
creasing data modality [ 18,28,54]. In particular, the increasing
number of sensors and devices in contemporary IoT platforms withincreasing data volatility creates the requirement for significant
amounts of data for accurate inference. However, due to the rising
federated learning paradigm with geographically distant clusters,
synchronizing databases across devices is expensive, causing lim-
ited data availability for training [ 48,57]. Further, next-generation
applications need ultra-fast inference speeds for quick recovery and
optimal Quality of Service (QoS) [ 6,49,50]. Time-series databases
are generated using several engineering artifacts (servers, robots,
etc.) that interact with the environment, humans or other systems.
As a result, the data often displays both stochastic and temporal
trends [ 45]. It thus becomes crucial to distinguish outliers due to
stochasticity and only pinpoint observations that do not adhere to
the observed temporal trends. Moreover, the lack of labeled data
and anomaly diversity makes the problem challenging as we cannot
use supervised learning models, which have shown to be effective
in other areas of data mining [ 12]. Finally, it is not only impor-
tant to detect anomalies but also the root causes, i.e., the specific
data sources leading to abnormal behavior [ 23]. This complicates
the problem further as we need to perform multi-class prediction
(whether there is an anomaly and from which source if so) [60].
Existing solutions. The above discussed challenges have led
to the development of a myriad of unsupervised learning solu-
tions for automated anomaly detection. Researchers have devel-
oped reconstruction-based methods that predominantly aim to
encapsulate the temporal trends and predict the time-series data in
an unsupervised fashion, then use the deviation of the prediction
with the ground-truth data as anomaly scores. Based on various
extreme value analysis methods, such approaches classify times-
tamps with high anomaly scores as abnormal [ 4,10,14,20,28,29,
45,60,62]. The way prior works generate a predicted time-series
from a given one varies from one work to another. Traditional ap-
proaches, like SAND [ 10], use clustering and statistical analysis to
detect anomalies. Contemporary methods like openGauss [ 30] and
LSTM-NDT [ 20] use a Long-Short-Term-Memory (LSTM) based
neural networks to forecast the data with an input time-series and
a non-parametric dynamic thresholding approach for detecting
anomalies from prediction errors. However, recurrent models like
LSTMs are known to be slow and computationally expensive [ 4]. Re-
cent state-of-the-art methods, like MTAD-GAT [ 62] and GDN [ 14],
use deep neural networks with a time-series window as an input
for more accurate predictions. However, as the inputs become more
data-intensive, small constant size window inputs limit the detec-
tion performance of such models due to the restricted local context
information given to the model [ 4]. There is a need for a model that
is fast and can capture high-level trends with minimal overheads.
New insights. As noted above, recurrent models based on prior
methods are not only slow and computationally expensive, but arearXiv:2201.07284v6  [cs.LG]  14 May 2022