Topological Autoencoders
Michael Moor†12Max Horn†12Bastian Rieck‡12Karsten Borgwardt‡12
Abstract
We propose a novel approach for preserving topo-
logical structures of the input space in latent rep-
resentations of autoencoders. Using persistent ho-
mology , a technique from topological data analy-
sis, we calculate topological signatures of both the
input and latent space to derive a topological loss
term. Under weak theoretical assumptions, we
construct this loss in a differentiable manner, such
that the encoding learns to retain multi-scale con-
nectivity information. We show that our approach
is theoretically well-founded and that it exhibits
favourable latent representations on a synthetic
manifold as well as on real-world image data sets,
while preserving low reconstruction errors.
1. Introduction
While topological features, in particular multi-scale features
derived from persistent homology, have seen increasing use
in the machine learning community ( Carrière et al. ,2019 ,
Guss & Salakhutdinov ,2018 ,Hofer et al. ,2017 ,2019a ,b,
Ramamurthy et al. ,2019 ,Reininghaus et al. ,2015 ,Rieck
et al.,2019a ,b), employing topology directly as a constraint
for modern deep learning methods remains a challenge. This
is due to the inherently discrete nature of these computa-
tions, making backpropagation through the computation of
topological signatures immensely difﬁcult or only possible
in certain special circumstances ( Chen et al. ,2019 ,Hofer
et al.,2019a ,Poulenard et al. ,2018 ).
This work presents a novel approach that permits obtaining
gradients during the computation of topological signatures.
This makes it possible to employ topological constraints
while training deep neural networks, as well as building
topology-preserving autoencoders. Speciﬁcally, we make
†Equal contribution.‡These authors jointly directed this
work.1Department of Biosystems Science and Engineering, ETH
Zurich, 4058 Basel, Switzerland2SIB Swiss Institute of Bioin-
formatics, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Karsten Borgwardt
<karsten.borgwardt@bsse.ethz.ch>.
Proceedings of the 37thInternational Conference on Machine
Learning , Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the au-
thor(s).the following contributions:
1.We develop a new topological loss term for autoen-
coders that helps harmonise the topology of the data
space with the topology of the latent space.
2.We prove that our approach is stable on the level of
mini-batches, resulting in suitable approximations of
the persistent homology of a data set.
3.We empirically demonstrate that our loss term aids
in dimensionality reduction by preserving topological
structures in data sets; in particular, the learned latent
representations are useful in that the preservation of
topological structures can improve interpretability.
2. Background: Persistent Homology
Persistent homology ( Barannikov ,1994 ,Edelsbrunner &
Harer ,2008 ) is a method from the ﬁeld of computational
topology, which develops tools for analysing topological fea-
tures (connectivity-based features such as connected com-
ponents) of data sets. We ﬁrst introduce the underlying
concept of simplicial homology. For a simplicial complex
K, i.e. a generalised graph with higher-order connectivity
information such as cliques, simplicial homology employs
matrix reduction algorithms to assign Ka family of groups,
thehomology groups . The dthhomology group Hd(K)of
Kcontains d-dimensional topological features, such as con-
nected components ( d=0), cycles/tunnels ( d=1), and
voids ( d=2). Homology groups are typically summarised
by their ranks, thereby obtaining a simple invariant “signa-
ture” of a manifold. For example, a circle in R2has one
feature with d=1(a cycle), and one feature with d=0(a
connected component).
In practice, the underlying manifold Mis unknown and we
are working with a point cloud X:={x1,...,x n}✓Rd
and a metric dist: X⇥X!Rsuch as the Euclidean
distance. Persistent homology extends simplicial homol-
ogy to this setting: instead of approximating Mby means
of asingle simplicial complex, which would be an unsta-
ble procedure due to the discrete nature of X, persistent
homology tracks changes in the homology groups over mul-
tiple scales of the metric. This is achieved by construct-
ing a special simplicial complex, the Vietoris–Rips com-
plex ( Vietoris ,1927 ). For 0✏<1, the Vietoris–Rips
complex of Xat scale ✏, denoted by R✏(X), contains all