Topological Autoencoders
FASHION -MNIST MNIST CIFAR-10
PCA
t-SNE
UMAP
AE
TopoAE
Figure 4. Latent representations of the FASHION -MNIST (left
column), MNIST (middle column), CIFAR-10 (right column)
data sets. The respective batch size values for our method
are(95,126,82). Please refer to Figures A.6,A.7, and A.8in
the supplementary materials for enlarged versions.
In our experiments, we observed that our method is uniquely
able to capture spatial relationships between nested high-
dimensional spheres. This is relevant, as the ability to cope
with several manifolds in the domain of manifold learning
still remains a challenging task. On real-world data sets,
we observed that our topological loss leads to competitive
performance in terms of numerous quality metrics (such as
a density preservation metric), while notadversely affecting
the reconstruction error. In both synthetic and real-world
data sets, we obtain interesting and interpretable represen-
tations, as our method does not merely pull apart different
classes, but tries to spatially arrange them meaningfully.
Thus, we do not observe mere distinct “clouds”, but ratherentangled structures, which we consider to constitute a more
meaningful representation of the underlying manifolds (an
auxiliary analysis in Supplementary Section A.10 conﬁrms
that our method inﬂuences topological features, measured
using PH, in a beneﬁcial manner).
Future work Our topological loss formulation is highly
generalizable; it only requires the existence of a distance
matrix between individual samples (either globally, or on
the level of batches). As a consequence, our topological
loss term can be directly integrated into a variety of dif-
ferent architectures and is notlimited to standard autoen-
coders. For instance, we can also apply our constraint to
variational setups (see Figure A.3for a sketch) or create
a topology-aware variant of principal component analy-
sis (dubbed “TopoPCA”; see Table A.2for more details,
as well as Figures A.6,A.7, and A.8for the corresponding
latent space representations). Employing our loss term to
more involved architectures will be an exciting route for
future work. One issue with the calculation is that, given the
computational complexity of calculating R✏(·), for higher-
dimensional features, we would scale progressively worse
with increasing batch size. However, in our low-dimensional
setup, we observed that runtime tends to grow with decreas-
ing batch size, i.e. the mini-batch speed-up still dominates
runtime (for more details concerning the effect of batch
sizes, see Supplementary Section A.8). In future work,
scaling to higher dimensions could be mitigated by approxi-
mating the calculation of persistent homology ( Choudhary
et al.,2018 ,Kerber & Sharathkumar ,2013 ,Sheehy ,2013 )
or by exploiting recent advances in parallelising it ( Bauer
et al.,2014 ,Lewis & Morozov ,2015 ). Another interesting
extension would be to tackle classiﬁcation scenarios with
topology-preserving loss terms. This might prove challeng-
ing, however, because the goal in classiﬁcation is to increase
class separability, which might be achieved by removing
topological structures. This goal is therefore at odds with
our loss term that tries preserving those structures. We think
that such an extension might require restricting the method
to a subset of scales (namely those that do not impede class
separability) to be preserved in the data.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors wish to thank Christian Bock for fruitful discus-
sions and valuable feedback.
This project was supported by the grant #2017-110 of the
Strategic Focal Area “Personalized Health and Related Tech-
nologies (PHRT)” of the ETH Domain for the SPHN/PHRT
Driver Project “Personalized Swiss Sepsis Study” and the
SNSF Starting Grant “Signiﬁcant Pattern Mining” (K.B.,
grant no. 155913). Moreover, this work was funded in part
by the Alfried Krupp Prize for Young University Teachers of
the Alfried Krupp von Bohlen und Halbach-Stiftung (K.B.).