Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2020 ,17, 3176 2 of 8
Bats, which are reservoir hosts of various zoonotic viruses, including the Hendra and Nipah viruses,
have been indicated as putative key reservoirs of coronavirus in China [ 5]. From a genomic standpoint,
the SARS-CoV-2 shares approximately 50% and 79% of its genetic sequence with the MERS-CoV and
the SARS-CoV , respectively. Furthermore, SARS-CoV-2 shares a receptor-binding domain structure
with SARS-CoV [6].
Thanks to the latest advancements in the ﬁeld of computational techniques and information and
communication technologies (ICTs), artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) and Big Data can help handle the huge,
unprecedented amount of data derived from public health surveillance, real-time epidemic outbreaks
monitoring, trend now-casting /forecasting, regular situation brieﬁng and updating from governmental
institutions and organisms, and health resources utilization information [7].
Big Data have been classically deﬁned by three Vs: (i) velocity (in terms of the unprecedented
speed of data acquisition, processing and manipulation; in this regard, Big Data are known also as
“fast data”); (ii) volume (in terms of the high amount of information available); and (iii) variety (in
terms of the number of the di erent sources and channels that can produce and release Big Data) [ 8,9].
There are various types of Big Data, based on their sources: (i) molecular Big Data (obtained by
means of wet-lab techniques and OMICS-based approaches, such as genomics, and post-genomics
specialties, including proteomics, and interactomics); (ii) imaging-based Big Data (like radiomics or
the massive data-mining approach to extract clinically meaningful, high-dimensional information
from images); (iii) sensor-based Big Data (wearable sensors); and (iv) digital and computational Big
Data (with an incredible wealth of data produced by the internet, smart phones, and other mobile
devices) [10–13].
In the remaining part of this paper, we will overview some of the major possible applications of
AI and Big Data for the management of COVID-19.
2. Short-Term Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Big Data: A Quick and E ective
Pandemic Alert
Big Data can enable monitoring of the disease outbreak in real-time. With respect to previous
epidemics and pandemics outbreaks, COVID-19 is unprecedented in that open-access datasets
containing daily numbers of new infections broken down by country, and, in some cases, even cities, are
widely available. Combined with the information we have about the movement of people, it represents
the perfect dataset to combine mathematical modeling and AI.
Blue Dot, a Toronto-based start-up that uses an AI-enhanced surveillance system, seems to have
been the ﬁrst to detect the epidemic outbreak, several hours after its insurgence in the ﬁrst reported
epicenter of Wuhan, well ahead of the Chinese authorities and other international institutions and
agencies [14].
Computational techniques enable us to visualize in real-time the spreading of the virus, such as
the application designed at the John Hopkins University, USA. Furthermore, social Big Data, collected
from social networks and other related non-conventional data streams, enable us to reconstruct
early epidemiological story of the outbreak. For instance, Sun and colleagues [ 15] performed a
population-level observational study, monitoring healthcare related websites, social networks and
news reports, between 13th January and 31st January 2020, in mainland China. Authors concluded
that non-classical datasets can help researchers understanding the spreading of an outbreak, in terms
of health literacy, healthcare-seeking behaviors, and health resources’ utilization. Especially in the
early stages of the outbreak, non-classical datasets and data streams can inform the design and
implementation of e ective public health measures.
Similarly, Qin and coworkers [ 16] exploited Big Data to predict the number of new COVID-19
cases, either suspected or conﬁrmed. In more detail, authors utilized a lagged series of “Social media
search indexes” (SMSI) for various keywords, including COVID-19 clinical symptoms (such as dry
cough, fever, chest distress, and pneumonia). Authors found that, by employing techniques such as