Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2020 ,17, 3176 3 of 8
subset selection method, new COVID-19 suspected and conﬁrmed cases could be detected 6–9 and
10 days in advance, respectively.
Yang and colleagues [ 17] utilized population migration data to populate a dynamic transmission,
compartmental “Susceptible-Exposed-Infectious-Removed” (SEIR) model, combined with an AI
approach, trained on the SARS data, in order to predict the COVID-19 pandemic curve. Authors
demonstrated that a ﬁve-day delay in the implementation of the stringent public health measures
adopted by the Chinese authorities would have resulted in an epidemic size increased by three times.
Loosening /lifting the lock-down intervention would cause a second peak in the Hubei province by
mid-March until late April.
Concerning another coronavirus, Song and coworkers [ 18] investigated online di usion of
information, spread of fear, and perceived risk of contracting MERS infection during the MERS
outbreak in South Korea in May-June of 2015. Buzz conveying negative feelings was found to be
more prevalent in online discussion boards, Twitter, and online cafes than news sites and blogs.
News buzz, but not rumor buzz, correlated with positive emotions and the mention of taking
immunity-boosting food.
However, a particular aspect to which public health authorities should pay attention is another
V of the three Vs of Big Data: V of veracity, that is to say, the accuracy and reliability of the data
collected. The processing and modeling of Big Data should incorporate such uncertainty and deal with
it, ensuring robustness of the ﬁndings. To date, this is still an open challenge.
3. Short-Term Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Big Data: Tracking and Diagnosing
COVID-19 Cases
Having a reliable, sensitive and speciﬁc diagnostic test is of paramount importance in the
prevention and control of infectious disorders. Researchers have succeeded in establishing a molecular
kit able to quickly and accurately capture the proper diagnosis and distinguish between COVID-19 and
SARS-CoV . Salivary diagnostics seems to hold great promise in e ectively detecting the virus. Together
with molecular assays and tests, ether multiplex nucleic acid ampliﬁcation or microarray-based,
high-resolution CT of the chest is fundamental for monitoring the disease course and its evolution in
terms of severity and response to treatment. Currently ongoing research is also trying to identify early
radiological predictors of prognosis, which would be extremely helpful in stratifying patients with
COVID-19 and in their clinical management [7,14,19].
AI can facilitate the diagnosis of COVID-19 cases. For instance, Infervision is a start-up that
employs deep learning medical imaging platforms for facilitating quick diagnosis of COVID-19 cases
via the recognition of speciﬁc lung features [7,14].
Furthermore, block-chain technology is a unique decentralized system of recording, verifying and
approving data and carrying out a series of transactions. It is characterized by a high level of security
and enables the delivery of patient-centered healthcare services, enhanced public health surveillance,
management of outbreaks and a quick and e ective decision-making process [ 20–22]. A low-cost
block-chain and AI-coupled self-testing and tracking system has been proposed for managing the
COVID-19 pandemics, in developed settings (to avoid overwhelming and straining public health
capacity and healthcare /laboratory infrastructure) and in developing, resource-limited contexts [20].
4. Medium-Term Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Big Data: Identifying a Potential
Pharmacological Treatment
Currently, no o cially approved therapeutic options exist for the treatment of COVID-19.
Physicians should provide patients with supportive management and screen their nutritional status
before administering any drugs.
Due to the emergency situation, since it would be time- and resource-consuming to develop ad
hoc speciﬁc therapeutics, scientists are exploring three major approaches: (i) the feasibility of utilizing
already existing broad-spectrum anti-viral drugs, (ii) the possibility of modifying /adapting them,