Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2020 ,17, 3176 5 of 8
5. Medium-Term Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Big Data: Facilitating the
Implementation of Public Health Interventions
During an outbreak, resources are limited and can be quickly consumed. As such, to avoid
wasting resources and to better allocate those available, the Chinese government has supplemented
classical data collection methods with sophisticated computational systems and advanced techniques
that have helped identify at-risk subjects.
A start-up, Megvii, has announced the development of sophisticated body and face detection
and dual sensing via infrared cameras and visible light, as thermal scanners for rapidly screening
subjects transiting in a crowded place and identifying fever and high temperature, potentially related
to COVID-19.
Ant Financial Services Group, formerly known as Alipay, of the Alibaba group, have devised
AI-based applications, based on parameters like self-reported health status, history of travels and
contacts, that can identify COVID-19 cases. This system has been implemented in the county of Shizhu,
located in Chongqing, in the southwestern part of the People’s Republic of China, to monitor the ﬂow
of people during the Chinese Lunar New Year holiday, which has favored the spreading of the virus.
Based on this tool, it has been possible to inform the measure of quarantine. Similarly, in the provinces
of Zhejiang, Sichuan and Hainan, advanced data analyses have been exploited to reconstruct social
interactions and perform contact tracing.
Srinivasa Rao and Vazquez [ 26] have described a framework based on an AI algorithm that
would enable a quick identiﬁcation of infected cases, performing a risk assessment and evaluation
according to the symptoms and signs related to the novel coronavirus. This would be done via a web-
or mobile-based survey. Further, depending on the replies, the algorithm is able to send alerts to clinics
or mobile health units, for health visits and conﬁrmation of the case.
6. Long-Term Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Big Data: Building Smart, Health,
Resilient Cities
In recent years, profound societal phenomena, including globalization and rapid urbanization
together with population explosion and demographic changes, have deeply modiﬁed our lifestyles.
Approximately more than half of humanity dwell in urban areas and settlements, with this ﬁgure being
expected to signiﬁcantly increase up to two-thirds of the global population by 2050. In the Western
countries, whereas, at the beginning of the 20th century, less than half of the population lived in urban
areas, this percentage had doubled at the beginning of the new century and it can be anticipated that it
will further rise in the coming decades.
“Make cities and human settlements inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable”, was ambitiously
declared by the eleventh Sustainable Development Goal (SDG-11) of the United Nations, and has been
rearmed during the 2016 United Nations Habitat III on housing and sustainable urban development
in Ecuador (the “New Urban Agenda”). It is becoming more and more imperative. Environmental
(pollution, waste disposal, climate change) and health (communicable diseases, such as food- or
vector-borne infections) challenges represent serious concerns that may threaten citizens’ livability and
quality of life [27].
All this requires a multi-disciplinary approach to be properly and e ectively addressed by all the
stakeholders (urban designers and planners, workers in the ﬁeld of public health), also incorporating
citizens in the planning of a sustainable urban management and empowering them. A highly integrated
systems approach is of crucial importance, in that a healthy city is like a living, dynamic organism.
Smart interconnected devices, wearable sensors and other innovative technologies like smart phones,
telecommunications, networks and GPS, enable to collect an incredible wealth of data in real time
that are user-centered and technology-driven, allowing: (1) quality monitoring, transparency and
accountability, (2) resource allocation optimization, (3) citizen participation and inclusion, and 4)
resilience and adaptation to exogenous events.