Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2020 ,17, 3176 4 of 8
taking into account the biochemical and biophysical features of the novel virus, and (iii) exploiting
available pharmaceutics (either belonging to Western or Chinese traditional medicine) for other
therapeutic purposes (drug repositioning or repurposing) [2].
These strategies are aimed at targeting the virus by (i) interfering directly with it, or by (ii)
blocking /inhibiting its related biological process and events (such as viral entry and replication),
or targeting human immune system, by (iii) enhancing it [ 2]. Advancements in the genomic and
post-genomic ﬁelds enable to quickly scrutinize genome sequences, looking for similarity with other
genomes and discovering potential druggable targets.
Candidate drugs against COVID-19 include neuraminidase inhibitors such as Oseltamivir
and Peramivir, anti-retroviral protease inhibitors like Ritonavir /Lopinavir, nucleotide analogs as
Remdesivir, nucleoside inhibitors as Ribavirin, inﬂuenza hemagglutinin-mediated fusion inhibitors
like Arbidol /Umifenovir and anti-malarials as Chloroquine, among others.
Most patients with COVID-19 are being treated with Oseltamivir, despite some recent Cochrane
reviews questioning its e ectiveness in the management of inﬂuenza. Oseltamivir has been shown to
result in small clinically relevant e ects, with a remarkable occurrence of side e ects. Data concerning
Peramivir are even more limited, with few randomized clinical trials (RCTs) available, thus hindering a
comparison between the two neuraminidase inhibitors. Moreover, in-vitro testing assays have failed to
show the inhibition of cytopathic e ects of SARS-CoV [ 2], demonstrating, on the contrary, the e cacy
of some commercially available interferons. However, to date, these have been less utilized for the
clinical management of patients with COVID-19.
The usage of Ribavirin, a pro-drug of ribavirin triphosphate and a competitive inhibitor of the
enzyme inosine monophosphate dehydrogenase, which is crucial for the biosynthesis of guanosine and
nucleic acids synthesis, is neither supported by cellular nor clinical data, with several studies reporting,
instead, contrasting ﬁndings and clinically relevant toxicities that may result in discontinuation of
therapy [ 2]. For Arbidol, limited data exist [ 2] and generally its use in treating severe acute respiratory
infections is not recommended. In SARS patients, Lopinavir /Ritonavir, besides exerting in-vitro
anti-viral activities, has contributed to sparing steroid doses, reducing hospitalizations and nosocomial
infections, resulting in a decreased viral load and increased peripheral lymphocyte count [2].
Few patients are being treated with gancivlovir, an acyclovir analogue and inhibitor of the
Herpesvirus family including cytomegalovirus (CMV). Ganciclovir is approved for the treatment of
complications arising from AIDS-associated CMV infection, but in-vitro assays have not shown any
inhibition of the cytopathic e ects of SARS-CoV [2].
Furthermore, some physicians administer corticosteroids, the evidence of which in terms of clinical
outcomes and complications /death prevention is moderate according to the Cochrane reviews. In a
systematic review of the treatment e ects of candidate drugs against SARS-CoV , 25 out of 29 studies
assessed mentioning steroid, its use was found to be inconclusive, with four of them showing potential
harm to patients’ health [ 23]. Similarly, the e ectiveness of antibiotics in the treatment of viral
pneumonia appears to be limited [2].
In conclusion, an e ective treatment for COVID-19 is still lacking.
AI can help quickly identify potential therapeutics and candidate vaccines. For instance,
a collaboration between an AI start-up, BenevolentAI, and a university institution, the Imperial
College London, UK, has led to the discovery that baricitinib, a biologic used for the treatment of
moderately to severely active rheumatoid arthritis in adults, inhibitor of the janus kinases JAK1 and
JAK2, may exert anti-viral e ects [ 24], whereas another start-up, Insilico Medicine, located in Hong
Kong, has reported to have found six new drugs that may inhibit viral replication [14].
Concerning traditional Chinese medicine, by employing network pharmacology analysis,
Zhang and coauthors [ 25] systematically screened natural compounds used in Chinese treatment, and
found 13 of them to exert potential anti-COVID-19 e ects in terms of the regulation of viral replication,
modulation of immune and inﬂammatory pathways and hypoxia cascade.