Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2020 ,17, 3176 6 of 8
In recent years, several cities and communities in Spain, New Zealand, United States,
United Kingdom, Canada and United Arab Emirates have launched initiatives and challenges
with the aim of promoting research and innovation in the ﬁeld.
According to a recent systematic review of the literature, smart cities can enable population-wide
surveillance, counteract ageing, by promoting active ageing, socialization and healthy lifestyles, include
disabled and marginalized people, and provide quick and e ective responses to emergencies and
disasters such as outbreaks [27].
However, despite the importance of such a topic, there is a dearth of mathematical models, as
stated by Grindrod and colleagues [ 28]. The ﬁeld of “mathematics of smart cities” is particularly
challenging in that modeling communities is not a trivial task in terms of city boundaries and their
relationship with the surrounding environments. Capturing the time-dependency of interactions
among the di erent components of a smart city is rather demanding.
In the aftermath of disasters, the risk of communicable disorders is high. Designing and
implementing policies for properly managing disasters and emergencies should be holistic and
multi-level, incorporating prevention, defense, mitigation, preparation, response and recovery.
Current policies su er from gaps, in that, instead of being multi-criteria, broader and highly
integrated, foreseeing future events based on risk-assessment scenarios and planning in advance, focus
mainly on disaster resistance and are based on contingent evaluations based on administrative and
political pressures.
AI and Big Data can provide local decision- and policy-makers with informed, evidence-based
predictions. Allam and Jones [ 29] have investigated the COVID-19 outbreak adopting an urban
standpoint, showing how smart cities and smart networks can exploit high-quality, enhanced
standardized protocols for data sharing during emergencies, to better manage such situations.
However, di erently from the previous sections, this section still remains highly speculative,
with applications currently being experimental.
7. Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Big Data for COVID-19: Conclusions and Future Prospects
The potential applications of AI and Big Data for the management of COVID-19 are summarized
in Table 1.
Table 1. Possible applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Big Data for the management of the ongoing
COVID-19 outbreak.
Time-Scale Possible Application Example
Short-term (weeks)Rapid identiﬁcation of an ongoing
outbreakAI can facilitate real-time epidemiological data collection,
risk-assessment, decision-making processes, and
design /implementation of public health interventions
Diagnosis and prognosis of
COVID-19 casesRecognition of speciﬁc diagnostic and prognostic features
Medium-term (months)Identiﬁcation of a potential
therapeutic optionIdentify already existing drugs /discovering new molecules
Long-term (decades)Enhancing cities and favoring the
development of healthy, smart,
resilient citesDesign new standardized protocols for sharing data and
information during emergencies
AI and Big Data appear to have enormous potential for the management of COVID-19 and other
emergencies, and their role is anticipated to increase in the future. AI and Big Data can be used to
track the spread of the virus in real time, and plan and lift public health interventions accordingly,
monitor their e ectiveness, repurpose old compounds and discover new drugs, as well as identify
potential vaccine candidates and enhance the response of communities and territories to the ongoing
pandemic. These emerging approaches can be exploited together with classical surveillance: whilst
the latter enables data analysis and interpretation, the former uncovers hidden trends and patterns,
which can be used to build predictive models.