to external knowledge sources, such as the sentences at the
bottom of the ﬁgure taken from Wikipedia. Given the ques-
tion, image, and Wikipedia sentences, there is now enough
information to answer the question: Teddy Roosevelt!
More recent research has started to look at how to in-
corporate knowledge-based methods into VQA [ 29,30,36,
37]. These methods have investigated incorporating knowl-
edge bases and retrieval methods into VQA datasets with a
set of associated facts for each question. In this work, we go
one step forward and design a VQA dataset which requires
VQA to perform reasoning using unstructured knowledge.
To enable research in this exciting direction, we in-
troduce a novel dataset, named Outside Knowledge VQA
(OK-VQA), which includes only questions that require ex-
ternal resources for answering them. On our dataset, we can
start to evaluate the reasoning capabilities of models in sce-
narios where the answer cannot be obtained by only looking
at the image. Answering OK-VQA questions is a challeng-
ing task since, in addition to understanding the question and
the image, the model needs to: (1) learn what knowledge is
necessary to answer the questions, (2) determine what query
to do to retrieve the necessary knowledge from an outside
source of knowledge, and (3) incorporate the knowledge
from its original representation to answer the question.
The OK-VQA dataset consists of more than 14,000 ques-
tions that cover a variety of knowledge categories such as
science & technology, history, and sports. We provide cat-
egory breakdowns of our dataset, as well as other relevant
statistics to examine its properties. We also analyze state-
of-the-art models and show their performance degrades on
this new dataset. Furthermore, we provide results for a set
of baseline approaches that are based on simple knowledge
retrieval. Our dataset is diverse, difﬁcult, and to date the
largest VQA dataset focused on knowledge-based VQA in
natural images.
Our contributions are: (a) we introduce the OK-VQA
dataset, which includes only questions that require external
resources to answer; (b) we benchmark some state-of-the-
art VQA models on our new dataset and show the perfor-
mance of these models degrades drastically; (c) we propose
a set of baselines that exploit unstructured knowledge.
2. Related Work
Visual Question Answering (VQA). Visual question an-
swering (VQA) has been one of the most popular topics in
the computer vision community over the past few years.
Early approaches to VQA combined recurrent networks
with CNNs to integrate textual and visual data [ 27,1].
Attention-based models [ 11,25,39,40,41,47] better guide
the model in answering the questions by highlighting im-
age regions that are relevant to the question. Modular net-
works [ 2,15,19] leverage the compositional nature of the
language in deep neural networks. These approaches havebeen extended to the video domain as well [ 16,28,35]. Re-
cently, [ 13,9] address the problem of question answering in
an interactive environment. None of these approaches, how-
ever, is designed for leveraging external knowledge so they
cannot handle the cases that the image does not represent
the full knowledge to answer the question.
The problem of using external knowledge for answer-
ing questions has been tackled by [ 38,36,37,23,30,29].
These methods only handle the knowledge that is repre-
sented by subject-relation-object or visual concept-relation-
attribute triplets, and rely on supervision to do the retrieval
of facts. In contrast, answering questions in our dataset re-
quires handling unstructured knowledge resources.
VQA datasets. In the past few years several datasets have
been proposed for visual question answering [ 26,3,12,44,
31,47,34,21,18,37]. The DAQUAR dataset [ 26] includes
template-based and natural questions for a set of indoor
scenes. [ 3] proposed the VQA dataset, which is two or-
ders of magnitude larger than DAQUAR and includes more
diverse images and less constrained answers. FM-IQA [ 12]
is another dataset that includes multi-lingual questions and
answers. Visual Madlibs [ 44], constructs ﬁll-in-the-blank
templates for natural language descriptions. COCO-QA
[31] is constructed automatically by converting image de-
scriptions to questions. The idea of Visual 7W [ 47] is to
provide object-level grounding for question-answer pairs as
opposed to image-level associations between images and
QA pairs. Visual Genome [ 21] provides dense annota-
tions for image regions, attributes, relationships, etc. and
provide free-form and region-based QA pairs for each im-
age. MovieQA [ 34] is a movie-based QA dataset, where
the QAs are based on information in the video clips, subti-
tles, scripts, etc. CLEVR [ 18] is a synthetic VQA dataset
that mainly targets visual reasoning abilities. In contrast
to all these datasets, we focus on questions that cannot be
answered by the information in the associated image and
require external knowledge to be answered.
Most similar to our dataset is FVQA [ 37]. While that
work also tackles the difﬁcult problem of creating a VQA
dataset requiring outside knowledge, their method annotates
questions by selecting a fact (a knowledge triplet such as
“dog is mammal") from a ﬁxed knowledge base. While this
dataset is still quite useful for testing methods’ ability to in-
corporate a knowledge base into a VQA system, our dataset
tests methods’ ability to retrieve relevant facts from the web,
from a database, or some other source of knowledge that
was not used to create the questions. Another issue is that
triplets are not sufﬁcient to represent general knowledge.
Building knowledge bases & Knowledge-based reason-
ing. Several knowledge bases have been created using vi-
sual data or for visual reasoning tasks [ 46,8,10,32,49,48].
These knowledge bases are potentially helpful resources
for answering questions in our dataset. Knowledge-based
3196