1. Vehicles and 
Transportation
16%
2. Brands, 
Companies and 
Products
3%
3. Objects, 
Material and 
Clothing
8%
4. Sports and 
Recreation
12%
5. Cooking and 
Food
15%6. Geography 
History, 
Language and 
Culture
3%7. People and 
Everyday Life
9%8. Plants and 
Animals
17%9. Science and 
Tec h n o lo g y
2%10. Weather and 
Climate
3%Other
12%KNOWLEDGE CATEGORIES
Figure 3: Breakdown of questions in terms of knowledge
categories. We show the percentage of questions falling
into each of our 10 knowledge categories.
Madlibs [ 44]. Since we manually ﬁltered our dataset to
avoid the pitfalls of other datasets and to ensure our ques-
tions are knowledge-based and because we ﬁltered down
common answers to emphasize the long tail of answers, our
dataset is more time-intensive and expensive to collect. We
trade off size in this case for knowledge and difﬁculty.
We can see from the average question lengths and av-
erage answer lengths that our questions and answers are
about comparable to KB-VQA [ 36] and FVQA [ 37] and
longer than the other VQA datasets with the exception of
DAQUAR and CLEVR (which are partially and fully auto-
mated from templates respectively). This makes sense since
we would expect knowledge-based questions to be longer as
they are typically not able to be as short as common ques-
tions in other datasets such as “How many objects are in the
image?” or “What color is the couch?”.
Question statistics. We also collected statistics for our
dataset by looking at the number of questions, and by look-
ing at which were most frequent for each knowledge cate-
gory. OK-VQA has 12,591 unique questions out of 14,055
total, and 7,178 unique question words. This indicates that
we get a variety of different questions and answers in our
dataset. We also looked at the variety of images in our
dataset. As we stated earlier, our images come from the
COCO image dataset, so our dataset contains the same ba-
sic distribution of images. However, we only use a subset
of COCO images, so we want to see if we still get a wide
distribution of images. For this, we ran a Places2 [ 45] clas-
siﬁer on our images and looked at the top-1 scene class for
each image and compared that to COCO overall. Out of 365
scenes, our dataset contains all but 5 classes: hunting lodge,
mansion, movie theater, ruin and volcano. These classes ap-
pear infrequently in the overall COCO dataset (10, 22, 28,Knowledge Category Highest relative 
frequency question 
wordsHighest relatively 
frequency answers
1. Vehicles and 
Transportationbus, train, truck, 
buses, jetjet, double decker, 
take off, coal, freight
2. Brands, Companies 
and Companiesmeasuring, founder, 
advertisements, 
poster, mobileebay , logitech , gift 
shop, flickr , sprint
3. Objects, Material 
and Clothingscissors, toilets, disk, 
teddy, sharpsew, wrench, quilt, 
teddy, bib
4. Sports and 
Recreationtennis, players, player, 
baseball, batumpire, serve, 
catcher, ollie, pitcher
5. Cooking and Food dish, sandwich, meal, 
cook, pizzadonut, fork, meal, 
potato, vitamin c
6. Geography, History, 
Language and Culturedenomination, nation, 
festival, century, 
monumentprom, spire, illinois , 
past, bern
7. People and 
Everyday Lifeexpressing, emotions, 
haircut, sunburned, 
punkhello, overall, twice, 
get married, cross leg
8. Plants and Animals animals, wild, cows, 
habitat, elephantsherbivore, zebra, 
herd, giraffe, ivory
9. Science and 
Technologyindoor, mechanical, 
technology, voltage, 
connectsurgery, earlier, 1758, 
thumb, alan turing
10. Weather and 
Climateweather, clouds, 
forming, sunrise, 
windystormy, noah, chilly, 
murky, oasis
Figure 4: For each category we show the question words
and answers that have the highest relative frequency across
our knowledge categories (i.e. frequency in category di-
vided by overall frequency).
37 and 25 times respectively), so overall, we still captured
quite a lot of the variation in scenes.
Finally, we show in Figure 4the question words and an-
swers in each category that are the most “unique” to get
a better idea of what types of questions we have in each
of these categories. We calculate these for each knowl-
edge category by looking at the number of appearances
within the category over the total number in the dataset
to see which question words and answers had the highest
relative frequency in their category. When looking at the
question words, we see words speciﬁc to categories such
as bus in Vehicles and Transportation, sandwich in Cook-
ing and Food, and clouds in Weather and Climate. We also
see that the answers are also extremely related to each cat-
egory, such as herbivore in Plants and Animals, and umpire
in Sports and Recreation. In the supplemental material, we
also show the most common question words and answers.
5. Benchmarking
In this section, we evaluate current state-of-the-art VQA
approaches and provide results for some baselines, includ-
3199