[But] most seedless citrus fruits 
require a stimulus from 
pollination to produce fruitThe orange (specifically the 
sweet orange) is the fruit of the 
citrus species citrus x sinensis in 
the family Rutaceae
The citrus sinensis is subdivided 
into four classes with distinct 
characteristics common 
oranges …Q: What fruit family is this 
from?
GT Ans: citrus,orange
MUTAN : fruit 
MUTAN+AN: citrus
Retrieved Sentences
Query: fruit orange
Query: orange family
Query: fruit
X inactivation is when one of 
the two x chromosomes in 
females is almost completely 
inactivatedHuman cells have 23 pairs of 
chromosomes 22 pairs of 
autosomes and one pair of sex 
chromosomes …
Most eukaryotic cells have a set 
of chromosomes 46 in humans 
with the genetic material 
spread among themQ: How many chromosomes 
do these creatures have?
GT Ans: 46,23,23 pairs
MUTAN : 3
MUTAN+AN: 23
A cow will produce large 
amounts of milk over its 
lifetimeCows of certain breeds that are 
kept for the milk they give are 
called dairy cows or milking 
cows (formerly milch cows)
Milk is a pale liquid produced 
by the mammary glands of 
mammalsQ: What type of liquid does 
this animal produce?
GT Ans: milk
MUTAN: beef
MUTAN+AN: milk
Retrieved Sentences Retrieved Sentences
Query: cow
Query: liquid cow
Query: produce cowQuery: chromosomes
Query: chromosomes
Query: chromosomesFigure 6: Qualitative results. We show the result of MUTAN+AN compared to the MUTAN baseline answer and the ground
truth answer (‘GT Ans’). We show the query words that were used by ArticleNet (pink boxes) and the corresponding most
relevant sentences (blue boxes).
dom subdivision of our training set and train MUTAN on
progressively smaller subsets of the training data and eval-
uate on our original test set. Figure 7shows the results.
Qualitative examples. We show some qualitative examples
in Figure 6to see how outside knowledge helps VQA sys-
tems in a few examples. We compare MUTAN+AN method
with MUTAN. The left example asks what “fruit family” the
fruit in the image (oranges) comes from. We see that two
sentences that directly contain the information that oranges
are citrus fruits are retrieved —“The orange ... is a fruit
of the citrus species” and “The citrus sinensis is subdivided
into four classes [including] common oranges”.
The middle example asks what liquid the animal (cow)
produces. The ﬁrst and third sentences tell us that cows
produce milk, and the second sentence tells us that milk is
a liquid. This gives the combined MUTAN+AN method
enough information to correctly answer milk.
The example on the right asks how many chromosomes
humans have. It is somewhat ambiguous whether it means
how many individual chromosomes or how many pairs, so
workers labeled both as answers. The retrieved articles are
helpful here, retrieving two different articles referring to 23
pairs of chromosomes and 46 chromosomes total. The com-
bined MUTAN+AN method correctly answers 23, while
MUTAN guesses 3.
6. Conclusion
We address the task of knowledge-based visual ques-
tion answering. We introduce a novel benchmark called
OK-VQA for this task. Unlike the common VQA bench-
marks, the information provided in the question and the cor-
responding images of OK-VQA is not sufﬁcient to answer
the questions, and answering the questions requires reason-051015202530
5 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100OKVQA Score
% Training QuestionsOKVQA Scale Ablation
Figure 7: Results on OK-VQA using different sizes of the
training set.
ing on external knowledge resources. We show that the
performance of state-of-the-art VQA models signiﬁcantly
drops on OK-VQA. We analyze the properties and statistics
of the dataset and show that background knowledge can im-
prove results on our dataset. Our experimental evaluations
show that the proposed benchmark is quite challenging and
that there is a large room for improvement.
Acknowledgements : We would like to thank everyone who took time to
review this work and provide helpful comments. This work is in part sup-
ported by NSF IIS-165205, NSF IIS-1637479, NSF IIS-1703166, Sloan
Fellowship, NVIDIA Artiﬁcial Intelligence Lab, and Allen Institute for ar-
tiﬁcial intelligence. Thanks to Aishwarya Agrawal, Gunnar Sigurdsson,
Victoria Donley, Achal Dave, and Eric Kolve who provided valuable as-
sistance, advice and feedback. Kenneth Marino is supported by the De-
partment of Defense (DoD) through the National Defense Science & En-
gineering Graduate Fellowship (NDSEG) Program.
3202