Q: What sort of vehicle uses 
this item? 
A: firetruckVehicles and 
Transportation
Q: When was the soft drink 
company shown first created?
A: 1898Brands, Companies 
and Products
Q: What is the material used 
to make the vessels in this 
picture? 
A: copperObjects, Material and 
Clothing
Q: What is the sports position 
of the man in the orange shirt?
A: goalieSports and Recreation Cooking and Food
Q: What is the name of the 
object used to eat this food? 
A: chopsticks
Q: What days might I most 
commonly go to this building? 
A: SundayGeography, History, 
Language and Culture
Q: Is this photo from the 50’s 
or the 90’s?
A: 50’sPeople and Everyday Life
Q: What phylum does this 
animal belong to?
A: chordate, chordataPlants and Animals
Q: How many chromosomes 
do these creatures have?
A: 23Science and Technology Weather and Climate
Q: What is the warmest outdoor 
temperature at which this kind 
of weather can happen?
A: 32 degrees
Figure 2: Dataset examples. Some example questions and their corresponding images and answers have been shown. We
show one example question for each knowledge category.
question answering has received much more attention in the
NLP community (e.g., [ 5,43,42,6,33,22,7]).
3. OK-VQA Dataset
In this section we explain how we collect a dataset which
better measures performance of VQA systems requiring ex-
ternal knowledge. The common VQA datasets such as
[3,14] do not require much knowledge to answer a large
majority of the questions. The dataset mostly contains ques-
tions such as “How many apples are there?”, “What animal
is this?”, and “What color is the bowl?”. While these are
perfectly reasonable tasks for open-ended visual recogni-
tion, they do not test our algorithms’ ability to reason about
a scene or draw on information outside of the image. Thus,
for our goal of combining visual recognition with informa-
tion extraction from sources outside the image, we would
not be able to evaluate knowledge-based systems as most
questions do not require outside knowledge.
To see this speciﬁcally, we examine the “age annota-
tions” that are provided for 10,000 questions in the VQA
dataset [ 1]. For each question and image pair, an MTurk
worker was asked how old someone would need to be to
answer the question. While this is not a perfect metric, it
is a reasonable approximation of the difﬁculty of a ques-
tion and how much a person would have to know to an-
swer a question. The analysis shows that more than 78% of
the questions can be answered by people who are 10 years
old or younger. This suggests that very little background
knowledge is actually required to answer the vast majorityof these questions.
Given that current VQA datasets do not test exactly what
we are looking for, we collect a new dataset. We use ran-
dom images from the COCO dataset [ 24], using the origi-
nal 80k-40k training and validation splits for our train and
test splits. The visual complexity of these images compared
to other datasets make them ideal for labeling knowledge-
based questions.
In the ﬁrst round of labeling, we asked MTurk workers to
write a question given an image. Similar to [ 3], we prompt
users to come up with questions to fool a “smart robot.”
We also ask in the instructions that the question should be
related to the image content. In addition, we prompt users
not to ask what is in an image, or how many of something
there is, and specify that the question should require some
outside knowledge. In a second round of labeling, we asked
5different MTurk workers to label each question-image pair
with an answer.
Although this prompt yielded many high-quality ques-
tions, it also yielded a lot of low quality questions, for ex-
ample, ones that asked basic questions such as counting,
did not require looking at the image, or were nonsensical.
To ensure that the dataset asked these difﬁcult knowledge-
requiring questions, the MTurk provided questions were
manually ﬁltered to get only questions requiring knowl-
edge. From a pool of 86,700 questions, we ﬁltered down
to 34,921 questions.
One more factor to consider was the potential bias in
the dataset. As discussed in many works, including [ 14],
3197