OK-VQA: A Visual Question Answering Benchmark Requiring
External Knowledge
Kenneth Marino∗1, Mohammad Rastegari2, Ali Farhadi2,3and Roozbeh Mottaghi2
1Carnegie Mellon University
2PRIOR @ Allen Institute for AI
3University of Washington
Abstract
Visual Question Answering (VQA) in its ideal form lets
us study reasoning in the joint space of vision and language
and serves as a proxy for the AI task of scene understand-
ing. However, most VQA benchmarks to date are focused
on questions such as simple counting, visual attributes, and
object detection that do not require reasoning or knowl-
edge beyond what is in the image. In this paper, we address
the task of knowledge-based visual question answering and
provide a benchmark, called OK-VQA, where the image
content is not sufﬁcient to answer the questions, encour-
aging methods that rely on external knowledge resources.
Our new dataset includes more than 14,000 questions that
require external knowledge to answer. We show that the
performance of the state-of-the-art VQA models degrades
drastically in this new setting. Our analysis shows that our
knowledge-based VQA task is diverse, difﬁcult, and large
compared to previous knowledge-based VQA datasets. We
hope that this dataset enables researchers to open up new
avenues for research in this domain.
1. Introduction
The ﬁeld of Visual Question Answering (VQA) has
made amazing strides in recent years, achieving record
numbers on standard VQA datasets [ 20,4,11,17]. As origi-
nally conceived, VQA is not only a fertile ground for vision
and language research, but is also a proxy to evaluate AI
models for the task of open-ended scene understanding. In
its ideal form, VQA would require not only visual recog-
nition, but also logical reasoning and incorporating knowl-
edge about the world. However, current VQA datasets (e.g.,
[3,47]) are focused mainly on recognition, and most ques-
∗Work done during internship at Allen Institute for AIDeveloped apparently simultaneously by toymakers ... and name d after President 
Theodore "Teddy" Roosevelt, the teddy bear became an iconic chil dren's toy, 
celebrated in story, song, and film.Another lasting, popular legacy of Roosevelt is the stuffed t oy bears—teddy bears—
named after him following an incident on a hunting trip in Missi ssippi in 1902.
At the same time in the USA, Morris Michtom created the first teddy bear, after 
being inspired by a drawing of Theodore "Teddy" Roosevelt with a bear cub.
Q: Which American 
president is associated 
with the stuffed animal 
seen here?
A: Teddy Roosevelt
Outside Knowledge
Figure 1: We propose a novel dataset for visual question
answering, where the questions require external knowledge
resources to be answered. In this example, the visual con-
tent of the image is not sufﬁcient to answer the question. A
set of facts about teddy bears makes the connection between
teddy bear and the American president, which enables an-
swering the question.
tions are about simple counting, colors, and other visual
detection tasks, so do not require much logical reasoning
or association with external knowledge. The most difﬁcult
and interesting questions ideally require knowing more than
what the question entails or what information is contained
in the images.
Consider the question in Figure 1, which asks about the
relation between the teddy bear and an American president.
The information in the image here is not complete for an-
swering the question. We need to link the image content
3195