Date of publication xxxx 00, 0000, date of current version xxxx 00, 0000.
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/ACCESS.2017.DOI
Explainable AI: current status and future
directions
PRASHANT GOHEL1, PRIYANKA SINGH1, AND MANORANJAN MOHANTY2
1DA-IICT, Gandhinagar, Gujarat, India
2Centre for Forensic Science, University of Technology Sydney, Australia
Corresponding author: Prashant Gohel (e-mail: 202021003@daiict.ac.in).
ABSTRACT Explainable Artiﬁcial Intelligence (XAI) is an emerging area of research in the ﬁeld of
Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI). XAI can explain how AI obtained a particular solution (e.g., classiﬁcation or
object detection) and can also answer other "wh" questions. This explainability is not possible in traditional
AI. Explainablity is essential for critical applications, such as defence, health care, law and order, and
autonomous driving vehicles, etc, where the know how is required for trust and transparency. A number
of XAI techniques so far have been purposed for such applications. This paper provides an overview of
these techniques from a multimedia (i.e., text, image, audio, and video) point of view. Advantages and
shortcomings of these techniques have been discussed, and pointers to some future directions have also
been provided.
INDEX TERMS Explainable Artiﬁcial Intelligence (XAI), Explainability, Interpretable Artiﬁcial Intelli-
gence.
I. INTRODUCTION
In recent years, Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI)-based applica-
tions have been used in various aspects of human life, such
as science, business, ﬁnance and social networking, etc. AI-
based algorithms have been successfully applied to all types
of data (text, image, audio, video) in various applications,
such as healthcare, defence, law and order, governance, au-
tonomous industry, etc. An AI algorithm can now efﬁciently
solve a classiﬁcation, regression, clustering, transfer learning
or optimizations problem [16]. This current day AI is mainly
limited to a sub-branch known as machine learning (ML).
Machine learning provides a computer with a set of examples
(aka training data set), and let the computer learn from the
example set. Once well trained, the computer can then answer
questions related to what it was taught previously. Typically,
this traditional AI is a blackbox that can answer “yes” and
“no” type questions without elaborating how that answer is
obtained.
In many applications, an explanation of how an answer
was obtained is crucial for ensuring trust and transparency.
An example of one such application is a medical application,
where the doctors should be damn sure about a conclusion.
They, for example, would like to know how AI decided
whether someone is suffering from a disease by analyzing a
CT scan image. AI-based systems are not 100% perfect. An
FIGURE 1: AI vs XAI
insight of how a result was obtained will therefore not only
can induce trustfulness but also can avoid life-threatening
errors. In some other applications (e.g., law and order),
answers to other "wh" questions (such as "why", "when",
"where", etc.) could be required. The traditional AI is unable
to answer these "wh" questions.
This explainability requirement lead a new area of AI
research, know as Explainable AI (XAI). Figure 1 shows
VOLUME 4, 2016 1arXiv:2107.07045v1  [cs.LG]  12 Jul 2021