Gohel et al. : Explainable AI: current status and future directions
FIGURE 12: Saliency highlighting [37]
FIGURE 13: Visualizaton of POS tags [81]
FIGURE 14: Directed hate misclassiﬁed as offensive lan-
guage with very high conﬁdence(94%). The two words
“bitch” and “faggot” are the two main positive contributors to
the score. Although the two words are indeed offensive, they
misdirect the classiﬁer which misses the clear hate emerging
from the tweet [53].
VII. XAI AND VIDEO
Local optimum justiﬁcations are an effective technique for
the image domain. A model agnostic technique like LIME
shows a good success rate using local explanations. . For
video analysis and explainability, frame-wise decomposition
of video is applied.
LRP is another popular technique. LRP assumes that it
can access the internal architecture of a given complex neu-
ral network. LRP access model’s internal weight, bias, andactivation function for backward propagation. LRP is struc-
tured as a tool for pixel-wise decomposition for relevance to
a decision. LRP satisﬁes certain conditions for developing
justiﬁcations as below.
The relevance difference of each layer must converge
must sum at the ﬁnal layer of the model.
The relevance difference at any neuron of a given layer
apart from the ﬁnal layer is the sum of incoming rele-
vance differences to that layer.
Other techniques like LIME are useful to provide justiﬁ-
cations to develop explanations for models without accessing
internal structure and weights. LIME approximates decisions
by many sampled inputs. LIME is effectively applicable to
data like text, image, and tabular data.
The most popular of these techniques, known as Local
Interpretable Model Explanations or LIME, seeks to ap-
proximate the decision function by many closely sampled
input points, which all center around the input point to be
explained. It can then attribute positive or negative inﬂuence
on the decision function to the differences in the sampled in-
puts, and overlay this on the original input.
VIII. XAI AND AUDIO
In this area, much research is yet to be done. For linguistic
applications, audio waves are converted into text form. After
converting into text, NLP-based XAI techniques are applica-
12 VOLUME 4, 2016