Gohel et al. : Explainable AI: current status and future directions
how XAI can add new dimensions to AI by answering the
"wh" questions that were missing in traditional AI. The XAI,
therefore, has drawn a great interest from critical applica-
tions, such as health care, defence, law and order, etc., where
explaining how an answer was obtained (i.e., answers to "wh"
questions) is as important as obtaining the answer. In both
academia and industry, XAI research, therefore, has become
a priority. Although a number of work have been already
proposed, more and more work is required to realize the full
potential of XAI.
In this paper, we survey existing research on XAI from
multimedia (text, image, audio, and video) point of view.
Since each media is different than the other (i.e., image
is different than video) in some sense, an XAI method
applicable to one media may not be effective for another.
We group the proposed XAI methods for each media, point
out their advantages and disadvantages, and provide pointers
to some future works. We believe that our classiﬁcation of
XAI methods will provide a guide and inspirations to future
research in multi-modal applications (for example, XAI for
defence where AI-based solutions are required for image,
text, audio, etc.).
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II
discusses why classical blackbox AI. In Section III, we intro-
duce XAI by discussing its scopes, objectives, and various
tools proposed to realize explainability. This section also
provides a classiﬁcation tree outlining various XAI methods
proposed for multimedia data. These methods are elaborated
in the remaining sections. Section IV explains classiﬁcation
tree for XAI techniques, where transparent and post hoc
texhniques are explained. Section V discusses XAI methods
applied to image data. Section VI discusses XAI methods
applied to natural language processing (text data). Section
VII and VIII gives understanding about how XAI works with
video and audio type of data. Section IX explains about multi
modal data like caliberated data from sensors in CSV format
and also explains prevalence of XAI in defence and industrial
applications for providing predictive maintenance to reduce
cost of production and maintenance.
II. THE BLACKBOX AI
A. OVERVIEW
Blackbox models of machine learning are rapidly being used
with a tag of AI-enabled technology for various critical
domains of human life. The list of domains varies from socio-
economic justice, cyber forensics, criminal justice, etc. But
these AI-powered models are lagging to win the trust of naive
people because these models are less transparent and less
accountable [68]. For example, there are cases in criminal
justice where the AI-enabled justice model release criminals
on parole and grants bail. This leads to serious consequences
among people and the government [69].
B. EXPLAINABILITY REQUIREMENT
“Explainability” is a need and expectation that makes "deci-
sion" of intrinsic AI model more transparent. This need willdevelop rationale approach to implementing action driven by
AI and also helpful for end users to understand [70].
In some basic level applications of AI, such as symptoms
based health diagnosis, explainability is straightforward. But
in the race of achieving more human level accuracy, re-
searchers and scientists developed more complex algorithms.
Neural network and deep learning based applications for
decision making is quite elusive and less interpretable [10]
[12].
1) Case Study 1: Oil Reﬁnery Assets Reliability: Furnace
Flooding Predictions
The Situation : Stable combustion is critical for uninter-
rupted operation of furnace. Due to unidentiﬁed factors,
if stable combustion is interrupted, it leads to disastrous
incident. For consideration of safety, it is highly required
that such conditions need to be identiﬁed and acted upon.
If such preventive measures are not taken, furnace may ﬂood
and eventually occurs in explosion. Such incident turns into
shut down of plant which causes production delay and huge
maintenance cost. Unplanned shutdown of industrial plant
results in to huge ﬁnancial loss.
The ML/AI Solution : A reliable prediction of furnace
ﬂooding is required to alert maintenance staff at least 30 min-
utes. To develop such kind of predictive maintenance model,
it requires to collect calibration from all sensor data including
weather and humidity etc. This model should predict ﬂooding
prediction at least 20 minutes prior.
Why Explainable AI : There could be n number of dif-
ferent factors which are responsible for ﬂooding or shut
down of combustion chamber or furnace. After shutting down
the furnace maintenance staff needs to investigate cause of
failure. This investigation helps to identify which sensor
causes unstability of continuous operation in furnace. Mak-
ing prediction in such a way that helps to identify cause of
failure with respect to different parts of combustion chamber.
This explainability makes easier to address snag in industrial
operation with out wasting much time in investigation.
2) Case Study 2: Video Threat Detection
The Situation : In today’s age, it is required to secure physi-
cal asset and human. A typical solution is to combine security
personnel and digital camera for video analytics. Due to
human eye limitation. it is not possible to watch every entry
point and every video feed at all times. Absolute human
supported surveliance may have certain error and threats of
miss identiﬁcation.
The ML/AI Solution : AI and deep learning based models
evaluate video feeds to detect threats. These threats are later
ﬂagged for the security personnel. AI based object or face
recognition models evaluate video feeds at air port to identify
visitors who carry weapon or those are known criminals.
These AI model should ignore normal employee or air port
staff.
Why Explainable AI : Due to skewness or bias of model, it
may possible that trained AI model detects innocents visitors
2 VOLUME 4, 2016