Gohel et al. : Explainable AI: current status and future directions
LRP, SHAP, provenance and taxonomy inductions, counter
factual explanations are applicable on different type of data
like text, image, audio and video.
1) LIME- Local Interpretable Model-agnostic Explanations
Model agnosticism speciﬁes the property that LIME is able
to provide justiﬁcation for any type of supervised learning
model’s prediction. This technique is applicable for any sort
of data like image, text and video. This means that LIME
is able to handle any supervised learning model and provide
justiﬁcation.
LIME provides local optimum explanations which com-
putes important features around the vicinity of given partic-
ular instance to be explained. By default it generates 5000
samples of the feature vector which are following normal
distributions. After producing normally distributed samples
it ﬁnds the target variables for samples whose decisions are
explained by LIME.
After obtaining local generated dataset and their predic-
tions it assigns weights to each of the rows how close they
are from original samples. Then it uses a feature selection
technique like lasso or PCA (Principle Component Analysis)
to get signiﬁcant features. Detailed discussion about LIME is
referred in section V-A.
LIME has found much success and support in the ﬁeld
of XAI and is implemented for text, image, and tabular
data. One noiticeable observation about LIME is that it is
applicable and extendable to all signiﬁcant machine learning
domains. In the domain of text processing, embeddings and
vectorization of given word or sentence can be considered
as a basic unit for sampling. For Image, segmented parts of
Image are considered as samples for input.
2) Perturbation
Perturbation helps to generate desired explanation drivers
and analyze impact of perturbed features on the given target.
It provides summary of all features for given pertubed results.
In perturbation mechanism local changes are observed
on target results and perturbation scores are assigned to all
features using LIME or SHAP methods.
Perturbation method is easy to implement and it is not
applicable to speciﬁc architecture of model. This method
can be applied to type of AI/ML model. Disadvantage of
perturbation method is, it is computationally expensive if
number of features are relatively greater than normal average.
As there are more number of features it takes more time to
evaluate combination of all features.
This scenario occurs speciﬁcally when dimensions of input
are more because number of combinations of all features
grows rapidly. Moreover, this mechanism can underestimate
the selected feature’s contribution because respective feature
reaches saturation level in perturbation such that perturbing
them do not have any impact on derived results.3) LRP: Layer-wise Relevance Propagation
LRP is useful to unbox complex neural networks. It pro-
pogates predictions backward in the neural network. For
backward propogations speciﬁc rules are designed.
4) Provenance and taxonomy induction
Provenance and taxonomy induction are logical inference
based techniques to justify result based on partially derived
results. In section VI-A it is discussed with detail [80]. Com-
prehensive analysis of important XAI techniques is presented
in Table 1.
V. XAI AND IMAGE
Explanations in XAI are often categorized into two main
aspects. The ﬁrst category is whether the given explanation
is limited to the given conclusion of a model or it describes
the entire prediction process which includes training aspects
also. The second category differentiates between whether
explanation comes directly from the prediction process or it
requires posthoc analysis [1] [23].
Popular instance-level explanation methods for image
classiﬁcation such as LIME [2], SHAP [3] and LRP [4],
typically create feature importance rankings. Although in-
sightful, these methods have clear drawbacks: they do not
determine the optimal explanation size, they do not account
for feature dependence, and they are related to only one
prediction class.
A. LIME
Local interpretable model-agnostic explanations (LIME), as
the name suggests it interprets the model locally and explains
the classiﬁcation of the model in a faithful manner. In LIME,
the prediction of the model is used as labels for supervised
training to train the XAI model.
FIGURE 7: Explaining an image classiﬁcation prediction
made by Google’s Inception neural network. The top3 classes
predicted are “Electric Guitar” (p= 0.32), “Acoustic guitar”
(p= 0.24) and “Labrador” (p= 0.21) [73]
Sparse linear models are a useful tool to explain LIME-
based justiﬁcation [5]. Using a sparse linear model it is
possible to highlight important pixels with their weights for
a particular respective class as shown in Fig. 7. This set
of important pixel areas give intuition as to why the model
would think that class may be present. As described in ﬁgure
5 important pixel-based explanation is given. It interprets
the original image as electric guitar, acoustic guitar, and
Labrador with respect to the conﬁdence score of 0.32, 0.24,
and 0.21.
VOLUME 4, 2016 7