Gohel et al. : Explainable AI: current status and future directions
FIGURE 9: Attributions of VGG-16 with images from Imagenet using the methods implemented in [42]
to features is recorded. Occlusion is an important technique
for extracting important features from given Image [46] [47].
It is a straightforward model to perform a model agnostic
approach that explores the latent feature ranking of a model.
All pixels occlusion is computationally expensive, hence 3
x 3 and 10 x 10 tiles are generally useful for occlusion [48]
[49]. Trade-off is there with respect to the size of tiles and
accuracy.
2) XAI for Health care applications
Brain Imaging CNN is a tool for accurate Image classiﬁca-
tion. Features-based classiﬁcation of Alzheimer’s using CNN
gives robust [64] classiﬁcation and accuracy.
Using post hoc analysis we can understand there is a
certain amount of overﬁtting is available due to certain fea-
tures. In post model analysis it is possible to tweak certain
hyperparameters so that more accurate results are possible to
extract. Methods like Guided backpropagation (GBP), LRP,
and DeepShap are useful for brain imaging and classiﬁcation
[65].
During surge of COVID 19 pandemic AI along with ex-
plainability plays an important role in covid 19 diagnosis.
Major steps are depicted in Fig. 11.
Extraction of lung information from chest CT scan.
Classiﬁcation of CT scans in the category of covid
positive and negative using convolution.
Localization of lung symptoms like ground glass and
crazy paving in CT scans.
Provide well-documented justiﬁcation [66].
Fig. 10 explains neural network architecture of covid 19
detection model to test presence of covid 19 by analysing CT
scan of lung. The sequence of 3 consecutive slices (224×224)
FIGURE 10: The proposed segmentation architecture, con-
sisting of a down sampling path (top)and an up sampling
path (bottom), interconnected by skip connections and by the
bottleneck layer. [66]
lungs CT scan, which are fed in pipeline individually and
combined through a convolutional LSTM layer. The architec-
ture of convolutional LSTM is described in ﬁgure 9. The re-
sulting feature maps are then processed with downsampling.
Downsampling generates ﬁve sequences of dense blocks and
then squeezing-excitation is performed. At last, max-pooling
operation is performed. At the end, six channel segmentation
is generated for lobs and nonlungs area of CT scan as shown
in Fig. 11.
.
VI. XAI AND TEXT
In general, Natural language processing (NLP) systems are
having inherent explainability. NLP major applications using
machine learning are sentiment analysis, hate speech detec-
10 VOLUME 4, 2016