Gohel et al. : Explainable AI: current status and future directions
FIGURE 6: XAI classiﬁcation with respect to type of data
A. POSTHOC METHODS
When there is a nonlinear relationship or higher data com-
plexity exists, posthoc methods are useful to interpret model
complexity. In this case, the posthoc approach is a useful
tool to explain what the model has learned when it is not
following a simple relationship among data and features.
Result-oriented interpretability methods are based on fea-
ture summary’s statistical and visualization-based presenta-
tion. statistical presentation denotes statistics for each feature
where the feature’s importance is quantiﬁed based on its
weight in prediction.
A post-hoc XAI method receives a trained and/or tested
AI model as input, then generates useful approximations of
the model’s inner working and decision logic by producing
understandable representations in the form of feature impor-
tance scores, rule sets, heat maps, or natural language. Many
posthoc methods try to disclose relationships between feature
values and outputs of a prediction model, regardless of its in-
ternals. This helps users identify the most important features
in an ML task, quantify the importance of features, reproduce
decisions made by the black-box model, and identify biases
in the model or data.
Some post-hoc methods, such as Local Interpretable
Model-agnostic Explanations, extract feature importance
scores by perturbing real samples, observing the change in
the ML model’s output given the perturbed instances, and
building a local simple model that approximates the original
model’s behavior in the neighborhood of the original sam-
ples. Posthoc methods are further classiﬁed in model agnos-
tic and model speciﬁc. Model-speciﬁc techniques supports
explainability constraints with respect to learning algorithm
and internal structure of given deep learning model. model-
agnostic techniques applies pair wise analysis of model
inputs and predictions to understand learning mechanism and
to generate explanations.
It is observed that global methods are capable to explainfor all data sets while local methods are limited to speciﬁc
kind of data sets. In contrast, model-agnostic tools can be
used for any AI/ML model. Here pairwise analysis of input
and results plays a key role behind interpretability. In next
sections, we have discussed model speciﬁc techniques like
feature relevance, condition based explanations,rule based
learning and saliency map.
B. TRANSPARENT METHODS
Transparent method like logistic regression, support vector
machine, Bayesian classiﬁer, K nearest neighbour provides
justiﬁcation with local weights of features. Models falls
under this category satisﬁes three properties named as algo-
rithmic transparency, decomposability and simulatability.
Simulatability stands for simulation of model must be
executed by a human. For human enabled simulation com-
plexity of model plays an important role. For an example
sparse matrix model is easy to interpret compared dense
matrix because sparse matrix model ia easy to justify and
visualize by humans.
Decomposability stands for explainability of each aspect
of model from input of data to hyper parameters as well as
inherent calculations. This characteristics deﬁnes behavior of
a model and its performance constraints. Complex input fea-
tures are not readily interpretable. Due to this contraints such
models are not belongs to category of transparent model.
Algorithmic transparency deﬁnes algorithm level inter-
pretability from input of given data to ﬁnal decision or
classiﬁcation. Decision making process should be understood
by users with transparency. For an example linear model is
deemed transparent because error plot is easy to visualize and
interpret. With help of visualization user can understand how
model is reacting in different situation.
The transparent model is realized with the following XAI
techniques.
VOLUME 4, 2016 5