Gohel et al. : Explainable AI: current status and future directions
ble. Such techniques comprise lime, perturbation, SHAP and
taxonomy-based inductions [79] [56].
Now a days, auto speech recognition powered voice as-
sistant like alexa and siri are being used more frequently by
users [78]. Audio waveform based key word classiﬁcation for
virtual agents is more convincing along with visual presence
of agent rather than only voice or text based output [74].
It is observed that the visual presence of virtual agents in
graphical 2d or 3d forms develops trust in the XAI systems.
To evaluate this observation, a user study is conducted in
which a virtual agent demonstrates XAI visualization of a
neural network-based speech recognition model. This model
classiﬁes audio keywords with respect to their spectrograms.
In this study, users are classiﬁed into three groups. First,
interact with the text. Second, interact with voice, and Third,
interact with virtual agents [74]. The results show that the
visual appearance of an agent gains more trust rather than
only text or voice-based interactions.
LIME framework is applied to generate XAI visualization
to understand voice classiﬁcation. Model agnostic character-
istics of LIME make it applicable to any sort of input data.
Fig 15 shows XAI visualization of the keyword "House".
FIGURE 15: A spectrogram of an audio sample (left), its
segmentation into superpixels (center) and the output for the
user containing LIME visualisations and additional phoneme
information (right) [74]
IX. XAI AND MULTIMODAL DATA
Some time input data may differ from conventional input data
like audio, video, text, and image. If data is in CSV format, it
requires different pre-processing of data and normalization.
For example, in industry sensor data are calibrated in CSV
datasheets.
In industrial automation, maintenance is one of the crucial
aspects for the continuity of industry. Due to various physical
parameters like temperature, vibration, pressure, RPM, etc.,
there are signiﬁcant impacts on various parts of the assembly
line or mechanical system which leads to failure [75]. XAI
along with failure diagnosis makes the ML model more
transparent and interpretable towards the provided diagnosis
of the failed component [76].In the aviation sector, aircraft maintenance is handled by
scheduled or event-based triggered maintenance. Such sort of
maintenance is unreliable because that causes serious disaster
when aircraft is in the air. Such disasters can be prevented if
predictive maintenance is applied. In any giant mechanical
system, there is a gradual degradation in the reading of
various tools or sensors, these tools are making a cumulative
effect for ﬁnal break down [77]. Such calibration of readings
can be used as a feature set and model training is possible for
failure diagnosis and remaining useful life (RUL) prediction
of aircraft or any critical electro-mechanical system.
The prediction of failure with explanation makes the jus-
tiﬁcation for derived diagnosis. Hence it improves reliability
and saves cost [67].
Maintenance with interpretability for failure diagnosis can
add useful insights about the disposal of certain parts which
might not be available with crew members of maintenance
teams. The pipeline of predictive maintenance with XAI
insights is mentioned in Fig. 16. of sequential steps like
data collection, data cleaning, feature selection, diagnosis,
and explanation with validation. One advantage of predictive
maintenance it helps to mandatory understanding of different
physical components and their physical properties.
X. CONCLUSION
It is emphasized here that XAI is an important and manda-
tory aspect of AI/ML based application to use in real time.
Our study has started discussion from conventional AI and
limitations. The need for XAI is well explained in the case of
studies along with key issues of explainable AI.
Objectives and scopes of XAI are discussed in length and
breadth. We discussed major objectives like transparency,
fairness, bias, and conﬁdence. Scope of XAI is discussed
in detail for its application in the major domain like NLP,
medical, defense and Engineering.
Different methodologies (post hoc and transparent) for
explainability are discussed to get preliminary hands on to
dive into this ﬁeld. Conceptual and detailed explanations with
the example for all methodologies are also discussed. After
providing a conceptual understanding of XAI approaches, we
have provided XAI as a tool to be applied to speciﬁc kinds of
data like image, text, video, audio, and multimodal data.
This survey elaborates a conceptual understanding of XAI
along with the importance of explainability that motivates
researchers for diversiﬁed aspects of XAI. This purpose mo-
tivates researchers for interpretable AI/ML methods. These
detailed highlights make a baseline for the understanding of
the current literature of XAI, which can be approached in
two ways. 1) Transparent ML models which are interpretable
to an extent by themselves only. 2) Post hoc methods for
explainability which makes the model more interpretable. We
presented XAI as a tool for responsible AI, a paradigm that
can enable series of algorithms that will work in synergy to
achieve the goal of responsible AI. Responsible AI stands for
trust, conﬁdence, fairness, and transparency.
VOLUME 4, 2016 13