Gohel et al. : Explainable AI: current status and future directions
or employees due to certain weighted features in training
samples. Such kind of incidents raises legality aspects for
genuinity of such surveliance systems. Transparency in such
systems are one of the crucial factor before framing one
person as a criminal or suspect. Company of AI enabled
surveliance system are required to provide justiﬁcation in
the court. An individual humiliated and searched publically
by security forces leads to several legal consequences on
government as well as airport authority.
C. USAGE
AI covers the entire ecosystem of computer-enabled interdis-
ciplinary technologies. AI enables a group of technologies to
behave more cognitively and context-oriented like human or
animal rather than rule-oriented. AI is all about mimicking
the complex cognitive behavior of all living entities on the
earth [71].
There are many day-to-day usages of AI-enabled appli-
cations from object recognition, product recommendation in
online shopping portals, chatbots for customer service and
document processing, etc. AI is also one of the important
tools for medical imaging and diagnosis. CT scan-based
tumor diagnoses are effective and more accurate for certain
conditions [71].
AI will have much more applications in the future. AI will
be a reliable helping hand for doctors to do surgery and di-
agnoses. Autonomous vehicle driving is one of the upcoming
areas where AI will be an important tool. AI can decide while
on-road driving for elder people either by taking complete
control or by assisting a human driver. For the criminal justice
system, AI can make an important decision to declare a
person guilty or non guilty [69]. AI-enabled decision-making
systems provide better support for professionals. Because of
the surge in applications of AI in corporate and industry, it
becomes a hot topic for ethical concerns. AI usage policies
will be decided by government agencies on aspects like
privacy, optimization, etc. To make AI more reliable we
need to make it more transparent and interpretable. This
motivation makes upcoming AI development with aspects
of explainability. This area of explainability oriented AI is
known as XAI.
D. KEY ISSUES WITH EXPLAINABLE ML
The main reason behind the difﬁculty to understand and inter-
pret the Black box ML model is either black-box function is
quite complicated for a human to understand. Because deep
learning-based models are recursive with non-differentiable
recursive functions as active functions. Another reason is
some functions are proprietary so it is not allowed to expose
publicly. There is a belief in XAI researchers that inter-
pretable ML models may reduce the accuracy of prediction
and conclusion. Due to this belief, many researchers are now
having good expertise in deep learning but not in XAI [11].
Many times explainable AI methods provide justiﬁcations
that are not aligned with what the original method computes.
If explainable methods are computing the same results andpredictions as original models then there is no need for
an original model. Despite original and XAI models are
computing the same predictions there are pretty good chances
that both approaches are using a different set of features for
making the same predictions. Hence, it is not faithful towards
the computation of the black box. It also happens sometimes
that the XAI model provides too much extra information
which is not relevant to the original inferences of a black-box
model.
For image processing domain saliency maps are consid-
ered the best tool for image classiﬁcation. These maps are
being useful to determine which part of an image is con-
sidered and which is omitted by the model for prediction.
But saliency maps are not explaining how different parts of
images are contributing to the given prediction. As shown
in Fig. 2 Saliency maps are not able to demonstrate except
where neural network model is focusing.
FIGURE 2: Saliency does not explain anything except where
the network is looking. We have no idea why this image
is labelled as either a dog or a musical instrument when
considering only saliency. The explanations look essentially
the same for both classes. Credit: Chaofen Chen, Duke Uni-
versity [11]
.
Consider, for instance, a case where the explanations for
multiple (or all) of the classes are identical. This situation
would happen often when saliency maps are the explanations,
because they tend to highlight edges, and thus provide similar
explanations for each class. These explanations could be
identical even if the model is always wrong. Then, showing
only the explanations for the image’s correct class misleads
the user into thinking that the explanation is useful and that
the black box is useful, even if neither one of them is.
FIGURE 3: Panda image was tampered by adding some
adversarial noise [72]
Fig. 3 illustrates such an example where an image of a
Panda is predicted as a Gibbon with high conﬁdence after
VOLUME 4, 2016 3