Gohel et al. : Explainable AI: current status and future directions
Approach Advantages Drawbacks Future Directions
LIME [1][4]Plug and play
basedThe resulting explanations are found
to be unstable. The ranking does not
account for feature dependence.To reduce local ﬁdelity of justiﬁcation
, Non redundant instance based justiﬁ-
cation can be tried.
SHAP [5][8]Optimized for
speed upSmall perturbations with no change
in prediction leads to different
explanation.SHAP can be used to deﬁne contribution
of each feature.
LRP [0]Suitable for
neural networkLow abstract level explanation
with relevance mapWith layer wise attribution of neural network
class discriminavity can be increased
HeatmapFeature importance
based presentationIndividual pixels are typically
not meaningful for
humans less interpretableIt is a self explainable approach for image
classiﬁcation but future work required for
text-based presentation
SEDC and SEDC-T [6][7]More human
centric explanationMore than one irreducible explanation counter factual analysis for text based classiﬁcation.
Feature Importance [77][31][32]Feature weight based
explanationExplanation is limited with respect
to only local features.
May drive attention of user
towards from important global
dependency.Reduction of local ﬁdelity on prediction
Induction [77]More convenient
for programmingSuch techniques assume that end
users can understand
speciﬁc representations,
such as ﬁrst-order logic rules and
reasoning trees.Generalization is required for diversiﬁed data.
Provenance [77][33]Natural language
based explanationIt is more accessible for lay users
but not much compatible
for validation because it is
based on natural language.validation of justiﬁcation is required for
more reliability.
TABLE 1: Analysis of various XAI appraoches
B. SHAP (SHAPLEY ADDITIVE EXPLANATIONS)
The main objective of SHAP is to understand the prediction
of an input A by computing the decision-making contribution
of each feature for the classiﬁcation. SHAP computes Shap-
ley values using coalitional game theory. It is a technique
described by Shapley (1953) [9] as an approach for assigning
a reward to game players according to their contribution to
the game. SHAP assigns each feature an importance value
for a particular prediction [6].
The key difference between LIME and SHAP is the pro-
cess to assign weights to the regression linear model. LIME
uses cosine measure between the original and the perturbed
image. SHAP, the weights are determined using the Shapley
formula. LIME and SHAP methods have their drawbacks:
they do not determine the optimal explanation size, they do
not account for feature dependence, and they are related to
only one prediction class.
C. COUNTERFACTUAL VISUAL EXPLANATIONS
For human psychology, it is convenient to explain by giving
contrastive explanations rather than giving direct explana-
tions to the conclusion or prediction of the machine learning
model. We can explain by providing reasons, why only a
certain class is selected and why others are rejected.For explainability, we generally try to provide the ex-
planation on the basis of the selection and rejection of the
speciﬁc alternatives or outcomes. For given scenario, why
only outcome A selected not B. A useful tool to provide
such a discriminative explanation is using counterfactuals.
We can use counterfactuals to provide reasonably valid ar-
guments at the end of the conclusion by machine learning
model which is supported by either deep learning or classical
statistical modeling. With the nature of counterfactuals, a
certain set of features are deﬁned that can change the decision
of the model. If those features are not available then the
ﬁnal conclusion of the model will be changed. It is argued
that they are more likely to comply with recent regulatory
developments such as GDPR. The counterfactual approach
helps to understand and satisfy three important needs of
interpretability: how an interpretation of a model was made,
it provides the scope to tweak with adverse decisions, and
gives clues to receive intended results in prediction.
There is a scenario of classiﬁcation in classes A, B, and
C. let’s say there is a feature set (a1, a2,......, a10) which are
relatively required to get prediction A. For Given input result
of prediction is class B because feature set (a11,a12,.....a20)
is present and feature set (a1, a2,......,a10) is absent. The
approach with the feature set based interpretation leads to
8 VOLUME 4, 2016