Gohel et al. : Explainable AI: current status and future directions
smooth convincing in human-critical domains like Crime,
Forensic. [7].
FIGURE 8: Figure a depicts an image which predicted as
warplane by model. Figure b and c shows that by removing
body and main wings from plane model predicts tail portion
as wing rather than Plane. So ﬁgure b is an critically mini-
mum portion in an image to get classiﬁed as Warplane. [8]
This evidence-based approach of counterfactual is known
as Search for EviDence Counterfactual for Image Classiﬁca-
tion(SEDC). Fig. 8 explains how body of plane i s minimally
critically portion to classify as an Image.
As per the research of dhurandhar et al. [7] there is a
notion of pertinent positive(PP) and pertinent negative(PN).
A pertinent positive (PP) is a factor that is minimally required
for the justiﬁcation of the ﬁnal decision of the model. the
pertinent negative is a factor whose absence is minimally
required for justifying the conclusion. Figure 6 denotes that
the plane body is critical minimum evidence for getting
classiﬁed as Warplane.
The advanced approach is also under research which is
known as SEDC-T. Where T stands for predeﬁned target
class, not just another class. In SEDC segments images
are removed until the predicted class is not changed but in
SEDC-T segments are removed from Image until pre-deﬁned
class is reached.SEDC-T gives a more detailed explanation
of why the image is not predicted as a correct class rather
than just explaining the reason behind the prediction of the
incorrect class.
D. XAI AND HEALTHCARE
XAI and healthcare is an effective combo of digital tech-
nology. In the trend of AI-based diagnosis systems, trust
over AI-based conclusions is a matter of serious concern.
Trust is an important factor for the perseverance of AI in the
medical and healthcare segment of the digital industry [42].
If-else diagnosis models are inherently explainable because it
consists of feature value sets and will assign a score based on
a feature value of an instance case of health diagnosis. If-else-
based explainable medical diagnosis systems are well suited
for external symptomatic disease diagnosis [43]. Whether
a given deceased person is having asthma or not can be
detected by checking whether the symptoms list of the person
having what amount of matching criteria with If-else based
feature values. For example, if the patient is already having
a past history of respiratory illness and cough then there are
higher chances of having asthma.This step-by-step analysis provides a very effective expla-
nation for external symptoms. To cover a broad spectrum of
XAI it is required to make the justiﬁcation that is independent
of the AI model. Such methods are known as model agnostic
XAI methods. LIME (Local Interpretable Model-Agnostic
Explanation) [2] is an example of a model agnostic method.
LIME is a framework to quantify weights of all factors
which are there to make conclusion or prediction. There are
other model agnostic XAI techniques also like SHAPLEY
[6]. Deep learning is a very important tool for accurate
medical diagnosis but its black-box approach for prediction
and conclusion makes it restricted for the certain critical area
of human medical science.
1) Explainability methods for XAI-Healthcare
There are two types of methods for an explanation of medical
imaging. One method is based on attribution based and
another method is based on perturbation.
Attribution LIME is an attribution-based approach for
medical image diagnosis. In the attribution-based methods,
one needs to determine the contribution and weight of each
feature. The success of attribution-based explanation is based
on the generality of assigned weights for a given prediction or
conclusion at the end of the model. Heat maps are an example
of attribution maps. Fig. 9 explains how various feature set
with respect to different kernels in VGG 16 demonstrates heat
map feature weights.
DeepTaylor [41] has provided an approach to generat-
ing speciﬁc positive evidence for a given prediction. The
deepTaylor approach of XAI is useful for justifying CNN-
based classiﬁcation. It explains without changing underlying
architecture, this property makes it an effective XAI tool.
DeepExplain provides a uniﬁed framework using gradient
and perturbation-based attribution methods [44] [52].
DeepLIFT (Deep Learning Important FeaTures) is a tech-
nique based on decomposing the prediction of a neural net-
work for speciﬁc input. The entire backpropagation process
is observed along with observation of weight and bias on each
neuron on every layer of the entire architecture. Based on a
variety of weights on neurons speciﬁc scores are assigned to
each feature of input [45].
Perturbation In this approach, input features are getting
changed to observe the impact on ﬁnal prediction at the end
of the last layer in the neural network. Perturbation can be
achieved by masking or editing certain input features and
observations are recorded as model start training using for-
ward pass and backward pass. This is similar to the sensitivity
analysis performed in parametric control system models [50]
[51].
The sensitivity of each feature based on input variation is
recorded. This continuous observation makes the XAI prac-
titioner justify different predictions at the end of the neural
network. Rank assignment to various features is similar to
deep explain. one drawback of deeplift approach is computa-
tionally expensive. After each forward and backward pass of
a number of iterations, observation of sensitivity with respect
VOLUME 4, 2016 9