Gohel et al. : Explainable AI: current status and future directions
1) Linear/Logistic Regression
Logistic Regression (LR) is a transparent model to predict de-
pendent variable which follows property of binary variable.
This method assumes there is a ﬂexible ﬁt between predictors
and predicted variables.
For understanding of logistic regression, model it requires
audience to have knowledge of regression techniques and
its working methodology. Due to this constraints, depending
upon type of audience logistic regression falls either in trans-
parent or posthoc methods.Even though logistic regression
is the simplest form of supervised classiﬁcation techniques,
its mathematical and statistical concepts are need to be taken
care off.
2) Decision Trees
Decision trees is a transparent tool which satisﬁes trans-
parency in a large context. It is a hierarchical decision making
tool. Smaller scale decision trees are easily simulatable.
Increment in number of levels in trees make it more algo-
rithmically transparent but less simulatable. Due to its poor
generalization property, ensembling of trained decision trees
are useful to overcome poor generalization property. This
modiﬁcation makes decision tree tool less transparent.
3) K-Nearest Neighbors
KNN (K-Nearest Neighbors) is a voting based tool that
predicts class of test sample with help of voting the classes of
its k nearest neighbors. V oting in KNN depends on distance
and similarity between examples. Simple KNN supports
tansparency, algorithmic transparency and human centric
simulation. KNN’s transparency depends on the features,
parameter N and distance function used to measure similarity.
Higher value of K impacts simulation of model by human
user. Complex distance function restricts decomposability of
the model and transparency of algorithmic operation.
4) Rule based learning
Rule based model deﬁnes rule to train model. Rule can
be deﬁned in the simple conditional if-else form or ﬁrst
order predictive logic. Format of rules depends on type of
knowledge base. Rules provides two advantages to this type
of model. First, since format of rules are in linguistic terms
it is transparent for user to understand. Second, it can han-
dle uncertainty better than classical rule based model [25].
The number of rules in model improves the performance of
model with compromising interpretability and transparency
of model. Model with less number of rules can be easily
simulated by human.
5) Bayesian Model
Bayesian model are probabilistic model with notion of con-
ditional dependencies between set of dependent and indepen-
dent variables. Bayesian model is transparent enough for end
users who are having knowledge of conditional probability.
Bayesian model are enough suitable for all three propertiesdecomposable, algorithmic transparency and human simula-
tion. Complex variable dependency may affect transparency
and human simulation for bayesian model.
C. MODEL SPECIFIC
Model speciﬁc XAI models are realized using following
techniques.
1) Feature Relevance
It is always important to ﬁgure out the most impactful
features which are crucial for decision makings. For this
feature, importance is introduced. Feature importance shows
the impact factor of each feature in derived decisions [26].
Along with feature importance, correlation among features is
also useful for explainability. In AI-based medical diagnosis
model, feature correlation in training data is one of the
driving forces for diagnosis.
2) Condition based Explanation
Condition based explanation is required on the basis of
"why", "why despite" and "why given". Some speciﬁc ob-
served inputs plays key role to justify prediction. By asking
“Why?” oriented questions, model will provide all possible
explanations with set of conditions. This condition set is gen-
erated with completeness phenomena. "what if" provides hy-
pothetical reasoning for counterfactual justiﬁcation. A simple
logical model converts user inputs in to the form of con-
straints based inputs and provide justiﬁcation that whether
constraints are being satisﬁed in the form of conditions.
3) Rule based learning
Explainability is required because ML model output is nu-
merical and neural network is too much complex that normal
user can not understand the complexity of hyperparameters
and its effect on ﬁnal prediction.
After getting some insightful understanding of trained
model and interpretability of results, suitable approach is
to explain derived results to customers and naive users is
translation of those insights into rules such that it can provide
full transparency for XAI [25]. Once rules are framed for all
possible predictions, It makes even the most complex neural
network model transparent.
4) Feature based saliency map
Saliency maps are generally used with image processing
areas of applications to show what parts of video frames or
images are the most signiﬁcant for derived decision of CNN.
XAI saliency map is a tool which is useful showcase
inner working of DNNs. Gradinet computation using back
propagation algorithm are used as quantiﬁed measures to
project intensity of colours on plane.
D. MODEL AGNOSTIC
Model agnostic techniques are also applied for text, image,
audio and video. various techniques like LIME, perturbation,
6 VOLUME 4, 2016