Gohel et al. : Explainable AI: current status and future directions
the original Panda image was tampered by adding some
adversarial noise.
III. XAI AS A TOOL TO OPEN BLACK BOX
In section III-A objectives like transparency, trust, bias
and fairness of XAI are discussed. Section III-B provides
overview about different scopes of XAI.
A. OBJECTIVES
FIGURE 4: Objectives of XAI
The main objective of XAI is to answer the "wh" questions
related to an obtained answer. For example, XAI should be
able to answer "why a particular answer was obtained?",
"how a particular answer was obtained", "when a particular
AI-based system can fail?" [13] [14] [15] . By doing this,
XAI can provide trustworthiness, transparency, conﬁdence,
and informativeness (Figure 4).
1) Transparency and Informativeness
XAI can enhance transparency as well as fairness by provid-
ing a justiﬁcation that can be understood by a layman. The
minimum criteria for a transparent AI model are it should be
expressive enough to be human-understandable.
Transparency is important to assess the performance of the
XAI model and its justiﬁcation. Transparency can assure any
false training to model that causes vulnerabilities in the pre-
diction that makes a huge loss in person to the end consumer.
False training is possible to tweak the generalization of any
AI/ML model that leads to providing unethical beneﬁts to any
party unless it is not made transparent.
2) Trust and conﬁdence
Trust is one of the important factors that makes humans rely
on any speciﬁc technology. A logical and scientiﬁc justiﬁca-
tion for any prediction and conclusion makes humans favor
the prediction or conclusion made by AI/ML algorithms.
3) Bias Understanding and Fairness
Bias and variance trade-off in AI/ML model makes XAI pro-
mote fairness and helps to mitigate bias ( bias-variance trade
off) of prediction at the time of justiﬁcation or interpretation
[59].B. SCOPE
FIGURE 5: Scopes of XAI
Ideally, scope of XAI can be as broad as scope of AI. Major
scopes are NLP (natural language processing), health care,
engineering, and defense. NLP and engineering comprise
banking, ﬁnance, digitization, and automation. These scopes
of XAI are depicted in Figure 5.
1. Data Protection: European Union and its regulatory
body have a ’right to explanation’ clause. That makes to
enables explanation from XAI algorithms.
2. Medical: XAI can diagnose a patient by observing
his/her past medical records. Using AI/ML algorithms in the
medical image processing domain it is easier for medical
experts to diagnose patients with malignant cancer tumors
and other lung diseases.
3. Defense: XAI in defense practices becomes crucial
because of automated weapon and surveillance systems. XAI
also provides good second-hand support during combat mode
training and real-time combat tactics.
4. Banking: The banking system is one of the biggest
ﬁnancial sectors which affects human life the most. In day-
to-day life, there are many fraud transactions and cones by
cheaters. Well-trained XAI models can help to investigate
fraudulent transactions and help to reduce false positives
cases.
IV. CLASSIFICATION TREE
XAI techniques are classiﬁed in two categories of transparent
and post-hoc methods. Transparent methods are such meth-
ods where the inner working and decision-making process
of the model is simple to interpret and represent. Bayesian
model, decision trees, linear regression, and fuzzy inference
systems are examples of transparent models. Transparent
methods are useful where internal feature correlations are
not that much complex or linear in nature. Figure 6 depicts
detailed classiﬁcation of various XAI techniques and ap-
proaches with respect to various types of data [28].
4 VOLUME 4, 2016