Fig. 1 Schematic sketch of time-multiplexed reservoir computing
scheme. The input is preprocessed by multiplication with a mask that
induces the time-multiplexing and is then electrically injected. Thelaser in our case is governed by a Hopf normal form. The outputdimension of the system is in this example 4
capabilities from time series predictions [ 27,28] over an
equalization task on nonlinearly distorted signals [ 29]u pt o
fast word recognition [ 30]. More general analysis showed
the general and task-independent computational capabilities
of semiconductor lasers [31]. A broad overview is given in
[32,33].
In this paper we perform a numerical analysis of the
recall capabilities and the computing performance of asimple nonlinear oscillator, modelled by a Hopf normalform, with delayed feedback. We calculate the total memorycapacity as well as the linear and nonlinear contributions
using the method derived by Dambre et al. in [ 34].
The paper is structured as follows. First, we shortly
explain the concept of time-multiplexed reservoir comput-ing and give a short overview of the method used for
calculating the memory capacity. After that we present ourresults and discuss the impact of the delay time on the
performance and the different nonlinear recall contributions.
Methods
Traditionally, reservoir computing was realized by ran-
domly connecting nodes with simple dynamics (for examplethe tanh-function [1]) to a network, which was then used
to process information. The linear estimator of the readouts
is then trained to approximate a target, e.g. predict a time-dependent task. The network thus transforms the input into
a high dimensional space in which the linear combination
can be used to separate different inputs, i.e. to classify thegiven data.
In the traditional reservoir computing setup a reaction
from the system s
n=(s1n,s2n,...,s Mn)∈RMis recorded
together with the corresponding input unand the target on.
In this case nis the index for the nth input-output training
datapoint, ranging from 1 to N,a n dMis the dimension
of the measured system states. The goal for the reservoircomputing paradigm is to approximate the target o
nas close
as possible with linear combinations of the states snfor all
input-output pairs n, meaning that/summationtextM
m=1wmsmn=ˆon≈
onfor all n,w h e r ew =(w1,w2,...,w M)∈RMare theweights to be trained. We want to find the best solution
for
s·w≈o, (1)
where s∈RN×RMis the state matrix defined by all system
state reactions snto their corresponding inputs un,ware the
weights to train and o∈RNis the vector of targets to be
approximated. This is equivalent to a least square problem
which is analytically solved by [ 35]
w=(sTs)−1sTo.( 2)
The capability of the system to approximate the target
task can be quantified by the normalized root mean squaredifference between the approximated answers ˆo
nand the
targets on
NRMSE =/radicaltp/radicalvertex/radicalvertex/radicalvertex/radicalbtN/summationtext
n=1(on−ˆon)2
N·var( o), (3)
where NRMSE is the normalized root mean square error of
the target task with var( o)being the variance of the target
values o=(o1,o2,...,o N)and N the number of sample
points. An NRMSE of 1 indicates that the system is notcapable of approximating the task better than approximatingthe mean value, a value NRMSE = 0 indicates that it is ableto compute the task perfectly. For a successful operation
N/greatermuchMneeds to be fulfilled, where Mis the number
of output weights w
mandNis the number of training
data points. This corresponds to a training data set ofsizeNbeing significantly bigger than the possible output
dimension Mto prevent overfitting.
Appeltant et al. introduced in [ 20] a time-multiplexed
scheme for applying the reservoir computing paradigm on
a dynamical system with delayed feedback. In this case,the measured states for one input-output pair reaction s
n=
(s1n,s2n,...,s Mn)are recorded at different times tm=
tn+mθ, with m=1,2,...,M ,w h e r e tnis the time
at which the nth input unis fed into the system. θis
describing the distance between two recorded states of the
system and is called the virtual node separation time. The
time between two inputs tn+1−tnis called the clock
cycleTand describes the period length in which one input
unis applied to the system. To get different reactions
between two virtual nodes a time-multiplexed maskingprocess is applied. The information fed into the system ispreprocessed by multiplying a T-periodic mask gon the
inputs (see sketch Fig. 1), which is a piecewise constant
function consisting of Mintervals, each of length θ.T h i s
corresponds to the input weights in the spatially extended
system with the difference that now the input weights are
distributed over time.
Dambre et al. showed in [34] that the computational
capability of a system can be quantified completely via a1420 Cogn Comput (2023) 15:1419–1426