Fig. 3 aLinear capacity C1
{/Delta1n}plotted colorcoded over the delay
timeτand the input steps /Delta1n to recall. Parameters as given in
Table 1. The red horizontal solid lines indicate the scan from Fig. 2.
bQuadratic pure capacity C2,p
{/Delta1n}.cCombination of two Legen-
dre polynomials of degree 1 indicating the capability of nonlineartransformations of the form u−/Delta1n 1u−/Delta1n 2.H e r e /Delta1n1of the first
polynomial is plotted while between two /Delta1n1-steps /Delta1n2is
increased from 0 to 45 steps into the past. Yellow indicates good
while blue and black indicates bad recallability. The input period
timeT=80
combinations of two Legendre polynomials of degree 1 for
different input steps into the past have to be considered,
i.e.
P1(un−/Delta1n 1)P1(un−/Delta1n 2)=un−/Delta1n 1un−/Delta1n 2.
This is shown in Fig. 3c. Again, the capacities C2
{/Delta1n}are
depicted as a heatmap and the delay time τis varied along
the y-axis. This time the x-axis shows the steps of the first
Legendre polynomial /Delta1n1, while inbetween two ticks of
the x-axis, the second Legendre polynomial’s step /Delta1n2is
scanned from 0 up to 45 steps into the past. For the steps of
Fig. 4 Total memory capacity MC as defined by Eq. ( 8) (blue) and
memory capacities MC1,2,3,4of degree 1 to 4 (orange, green, red,
violet) plotted over the delay time τfor the same parameters as in
Fig.3. Resonances between the clock cycle Tand the delay time τare
depicted as vertical red and green dashed lines. One can see the loss
in memory capacity at the resonances, especially for degree 2. Higherorder transformations with d> 3 are more effective in the regime
where τ< 1.5Tthe second Legendre polynomial /Delta1n2the capacity exhibits
the same behaviour as already discussed for Fig. 3aa n db .
This does also apply to the first Legendre polynomial which
induces interference patterns in the capacity space of the
two combined Legendre polynomials. The red dashed lines
highlight the ray behaviour of the first Legendre polyno-mial. We therefore learn that the performance of a reservoir
computer described by a Hopf normal form with delay
drastically depends on the task. There are certain nonlineartransformation combinations u
−/Delta1n 1u−/Delta1n 2of the inputs
u−/Delta1n 1andu−/Delta1n 2which cannot be approximated due to the
missing memory at specific steps. To overcome these lim-itations it would be recommended to use multiple systemswith different parameters to compensate for each other.
To fully characterize the computational capabilities of
our reservoir computer, a full analysis of the degree d
memory capacities MC
dand the total memory capacity
MC as defined in Eq. ( 8) is done. The results are depicted
in Fig. 4a as a function of the delay time τ. All other
parameters are fixed as in Fig. 3. The orange solid line
in Fig. 4refers to the linear, the green, red and violet
lines to the quadratic, cubic and quartic memory capacityMC
1,2,3,4, respectively. The blue solid line shows the total
memory capacity MC summed up over all degrees up to
10. Dambre et al. showed in [34] that the MC is limited by
the number of read-out dimensions and equals it when allread-out dimensions are linearly independent. In our case
the read-out dimension is given by the number of virtual
nodes N
V=50. Nevertheless, the total memory capacity
MC starts at around 15 for a very short time delay with
respect to the input period time T. This low value arises
from the fact that a short delay induces a high correlation1423 Cogn Comput (2023) 15:1419–1426