correlation between the read-out dimensions. Degree 4 on
the other hand only has values as long as T> τ ,a
result coming from the fact that the input unhas to interact
with itself to get a transformation of degree 4. A possibleexplanation comes from the fact that the dynamical systemitself is not capable of transformations higher than degree
3, since the highest order in Eq. ( 10) is 3. If the delay
timeτand the input period time Tare long enough the
total memory capacity MC reaches 50 with exceptions of
resonances between τandT. These resonances are also seen
in the NARMA10 NRMSE for which higher errors occur.
Looking at the memory capacity of degree 1 and 2 MC
1,2
and comparing it with the NARMA10 NRMSE one can
see a tendency in which the NARMA10 NRMSE is lowest
where both have the highest capacities, raising from thefact that the NARMA10 task is highly dependent on linear
memory and quadratic nonlinear transformations. This can
also be seen in the area below the τ=T-resonance.
To conclude, one can use the parameter dependencies of
the memory capacities MC
dto make predictions of the
reservoir capability to approximate certain tasks.
Conclusions
We analysed the memory capacities and nonlinear transfor-
mation capabilities of a reservoir computer consisting of an
oscillatory system with delayed feedback operated close to
a Hopf bifurcation, i.e. a paradigmatic model also applicablefor lasers close to threshold. We systematically varied the
timescales and found regions of high and low reservoir
computing performing abilities. Resonances between theinformation input period time Tand the delay time τshould
be avoided to fully utilize the natural computational capa-bility of the nonlinear oscillator. A ratio of τ=1.6T was
found to be the optimal for the computed memory capac-ities, resulting in a good NARMA10 task approximation.
Furthermore, it was shown, that the recallability for high
delay times τ/greatermuchTis restricted to specific past inputs,
which rules out certain tasks. By computing the memory
capacities of a Hopf normal form, one can make general
assumptions about the reservoir computing capabilities ofany system operated close to a Hopf bifurcation. This sig-
nificantly helps in understanding and predicting the task
dependence of reservoir computers.
Acknowledgements The authors would like to thank Andr ´eR¨ohm,
Joni Dambre and David Hering for fruitfull discussion.
Funding Open Access funding provided by Projekt DEAL. This study
was funded by the “Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft” (DFG) in the
framework of SFB910.CompliancewithEthicalStandards
ConﬂictofInterest The Authors declare that they have no conflict of
interest.
EthicalApproval This article does not contain any studies with human
participants or animals performed by any of the authors.Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, aslong as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and thesource, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate
if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unlessindicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is notincluded in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intendeduse is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitteduse, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyrightholder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by/4.0/ .
Appendix
Derivation of the Stuart-Landau Equation with delay from
the Class B laser rate equations
˙E=(1+iα)EN (11)
˙N=1
T(P+ηgI−N−(1+2N)|E|2), (12)
where Eis the non-dimensionalized complex eletrical field
andNthe non-dimensionalized carrier inversion, P the
pump relativ to the threshold for Pthresh =0a n dα the
Henry factor. The reservoir computing signal is fed intothe system via electrical injection ηgI. If fast carriers are
considered, an adiabatic elimination of the charge carriers
yields
0=1
T(P+ηgI−N−(1+2N)|E|2) (13)
N=P+ηgI−|E|2
1+2|E|2, (14)
which after substituting into Eq. (11)g i v e s
˙E=(1+iα)E˜P−|E|2
1+2|E|2, (15)
where we introduced the quantity ˜P=P+ηgI for
convenience purposes. This equation yields the full Class A
rate equation for the non-dimensionalized complex electricfield. Simulations with the full Class A rate equation close
to the threshold show similar results to the reduced case.
Because we consider laser that are operated close to the
threshold level, a taylor expansion of the denominator for|E|
2≈0 is done,
˙E=(1+iα)E( ˜P−|E|2−2˜P|E|2), (16)1425 Cogn Comput (2023) 15:1419–1426