between the responses of the dynamical system which
induces highly linearly dependent virtual nodes. This is animportant general result that has to be kept in mind for all
delay-based reservoir computing systems: With τ< 1.5T
the capability of the reservoir computer is partially waisted.
Increasing the delay time τalso increases the total memory
capacity MC reaching the upper bound of 50 at around 1.5
times the input period time T.
Forτ> 1.5Tan interesting behaviour emerges.
Depicted by the vertical red dashed lines are multiples ofthe input period time Tat which the total memory capac-
ityMC drops again significantly to around 40. A drop in
the linear memory capacity was discussed in the paper by
Stelzer et al. [38] and explained by the fact that resonances
between the delay time τand the input period time Tcon-
cludes in a sparse connection between the virtual nodes.
Our results now show that this effects the total memory
capacity MC, by mainly reducing the quadratic memory
capacity MC
2. At the resonances the quadratic nonlinear
transformation capability of the system is reduced. To con-clude, delay-based reservoir computing systems should bekept off the resonances between Tandτto maximize the
computational capability. A surprising result is that for the
chosen Hopf nonlinearity the linear memory capacity MC
1
is only slightly influenced by the resonances. A result from
Dambre et al. in [34] and analysed by Inubushi et al. in
[39] showed that a trade-off between the linear recalla-
bility and the nonlinear transformation capability exists.This is clearly only the case if the theoretical limit of the
total memory capacity MC is reached and kept constant,
thus every change in the linear memory capacity MC
1has to
induce a change in the nonlinear memory capacities MCd,
d> 1. In the case of resonances, a decrease in the total
memory capacity MC happens and thus this loss can be
distributed in any possible way over the different memorycapacities MCd. In our case, we see that the influence on
the quadratic memory capacity MC2is highest.
The system is capable of a small amount of cubic
transformations, depicted by the solid red line in Fig. 4a,
which also decreases at the resonances in a similar way
as the quadratic contribution does. Higher order memory
capacities MCd, with d> 3, have only small contributions
for short delay times τ, dropping to 0 for increased time
delayτ. A possible explanation is the fact that short delays
induce an interaction of the last input directly with itself for
k=T
τtimes, depending on the ratio between τandT.A sa
result, short delay times τenable highly nonlinear tasks in
expense of a lower total memory capacity MC.
For more insights into the computing capabilities of our
nonlinear oscillator we now also discuss the NARMA10time series prediction task, shown in Fig. 4b. Comparing the
memory capacities MC
dwith the NARMA10 computation
error NRMSE in Fig. 4b, a small increase in the NARMA10
NRMSE can be seen at the resonances with nτ=mT,
where n∈[0,1,2...] andm∈[0,1,2...]. For a systematic
characterization a scan of the input period time Tand the
delay time τwas done and the total memory capacity MC
(Fig. 5c), the memory capacities of degrees 1–4 MC1,2,3,4
(Fig. 5a, b, d, e) and the NARMA10 NRMSE (Fig. 5f)
were plotted colorcoded over the two timescales. Thisis an extension of the results of R ¨ohm et al. in [19],
where only the linear memory capacity and the NARMA10computation error were analysed. For short time delaysτand period input times Tthe memory capacities of
degree 1–3 MC
1,2,3and the total memory capacity MC
are significantly below the theoretical limit of 50 as alreadyseen in the results from Fig. 4, while the NARMA10
NRMSE also has high errors of around 0.8. This comes
from the fact that short input period times Talso mean
short virtual node distances θ, which induces a high linear
Fig.5 aLinear memory
capacity MC1plotted
colorcoded over the delay time τ
and the input period time T.b
Degree 2, MC2.cTotal memory
capacity, MC. dDegree 3, MC3.
eDegree 4, MC4.fNARMA10
prediction error NRMSE
1424 Cogn Comput (2023) 15:1419–1426