A Game Theoretic Framework for Model Based Reinforcement Learning
Aravind Rajeswaran1 2Igor Mordatch1Vikash Kumar1
Abstract
Designing stable and efﬁcient algorithms for
model-based reinforcement learning (MBRL)
with function approximation has remained chal-
lenging despite growing interest in the ﬁeld. To
help expose the practical challenges in MBRL
and simplify algorithm design from the lens of ab-
straction, we develop a new framework that casts
MBRL as a game between: (1) a policy player,
which attempts to maximize rewards under the
learned model; (2) a model player, which attempts
to ﬁt the real-world data collected by the policy
player. We show that a near-optimal policy for
the environment can be obtained by ﬁnding an ap-
proximate equilibrium for aforementioned game,
and we develop two families of algorithms to ﬁnd
the game equilibrium by drawing upon ideas from
Stackelberg games. Experimental studies suggest
that the proposed algorithms achieve state of the
art sample efﬁciency, match the asymptotic per-
formance of model-free policy gradient, and scale
gracefully to high-dimensional tasks like dexter-
ous hand manipulation. Project page: https://
sites.google.com/view/mbrl-game .
1. Introduction
We study the problem of model-based reinforcement learn-
ing (MBRL) where a world model is learned from data to
aid policy search. Model-based algorithms can incorporate
historical off-policy data and generic priors like knowledge
of physics, making them highly sample efﬁcient. In addi-
tion, the learned models can also be re-purposed to solve
new tasks. As a result, there has been a recent surge of
interest in MBRL. However, a clear algorithmic framework
to understand MBRL and unify insights from recent works
has been lacking. To bridge this gap, and to facilitate the
1Google Brain, Mountain View, USA.2University of Washing-
ton, Seattle, USA. Work performed at Google Brain.. Correspon-
dence to: Aravind Rajeswaran <aravraj@cs.washington.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37thInternational Conference on Machine
Learning , Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the au-
thor(s).design of stable and efﬁcient algorithms, we develop a new
framework that casts MBRL as a two-player game.
Classical frameworks for MBRL, adaptive control (Åström
& Murray, 2004), and dynamic programming (Puterman,
1994), are often conﬁned to simple linear models or tabular
representations. They also rely on building global models
through ideas like persistent excitation (Narendra & An-
naswamy, 1987) or tabular generative models (Kearns &
Singh, 1998a). Such settings and assumptions are often lim-
iting for modern applications. To obtain a globally accurate
model, we need the ability to collect data from all parts
of the state space (Agarwal et al., 2019b), which is often
impossible. Furthermore, learning globally accurate models
may be unnecessary, unsafe, and inefﬁcient. For example,
to make an autonomous car drive on the road, we should
not require accurate models in situations where it tumbles
and crashes in different ways. This motivates a class of
incremental methods for MBRL that interleave policy and
model learning to gradually construct and reﬁne models in
the task-relevant parts of the state space. This is in sharp
contrast to a two-stage approach of ﬁrst building a model of
the world, and subsequently planning in it.
A unifying framework for incremental MBRL can connect
insights from different approaches and help simplify the
algorithm design process from the lens of abstraction. As
an example, distribution ordomain shift is known to be a
major challenge for incremental MBRL. When improving
the policy using the learned model, the policy will attempt to
shift the distribution over visited states. The learned model
may be inaccurate for this modiﬁed distribution, resulting
in a greatly biased policy update. A variety of approaches
have been developed to mitigate this issue. One class of ap-
proaches (Levine & Abbeel, 2014; Sun et al., 2018a; Kakade
& Langford, 2002), inspired by trust region methods, make
conservative changes to the policy to constrain the distri-
bution between successive iterates. In sharp contrast, an
alternate set of approaches do not constrain the policy up-
dates in any way, but instead rely on data aggregation to
mitigate distribution shift (Ross & Bagnell, 2012; Chua
et al., 2018; Nagabandi et al., 2019). Our game-theoretic
framework for MBRL reveals that these two seemingly dis-
parate approaches are essentially dual approaches to solve
the same game.