A Game Theoretic Framework for Model Based Reinforcement Learning
7. Summary and Conclusion
In this work, we developed a new framework for MBRL
that casts it as a game between a policy player and a model
player. We established that at equilibrium: (1) the model
accurately simulates the policy and predicts its performance;
(2) the policy is near-optimal. We derived sub-optimality
bounds and made a connection to domain adaptation to
characterize the equilibrium quality.
In order to solve the MBRL game, we constructed the Stack-
elberg version of the game. This has the advantage of: (1)
effective gradient based workhorses to solve the Stackelberg
optimization problem; (2) an effective objective function
to track learning progress towards equilibrium. General
continuous games possess neither of these characteristics.
The Stackelberg game can take two forms based on which
player we choose as the leader, resulting in two natural algo-
rithm families, which we named PAL and MAL. Together
they encompass, generalize, and unify a large collection
of prior MBRL works. This greatly simpliﬁes MBRL and
particularly algorithm design from the lens of abstraction.
We developed practical versions of PAL and MAL using
model-based natural policy gradient. We demonstrated sta-
ble and sample efﬁcient learning on a suite of control tasks,
including state of the art results on OpenAI gym bench-
marks. These results suggest that our practical variants of
PAL and MAL:
are substantially more sample efﬁcient compared to prior
model-based and model-free algorithms,
can achieve the same asymptotic performance as model-
free counterparts,
can scale to high-dimensional tasks with complex dynam-
ics like dexterous manipulation,
can scale to tasks requiring long horizon rollouts (e.g.
OpenAI gym tasks which have a 1000 timestep horizon).
More broadly, our work adds to a growing body of recent
work which suggests that MBRL can be stable, sample
efﬁcient, and more generalizable or adaptable to new tasks
and non-stationary settings. For future work, we hope to
study alternate ways to solve the Stackelberg optimization;
such as using the full implicit gradient term and unrolled
optimization. Finally, although we presented our game
theoretic framework in the context of MBRL, it is more
broadly applicable for any surrogate based optimization
including actor-critic methods. It would make for interesting
future work to study broader extensions and implications.
Acknowledgements
We thank Profs. Emo Todorov, Sham Kakade, Drew Bagnell,
and Sergey Levine for valuable feedback and discussions.We thank Michael Ahn and Michael Janner for sharing the
baseline learning curves; and Ben Eysenbach and Anirudh
Vemula for feedback on the paper draft. The work was
done by Aravind Rajeswaran during internships at Google
Brain, MTV . Aravind thanks Google for providing a highly
encouraging research environment.
References
Agarwal, A., Kakade, S. M., Lee, J. D., and Mahajan, G. Op-
timality and approximation with policy gradient methods
in markov decision processes. ArXiv , abs/1908.00261,
2019a.
Agarwal, A., Kakade, S. M., and Yang, L. F. On the optimal-
ity of sparse model-based planning for markov decision
processes. ArXiv , abs/1906.03804, 2019b.
Ahn, M., Zhu, H., Hartikainen, K., Ponte, H., Gupta, A.,
Levine, S., and Kumar, V . ROBEL: RObotics BEnch-
marks for Learning with low-cost robots. In Conference
on Robot Learning (CoRL) , 2019.
Åström, K. J. and Murray, R. M. Feedback systems an
introduction for scientists and engineers. 2004.
Ben-David, S., Blitzer, J., Crammer, K., and Pereira, F. C.
Analysis of representations for domain adaptation. In
NIPS , 2006.
Bengio, S., Vinyals, O., Jaitly, N., and Shazeer, N. Sched-
uled sampling for sequence prediction with recurrent neu-
ral networks. ArXiv , abs/1506.03099, 2015.
Brafman, R. I. and Tennenholtz, M. R-max - a general poly-
nomial time algorithm for near-optimal reinforcement
learning. J. Mach. Learn. Res. , 3:213–231, 2001.
Buckman, J., Hafner, D., Tucker, G., Brevdo, E., and
Lee, H. Sample-efﬁcient reinforcement learning with
stochastic ensemble value expansion. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1807.01675 , 2018.
Cesa-Bianchi, N. and Lugosi, G. Prediction, learning, and
games. 2006.
Chua, K., Calandra, R., McAllister, R., and Levine, S. Deep
reinforcement learning in a handful of trials using proba-
bilistic dynamics models. In NeurIPS , 2018.
Colson, B., Marcotte, P., and Savard, G. An overview of
bilevel optimization. Annals of Operations Research , 153:
235–256, 2007.
Deisenroth, M. P. and Rasmussen, C. E. Pilco: A model-
based and data-efﬁcient approach to policy search. In
ICML , 2011.