A Game Theoretic Framework for Model Based Reinforcement Learning
new goal distribution.
Thus, in summary, we ﬁnd that PAL is better suited for situ-
ations where the dynamics of the world can drift over time.
In contrast, MAL is better suited for situations where the
task or goal distribution can change over time, and related
settings like multi-task learning.
6. Related Work
MBRL and the closely related ﬁelds of adaptive control
and system identiﬁcation have a long and rich history
(see Åström & Murray (2004); Ljung (1987) for overview).
Early works in MBRL primarily focused on tabular re-
inforcement learning in a known generative model set-
ting (Kearns & Singh, 1998a; Agarwal et al., 2019a). How-
ever, this setting assumes access to a highly exploratory
policy to collect data, which is often not available in prac-
tice. Subsequent works like E3 (Kearns & Singh, 1998b)
and R-MAX (Brafman & Tennenholtz, 2001) attempt to lift
this limitation, but rely heavily on tabular representations
which are inadequate for modern applications like robotics.
Coupled with advances in deep learning, there has been a
surge of interest in incremental MBRL algorithms with rich
function approximation. They generally fall into two sets of
approaches, as we outline below.
The ﬁrst set of approaches are largely inspired by trust re-
gion methods, and are similar to the PAL family from our
work. A highly accurate “local” model is constructed around
the visitation distribution of the current policy, which is sub-
sequently used to conservatively improve the policy. The
trust region is intended to ensure that the model is accurate
for all policies within it, thereby enabling monotonic perfor-
mance improvement. GPS (Levine & Abbeel, 2014; Mor-
datch & Todorov, 2014), DPI (Sun et al., 2018b), and related
approaches (Kumar et al., 2016) learn a time varying linear
model and perform a KL-constrained policy improvement
step. Such a model representation is convenient for an iLQG
based policy update (Todorov & Li, 2005), but might be
restrictive for complex dynamics beyond trajectory-centric
RL. To remove these limitations, recent works have started
to consider neural networks to represent both policy and the
dynamics model. However, somewhat surprisingly, a clean
version from the PAL family has not been studied with neu-
ral network models. The motivations presented by Xu et al.
(2018) and Kurutach et al. (2018) resemble PAL, however
their practical implementations do not strongly enforce the
conservative nature of the policy update.
An alternate set of MBRL approaches take a view similar to
MAL. Models are updated conservatively through data ag-
gregation, while policies are aggressively optimized. Ross
& Bagnell (2012) explicitly studied the role of data aggrega-
tion in MBRL. They presented an agnostic online learningview of MBRL and showed that data aggregation can lead to
a no-regret algorithm for learning the model, even with ag-
gressive policy optimization. Subsequent works have used
data augmentation and proposed additional components to
enhance efﬁciency and stability, such as the use of model
predictive control (Williams et al., 2017; Lowrey et al., 2019;
Nagabandi et al., 2019), uncertainty quantiﬁcation through
Bayesian models (Deisenroth & Rasmussen, 2011), and en-
sembles of dynamics models (Rajeswaran et al., 2016; Chua
et al., 2018; Nagabandi et al., 2019). We refer readers to
Wang et al. (2019a) for overview of recent MBRL advances.
While speciﬁc instances of PAL and MAL have been stud-
ied in the past, an overarching framework around them has
been lacking. Our descriptions of the PAL and MAL fam-
ilies generalize and unify core insights from prior work
and simplify them from the lens of abstraction. Further-
more, the game theoretic formulation enables us to form a
connection between the PAL and MAL frameworks. We
also note that the PAL and MAL families have similarities
to multiple timescale algorithms (Konda & Borkar, 1999;
Konda & Tsitsiklis, 2004; Karmakar & Bhatnagar, 2015)
studied for actor-critic temporal difference learning. These
ideas have also been extended to study min-max games like
GANs (Heusel et al., 2017). However, they have not been
extended to study model-based RL.
We presented a model-based setting where the model is used
to directly improve the policy through rollout based opti-
mization. However, models can be utilized in other ways
too. Dyna (Sutton, 1990) and MBPO (Janner et al., 2019)
use a learned model to provide additional learning targets
for an actor-critic algorithm through short-horizon synthetic
trajectories. MBVE (Feinberg et al., 2018), STEVE (Buck-
man et al., 2018), and doubly-robust methods (Jiang & Li,
2015; Thomas & Brunskill, 2016; Farajtabar et al., 2018)
use model-based rollouts to obtain more favorable bias-
variance trade-offs for off-policy evaluation. Some of these
works have noted that long horizon rollouts can exacerbate
model bias. However, in our experiments, we were able
to successfully perform rollouts of hundreds of steps. This
is likely due to our practical implementation closely fol-
lowing the game theoretic algorithms designed explicitly to
mitigate distribution shift and enable effective simulation.
It is straightforward to extend PAL and MAL to a hybrid
model-based and model-free algorithm, which is likely to
provide further performance gains. Similarly, approaches
that bootstrap from the model’s predictions can improve
multi-step simulation (Venkatraman et al., 2015; Bengio
et al., 2015). We leave exploration of these directions for
future work.