5
and communication resources in the manner of edge server
selection and frequency spectrum allocation. More and more
research efforts focus on dynamically managing the radio and
computational resources for multi-user multi-server edge com-
puting systems, utilizing Lyapunov optimization techniques
[24] [25]. In recent years, optimizing computation ofﬂoading
decisions via DQN is popular [26] [27]. It models the compu-
tation ofﬂoading problem as a Markov decision process (MDP)
and maximize the long-term utility performance. The utility
can be composed of the above QoE indicators and evolves
according to the iterative Bellman equation. After that, the
asymptotically optimal computation ofﬂoading decisions are
achieved based on Deep Q-Network. User proﬁle migration
studies how to adjust the place of user proﬁles (conﬁguration
ﬁles, private data, logs, etc) when the mobile users are in
constant motion. User proﬁle migration is often associated
with mobility management [28]. In [29], the proposed JCORM
algorithm jointly optimizes computation ofﬂoading and migra-
tion by formulating cooperative networks. It opens research
opportunities where more advanced AI technologies can be
utilized to improve optimality. Many existing research efforts
study mobility management from the perspective of statistics
and probability theory. It has strong interests in realizing
mobility management with AI.
C. A Recapitulation of AIE
The right of the road-map is AI on edge . We name this kind
of work AIE (i.e. Artiﬁcial Intelligence on Edge) since it stud-
ies how to carry out the training and inference of AI models
on the network edge. By top-down decomposition, we divide
the research efforts in AI on edge into three categories: Model
Adaptation, Framework Design and Processor Acceleration.
Considering that the research efforts in Model Adaptation are
based on existing training and inference frameworks, let us
introduce Framework Design in the ﬁrst place.
1) Framework Design: Framework design aims at pro-
viding a better training and inference architecture for the
edge without modifying the existing AI models. Researchers
attempt to design new frameworks for both Model Training
and Model Inference.
For Model Training: To the best of our knowledge, for
model training, all proposed frameworks are distributed, ex-
cept those knowledge distillation-based ones. The distributed
training frameworks can be divided into data splitting and
model splitting [30]. Data splitting can be further divided
into master-device splitting, helper-device splitting and device-
device splitting. The differences lie where the training samples
come from and how the global model is assembled and
aggregated. Model splitting separates neural networks’ layers
and deploys them on different devices. It highly relies on
sophisticated pipelines. Knowledge distillation-based frame-
works may or may not be decentralized, and they rely on
transfer learning technologies [31]. Knowledge distillation can
enhance the accuracy of shallow student networks. It ﬁrst
trains a basic network on a basic dataset. After that, the learned
features can be transferred to student networks to be trained on
their datasets, respectively. The basic network can be trainedon cloud or edge server while those student networks can be
trained by numerous mobile end devices with their private
data, respectively. We believe that there exist great avenues
to be explored in knowledge distillation-based frameworks for
model training on the edge.
The most popular work in model training is Federated
Learning [11]. Federated Learning is proposed to preserve
privacy when training the DNNs in a distributed manner.
Without aggregating user private data to a central datacenter,
Federated Learning trains a series of local models on multiple
clients. After that, a global model is optimized by averaging
the trained gradients of each client. We are not going to
elaborate on Federated Learning thoroughly in this article.
For more details please refer to [11]. For the edge nodes with
limited storage and computing resource, it is unrealistic to train
a comprehensive model on their own. Thus, a more applicable
way is distributed training, where coordination between edge
nodes is necessary. For the communication between edge
nodes, the challenge is to optimize the global gradient from the
distributed local models. No matter what learning algorithms
is adopted, Stochastic Gradient Decent (SGD) is necessary
for model training. Distributed edge nodes use SGD to update
their local gradients based on their own dataset, which can be
viewed as a mini-batch. After that, they send their updated
gradients to a central node for global model upgrade. In this
process, trade-offs between model performance and commu-
nication overhead has to be considered. If all edge nodes send
their local gradients simultaneously, network congestion might
be caused. A better approach is to selectively choose local
gradients which have relatively large improvements. Under this
circumstance, the model performance of global model can be
guaranteed while the communication overheads are reduced.
For Model Inference: Although model splitting is hard
to realize for model training, it is a popular approach for
model inference. Model splitting/partitioning can be viewed
as a framework for model inference. Other approaches such
as model compression, input ﬁltering, early-exit and so on can
be viewed as adaptations from existing frameworks, which will
be introduced in the next paragraph and elaborated on carefully
in Subsection V-A. A typical example on model inference
on edge is [32], where a DNN is split into two parts and
carried out collaboratively. The computation-intensive part is
running on the edge server while the other is running on the
mobile device. The problem lies in where to split the layers
and when to exit the intricate DNN according to the constraint
on inference accuracy.
2) Model Adaptation: Model Adaptation makes appropri-
ate improvements based on existing training and inference
frameworks, usually Federated Learning, to make them more
applicable to the edge. Federated Learning has the potential
to run on the edge. However, the vanilla version of Federated
Learning has a strong demand for communication efﬁciency
since full local models are supposed to be sent back to
the central server. Therefore, many researchers exploit more
efﬁcient model updates and aggregation policies. Many works
are devoted to reducing cost and increasing robustness while
guaranteeing system performance. Methods to realize model
adaptation include but not limited to Model Compression,