8
edge . It studies the transfer of resource-intensive computa-
tional tasks from resource-limited mobile devices to edge or
cloud. This process involves the allocation of many resources,
ranging from CPU cycles to channel bandwidth. Therefore,
AI technologies with strong optimization abilities have been
extensively used in recent years. Among all these AI technolo-
gies,Q-learning and its derivatives, DQN, are in the spotlight.
For example, Qiu et al. design a Q-learning-based algorithm
for computation ofﬂoading [47]. It formulates the computation
ofﬂoading problem as a non-cooperative game in multi-user
multi-server edge computing systems and proves that Nash
Equilibrium exists. Then, this paper proposes a model-free
Q-learning-based ofﬂoading mechanism which helps mobile
devices learn their long-term ofﬂoading strategies to maximize
their long-term utilities.
More works are based on DQN because the curse of
dimensionality could be overcome with non-linear function
approximation. For example, Min et al. study the computation
ofﬂoading for IoT devices with energy harvesting in multi-
server MEC systems [26]. The need-to-be-maximized utility
formed from overall data sharing gains, task dropping penalty,
energy consumption and computation delay, which is updated
according to the Bellman equation. After that, DQN is used to
generate the optimal ofﬂoading scheme. In [27] [48], the com-
putation ofﬂoading problem is formulated as a MDP with ﬁnite
states and actions. The state set is composed of the channel
qualities, the energy queue, and the task queue while the action
set is composed of ofﬂoading decisions in different time slots.
Then, a DQN-based algorithm is proposed to minimize the
long-term cost. Based on DQN, task ofﬂoading decisions and
wireless resource allocation are jointly optimized to maximize
the data acquisition and analysis capability of the network [49]
[50]. The work in [51] studies the knowledge-driven service
ofﬂoading problem for Vehicle of Internet. The problem is also
formulated as a long-term planning optimization problem and
solved based on DQN. In summary, computation ofﬂoading
problems in various industrial scenarios have been extensively
studied from all sort of perspectives.
There also exist works who explore the task ofﬂoading
problem with other AI technologies. For example, [52] pro-
poses a long-short-term memory (LSTM) network to predict
the task popularity and then formulates a joint optimization
of the task ofﬂoading decisions, computation resource allo-
cation and caching decisions. After that, a Bayesian learning
automata-based multi-agent learning algorithm is proposed for
optimality.
B. Grand Challenges
Although it is popular to apply AI methods to edge for
the generation of better solutions, however, there have been
many challenges. In the next several Subsections, we list grand
challenges across the whole theme of AI for edge research.
These challenges are closely related but each has its own
emphasis.
1) Model Establishment: If we want to use AI methods, the
mathematical models have to be limited and the formulated
optimization problem need to be restricted. On one hand,this is because the optimization basis of AI technologies,
SGD (Stochastic Gradient Descent) and MBGD (Mini-Batch
Gradient Descent) methods, may not work well if the original
search space is constrained. On the other hand, especially for
MDPs, the state set and action set can not be inﬁnite, and
discretization is necessary to avoid the curse of dimensionality
before further processing. The common solution is changing
the constraints into a penalty and incorporating them into
the global optimization goal. The status quo greatly restricts
the establishment of mathematical models which leads to
performance degradation. It can be viewed as a compromise
for the utilization of AI methods. Therefore, how to establish
an appropriate system model poses great challenges.
2) Algorithm Deployment: The state-of-the-art works often
formulate a combinatorial and NP-hard optimization problem
which have fairly high computational complexity. Very few
works can achieve an analytic approximate optimal solution
with convex optimization methods. Actually, for AI for edge ,
the solution mostly comes from iterative learning-based ap-
proaches. There are many challenges that face when these
methods are deployed on the edge in an online manner.
Besides, another ignored challenge is which edge device
should undertake the responsibility for deploying and running
the proposed complicated algorithms. The existing research
efforts usually concentrate on their speciﬁc problems and do
not provide the details on that.
3) Balance between Optimality and Efﬁciency: Although
AI technologies can indeed provide solutions that are optimal,
the trade-off between optimality and efﬁciency can not be
ignored when it comes to the resource-constrained edge.
Thus, how to improve the usability and efﬁciency of edge
computing systems for different application scenarios with AI
technologies embedded is a severe challenge. The trade-off
between optimality and efﬁciency should be realized based
on the characteristics of dynamically changing requirements
on QoE and the network resource structure. Therefore, it is
coupling with the service subscribers’ pursuing superiority and
the utilization of available resources.
V. AI ONEDGE
In Subsection III-C, we divide the research efforts for AI on
edge into Model Adaptation, Framework Design and Processor
Acceleration. The existing frameworks for model training and
inference are rare. The training frameworks include Feder-
ated Learning and Knowledge Distillation while the inference
frameworks include Model Spitting and Model Partitioning. AI
models on edge are by far limited when compared to cloud-
based predictions because of the relatively limited compute
and storage abilities. How to carry out the model training and
inference on resource-scarce devices is a serious issue. As a
result, compared with designing new frameworks, researchers
in Edge Computing are more interested in improving existing
frameworks to make them more appropriate for the edge,
usually reducing resource occupation. As a result, Model
Adaptation based on Federated Learning is prosperously de-
veloped. As we have mentioned earlier, Processor Acceleration
will not be elaborated in details. Therefore, we only focus on