1
Edge Intelligence: The Conﬂuence of
Edge Computing and Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Shuiguang Deng, Senior Member, IEEE , Hailiang Zhao, Weijia Fang, Jianwei Yin,
Schahram Dustdar, Fellow, IEEE , and Albert Y . Zomaya, Fellow, IEEE
Abstract —Along with the rapid developments in communica-
tion technologies and the surge in the use of mobile devices, a
brand-new computation paradigm, Edge Computing, is surging
in popularity. Meanwhile, Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) applications
are thriving with the breakthroughs in deep learning and the
many improvements in hardware architectures. Billions of data
bytes, generated at the network edge, put massive demands
on data processing and structural optimization. Thus, there
exists a strong demand to integrate Edge Computing and AI,
which gives birth to Edge Intelligence. In this paper, we divide
Edge Intelligence into AI for edge (Intelligence-enabled Edge
Computing) and AI on edge (Artiﬁcial Intelligence on Edge).
The former focuses on providing more optimal solutions to key
problems in Edge Computing with the help of popular and
effective AI technologies while the latter studies how to carry
out the entire process of building AI models, i.e., model training
and inference, on the edge. This paper provides insights into
this new inter-disciplinary ﬁeld from a broader perspective. It
discusses the core concepts and the research road-map, which
should provide the necessary background for potential future
research initiatives in Edge Intelligence.
Index Terms —Edge Intelligence, Edge Computing, Wireless
Networking, Computation Ofﬂoading, Federated Learning.
I. I NTRODUCTION
COMMUNICATION technologies are undergoing a new
revolution. The advent of the 5th generation cellular
wireless systems (5G) that brings enhanced Mobile Broad-
Band (eMBB), Ultra-Reliable Low Latency Communica-
tions (URLLC) and massive Machine Type Communications
(mMTC). With the proliferation of the Internet of Things
(IoTs), more data is created by widespread and geographically
distributed mobile and IoT devices, and probably more than
the data generated by the mega-scale cloud datacenters [1].
Speciﬁcally, according to the prediction by Ericsson, 45%
This research was partially supported by the National Key Research and
Development Program of China (No.2017YFB1400601), National Science
Foundation of China (No.61772461 & No.61825205) and Natural Science
Foundation of Zhejiang Province (No.LR18F020003).
S. Deng is with the First Afﬁliated Hospital, Zhejiang University School
of Medicine, 310003 Hangzhou China and also the College of Computer
Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, 310058 Hangzhou, China. E-
mail: dengsg@zju.edu.cn.
H. Zhao and J. Yin are with the College of Computer Science and Tech-
nology, Zhejiang University, 310058 Hangzhou, China. E-mail: fhliangzhao,
zjuyjw g@zju.edu.cn.
W. Fang is with the First Afﬁliated Hospital, Zhejiang University School
of Medicine, 310003 Hangzhou, China. E-mail: weijiafang@zju.edu.cn,
S. Dustdar is with the Distributed Systems Group, Technische Universitt
Wien, 1040 Vienna, Austria. E-mail: dustdar@dsg.tuwien.ac.at.
A. Y . Zomaya is with the School of Computer Science, University of Syd-
ney, Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia. E-mail: albert.zomaya@sydney.edu.au.
Weijia Fang is the corresponding author.of the 40ZB global internet data will be generated by IoT
devices in 2024 [2]. Ofﬂoading such huge data from the edge
to cloud is intractable because it can lead to excessive network
congestion. Therefore, a more applicable way is to handle user
demands at the edge directly, which leads to the birth of a
brand-new computation paradigm, (Mobile !Multi-access)
Edge Computing [3]. The subject of Edge Computing spans
many concepts and technologies in diverse disciplines, in-
cluding Service-oriented Computing (SOC), Software-deﬁned
Networking (SDN), Computer Architecture, to name a few.
The principle of Edge Computing is to push the computation
and communication resources from cloud to edge of networks
to provide services and perform computations, avoiding unnec-
essary communication latency and enabling faster responses
for end users. Edge Computing is a booming ﬁeld today.
No one can deny that Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) is devel-
oping rapidly nowadays. Big data processing necessitates that
more powerful methods, i.e., AI technologies, for extracting
insights that lead to better decisions and strategic business
moves. In the last decade, with the huge success of AlexNet
and Deep Neural Networks (DNNs), which can learn the
deep representation of data, have become the most popular
machine learning architectures. Deep learning, represented by
DNNs and their offshoots, i.e., Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs), Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) and Generative
Adversarial Networks (GANs), has gradually become the most
popular AI methods in the last few years. Deep learning has
made striking breakthroughs in a wide spectrum of ﬁelds, in-
cluding computer vision, speech recognition, natural language
processing, and board games. Besides, hardware architectures
and platforms keep on improving at a rapid rate, which makes
it possible to satisfy the requirements of the computation-
intensive deep learning models. Application-speciﬁc accelera-
tors are designed for further improvement in throughput and
energy efﬁciency. In conclusion, driven by the breakthroughs
in deep learning and the upgrade of hardware architectures,
AI is undergoing sustained success and development.
Considering that AI is functionally necessary for the quick
analysis of huge volumes of data and extracting insights,
there exists a strong demand to integrate Edge Computing
and AI, which gives rise to Edge Intelligence. Edge Intel-
ligence is not the simple combination of Edge Computing
and AI. The subject of Edge Intelligence is tremendous
and enormously sophisticated, covering many concepts and
technologies, which are interwoven together in a complex
manner. Some works study the concept from the perspective
of constructing Intelligent Wireless Networks on Edge . For ex-arXiv:1909.00560v2  [cs.NI]  10 Feb 2020