2
TABLE I
RELATED SURVEYS AND THEIR EMPHASES .
Perspectives Related Surveys Highlights
Intelligent Wireless Networking [4] [5] [6]Summarize the utilization of machine learning on the wireless edge
Including basic principles and general applications
Focus on resource management, networking, and mobility management
Optimization across different layers with machine learning technologies
Deﬁnitions and Divisions of Edge Intelligence [7] [8] [9]Motivation, deﬁnition, division of Edge Intelligence
Including architectures, enabling technologies, learning frameworks, and
software platforms
Focus on model training and inference on edge
Discuss the application scenarios and the practical implementations
ample, Sun et al. comprehensively survey the recent advances
of the applications of machine learning technologies in wire-
less communication [4]. Speciﬁcally, this paper classiﬁes the
utilization of machine learning on the wireless edge into three
parts: resource management in the MAC layer, networking and
mobility management in the network layer, and localization
in the application layer. Different conditions and unsolved
challenges are also discussed. In addition, Mao et al. study the
state-of-the-art researches on the applications of deep learning
algorithms for different network layers [5]. Currently, there
is no formal and internationally accepted deﬁnition of Edge
Intelligence. To deal with the problem, some researchers put
forward their deﬁnitions. For example, Zhou et al. believe
that the scope of Edge Intelligence should not be restricted
to running AI models solely on edge servers or devices but in
collaboration of edge and cloud [7]. They deﬁne six levels of
Edge Intelligence, from cloud-edge co-inference (level 1) to
all on-device (level 6). Zhang et al. deﬁne Edge Intelligence
as the capability to enable edges to execute AI algorithms
[8]. In Table I, we summarize related survey papers on edge
intelligence.
In this paper, we propose to establish a broader vision and
perspective. We suggest to distinguish edge Intelligence into
AI for edge andAI on edge .
1)AI for edge is a research direction focusing on providing
a better solution to constrained optimization problems in
Edge Computing with the help of effective AI technolo-
gies. Here, AI is used to endow edge with more intel-
ligence and optimality. Therefore, it can be understood
asIntelligence-enabled Edge Computing (IEC) .
2)AI on edge studies how to run AI models on edge. It
is a framework for running training and inference of
AI models with device-edge-cloud synergy, which aims
at extracting insights from massive and distributed edge
data with the satisfaction of algorithm performance, cost,
privacy, reliability, efﬁciency, etc. Therefore, it can be
interpreted as Artiﬁcial Intelligence on Edge (AIE) .
Edge Intelligence, currently in its early stage, and is attracting
more researchers and companies from all over the world. To
disseminate the recent advances of Edge Intelligence, Zhou
et al. have conducted a comprehensive and concrete survey
of the recent research efforts on Edge Intelligence [7]. They
survey the architectures, enabling technologies, systems, and
frameworks from the perspective of AI models’ training andinference. However, the material in Edge Intelligence spans
an immense and diverse spectrum of literature, in origin and
in nature, which is not fully covered by this survey. Many
concepts are still unclear and questions remain unsolved. The
research process actually what motivated us to write this paper
to shed some light and provide more insights with simple and
clear classiﬁcation .
We commit ourselves to elucidating Edge Intelligence to
provide a broader vision and perspective. In Section II, we
discuss the relation between Edge Computing and AI. In
Section III, we demonstrate the research road-map of Edge
Intelligence concisely with a hierarchical structure. Section
IV and Section V elaborate the state of the art and grand
challenges on AI for edge andAI on edge , respectively. Section
VI concludes the article.
II. T HERELATIONS BETWEEN EDGE COMPUTING AND AI
We believe that the conﬂuence of AI and Edge Computing
is natural and inevitable. In effect, there is an interactive
relationship between them. On one hand, AI provides Edge
Computing with technologies and methods, and Edge Com-
puting can unleash its potential and scalability with AI; on
the other hand, Edge Computing provides AI with scenarios
and platforms, and AI can expand its applicability with Edge
Computing.
AI provides Edge Computing with technologies and
methods. In general, Edge Computing is a distributed com-
puting paradigm, where software-deﬁned networks are built
to decentralize data and provide services with robustness and
elasticity. Edge Computing faces resource allocation problems
in different layers, such as CPU cycle frequency, access ju-
risdiction, radio-frequency, bandwidth, and so on. As a result,
it has great demands on various powerful optimization tools
to enhance system efﬁciency. AI technologies are capable to
handle this task. Essentially, AI models extract unconstrained
optimization problems from real scenarios and then ﬁnd the
asymptotically optimal solutions iteratively with Stochastic
Gradient Descent (SGD) methods. Either statistical learning
methods or deep learning methods can offer help and advice
for the edge. Besides, reinforcement learning, including multi-
armed bandit theory, multi-agent learning and deep Q-network
(DQN), is playing a growing and important role in resource
allocation problems for the edge.
Edge Computing provides AI with scenarios and plat-
forms. The surge of IoT devices makes the Internet of