6
Conditional Computation, Algorithm Asynchronization and
Thorough Decentralization. Model compression exploits the
inherent sparsity structure of gradients and weights. Possible
approaches include but not limited to Quantization, Dimen-
sional Reduction, Pruning, Precision Downgrading, Compo-
nents Sharing, Cutoff and so on. Those approaches can be
realized by methods such as Singular Value Decomposi-
tion (SVD), Huffman Coding, Principal Component Analysis
(PCA) and several others. Conditional computation is an
alternative way to reduce the amount of calculation by se-
lectively turning off some unimportant calculations of DNNs.
Possible approaches include but not limited to Components
Shutoff, Input Filtering, Early Exit, Results Caching and so
on. Conditional Computation can be viewed as block-wise
dropout [33]. Besides, random gossip communication can be
utilized to reduce unnecessary calculations and model updates.
Algorithm Asynchronization trys aggregating local models
in an asynchronous way. It is designed for overcoming the
inefﬁcient and lengthy synchronous steps of model updates
in Federated Learning. Thoroughly decentralization removes
the central aggregator to avoid any possible leakage and
address the central server’s malfunction. The ways to achieve
totally decentralization include but not limited to blockchain
technologies and game-theoretical approaches.
3) Processor Acceleration: Processor Acceleration focuses
on structure optimization of DNNs in that the frequently-
used computation-intensive multiply-and-accumulate opera-
tions can be improved. The approaches to accelerate DNN
computation on hardware include (1) designing special in-
struction sets for DNN training and inference, (2) designing
highly paralleled computing paradigms, (3) moving compu-
tation closer to memory (near-data processing), etc. Highly
parallelized computing paradigms can be divided into temporal
and spatial architectures [34]. The former architectures such
as CPUs and GPUs can be accelerated by reducing the num-
ber of multiplications and increasing throughput. The latter
architectures can be accelerated by increasing data reuse with
data ﬂows. For example, Lee et al. propose an algorithm
to accelerate CNN inference [35]. The proposed algorithm
converts a set of pre-trained weights into values under given
precision. It also puts near-data processing into practice with
an adaptive implementation of memristor crossbar arrays. In
the research area of Edge Computing, a lot of works hammer
at the co-design of Model Adaptation and Processor Accel-
eration. Considering that Processor Acceleration is mainly
investigated by AI researchers, this paper will not delve into
it. More details on hardware acceleration for DNN processing
can be found in [34].
IV. AI FOR EDGE
In Subsection III-B, we divide the key issues in Edge Com-
puting into three categories: Topology, Content and Service. It
just presents a classiﬁcation and possible research directions
but does not provide in-depth analysis on how to apply AI
technologies to edge to generate more optimal solutions. This
Section will remedy this. Fig. 2 gives an example of how
AI technologies are utilized in the Mobile Edge Computing(MEC) environment. Firstly, we need to identify the problem
to be studied. Take performance optimization as an example,
the optimization goal, decision variables, and potential con-
straints need to be conﬁrmed. The need-to-be optimized goal
could be the combination of task execution delay, transmission
delay and task dropping cost. The studied task can be either
binary or partial. After that, the mathematical model should be
constructed. If the long-term stability of system is considered,
Lyapunov optimization technique cloud be used to formalize
the problem. At last, we should design an algorithm to solve
the problem. In fact, the model construction is not only
decided by the to-be-studied problem, but also the to-be-
applied optimization algorithms. Take DQN for example, we
have to model the problem as an MDP with ﬁnite states and
actions . Thus, the constraints cannot exist in the long-term
optimization problem. The most common way is transferring
those constraints into penalty and adding the penalty to the
optimization goal.
Problem DefinitionModel ConstructionAlgorithm DesignRefactorPerformance Optimization in MECDeep Q-Network (DQN)execution delayhandover delaytask dropping costBinaryTaskenergy allocationedge server selectionPartialTaskoffloading or notpartition pointbattery energy leveltask execution deadlineradio frequency bandwidthcomputing resourcesObserve States
Observe Actions(Discretization)energy statetask request stateresource usage...
edge server selectionoffloading decisionRemove Constraintsadd penaltytransfer to goaladd assumption...Memory Pool(Database of Samples)DNNgradientspolicyMini-batch
EnvironmentStateCostActionWeightUpdating(alternative)Need-to-be-minimized delayGoalDecision Variables
ConstraintsActionenergy allocation
Fig. 2. The utilization of AI technology for performance optimization.
Considering that current research efforts on AI for edge con-
centrate on Wireless Networking, Service Placement, Service
Caching and Computation Ofﬂoading, we only focus on these
topics in the following Subsection. For research directions that
haven’t been explored yet, we are expecting to see more works
in due course.
A. State of the Art
1) Wireless Networking: The 5G technology promises
eMBB, URLLC and mMTC in a real-time and highly dynamic
environment. Under the circumstances, researchers reach a
consensus on that AI technologies should and can be integrated
across the wireless infrastructure and mobile users [6]. We
believe that AI should be synergistically applied to achieve
intelligent network optimization in a fully online manner. One
of the typical works in this area is [15]. This paper advocates
a new set of design principles for wireless communication