10
TABLE II
METHODS AND THE CORRESPONDING PAPERS .
Methods Related Papers
Model CompressionSketched updates & structured updates [53]
Communication-efﬁcient secure aggregation [54]
Mixed low-bitwidth compression [55]
Retraining-after-pruning [56]
Compressed RNN (based on Hybrid Matrix Decomposition) [57]
Binary Neural Networks (BNNs) [58] [59] [60]
ProNN (based on Stochastic Neighborhood Compression) [61]
Conditional Computation Runtime-throttleable block-level gating [62]
Algorithm AsynchronizationGoSGD (based on Random-gossip communication) [63]
GossipGraD (based on Random-gossip communication) [64]
Thoroughly DecentralizationBlockFL (based on Blockchain) [65]
Game-theoretical approach
signiﬁcance here is identiﬁed based on the ability of a layer
to expand into higher dimensional space.
Model Compression is currently a very active direction in AI
on edge because it is easy to implement. However, the state-
of-the-art works are usually not tied to speciﬁc application
scenarios of edge computing systems. There are opportunities
for new works that construct edge platforms and hardware.
2) Conditional Computation: As demonstrated in Fig. 3,
the approaches for Conditional Computation include Com-
ponents Sharing, Components Shutoff, Input Filtering, Early
Exit, Results Caching and so on. To put it simply, Conditional
computation is selectively turning off some unimportant cal-
culations. Thus it can be viewed as block-wise dropout [33].
A lot of works devote themselves to ranking and selecting the
most worthy part for computation or early stop if the conﬁdent
threshold is achieved. For example, Hostetler et al. instantiate
aruntime-throttleable neural network which can adaptively
balance learning accuracy and resource occupation in response
to a control signal [62]. It puts Conditional Computation into
practice via block-level gating.
This idea can also be put into use for participator selection.
It selects the most valuable participators in Federated Learning
for model updates. The valueless participators will not engage
the aggregation of the global model. To the best of our
knowledge, currently, there is no work dedicated to participator
selection. We are eagerly looking forward to exciting works
on it.
3) Algorithm Asynchronization: As demonstrated in Fig.
3, Algorithm Asynchronization attempts to aggregate local
models in an asynchronous way for Federated Learning. As
we have mentioned before, the participating local users have a
signiﬁcant probability of failing to complete the model upload
and download due to the wireless network congestion. Apart
from model compression, another way is exchanging weights
and gradients peer-to-peer to reduce the high concurrency on
wireless channels. Random-gossip Communication is a typical
example. Based on randomized gossip algorithms, Blot et al.
propose GoSGD to train DNNs asynchronously [63]. The most
challenging problem for gossip training is the degradation of
convergence rate in large-scale edge systems. To overcome
the issue, Daily et al. introduce GossipGraD, which can
reduce the communication complexity greatly to ensure thefast convergence [64].
4) Thorough Decentralization: As demonstrated in Fig.
3, Thorough Decentralization attempts to remove the central
aggregator to avoid any possible leakage. Although Federated
Learning does not require consumers private data, the model
updates still contain private information as some trust of the
server coordinating the training is still required. To avoid
privacy leaks altogether, blockchain technology and game-
theoretical approaches can assist in total decentralization.
By leveraging blockchain, especially smart contracts, the
central server for model aggregating is not needed anymore.
As a result, collapse triggered by model aggregation can be
avoided. Besides, user privacy can be protected. We believe
that the blockchain-based Federated Learning will become a
hot ﬁeld and prosperous direction in the coming years. There
exists works that put it into practice. In [65], the proposed
blockchain-based federated learning architecture, BlockFL,
takes edge nodes as miners. Miners exchange and verify all the
local model updates contributed by each device and then run
the Proof-of-Work (PoW). The miner who ﬁrstly completes the
PoW generates a new block and receives the mining reward
from the blockchain network. At last, each device updates its
local model from the freshest block. In this paper, blockchain
is effectively integrated with Federated Learning to build a
trustworthy edge learning environment.
B. Grand Challenges
The grand challenges for AI on edge are listed from the per-
spective of data availability, model selection, and coordination
mechanism, respectively.
1) Data Availability: The toughest challenge lies in the
availability and usability of raw training data because us-
able data is the beginning of everything. Firstly, a proper
incentive mechanism may be necessary for data provisioning
from mobile users. Otherwise, the raw data may not be
available for model training and inference. Besides, the raw
data from various end devices could have an obvious bias,
which can greatly affect the learning performance. Although
Federated Learning can overcome the problem caused by non-
i.i.d. samples to a certain extent, the training procedure still
faces great difﬁculties on the design of robust communication