3
Everything (IoE) a reality [10]. More and more data is
created by widespread and geographically distributed mobile
and IoT devices, other than the mega-scale cloud datacen-
ters. Many more application scenarios, such as intelligent
networked vehicles, autonomous driving, smart home, smart
city and real-time data processing in public security, can
greatly facilitate the realization of AI from theory to practice.
Besides, AI applications with high communication quality
and low computational power requirements can be migrated
from cloud to edge. In a word, Edge Computing provides
AI with a heterogeneous platform full of rich capabilities.
Nowadays, it is gradually becoming possible that AI chips
with computational acceleration such as Field Programmable
Gate Arrays (FPGAs), Graphics Processing Units (GPUs),
Tensor Processing Units (TPUs) and Neural Processing Units
(NPUs) are integrated with intelligent mobile devices. More
corporations participate in the design of chip architectures to
support the edge computation paradigm and facilitate DNN
acceleration on resource-limited IoT devices. The hardware
upgrade on edge also injects vigor and vitality into AI.
III. R ESEARCH ROAD -MAP OF EDGE INTELLIGENCE
The architectural layers in the Edge Intelligence road-map,
depicted in Fig. 1, describe a logical separation for the two
directions respectively, i.e., AI for edge (left) and AI on edge
(right). In the bottom-up approach, we divide research efforts
in Edge Computing into Topology, Content, and Service. AI
technologies can be utilized in all of them. By top-down
decomposition, we divide the research efforts in AI on edge
into Model Adaptation, Framework Design and Processor
Acceleration. Before discussing AI for edge andAI on edge
separately, we ﬁrst describe the goal to be optimized for both
of them, which is collectively known as Quality of Experience
(QoE). QoE remains at the top of the road-map.
A. Quality of Experience
We believe that QoE should be application-dependent and
determined by jointly considering multi-criteria: Performance,
Cost, Privacy (Security), Efﬁciency and Reliability.
1)Performance . Ingredients of performance are different
forAI for edge andAI on edge . As for the former, performance
indicators are problem-dependent. For example, performance
could be the ratio of successfully ofﬂoading when it comes
into the computation ofﬂoading problems. It could be the
service providers’ need-to-be-maximized revenue and need-
to-be-minimized hiring costs of Base Stations (BSs) when it
comes into the service placement problems. As for the latter,
performance mainly consists of training loss and inference
accuracy, which are the most important criteria for AI models.
Although the computation scenarios have changed from cloud
clusters to the synergised system of device, edge, and cloud,
these criteria still play important roles.
2)Cost . Cost usually consists of computation cost, com-
munication cost, and energy consumption. Computation cost
reﬂects the demand for computing resources such as achieved
CPU cycle frequency, allocated CPU time while communi-
cation cost presents the request for communication resourcessuch as power, frequency band and access time. Many works
also focused on minimizing the delay (latency) caused by
allocated computation and communication resources. Energy
consumption is not unique to Edge Computing but more
crucial due to the limited battery capacity of mobile devices.
Cost reduction is crucial because Edge Computing promises
a dramatic reduction in delay and energy consumption by
tackling the key challenges for realizing 5G.
3)Privacy (Security) . With the increased awareness of the
leaks of public data, privacy preservation has become one of
the hottest topics in recent years. The status quo led to the
birth of Federated Learning, which aggregates local machine
learning models from distributed devices while preventing
data leakage [11]. The security is closely tied with privacy
preservation. It also has an association with the robustness
of middleware and software of edge systems, which are not
considered in this article.
4)Efﬁciency . Whatever AI for edge orAI on edge , high
efﬁciency promises us a system with excellent performance
and low overhead. The pursuit of efﬁciency is the key factor
for improving existing algorithms and models, especially for
AI on edge . Many approaches such as model compression,
conditional computation, and algorithm asynchronization are
proposed to improve the efﬁciency of training and inference
of deep AI models.
5)Reliability . System reliability ensures that Edge Comput-
ing will not fail throughout any prescribed operating periods.
It is an important indicator of user experience. For Edge Intel-
ligence, system reliability appears to be particularly important
forAI on edge because the model training and inference are
usually carried out in a distributed and synchronized way and
the participated local users have a signiﬁcant probability of
failing to complete the model upload and download due to
wireless network congestion.
B. A Recapitulation of IEC
The left-side of the road-map, depicted in Fig. 1, is AI for
edge . We name this kind of work IEC (i.e. Intelligence-enabled
Edge Computing) as AI provides powerful tools for solving
complex learning, planning, and decision-making problems.
By the bottom-up approach, the key concerns in Edge Comput-
ing are categorized into three layers, i.e., Topology, Content,
and Service.
ForTopology , we pay close attention to the Orchestration
of Edge Sites (OES) and Wireless Networking (WN). In this
paper, we deﬁne an edge site as a micro data center with
applications deployed, attached to a Small-cell Base Station
(SBS). OES studies the deployment and installation of wireless
telecom equipment and servers. In recent years, research
efforts on the management and automation of Unmanned
Aerial Vehicles (UA Vs) became very popular [12] [13] [14].
UA Vs with a small server and an access point can be regarded
as moving edge servers with strong maneuverability. There-
fore, many works explore scheduling and trajectory planning
problems with the minimization of energy consumption of
UA Vs. For example, Chen et al. study the power consumption
of UA Vs by caching the popular contents under predictions,