7
on edge with machine learning technologies and models
embedded, which are collectively named as Learning-driven
Communication . It can be achieved across the whole process
of data acquisition, which are in turn multiple access, radio
resource management and signal encoding.
Learning-driven multiple access advocates that the unique
characteristics of wireless channels should be exploited for
functional computation. Over-the-air computation (AirComp)
is a typical technique used to realize it [36] [37]. In [38] the
authors put this principle into practice based on Broadband
Analog Aggregation (BAA). Concretely, Zhu et al. suggest
that the simultaneously transmitted model updates in Fed-
erated Learning should be analog aggregated by exploiting
the waveform-superposition property of multi-access channels
[38]. The proposed BAA can dramatically reduce communica-
tion latency compared with traditional Orthogonal Frequency
Division Multiple Access (OFDMA). The work in [39] ex-
plores the over-the-air computation for model aggregation in
Federated Learning. More speciﬁcally, Yang et al. puts the
principle into practice by modeling the device selection and
beamforming design as a sparse and low-rank optimization
problem, which is computationally intractable [39]. To solve
the problem with a fast convergence rate, this paper proposed
a difference-of-convex-functions (DC) representation via suc-
cessive convex relaxation. The numerical results show that the
proposed algorithm can achieve lower training loss and higher
inference accuracy compared with state-of-the-art approaches.
This contribution can also be categorized as Model Adaptation
inAI on edge , but it accelerates Federated Learning from the
perspective of fast data acquisition.
Learning-driven radio resource management promotes
the idea that radio resources should be allocated based
on the value of transmitted data, not just the efﬁciency
of spectrum utilization. Therefore, it can be understood as
importance-aware resource allocation and an obvious ap-
proach is importance-aware retransmission . In [40] the au-
thors put the principle into practice. This paper proposed a
retransmission protocol, named importance-aware automatic-
repeat-request (importance ARQ). Importance ARQ makes the
trade-off between signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) and data uncer-
tainty under the desired learning accuracy. It can achieve fast
convergence while avoiding learning performance degradation
caused by channel noise.
Learning-driven signal encoding stipulates that signal
encoding should be designed by jointly optimizing feature
extraction, source coding, and channel encoding. A work
puts this principle into practice is [41], which proposes a
Hybrid Federated Distillation (HFD) scheme based on separate
source-channel coding and over-the-air computing. It adopts
sparse binary compression with error accumulation in source-
channel coding. For both digital and analog implementations
over Gaussian multiple-access channels, HFD can outperform
the vanilla version of Federated Learning in a poor communi-
cation environment. This principle has something in common
with Dimensional Reduction and Quantization from Model
Adaptation in AI on edge , but it reduces the feature size from
the source of data transmission. It opens up great research
opportunities for the co-design of learning frameworks anddata encoding.
Apart from Learning-driven Communication , some works
contribute to AI for Wireless Networking from the perspective
of power and energy consumption management. Shen et al.
utilizes Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) to develop scalable
methods for power control in K-user interference channels
[42]. This paper ﬁrst models the K-user interference channel
as a complete graph, then it learns the optimal power control
with a graph convolutional neural network. Temesgene et al.
study an energy minimization problem where the baseband
processes of the virtual small cells powered solely by energy
harvesters and batteries can be opportunistically executed in a
grid-connected edge server [43]. Based on multi-agent learn-
ing, several distributed fuzzy Q-learning-based algorithms
are tailored. This paper can be viewed as an attempt for
coordination with broadcasting.
As we will expound later, Wireless Networking is often
combined with Computation Ofﬂoading when it is studied in
the form of optimization. State of the art of these works is
listed in Subsection IV-A3.
2) Service Placement and Caching: Many researchers
study service placement from the perspective of Application
Service Providers (ASPs). They model the data and service
(it can be compounded and complex) placement problem as
a Markov Decision Process (MDP) and utilize AI methods
such as reinforcement learning to achieve optimal placement
decision. A typical work implementing this idea is [44]. This
paper proposes a spatial-temporal algorithm based on Multi-
armed bandit (MAB) and achieves the optimal placement
decisions while learning the beneﬁt. Concretely, it studies
how many SBSs should be rented for edge service hosting to
maximize the expected utility up to a ﬁnite time horizon. The
expected utility is composed of delay reduction of all mobile
users. After that, a MAB-based algorithm, named SEEN, is
proposed to learn the local users service demand patterns of
SBSs. It can achieve the balance between exploitation and
exploration automatically according to the fact that whether
the set of SBSs is chosen before. Another work attempts to
integrate AI approaches with service placement is [45]. This
work jointly decides which SBS to deploy each data block and
service component and how much harvested energy should be
stored in mobile devices with a DQN-based algorithm. This
article will not elaborate on DQN. More details can be found
in [46].
Service caching can be viewed as a complement to service
placement. Edge servers can be equipped with special service
cache to satisfy user demands on popular contents. A wide
range of optimization problems on service caching are pro-
posed to endow edge servers with learning capability. Sadeghi
et al. study a sequential fetch-cache decision based on dynamic
prices and user requests [23]. This paper endows SBSs with
efﬁcient fetch-cache decision-making schemes operating in
dynamic settings. Concretely, it formulates a cost minimization
problem with service popularity considered. For the long-
term stochastic optimization problem, several computationally
efﬁcient algorithms are developed based on Q-learning.
3) Computation Ofﬂoading: Computation ofﬂoading can be
considered as the most active topic when it comes to AI for