Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9, 4050 3 of 16
2.3. Traditional Speech Synthesis Technology
To understand why deep learning techniques are being used to generate speech today, it is
important to know how speech generation is traditionally done. There are two speciﬁc methods for
TTS conversion: concatenative TTS and parametric TTS. This paper will give a brief introduction to
the two kinds of methods in the following sections.
2.3.1. Concatenative Speech Synthesis
The waveform concatenation based synthesis method directly concatenates the waveforms in the
speech waveform database and outputs a continuous speech stream. Its basic principle is to select the
appropriate speech unit from the pre-recorded and labeled speech corpus according to the context
information analyzed from the text input, and concatenate the selected speech unit to obtain the ﬁnal
synthesized speech. With the guidance of the context infomation, the naturalness of the synthesized
speech has been improved greatly.
There are two different schemes for concatenative synthesis: one is based on linear prediction
coefﬁcients (LPCs) [ 21], the other is based on PSOLA. The ﬁrst method mainly uses the LPC coding of
speech to reduce the storage capacity occupied by the speech signal, and the synthesis is also a simple
decoding and concatenation process. The speech synthesized by this method is very natural for a single
word because the codec preserves most of the information of the speech. However, since the natural
ﬂow of words when people actually speak is not just a simple concatenation of individual isolated
speech units, the overall effect will be affected by the concatenative points. To address this problem,
PSOLA, which pays more attention to the control and modiﬁcation of prosody, has been proposed.
Different from the former method, PSOLA adjusts the prosody of the concatenation unit according to
the target context, so that the ﬁnal synthesized waveform not only maintains the speech quality of the
original pronunciation, but also makes the prosody features of the concatenation unit conform to the
target context. However, this method also has many defects: (1) as stated in Section 2.2, the quality
of the synthesized speech will be affected by the pitch period or starting point; and (2) the problem
of whether it can maintain a smooth transition has not been solved. These defects greatly limit its
application in diversiﬁed speech synthesis [22].
2.3.2. Parametric Speech Synthesis
The parametric speech synthesis refers to the method that uses digital signal processing
technologies to synthesize speech from text. In this method, it considers the human vocal process as
a simulation that uses a source of glottal state to excite a time-varying digital ﬁlter which characterizes
the resonance characteristics of the channel. The source can be a periodic pulse sequence that is
used to represent the vocal cord vibration of the voiced speech, or a random white noise to indicate
undeﬁned unvoiced speech. By adjusting the parameters of the ﬁlter, it can synthesize various types
of speeches [ 15]. Typical methods include vocal organ parametric synthesis [ 23], formant parametric
synthesis [ 24], HMM-based speech synthesis [ 25], and deep neural network (DNN)-based speech
synthesis [26,27].
3. Statistical Parametric Speech Synthesis
A complete SPSS system is generally composed of three modules: a text analysis module,
a parameter prediction module which uses a statistical model to predict the acoustic feature parameters
such as fundamental frequency (F0), spectral parameters and duration, and a speech synthesis
module. The text analysis module mainly preprocesses the input text and transforms it into linguistic
features used by the speech synthesis system, including text normalization [ 28], automatic word
segmentation [ 20], and grapheme-to-phoneme conversion [ 29]. These linguistic features usually
include phoneme, syllable, word, phrase and sentence-level features. The purpose of the parameter
prediction module is to predict the acoustic feature parameters of the target speech according to