Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9, 4050 5 of 16
parameters which include voiced and unvoiced regions, it is difﬁcult to apply discrete or continuous
HMMs because the values of F0 are not deﬁned in unvoiced regions. To address this problem,
the HMM-based method adopts multi-space probability distribution to model the voiced and unvoiced
regions (e.g., voiced/unvoiced (V/UV) parameters), separately. To improve the accuracy and ﬂexibility
of acoustic parameter prediction, the authors in [ 28] introduce the articulatory feature that is related to
the speech generation mechanism and integrates it with the acoustic features.
3.2.2. DNN-Based Parameter Prediction
It is well known that the acoustic features of a particular phoneme will be affected by the
context information associated with the phoneme [ 30]. It means that the context information plays
a signiﬁcant role in the prediction of the acoustic features. Researchers show that the human speech
generation process usually uses a hierarchical structure to convert the context information into a speech
waveform [ 31]. Inspired by this idea, the deep structure models have been introduced in predicting
acoustic feature parameters for speech synthesis [ 32]. The framework of the DNN-based parameter
prediction progress can be seen in [20].
To compare with the HMM-based parameter prediction methods, the DNN-based methods can
not only map complex linguistic features into acoustic feature parameters, but also use long short-term
context information to model the correlation between frames which improves the quality of speech
synthesis. In addition, for the HMM-based methods, the principal of MLE is used to maximize
the output probability which makes the parameter sequence a mean vector sequence, resulting in
a step-wise function. The jumps cause discontinuities in the synthesized speech. To address this
problem, the maximum likelihood parameter generation (MLPG) algorithm is used to smooth the
trajectory by taking the dynamic features including the delta and delta–delta coefﬁcients into account.
However, the DNN-based methods cannot suffer from this problem.
3.3. Vocoder-Based Speech Synthesis
Speech synthesizer or vocoder is an important component of statistical parametric speech
synthesis, which aims at synthesizing speech waveform based on the estimated acoustic feature
parameters. Traditional methods usually use the HTS_engine [ 33] synthesizer since it is free and
fast to synthesize speech. However, the synthesized speech usually sounds dull, thus making the
quality not good. To improve the quality of the synthesized speech, STRAIGHT [ 34,35] is proposed
and used in various studies, making it easy to manipulate speech. Other methods such as phase
vocoder [ 36], PSOLA [ 18] and sinusoidal model [ 37] are also proposed. Legacy-STRAIGHT [ 38] and
TANDEM-STRAIGHT [ 38] were developed as algorithms to meet the requirements for high-quality
speech synthesis. Although these methods can synthesize speech with good quality, the speed still
cannot meet the real-world application scenarios. To address this problem, real-time methods remain
a popular research topic. For example, the authors in [ 34] proposed the real-time STRAIGHT as a way
to meet the demand for real-time processing. The authors in [ 38] proposed a high-quality speech
synthesis system which used WORLD [ 39] to meet the requirements of not only high sound quality
but also real-time processing.
4. Deep Learning Based Speech Synthesis
It is known that the HMM-based speech synthesis method maps linguistic features into probability
densities of speech parameters with various decision trees. Different from the HMM-based method,
the DL-based method directly perform mapping from linguistic features to acoustic features with
deep neural networks which have proven extraordinarily efﬁcient at learning inherent features of
data. In the long tradition of studies that adopt DL-based method for speech synthesis, people have
proposed numerous models. To help readers better understand the development process of these
methods (Audio samples of different synthesis methods are given at: http://www.ai1000.org/sampl