Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9, 4050 2 of 16
have good performance on data with less complicated internal structures and weak constraints.
However, when dealing with the data having complex internal structures in the real world (e.g., speech,
natural language, image, video, etc.), the representation capability of shallow models will be restricted.
Deep learning (DL) is a new research direction in the machine learning area in recent years.
It can effectively capture the hidden internal structures of data and use more powerful modeling
capabilities to characterize the data [ 10]. DL-based models have gained signiﬁcant progress in many
ﬁelds such as handwriting recognition [ 11], machine translation [ 12], speech recognition [ 13] and
speech synthesis [ 14]. To address the problems existing in speech synthesis, many researchers have
also proposed the DL-based solutions and achieved great improvements. Therefore, to summarize the
DL-based speech synthesis methods at this stage will help us to clarify the current research trends in
this area. The rest of the article is organized as follows. Section 2 gives an overview of speech synthesis
including its basic concept, history and technologies. In Section 3, this paper introduces the pipeline
of SPSS. A brief introduction is given in Section 4 about the DL-based speech synthesis methods
including the end-to-end ones. Finally, Section 5 provides discussions on new research directions.
Finally, Section 6 concludes the article.
2. An Overview of Speech Synthesis
2.1. Basic Concept of Speech Synthesis
Speech synthesis or TTS is to convert any text information into standard and smooth speech in
real time. It involves many disciplines such as acoustics, linguistics, digital signal processing, computer
science, etc. It is a cutting-edge technology in the ﬁeld of information processing [ 15], especially for
the current intelligent speech interaction systems.
2.2. The History of Speech Synthesis
With the development of digital signal processing technologies, the research goal of speech
synthesis has been evolving from intelligibility and clarity to naturalness and expressiveness.
Intelligibility describes the clarity of the synthesized speech, while naturalness refers to ease of
listening and global stylistic consistency [16].
In the development of speech synthesis technology, early attempts mainly used parametric
synthesis methods. In 1971, the Hungarian scientist Wolfgang von Kempelen used a series of delicate
bellows, springs, bagpipes and resonance boxes to create a machine that can synthesize simple words.
However, the intelligibility of the synthesized speech is very poor. To address this problem, in 1980,
Klatt’s serial/parallel formant synthesizer [ 17] was introduced. The most representative one is the
DECtalk text-to-speech system of the Digital Equipment Corporation (DEC) (Maynard, MA, USA).
The system can be connected to a computer through a standard interface or separately connected
to the telephone network to provide a variety of speech services that can be understood by users.
However, since the extraction of the formant parameters is still a challenging problem, the quality of
the synthesized speech makes it difﬁcult to meet the practical demand. In 1990, the Pitch Synchronous
OverLap Add (PSOLA) [ 18] algorithm greatly improved the quality and naturalness of the speech
generated by the time-domain waveform concatenation synthesis methods. However, since PSOLA
requires the pitch period or starting point to be annotated accurately, the error of the two factors
will affect the quality of the synthesized speech greatly. Due to the inherent problem of this kind of
method, the synthesized speech is still not as natural as human speech. To tackle the issue, people
conducted in-depth research on speech synthesis technologies, and used SPSS models to improve
the naturalness of the synthesized speech. Typical examples are HMM-based [ 19] and DL-based [ 20]
synthesis methods. Extensive experimental results demonstrate that the synthesized speech of these
models has been greatly improved in both speech quality and naturalness.