Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9, 4050 4 of 16
the output of the text analysis module. The speech synthesis module generates the waveform of
the target speech according to the output of the parameter prediction module by using a particular
synthesis algorithm. The SPSS is usually divided into two phases: the training phase and the synthesis
phase. In the training phase, acoustic feature parameters such as F0 and spectral parameters are ﬁrstly
extracted from the corpus, and then a statistical acoustic model is trained based on the linguistic
features of the text analysis module as well as the extracted acoustic feature parameters. In the
synthesis phase, the acoustic feature parameters are predicted using the trained acoustic model with
the guidance of the linguistic features. Finally, the speech is synthesized based on the predicted
acoustic feature parameters using a vocoder.
3.1. Text Analysis
Text analysis is an important module of the SPSS model. Traditional text analysis methods
are mainly rule-based, which require a lot of time to collect and learn these rules. With the
rapid development of data mining technology, some data-driven methods have been gradually
developed, such as the bigram method, trigram method, HMM-based method and DNN-based
method. When using the latter two methods for text analysis, the Festival [ 4] system is usually used to
perform phoneme segmentation and annotation on the corpus, which mainly includes the following
ﬁve levels:
Phoneme level: the phonetic symbols of the previous before the previous, the previous, the current,
the next or the next after the next; the forward or backward distance of the current phoneme
within the syllable.
Syllable level: whether the previous, the current or the next syllable is stressed; the number of
phonemes contained in the previous, the current or the next syllable; the forward or the backward
distance of the current syllable within the word or phrase; the number of the stressed syllables before
or after the current syllable within the phrase; the distance from the current syllable to the forward or
backward most nearest stressed syllable; the vowel phonetics of the current syllable.
Word level: the part of speech (POS) of the previous, the current or the next word; the number of
syllables of the previous, the current or the next word; the forward or backward position of the current
word in the phrase; the forward or backward content word of the current word within the phrase;
the distance from the current word to the forward or backward nearest content word; the POS of the
previous, the current or the next word.
Phrase level: the number of syllables of the previous, the current or the next phrase; the number
of words of the previous, the current or the next phrase; the forward or backward position of the
current phrase in the sentence; the prosodic annotation of the current phrase.
Sentence level: The number of syllables, words or phrases in the current sentence.
3.2. Parameter Prediction
Parameter prediction is used to predict acoustic feature parameters based on the result of the
text analysis module and the trained acoustic model. For the SPSS, there are usually two kinds
of parameter prediction methods: HMM-based parameter prediction and DNN-based parameter
prediction. This paper will give a review of these methods in the following.
3.2.1. HMM-Based Parameter Prediction
The HMM-based parameter prediction method mainly generates the sequence of F0 and spectral
parameters from the trained HMMs. It is achieved by calculating the sequence of acoustic features
with the maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) algorithm given a Gaussian distribution sequence.
Due to the differences between F0 and spectral parameters, different methods have been adopted to
model the two kinds of feature parameters. For the continuous spectral parameters, the continuous
density hidden Markov model (CD-HMM) is used and the output of each HMM state is a single
Gaussian or a Gaussian mixture model (GMM) [ 27]. However, for the variable-dimensional F0