Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9, 4050 11 of 16
Voice 3, for speech synthesis, which enables fully parallel computation to make the training process
faster than that of using recurrent units.
5. Discussion
Compared with the concatenative speech synthesis method, the SPSS system can synthesize
speech with high intelligibility and naturalness. Due to the limitations of the HMM-based speech
synthesis model (such as the use of context decision trees to share speech parameters), the synthesized
speech is not vivid enough to meet the requirements of expressive speech synthesis. The DL-based
speech synthesis models adopt complete context information and distributed representation to replace
the clustering process of the context decision tree in HMM, and use multiple hidden layers to map
the context features to high-dimensional acoustic features, thus making the quality of the synthesized
speech better than the traditional methods.
However, the powerful representation capabilities of DL-based models have also brought some
new problems. To achieve better results, the models need more hidden layers and nodes, which will
undoubtedly increase the number of parameters in the network, and the time complexity and space
complexity for network training. When the training data are insufﬁcient, the models usually have
over-ﬁtting. Therefore, it requires a large amount of corpora and computing resources to train the
network. In addition, the DL-based models also require much more space to store the parameters.
There is no doubt that the existing end-to-end models are still far from perfect [ 77]. Despite many
achievements, there are still some challenging problems. Next, we will discuss some research directions:
 Investigating context features hidden in end-to-end speech synthesis. The end-to-end TTS
system, mostly back-end, has achieved state-of-the-art performance since it was proposed.
However, there is little progress in front-end text analysis, which extracts context features or
linguistic features that are very useful to bridge the gap between text and speech [ 78]. Therefore,
demonstrating what types of context information are utilized in end-to-end speech synthesis
system is a good direction in future.
 Semi-supervised or unsupervised training in end-to-end speech synthesis. Although end-to-end
TTS models have shown excellent results, they typically require large amounts of high-quality
<text, speech> pairs for training, which are expensive and time-consuming to collect.
It is important and of great signiﬁcance to improve the data efﬁciency for end-to-end TTS training
by leveraging a large scale of publicly available unpaired text and speech recordings [79].
 The application of other speech related scenarios. In addition to the application of text-to-speech
in this paper, the application to other scenarios such as voice conversion, audio-visual speech
synthesis, speech translation and cross-lingual speech synthesis is also a good direction.
 The combination of software and hardware. At present, most deep neural networks require a lot
of calculations. Therefore, parallelization will be an indispensable part of improving network
efﬁciency. In general, there are two ways to implement parallelization: one is the parallelization
of the machines; the other is to use GPU parallelization. However, since writing GPU code
is still time-consuming and laborious for most researchers, it depends on the cooperation of
hardware vendors and software vendors, to provide the industry with more and more intelligent
programming tools.
6. Conclusions
Deep learning that is capable of leveraging large amount of training data has become an important
technique for speech synthesis. Recently, increasingly more researches have been conducted on
deep learning techniques or even end-to-end frameworks and achieved state-of-the-art performance.
This paper gives an overview to the current advances on speech synthesis and compare both of the
advantages and disadvantages among different methods, and discusses possible research directions
that can promote the development of speech synthesis in the future.