Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9, 4050 6 of 16
es/index.html.), this paper gives a brief overview of the advantages and disadvantages in Table 1 and
makes a detailed introduction in the following.
Table 1. The advantages and disadvantages of different speech synthesis methods, including
hidden Markov model (HMM), restrictive Boltzmann machine (RBM), deep belief network (DBN),
deep mixture density network (DMDN), deep bidirectional long short-term memory (DBLSTM),
WaveNet, Tacotron and convolutional neural network (CNN).
Methods Advantages Disadvantages
HMMFlexible with changing voice characteristics and the
system is robustThe acoustic features are oversmoothed,
making the generated speech sounds mufﬂed
RBMCan better describe the distribution of high-dimensional
spectral envelopes to alleviate the over-smooth problemSuffer from the fragementation problem of
training data
DBNCannot suffer from the training data fragementation
problem and reduce the over-smoothing problemThe quality of generated speech
will be degraded
DMDN Can solve the single modality problemCan only leverage limited contexts and each
frame is mapped independently
DBLSTM Can fully leverage contextual information Still needs a vocoder to synthesize waveform
WaveNet Can produce high-quality speech waveformsToo slow and the errors from the front-end
will affect the synthesis effect
TacotronFully end-to-end speech synthesis model and
can produce high-quality speech waveformsQuite costly to train the model
CNN Fast to train the model The speech quality might be degraded
4.1. Restrictive Boltzmann Machines for Speech Synthesis
In recent years, restricted Boltzmann machines (RBMs) [ 40] have been widely used for
modeling speech signals, such as speech recognition, spectrogram coding and acoustic-articulatory
inversion mapping [ 40]. In these applications, RBM is often used for pre-training of deep
auto-encoders (DAEs) [ 41,42] or DNNs. In the ﬁeld of speech synthesis, RBM is usually regarded as
a density model for generating the spectral envelope of acoustic parameters. It is adopted to better
describe the distribution of high-dimensional spectral envelopes to alleviate the over-smooth problem
in HMM-based speech synthesis [ 40]. After training the HMMs, a state alignment is performed for
the acoustic features and the state boundaries are used to collect the spectral envelopes obtained from
each state. The parameters of the RBM are estimated using the maximum likelihood estimation (MLE)
criterion. Finally, RBM–HMMs are constructed to model the spectral envelopes. In the synthesis
phase, the optimal spectral envelope sequence is estimated based on the input sentence and the
trained RBM–HMMs. Although the subjective evaluation result of this method is better than that of
traditional HMM–GMM systems, and the predicted spectral envelope is closer to the original one, this
method still cannot solve the fragementation problem of training data encountered in the traditional
HMM-based method.
4.2. Multi-Distribution Deep Belief Networks for Speech Synthesis
The multi-distribution deep belief network (DBN) [ 43] is a method of modeling the joint
distribution of context information and acoustic features. It models the coutinuous spectral, discrete
voiced/unvoiced (V/UV) parameters and the multi-space F0 simultaneously with three types of RBMs.
Due to the different data types of the 1-out-of- Kcode, the F0, the spectral and the V/UV parameters,
the method uses the 1-out-of- Kcode of the syllable and its corresponding acoustic parameters as
the visible-layer data of the RBM to train the RBMs. In DBNs, the visible unit can obey different
probability distributions; therefore, it is possible to characterize the supervectors that are composed of
these features. In the training phase, given the 1-out-of- Kcode of the syllable, the network ﬁxes the
visible-layer units to calculate the hidden-layer parameters ﬁrstly, and then uses the parameters of
the hidden layers to calculate the visible-layer parameters until convergence. Finally, the predicted
acoustic features are interpolated based on the length of the syllable.