Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9, 4050 10 of 16
To generate speech of the speciﬁed speaker or the speciﬁed text, global and local conditions are usually
introduced to control the synthesis contents.
While the WaveNet model can produce high-quality audios, it still suffers from the following
problems: (1) it is too slow because the prediction of each sampling point always depends on the
predicted sampling points before; (2) it also depends on linguistic features from an existing TTS
front-end and the errors from the front-end text analysis will directly affect the synthesis effect.
To address these problems, the parallel WaveNet is proposed to improve the sampling efﬁciency.
It is capable of generating high-ﬁdelity speech samples at more than 20 times faster [ 61]. Another neural
model, Deep Voice [ 62], is also proposed to replace each component including a text analysis front-end,
an acoustic model and a speech synthesizer by a corresponding neural network. However, since each
component is trained independently, it is not a real end-to-end synthesis.
4.6.2. Speech Synthesis Based on Tacotron
Tacotron [ 63,64] is a fully end-to-end speech synthesis model. It is capable of training a speech
synthesis model given <text, audio> pairs, thus alleviating the need for laborious feature engineering.
In addition, since it is based on character level, it can be applied in almost all kinds of languages
including Chinese Mandarin.
Like WaveNet, the Tacotron model is also a generative model. Different from WaveNet, Tacotron
uses a seq2seq model with an attention mechanism to map text to a spectrogram, which is a good
representation of speech. Since a spectrogram doesn’t contain phase information, the system uses
the Grifﬁn–Lim algorithm [ 65] to reconstruct the audio by estimating the phase information from the
spectrogram iteratively. The overall framework of the Tacotron speech synthesis model can be seen
in [63].
Since Tacotron is a fully end-to-end model that directly maps the input text to mel-spectrogram,
it has received a wide amount of attention of researchers and various improved versions have been
proposed. For example, some researchers implemented open clones of Tacotron [ 66–68] to reproduce
the speech of satisfactory quality as clear as the original work [ 69]. The authors in [ 70] introduced deep
generative models, such as Variational Auto-encoder (VAE) [ 71], to Tacotron to explicitly model the
latent representation of a speaker state in a continuous space, and additionally to control the speaking
style in speech synthesis [70].
There are also some works that combine Tacotron and WaveNet for speech synthesis, such as
Deep Voice 2 [ 72]. In this system, Tacotron is used to transform the input text to the linear scale
spectrogram, while WaveNet is used to generate speech from the linear scale spectrogram output of
Tacotron. In addition, the authors in [ 73] also proposed the Tacotron2 system to generate audio signals
that resulted in a very high mean opinion score (MOS) comparable to human speech [ 74]. The authors
in [73] described a uniﬁed neural approach that combines a seq2seq Tacotron-style model to generate
mel-spectrogram and a WaveNet vocoder to synthesize speech from the generated mel-spectrogram.
4.6.3. Speech Synthesis Based on Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs)
Although the Tacotron-based end-to-end system has achieved promising performance recently,
it still has a drawback that there are many recurrent units. This kind of structure makes it quite costly to
train the model and it is also infeasible for researchers without high-performance machines to conduct
further research on it. To address this problem, a lot of works have been proposed. The authors
in [69] proposed a deep convolutional network with guided attention which can be trained much faster
than the RNN-based state-of-the-art neural system. Different from the WaveNet model, which utilized
the fully-convolutional structure as a kind of vocoder or a back-end, Ref. [ 69] is rather a frond-end
(and most of back-end processing) that can synthesize a spectrogram. The authors in [ 75] used
CNN-based architecture for capturing long-term dependencies of singing voice and applied parallel
computation to accelerate the model train and acoustic feature generation processes. The authors
in [76] proposed a novel, fully-convolutional character-to-spectrogram architecture, namely Deep