4 Li et al.
orthogonal to our proposed algorithm. More recently, versatile techniques were
proposed to achieve automated and ecient pruning strategies such as reinforce-
ment learning [7], generative adversarial learning mechanism [17] and so on. But
the introduced hyper-parameters add diculty to repeat the experiments and
the trail-and-error to get the auxiliary models work well can be time consuming.
The technique of adjusting BN was used to serve for non-pruning purposes
in existing works. [14] adapts the BN statistics for target domain in domain
adaptation tasks. The common point with our work is that we both notice the
batch normalization requires an adjustment to adapt models in a new setting
where either model or domain changes. But this useful technique has not been
particularly used for model pruning purposes.
3 Methodology
Training Pruning Evaluation Fine -tuning
Full 
ModelTrained 
ModelPruning 
CandidatesWinner 
CandidateDelivered 
Pruned Model
Fig. 2. A typical pipeline for neural network training and pruning
A typical neural network training and pruning pipeline is generalized and
visualized in Figure 2. Pruning is normally applied to a trained full-size network
for redundancy removal purposes. An ne-tuning process is then followed up
to gain accuracy back from losing parameters in the trimmed lters. In this
work, we focus on structured lter pruning approaches, which can be generally
formulated as
(r1;r2;:::;r L)= arg min
r1;r2;:::;rLL(A(r1;r2;:::;r L;w)); s:t:C<constraints;(1)
whereLis the loss function and Ais the neural network model. rlis the pruning
ratio applied to the lthlayer. Given some constraints Csuch as targeted amount
of parameters, operations, or execution latency, a combination of pruning ratios
(r1;r2;:::;r L), which is referred as pruning strategy, is applied to the full-size
model. All possible combinations of the pruning ratios form a searching space. To
obtain a compact model with the highest accuracy, one should search through the
search space by applying dierent pruning strategies to the model, ne-tuning
each of the pruned model to converged and pick the best one. We consider the
pruning task as nding the optimal pruning strategy, denoted as ( r1;r2;:::;r L),
that results in the highest converged accuracy of the pruned model.