EagleEye 7
think leads to the low-range accuracy results and unfair candidate selection. If
the global BN statistics are out-dated to the sub-nets, we should re-calculate T
and2
Twith adaptive values by conducting a few iterations of inference on part of
the training set, which essentially adapts the BN statistical values to the pruned
network connections. Concretely, we freeze all the network parameters while
resetting the moving average statistics. Then, we update the moving statistics by
a few iterations of forward-propagation, using Equation 4, but without backward
propagation. We note the adaptive BN statistics as ^ Tand^2
T.
Fig. 4. Correlation between ne-tuning accuracy and inference accuracy gained from
vanilla evaluation (left), adaptive-BN-based evaluation (right) based on MobileNet V1
experiments on ImageNet Top-1 classication results.
Figure 4 right illustrates that applying adaptive BN delivers evaluation accu-
racy that has a stronger correlation, compared to the vanilla evaluation Figure 4
left.
As another evidence, we compare the distance of BN statistical values be-
tween true statistics. We consider and2sampled from the validation data as
the true statistics, noted as valand2
val, because they are the real statistical
values in the testing phase. Specially, we are not obtaining insights from the val-
idation data, which we think is unfair, but simply showing that our evaluation
results are closer to the ground truth compared to the vanilla method. Con-
cretely, we expect ^ Tand ^2
Tto be as close as possible to the true BN statistics
values,valand2
val, so they could deliver close computational results. So we
visualize the distance of BN statistical values gained from dierent evaluation
methods (see Figure 5). Each pixel in the heatmaps represents a distance for a
type of BN statistics, either valor2
val, between post-evaluation results and the
true statistics sampled via one lter in MobileNet V1 [9]. The visual observation
shows that adaptive BN provides closer statistical values to the true values while
global BN is way further. A possible explanation is that the global BN statistics
are out-dated and not adapted to the pruned network connections. So they mess
up the inference accuracy during evaluation for the pruned networks.
Noticeably, ne-tuning also relieves such problem of mismatched BN statis-
tics because the training process itself re-calculates the BN statistical values in
the forward pass and hence xes the mismatch. However, BN statistics are not
trainable values but sampling parameters only calculated in inference time. Our