EagleEye 9
[0.1, 0.5, ...,0.5]
[0.5, 0.2, ...,0.1]
[0.3, 0.2, ...,0.7]
Pruning Strategy
Generation𝜔𝑇,𝜇𝑇,𝜎𝑇2𝜔𝑇,ො𝜇𝑇,ො𝜎𝑇2 𝜔𝑇,𝜇𝑇,𝜎𝑇2
Adaptive BN
Adaptive BN
Adaptive BN3%
14%
10%Finetuning
70.7%
𝜔𝑇+Δ𝑇,ො𝜇𝑇+Δ𝑇,ො𝜎𝑇+Δ𝑇2
Trained
ModelDelivered
Pruned Model
………
Winner Candidates
SelectionSub-nets From
Searching SpaceFilter
Pruning
Strategy Generation Filter Pruning Adaptive -BN-based Candidate Evaluation… …
Fig. 6. Work
ow of the EagleEye Pruning Algorithm
contains three parts, pruning strategy generation, lter pruning, and adaptive-
BN-based evaluation.
Strategy generation outputs pruning strategies in the form of layer-wise
pruning rate vectors like ( r1;r2;:::;r L) for aL-layer model. The generation pro-
cess follows pre-dened constraints such as inference latency, a global reduction
of operations (FLOPs) or parameters and so on. Concretely, it randomly samples
Lreal numbers from a given range [0 ;R] to form a pruning strategy, where rlde-
notes the pruning ratio for the lthlayer.Ris the largest pruning ratio applied to
a layer. This is essentially a Monte Carlo sampling process with a uniform distri-
bution for all legitimate layer-wise pruning rates, i.e. removed number of lters
over the number of total lters. Noticeably, other strategy generation methods
can be used here, such as the evolutionary algorithm, reinforcement learning etc.,
we found that a simple random sampling is good enough for the entire pipeline
to quickly yield pruning candidates with state-of-the-art accuracy. A possible
reason for this can be that the adjustment to the BN statistics leads to a much
more accurate prediction to the sub-nets' potential, so the eorts of generating
candidates are allowed to be massively simplied. The low computation cost
of this simple component also adds the advantage of fast speed to the entire
algorithm.
Filter pruning process prunes the full-size trained model according to the
generated pruning strategy from the previous module. Similar to a normal lter
pruning method, the lters are rstly ranked according to their L1-norm and
therlof the least important lters are trimmed o permanently. The sampled
pruning candidates from the searching space are ready to be delivered to the
next evaluation stage after this process.
The adaptive-BN-based candidate evaluation module provides a BN
statistics adaptation and fast evaluation to the pruned candidates handed over
from the previous module. Given a pruned network, it freezes all learnable pa-
rameters and traverses through a small amount of data in the training set to
calculate the adaptive BN statistics ^ and ^2. In practice, we sampled 1/30 of
the total training set for 100 iterations in our ImageNet experiments, which takes