EagleEye 3
Above-mentioned issues in current works motivate us to propose a better
pruning algorithm that equips with a faster and more accurate evaluation pro-
cess, which eventually helps to provide the state-of-the-art pruning performance.
The main novelty of the proposed EagleEye pruning algorithm is described as
below:
{We point out the reason that a so-called vanilla evaluation step (explained
in Section 3.1) widely found in many existing pruning methods leads to poor
pruning results. To quantitatively demonstrate the issue, we are the rst to
introduce a correlation analysis to the domain of pruning algorithm.
{We adopt the technique of adaptive batch normalization for pruning pur-
poses in this work to address the issue in the vanilla evaluation step. It is
one of the modules in our proposed pruning algorithm called EagleEye. Our
proposed algorithm can eectively estimate the converged accuracy for any
pruned model in the time of only a few iterations of inference. It is also gen-
eral enough to plug-in and improve some existing methods for performance
improvement.
{Our experiments show that although EagleEye is simple, it achieves the
state-of-the-art pruning performance in comparisons with many more com-
plex approaches. In the ResNet-50 experiments, EagleEye delivers 1.3% to
3.8% higher accuracy than compared algorithms. Even in the challenging
task of pruning the compact model of MobileNet V1, EagleEye achieves the
highest accuracy of 70.9% with an overall 50% operations (FLOPs) pruned.
The results here are ImageNet top-1 classication accuracy.
2 Related work
Pruning was mainly handled by hand-crafted heuristics in early time [13]. So
a pruned candidate network is obtained by human expertise and evaluated by
training it to the converged accuracy, which can be very time consuming con-
sidering the large number of plausible sub-nets. In later chapters, we will show
that the pruning candidate selection is problematic and selected pruned net-
works cannot necessarily deliver the highest accuracy after ne-tuning. Greedy
strategy were introduced to save manual eorts [26] in more recent time. But
it is easy for such strategy to fall into the local optimal caused by the greedy
nature. For example, NetAdapt [26] supposes the layer ltwith the least accuracy
drop, noted as dt, is greedily pruned at step t. However, there may exist a better
pruning strategy where d0
t>dt, butd0
t+d0
t+1<dt+dt+1. Our method searches
the pruning ratios for all layers together in one single step and therefore avoids
this issue.
Some other works induce sparsity to weights in training phase for pruning
purposes. For example, [25] introduces group-LASSO to introduce sparsity of
the kernels and [21] regularizes the parameter in batch normalization layer.
[23] ranks the importance of lters based on Taylor expansion and trimmed o
the low-ranked ones. The selection standards proposed in these methods are