2 Li et al.
DNN pruning can be considered as a searching problem. The searching space
consists of all legitimate pruned networks, which are referred as sub-nets or prun-
ing candidates. In such space, how to obtain the sub-net with highest accuracy
with reasonably small searching eorts is the core of a pruning task.

Full-size NetworkPruned NetworkAdaptive BNSensitivity AnalysisMetaNetworkShort-term Fine-tuning
Evaluation Process
PruningFine-tuning(Optional)
Fig. 1. A generalized pipeline for pruning tasks. The evaluation process unveils the
potential of dierent pruning strategies and picks the one that most likely to deliver
high accuracy after convergence.
Particularly, an evaluation process can be commonly found in existing prun-
ing pipelines. Such process aims to unveil the potential of sub-nets so that best
pruning candidate can be selected to deliver the nal pruning strategy. A visual
illustration of this generalization is shown in Figure 1. More details about the
existing evaluation methods will be discussed throughout this work. An advan-
tage of using an evaluation module is fast decision-making because training all
sub-nets, in a large searching space, to convergence for comparison can be very
time-consuming and hence impractical.
However, we found that the evaluation methods in existing works are sub-
optimal. Concretely, they are either inaccurate or complicated.
By saying inaccurate, it means the winner sub-nets from the evaluation pro-
cess do not necessarily deliver high accuracy when they converge [13,7,19]. This
will be quantitatively proved in Section 4.1 as a correlation problem measured
by several commonly used correlation coecients. To our knowledge, we are the
rst to introduce correlation-based analysis for sub-net selection in pruning task.
Moreover, we demonstrate that the reason such evaluation is inaccurate is the
use of sub-optimal statistical values for Batch Normalization (BN) layers [10].
In this work, we use a so-called adaptive BN technique to x the issue and
eectively reach a higher correlation for our proposed evaluation process.
By saying complicated, it points to the fact that the evaluation process in
some works rely on tricky or computationally intensive components such as a
reinforcement learning agent [7], auxiliary network training [22], knowledge
distillation [8], and so on. These methods require careful hyper-parameter tuning
or extra training eorts on the auxiliary models. These requirements make it
potentially dicult to repeat the results and these pruning methods can be
time-consuming due to their high algorithmic complexity.