EagleEye 5
Apart from handcraft designing, dierent searching methods have been ap-
plied in previous work to nd the optimal pruning strategy, such as greedy algo-
rithm [26,28], RL [7], and evlolutionary algorithm [20]. All of the these methods
are guided by the evaluation results of the pruning strategies.
3.1 Motivation
In many published approaches [7,13,19] in this domain, pruning candidates di-
rectly compare with each other in terms of evaluation accuracy. The sub-nets
with higher evaluation accuracy are selected and expected to also deliver high ac-
curacy after ne-tuning. However, such intention can not be necessarily achieved
as we notice the sub-nets perform poorly if directly used to do inference. The in-
ference results normally fall into a very low-range accuracy, which is illustrated
in Figure 3 left. An early attempt is to randomly generate pruning rates for
MobileNet V1 and apply L1-norm based pruning [13] for 50 times. The dark
red bars form the histogram of accuracy collected from directly doing inference
with the pruned candidates in the same way that [7,13,19] do before ne-tuning.
Because our pruning rates are randomly generated in this early attempt, so the
accuracy is very low and only for observation. The gray bars in Figure 4 shows
the situation after ne-tuning these 50 pruned networks. We notice a huge dif-
ference in accuracy distribution between these two results. Therefore, there are
two questions came up to our mind given above observation. The rst question
is why removal to lters, especially considered as unimportant lters, can cause
such noticeable accuracy degradation although the pruning rates are random?
The natural question to ask next is how strongly the low-range accuracy is pos-
itively correlated to the nal converged accuracy. These two questions triggered
our investigation into this commonly used evaluation process, which is called
vanilla evaluation in this work.
Fig. 3. Left: Histogram for accuracy collected from directly pruning MobileNet V1 and
ne-tuning 15 epoches. Right: Evolution of the weight distribution of a pruned Mo-
bileNetV1 [9] during ne-tuning on ImageNet [3]. Where Xaxis presents the magnitude
of theL1-norm of kernel, Yaxis presents the quantity, Zaxis presents the ne-tuning
epochs.