Article  
AI-Based Financial Transaction Monitoring and Fraud 
Prevention with Behaviour Prediction  
Jiahao Xu  1,* and Tianyi Yang  2,Shikai Zhuang  3,Huixiang Li  4 and Wenran Lu  5 
1 Computer Science, Fudan University, ShangHai, China  
2 Financial Risk Management,University of Connecticut,Stamford CT,USA  
3 Electrical Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle,WA, USA  
4 Information Studies, Trine University, AZ, USA  
5 Electrical Engineering , University of Texas at Austin , Austin, TX , USA  
* Correspondence: author E -mail: lizengyi.zy@bytedance.com  
Abstract : In this study, we explored the application of deep learning techniques for credit card fraud detection, 
aiming to improve the performance and reliability of anomaly detection methods in financial transactions. We 
first utilized the Isolation Forest algorit hm, achieving a detection accuracy of 26% for the top 1000 transactions. 
Subsequently, we experimented with the Autoencoder algorithm, an unsupervised deep neural network 
model, which enhanced the detection accuracy to 33.6% in the best case desp ite some fluctuations. The results 
demonstrate deep learning model s’ strong feature extraction capability and adaptability , highlighting their 
potential to surpass traditional methods. However, the high imbalance in the dataset, with only 0.17% of 
transactions being fraudulent, poses a significant challenge. This study underscores the necessity for further 
experimentation and  optimization of network structures and hyperparameters to achieve more stable and 
efficient fraud detection. The findings provide val uable insights and reference points for future research in 
financial fraud detection using deep learning methodologies.  
Keywords:  deep learning; fraud detection;  autoencoder;  financial transactions  
 
1. Introduction  
Article 11 of the Measures for the Administration of Large Transactions and Suspicious 
Transaction Reports by Financial Institutions provides that “If a financial institution finds or has 
reasonable grounds to suspect that a customer, the custome r’s funds or other assets, the custome r’s 
transactions or attempted transactions are related to criminal activities such as money laundering or 
terrorist financing, it shall file a suspicious transaction report, regardless of the number  of funds 
involved or the valu e of the assets involved .” [1,2]Financial institutions sha ll establish a sound 
transaction monitoring system to identify transactions that may involve money laundering or other 
upstream crimes by analyzing  customer information and transaction information, and conduct 
further due diligence. If there are reasonable grounds for suspicion or the suspicion cannot be ruled 
out, the suspicious transaction report shall be reported to the China Anti -Money Laundering  
Monitoring and Analysis Centre and relevant depart ments. Through suspicious transaction 
monitoring, it can effectively detect and prevent the flow of illegal funds and play a role in 
safeguarding the security and stability of the financial system, combating criminal activities and 
maintaining social fairn ess and justice. Based on the prediction of transaction fraud based on financial 
market monitoring, this paper discusses some suggestions to improve the effectiveness, timeliness 
and integrity of suspicious transaction monitoring and identification from th e common difficulties 
faced by financial institutions at present.  
  Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions, and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual author(s) and 
contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to people or property resulting 
from any ideas, methods, instructions, or products referred to in the content.Preprints.org  (www.preprints.org)  |  NOT PEER-REVIEWED  |  Posted: 16 July 2024                    doi:10.20944/preprints202407.1107.v1
©  2024 by the author(s). Distributed under a Creative Commons CC BY  license.