5 
 In conclusion, the traditional financial transaction monitoring system is faced with large and 
complex data volume, high false alarm rate, monitoring system response speed and real -time 
problems, and cross -institutional and cross -border coordination proble ms. [12]These challenges not 
only increase the operating costs and regulatory burden of financial institutions, but also make some 
suspicious transactions that actually exist may be overlooked. In order to solve these problems and 
improve the effectiveness  and efficiency of financial transaction monitoring, the application of 
artificial intelligence (AI) and behavior prediction technology has become a viable solution.  
3. Application of AI Fraudulent Behaviour Prediction  
In a world where transactions and interactions take place almost entirely online, the threat of 
fraud is paramount. As more and more financial transactions take place in the digital space, controls 
should be in place to ensure security. Artificial intellig ence has proven to be an effective tool in the 
fight against fraud. Its function is based on learning from a sufficient amount of data and identifying 
patterns and biases in order to detect and prevent illegal behaviour.  
3.1. Traditional fraud detection methods  
Traditional rule -based fraud detection methods are very ineffective in toda y’s financial 
transaction environment. False positives and missed positives are the main reasons for this. Fraud 
detection through false positives is inaccurate, resulting in transactions being delayed before 
confirmation and requiring further investigation,  causing inconvenience without providing any 
benefit. Under -reporting, on the other hand, is even more damaging, as financial institutions fail to 
prevent fraudulent activity, res ulting in financial loss and reputational damage. The common 
disadvantage of both false positives and false negatives is that they rely on pre -defined rules that 
may not cover all possibilities, but cannot be modified due to their number. There is therefor e a need 
for more intelligent and flexible fraud detection methods.  
Second, data quality can negatively impact the performance of traditional fraud detection 
systems. Incomplete, incorrect or outdated data can compromise a syste m’s ability to adequately 
identify fraud patterns. Because of the volume and variety of data collected today, it is difficult to 
obtain high -quality data that can be properly interpreted. [14]However, ensuring that data sources 
are reliable and timely is critical to improving the outcomes of legacy systems. Generating high 
quality data is not easy, w hich is particularly important for organisations working with legacy 
systems and mixed data sources.  
However, with the advent of artificial intelligence and machine learning technologies, financial 
services organisations have an opportunity to overcome these challenges. Artificial intelligence and 
machine learning techniques can help process large amounts  of data quickly and in real time, identify 
subtle patterns that may indicate fraud, and adapt to new fraud strategies. Artificial intelligence and 
machine learning technologies use predictive modelling, natural language processing and anomaly 
detection te chniques to help organisations improve the accuracy and efficiency of fraud detection.  
3.2. Fraud detection with AI  
Artificial intelligence plays an important role in fraud detection, using complex algorithms to 
analyse activity, identify anomalies and spot fraud in large data sets. AI systems learn from past 
experience, which in practice means they get better at predic ting and identifying fraud over time by 
adapting to new technologies used by fraudsters. [15]This includes automated anomaly detection, 
behavioural analysis and natural language processing that can identify and evaluate trends and 
activities that may be in dicators of fraud. AI fraud detection works by observing operations, taking 
an average of normal operations, and refining judgments to distinguish between correct and 
fraudulent operations in real time. By quickly processing large amounts of data, it can a ccurately 
identify subtle fraud patterns that can cause financial damage and maintain consumer confidence. In 
addition, AI technology can be used in the broad area of transaction verification, monitoring 
transactions and their myriad distinguishing feature s, and can also identify many of the signature Preprints.org  (www.preprints.org)  |  NOT PEER-REVIEWED  |  Posted: 16 July 2024                    doi:10.20944/preprints202407.1107.v1