10 
 stably and efficiently, thereby helping financial institutions reduce potential losses and improve 
security.  
5. Conclusion  
In conclusion, this study demonstrates the significant potential of deep learning methods, 
particularly the Autoencoder algorithm, in the detection of financial fraud. Our experiments reveal 
that while traditional algorithms like the Isolation Forest can a chieve satisfactory results, deep 
learning techniques offer superior feature extraction capabilities and adaptability to complex data 
patterns. Despite some fluctuations in performance, the Autoencoder achieved a top detection 
accuracy of 33.6%, indicating  its promise for further optimization. This research underscores the 
importance of continuous experimentation and improvement in deep learning models to enhance the 
stability and efficiency of fraud detection systems, ultimately aiding financial institutio ns in 
mitigating risks and safeguarding their operations.  
Looking ahead, the application of artificial intelligence (AI) in financial transaction monitoring 
and behaviour prediction has broad prospects and will greatly enhance the safety, stability and 
efficiency of the financial system in the future. First, the application of deep learning will greatly 
improve the accuracy and effectiveness of financial fraud detection. Deep learning algorithms, such 
as autoencoders and neural networks, are capable of processing complex non -linear data to extract 
valuable feature s. Through continuous optimisation, these algorithms will have higher detection 
accuracy and real -time capability to detect anomalous behaviour more effectively and reduce the 
false positive rate. Traditional financial transaction monitoring systems are of ten slow to respond, 
and advanced AI technology will change this. The financial regulatory system of the future will be 
able to perform real -time analysis and judgement at the moment a transaction occurs, quickly 
identifying and blocking suspicious transac tions. This will not only significantly reduce the success 
rate of fraud, but also improve the security and stability of the entire financial system.  
AI technology can therefore help financial institutions to share information and data more 
efficiently and promote international cooperation. Through harmonised technical standards and data 
interfaces, AI will facilitate the exchange of information across borders, thereby enhancing the overall 
capacity of global financial regulation.  
References  
1. Shi, Y., Yuan, J., Yang, P., Wang, Y., & Chen, Z. Implementing Intelligent Predictive Models for Patient 
Disease Risk in Cloud Data Warehousing.  
2. Zhan, T., Shi, C., Shi, Y., Li, H., & Lin, Y. (2024). Optimization Techniques for Sentiment Analysis Based on 
LLM (GPT -3). arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.09770.  
3. Lin, Y., Li, A., Li, H., Shi, Y., & Zhan, X. (2024). GPU -Optimized Image Processing and Generation Based 
on Deep Learning and Computer Vision. Journal of Artificial Intelligence General science (JAIGS) ISSN: 3006 -
4023 , 5(1), 39 -49. 
4. Chen, Zhou, et al. “Application of Cloud -Driven Intelligent Medical Imaging Analysis in Disease Detection. ” 
Journal of Theory and Practice of Engineering Science 4.05 (2024): 64 -71. 
5. Wang, B., Lei, H., Shui, Z., Chen, Z., & Yang, P. (2024). Current State of Autonomous Driving Applications 
Based on Distributed Perception and Decision -Making.  
6. Jiang, W., Qian, K., Fan, C., Ding, W., & Li, Z. (2024). Applications of generative AI -based financial robot 
advisors as investment consultants. Applied and Computational Engineering, 67, 28 -33. 
7. Yang, J., Qin, H., Por, L. Y., Shaikh, Z. A., Alfarraj, O., Tolba, A., ... & Thwin, M. (2024). Optimizing diabetic 
retinopathy detection with inception -V4 and dynamic version of snow leopard optimization algorithm. 
Biomedical Signal Processing and Control,  96, 106501.  
8. Fan, C., Li, Z., Ding, W., Zhou, H., & Qian, K. Integrating Artificial Intelligence with SLAM Technology for 
Robotic Navigation and Localization in Unknown Environments.  
9. Guo, L., Li, Z., Qian, K., Ding, W., & Chen, Z. (2024). Bank Credit Risk Early Warning Model Based on 
Machine Learning Decision Trees. Journal of Economic Theory and Business Management , 1(3), 24 -30. 
10. Li, Zihan, et al. “Robot Navigation and Map Construction Based on SLAM Technology. ” (2024).  
11. Fan, C., Ding, W., Qian, K., Tan, H., & Li, Z. (2024). Cueing Flight Object Trajectory and Safety Prediction 
Based on SLAM Technology.  Journal of Theory and Practice of Engineering Science,  4(05),  Preprints.org  (www.preprints.org)  |  NOT PEER-REVIEWED  |  Posted: 16 July 2024                    doi:10.20944/preprints202407.1107.v1