3 
 uncertainty, and then increases the risk. [8]From the perspective of matching risk and return, the 
regulator should focus on not “preventing failure ”, but providing a better environment and more 
transparent disclosure rules, so that the risk -return of Internet financial investment can be more easily 
identified by investors, and the supervision should focus on making Internet finance transparent and 
legalized, and incorporated into the formal regulatory system to eliminate the mismatch between risk 
and retur n. Therefore, Internet financial regulation should pay more attention to the education and 
protection of financial consumers and investors. [9]The “twin peaks ” theory, which represents the 
new international financial regulation theory, emphasizes equal emphasis on risk regulation and 
consumer protection. Therefore, Internet financial regulation should be based on this theory from the 
beginning, focusing on corre cting limited rationality, focusing on natural person supervision, 
developing supervision, and ex erting the positive role of Internet finance on the real economy 
through supervision. Furthermore, Traditional financial regulation indirectly serves economic 
development by preventing risks, while Internet financial regulation is more direct in promoting the 
development of the real economy.  
2.2. Traditional Finance Relies on Mature Traditional Regulatory Standards and Means  
Along with the deepening of the reform of financial institutions and financial markets, Chin a’s 
financial supervision has tended to mature. On the basis of fully studying the development of the 
domestic financial industry and reasonably drawing lessons from the experience of financial 
supervision in developed countries, the three committees have fo rmed relatively mature supervision  
methods and rules.  
1. Relatively clear regulatory quantitative standards. Since traditional financial transactions 
mainly rely on the medium of financial institutions for financing and other aspects, transaction 
behaviors are more dependent on paper texts for regulation and operation. As a medium of financial 
transactions, financial institutions can collect their trading behavior and financial data information 
relatively easily, which provides conditions for regulators to study information and make decisions. 
The regulatory r ules focus on strict requirements on financial industry capital, such as the Basel 
Agreement stipulates that the capital adequacy ratio of banks shall not be less than 8% and the core 
capital adequacy ratio shall not be less than 4% [10]. In addition, with the development of the financial 
industry, the Basel Agreement has been continuously revised, and the capital adequacy standard has 
been continuously improved. Basel II includes operational risk measurement into risk capital, and 
propos es basic index metho d and internal rating method, both of which are based on quantitative 
indicators and a large amount of internal data. Basel III also put forward specific ratio requirements 
for loan -to-deposit ratio and loan -to-loan ratio, and also increased new liquidity regulatory indicators 
such as net stable financing ratio and liquidity coverage ratio.  
2. Relatively simple and fixed regulatory measures. The three major regulatory means of 
traditional financial regulation are market access, on -site inspection and off -site supervision based 
on regulatory rules. In terms of market access methods, due to the  leverage role of the financial 
industry, combined with the existence of systemic risks and systemically important financial 
institutions, traditional financial supervision has a naturally high threshold in terms of market access, 
and the formal entry and exit mechanisms are very strict. In the approval of access, the examination 
and review of senior executives, businesses and institutions is carried out. In terms of on -site 
inspection methods, in traditional financial transactions, it takes a relatively lo ng time to collect 
information, negotiate transactions, sign contracts and supervise the performance of contracts, 
resulting in large transaction costs. For the consideration of cost and income, a single transaction 
generally has a considerable amount of u nderlying capital, and banking institutions can realize 
economies of scale by using fine management. [11]On-site inspection can effectively identify this 
micro -behavior and conduct a certain compliance review, and effectively track down similar large 
funds. In terms of off -site supervision methods, the regulatory authorities have established a data 
submission  system with financial institutions, formulated a relatively complete statement and data 
system, standardized and unified the statements of traditional  financial institutions and regulatory 
authorities, and established a strict data docking audit system. Through the use of off -site information Preprints.org  (www.preprints.org)  |  NOT PEER-REVIEWED  |  Posted: 16 July 2024                    doi:10.20944/preprints202407.1107.v1