2 
 2. Related Work  
2.1. Traditional Transaction Monitoring System  
The objective of financial supervision is not only the criterion for evaluating the quality of 
financial supervision, but also the basis for regulators to take supervisory actions and the premise for 
realizing effective financial supervision. [3]The goals of financial supervision can be divided into 
general goals and specific goals. The objectives of financial regulation are threefold: to maintain 
financial security, stability and good financial order; Preventing monopolies in the financial sector  to 
mainta in financial efficiency; Protecting the interests of investors and depositors. [4]Supervision is to 
take into account the three goals of safety, efficiency and depositor s’ interests, and adjust the focus of 
supervision goals accordingly with the changes in economic and financial situations. In this regard, 
the emphasis of Internet financial regulation is different from that of traditional financial regulation.  
(1) Traditional financial regulation is based on functional regulation theory  
Traditional and Internet financial regulation, as institutional arrangements, fundamentally aim 
to correct financial market failures caused by risks, reduce these risks, and improve financial 
efficiency.  Both regulations aim to reduce transaction costs caused by economic uncertainty to the 
greatest extent. From the perspective of risk prevention, supervision must first focus on tracing the 
source of risk, so as to form the theoretical basis of supervision . The most essential risks of traditional 
finance are credit risk and high leverage risk, which arise from peopl e’s limited rationality and 
opportunism tendency. [5]Therefore, the most fundamental aspect of traditional financial regulation 
is to reduce and  correct peopl e’s limited rationality and opportunism in order to minimize financial 
uncertainty. The traditional financial threshold is high, especially the quality of investors and 
consumers involved in high -risk business is relatively high, and the more important conte nt of 
supervision is to protect the interests of the largest number of depositors through the prevention of 
credit risks. [6]To a large extent, the emergence of traditional financial supervision is due to the theory 
of financial fragility. In reality, the objects of traditional financial supervision are real various 
financial institutions, which have already possessed a huge scale and system after years of 
development. The function of these financial institutions as economic intermediaries o r capital 
intermediaries is very powerful. Therefore, the traditional financial regulation has been  based on the 
functional regulation theory from the very beginning, focusing on correcting opportunism and 
paying attention to the supervision of legal insti tutions and risk supervision. With the development 
of regulatory economics, there are still differences between functional supervision and institutional 
supervision in the academic circle, and traditional financial supervision is showing an increasingly 
diversified theoretical tendency. However, with traditional financial institutions still existing and 
thriving today, I think functional supervision theory is still the main theoretical principle that 
traditional financial supervision should follow.  
(2) Internet financial regulation is based on the new regulatory theory  
Because our country has been in the financial repression environment for a long time, Internet 
finance has carried out more aggressive regulatory arbitrage than traditional finance. Its 
development, for a long time the traditional financial system is too large  [7], small and micro 
enterprises financing difficulties and lack of investment channels, an “extra -legal” supplement,  in 
essence can even be said to be the development and extension of private finance with high -tech 
means. The essence of Internet fina nce is still a financial contractual relationship or a lending 
contractual relationship. Financial development and financial risk cannot be separated or opposed, 
but should be reflected in the matching of returns and risks. The Internet financial risk is a lso a credit 
risk in essence, especially for the business with financial leverage transactions, which is widely 
involved in traditional finance. If we pursue this source of risk, compared with traditional financial 
risks, these financial products and model s have a short time and change quickly, and there is no fixed 
routine and ready -made rules to restrict and supervise.  
However, in reality, the huge capital supply and demand market is quite attractive to subjects 
without formal financial licenses, so there is a profit -seeking behavior to circumvent regulation, 
which increases the information cost and transaction cost of t he financial market, increases the Preprints.org  (www.preprints.org)  |  NOT PEER-REVIEWED  |  Posted: 16 July 2024                    doi:10.20944/preprints202407.1107.v1