Deep Reinforcement Learning for Trading
Zihao Zhang, Stefan Zohren, and Stephen Roberts
Department of Engineering Science,
Oxford-Man Institute of Quantitative Finance, University of Oxford
Abstract
We adopt Deep Reinforcement Learning algorithms to design trading strategies
for continuous futures contracts. Both discrete and continuous action spaces are
considered and volatility scaling is incorporated to create reward functions which
scale trade positions based on market volatility. We test our algorithms on the 50
most liquid futures contracts from 2011 to 2019, and investigate how performance
varies across different asset classes including commodities, equity indices, ﬁxed
income and FX markets. We compare our algorithms against classical time series
momentum strategies, and show that our method outperforms such baseline models,
delivering positive proﬁts despite heavy transaction costs. The experiments show
that the proposed algorithms can follow large market trends without changing
positions and can also scale down, or hold, through consolidation periods.
1 Introduction
Financial trading has been a widely researched topic and a variety of methods have been proposed to
trade markets over the last few decades. These include fundamental analysis [ 16], technical analysis
[38] and algorithmic trading [ 8]. Indeed, many practitioners use a hybrid of these techniques to make
trades [ 42]. Algorithmic trading has arguably gained most recent interest and accounts for about 75%
of trading volume in the United States stock exchanges [ 8]. The advantages of algorithmic trading
are widespread, ranging from strong computing foundations, faster execution and risk diversiﬁcation.
One key component of such trading systems is a predictive signal that can lead to alpha (excess
return) and, to this end, mathematical and statistical methods are widely applied. However, due to
the low signal-to-noise ratio of ﬁnancial data and the dynamic nature of markets, the design of these
methods is non-trivial and the effectiveness of commonly derived signals varies through time.
In recent years, machine learning algorithms have gained much popularity in many areas, with notable
successes in diverse application domains including image classiﬁcation [ 25] and natural language
processing [ 11]. Similar techniques have also been applied to ﬁnancial markets in an attempt to ﬁnd
higher alpha (see [ 54,55,56,47,44,55] for a few examples using such techniques in the context
of high-frequency data). Most research focuses on regression and classiﬁcation pipelines in which
excess returns, or market movements, are predicted over some (ﬁxed) horizons. However, there is
little discussion related to transforming these predictive signals into actual trade positions (see [ 27]
for an attempt to train a deep learning model to learn positions directly). Indeed such a mapping
is non-trivial. As an example, predictive horizons are often relatively short (one day or a few days
ahead if using daily data), however large trends can persist for weeks or months with some moderate
consolidation periods. We therefore not only need a signal with good predictive power but also a
signal that can consistently produce good directional calls.
In this work, we report on Reinforcement Learning (RL) [ 45] algorithms to tackle above problems.
Instead of making predictions - followed by a trade decision based on predictions, we train our models
to directly output trade positions, bypassing the explicit forecasting step. Modern portfolio theory
[1,39,21] implies that, given a ﬁnite time horizon, an investor chooses actions to maximise some
Correspondence to: Zihao Zhang <zihao@robots.ox.ac.uk>.arXiv:1911.10107v1  [q-fin.CP]  22 Nov 2019