can still generate positive proﬁts with cost rate at 25bp. To understand how cost rates (bp) translate
into monetary values, we plot the average cost per contract at the right of Figure 2 and we can see
that 25bp represents roughly $3.5 per contract. This is a realistic cost for a retail trader to pay but
institutional traders have a different fee structure based on trading volumes and often have cheaper
cost. In any case, this shows the validity of our methods in a realistic setup.
The performance of a portfolio is generally better than the performance of an individual contract as
risks are diversiﬁed across a range of assets, so the return per risk is higher. In order to investigate
the raw quality of our methods, we investigate the performance of individual contracts. We use the
boxplots in Figure 3 to present the annualised Sharpe Ratio and average trade return per turnover
for each futures contract. Overall, these results reinforce our previous ﬁndings that RL algorithms
generally work better, and the performance of our method is not driven by a single contract that
shows superior performance, reassuring the consistency of our model.
Long Sign(R) MACD DQN PG A2C2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.00.51.0Sharpe Ratio1bp
5bp
10bp
15bp
20bp
25bp
30bp
35bp
40bp
45bp
Long Sign(R) MACD DQN PG A2C01234567Ave. Cost per contract1bp
5bp
10bp
15bp
20bp
25bp
30bp
35bp
40bp
45bp
Figure 2: Sharp Ratio ( Left ) and average cost per contract ( Right ) under different cost rates.
5 Conclusion
We adopt RL algorithms to learn trading strategies for continuous futures contracts. We discuss the
connection between modern portfolio theory and the RL reward hypothesis, and show that they are
equivalent if a linear utility function is used. Our analysis focuses three RL algorithms, namely Deep
Q-learning Network, Policy Gradients and Advantage Actor-Critic, and investigate both discrete and
continuous action spaces. We utilise features from time series momentum and technical indicators to
form state representations. In addition, volatility scaling is introduced to improve reward functions.
We test our methods on 50 liquid futures contracts from 2011 to 2019, and our results show that RL
algorithms outperform baseline models and deliver proﬁts even under heavy transaction costs.
In subsequent continuations of this work, we would like to investigate different forms of utility
functions. In practice, an investor is often risk-averse and the objective is to maximise a risk-adjusted
performance function such as the Sharpe Ratio, leading to a concave utility function. As suggested
in [20], we can resort to distributional reinforcement learning [ 6] to obtain the entire distribution
overQ(s;a)instead of the expected Q-value. Once the distribution is learned, we can choose actions
with the highest expected Q-value and the lowest standard deviation of it, maximising the Sharpe
Ratio. We can also extend our methods to portfolio optimisation by modifying the action spaces
to give weights of individual contracts in a portfolio. We can incorporate the reward functions
with mean-variance portfolio theory [ 29] to deliver a reasonable expected trade return with minimal
volatility.
Acknowledgement
The authors would like to thank Bryan Lim, Vu Nguyen, Anthony Ledford and members of Machine
Learning Research Group at the University of Oxford for their helpful comments. We are most
grateful to the Oxford-Man Institute of Quantitative Finance, who provided the Pinnacle dataset and
computing facilities.
9