expected utility of ﬁnal wealth:
E[U(WT)] =E"
U 
W0+TX
t=1Wt!#
; (1)
whereUis the utility function, WTis the ﬁnal wealth over a ﬁnite horizon TandWtrepresents
the change in wealth. The performance of the ﬁnal wealth measure depends upon sequences of
interdependent actions where optimal trading decisions do not just decide immediate trade returns
but also affect subsequent future returns. As mentioned in [ 30,40], this falls under the framework
of optimal control theory [ 24] and forms a classical sequential decision making process. If the
investor is risk-neutral, the utility function becomes linear and we only need to maximise the expected
cumulative trades returns, E(PT
t=1Wt)and we observe that the problem ﬁts exactly with the
framework of RL, the goal of which is to maximise some expected cumulative rewards via an agent
interacting with an uncertain environment. Under the RL framework, we can directly map different
market situations to trade positions and conveniently include market frictions, such as commissions,
to our reward functions, allowing trading performance to be directly optimised.
In this work, we adopt state-of-art RL algorithms to the aforementioned problem setting, including
Deep Q-learning Networks (DQN) [ 34,49], Policy Gradients (PG) [ 52] and Advantage Actor-Critic
(A2C) [ 33]. Both discrete and continuous action spaces are explored in our work, and we improve
reward functions with volatility scaling [ 37,17] to scale up trade positions while volatility is low,
and vice versa. We show the robustness and consistency of our algorithms by testing on the 50 most
liquid futures contracts [ 10] between 2011 and 2019. Our dataset consists of different asset classes
including commodities, equity indexes, ﬁxed income and FX markets. We compare our method
with classical time series momentum strategies, and our method outperforms baselines models and
generates positive returns in all sectors despite heavy transaction costs. Time series strategies work
well in trending markets, like ﬁxed income markets, however suffer losses in FX markets where
directional moves are less usual. Our experiments show that our algorithms can monetise on large
moves without changing positions and also deal with markets that are more “mean-reverting”.
Outlines The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 introduces the current
literature and Section 3 presents our methodology. In Section 4, we compare our method with baseline
algorithms and show how trading performance varies among different asset classes. A description of
dataset and training methodology is also included in this section. Section 5 concludes our ﬁndings
and discusses extensions of our work.
2 Literature Review
In this section, we review some classical trading strategies and discuss how RL has been applied
to this ﬁeld. Fundamental analysis aims to measure the intrinsic value of a security by examining
economic data so investors can compare the security’s current price with estimates to see if the
security is undervalued or overvalued. One of the established strategies is called CAN-SLIM [ 43]
and it is based on a major study of market winners from 1880 to 2009. However, a common criticism
of fundamental analysis is that the timing of enter and exit of trades is not speciﬁed. Even the markets
move towards the estimated price, a bad timing of entering the trades could lead to huge drawdowns
and such moves in account values are often not bearable to investors, shaking them out of the markets.
Technical analysis is in contrast to fundamental analysis where a security’s historical price data is
used to study price patterns. Technicians place trades based on a combination of indicators such
as the Relative Strength Index (RSI) and Bollinger Bands. However, due to the lack of analysis on
economic or market conditions, the predictability of these signals is not strong, often leading to false
breakouts.
Algorithmic trading is a more systematic approach that involves mathematical modelling and auto-
mated execution. Examples include trend-following [ 42], mean-reversion [ 9], statistical arbitrage
[8] and delta-neutral trading strategies [ 32]. We mainly review time series momentum strategies
by [37] as we benchmark our models against their algorithms. Their work developed a very robust
trading strategy by simply taking the sign of returns over the last year as a signal and demonstrated
proﬁtability for every contract considered within 58 liquid instruments over 25 years. Thenceforth,
a number of methods [ 2,4,41,27] have been proposed to enhance this strategy by estimating the
2