210 S. Alqazzaz, X. Sun, X. Yang, et al.
example, T1-weighted images are good at separating
healthy tissues in the brain while T1ce (contrast
enhanced) helps to separate tumor boundaries which
appear brighter because of the contrast agent. Edema
around tumors is detected well in T2-weighted images,
while FLAIR images are best for diﬀerentiating edema
regions from cerebrospinal ﬂuid (CSF) [3, 4].
Gliomas have complex structure and appearance.
They require accurate delineation in images. Tumor
components are often diﬀuse, with weak contrast.
Their borders are often fuzzy and hard to distinguish
from healthy tissue (white matter, gray matter, and
CSF), making them hard to segment [ 5]. All these
factors lead to time-consuming manual delineation,
which is expensive and prone to operator bias.
Automatic brain tumor segmentation using MRI
would solve these issues by providing an eﬃcient
tool for reliable diagnosis and prognosis of brain
tumors. Therefore, many researchers have considered
automated brain tumor segmentation from MRI
images.
Recently, convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
have attracted attention in object detection, seg-
mentation, and image classiﬁcation. For the BraTS
challenge, most CNN-based methods are patch-wise
models [ 5–7]. These methods take only a small region
as input to the network, which disregards the image
content and label correlations. Additionally, these
methods take a long time for training.
CNN architecture is modiﬁed in several ways
in fully convolutional networks (FCN). Speciﬁcally,
instead of making probability distribution prediction
patch-wise in CNN, FCN models predict one
probability distribution pixel-wise [ 8]. In the method
of Ref. [ 9], diﬀerent MRI modalities are stacked
together as diﬀerent input channels into deep learning
models. However, the correlation between diﬀerentMRI modalities was not explicitly considered. Toovercome this problem, we develop a feature fusion
method to select the most eﬀective information from
diﬀerent modalities. A model is proposed to deal
with multiple MRI modalities separately and then
incorporate spatial and sequential features from them
for 3D brain tumour segmentation.
In this study, we ﬁrst trained four SegNet models
with 3D data sets with Flair, T1, T1ce, and T2
modalities as input data. The outputs of each SegNet
model are four feature maps, which represent thescores of each pixel being classiﬁed as background,
edema, enhancing tumor, and necrosis. The highest
scores in the same class from the four SegNet models
are extracted and four feature maps with the highestscores are obtained. These feature maps are combined
with the pixel values of the original MRI models, and
are taken as the input to a DT classiﬁer to further
classify each pixel. Our results demonstrate that
this proposed strategy can perform fully automatic
segmentation of tumor and sub-tumor regions.
The main contributions of this paper are as follows:
•A brain tumour segmentation method that uses 3D
data information from the neighbors of the slice
in question to increase segmentation accuracy for
single mode MR images.
•Eﬀective combination of features extracted from
multi-modal MR images, maximizing the usefulinformation from diﬀerent modalities of MR
images.
•A decision tree-based segmentation method
which incorporates features and pixel intensities
from multi-modal MRI images, giving higher
segmentation accuracy than single-modal MR
images.
•Evaluation on the BraTS 2017 dataset showing
that the proposed method gives state-of-the-art
results.
2 Related work
Many methods have been investigated for medical
image analysis; promising results have been provided
by computational intelligence and machine learning
methods in medical image processing [ 10]. The
problem of brain tumour segmentation from multi-
modal MRI scans is still a challenging task, although
recently various advanced methods of automated
segmentation have been proposed to solve this task.
Here, we will review some of the relevant works for
brain tumour segmentation. For machine learning
methods other than deep learning, Gooya et al. [ 11],
Zikic et al. [ 12], and Tustison et al. [ 13] present
some typical works in this ﬁeld. Discriminative
learning techniques such as SVM, decision forests, and
conditional random ﬁelds (CRFs) have been reviewed
in Ref. [2].
One common aspect of classical discriminative
models is that their implementation is based on pre-
deﬁned features, as opposed to deep learning models