Automated brain tumor segmentation on multi-modal MR image using SegNet 219
Xianfang Sun received his Ph.D. degree
in control theory and its applications
from the Institute of Automation,
Chinese Academy of Sciences. He isa senior lecturer at Cardiff University.
His research interests include computer
vision and graphics, pattern recognition
and artificial intelligence, and system
identification and control.
Xin Yang since 2013 has been a lecturer
in medical engineering and director ofthe Medical Ultrasound and Sensors
Laboratory in the School of Engineering,
Cardiﬀ University, and adjunct professor
at Lanzhou Jiaotong University, China.He studied biomedical engineering inBeijing Jiaotong University from 2001
to 2005. He was awarded an M.Sc. degree in medical
electronics & physics at Queen Mary College, London, in
2006. He worked as CEO and CTO for two years in
Beijing BJ Device Ltd. He was awarded a Ph.D. degreein 2011 for work on Doppler ultrasound in quantifying
neovascularisation. He was a British Heart Foundation
research fellow working on Doppler ultrasound phantoms and
wall shear stress measurement at Queen’s Medical Research
Institute, University of Edinburgh. He is principal author of
8 books on electronics and microcontrollers.
Len Nokes is a professor of clinical
biomechanics, Cardiﬀ University, UK.
He holds doctorates in both engineering
and medicine and has co-authored fourtext books on biomechanics. He also
has a D.Sc. degree for his work ontrauma science. He has published over
100 scientiﬁc papers, and is a Fellow of
the Institution of Mechanical Engineers and a CharteredEngineer. He is also a Fellow of the Faculty of Sports andExercise Medicine (UK). His main research areas involve
trauma and sports biomechanics.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative
Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduc-
tion in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate
credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link
to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes
were made.
The images or other third party material in this
article are included in the article’s Creative Commonslicence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the
material. If material is not included in the article’sCreative Commons licence and your intended use is not
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted
use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the
copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
Other papers from this open access journal are available
free of charge from http://www.springer.com/journal/41095.
To submit a manuscript, please go to https://www.
editorialmanager.com/cvmj.