214 S. Alqazzaz, X. Sun, X. Yang, et al.
maps. The values of each highest activation feature
maps represent those strong features that include all
hierarchical features (at higher resolution), helping
to increase the classiﬁcation performance. To further
increase the information for classiﬁcation, a feature
vector is generated based on combination of the four
highest score maps and the pixel intensity values of
the original MRI modalities. Finally, the encoded
feature vector is applied to a DT classiﬁer to classify
each MRI image voxel into tumor and sub-tumor
parts. The reason for using DT as the classiﬁer in
this work is that it has been shown to provide high
performance for brain tumour segmentation [ 2]. The
selection process for highest feature maps and their
location in the SegNet architecture are illustrated in
Fig. 4.
3.4 SegNet Max DT
As described above, the four highest score maps are
combined with pixel intensity values and considered
as feature vectors. Then, the feature vectors are
presented to a DT classiﬁer. In this phase, themaximum number of splits or branch points isspeciﬁed to control the depth of the designed tree.Diﬀerent tree depths of DT classiﬁer were examined
and tuned on the training datasets. Optimalgeneralization and accuracy were obtained from a
tree with depth 15. 5-fold cross validation data were
used to evaluate the classiﬁcation accuracy.
3.5 Training and implementation details
The proposed algorithm was implemented using
MATLAB 2018a and run on a PC with an Intel
Core i7 CPU with 16 GB RAM using Windows 7.Our implementation was based on the MATLAB
deep learning toolbox for semantic segmentation and
its classiﬁcation learner toolbox for training the DT
classiﬁer. The whole training process for each model
took approximately 3 days on a single NVIDIA GPU
Titan XP. We updated the loss function on the
training set using stochastic gradient descent, withparameters set as follows: learning rate = 0.0001,
maximum number of epochs = 80.
4 Experiments and results
All 285 patient subjects with HGG and LGG in
the BraTS 2017 dataset were included in this study
Fig. 4 Selection process of maximum feature maps. (a) Background. (b) Edema. (c) Enhancing tumor. (d) Necrosis. (e) Maximum feature
maps.