Automated brain tumor segmentation on multi-modal MR image using SegNet 211
that automatically learn a hierarchy of increasingly
complex features directly from data, resulting in more
robust features [ 5]. Pereira et al. [ 7] used two diﬀerent
CNNs for the segmentation of LGG and HGG. The
architecture in Ref. [ 5] involves two pathways, a local
pathway that focuses on the information in a pixel’s
neighborhood, and a global pathway that captures
global contextual information from an MRI slice to
perform accurate brain tumour segmentation. A dual-stream 11-layer network with a 3D fully CRF as post-
processing was presented in Ref. [ 14]. An adapted
version of DeepMedic with residual connection
was employed for brain tumour segmentation in
Ref. [15].
Patch-wise methods contain many redundant
convolutional calculations, but only explore spatially
limited contextual features. To avoid using patches,
FCN with deconvolution layers can be used to
train an end to end and pixel to pixel CNN for
pixel-wise prediction with the whole image as input
[8]. Chang [ 16] demonstrated an algorithm that
contains FCN and CRF. Shelhamer et al. [ 8] suggested
to use skip connections to join high-level features
from deep decoding layers with appearance features
from shallow encoding layers to recover spatial
information lost during downsampling. This method
has demonstrated promising results on natural images
and is also applicable to biomedical images [ 17].
Ronneberger et al. [ 9]a n d C ¸i¸ cek et al. [ 18] used U-
Net architecture which consists of a down-sampling
path to capture contextual features and a symmetric
up-sampling path that enables accurate localization
with 3D extension. However, the depth information
is ignored by approaches based on 2D. Nevertheless,
Lai [19] used the depth information by implementing
a 3D convolution model which utilizes the correlation
between slices. A large number of parameters is
required by the 3D convolution network. Moreover,
in a small dataset, a 3D convolution network is prone
to overﬁtting.
In Refs. [ 5,20], the input data to the deep
learning methods were treated as diﬀerent modality
channels. Therefore, the correlation between them
is not well used. The correlations between diﬀerent
MRI modalities are utilized in our proposed method
by implementing 3D MRI data sets for each MRI
modality separately with a SegNet model, andcombining the feature maps of the last deconvolution
layers for each trained SegNet model with the pixel
intensity values of the original MRI models, feeding
them into a classiﬁer.
3 Approach
Our brain tumor segmentation algorithm aims tolocate the entire tumor volume and accuratelysegment the tumor into four sub-tumor parts. Our
method has four main steps: a pre-processing step to
construct 3D MRI datasets, a training step to ﬁne-tune a pretrained SegNet for each MRI modalityseparately, a post-processing step to extract fourmaximum feature maps from the SegNet models’
score maps, and a classiﬁcation step to classify each
pixel based on the maximum feature maps and the
MRI pixel values. Figure 1 shows the pipeline of our
proposed system using SegNet networks.
3.1 Data pre-processing
In our study, MRI intensity value normalization is
important to compensate for MRI artifacts, such as
motion and ﬁeld inhomogeneity, and also to allow
data from diﬀerent scanners to be processed by a
single algorithm. Therefore, we need to ensure that
the value ranges match between patients and diﬀerent
modalities to avoid initial biases of the network.
Firstly, to remove unwanted artifacts, N4ITK bias
ﬁeld correction is applied to all MRI modalities [ 21]. If
this correction is not performed in the pre-processing
step, artifacts cause high false positives, resulting
in poor performance. Figure 2 shows the eﬀects of
applying bias ﬁeld correction to an MR image. Higher
intensity values, which can lead to false positives in
the predicted output results, are observed in the ﬁrst
scan near the bottom left corner. The second scan
has better contrast near the edges after removing the
bias.
Intensity values across MRI slices have been
observed to vary greatly, so a normalization pre-
processing step is also applied in addition to bias ﬁeldcorrection so as to bring the mean intensity value and
variance close to 0 and 1, respectively. Equation (1)
shows how to compute the slice value In:
In=I−μ
σ(1)
where Iis the original intensity value of the MRI slice,
andμandσare the mean and standard deviation of
Irespectively.