Automated brain tumor segmentation on multi-modal MR image using SegNet 213
Fig. 3 (a) Architecture of the SegNet; (b) SegNet which uses max
pooling indices to up-sample the feature maps and convolve them with
a trainable decoder ﬁlter bank [22].
process, the ﬁnal SegNet model is used to create
predicted segmentation masks for tumor regions for
unidentiﬁed images. The motivation for using SegNet
networks instead of other deep learning networks
is that SegNet has a small number of parameters
and does not need high computational resources like
DeconvNet [ 23], and it is easier to train end-to-end.
Moreover, in a U-Net network [ 9], entire feature maps
in the encoders are transferred to the corresponding
up-sampling decoders and concatenated to givedecoder feature maps, which leads to high memoryrequirements, while in SegNet only pooling indices
are reused, needing less memory.
In our network architecture, the main idea used
from FCN is to change the fully connected layers
of VGG-16 into convolutional layers. This not only
helps in retaining higher resolution feature maps at
the deepest encoder outputs, but also reduces the
number of parameters in the SegNet encoder networksigniﬁcantly (from 134M to 14.7M). This enables theclassiﬁcation net to output a dense feature map which
keeps spatial information [22].
The SegNet architecture consists of a down-
sampling (encoding) path and a corresponding up-
sampling (decoding) path, followed by a ﬁnal pixel-
wise classiﬁcation layer. In the encoder path, there
are 13 convolutional layers which match the ﬁrst
13 convolutional layers in the VGG16 network.
Each encoder layer has a corresponding decoderlayer; therefore, the decoder network also has 13convolutional layers. The output of the ﬁnaldecoder layer is fed into a multi-class soft-max
classiﬁer to produce class probabilities for each pixel
independently.
The encoder path consists of ﬁve convolution blocks,
each of which is followed by a max-pooling operation
with a 2 ×2 window and stride 2 for downsampling.
Each convolution block is constructed by severallayers of 3
×3 convolution combined with batch
normalization and element-wise rectiﬁed linear non-
linearity (ReLU). There are two layers in each ofthe ﬁrst two convolution blocks, and three layersfor the next three blocks. The decoder path hasa symmetric structure to the encoder path exceptthat the max-pooling operation is replaced by an
upsampling operation. Upsampling takes the outputs
of the previous layer and the output of the max
pooling indices of the corresponding encoding layer
as input. The output of the ﬁnal decoder, which is a
high dimensional feature representation, is fed into
a soft-max classiﬁer layer, which classiﬁes each pixel
independently. See Fig. 3. Subsequently, the output
of the soft-max classiﬁer is a Kchannel image, where
Krepresents the number of desired classes, with
probability value at each pixel.
3.3 Post-processing
As described in Section 3.2, four SegNet models are
adapted and trained separately for segmentation of
brain tumors from multi-modal MR images. The
earlier layers of the SegNet models learn simple
features like circles and edges, while the deeper layerslearn complex and useful ﬁner features. The machine-
learned features in the last deconvolution layer in
each SegNet model represent four score maps, relatedto the four classiﬁcation labels (background, necrosis,edema, and enhancing tumor). The four highest score
maps are constructed from the obtained 16 feature