JANUARY 2020  |  VOL. 63  |  NO. 1  |   COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM    71review articles
network.32 The activation vectors of an 
active capsule can represent various 
semantic-aware concepts like position 
and pose of a particular object. This 
nice property makes capsule network 
more comprehensible for humans.
However, there are often trade-offs 
between prediction accuracy and inter-
pretability when constraints are direct-
ly incorporated into models. The more 
interpretable models may result in re-
duced prediction accuracy comparing 
the less interpretable ones.
Interpretable model extraction. An 
alternative is to apply interpretable 
model extraction, also referred as 
mimic learning,36 which may not have 
to sacrifice the model performance too 
much. The motivation behind mimic 
learning is to approximate a complex 
model using an easily interpretable 
model such as a decision tree, rule-
based model, or linear model. As long 
as the approximation is sufficiently 
close, the statistical properties of the 
complex model will be reflected in the 
interpretable model. Eventually, we 
obtain a model with comparable pre-
diction performance, and the behavior 
of which is much easier to understand. 
For instance, the tree ensemble model 
is transformed into a single decision 
tree.36 Moreover, a DNN is utilized to 
train a decision tree that mimics the 
input-output function captured by 
the neural network so the knowledge 
encoded in DNN is transferred to the 
decision tree.5 To avoid the overfitting 
of the decision tree, active learning is 
applied for training. These techniques 
convert the original model to a deci-
sion tree with better interpretability 
and maintain comparable predictive 
performance at the same time.
Locally interpretable models are 
usually achieved by designing more jus-
tified model architectures that could 
explain why a specific decision is made. 
Different from the globally interpre-
table models that offer a certain extent 
of transparency about what is going on 
inside a model, locally interpretable 
models provide users understandable 
rationale for a specific prediction.
A representative scheme is employ-
ing attention mechanism,4,38 which is 
widely utilized to explain predictions 
made by sequential models, for exam-
ple, recurrent neural networks (RNNs). 
Attention mechanism is advantageous in that it gives users the ability to inter-
pret which parts of the input are attend-
ed by the model through visualizing the 
attention weight matrix for individual 
predictions. Attention mechanism has 
been used to solve the problem of gen-
erating image caption.38 In this case, a 
CNN is adopted to encode an input im-
age to a vector, and an RNN with atten-
tion mechanisms is utilized to generate 
descriptions. When generating each 
word, the model changes its attention 
to reflect the relevant parts of the im-
age. The final visualization of the atten-
tion weights could tell human what the 
model is looking at when generating a 
word. Similarly, attention mechanism 
has been incorporated in machine 
translation.4 At decoding stage, the 
neural attention module added to neu-
ral machine translation (NMT) model 
assigns different weights to the hidden 
states of the decoder, which allows the 
decoder to selectively focus on different 
parts of the input sentence at each step 
of the output generation. Through visu-
alizing the attention scores, users could 
understand how words in one language 
depend on words in another language 
for correct translation.
Post-Hoc Global Explanation
Machine learning models automati-
cally learn useful patterns from a huge 
amount of training data and retain the 
learned knowledge into model struc-
tures and parameters.
Post-hoc global explanation aims to 
provide a global understanding about 
what knowledge has been acquired by 
these pretrained models and illumi-
nate the parameters or learned repre-
sentations in an intuitive manner to hu-
mans. We classify existing models into 
two categories: traditional machine 
learning and deep learning pipelines 
(see Figure 2), since we are capable of 
extracting some similar explanation 
paradigms from each category. Here, 
we introduce how to provide explana-
tion for these two types of pipelines.
Traditional machine learning expla-
nation. Traditional machine learning 
pipelines mostly rely on feature engi-
neering, which transforms raw data 
into features that better represent the 
predictive task, as shown in Figure 2. 
The features are generally interpretable 
and the role of machine learning is to 
map the representation to output. We consider a simple yet effective explana-
tion measure that is applicable to most 
of the models belonging to traditional 
pipeline, called feature importance, 
which indicates statistical contribution 
of each feature to the underlying model 
when making decisions.
Model-agnostic explanation. The 
model-agnostic feature importance is 
broadly applicable to various machine 
learning models. It treats a model as a 
black-box and does not inspect inter-
nal model parameters.
A representative approach is “per-
mutation feature importance.”1 The 
key idea is the importance of a specific 
feature to the overall performance of a 
model can be determined by calculat-
ing how the model prediction accuracy 
deviates after permuting the values of 
that feature. More specifically, given a 
pretrained model with n  features and a 
test set, the average prediction score of 
the model on the test set is p , which is 
also the baseline accuracy. We shuffle 
the values of a feature on the test set and 
compute the average prediction score of 
the model on the modified dataset.
This process is iteratively performed 
for each feature and eventually n  predic-
tion scores are obtained for n  features 
respectively. We then rank the impor-
tance of the n features according to the 
reductions of their score comparing to 
baseline accuracy p . There are several 
advantages for this approach. First, we 
do not need to normalize the values of 
the handcrafted features. Second, it can 
be generalized to nearly any machine 
learning models with handcrafted fea-
tures as input. Third, this strategy has 
been proved to be robust and efficient 
in terms of implementation.
Model-specific explanation. There 
also exists explanation methods spe-
cifically designed for different models. 
Model-specific methods usually de-
rive explanations by examining inter-
nal model structures and parameters. 
Here, we introduce how to provide fea-
ture importance for two families of ma-
chine learning models.
Generalized linear models (GLM) is 
constituted of a series of models that 
are linear combination of input fea-
tures and model parameters followed 
by feeding to some transformation 
function (often nonlinear).21 Examples 
of GLM include linear regression and 
logistic regression. The weights of a