JANUARY 2020  |  VOL. 63  |  NO. 1  |   COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM    73review articles
marks, brackets, and line lengths in a 
text. In another work, a word-level lan-
guage model is utilized to analyze the 
linguistic features encoded by individ-
ual hidden units of RNN.17 The visual-
izations illustrate that some units are 
mostly activated by certain semantic 
category, while some others could cap-
ture a particular syntactic class or de-
pendency function. More interesting-
ly, some hidden units could carry the 
activation values over to subsequent 
time steps, which explains why RNN 
can learn long-term dependencies and 
complex linguistic features.
Second, the research finds that RNN 
is able to learn hierarchical represen-
tations by inspecting representations 
at different hidden layers.28 This ob-
servation indicates that RNN repre-
sentations bear some resemblance to 
their CNN counterpart. For instance, 
a bidirectional language model is con-
structed using a multi-layer LSTM.28 
The analysis of representations at dif-
ferent layers of this model shows that 
the lower-layer representation cap-
tures context-independent syntactic 
information. In contrast, higher-layer 
LSTM representations encode context-
dependent semantic information. The 
deep contextualized representations 
can disambiguate the meanings of 
words by utilizing their context, and 
thus could be employed to perform 
tasks which require context-aware un-
derstanding of words.
Post-Hoc Local Explanation
After understanding the model glob-
ally, we zoom in to the local behavior 
of the model and provide local expla-
nations for individual predictions. Lo-
cal explanations target to identify the 
contributions of each feature in the 
input toward a specific model predic-
tion. As local methods usually attribute 
a model’s decision to its input features, 
they are also called attribution meth-
ods. Here, we first introduce model-
agnostic attribution methods and then 
discuss attribution methods specific to 
DNN-based predictions.
Model-agnostic explanation. Mod-
el-agnostic methods allow explain-
ing predictions of arbitrary machine 
learning models independent of the 
implementation. They provide a way 
to explain predictions by treating the 
models as black boxes, where explana-tions could be generated even without 
access to the internal model parame-
ters. They bring some risks at the same 
time, since we cannot guarantee the 
explanation faithfully reflects the deci-
sion-making process of a model.
Local approximation-based explana-
tion is based on the assumption the 
machine learning predictions around 
the neighborhood of a given input can 
be approximated by an interpretable 
white-box model. The interpretable 
model does not have to work well glob-
ally, but it must approximate the black-
box model well in a small neighbor-
hood near the original input. Then the 
contribution score for each feature can 
be obtained by examining the param-
eters of the white-box model.
Some studies assume the predic-
tion around the neighborhood of an 
instance could be formulated as the 
linearly weighted combination of its 
input features.30 Attribution methods 
based on this principle first sample the 
feature space in the neighborhood of 
the instance to constitute an addition-
al training set. A sparse linear model, 
such as Lasso, is then trained using the 
generated samples and labels. This ap-
proximation model works the same as 
a black-box model locally but is much 
easier to inspect. Finally, the predic-
tion of the original model can be ex-
plained by examining the weights of 
this sparse linear model instead.
Sometimes, even the local behav-
ior of a model may be extremely non-
linear, linear explanations could lead to 
poor performance. Models which could 
characterize non-linear relationship are 
thus utilized as the local approxima-
tion. For instance, a local approxima-
tion-based explanation framework can 
be constructed using if-then rules.31 
Experiments on a series of tasks show 
that this framework is effective at 
capturing nonlinear behaviors. More 
importantly, the produced rules are 
not confined merely to the instance 
being explained and often generalize 
to other instances.
Perturbation-based explanation. This 
line of work follows the philosophy that 
the contribution of a feature can be de -
termined by measuring how predic-
tion score changes when the feature is 
altered. It tries to answer the question: 
Which parts of the input, if they were not 
seen by the model, would most change Explanations could 
help examine 
whether a machine 
learning model has 
employed the true 
evidences instead 
of biases that 
widely exist among 
training data.