76    COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM   |   JANUARY 2020  |   VOL. 63  |   NO. 1review articles
prediction was made, but rather explain 
why this prediction was made instead of 
another, so as to answer questions like 
“Why Q rather than R ?” Here Q  is the 
fact that requires explanation, and R  is 
the comparing case, which could be a 
real one or virtual one. Consider, for in-
stance, a user is declined mortgage. The 
user may compare with another real 
case and raise question: “Why didn’t I 
get a mortgage when my neighborhood 
did?” On the other hand, the user may 
ask: “Why was my mortgage rejected?” 
Here is an implicit contrast case, and 
actually the user is requesting expla-
nation for a virtual case “How to get 
my mortgage loan approved?” Since it 
is compared to an event that has not 
happened, thus the desirable expla -
nation here can also be called counter-
factual explanation.37
To provide contrastive explanations 
for a model prediction, similar strat-
egy could be used for both comparisons 
mentioned earlier. We first produce 
feature importance attribution for two 
instances: not-accepted case for the 
user, has-accepted case of a neighbor 
(or would-be-accepted case of the user), 
and then compare the two attribu-
tion vectors. Note that we could resort 
to adversarial perturbation to find the 
would-be-accepted case. Besides, it is 
recommended to provide a diverse set of 
reasons, that is, to find multiple contrast 
cases, to make the explanation more in-
formative. Ultimately, we generate ex-
planations of the form: “Your mortgage 
is rejected because your income is lower 
than your neighbor’s, your credit history 
is not as strong as your neighbor’s … or 
“Your mortgage would be accepted if 
your income is raised from x  to y .”
Selective explanations. Usually, users 
do not expect an explanation can cover 
the complete cause of a decision. In-
stead, they wish the explanation could 
convey the most important informa-
tion that contributes to the decision.22 
A sparse explanation, which includes a 
minimal set of features that help justify 
the prediction is preferred, although 
incompletely. Still use the mortgage 
case for example. One good explana-
tion could be presenting users the top 
two reasons contributing to the deci-
sion, such as poor credit history or low 
income to debt ratio.
Credible explanations. Good expla-
nation might be consistent with prior equally important to assess the faithful-
ness of explanation to the original mod-
el, which is often omitted by existing 
literature. As mentioned earlier, gener-
ated explanations for a machine learn-
ing model are not always reasonable to 
humans. It is extremely difficult to tell 
whether the unexpected explanation is 
caused by misbehavior of the model or 
limitation of the explanation method. 
Therefore, better metrics to measure the 
faithfulness of explanations are needed, 
in order to complement existing evalua-
tion metrics. The degree of faithfulness 
can determine how confident we can 
trust an explanation. Nevertheless, the 
design of appropriate faithfulness met-
ric remains an open problem and de-
serves further investigation.
Discussion
We briefly introduce limitations of ex-
planation methods we have surveyed 
and then present explanation formats 
that might be more understandable 
and friendly to users.
Limitations of current explanations. 
A major limitation of existing work on 
interpretable machine learning is that 
the explanations are designed based on 
the intuition of researchers rather than 
focusing on the demands of endusers. 
Current local explanations are usually 
given in the format of feature impor-
tance vectors, which are a complete 
causal attribution and a low-level expla-
nation.23 This format would be satisfac-
tory if the explanation audiences are de-
velopers and researchers, since they can 
utilize the statistical analysis of the fea-
ture importance distribution to debug 
the models. Nevertheless, this format 
is less friendly if the explanation receiv-
ers are lay users of machine learning. 
It describes the full decision logic of a 
model, which contains a huge amount 
of redundant information and will be 
overwhelming to users. The presenta-
tion formats could be further enhanced 
to better promote user satisfaction.
Toward human-friendly explana-
tions. Based on findings in social sci-
ences and human behavioral studies,22 
we provide some directions toward 
user-oriented explanations, which 
might be more satisfying to humans as 
a means of communication.
Contrastive explanations. They are 
also referred as differential explana-
tions.22 They do not tell why a specific Model explanation 
and surprising 
artifacts are often 
two sides of  
the same coin.