JANUARY 2020  |  VOL. 63  |  NO. 1  |   COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM    69ILLUSTRATION BY PETER CROWTHER ASSOCIATESbehavior may frustrate and confuse us-
ers, making them wonder why. Even 
worse, the wrong decisions could 
cause severe consequences if the car 
is driving at highway speeds and might 
ultimately crash into the firetruck. The 
concerns about the black-box nature of 
complex models have hampered their 
further applications in our society, es-
pecially in those critical decision-mak-
ing domains like self-driving cars.
Interpretable machine learning would 
be an effective tool to mitigate these 
problems. It gives machine learning 
models the ability to explain or to pres-
ent their behaviors in understandable 
terms to humans,10 which is called 
interpretability or explainability and we use them interchangeably in this 
article. Interpretability would be an in-
dispensable part for machine learning 
models in order to better serve human 
beings and bring benefits to society. 
For end users, explanation will increase 
their trust and encourage them to 
adopt machine learning systems. From 
the perspective of machine learning 
system developers and researchers, the 
provided explanation can help them 
better understand the problem, the 
data and why a model might fail, and 
eventually increase the system safety. 
Thus, there is a growing interest among 
the academic and industrial commu-
nity in interpreting machine learning 
models and gaining insights into their working mechanisms.
Interpretable machine learning 
techniques can generally be grouped 
into two categories: intrinsic interpret-
ability and post-hoc interpretability, 
depending on the time when the inter-
pretability is obtained.23 Intrinsic inter-
pretability is achieved by constructing 
self-explanatory models which incor-
porate interpretability directly to their 
structures. The family of this category 
includes decision tree, rule-based mod-
el, linear model, attention model, and 
so on. In contrast, the post-hoc one re-
quires creating a second model to pro-
vide explanations for an existing mod-
el. The main difference between these 
two groups lies in the trade-off between