74    COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM   |   JANUARY 2020  |   VOL. 63  |   NO. 1review articles
Figure 3. Heatmap of DNN-specific local explanation. (a) original input, (b) back-propaga-
tion, (c) mask perturbation, and (d) investigation of representations.
Figure 4. Progress of interpretable ML. 
(a) Input (b) Gradient (c) Pertur bation (d) Represen tationSki Cardoonare integrated into a unified framework 
where all methods are reformulated as a 
modified gradient function.2 This unifi-
cation enables comprehensive compari-
son between different methods and fa-
cilitates effective implementation under 
modern deep-learning libraries, such as 
TensorFlow and PyTorch. Back-propa-
gation-based methods are efficient in 
terms of implementation, as they usu-
ally need a few forward and backward 
calculations. On the other hand, they 
are limited in their heuristic nature and 
may generate explanations of unsat-
isfactory quality, which are noisy and 
highlight some irrelevant features, as 
shown in Figure 3b.
Mask perturbation. The previously 
mentioned model-agnostic perturba-
tion could be computationally very 
expensive when handling an instance 
with high dimensions, since they need 
to sequentially perturb the input. In 
contrast, DNN-specific perturbation 
could be implemented efficiently 
through mask perturbation and gradi-
ent descent optimization. One repre-
sentative work formulates the pertur-
bation in an optimization framework 
to learn a perturbation mask, which 
explicitly preserves the contribution 
values of each feature.13 Note that this 
framework generally needs to impose 
various regularizations to the mask to 
produce meaningful explanation rath-
er than surprising artifacts.13 Although 
the optimization-based framework 
has drastically boosted the efficiency, 
generating an explanation still needs 
hundreds of forward and backward op-
erations. To enable more computation-
ally efficient implementation, a DNN 
model can be trained to predict the at-
tribution mask.8 Once the mask neural 
network model is obtained, it only re-
quires a single forward pass to yield at-
tribution scores for an input.
Investigation of deep representa-
tions. Either perturbation or back-
propagation-based explanations ig-
nore the deep representations of the 
DNN that might contain rich informa-
tion for interpretation. To bridge the 
gap, some studies explicitly utilize the 
deep representations of the input to 
perform attribution.
Based on the observation that deep 
CNN representations capture the high-
level content of input images as well 
as their spatial arrangement, a guided Current stage is researcher-oriented explanations. We can make it more faithful  
and accurate, which can be further utilized to promote model generalization ability,  
and then develop user-friendly explanations.
Interpretable  Mach ine Learn ing
More faithful and accurate Resear cher -oriented
explanation
Curr ent stage
Difﬁcul ty of TasksImpr ove ML g ener alizationUser-friendly
explanationits prediction? Thus, the results may 
be called counterfactual explanations. 
The perturbation is performed across 
features sequentially to determine their 
contributions and can be implemented 
in two ways: omission and occlusion. For 
omission, a feature is directly removed 
from the input, but this might be im-
practical since few models allow setting 
features as unknown. As for occlusion, 
the feature is replaced with a reference 
value, such as zero for word embeddings 
or specific gray value for image pixels. 
Nevertheless, occlusion raises a new 
concern that new evidence may be intro-
duced and that can be used by the mod-
el as a side effect.8 For instance, if we 
occlude part of an image using a green 
color and then we may provide undesir-
able evidence for the grass class. Thus, 
we should be particularly cautious when 
selecting reference values to avoid intro-
ducing extra pieces of evidence.
Model-specific explanation. There 
are also explanation approaches ex-
clusively designed for a specific type of model. Here, we introduce DNN-spe-
cific methods that treat the networks 
as white boxes and explicitly utilize the 
interior structure to derive explana-
tions. We divide them into three major 
categories: back-propagation based 
methods in a top-down manner; per-
turbation-based methods in a bottom-
up manner; and investigation of deep 
representations in intermediate layers.
Back-propagation-based methods 
calculate the gradient, or its variants, of 
a particular output with respect to the 
input using back-propagation to derive 
the contribution of features. In the sim-
plest case, we can back-propagate the 
gradient.33 The underlying hypothesis 
is that larger gradient magnitude repre-
sents a more substantial relevance of a 
feature to a prediction. Other approach-
es back-propagate different forms of 
signals to the input, such as discarding 
negative gradient values at the back-
propagation process,34 or back-propagat-
ing the relevance of the final prediction 
score to the input layer.3 These methods