72    COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM   |   JANUARY 2020  |   VOL. 63  |   NO. 1review articles
neurons detect object parts, such as 
faces and legs. Higher-layer neurons 
respond to whole objects or even 
scenes. Interestingly, the visualization 
of the last-layer neurons illustrates 
that CNN exhibits a remarkable prop-
erty to capture global structure, local 
details, and contexts of an object. Sec-
ond, a neuron could respond to differ-
ent images that are related to a seman-
tic concept, revealing the multifaceted 
nature of neurons.27 For instance, a 
face detection neuron can fire in re-
sponse to both human faces and ani-
mal faces. Note that this phenomenon 
is not confined to high-layer neurons, 
as all layers of neurons are multifaceted. 
The neurons at higher layers are more 
multifaceted than the ones at lower 
layers, indicating that higher-layer 
neurons become more invariant to 
large changes within a class of inputs, 
such as colors and poses. Third, CNN 
learns distributed code for objects.40 
Objects can be described using part-
based representations and these parts 
can be shared across different categories.
Explanation of RNN representation. 
Following numerous efforts to inter-
pret CNN, uncovering the abstract 
knowledge encoded by RNN represen-
tations (including GRUs and LSTMs) 
has also attracted increasing interest 
in recent years. Language modeling, 
which targets to predict the next token 
given its previous tokens, is usually 
utilized to analyze the representations 
learned by RNN. The studies indicate 
that RNN indeed learns useful repre-
sentations.17,18,28
First, some work examines the rep-
resentations of the last hidden layer 
of RNN and study the function of dif-
ferent units at that layer, by analyzing 
the real input tokens that maximally 
activate a unit. The studies demon-
strate that some units of RNN repre-
sentations are able to capture complex 
language characteristics, for example, 
syntax, semantics, and long-term de-
pendencies. For instance, a study ana-
lyzes the interpretability of RNN acti-
vation patterns using character-level 
language modeling.18 This work finds 
that although most of the neural units 
are difficult to find particular mean-
ings, there indeed exist certain dimen-
sions in RNN hidden representations 
that are able to focus on specific lan-
guage structures such as quotation GLM directly reflect feature impor-
tance, so users can understand how the 
model works by checking their weights 
and visualizing them. However, the 
weights may not be reliable when dif-
ferent features are not appropriately 
normalized and vary in their scale of 
measurement. Moreover, the interpret-
ability of an explanation will decrease 
when the feature dimensions become 
too large, which may be beyond the 
comprehension ability of humans.
Tree-based ensemble models, such as 
gradient boosting machines, random 
forests, and XGBoost,7 are typically 
inscrutable to humans. There are sev-
eral ways to measure the contribution 
of each feature. The first approach is 
to calculate the accuracy gain when a 
feature is used in tree branches. The 
rationale behind is that without add-
ing a new split to a branch for a fea-
ture, there may be some misclassified 
elements, while after adding the new 
branch, there are two branches and 
each one is more accurate. The second 
approach measures the feature cov-
erage, that is, calculating the relative 
quantity of observations related to a 
feature. The third approach is to count 
the number of times that a feature is 
used to split the data.
DNN representation explanation.  
DNNs, in contrast to traditional mod-
els, not only discover the mapping from 
representation to output, but also learn 
representations from raw data,15 as il-
lustrated in Figure 2. The learned deep 
representations are usually not human 
interpretable,19 hence the explanation 
for DNNs mainly focuses on under-
standing the representations captured 
by the neurons at intermediate layers of 
DNNs. Here, we introduce explanation 
methods for two major categories of 
DNN, including CNN and RNN.
Explanation of CNN representation. 
There has been a growing interest to 
understand the inscrutable representa-
tions at different layers of CNN. Among 
different strategies to understand CNN 
representations, the most effective and 
widely utilized one is through finding 
the preferred inputs for neurons at a 
specific layer. This is generally formu-
lated in the activation maximization 
(AM) framework,33 which can be for-
mulated as:
x * = argmax  fl (x)  – R (x),  (1)
 xwhere fl (x)  is the activation value of a 
neuron at layer l  for input x , and R(x)  is 
a regularizer. Starting from random 
initialization, we optimize an image to 
maximally activate a neuron. Through 
iterative optimization, the derivatives 
of the neuron activation value with re-
spect to the image is utilized to tweak 
the image. Eventually, the visualization 
of the generated image could tell what 
individual neuron is looking for in its 
receptive field. We can in fact do this 
for arbitrary neurons, ranging from 
neurons at the first layer all the way to 
the output neurons at the last layer, to 
understand what is encoded as repre-
sentations at different layers.
While the framework is simple, get-
ting it to work faces some challenges, 
among which the most significant one 
is the surprising artifact. The optimiza-
tion process may produce unrealistic 
images containing noise and high-
frequency patterns. Due to the large 
searching space for images, if without 
proper regularization, it is possible to 
produce images that satisfy the optimi-
zation objective to activate the neuron 
but are still unrecognizable. To tackle 
this problem, the optimization should 
be constrained using natural image 
priors so as to produce synthetic imag-
es that resemble natural images. Some 
researchers heuristically propose 
handcrafted priors, including total 
variation norm, α -norm, and Gauss-
ian blur. In addition, the optimiza-
tion could be regularized using stron-
ger natural image priors produced by 
a generative model, such as GAN or 
VAE, which maps codes in the latent 
space to the image spaces.25 Instead 
of directly optimizing the image, these 
methods optimize the latent space 
codes to find an image that can activate 
a given neuron. Experimental results 
have shown the priors produced by 
generative models lead to significant 
improvements in visualization.
The visualization results provide 
several interesting observations about 
CNN representations. First, the net-
work learns representations at several 
levels of abstraction, transiting from 
general to task-specific from the first 
layer to the last layer. For example, take 
the CNN trained with the ImageNet 
dataset. Lower-layer neurons detect 
small and simple patterns, such as 
object corners and textures. Mid-layer