70    COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM   |   JANUARY 2020  |   VOL. 63  |   NO. 1review articles
Figure 1. An illustration of three lines of interpretable machine learning techniques, taking 
DNN as an example.
Intrinsic Explanation
(global or local)New layer with
interpretable constraints
Post-hoc
Global ExplanationPost-hoc
Local ExplanationIn this article, we first summarize 
current progress of three lines of 
research for interpretable machine 
learning: designing inherently inter-
pretable models (including globally 
and locally), post-hoc global expla-
nation, and post-hoc local explana-
tion. We proceed by introducing ap-
plications and challenges of current 
techniques. Finally, we present limi-
tations of current explanations and 
propose directions toward more hu-
man-friendly explanations.
Inherently Interpretable Model
Intrinsic interpretability can be 
achieved by designing self-explanatory 
models that incorporate interpretabil-
ity directly into the model structures. 
These constructed interpretable mod-
els either are globally interpretable or 
could provide explanations when they 
make individual predictions.
Globally interpretable models can 
be constructed in two ways: directly 
trained from data as usual but with 
interpretability constraints and be-
ing extracted from a complex and 
opaque model.
Adding interpretability constraints.  
The interpretability of a model could 
be promoted by incorporating inter-
pretability constraints. Some repre-
sentative examples include enforcing 
sparsity terms or imposing semantic 
monotonicity constraints in classifica-
tion models.14 Here, sparsity means a 
model is encouraged to use relatively 
fewer features for prediction, while 
monotonicity enables the features to 
have monotonic relations with the 
prediction. Similarly, decision trees 
are pruned by replacing subtrees with 
leaves to encourage long and deep trees 
rather than wide and more balanced 
trees.29 These constraints make a model 
simpler and could increase the model’s 
comprehensibility by users.
Besides, more semantically mean-
ingful constraints could be added to 
a model to further improve interpret-
ability. For instance, interpretable con-
volutional neural networks (CNN) add 
a regularization loss to higher convo-
lutional layers of CNN to learn disen-
tangled representations, resulting in 
filters that could detect semantically 
meaningful natural objects.39 Another 
work combines novel neural units, 
called capsules, to construct a capsule model accuracy and explanation fidel-
ity. Inherently interpretable models 
could provide accurate and undistorted 
explanation but may sacrifice predic-
tion performance to some extent. The 
post-hoc ones are limited in their ap-
proximate nature while keeping the un-
derlying model accuracy intact.
Based on categorization noted here, 
we further differentiate two types of 
interpretability: global interpretability 
and local interpretability. Global inter-
pretability means users can under-
stand how the model works globally by 
inspecting the structures and param-
eters of a complex model, while local 
interpretability examines an individual 
prediction of a model locally, trying to 
figure out why the model makes the decision it makes. Using the DNN in 
Figure 1 as an example, global inter-
pretability is achieved by understand-
ing the representations captured by 
the neurons at an intermediate layer, 
while local interpretability is obtained 
by identifying the contributions of 
each feature in a specific input to the 
prediction made by DNN. These two 
types bring different benefits. Global 
interpretability could illuminate the 
inner working mechanisms of ma-
chine learning models and thus can in-
crease their transparency. Local inter-
pretability will help uncover the causal 
relations between a specific input and 
its corresponding model prediction. 
Those two help users trust a model and 
trust a prediction, respectively.
Figure 2. A traditional machine learning pipeline using feature engineering, and a deep 
learning pipeline using DNN-based representation learning.
Raw inp ut Feature enginee ring
 Features Traditiona l ML model Output
Raw input Output DNN- based representation learnin gTraditional machine learning
Deep learning