JANUARY 2020  |  VOL. 63  |  NO. 1  |   COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM    75review articles
feature inversion framework is pro-
posed to provide local explanations.11 
This framework inverts the representa-
tions at higher layers of CNN to a syn-
thesized image, while simultaneously 
encodes the location information of the 
target object in a mask. Decomposition 
is another perspective to take advan-
tage of deep DNN representations. For 
instance, through modeling the infor-
mation-flowing process of the hidden 
representation vectors in RNN models, 
the RNN prediction is decomposed into 
additive contribution of each word in 
the input text.12 The decomposition re-
sult could quantify the contribution of 
each individual word to a RNN predic-
tion. These two explanation paradigms 
achieve promising results on a variety 
of DNN architectures, indicating the 
intermediate information indeed con-
tributes significantly to the attribution. 
Furthermore, deep representations 
serve as a strong regularizer, increasing 
the possibility the explanations faith-
fully characterize the behaviors of DNN 
under normal operating conditions. 
Thus, it reduces the risks of generating 
surprising artifacts and leads to more 
meaningful explanations.
Applications
Interpretable machine learning has 
numerous applications. We introduce 
three representative ones: model vali-
dation, model debugging, and knowl-
edge discovery.
Model validation. Explanations 
could help examine whether a machine 
learning model has employed the true 
evidences instead of biases that widely 
exist among training data. A post-hoc at-
tribution approach, for instance, analyz-
es three question answering models.24 
The attribution heatmaps show these 
models often ignore important parts 
of the questions and rely on irrelevant 
words to make decisions. They further 
indicate the weakness of the models is 
caused by the inadequacies of training 
data. Possible solutions to fix this prob-
lem include modifying training data or 
introducing inductive bias when train-
ing the model. More seriously, machine 
learning models may rely on gender and 
ethnic biases to make decisions.9 Inter-
pretability could be exploited to iden-
tify whether models have utilized these 
biases to ensure models do not violate 
ethical and legal requirements.Model debugging. Explanations also 
can be employed to debug and ana-
lyze the misbehavior of models when 
models give wrong and unexpected 
predictions. A representative example 
is adversarial learning.26 Recent work 
demonstrated that machine learning 
models, such as DNNs, can be guided 
into making erroneous predictions 
with high confidence, when process-
ing accidentally or deliberately crafted 
inputs.20,26 However, these inputs are 
quite easy to be recognized by humans. 
In this case, explanation facilitates hu-
mans to identify the possible model de-
ficiencies and analyze why these models 
may fail. More importantly, we may fur-
ther take advantage of human knowl-
edge to figure out possible solutions to 
promote the performances and reason-
ability of models.
Knowledge discovery. The derived ex-
planations also allow humans to obtain 
new insights from machine learning 
model through comprehending their 
decision-making process. With expla-
nation, the area experts and the end 
users could provide realistic feedbacks. 
Eventually, new science and new knowl-
edge, which are originally hidden in the 
data, could be extracted. For instance, 
a rule-based interpretable model has 
been utilized to predict the mortality 
risk for patients with pneumonia.6 One 
of the rules from the model suggests 
having asthma could lower a patient’s 
risk of dying from pneumonia. It turns 
out to be true since patients with asthma 
were given more aggressive treatments, 
which led to better outcomes.
Research Challenges
Despite recent progress in interpre-
table machine learning, there are 
still some urgent challenges, espe-
cially on explanation method design 
as well as evaluation.
Explanation method design. The 
first challenge is related to the method 
design, especially for post-hoc expla-
nation. We argue that an explanation 
method should be restricted to truly 
reflect the model behavior under nor-
mal operation conditions. This criteri-
on has two meanings. Firstly, the ex-
planations should be faithful to the 
mechanism of the underlying machine 
learning model.12 Post-hoc explana-
tion methods propose to approximate 
the behavior of models. Sometimes, the approximation is not sufficiently 
accurate, and the explanation may fail 
to precisely reflect the actual opera-
tion status of the original model. For 
instance, an explanation method may 
give an explanation that makes sense 
to humans, while the machine learn-
ing model works in an entirely differ -
ent way. Second, even when explana-
tions are of high fidelity to the 
underlying models, they may fail to 
represent the model behavior under 
normal conditions. Model explana-
tion and surprising artifacts are often 
two sides of the same coin. The expla-
nation process could generate exam-
ples that are out of distribution from 
the statistics in the training dataset, 
including nonsensical inputs and adver-
sarial examples,16 which are beyond 
the capability of current machine 
learning models. Without careful 
design, both global and local explana-
tions may trigger the artifacts of ma-
chine learning models, rather than 
produce meaningful explanations.
Explanation method evaluation. The 
second challenge involves the method 
evaluation. We introduce below the 
evaluation challenges for intrinsic ex-
planation and post-hoc explanation.
The challenge for intrinsic explana-
tion mainly lies in how to quantify the 
interpretability. There are broad sets of 
interpretable models designed accord-
ing to distinct principles and have vari-
ous forms of implementations. Take 
the recommender system as an ex-
ample, both interpretable latent topic 
model and attention mechanism could 
provide some extent of interpretability. 
Nevertheless, how can we compare the 
interpretability between globally inter-
pretable model and locally interpreta-
ble model? There is still no consensus 
on what interpretability means and 
how to measure the interpretability. 
Finale and Been propose three types 
of metrics: application-grounded met-
rics, human-grounded metrics, and 
functionally grounded metrics.10 These 
metrics are complementary to each 
other and bring their own pros and 
cons regarding the degree of validity 
and the cost to perform evaluations. 
Adopting what metrics heavily de-
pends on the tasks so as to make more 
informed evaluations.
For post-hoc explanation, compar-
ing to evaluate its interpretability, it is