6 Belarbi, Khan, Carnelli, Spyridopoulos
Remove NaN, Inf,
DuplicatesData Cleaning
SMOTE +
RandomUnderSamplerClass ImbalanceData Pre-Processing
Quantile T ransformerData StandardisationPCA transformationDimensionality  Reduction
CICIDS 2017  
dataset DBN modelOptimal
ParametersModel T raining
Classification
using DBNResultsModel Detection
Fig. 2: High-level architecture of our DBN-based NIDS
2.2 Deep Belief Network
A DBN is a deep architecture of multiple stacks of RBMs sequentially connected
as shown in Fig. 1b. Each RBM model performs a non-linear transformation on
its input vectors and produces outputs vectors that will serve as input for the
next RBM model in the sequence. Except for the rst and nal layers of the
DBN, every layer serves as a hidden layer to the nodes that come before and
as a visible/input layer to the nodes that comes after. DBNs can be used in
both unsupervised learning for generating images and in supervised learning for
classication [24]. DBNs are pre-trained layer by layer and ne-tuned using the
back-propagation technique.
3 Methodology
In this paper, we aim to evaluate DBNs for network intrusion detection and
address the issue of high-class imbalance in network trac datasets. Fig. 2 il-
lustrates the high level architecture of our approach. In the next sections we
present and analyse the key processes in our architecture.
3.1 Training Data Pre-Processing
We split the dataset into training, validation, and testing sets. The training set is
used to train the model; the model learns the mapping function from this data.
The validation set is used to perform the initial testing and tuning of the model,
while the testing set is used to evaluate the model's performance. In datasets
with high-class imbalance (as is generally observed in IDS datasets), a stratied
split of the data is very important allowing a fairer assessment of the model's
performance [14]. Stratied data splitting preserves the proportion of samples
for each target class essentially ensuring that enough samples of the minority
class are included in the training set.
Class Imbalance: As highlighted above, IDS datasets generally suer from
higher class imbalance compared to datasets from other domains. For example,
datasets such as NSL-KDD and CICIDS2017 have 95% and 90% benign sam-
ples respectively, with the rest containing dierent types of attacks. This can
fundamentally be attributed to the nature of these attacks, even in real-world
deployments where the majority of the network trac is expected to be benign