An Intrusion Detection System based on Deep Belief Networks 3
in the under analysis system. In most cases, they are separate devices attached
to the network gateway. Depending on the application and the related privacy
policy, they may collect and analyse only the headers of the network trac
packets or require access to the packet payload as well [19]. Our work focuses on
the pre-processing, the feature extraction/selection and the decision engine for
the implementation of NIDS. Our NIDS model relies on the CICIDS2017 dataset
[26], which was generated by analysing full-packet network trac. However, the
extracted data and our generated features do not rely on the payload of the
network packets nor on the source/destination IP address and port number.
Therefore, our model preserves user privacy to an extent. Nevertheless, user
privacy largely depends on the way data are captured on the network, which is
outside the scope of our research.
Various machine learning methodologies have been researched for the devel-
opment of NIDS [4,13,17]. Among these, Support Vector Machines (SVMs) have
been one of the most commonly used [7,11,12]. Researchers in [7] combined SVMs
with ensemble learning to increase the generalisation ability of the model and im-
prove its performance on the unknown data samples. However, both the Fuzzy-C
Means (FCM) clustering method and the k-fold cross validation method used to
train and test the nal SVM can be problematic when applied to network trac
time series datasets. A similar issue is evident in other current SVM-based NIDS
works [11]. Additionally, research conducted in [3] demonstrated that SVMs can
take a signicantly longer time to classify unseen data.
Recent work has demonstrated that deep learning techniques are quite e-
cient in identifying cyber-attacks on networks [27]. In [31], the authors proposed
a deep learning approach for intrusion detection using Recurrent Neural Net-
works (RNNs). The proposed RNN-IDS eectively recognised the type of intru-
sion with a higher accuracy and detection rate than traditional ML-based IDS in
both binary and multi-class classication. However, it performed poorly against
the minority classes in multi-class classication, a common issue in cyber-security
datasets. In a similar work [21], it was demonstrated that an ensemble of RNNs
can perform binary classication with 94% accuracy within the rst 5 seconds
of execution. However, no discussion was provided by the authors around the
performance of the approach against the minority classes of imbalanced datasets.
In [22], the authors implemented and tested four classiers for Distributed
Denial Of Service (DDoS) attack detection using deep learning models such as
MLP, 1D-Convolutional Neural Network (CNN), LSTM and 1D-CNN+LSTM.
The models were built based on the CICIDS2017 dataset [26]. The dataset was
balanced by using the duplicating method. The experimental results demon-
strated that the CNN+LSTM performed better than the rest of the deep learning
models achieving an accuracy of 97 :16%.
The researchers in [8] presented a deep learning detection system for DDoS
attacks, called LUCID. LUCID is a CNN-based IDS for binary classication of
DDoS attacks. The proposed approach can be used in online resource-constrained
environments thanks to its ability to ensure low processing overhead and attack