An Intrusion Detection System based on Deep Belief Networks 7
in nature. High-class imbalance in datasets introduces bias in favour of the ma-
jority class (benign), which makes the classication of the minority classes very
challenging. There are multiple methods introduced in the literature that can
handle such class imbalance. We evaluate the following methods in this paper:
Under-sampling and Over-sampling: Under-sampling methods re-sample the
majority class by removing some of the instances. Typically, a random under-
sampler is employed in which the majority class samples are removed at ran-
dom. Over-sampling methods on the other hand re-sample the minority classes
by duplicating or creating new articial instances with algorithms such as the
Synthetic Minority Over-sampling Technique (SMOTE) [6].
Class Weight Strategy: Models could consider the underrepresented classes
without re-sampling the training set by adding weights to the loss function of
the algorithm [28]. The class weight strategy penalises the wrong classication of
the minority classes more than the misclassication of the majority class. Hence,
each class will have equal importance on gradient updates, on average, regardless
of the number of samples.
Sample Weight Strategy: Another method consists of associating a weight
to each training sample where the weight is computed as described above. In
this strategy, the dataset is re-balanced by ensuring that each batch of data is
proportionally distributed.
Data Standardisation: IDS datasets are sometimes high dimensional in
nature (e.g. CICIDS2017 dataset has 78 features). In the case of such higher-
dimensional datasets without any form of normalization, machine learning mod-
els in general do not optimise very well or take much longer to train. Standar-
dising the input variables to overcome this issue can become skewed or biased,
due to the large number of outliers in the highly imbalanced security datasets.
Dropping outliers may help, however, it is not recommended since there is a risk
of losing essential information required for correctly classifying attacks. There
are dierent methods to overcome this problem by using statistics that are ro-
bust to outliers. Unlike other scalers, robust scaler and quantile transformation
methods are not in
uenced by the impact of marginal outliers (because they are
based on percentiles and quantiles respectively). In robust scaling, the median of
a given feature is subtracted from values and divided by the interquartile range.
The resulting range is larger than the other scalers. The quantile transformation
is another standardization method that is robust to outliers. This method esti-
mates the cumulative distribution function of the input variables and transforms
the values to a uniform distribution [0, 1]. Then, the obtained values are mapped
to the desired distribution using the associated quantile function.
Dimensionality Reduction: One of the most important steps in typical
machine learning toolchains is dimensionality reduction. This can be achieved
through feature selection or other methods such as Principal Components Anal-
ysis (PCA). PCA is a data analysis technique that transforms the possible cor-
related features set to uncorrelated features set. It can be used to reduce the
dimensionality feature space by ignoring the components containing the least
variance of the original feature space.