4 Belarbi, Khan, Carnelli, Spyridopoulos
visible layer hidden layer 
b1 b2 bmc1 c2 c3 cn
v1 v2 vmh1 h2 h3 hn
wmn w11w1n
(a) RBM
a1
a2
a3b1
b2
b3
b4k1
k2
k3
k4l1
l2
l3
l4nk
nv
Input
NodesHidden
Layer 1Hidden
Layer kHidden
Layer lOutput
NodesRBM n°1RBM n°kRBM n° l
LR 
Classifier (b) DBN
Fig. 1: Algorithm structure
detection time. The evaluation results showed that the CNN-based IDS recog-
nises DDoS attack on the CICIDS2017 dataset with an accuracy of 99 :7%.
The authors in [9] focused on real time detection of malicious trac in large-
scale high-throughput networks. The proposed approach, named Whisper, lever-
ages frequency domain analysis to extract and analyse sequential information of
the network trac. Whisper can eectively detect 42 sophisticated attacks from
the WIDE MAWI dataset in high throughput with at least 90% detection accu-
racy. Even though our work does not focus on large-scale networks, combining
it with frequency domain analysis is an interesting concept we would like to
explore in future work.
Researchers in [29] used an RBM to extract fundamental features from the
trac data and then train an SVM classier. This approach was able to shorten
the training time whilst preserving performance of the classier. In a similar
work [20], a NIDS based on deep learning was built using the KDD CUP'99
dataset. The authors used an RBM to extract higher-level features from the in-
put data followed by a back-propagation neural network to classify intrusions.
The suggested model showed signicant improvement in accuracy over tradi-
tional ML-based NIDS. Finally, a system that classies network intrusions using
DBNs (a stack of RBMs) was implemented in [2]. In that work, the DBN-IDS
achieved an accuracy of around 97 :5% using 40% of the dataset in the training
process. However, the evaluation metrics were only limited to accuracy, with no
discussion around recall and precision. The proven ability of RBMs to improve
the performance of existing classiers, along with the lack of an in-depth analysis
of DBNs as NIDS and the limited work on tackling imbalanced cyber-security
datasets, inspired the research presented in this paper.
2.1 Restricted Boltzmann Machines
RBMs are Energy-Based Models (EBMs) that have been largely used for several
tasks such as feature extraction, feature reduction and collaborative ltering