10 Belarbi, Khan, Carnelli, Spyridopoulos
Table 2: Model design and parameters.
(a) DBN
Parameter Pre-training Fine-tuning
Epochs 10 30
Learning rate 0.1 0.001
Batch size 64 128
Momentum 0.9 -
Optimiser SGD Adam
Loss function - cross-entropy
Gibbs step 1 step -
Weight init. Xavier initialiser -
Bias init. Zeros (0) -(b) MLP
Parameter
Epochs 10
Learning rate 0.02
Batch size 64
Momentum 0.9
Weight decay -
Optimiser SGD
Loss function cross-entropy
to represent the number of input features. After ne-tuning, two hidden layers
with 64 nodes each were set and the ReLU activation function was used in the
hidden layers. Six nodes were used in the output layer, each node representing
one class. Finally, the Soft-Max function was used in the output layer to perform
a multi-class classication.
Fig. 3b shows the architecture of the implemented DBN. After ne-tuning,
ve RBMs are stacked with (49, 128), (128, 256), (256, 128), (128, 128), and
(128, 64) visible/hidden nodes set per RBM respectively. The output from the
last RBM is connected to a fully connected layer with 6 nodes for multi-class
classication using the Softmax function. The training parameters of the DBN
and MLP are shown in Table 2.
4.3 Results
We compare the performance of the dierent class balancing techniques using
the evaluation metrics dened in Section 3.2.
Fig. 4 shows the F1-score, precision, and recall that the DBN-based NIDS
achieved for various class balancing techniques. The model has a high precision
and recall, thus a high F1-score, for the \Benigh", \Brute Force", \DoS/DDoS",
and \PortScan" classes. However, for the \Web Attack" and \Botnet" classes,
either high recall and low precision, or vice versa is observed. It may not always
be possible to have high values for both precision and recall. Hence, a trade-
o between the precision and the recall is required. In the context of cyber-
security, it is important to be able to detect all the malicious activities on the
network (high recall). However, it is less severe if few false alarms are raised (low
precision). Fig. 4 shows that the combination of SMOTE and random under-
sampler achieved the best results. The recall value of every class is at least
equal to 99%, which means that most of the attacks are successfully detected.
Moreover, this method has the best precision for the Botnet class in comparison
to the other class balancing techniques.