An Intrusion Detection System based on Deep
Belief Networks
Othmane Belarbi1, Aftab Khan *1, Pietro Carnelli1, and Theodoros
Spyridopoulos2
1Toshiba Europe Ltd., Bristol Research & Innovation Laboratory, Bristol, UK
fothmane.belarbi, aftab.khan, pietro.carnelli g@toshiba-bril.com
2Cardi University, School of Computer Science & Informatics, Cardi, UK
spyridopoulost@cardiff.ac.uk
Abstract. The rapid growth of connected devices has led to the prolif-
eration of novel cyber-security threats known as zero-day attacks. Tradi-
tional behaviour-based Intrusion Detection Systems (IDSs) rely on Deep
Neural Networks (DNNs) to detect these attacks. The quality of the
dataset used to train the DNNs plays a critical role in the detection per-
formance, with underrepresented samples causing poor performances.
In this paper, we develop and evaluate the performance of Deep Belief
Networks (DBNs) on detecting cyber-attacks within a network of con-
nected devices. The CICIDS2017 dataset was used to train and evaluate
the performance of our proposed DBN approach. Several class balancing
techniques were applied and evaluated. Lastly, we compare our approach
against a conventional Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) model and the ex-
isting state-of-the-art. Our proposed DBN approach shows competitive
and promising results, with signicant performance improvement on the
detection of attacks underrepresented in the training dataset.
Keywords: Network Intrusion Detection System ·Deep Learning ·Deep
Belief Networks ·Class Balancing
1 Introduction
Traditional Intrusion Detection Systems (IDSs) are signature-based, relying on
existing signatures of known attacks. They are designed to detect single attacks
or families of attacks based on their particular characteristics. However, the vast
amount of data that needs to be daily processed to develop new signatures ren-
ders their timely generation a challenging task. Furthermore, the generation of
signatures for complex attacks that have evolved from previously known threats
is not straightforward and requires additional eort [32].
Behaviour analysis techniques have also been explored by researchers to de-
tect intrusions [32]. Most of these systems use machine learning techniques to
model system behaviour and detect malicious activity. Compared to signature-
based IDSs, machine learning techniques can detect large families of attack
variants regardless of their complexity. Typical machine learning techniques forarXiv:2207.02117v1  [cs.CR]  5 Jul 2022