2 Belarbi, Khan, Carnelli, Spyridopoulos
classication are used to train models of malicious behaviour based on existing
labelled datasets of system activity [1,18]. Classication can be binary (i.e. nor-
mal or malicious) or multi-class. In multi-class classication, the model can also
detect the type of attack based on the classes/labels in the training set.
The quality of the dataset plays a critical role in the detection performance of
the trained IDS model. When a type of attack is underrepresented in the dataset,
typical in IDS datasets, the resulting model performs poorly on the detection
of attack variants that belong to the infrequent attack type. Several attempts
have been proposed to mitigate the issues caused by imbalanced IDS datasets,
focusing mainly on the data sampling and class balancing techniques [25].
In this paper, we propose a multi-class classication Network Intrusion De-
tection System (NIDS) based on Deep Belief Networks (DBNs)3. DBN is a gen-
erative graphical model formed by stacking multiple Restricted Boltzmann Ma-
chines (RBMs). It can identify and learn high-dimensional representations. A
DBN is rst pre-trained in an unsupervised way by using a greedy layer-by-layer
learning algorithm and then ne-tuned using the back-propagation technique
in a supervised manner. As shown in our experimental results, this two-stage
training process improves the detection performance against infrequent attack
samples whilst retaining a high performance against the rest of the attacks.
This paper's contributions can be summarised as follows:
1. We demonstrate that our DBN-based NIDS outperforms MLP-based NIDSs,
especially when there is a small number of attack samples in the dataset.
2. We conducted a series of class balancing experiments on the highly imbal-
anced CICIDS2017 dataset [26], which includes benign network trac and
twelve attacks. Our experimental results demonstrate that our class balanc-
ing approach improves the detection performance in terms of F1-score.
3. The classication results of our NIDS, after applying our class balancing
approach, are compared against the state-of-the-art. Our proposed method
demonstrates signicant improvement in F1-score from 0.873 to 0.94.
The rest of the paper is organised as follows. In Section 2, we present recent
related work on IDSs and DBNs. Section 3 describes the proposed methodology
for the DBN-based NIDS. In Section 4, we analyse the pre-processing approach
we followed on the CICIDS2017 dataset and the model architecture we used,
and report the performance results of the study comparing them against the
state-of-the-art. Finally, we conclude the paper and present pathways for future
work in Section 5.
2 Related Work
In general, all ML-based IDSs comprise multiple components including data
collection, pre-processing, feature extraction/selection and decision engine [5].
NIDS rely on capturing and analysing inbound and outbound network trac
3https://github.com/othmbela/dbn-based-nids