IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. XX, NO. XX 1
Local Differential Privacy for Deep Learning
Pathum Chamikara Mahawaga Arachchige, Peter Bertok, Ibrahim Khalil, Dongxi Liu, Seyit Camtepe,
and Mohammed Atiquzzaman
The published article can be found at
https://doi.org/10.1109/JIOT.2019.2952146
Abstract —The internet of things (IoT) is transforming major
industries including but not limited to healthcare, agriculture,
ﬁnance, energy, and transportation. IoT platforms are contin-
ually improving with innovations such as the amalgamation
of software-deﬁned networks (SDN) and network function vir-
tualization (NFV) in the edge-cloud interplay. Deep learning
(DL) is becoming popular due to its remarkable accuracy when
trained with a massive amount of data, such as generated by
IoT. However, DL algorithms tend to leak privacy when trained
on highly sensitive crowd-sourced data such as medical data.
Existing privacy-preserving DL algorithms rely on the traditional
server-centric approaches requiring high processing powers. We
propose a new local differentially private (LDP) algorithm named
LATENT that redesigns the training process. LATENT enables
a data owner to add a randomization layer before data leave
the data owners’ devices and reach a potentially untrusted
machine learning service. This feature is achieved by splitting the
architecture of a convolutional neural network (CNN) into three
layers: (1) convolutional module, (2) randomization module, and
(3) fully connected module. Hence, the randomization module
can operate as an NFV privacy preservation service in an SDN-
controlled NFV , making LATENT more practical for IoT-driven
cloud-based environments compared to existing approaches. The
randomization module employs a newly proposed LDP protocol
named utility enhancing randomization, which allows LATENT
to maintain high utility compared to existing LDP protocols.
Our experimental evaluation of LATENT on convolutional deep
neural networks demonstrates excellent accuracy (e.g. 91%-
96%) with high model quality even under low privacy budgets
(e.g."=0:5).
Index Terms —Data privacy, deep learning, differential privacy,
local differential privacy
I. I NTRODUCTION
THE internet of things (IoT) has become one of the
essential assets that transform many industries, such as
oil and gas, healthcare, agriculture, ﬁnance, and transportation.
The production of a large amount of IoT data has led to
the advancement of different technologies, such as big data
Manuscript received August 31, 2019; revised xx, xx; accepted xx, xx. Date
of publication xx, xx; date of current version xx, xx.
M.A.P. Chamikara is with the department of Computer Science and
Software Engineering at the School of Science, RMIT University, Australia.
He is also with CSIRO Data61, Melbourne, Australia.
E-mail: pathumchamikara.mahawagaarachchige@rmit.edu.au
P. Bertok and I. Khalil are with the department of Computer Science and
Software Engineering at the School of Science, RMIT University, Melbourne,
Australia.
D. Liu and S. Camtepe are with CSIRO Data61, Sydney, Australia.
M. Atiquzzaman is with the School of Computer Science at the University
of Oklahoma.
Copyright c
20xx IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted.
However, permission to use this material for any other purposes must be
obtained from the IEEE by sending a request to pubs-permissions@ieee.org.analytics and machine learning (ML), and has opened up
new opportunities. The underlying technologies of IoT are
continuously improving to address complex heterogeneity and
to improve programmable ﬂexibility. Network infrastructural
improvements, such as the amalgamation of software-deﬁned
networks (SDN) and network function virtualization (NFV) in
the edge-cloud interplay, are promising better quality of ser-
vice (QoS) for complex IoT-driven applications. Such environ-
ments can be fully utilised using ML to generate efﬁcient and
advanced analytics. However, the server-centric architectures
employed by many ML algorithms limits their integration into
distributed environments such as SDN-controlled NFV .
Compared to traditional machine learning approaches, deep
learning (DL) shows remarkable success in addressing com-
plex problems such as image classiﬁcation, natural language
processing, and speech recognition. DL models are often
trained on sensitive crowd-sourced data such as personal im-
ages, health records, and ﬁnancial records. When DL models
are trained on massive databases containing sensitive data,
they tend to expose private information [1], [2]. With the
advancement of distributed, cloud-based machine learning
environments such as those offered by Google and Amazon
[3], [4], more users may become vulnerable to such attacks.
Trusting these environments, users may feed their data to
train the models and obtain white-box or black-box access
to these models without being concerned about the actual
training process. However, an adversary can easily implement
malicious algorithms and offer them as part of the training
process. Malicious algorithms may memorize the sensitive
user information as part of the trained models. Adversaries can
later extract and approximate the memorized information, and
thereby obtain information about the users and breach their
privacy [5]. Privacy inference attacks, such as membership
inference, show the vulnerability of deep learning models
trained on sensitive data even when they are released as black-
box models [2]. Another example that shows the weakness of
trained ML models is model inversion attacks that recover
images from a facial recognition system [6]. It is essential
that machine learning as a service employs sufﬁcient privacy-
preserving mechanisms to limit privacy leaks of trained DL
models. It is also essential that these privacy-preserving ap-
proaches for DL can be used for IoT based applications such
as smart healthcare, IIoT, and Industry 4.0.
In this paper, we examine the privacy issues of deep learning
and develop a distributed privacy-preserving mechanism using
differential privacy (DP) to control and limit privacy leaks in
deep learning. DP constitutes a robust framework guaranteeing
strong levels of privacy [7]. The existing benchmark privacy-
preserving approaches for deep learning are based on global
differential privacy (GDP) [1], [8]. However, we chose localarXiv:1908.02997v3  [cs.LG]  9 Nov 2019