IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. XX, NO. XX 10
batch size of 32 using the Adadelta optimization algorithm.
d) DPCNN for CIFAR-10: The right-hand side ﬁgure of
Fig. 8 represents the DPCNN for the CIFAR-10 dataset. The
DPCNN model creation follows the same approach explained
under the model creation process for the MNIST dataset.
However, we increased the resolution of the images to 56 56
to enhance the features. As a result of that, the input layer
(layer 1) was customized to accept 56 56, 3 channel input
images. We do not use dropouts in the convolutional module
for reasons explained in Section III-A. In the experiments with
the DPCNN model for the CIFAR-10 dataset, we maintained
a ﬁxed size of 10 bits to represent each output of the ﬂattening
layer. The 10 bits are composed of 2 bits for the whole number,
7 bits for the fraction and 1 bit for the sign.
2) Hyperparameter tuning and regularization: As ex-
plained in Section III-A, we conducted the training only on
the FC module. Therefore, we apply hyperparameter tuning
and regularization only on the FC module. Given the number
of possible values for each hyperparameter, the number of
test cases can become large, and it may entail a substantial
computational cost with exponential time. Therefore, it can be
imperative to use insights such as used by [1] to minimize
the number of hyperparameter settings that need to be tested.
Since LATENT does not change the internal parameters of the
FC module, the architectural modiﬁcations necessary can be
thought of as an independent procedure that can be common in
any ANN training process. Consequently, we tested different
combinations for percentage dropouts, batch sizes, activation
functions, number of neurons, optimizers, number of epochs,
for the hyperparameter tuning process as given in Table I.
The values used for the hyperparameters during the HPT
processes with each dataset (MNIST and CIFAR-10) are given
in Table I. We preferred higher number of neurons and epochs
for CIFAR-10 due to its complexity compared to MNIST.
During the hyperparameter tuning process, the probability of
preserving the true value of an original bit ( p) was set to 1,
which corresponds to the nonprivate state of LATENT. When
p=1, the binary feature vectors will not be randomized, and
the model will result in greater accuracy than when p<1. Due
to the enlarged feature space compared to the conventional 1-
D output of the ﬂattening layer, the input features will have
more representative properties. These properties will allow
the proposed architecture of CNN to generate better accuracy
than that of the original CNN architecture without LATENT.
We generated the test cases using combinations of parameter
values. We applied k-fold cross-validation (k=10) on each
test case to derive a fair set of accuracy results. Since the
search space is large, we divided the list of test cases into
nine groups based on the combinations of the optimizers and
the activation function. The best parameter values returned
for each dataset are colored in red in Table I. Next, we used
the best parameters returned by the tuning process to produce
differentially private models (for MNIST and CIFAR-10) with
the best performance. We used the ﬁnal DPCNN models of the
hyperparameter tuning process to carry out further experiments
and analyses.
(a) FC module training with =5
 (b) FC module training with =6
(c) FC module training with =7
 (d) FC module training with =8
Fig. 9: The model convergence of the FC module for the
MNIST dataset (under "=0:5and the chosen hyper-
parameters which are red-colored in Table I for MNIST) under
differentvalues (randomization levels)
84%86%88%90%92%94%96%98%100%
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 910accuracy
privacy budget ( 𐐩)MNIST (Training)
MNIST (Testing)
CIFAR-10 (Training)
CIFAR-10 (Testing)
Fig. 10: Change of accuracy of LATENT against "
3) Image augmentation to improve robustness of the
DPCNN trained using CIFAR-10 : Although we could im-
prove the accuracy of the DPCNN for CIFAR-10 using hy-
perparameter tuning, the model was still not performing well
and tended to overﬁt. To improve the model robustness, we
applied image augmentation and generated 150,000 additional
augmented images using the 50,000 training input images.
Each augmented image was generated by applying a random
horizontal shift of a 0.1 fraction of the total width, a random
vertical shift of a 0.1 fraction of the total height, a random
rotation of 10 degrees, and a random horizontal ﬂip, on the
original input images. After introducing the new augmented
images, the DPFC module stopped overﬁtting and started
generating a training accuracy of around 98% and a testing