IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. XX, NO. XX 2
differential privacy (LDP) over GDP. As shown in Fig. 1,
GDP employs a trusted curator to apply calibrated noise to
produce differential privacy [9], [10]. The necessity of a
trusted curator makes the existing GDP methods unsuitable for
practical DL services, such as those offered by Google. In such
a scenario, the GDP algorithm should reside in the server, and
the original data need to be uploaded to the server for training.
This approach can pose a threat to privacy, as an adversary can
perform server-centric attacks such as membership inference
and model memorizing attacks. Moreover, DL algorithms are
inherently computationally complex, and privacy-preserving
solutions on DL models also tend to be complex and need high
computational processing power. As a result, GDP algorithms
are preferred to run on high-performance computers, and
resource-constrained data owners can not use them in untrusted
environments. Furthermore, noise calibration of GDP methods,
such as Laplacian and Gaussian mechanisms for DL models,
can be complex, indeﬁnite, and produce less accurate results or
entail a higher level of privacy leak [1], [8]. However, in LDP,
data owners perturb their data before releasing them, which
avoids the need for a trusted third party while guaranteeing
better privacy, as depicted in Fig. 1 [10]. The local approach
to data perturbation in LDP innovates the development of
distributed privacy preservation algorithms for many modern
distributed scenarios, such as those based on IoT.
Our contribution is a distributed LDP mechanism with a new
LDP protocol for limiting the privacy leaks of convolutional
neural network (CNN) models that are released as black-box
models. The proposed algorithm (named LATENT) employs
the properties of randomized response [11], a popular survey
technique that satisﬁes local differential privacy. The LDP
setting and the layered architecture of LATENT allow privacy-
preserving communication between several parties, which is
not possible with existing GDP methods for deep learning.
We conducted an in-depth analysis of the existing LDP pro-
tocols and devised a new protocol named utility enhancing
randomization (UER) that provides better utility than exist-
ing LDP protocols. We ﬁrst improved the optimized unary
encoding protocol (OUE) to propose a new LDP protocol
named modiﬁed OUE (MOUE), which provides enhanced
ﬂexibility of binary string randomization. OUE is an LDP
protocol that follows the intuition of randomizing 1’s and
0’s differently to improve utility. MOUE achieves improved
ﬂexibility by introducing an additional coefﬁcient (named
as the privacy budget coefﬁcient) that provides improved
ﬂexibility in choosing randomization probabilities. We then
followed the motivation behind MOUE to propose UER that
maintains the utility during the randomization of long binary
strings with high sensitivity. LATENT can be easily integrated
into modern environments such as SDN controlled NFV by
moving the layer of randomization to run as an NFV service.
As the LDP approach of LATENT enables the control of the
privacy budget before the perturbation process, accuracy can
be effectively tuned independently. In other words, LATENT
reduces the impact of the privacy budget ( ") on the accuracy,
and this leads to signiﬁcantly higher privacy and accuracy than
what is offered by existing solutions. Compared to current
GDP methods for deep learning, LATENT provides excellentaccuracy (above 90%) under extreme cases of privacy budgets
(e.g."=0:5) that ensure minimum leak. Our experiments
clearly show that a general-purpose computer is sufﬁcient to
perform the required computations efﬁciently and reliably at
the data owner’s end. Accordingly, LATENT can be a more
practical and robust tool to limit the privacy leak of deep
learning models than existing methods.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The underlying
concepts used in LATENT are presented in Section II. Section
III explains the steps of the differentially private mechanism
for deep learning. The results of LATENT are discussed in
Section IV. Section V provides a summary of existing related
work. The paper is concluded in Section VI.
Analysis  
RequestLDP Algorithm  
Untrusted CuratorGDP Algorithm  
 
 
 
 
 
Untrusted third party users  Analysis  
Results  Original Data
Trusted CuratorOwner-1 Owner-2 Owner-n
Perturbed Data
Local Dif ferential PrivacyGlobal Dif ferential Privacy
Fig. 1: Global vs. Local differential privacy
II. B ACKGROUND
This section provides brief descriptions of the underlying
concepts of LATENT. It includes brief summaries of basic
principles related to "Differential Privacy" and to "Deep Learn-
ing", which are used in LATENT.
A. Differential Privacy
Differential privacy (DP) is a privacy model that is known
to render maximum privacy by minimizing the chance of
individual record identiﬁcation [12]. In principle, DP deﬁnes
the bounds to how much information can be revealed to
a third party/adversary about someone’s data being present
in a particular database. Conventionally "(epsilon) and 
(delta) are used to denote these bounds, which describe the
level of privacy rendered by a randomized privacy preserving
algorithm ( M) over a particular database ( D).
1) Privacy budget / privacy loss ( "):"is called the privacy
budget that provides an insight into the privacy loss of a DP
algorithm. The higher the value of ", the higher the privacy
loss.