Comprehensive Taxonomies of Nature- and Bio-inspired Optimization:
Inspiration versus Algorithmic Behavior, Critical Analysis
and Recommendations (from 2020 to 2024)
Daniel Molina1,Javier Poyatos1,Javier Del Ser2,3,Salvador García1,
Amir Hussain4, and Francisco Herrera1
1Department of Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence, DaSCI Andalusian Institute of Data
Science and Computation Intelligence, University of Granada, Spain, {dmolina, savalgl,
herrera}@decsai.ugr.es, jpoyatosamador@ugr.es
2TECNALIA, Basque Research & Technology Alliance (BRTA), Spain, javier.delser@tecnalia.com
3Dept. of Communications Engineering, University of the Basque Country (UPV/EHU), Spain
4Edinburgh Napier University, United Kingdom, a.hussain@napier.ac.uk
Abstract
In recent years, bio-inspired optimization has garnered significant attention in the literature. This algorithmic family
mimics various biological processes observed in nature to effectively tackle complex optimization problems. The proliferation
of nature- and bio-inspired algorithms, accompanied by a plethora of applications, tools, and guidelines, underscores the
growing interest in this field. However, the exponential rise in the number of bio-inspired algorithms poses a challenge to
the future trajectory of this research domain. Along the five versions of this document, the number of approaches grows
incessantly, and where having a new biological description takes precedence over real problem-solving. This document, in its
fifth revision since the original published version in [1], presents two comprehensive taxonomies. One is based on principles
of biological similarity, and the other one is based on operational aspects associated with the iteration of population models
that initially have a biological inspiration. Therefore, these taxonomies enable researchers to categorize existing algorithmic
developments into well-defined classes, considering two criteria: the source of inspiration and the behavior exhibited by each
algorithm. Using these taxonomies, we classify 518 algorithms based on nature-inspired and bio-inspired principles. Each
algorithm within these categories is thoroughly examined, allowing for a critical synthesis of design trends and similarities, and
identifying the most analogous classical algorithm for each proposal. From our analysis, we conclude that a poor relationship
is often found between the natural inspiration of an algorithm and its behavior. Furthermore, similarities in terms of behavior
between different algorithms are greater than what is claimed in their public disclosure: specifically, we show that more than
one-fourth of the reviewed bio-inspired solvers are versions of classical algorithms. The conclusions from the analysis of the
algorithms lead to several learned lessons.
Moreover, in this new update we have decided to take a brief tour of literature towards three broad directions, providing a
more extensive approach to the original document:
• First, we offer a critical perspective on the field following our insights in [2], highlighting the good (a present and future
plenty of exciting applications), the bad(novel metaphors not leading to innovative solvers), and the ugly (poor methodological
practices) in metaheuristic optimization, with an expansion of these perspectives.
• Second, we revisit evolutionary and bio-inspired algorithms from a threefold approach: i) where we stand and what’s
next in evolutionary algorithms and population-based nature and bio-inspired optimization, based on a structured proposal
of challenges that were discussed in 2020, but still exist today [3]; ii) a prescription of methodological guidelines for
comparing bio-inspired optimization algorithms [4]; and iii) a tutorial on the design, experimentation, and application of
metaheuristic algorithms to real-world optimization problems [5].
• Third, we perform a brief review of recent studies that propose good practices for designing metaheuristic algorithms,
alongside a few highlighted taxonomies, overviews, and general approaches that, far from without attempting to be exhaustive
with the literature, showcase the rich activity and attention received by this field in recent years.
This updated study ends with an analysis that exposes the double vision of the wide range of proposals that contributed
to the field of metaheuristic optimization after five years of analysis: on one hand, we note a lack of analysis of the real
1arXiv:2002.08136v5  [cs.AI]  17 Apr 2024