10 Conclusions
Nature and biological organisms have been a source of inspiration for many optimization algorithms. During the last
few years, this family of solvers has grown considerably in size, achieving unseen levels of diversity about their source of
inspiration. This explosion of literature has made it difficult for the community to appraise the general trajectory followed by
the field, which is a necessary step towards identifying research trends and challenges of scientific value and practical impact.
Some efforts have been dedicated so far towards classifying the state of the art on nature- and bio-inspired optimization in a
taxonomy with well-defined criteria, allowing researchers to classify existing algorithms and newly proposed schemes.
We have reviewed 518 nature- and bio-inspired algorithms and grouped them into two taxonomies. The first taxonomy has
considered the source of inspiration, while the second has discriminated algorithms based on their behavior in generating new
candidate solutions. We have provided clear descriptions, examples, and an enumeration of the reviewed approaches within
each taxonomy category. Our study has critically examined the reviewed literature and found that many algorithms claiming
to be inspired by different natural and biological phenomena exhibit algorithmic similarities. Additionally, a significant
percentage (24%) of the reviewed proposals have been identified as versions of classical algorithms such as PSO, DE, or GA.
These findings shed light on the ongoing debate within the nature- and bio-inspired community regarding the algorithmic
contributions of recent advances in the field.
A critical point of reflection associated with this explosion of proposals has been that novel metaphors do not lead to new
solvers, and that comparisons undergo serious methodological problems. Although there are increasingly more bio-inspired
algorithms, many of them rely on so-claimed novel metaphors that do not create any innovative bio-inspired solvers. In
addition, comparisons have been often inadequate, leading to problems of reproducibility and applicability. This problem has
captured the interest of other researchers, leading to several papers on various aspects related to bad comparisons and the
increasing number of unoriginal proposals, even to the point of not accepting completely new proposals with quality marks.
As we have mentioned, we emphasize that in these new algorithms there exists a lack of justification together with the lack of
comparison with the state of the art and the lack of real interest in achieving reasonable levels of quality from the perspective
of the optimization of well-known problems in recent competitions. Good methodological practices must be followed in
forthcoming studies when designing, describing, and comparing new algorithms.
From a positive vision, bio-inspired algorithms have been regularly used in AI and real-world applications. These
algorithms hold potential in new scientific avenues, contributing to recent advances in DL evolution [8], the design of large
language models (LLM) [627], and more recently, the design and enrichment of GPAIS [628]. GPAIS (including DL evolution
and generative AI, such as LLM) are capable of performing tasks beyond those for which they were originally designed. In
this context, the paradigm of AI-powered AI, which involves utilizing AI algorithms to enhance other AI systems, assumes
paramount importance. In this thrilling era of AI explosion and advancement, we are already witnessing the significant impact
of bio-inspired algorithms on the improvement of AI systems through examples like POET [621], EUREKA [624], EvoPrompt
[629], and EGANs [630], among others.
In the last update of this report, which is herein released 4 years after its original version, we note that there has been
an evolution within the nature and bio-inspired optimization field. There is an excessive use of the biological approach as
opposed to the real problem-solving approach to tackle real and complex optimization goals, as those discussed in Section
8.1. This issue needs to be addressed in the future by following guidelines that will allow for the definition of metaheuristics
in a way that is appropriate to current challenges. This is important for the constructive design and development of proposals
in response to emerging problems. For this reason, the potential impact the emerging problems and GPAIS, population-based
metaheuristics as nature and bio-inspired optimization algorithms are poised to shape the future of AI, contributing to the
design of continuously emerging AI systems, and serving as an inspiration for the new era of innovation and progress in AI.
References
[1] Molina D, Poyatos J, Ser JD, García S, Hussain A, Herrera F. Comprehensive taxonomies of nature-and bio-inspired
optimization: Inspiration versus algorithmic behavior, critical analysis recommendations. Cognitive Computation.
2020;12; p. 897–939.
[2] Molina Cabrera D, Poyatos Amador J, Osaba Icedo E, Del Ser Lorente J, Herrera Triguero F. Nature-and bio-inspired
optimization: the good, the bad, the ugly and the hopeful. DYNA Ingeniería e Industria. 2022;97(2); p. 114–117.
56