4.1 Differential Vector Movement
This category of our behavior-based taxonomy amounts up to 69% of the analyzed algorithms. In all of them, new
solutions are obtained by a movement departing from existing solutions. By using a solution as the reference, a differential
vector is used to move from the reference towards a new candidate, that could replace the previous one or instead compete to
be included into the population.
The crucial decision in differential vector movement is how the differential vector (namely, the intensity and direction
of the movement) is calculated. This differential vector could be calculated so as to move the reference solution to another
solution (usually a better one), or as a lineal combination of other different solutions, allowing the combination of attraction
vectors (toward the best solutions) with repulsion vectors (away from worse ones, or from other solutions, to enforce diversity).
The mathematical nature of this operation usually restricts the domain of the representation to a numerical, usually real-valued
representation.
This category is further divided into subcategories as a function of the above decision, i.e. which solutions are considered
to create the movement vector. It should be noted that some algorithms can be classified into more than one subcategory. For
instance, a particle’s update in the PSO solver is affected by the global best particle behavior and certain local best particle(s)
behavior. The local best behavior can be either dependent on the particle’s previous behavior or the behavior of some particles
in its neighborhood. This makes PSO a possible member of two of the subcategories, namely, Differential Vector as a Function
of Representative Solutions andDifferential Vector as a Function of a Group of Solutions . Nevertheless, we have considered
the classical PSO as a member of Representative Solutions because the influence of the best algorithm is stronger than the
influence of the neighborhood. In any case, following the above rationale, other PSO variants could fall within any other
subcategory. We now describe each of such subcategories.
4.1.1 Differential Vector as a Function of the Entire Population
One possible criterion is to use all the individuals in the population to generate the movement of each solution. In these
algorithms, all individuals have a degree of influence on the movement of the other solutions. Such a degree is usually
weighted according to the fitness difference and/or distance between solutions. A significant example is FA [117], in which
a solution suffers a moving force towards better solutions as a function of their distance. Consequently, solutions closer to
the reference solution will have a stronger influence than more distant counterparts. As shown in Table 17, algorithms in this
subcategory belong to different categories in the previous inspiration source based taxonomy.
4.1.2 Differential Vector as a Function of Representative Solutions
In this group (the most populated in this second taxonomy), the different movement of each solution is only influenced
by a small group of representative solutions. It is often the case that these representative solutions are selected to be the best
solutions found by the algorithm (as per the objective of the problem at hand), being able to be guided only by e.g. the current
best individual of the population.
Tables 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23 and 24 show the different algorithms in this subcategory. An exemplary algorithm of this
category that has been a major meta-heuristic solver in the history of the field is PSO [80]. In this solver, each solution
or particle is guided by the global current best solution and the best solution obtained by that particle during the search.
Another classical algorithm in this category is the majority of the family of DE approaches [59]. In most of the variants
of this evolutionary algorithm, the influence of the best solution(s) is hybridized with a differential vector that perturbs the
new solution toward random individuals for the sake of increased diversity along the search. However, this subcategory
also includes many other algorithms with differences in considering nearly better solutions (as in the Bat Inspired Algorithm
[153] or the Brain Storm Optimization Algorithm [469]) or the worse solutions (to avoid less promising regions), as in the
Grasshopper Optimization Algorithm (GOA, [118]). More than half of all algorithmic proposals dwell in this subcategory,
with a prominence of Swarm Intelligence solvers due to their behavioral inspiration in PSO and DE. We will revolve around
these identified similarities in Section 5.
4.1.3 Differential Vector as a Function of a Group of Solutions
Algorithms within this category do not resort to representative solutions of the entire population (such as the current best),
but they only consider solutions of a subset or group of the solutions in the population. When the differential movement
27