need to address important problems and challenges in optimization for EAs and population-based optimization models, a
prescription of methodological guidelines for comparing bio-inspired optimization algorithms, and a tutorial on the design,
experimentation, and application of metaheuristic algorithms to real-world optimization problems.
8.1 Bio-inspired computation: Where we stand and what’s next
We should pause and reflect on which research directions should be pursued in the future in regard to bio-inspired
optimization and related areas, as there are other remarkable fields to be noted as direct applications for bio-inspired optimization.
In [3], the authors show a full discussion of the status of the field from both descriptive ( where we stand ) and prescriptive
(what’s next ) points of view. Here, we describe the areas in which bio-inspired optimization algorithms are used, and research
niches related to them, as shown in Figure 7. The areas and their main aspects that can be studied as promising research lines
are:
• Theoretical studies: By the hand of the fitness landscape for a better understanding of how a search algorithm can
perform on a family of problem instances, of multidisciplinary theories to study the role of diversity and the balance of
local search and global search required to undertake a certain problem efficiently, and of convergence, studies to identify
the conditions for the convergence of the algorithm, its speed, fitness stability, and other characteristics.
• Dynamic and stochastic optimization: These areas need reliable modeling of real optimization scenarios where the
characteristics of several of these problems hold (diversity control), and the development of change detection mechanisms
relying on characteristics of the optimization algorithm (change detection).
• Multi/Many-objective optimization: These areas need new ideas regarding the design of multiobjective solvers because
they usually use the main multi-objective solver (radically new approaches) or even the combination of different solvers
to create new ones (hybridization of techniques). Another problem to be addressed is the scalability, as solvers do not
scale properly with many objectives.
• Multimodal optimization: The incorporation of new bio-inspired multimodal solvers and the hybridization of new
bio-inspired techniques with traditional strategies can contribute to the progress of this area.
• Topologies: A promising research direction is to jointly consider topologies and ensemble strategies to leverage the
superior explorative/exploitative powers of ensembles and also topologies for population-based metaheuristics to achieve
better solutions than other solvers.
• Surrogate model-assisted optimization: This area has promising research lines of investigation with highly dimensional
search spaces and DL models, where there is a need to alleviate high computational efforts, with evaluation times that
range from hours to days per experiment.
• Distributed EAs: These algorithms are needed in large-scale data mining to deal with expensive objective functions,
which are common in real-world applications comprising multiple criteria, and also in large-scale multi-objective
optimization for the development of asynchronous parallel multi-objective solvers.
• Ensemble methods and hyper-heuristics: Both areas have promising challenges in large-scale optimization to address
problems such as the encoding strategy, the exploration capabilities of the algorithms, and the computational complexity
of the proper ensembles. In real applications, these areas need to address the challenge of the appropriate selection of
their low-level composing pieces.
• Memetic algorithms: Although these algorithms have shown great results, researchers need to investigate their hybridization
with other bio-inspired optimization algorithms for the design of new algorithms, and also the derivation of self-adaptive
mechanisms to tune the balance between exploration and exploitation
• Large-scale global optimization: For this area, it will be interesting to develop new techniques that automatically
infer relationships among variables (grouping variables) that could be optimized in isolation with the minimum loss
of efficiency and to study new approaches of memetic computing with this area, due to the great results of DE and
large-scale global optimization.
49