Fortunately, other algorithms have a stronger influence. In view of this dichotomy, the researchers should evaluate their
proposals for diverse problems, including widely acknowledged benchmark functions and real-world practical problems,
to grasp the interest of the community in considering their proposed algorithms for tackling other applications.
5.The interest of making source code available: Related to the previous one, it is very interesting, in order to gain more
visibility, to make the source code of the proposed algorithm available for the community. It is true that the paper
presenting the new algorithm should be detailed enough to allow for a clean implementation of the proposal from the
provided specification. However, it is widely acknowledged that, in many occasions, there are important details that even
though they have a strong influence on the results, are not remarked in the description [602, 603]. A publicly available
reference implementation could not only improve its visibility, but could also offer other researchers the chance to undertake
more thorough performance comparisons. In addition, there are a huge number of software frameworks for Evolutionary
Computation and Swarm Intelligence programmed in different languages (such as C++, Java, Matlab, or Python), some
of them very popular in the current research landscape. To cite a few: Evolutionary Computation Framework (ECF)1and
ParadisEO [604] in C++; jMetal [605] and MOEA2in Java; NiaPy[606], jMetalPy [607] and PyGMO3in Python; or
PlatEMO [608] in Matlab, among others. Each of them implements the most popular algorithms (GA, DE, PSO, ABC,
...). A reference implementation could also favor the inclusion of the proposal in frameworks as the ones exemplified
previously. Otherwise, different implementations of the allegedly same algorithm could produce diverging results from the
original proposal (in part due to the ambiguity of the description).
6.The role of bio-inspired algorithms in competitions: Finally, we also stress on the fact that metaheuristic algorithms
that have scored best in many competitions are far from being biologically inspired, although some of them retain their
nature-inspired roots (mostly, DE) [44]. This fact was expected for the lack of good methodological practices when
comparing nature- and bio-inspired algorithms, which was pointed out previously in our analysis. This issue has not
encouraged participants in competitions to embrace them as reference algorithms to design better solvers. The rising trend
of the community to generate an ever-growing number of bio-inspired proposals can be counterproductive and deviate
efforts towards the development of a reduced number of proposals but with a better performance.
7 A Short Reflection on The Good , the Bad and the Ugly
This section corresponds to the integration and extension of Section 3 of the article published in [2] within this report.
In Section 7.1, we extend the original analysis on the importance of applications, stressing on the numerous applications
that leverage results from this research area (the good ). In section 7.2, we have also extended the original content to more
studies based on the recent problems of the area, namely, the lack of algorithmic innovation in algorithms inspired by novel
metaphors and good comparisons between algorithms (the bad). Section 7.3 remains as in the original work, underscoring the
poor practices experienced by the area in recent times (the ugly).
7.1 The Good : A Present and Future Plenty of Exciting Applications
An undeniable fact is that nature- and bio-inspired optimization algorithms have been applied to a great variety of
optimization problems emerging in different disciplines. We distinguish among three different horizons of applications,
without being exhaustive, nor entering into the recent horizons of general-purpose AI that we will mention in the conclusions.
They are outlined shortly as follows:
•Real-world engineering applications : We can find many examples regarding the usage of bio-inspired techniques to solve
real-world engineering processes [609]. Furthermore, structural design and civil engineering have also largely embraced
the benefits of nature and bio-inspired solvers to assorted problems, including the multi-criteria design of structures [610],
logistics and supply chain management [611], to cite a few. The application of Evolutionary Algorithms (EAs) has reached
many areas, including works from these human competitions for the design of breakwaters [612], the evolution of antennas
for Space Mission of the NASA [613], and also the discovery of new formulas in the field of physics [614], among many
other important applications.
1http://ecf.zemris.fer.hr/
2http://moeaframework.org/
3http://esa.github.io/pygmo/index.html
45