is that by combining good solutions, even better solutions can be eventually generated.
The combining method can be specific for the problem to be solved or instead, be conceived for a more general family
of problems. In fact, combining methods are usually devised to be adaptable to many different solution representations. As
mentioned before, the most popular algorithm in this category is GA [98]. However, many other bio-inspired algorithms
exhibit a similar behavior when creating solutions, yet they are inspired by other phenomena, such as Cultural Optimization
(CA, [479]) (in the Social Human Behavior category), LA [267] (in the Swarm Intelligence category), Particle Collision
Algorithm (PCA, [429], in the chemistry-based category) or Light Ray Optimization (LRO, [421], in the physics-based
category). Tables 27, 28, 29, and 30 show the algorithms that rely on combination when creating new solutions along their
search.
4.2.2 Creation by Stigmergy
Another popular option of creating new solutions relies on stigmergy, namely, an indirect communication and coordination
between the different solutions or agents used to create new solutions. This communication is usually done using an intermediate
structure, with information obtained from the different solutions, used to generate new solutions oriented towards more
promising areas of the search space. This is indeed the search mechanism used in the most representative algorithm of
this category, ACO [598], which is inspired by the foraging mechanism of ant colonies. Each ant of the colony describes
a trajectory over a graph representation of the search space of the problem at hand, and leaves a trace of pheromone along
its way whose intensity depends, in part, on the fitness value corresponding to the solution encoded by the trajectory of the
ant. In subsequent iterations, new solutions are generated, dimension by dimension, considering the pheromones trail left by
preceding ants, enforcing the search around the most promising values for each dimension.
Table 31 lists the reviewed algorithms that employ stigmergy when creating new solutions. This is a reduced list when
comparing with preceding categories, with the majority of the algorithms relying on Swarm Intelligence among insects
(similarly to ACO). However, other algorithms inspired in physics have also a stigmertic behavior when producing new
solutions, such as methods inspired by water flow dynamics [452] and the natural formation of rivers [434].
5 Taxonomies Analysis: Comparison and More Influential Algorithms
We now proceed by critically examining the reviewed literature as per the different taxonomies proposed in this overview.
First, we are going to study the similarities between the results of the classifications following each taxonomy. Later, we
identify the most influential algorithms over the rest, based on the behavior of the algorithms.
5.1 Comparison Between both Taxonomies
Comparing the two taxonomies to each other and the algorithms falling into each of their categories, it can be observed that
there is not a strong relationship between them. Interestingly, this unveils that features characterizing one algorithm are loosely
associated with its inspirational model. For instance, algorithms inspired by very different concepts such as the gravitational
forces (GFA, [410]) or animal evolution (ABO, [123]) exhibit a significant similarity with PSO [80]. This statement is
supported by the fact that, in the second taxonomy, each category is composed by algorithms that, as per the first taxonomy,
are inspired by diverse phenomena. The contrary also holds in general: proposals with very similar natural inspiration fall in
the same category of the first taxonomy (as expected), but their search procedures differ significantly from each other, thereby
being classified in different categories of the second taxonomy. An illustrative example is the Delphi Echolocation algorithm
(DE, [195]) and the Dolphin Partner Optimization [201]. Both are inspired by the same animal (dolphin) and its mechanism to
detect fishes (echolocation), but they are very different algorithms: the former creates new solutions by combination, whereas
the latter resembles closely the movement performed in the PSO solver, mainly guided by the best solution.
In this same line of reasoning, the largest subcategory of the second taxonomy (Differential Vector Movements guided
by representative solutions) not only contains more than half of the reviewed algorithms (almost 60%), but it also comprises
algorithms from all the different categories in the first taxonomy: Social Human Behavior (as Anarchic Society Optimization,
ASO, [472]), microorganisms (Bacterial Colony Optimization, [145]), Physics/Chemistry category (correspondingly, Fireworks
Algorithm Optimization, FAO, [575]), Breeding-based Evolution (as Variable Mesh Optimization, VMO [113]), or even
Plants-Based (such as Flower Pollination Algorithm, FPA [529]). This inspirational diversity is not exclusive to this subcategory.
Others, such as Solution Creation, also include algorithms relying on the heterogeneity of natural concepts.
37