optimization challenges and useful proposals instead of new metaheuristics only focused on a basic comparison with very
classical problems versus algorithms. On the other hand, we offer a positive vision of the crucial role that population-based
optimization models can take in the design of modern Artificial Intelligence algorithms.
This document is an update as of April 2024, and contains 518 algorithms as opposed to the originally published version
which amounted to 323 revised metaheuristics. This arXiv document corresponds with an extension (already mentioned) of
the 2 following papers, with references:
• Molina, D., Poyatos, J., Del Ser, J., García, S., Hussain, A., & Herrera, F. (2020). Comprehensive taxonomies of nature-and
bio-inspired optimization: Inspiration versus algorithmic behavior, critical analysis recommendations. Cognitive Computation,
12, 897-939. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s12559-020-09730-8
• Molina-Cabrera, D., Poyatos, J., Osaba, E., Del Ser, J., Herrera, F. (2022). Nature- and Bio-inspired Optimization: the
Good, the Bad, the Ugly and the Hopeful. DYNA, 97(2). 114-117. DOI: https://doi.org/10.6036/10331
Keywords – Nature-inspired algorithms, bio-inspired optimization, taxonomy, critical analysis.
1 Introduction
Traditional optimization techniques are motivated by the complexity of the problem and the mathematical properties of its
fitness function and constraints. However, in many real-world optimization problems, no exact solver can be applied to solve
them at an affordable computational cost or within a reasonable time. Moreover, in some cases, there is no analytical form for
the problem’s objective and constraints. Under such circumstances, the use of traditional techniques has been widely proven
to be unsuccessful, thereby calling for the consideration of alternative optimization approaches.
In this context, complexity is not unusual in Nature: a plethora of complex systems, processes and behaviors have evinced
a surprising performance to efficiently address intricate optimization tasks. The most clear example can be found in the
different animal species, which have developed over generations very specialized capabilities by evolutionary mechanisms.
Indeed, evolution has allowed animals to adapt to harsh environments, foraging, very difficult tasks of orientation, and to
resiliently withstand radical climatic changes, among other threats. Animals, when organized in independent systems, groups
or swarms or colonies (systems quite complex on their own) have managed to colonize the Earth completely, and eventually
achieve a global equilibrium that has permitted them to endure for thousands of years. This renowned success of biological
organisms has inspired all kinds of solvers for optimization problems, which have been so far referred to as bio-inspired
optimization algorithms . This family of optimization methods simulates biological processes such as natural evolution, where
solutions are represented by individuals that reproduce and mutate to generate new, potentially improved candidate solutions
for the problem at hand.
Disregarding their source of inspiration, there is clear evidence of the increasing popularity and notoriety gained by
nature- and bio-inspired optimization algorithms in the last two decades. This momentum finds its reason in the capability
of these algorithms to learn, adapt, and provide good solutions to complex problems that otherwise would have remained
unsolved. Many overviews have capitalized on this spectrum of algorithms applied to a wide range of problem casuistry, from
combinatorial problems [6] to large-scale optimization [7], evolutionary deep learning [8] and other alike. As a result, almost
all business sectors have leveraged this success in recent times.
From a design perspective, nature- and bio-inspired optimization algorithms are usually conceived after observing a
natural process or the behavioral patterns of biological organisms, which are then converted into a computational optimization
algorithm. New discoveries in Nature and the undoubted increase of worldwide investigation efforts have ignited the interest
of the research community in biological processes and their extrapolation to computational problems. As a result, many new
bio-inspired meta-heuristics have appeared in the literature, increasing the outbreak of proposals and applications every year.
Nowadays, every natural process can be thought to be adaptable and emulated to produce a new meta-heuristic approach, yet
with different capabilities of reaching global optimum solutions to optimization problems.
The above statement is quantitatively supported by Figure 1, which depicts the increasing number of papers/book chapters
published in the last years with bio-inspired optimization andnature-inspired optimization in their title, abstract and/or
keywords. We have considered both bio-inspired andnature-inspired optimization because sometimes both terms are confused
and indistinctly used, although nature-inspiration includes bio-inspired inspiration and complements it with other sources
of inspirations (like physics-based optimization, chemistry-based optimization, ...). A major fraction of the publications
comprising this plot proposed new bio-inspired algorithms at their time. From this rising number of nature and bio-inspired
algorithms, one can easily conclude that it would be convenient to organize them into a taxonomy with well-defined criteria
2