bio-inspired meta-heuristics based on Swarm Intelligence are those inspired by the collective behavior of animal societies,
such as insect colonies or bird flocks, wherein the collective intelligence emerging from the swarm permits to efficiently
undertake optimization problems. The seminal bio-inspired algorithm relying on SI concepts was PSO [80], followed shortly
thereafter by ACO [115]. These early findings around SI concepts applied to optimization spurred many SI-based algorithms
in subsequent years, such as ABC [116] and more recently, Firefly Algorithm (FA, [117]) and Grasshopper Optimization
Algorithm (GOA, [118]).
Reviewed algorithms that fall under the Swarm Intelligence umbrella are shown in Tables 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 and 8. This is
the most populated category of all our study, characterized by a first category that relates to the type of animal that has
inspired each algorithm: as such, we find i) flying animals , namely, algorithms inspired in the flying movement of birds
and flying animals like insects; ii) terrestrial animals , inspired by the foraging and hunter mechanisms of land animals; iii)
aquatic animals , whose inspiration emerges from the movement of fish schools or other aquatic animals like dolphins; and iv)
microorganisms , inspired by virus, bacteria, algae and others alike.
Inside each subcategory, we have also distinguished whether they are inspired by the foraging action of the inspired
living creature – Foraging-inspired is in fact another popular term related to this type of inspiration [119] – or, instead, by
its movement patterns in general. When the behavior of the algorithm is inspired by both the movement and the foraging
behavior of the animal, it is cataloged as foraging inside our first taxonomy. We will next examine in depth each of these
subcategories.
3.2.1 Subcategories of SI based algorithms by the environment
As mentioned previously, the global set of Swarm Intelligence algorithms can be divided as a function of the type of
animals. Between the possible categories stemming from this criteria, we have grouped them according to the environmental
medium inhibited by the inspiring animal (aquatic, terrestrial or aerial). This criterion is not only very intuitive since it inherits
a criterion already applied in animal taxonomies, but it also relies on the fact that these environments condition the movement
and hunting mode of the different species. As such, the following subcategories have been established:
•Flying animals: This category comprises meta-heuristics based on the concept of Swarm Intelligence in which the trajectory
of agents is inspired by flying movements, as those observed in birds, bats, or other flying insects. The most well-known
algorithms in this subcategory are PSO [80] and ABC [116].
•Terrestrial animals: Meta-heuristics in this category are inspired by foraging or movements in terrestrial animals. The
most renowned approach within this category is the classical ACO meta-heuristic [115], which replicates the stigmergic
mechanism used by ants to locate food sources and inform of the existence of their counterparts in the colony. This
category also includes other popular algorithms like Grey Wolf Optimization (GWO, [240]), inspired in the wild wolf
hunting strategy, Lion Optimization Algorithm (LOA, [267]), which imitates hunting methods used by these animals, or
the more recent Grasshopper Optimization Algorithm (GOA, [118]), which finds its motivation in the jumping motion of
grasshoppers.
•Aquatic animals: This type of meta-heuristic algorithm focuses on aquatic animals. The aquatic ecosystem in which
they live has inspired different exploration mechanisms. It contains popular algorithms such as Krill Herd (KH, [259]),
Whale Optimization Algorithm (WOA, [380]), and algorithms based on the echolocation used by dolphins to detect fish like
Dolphin Partner Optimization (DPO, [201]) and Dolphin Echolocation [195].
•Microorganisms: Meta-heuristics based on microorganisms are related with the food search performed by bacteria. A
bacteria colony performs a movement to search for food. Once they have found and taken it, they split to search again
in the environment. Other types of meta-heuristics that can be part of this category are the ones related with virus, which
usually replicate the infection process of the cell by virus. The most known algorithm of this category is Bacterial Foraging
Optimization Algorithm (BFOA, [148]).
3.2.2 Subcategories of SI based algorithms by the inspirational behavior
Another criterion to group SI based algorithms is the specific behavior of the animal that captured the attention of
researchers and inspired the algorithm. This second criterion is also reflected in Tables 3-6, classifying each algorithm as
belonging to one of the following behavioral patterns:
11