performance reported for many optimization problems [44].
When inspecting the influential approaches from a higher perspective, two are the categories whose algorithms have
been more frequently used to create new nature-based algorithms. The first one is Swarm Intelligence : about 14% of all
studied nature-inspired algorithms are variations of SI algorithms (PSO, ACO, and ABC). The second one is shared between
Evolutionary Algorithms and GA, whose represented algorithms are both used in almost 5% of the reviewed cases. It is
noteworthy to highlight that it appears that the influence of more classic algorithms like GA and SA is declining when
compared to other algorithms, such as DE and PSO.
In summary, although in the last years many nature-inspired algorithms have been proposed by the community and their
number grows steadily every year, more than half of the proposals reviewed in our work are incremental, minor versions of
only three very classical algorithms (PSO, DE, and GA). We, therefore, conclude that a huge number of natural and biological
sources of inspiration used so far to justify the design of new optimization solvers have not led to significantly disruptive
algorithmic behaviors. This closing note will be at the heart of our critical analysis exposed in the next section.
6 Learned Lessons and Recommendations from the Analysis of the Evolution of
Bio-Inspired Optimization
After reviewing the algorithms and both taxonomies, we have identified several key learned lessons which serve as
recommendations to deal with in forthcoming years for that is working on nature- and bio-inspired optimization. The learned
lessons gained from the taxonomies and research outlined in [1] form the foundation of this section. In the subsequent sections,
we will further expand upon them to provide a more extended analysis. We next outline them in no particular order:
1.The behavior is more relevant than the natural inspiration: As was exposed in Section 5, the current literature is flooded
with a huge number of nature- and bio-inspired algorithms. However, as has been spotted by our proposed taxonomies,
several algorithms belonging to categories with different sources of inspiration results are very similar in terms of behavior.
This disparity is a controversial topic in recent years [3, 599]. Therefore, we call for more research efforts around the design
of optimization algorithms that focus on their behavior and properties (e.g., good performance, simplicity, ability to run it
in parallel or their suitability to a specific type of problems) rather than on new inspiration sources.
2.Nature-based terminology can make it more difficult to understand the proposal: A great deal of papers presenting
new bio-inspired solvers are difficult to understand and replicate due to the extended usage of vocabulary related to the
natural source of inspiration. It is logical to use the semantic of the biological or natural domain, but to an extent. It
would be desirable that the description of the algorithm could be defined in an inspiration-agnostic fashion, resorting
to mathematical terms to describe each component, agent and/or phase of the optimization process (e.g. optimum/a,
individuals, or solutions). Excessive usage of the domain terminology (without explicitly indicating the correspondences)
could make it difficult to follow the details of the algorithm for researchers not acquainted with such a terminology. To
overcome this issue, the correspondence between the domain terminology and the optimization terminology should be
explicitly indicated.
3.Good comparisons are crucial for new proposals: The lack of fair comparisons is another important drawback of many
proposals published to date. When new algorithms are proposed, unfortunately, many of them are only compared to very
basic and classical algorithms (such as GA or PSO). These algorithms have been widely surpassed by more advanced
versions over the years which, so obtaining better performance than naive version of classical algorithms is relatively easy
to achieve, and it does not imply a competitive performance [600]. In some cases, the proposed algorithm is compared
to similar algorithms but not with competitive algorithms outside that semantic niche [600, 601]. This methodological
practice must be regarded as a very serious barrier for their application to real-world problems. We encourage researchers
to increase the algorithms used in their experimental section, including more competitive or state-of-the-art algorithms:
until they are proven to be competitive in respect to the state of the art, new nature- and bio-inspired solvers will not be
used in practice either will attract enough attention of the research community.
4.Many proposals have a very limited influence: By examining in depth the historical trajectory followed by each reviewed
algorithm, an intriguing trend is revealed: a fraction of the proposals have a very limited influence in new papers after the
original publication. For them, there are almost no new papers with improved versions, or applying it to new problems.
44