Considering the previous examples, it is clear that the real behavior of the algorithm is much more informative than its
natural or biological inspiration. Even more, we have observed that in our first proposed taxonomy, built upon the review of
518 proposals, the huge diversity of inspirational sources does not correspond with the lower number of algorithmic behaviors
on which our second taxonomy is based. This observation is in accordance with previous works in the literature, which have
put to question whether the novelty in the natural inspiration of the algorithm actually yields different algorithms that could
produce competitive results [599, 600].
We further elaborate on the above statement: our literature analysis revealed that the majority of proposals (more than
a half, 60%) generate new solutions based on differential vector forces over existing ones, as in the classical PSO or DE.
A complementary analysis can be done by departing from this observation towards discriminating which of the classical
algorithms (PSO, DE, GA, ACO, ABC or SA) can be declared to be most similar to modern approaches. The results of
this analysis are conclusive: 23% of all reviewed algorithms (122 out of 518) were found to be so influenced by classical
algorithms that, without their biological inspiration, they could be regarded as incremental variants. The other 396 solvers
(about 77%) have enough differences to be considered a new proposal by themselves, instead of another version of existing
classical algorithms. But, we must emphasize that in these new algorithms there exists a lack of originality or justification in
a significant percentage of cases. We must emphasize that in these new algorithms there exists a lack of justification due to
the lack of comparison with the state of the art and the lack of real interest in achieving reasonable levels of quality from the
perspective of the optimization of well-known problems in recent competitions.
Table 32: Percentages of similar algorithms in the reviewed literature.
Classical algorithm Number of papers with similar algorithms Percentage over the total
PSO 57 11.00%
DE 24 4.63%
GA 24 4.63%
ACO 7 1.35%
ABC 7 1.35%
SA 3 0.59%
Total 122 23.55%
5.2 Identification of the Most Influential Algorithms
In order to know which are the most influential reference algorithms used to design other bio-inspired algorithms, we have
grouped together reviewed proposals that could be considered to be versions of the same classical algorithm. Figure 5.2 shows
the classification of each algorithm based on its behavior, and the number of proposals in each classification are summarized
in Table 32.
Very insightful conclusions can be drawn from this grouping. To begin with, in Table 32 the most influential algorithm was
identified to be PSO, appearing in 11% of the reviewed literature (which corresponds to almost 47% of the proposals that were
clearly based on a previous algorithm). This bio-inspired solver is one of the most prominent and historically acknowledged
algorithms in the Swarm Intelligence category and is the reference of many bio-inspired algorithms contributed since its
inception. The simplicity of this algorithm and its ability to reach an optimum quickly – as has been comparatively assessed
in many application scenarios, see e.g. [72, 73] – have inspired many authors to create new metaheuristics characterized by
similar solution movement dynamics to those defined by PSO. Thus, many algorithms whose authors claim to simulate the
behavior of a biological system eventually perform their search process through movements strongly influenced by PSO (in
some cases, without any significant difference).
The second and third most influential algorithms are GA, a very classic algorithm, and DE, a well-known algorithm
whose natural inspiration resides only in the evolution of a population. Both have been used by around 5% of all reviewed
nature-inspired algorithms, and they are the most representative approach in the Evolutionary Algorithms category. The
search mechanism of GA is solution creation by combination, and the search mechanism of DE is to create new solutions with
a linear combination of existing ones in the population, which is used by 5% of all reviewed proposals, maybe by its superior
42