Seen from the algorithmic perspective, many particular bio-inspired solvers have been modified over the years to yield
different versions analyzed in surveys devoted to that type of algorithms, from classical approaches such as PSO [56] and DE
[57, 58, 59] to more modern ones, e.g., ABC [60, 61], Bacterial Foraging Optimization Algorithm (BFOA, [62]) or the Bat
Algorithm [63]. From a more general albeit still algorithmic point of view, [9] explains how the metaphor and the biological
idea are used to create a bio-inspired meta-heuristic optimization algorithm. In this study, the reader is also provided with some
examples and characteristics of this design process. Books like [64] or [65] show many nature-inspired algorithms. However,
they are more focused on describing the different algorithms available in the literature than on classifying and analyzing them
in depth.
Several comparison studies among bio-inspired algorithms with very different behaviors can be found in the current
literature, which mostly aims at deciding which approach to use for solving a problem. In [66], the popular PSO and DE
versions are compared. This research line is followed by [67], which compared the performance of different bio-inspired
algorithms, again with prescribing which one to use as its primary goal. More recently, [68] examined the features of
several recent bio-inspired algorithms, suggesting, on a concluding note, to which type of problem each of the examined
algorithms should be applied. More specific is the work in [69], which compares several different algorithms considering
its parallel implementation on GPU devices. More recently, the focus has shifted towards comparing groups of algorithms
instead of making a comparison between individual solvers: this is the case of [70], which compares Swarm Intelligence and
Evolutionary Computation methods in order to assess their properties and behavior (e.g., their convergence speed). Once
again, the main purpose of this recent literature strand is to compare bio-inspired algorithms, not to classify them nor to find
similarities and design patterns among them. In [71], foraging algorithms (such as the aforementioned BFOA) are compared
against other evolutionary algorithms. In that paper, algorithms are classified into two large groups: algorithms with and
without cooperation. In [72, 73], PSO was proven to outperform other bio-inspired approaches (namely, DE, GA and ABC)
when used for efficiently training and configuring Echo State Networks.
It has not been until relatively recent times that the community has embraced the need for arranging the myriad of existing
bio-inspired algorithms and classifying them under principled, coherent criteria. In 2013, [74] presented a classification of
meta-heuristic algorithms as per their biological inspiration that discerned categories with similar approaches in this regard:
Swarm Intelligence ,Physics and Chemistry Based ,Bio-inspired algorithms (not SI-based) , and an Other algorithms category.
However, the classification given in this paper is not actually hierarchical, so it can not be regarded as a true taxonomy.
Another classification was proposed in [75, 76], composed by Evolution Based Methods ,Physics Based Methods ,Swarm
Based Methods , and Human-Based Methods . With respect to the preceding classification, a new Human-Based category is
proposed, which collectively refers to algorithms inspired by human behavior. The classification criteria underneath these
categories are used to build up a catalog of more than 50 algorithmic proposals, obtaining similar groups in size. In this case,
there is no miscellaneous category as in the previous classification. Similarly to [74], categories are disjoint groups without
subcategories.
Recently, [77] offers a review of meta-heuristics from the 1970s until 2015, i.e., from the development of neural networks
to novel algorithms like Cuckoo Search. Specifically, a broad view of new proposals is given, but without proposing any
category. The most recent survey to date is that in [78], in which nature-inspired algorithms are classified not in terms of their
source of inspiration, but rather by their behavior. Consequently, algorithms are classified as per three different principles.
The first one is learning behavior , namely, how solutions are learned from others preceding them. The learning behavior
can be individual, local (i.e., only inside a neighborhood), global (between all individuals), and none (no learning). The
second principle is interaction-collective behavior , denoting whether individuals cooperate or compete between them. The
third principle is referred to as diversification-population control , by which algorithms are classified based on whether the
population has a converging tendency, a diffuse tendency, or no specific tendency. Then, 29 bio-inspired algorithms are
classified by each of these principles, and approaches grouped by each principle are experimentally compared.
The prior related work reviewed above indicates that the community widely acknowledges (with more emphasis in recent
times) the need for properly organizing the plethora of bio- and nature-inspired algorithms in a coherent taxonomy. However,
the majority of them are only focused on the natural inspiration of the algorithms for creating the taxonomy, not giving any
attention to their behavior. This aspect is considered in [78], but does not propose a real taxonomy, but rather different
independent design principles. On the contrary, as will be next described, our proposed taxonomies consider 1) the source of
inspiration; and 2) the procedure by which new solutions are produced over the search process of every algorithm ( behavior ).
Furthermore, we note that efforts invested in this regard to date are not up to the level of ambition and thoroughness pursued
in our study. In addition, no study published so far has been specifically devoted to unveiling structural similarities between
classical and modern meta-heuristics. There lies the novelty and core contribution of our study, along with the aforementioned
6