•Initialization of metaheuristics: comprehensive review, critical analysis, and research directions - 2023 [35] : This
review addresses a gap in the literature by developing a taxonomy of initialization methods for metaheuristics. This
classification is based on the initialization of metaheuristics according to random techniques, learning methods (supervised
learning, Markov models, opposition- and diversification-based learning), and other generic methods based on sampling,
clustering, and cooperation. The review also examines the initialization of metaheuristics with local search approaches,
offers guidance on designing a diverse and informative sequence of initial solutions, and provides insights that will help
research in constrained and discrete optimization problems.
•Metaheuristic optimization algorithms: a comprehensive overview and classification of benchmark test functions -
2024 [37] : This work focuses on the practical scenario of developing a new metaheuristic. It reviews over 200 mathematical
test functions and more than 50 real-world engineering design problems. For each function, it is described its variables
and value range. Due to the design of a metaheuristic should be accompanied by a set of experiments, this paper provides
researchers with a wide range of options to test the quality of their new developments.
•A literature review and critical analysis of metaheuristics recently developed - 2024 [38] : This review focuses on
algorithms with titles containing words such as ‘new’, ‘hybrid’, or ‘improved’, in response to the growing trend of nature-based
approaches. After analyzing over 100 algorithms, it was found that a significant percentage of these algorithms outperform
previous techniques. From the several analyses made in this review, it is noted that most new algorithms are an improved
version of some established algorithm, which reveals that the trend is no longer to propose metaheuristics based on new
analogies. Moreover, they compare Black Widow Optimization and Coral Reef Optimization, which are considered new
frameworks. By analyzing the components of both metaheuristics, authors evident the lack of innovation, as the operators
of such algorithms are merely a combination of other evolutionary operators.
•Metaheuristic optimization algorithms: an overview - 2024 [39] : This paper focuses on studying the main components
and concepts of optimization. More specifically, the overview provides the advantages (agnostic to the problem being solved,
gradient independence, global search capability, the capability of dealing with multi-objective optimization problems,
balanced exploration and exploitation, configurability and tuning, practical problem-solving, and innovation) and the limitations
(absence of global optimality guarantee, convergence speed, parameter tuning, and black-box nature) of metaheuristics.
The authors specifically focus on the references used by the algorithms to guide the search, and on how to achieve a good
balance between exploration and exploitation. Visual representations accompany the text to illustrate the behavior of a set
of metaheuristics.
•50 years of metaheuristics - 2024 [40] : This overview traces the last 50 years of the field, starting from the roots of the area
to the latest proposals to hybridize metaheuristics with machine learning. The revision encompasses constructive (GRASP
and ACO), local search (iterated local search, Tabu search, variable neighborhood search), and population-based heuristics
(memetic algorithms, biased random-key genetic algorithms, scatter search, and path relinking). Each category presents
its core characteristics and the description of the mentioned algorithms. This review presents metaheuristic frameworks to
guide the design of heuristic optimization algorithms during the last 50 years. It discusses the role of the journal in which it
is published in introducing solid heuristic papers. This work also recalls the maturity of the field, which leads to solving very
complex problems, with a growing number of researchers applying them, as shown in the numerous conferences and related
events. Also, they criticize the fragmentation as each group of research usually applies the same methods regardless of the
type of problem being solved, the lack of theoretical foundations, the limited analytical understanding of novel proposals,
the problem-specific tuning of metaheuristics, the lack of standardized benchmarking protocols and the absence of general
guidelines. Several research directions are also annotated for researchers to be applied in the future.
•Learn to optimize – A brief overview - 2024 [41] : This paper discusses the concept of Learn to Optimize (L2O) and
its application in accelerating the configuration process to obtain a good solver for unseen instances. The studies can be
categorized into three main types: training a solver performance prediction model, training a single solver, and training
a portfolio of solvers. The first category aims to connect problem instance features with solver performance, resulting in
the selection of the best solver, as seen in Automated Algorithm Selection (AAS). The second category, training a single
solver, involves finding the best solver for overall performance on the training instances, known as Automatic Algorithm
Configuration (AAC). The last category, training a portfolio of solvers, is a more general case of the second category in
which a set of solvers is trained, introducing a higher degree of freedom. L2O has achieved importance in general-purpose
approaches and other problems like adversarial attacks.
55