Figure 1: Number of papers with bio-inspired optimization andnature-inspired optimization in the title, abstract and/or
keywords, over the period 2005–April 2024 (Scopus database).
where to classify both the existing bio-inspired algorithms and new proposals to appear in the future. Unfortunately, the
majority of such publications do not include any type of taxonomy, nor do they perform an exhaustive analysis of the similarity
of their proposed algorithms concerning other counterparts. Instead, they only focus on the nature or biological metaphor
motivating the design of their meta-heuristic.
This metaphor-driven research trend has been already underscored in several contributions [9, 10], which have unleashed
hot debates around specific meta-heuristic schemes that remain unresolved to date [11, 12]. This problem gets exacerbated
when important challenges are overseen and if more and more biological inspirations are used as the primary driver for
research, as we can observe in 2024 with more than 500 proposals. It is our firm belief that this controversy could be lessened
by a comprehensive taxonomy of nature and bio-inspired optimization algorithms that settled the criteria to justify the novelty
and true contributions of current and future advances in the field.
In this fifth version of the original study published in [1], we have classified 518 works proposing different types of
meta-heuristic algorithms. Building upon this knowledge, we herein propose two different taxonomies for nature- and
bio-inspired optimization algorithms:
• The first taxonomy classifies algorithms based on their natural or biological inspiration so that given a specific algorithm,
we can find its category quickly and without any ambiguity. The goal of this first taxonomy is to allow easy grouping the
upsurge of solvers published in the literature.
• The second taxonomy classifies the reviewed algorithms based exclusively on their behavior, i.e., how they generate new
candidate solutions for the function to be optimized. Our aim is to group together algorithms with similar behavior, without
considering its inspirational metaphor.
We believe that this dual criterion can be very useful for researchers. The first one helps classify the different proposals
3