9 A Short Recent Literature Analysis: Good Practices, Taxonomies, Overviews,
and General Approaches
Since the initial version of this paper in 2020, the field of nature and bio-inspired optimization algorithms has continuously
evolved. During these last years, the lack of novelty, and bad comparisons, among others, are described as problems that
have to be solved to keep the field in progress. As a result, in Subsection 9.1, we show several studies and guidelines as
good practices for designing metaheuristics. At the same time, researchers continue to work on new ways of classifying
metaheuristics and publishing general studies on the topic. That is why in Subsection 9.2 we consider, without the intention of
being exhaustive with all the studies, a summary of almost a dozen of recent studies about taxonomies [33, 34, 35], overviews
[15, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40], and general approaches [41]. For each paper cited in both subsections, we provide its title, year of
publication, and a very short summary of its main contents.
9.1 Good Practices for Designing Metaheuristics
The constant evolution of the field leads to a significant issue: the lack of novelty in metaheuristics. However, researchers
recognize the need to address this problem and have proposed methods to evaluate the novelty of new algorithms. This
section shows different studies and guidelines to measure novelty, to design new metaheuristics, and to perform statistical
tests between metaheuristics. We list these approaches as follows:
•On detecting the novelties in metaphor-based algorithms - 2021 [32] : This work studies the comparison at the conceptual
level using a mathematical formulation based on Markov’s chains, and also at the experiment level using the Spearman
correlation coefficient between the objective and the population diversity of the algorithms.
•Similarity in metaheuristics: A gentle step towards a comparison methodology - 2022 [27] : This paper uses a pool
template as a framework for decomposing and analyzing metaheuristics, inspired by another previous work. This template
works as a framework for decomposing and analyzing metaheuristics based on these concepts explained in such work:
generation method, pool of solutions, archive of solutions, selected pool of solutions, updating mechanism, updated pool,
and the archiving and output functions. The authors provide some measures and methodologies to identify their similarities
and novelties based on the updating mechanism component, similar to our second taxonomy. They review 15 metaheuristics
and their insights confirm that many metaheuristics are special cases of others.
•Metaheuristics “In the Large” - 2022 [28] : The objective of this work is to provide a useful tool for researchers. To
address the lack of novelty, the authors propose a new infrastructure to support the development, analysis, and comparison
of new approaches. This framework is based on (1) the use of algorithm templates for reuse without modification, (2) white
box problem descriptions that provide generic support for the injection of domain-specific knowledge, and (3) remotely
accessible frameworks, components, and problems. This can be considered as a step towards the improvement of the
reproducibility of results.
•Designing new metaheuristics: Manual versus automatic approaches - 2023 [29] : This study discusses two methods for
the design of new metaheuristics, manual or automatic. Although authors give credit to the manual design of metaheuristics
because this development is based on the designer’s intuition and often involves looking for inspiration in other fields of
knowledge, which is a positive aspect. However, they remark that this method could involve finding a good algorithm design
in a large set of options through trial and error, possibly leading to eliminating designs that, based on their knowledge, they
believe would not work for the problem at hand. For this reason, the authors assure the benefits of automatic design,
which seeks to reduce human involvement in the design process by harnessing recent advances in automatic algorithm
configuration methods. In this work, several automatic configuration methods and metaheuristic software frameworks from
the literature are presented and analyzed, some of them already mentioned in section 6, as steps towards better design of
metaheuristics.
•Research orientation and novelty discriminant for new metaheuristic algorithms - 2024 [26] : This work proposes a
discriminant method based on a mathematical formulation. It provides the division into root and homologous algorithms so
that the former represent strongly innovative proposals due to the novelty of their reproduction operators, and the latter
does not show any new combinatorial structure about their reproduction operator. This method shows that Harmony
53