novel behavior-based taxonomy.
3 Taxonomy by Source of Inspiration
In this section, we propose a novel taxonomy based on the inspirational source in which nature- and bio-inspired algorithms
are claimed to find their design rationale in the literature. This allows classifying the great amount and variety of contributions
reported in related fora.
The proposed taxonomy presented in what follows was developed reviewing 518 papers over different years, starting
from the most classical proposals in the late 80’s (such as Simulated Annealing [79] or PSO [80]) to more novel techniques
appearing in the literature until 2024 [81]. Thus, to our knowledge, this exercise can be considered the most exhaustive review
in the area to date.
Taking into account all the reviewed papers, we group the proposals therein in a hierarchy of categories. In the hierarchy,
not all proposals of a category must fit in one of its subcategories. In our classification, categories lying at the same level are
disjoint sets, which means that each proposed algorithm can be only a member of one of these categories. To this end, for
each algorithm, we select the category considered to be most suitable considering the nuances of the algorithm that allow us
to differentiate it from its remaining counterparts.
Methodologically, a classification of all nature- and bio-inspired algorithms that can be found in the literature can become
complicated, considering the different sources of inspiration as biological, physical, human-being, ... In some papers, authors
suggest a possible categorization of more well-established groups, but not in all of them. Also, its classification could not be
more appropriate and become eventually obsolete, since the number of proposals – and thereby, the diversity of sources of
inspiration motivating them – increases over time. Algorithms within each proposed category were selected by their relative
importance in the field, considering the number of citations, the number of algorithmic variants that were inspired by that
algorithm, and other similar factors.
When establishing a hierarchical classification, it is important to achieve a good trade-off between information and
simplicity by the following criteria:
• When to establish a new division of a category into subcategories: a coarse split criterion for the taxonomy can imply
categories of little utility for the subsequent analysis, since in that case, the same category would group very different
algorithms. On the other hand, a fine-grained taxonomy can produce very complex hierarchies and, therefore, with little
usefulness. To keep the taxonomy simple yet informative for our analytical purposes, we decided that a category should
have at least four algorithms in order to be kept in the taxonomy. Thus, a category is only decomposed into subcategories if
each of them has coherence and a minimum representativeness (as per the number of algorithms it contains).
• Which number of subcategories into which to divide a category: the criterion followed in this regard must produce meaningful
subcategories. In order to ensure a reduced number of subcategories, we consider that not all algorithms inside one category
must be a member of one of its subcategories. In that way, we avoid introducing mess categories that lack cohesion.
Figure 2 depicts the classification we have reached, indicating, for the 518 reviewed algorithms, the number and ratio of
proposals classified in each category and subcategory. It can be observed that the largest group of all is Swarm Intelligence
category (more than a half of the proposed, 53%), inspired in the Swarm Intelligence concept [64], followed by the Physics
and Chemistry category, inspired by different physical behaviors or chemical reactions (almost 15% of proposals). Other
relevant categories are Social Human Behavior Algorithms (11%), inspired by human aspects, and Breeding-based Evolution
(near 7%), inspired by the Theory of Evolution over a population of individuals, that includes very renowned algorithms such
as Genetic Algorithms. A new category emerges from our study – Plants Based – which has not been included in other
taxonomies. Nearly 10% of the proposals are so different between them that they cannot be grouped in new categories. The
percentage of classification of each category is visually displayed in Figure 3.
For the sake of clarity regarding the classification criteria, in the next subsections, we provide a brief description of the
different categories in this first taxonomy, including their main characteristics, an example, and a table listing the algorithms
belonging to each category.
7