4 Taxonomy by Behavior for Population based Nature- and Bio-inspired Optimization
We now proceed with our second proposed taxonomy for population-based metaheuristics. In this case, we sort the
different algorithmic proposals reported by the community by their behavior, without any regard to their source of inspiration.
To this end, a clear sorting criterion is needed that, while keeping itself agnostic with respect to its inspiration, could summarize
as much as possible the different behavioral procedures characterizing the algorithms under review. The criterion adopted for
this purpose is the mechanisms used for creating new solutions, or for changing existing solutions to the optimization problem.
These are the main features that define the search process of each algorithm.
First, we have divided the reviewed optimization algorithms into two categories:
•Differential Vector Movement , in which new solutions are produced by a shift or a mutation performed onto a previous
solution. The newly generated solution could compete against previous ones, or against other solutions in the population
to achieve a space and remain therein in subsequent search iterations. This solution generation scheme implies selecting
a solution as the reference, which is changed to explore the space of variables and, effectively, produce the search for
the solution to the problem at hand. The most representative method of this category is arguably PSO [80], in which
each solution evolves with a velocity vector to explore the search domain. Another popular algorithm with differential
movement at its core is DE [59], in which new solutions are produced by adding differential vectors to existing solutions
in the population. Once a solution is selected as the reference one, it is perturbed by adding the difference between other
solutions. The decision as to which solutions from the population are influential in the movement is a decision that has an
enormous influence on the behavior of the overall search. Consequently, we further divide this category by that decision.
The movement – thus, the search – can be guided by i) all the population (Figure 4.a); ii) only the significant/relevant
solutions, e.g., the best and/or the worst candidates in the population (Figure 4.b); or iii) a small group, which could stand
for the neighborhood around each solution or, in algorithms with subpopulations, only the subpopulation to which each
solution belongs (Figure 4.c).
•Solution creation , in which new solutions are not generated by mutation/movement of a single reference solution, but
instead by combining several solutions (so there is not only a single parent solution), or other similar mechanism. Two
approaches can be utilized for creating new solutions. The first one is by combination, or crossover of several solutions
(Figure 4.d). The classical GA [98] is the most straightforward example of this type. Another approach is by stigmergy
(Figure 4.e), in which there is indirect coordination between the different solutions or agents, usually using an intermediate
structure, to generate better ones. A classical example of stigmergy for creating solutions is ACO [598], in which new
solutions are generated by the trace of pheromones left by different agents on a graph representing the solution space of the
problem under analysis.
Bearing the above criteria in mind, Figure 5 shows the classification reached after our literature analysis. The plot indicates,
for the 518 reviewed algorithms, the number and ratio of proposals classified in each category and subcategory. It can be
observed that in most nature- and bio-inspired algorithms, new solutions are generated by differential vector movement over
existing ones (69% vs 31%). Among them, the search process is mainly guided by representative solutions (almost 60% in
global, 86% from this category), mainly the so-called current best solution (in a very similar fashion to the naive version of
the PSO solver). Thus, the creation of new solutions by movement vectors oriented towards the best solution is the search
mechanism found in more than half (almost 60%) of all the 518 reviewed proposals.
25