8.3 Bridging Theory and Practice in Bio-inspired Optimization: Application to real-world Problems
The correct design of a bio-inspired algorithm involves the execution of a series of steps in a conscientious and organized
manner, both at the time of algorithm development and during subsequent experimentation and application to real-world
optimization problems. In [5], a complete tutorial on the design of new bio-inspired algorithms is presented, and in this work,
we make a brief introduction to the phases that are necessary for quality research.
In such work, an analysis is conducted from a critical yet constructive point of view, aiming to correct misconceptions and
bad methodological habits. Each phase of the analysis includes the prescription of application guidelines and recommendations
intended for adoption by the community. These guidelines are intended to promote actionable metaheuristics designed and
tested in a principled manner, to achieve valuable research results and ensure their practical use in real-world applications.
Other studies have standardized key optimization concepts, though often focusing narrowly on specific phases or domains.
However, this tutorial addresses this gap by offering a comprehensive approach, covering all steps from problem modeling
to algorithm validation and implementation. This analysis sheds light on different issues to be solved while designing new
bio-inspired algorithms and, to prevent this difficulty, a list of the steps to be performed during the creation of the algorithm is
presented, ranging from the early phase of problem modeling to the validation of the developed algorithm, as follows:
•Problem Modeling and Mathematical Formulation : Leading by a previous conceptualization of the problem, this phase
entails the modeling and mathematical formulation of the optimization problem.
•Algorithmic Design, Solution Encoding and Search Operators : The goal of this phase is to design and implement the
bio-inspired algorithm. In order to do so, we have to avoid the metaphor and align the design of the algorithm according to
the constraints of the problem at hand.
•Performance Assessment, Comparison and Replicability : Certain aspects of correct evaluation, applicability, and consistency
of the research are studied in this phase. It should be based on good practices as he published in [4] which are resumed in
the previous subsection.
•Algorithmic Deployment for Real-World Applications : This phase is focused on the study of the deployment of the
algorithm in a real environment.
These phases are described in depth in the manuscript, but here we show in Figure 9 a summary of the main recommendations
for every phase of the proposed methodology for the design of new bio-inspired optimization algorithms.
Figure 9: Summary of the recommendations in the four stages of the proposed methodology for the design of new bio-inspired
algorithms. Image taken from [5].
52