Search, Backtracking Search Optimization Algorithm, Grey Prediction Evolution algorithm, Grey Wolf Optimizer, and
Gaining-sharing Knowledge-based algorithm are homologous to several classical algorithms. As a consequence, they
develop a research orientation for homologous algorithms to transform the nature metaphor into new structures.
•Guided learning strategy: A novel update mechanism for metaheuristic algorithms design and improvement - 2024
[30]: This work provides guidelines for improving the performance of metaheuristics. The authors have developed a strategy
for recalling the algorithm’s requirements based on the current population. Authors annotate that this novel mechanism is
capable of checking that if the algorithm is biased towards exploration, it will shift towards exploitation in subsequent
iterations and vice versa. This strategy obtains the dispersion degree of the population by calculating the standard deviation
of the historical locations of individuals in recent generations and infers what guidance the algorithm currently needs. This
method has been tested with nearly 60 algorithms, validating its effectiveness in improving performance.
•A Simple statistical test against origin-biased metaheuristics - 2024 [31] : The authors have developed a test to determine
algorithm bias. The test is based on the idea that an unbiased algorithm can choose either direction for one of two different
local optima in a function. If there is a difference in behavior between independent runs, then the algorithm is likely biased.
Algorithms that are biased in terms of the fitness function can lead to undesired behavior. This paper develops and applies
a test to known algorithms, including Grey Wolf Optimizer, Whale Optimization, and Harris Hawk, which fail this test.
However, algorithms such as DE, GA, and PSO pass the test. This test is a useful tool to solve the centre-bias problem that
has already been studied in [25].
9.2 Latest Metaheuristics based Taxonomies, Overviews, and General Approaches
This section aims to briefly analyze a summary of almost a dozen other taxonomies, overviews, and global approaches
developed during these years. Sorted by year of publication, each work is shortly explained to summarize their messages and
contribution to the community:
•A new taxonomy of global optimization algorithms - 2020 [33] : This work analyzes the four characteristic elements
of optimization algorithms: how they initialize, generate, and select solutions, how these solutions are evaluated, and
lastly, how these algorithms can be parametrized and controlled. By leveraging these elements, a generalized view of
optimization algorithms can be created, just by identifying their specific components. The algorithms, according to those
specific components, are classified in a taxonomy based on five categories: hill-climbing, trajectory, population-based,
surrogate, or hybrid algorithms. Moreover, the study concludes that most algorithms and algorithm classes have a close
connection and share similar components, operators, and a large part of their search strategies, which is the basis for the
automated design of new algorithms. Lastly, this work provides a guide for algorithm selection, offering best practices for
advanced practitioners when choosing optimization algorithms for new problems.
•Nature inspired optimization algorithms or simply variations of metaheuristics? - 2021 [15] : This overview focuses
on the study of the frequency of new proposals that are no more than variations of old ones. The authors critique a large
set of algorithms based on three criteria: (1) whether there is a physical analogy that follows the metaheuristic, (2) whether
most algorithms are duplicates or similarly inspired, and (3) whether the authors propose different techniques based on the
same idea. They then specify their criteria for introducing a new metaheuristic.
•An exhaustive review of the metaheuristic algorithms for search and optimization: taxonomy, applications, and open
challenges - 2023 [34] : This taxonomy provides a large classification of metaheuristics based on the number of control
parameters of the algorithm. In this work, the authors question the novelty of new proposals and discuss the fact that calling
an algorithm new is often based on relatively minor modifications to existing methods. They highlight the limitations of
metaheuristics, open challenges, and potential future research directions in the field.
•Metaheuristics in a nutshell - 2023 [36] : The purpose of this overview is to define the main terms related to the concept
of metaheuristic. The text does not provide an extensive taxonomy, but it clearly distinguishes between two classes of
metaheuristics: trajectory and population algorithms. It describes the most well-known algorithms for both classes and for
single and multi-objective problems. Finally, quality indicators and statistical analysis are explained as good practices. This
overview serves as an introduction to the main concepts, algorithms, and methodologies that every metaheuristics researcher
should know.
54