reflected by the authors is “the lack of a well-established statistical tradition in the field compounds the problem, leading
to generally poor practices by authors and, in many cases, an inability of reviewers to pick up on the main methodological
problems of some papers”.
• In [23], authors aim to present some nature-inspired methods that contribute to achieving lifelike features of computing
systems such as open-ended evolution, intelligence, emergence, resilience, and social awareness. In this work, authors select
the algorithms of Big Bang–Big Crunch, Mine Blast Algorithm, Lightning Search Algorithm, Water Wave Optimization,
Gravitational Search Algorithm, Cat Swarm Optimization, Chicken Swarm Optimization, and Roach Infestation Optimization
to “investigate if the mechanisms being part of the algorithms produce qualities found in evolutionary, physical, or chemical
analogues.” The conclusion is that most nature-inspired algorithms “do not contribute to achieving lifelike features” and
that “the recent algorithms do not remain accurate to the behavior or the phenomenon on which they are based.”
• In [24], the authors claim that grey wolf, moth-flame, whale, firefly, bat, and antlion algorithms are not novel algorithms, and
their inspiration has been in the literature for years. To assert this, the authors present a rigorous, component-based analysis
of each algorithm that reveals evidences about them: these algorithms are variants of PSO and evolutionary strategies.
• In [25], authors discuss the problem of centre-bias. 47 of 90 algorithms that were compared presented a centre-bias. Also,
the authors conclude that Harmony Search (HS), Cuckoo Search Algorithm, Firefly Algorithm, Moth Flame Optimization,
Ant Lion Optimizer (ALO) should not be used, due to similarities to other algorithms.
7.3 The Ugly : Poor Methodological Practices (Questionable Reproducibility and Comparability)
An alarming issue that prevails in the area besides the number of metaphor-based proposals is the lack of a fair experimental
study to prove their competitiveness when compared to existing solvers. In many research contributions, the newly introduced
bio-inspired optimization algorithms are not compared to relevant techniques, but only to classical solvers already surpassed
by more recent approaches. Therefore, improving their performance in a benchmark is not a reliable proof of performance
competitiveness, but rather a convenient choice of comparison counterparts. Moreover, the experimental design is often not
right: for example, the optima of the tested functions is often at the center of the domain search, which favors solvers that focus
their search over this region of the solution space. In addition, the statistical significance of the performance gaps reported
among algorithms is also frequently overlooked, despite the variability of the results imprinted by the stochastic nature of
these algorithms. In this regard, in [25] the same controversy as shown in [21] is followed: several algorithms contain a
centre-bias operator that makes them more suitable for certain fitness functions. As a result of such bias, these algorithms
achieve better results than other algorithms in the appearance of this condition. Thus, they should not be recommended for
real-world problems, because the experiments that showed their good performance are biased.
Another important concern in the area is the questionable reproducibility of published studies: the only proof that a
proposal is competitive is done experimentally, so it is of utmost importance that results can be reproduced, checked, and
verified by third parties, ideally by a different team to that proposing the new algorithm. Unfortunately, in the majority of
cases, this is not possible because the implementation of the algorithms is not available, or because important information for
the replicability of the experiments is missing or not reported whatsoever [626].
More and more researchers are advocating that a novel metaphor is not enough for a new bio-inspired algorithm to be
considered a step beyond the state of the art. Instead, several factors should be proven with empirical evidence, such as superior
performance to the state of the art, innovation in the design of its mathematical components and operators, or non-functional
benefits that make them more appropriate for real-world optimization problems when compared to other alternatives, e.g. less
computational complexity, smaller memory footprint, or faster convergence properties [5].
We strongly urge interested readers to embrace the methodological practices recommended in [4], considering proposals
that have been tested against modern techniques, using standard benchmarks, and with adequate statistical testing to shed light
on the relevance of performance gaps. Unfortunately, many recent proposals do not follow these guidelines, remaining as
evidence of the ugly side that still prevails in this research area.
8 Three Propositional Discussions about Nature- and Bio-Inspired Optimization
As we have mentioned in the introduction, we revisit a triple study of evolutionary and bio-inspired algorithms from
a triple perspective, where we stand and what’s next from a perspective published in 2020, but still valid in terms of the
48