•Similar inspiration or duplicate methods? : Authors analyze several classes of bio-inspired algorithms such as those
based on gravitational forces, water phenomena, bees, penguins, wolves, and bacteria, and conclude that not all the different
variations are real contributions.
•Do authors propose multiple techniques based on the same idea? : Authors discuss the fact that “ several cases can be
found where the same authors propose multiple algorithms, which are based on the same nature-inspired idea.” They show
various examples in which a research group has almost a dozen “novel” algorithms, with the same researchers at the front.
Also, a relevant group of algorithms that are based and attraction and repulsion is full of works under the same researcher’s
name.
•When should a new nature-inspired algorithm be introduced? : The authors analyze the cases in which it is necessary
to create novel algorithms. In their words, “They could be used as global optimizers, while a heuristic algorithm could be
added for acting as local search technique for the solutions provided by the nature-inspired method.” They also annotate the
ability of these algorithms as optimizers for Artificial Neural Networks and Support Vector Machines.
Due to “useless metaphors”, “lack of novelty” and “poor experimental validation and comparison”, in [16] authors took
the decision in this letter to “call upon all editors-in-chief in the field to adapt their editorial policies” to reject the publication
ofnovel metaphor-based metaheuristics. More than 80 important researchers in the area signed this letter, and accept the
publication of novel bio-inspired algorithms if and only if (1) present their method using the normal, standard optimization
terminology; (2) show that the new method brings useful and novel concepts to the field; (3) motivate the use of the metaphor
on a sound, scientific basis; and (4) present a fair comparison with other state-of-the-art methods using state-of-the-art practices
for benchmarking algorithms.
In the following, we shortly describe the critical analysis that has recently been published in several articles that address
this problem “not leading to innovative solvers”:
• In [17], the authors argue that metaheuristics should be simplified by eliminating the unneeded elements as in the case of
two winners of the CEC2016 competition, L-SHADE-EpSin and UMOEA-II. The authors conclude that these algorithms
“contain operators that structurally bias their search by favouring sampling from some parts of the decision space” and “other
metaheuristics should be simplified as they contain unneeded or even harmful operators”. By doing so, metaheuristics will
be easier to understand for other researchers. The authors simplify both algorithms by removing operators that are the main
cause of structural bias and the experiments when testing against other metaheuristics reveal “ that simplification of some
metaheuristics may not only make them more transparent and easier to use, but also improve their performance.”
• In [18, 19], the authors analyze the algorithm called Intelligent Water Drops, providing several proofs that “ all main
algorithmic components of Intelligent Water Drops are simplifications or special cases of ant colony optimization (ACO)”.
They also examine the natural metaphor of “water drops flowing in rivers removing the soil from the riverbed”, which is the
source of inspiration for this algorithm. Authors conclude that it “is unnecessary, misleading and based on unconvincing
assumptions of river dynamics and soil erosion that lack a real scientific rationale”.
• In [20], authors present an analysis of the Cuckoo Search, one of the most well-known algorithms in the literature. Their
review of this algorithm based on its usefulness, novelty and sound motivation allow them to “conclude that neither the
metaphor nor the algorithm can be considered as part of the set of useful techniques in stochastic optimization”. The
Cuckoo Search is just an evolutionary strategy with some parts of DE, algorithms from the last century.
• In [21], authors perform a comparison between seven bio-inspired algorithms with various benchmarks and discovered that
“these (algorithms) contain a centre-bias operator that lets them find optima in the centre of the benchmark set with ease”.
The conclusion is that making more “comparison with other methods (that do not have a centre-bias) is meaningless”.
This problem is similar to the appearance of harmful operators, which has already been discussed in [17]. Authors carry
out experimentation with these algorithms against DE and PSO on shifted problems and encounter that “the worst one
performed barely better than a random search”, which is a very serious problem.
• In [22], authors discuss the possible causes of the exponential growth of nature-inspired algorithms and the negative
consequences for the field. One cause is the pressure to “publish or perish,” and authors argue that the “publishing
metaphor-based method is perceived as a low-effort, low-risk process with high potential rewards” because there are authors
that have built professional careers out of creating not one but often multiple metaphor-based methods. The other cause
47