Figure 3: Ratio of reviewed algorithms by its category (first taxonomy).
3.1 Breeding-based Evolutionary Algorithms
This category comprises population-based algorithms inspired by the principles of Natural Evolution. Each individual
in the population represents a solution of the problem and has an associated fitness value (namely, the value of the problem
objective function for that solution). In these algorithms, a process of reproduction (also referred to breeding or crossover) and
survival iterated over successive generations makes the population of solutions potentially evolve towards regions of higher
optimality (as told by the best solution in the population). Thus, this category is characterized by the fact of being inspired
by the concept of breeding-based evolution, without considering other operators performed on individuals than reproduction
(e.g., mutation).
More in detail, in these algorithms we have a population with individuals that have the ability to breed and produce new
offspring. Therefore, from the parents, we get children, which introduces some variety with respect to their parents. These
characteristics allow them to adapt to the environment which, translated to the optimization realm, permits them to search more
efficiently over the solution space of the problem at hand. By virtue of this mechanism, we have a population that evolves
through generations and, when combined with a selection (survival) and – possibly – other operators, results are improved.
Nevertheless, the breeding characteristic is what makes algorithms within this category unique with respect to those in other
categories.
Table 2 compiles all reviewed algorithms that fall within this category. As could have been a priori expected, well-known
classical Evolutionary Computation algorithms can be observed in this list, such as Genetic Algorithm (GA), Evolution
Strategies (ES), and Differential Evolution (DE). However, other algorithms based on the reproduction of different biological
organisms are also notable, such as queen bees and weeds.
3.2 Swarm Intelligence based Algorithms
Swarm Intelligence (SI) is already a consolidated term in the community, which was first introduced by Gerardo Beni and
Jing Wang in 1989 [47]. It can be defined as the collective behavior of decentralized, self-organized systems, in either natural
or artificial environments. The expression was proposed in the context of robotic systems, but has generalized over the years
to denote the emergence of collective intelligence from a group of simple agents, governed by simple behavioral rules. Thus,
9