•Academic competitions : From the research perspective, several worldwide competitions have developed over the years
to test new proposals in an unbiased and replicable way. In such competitions, DE has created a great impact as the core
meta-heuristic algorithm of winning competitors in the global optimization competitions held in renowned conferences
(GECCO and CEC) over the last decade [44]. The family of EAs has attracted the interest of researchers by participating
in genetic and evolutionary competitions with prizes4(Annual "Humies" Awards For Human-Competitive Results), and
others such as GECCO and CEC previously annotated [600].
•Going deeper into the creation of Machine Learning (ML) and Deep Learning (DL) models : Although most algorithms
have been developed in recent years, the impact of EAs, a classical family of algorithms, has risen in the last few years.
Their use in ML has been widely studied both for the design of models [615] and also as a support for the optimization of
those models [616]. These algorithms have gained momentum under the evidence reported around their usage to evolve and
improve other AI techniques: most notably, the optimization of the structure and training parameters of deep neural networks
[8], or the creation of new data-based models from scratch (i.e. by evolving very essential data processing primitives) that
has been presented in the groundbreaking work by Google [617]. With this ongoing development, the research trend of
Neural Architecture Search has emerged as another important area full of EAs applications [618], which mainly focuses
on the construction of the DL model via the evolution of block of layers [619, 14, 620]. Recently, we have witnessed the
use of EAs to model more AI models, as in the case of POET [621] where more environments are generated to learn from
the diversity created, with the merging of EAs with Large Language Model (LLM) [622], and with other areas such as
Automated Machine Learning [623], Reinforcement Learning and robotics [624], and Multi-task Learning [625]. In recent
years, an interesting synergy between bio-inspired optimization and modern ML systems has been observed in the literature,
in particular General-Purpose Artificial Intelligence Systems (GPAIS), as we will highlight later in the report.
7.2 The Bad: Novel Metaphors Not Leading to Innovative Solvers
As previously mentioned, an ever-growing amount of new bio-inspired optimization techniques has been proposed in
recent decades (see Figure 1). This overwhelming number of alternatives could make it difficult to choose an appropriate
option for a given optimization problem. The vast number of proposals not only casts doubt on the convenience of choosing
one or another algorithm but has also produced solvers that, even if relying on different metaphors, are mathematically too
similar to already existing optimization algorithms. In other words, despite the diversity of methods considering their natural
inspiration, such diversity does not hold as far as mathematical differences are concerned, as exposed by recent studies
[13]. As we have mentioned in the introduction, this metaphor-driven research trend has been already denounced in several
contributions [9, 10], which have unleashed hot debates around specific meta-heuristic schemes that remain unresolved to
date [11, 12], and with a growing problem when important challenges are not addressed and if more and more biological
inspirations are maintained as we can observe in 2024 with more than 500 proposals.
Particular reasons aside, some algorithms are not created to solve problems and provide a practical advantage, but mainly
to be published and gain notoriety without any consideration for their lack of algorithmic novelty and innovation. Examples
of this controversy can be found in [14], as authors state this problem even in the title of the work. In the previous work,
authors “provide compelling evidence that the grey wolf, the firefly, and the bat algorithms are not novel, but a reiteration of
ideas introduced first for particle swarm optimization and reintroduced years later using new natural metaphors”. Then, they
rewrite these highly cited papers in terms of PSO, and conclude that “they create confusion because they hide their strong
similarities with existing PSO algorithms ... these three algorithms are unnecessary since they do not add anything new to the
tools that can be used to tackle optimization problems”.
More and more works lack variety in the field, as it was discussed in [15] (“Nature inspired optimization algorithms or
simply variations of metaheuristics?”), authors discussed several matters listed as follows:
•Does the physical analogue exist? : The inspiration of several bio-inspired algorithms does not strictly follow the rules of
a phenomenon. An example is Cat Swarm Optimization, in which cats form a swarm, but in real life, they do not seem
to cooperate in any way. Authors show more examples (Coyote Optimization Algorithm, Dolphin Swarm Optimization
Algorithm, among others), and claim that “ a significant number of these algorithms are very similar to other already
existing ones”.
4https://human-competitive.org/
46