by their origin of inspiration, whereas the second one provides valuable information about their algorithmic similarities and
differences. This double classification allows researchers to identify each new proposal in an adequate context. To the best of
our knowledge, there has been no previous attempt as ambitious as the one presented in this overview to organize the existing
literature on nature- and bio-inspired optimization.
Considering the classifications obtained in our study, we have critically examined the reviewed literature classification
in the different taxonomies proposed in this work. The goal is to analyze if there is a relationship between the algorithms
classified in the same category in one taxonomy and their classification in the other taxonomy. Next, similarities detected
among algorithms will allow discovering the most influential meta-heuristic algorithms, whose behavior has inspired many
other nature- and bio-inspired proposals.
These previous research tasks provide several insights to conduct a comprehensive two-fold analysis of the field:
• The first analysis focuses on taxonomies. Specifically, we provide several recommendations to improve research practices
in this area. The growing number of nature-inspired proposals could be seen as a symptom of the active status of this field;
however, its sharp evolution suggests that research efforts should be also invested towards new behavioral differences and
verifiable performance evidence in practical problems.
• The second analysis delves into a critical perspective on bio-inspired optimization. It discusses the strengths, weaknesses,
and challenges that have been identified in the field in recent years, while it also highlights the potential held for future
developments in bio-inspired optimization.
Both taxonomies and the analysis provide a full overview of the situation of the bio-inspired optimization field. However,
Figure 1 reflects the interest of research in this field, as the number of papers is in continuous growth of interest. We believe
that it is essential to highlight and reflect on what is expected from this field in the coming years, in terms of where it is
currently being used and how researchers are proposing methodologies to properly design and apply bio-inspired algorithms
not in real-world applications, but also in other emerging areas of Artificial Intelligence (AI). As a consequence, an analysis
of the field in terms of Bio-inspired Optimization ,Evolutionary Computation ,Guidelines ,Comparison Methodology and
Benchmarking are found in this report.
As we have mentioned in the abstract, in this final version of the report we have decided to take a brief tour of literature
from three broad perspectives with a more extensive approach to the document:
In Section 7, we pay attention from a triple critical position as it was pointed out in [2], highlighting the good (a present and
future plenty of exciting applications), the bad(novel metaphors not leading to innovative solvers, going deeper into the group
of works that criticize the lack of novelty of the new proposals [13, 9, 11, 10, 12, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25]),
and the ugly (poor methodological practices) as it was pointed out in [2], with an expansion of these analyses. As we have
mentioned, we must emphasize that in these new algorithms, there exists a lack of justification together with the lack of
comparison with the state of the art and of real interest in achieving reasonable levels of quality from the point of view of the
optimization of well-known problems in recent competitions. Good methodological practices must be followed in forthcoming
studies when designing, describing, and comparing new algorithms.
The analysis of the issues undergone by the field enables us to provide potential solutions and an analysis toward best
practices. Hence, in Section 8, we introduce three previous works, outlined as follows:
• Bio-inspired computation: Where we stand and what’s next [3].
• A prescription of methodological guidelines for comparing bio-inspired optimization algorithms [4].
• A tutorial on the design, experimentation, and application of metaheuristic algorithms to real-world optimization problems
[5].
Lastly, Section 9 presents an analysis of metaheuristics based on studies, guidelines, and other works of a more theoretical
nature that help to solve the problems of the field. We perform a brief review of recent studies that address good practices for
designing metaheuristics and discussions from this perspective, and a short review of references – without attempting to be
exhaustive – that address taxonomies, overviews, and general approaches in bio-inspired optimization. Therefore, this section
considers such studies from a double vision:
• Good practices for designing metaheuristics: It gathers several works that are guidelines for good practices related to
research orientation to measure novelty [26], to measure similarity in metaheuristics [27], Metaheuristics “In the Large”
4