Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
AUGMENTING GENETIC ALGORITHMS WITH DEEP
NEURAL NETWORKS FOR EXPLORING THE CHEMICAL
SPACE
AkshatKumar Nigam1;y, Pascal Friederich1;2;y
Mario Krenn ,1;3;4, Al´an Aspuru-Guzik1;3;4;5;
1Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto, Canada.
2Institute of Nanotechnology, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Germany.
3Department of Chemistry, University of Toronto, Canada.
4Vector Institute for Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Toronto, Canada.
5Canadian Institute for Advanced Research (CIFAR) Senior Fellow, Toronto, Canada
ABSTRACT
Challenges in natural sciences can often be phrased as optimization problems. Ma-
chine learning techniques have recently been applied to solve such problems. One
example in chemistry is the design of tailor-made organic materials and molecules,
which requires efﬁcient methods to explore the chemical space. We present a ge-
netic algorithm (GA) that is enhanced with a neural network (DNN) based dis-
criminator model to improve the diversity of generated molecules and at the same
time steer the GA. We show that our algorithm outperforms other generative mod-
els in optimization tasks. We furthermore present a way to increase interpretability
of genetic algorithms, which helped us to derive design principles.
Our open source implementation: https://github.com/aspuru-guzik-group/GA.
1 I NTRODUCTION
The design of optimal structures under constraints is an important problem spanning multiple do-
mains in the physical sciences. Speciﬁcally, in chemistry, the design of tailor-made organic mate-
rials and molecules requires efﬁcient methods to explore the chemical space. Purely experimental
approaches are often time consuming and expensive. Reliable computational tools can accelerate
and guide experimental efforts to ﬁnd new materials faster.
We present a genetic algorithm (GA) (Davis, 1991; Devillers, 1996; Sheridan & Kearsley, 1995;
Parrill, 1996) for molecular design that is enhanced with two features:
1. A neural network based adaptive penalty. This promotes exploratory behaviour of the GA
and thus improve the diversity of generated molecules.
2. Exploiting the robustness of S ELFIES (Krenn et al., 2019), we do not need to incorporate
any expert based mutation or cross-over rules.
Starting from only simple methane molecules, our algorithm outperforms other generative models in
optimization tasks for molecular design. By introducing machine learning (ML) techniques, the long
term behaviour is not subject to stagnation, thus solving a signiﬁcant problem in genetic algorithms
(Paszkowicz, 2009).
No domain knowledge is required; thus, our approach is not limited to chemistry-speciﬁc questions
but can be applied to a wide range of optimization problems.
yThese authors contributed equally
Correspondence to: alan@aspuru.com
1arXiv:1909.11655v4  [cs.NE]  15 Jan 2020