Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
Figure 7: Variation of the model parameter that weights the discriminator score in the overall
ﬁtness function. a) Average J(m)as a function of the generation. b) Average discriminator score as
a function of the generation. c) Distributions of J(m)and discriminator score Dfor multiple values
of. d) Examples of molecules generated with = 0and= 50 .
D(m). Large values of promote the generation of molecules that resemble the molecules from the
reference data set, while small values of let the GA explore molecules outside of the distribution
of the reference data set. To systematically explore this behaviour, we varied the parameter and
analyzed the resulting values of J(m),D(m)as well as their distributions. Figure 7 illustrates the
results of this test, where each curve is obtained from averaging ﬁve independent runs with equal
settings.
In Figure 7a, we show the average property score J(m)for 11 different values and observe, as
expected, that low values of on average lead to higher J(m)score while very high values of 
limit the algorithm to stay inside the reference data set distribution, which, per deﬁnition, has a mean
J(m)score of 0. Figure 7b illustrates the low average discriminator scores encountered after a few
generations in case of low values of . The curves shown in Figure 7a and b suggest that allows
us to interpolate between high and low J(m)and high and low resemblance with the reference data
set. However, as shown in Figure 7c, this is not the case. At values of 20, there is a rather fast
transition from molecules with high values of J(m)of approximately 12-13 to a J(m)distribution
centered around 0 which is similar to the J(m)distribution of the reference data set. The same
abrupt change is visible in the distributions of the discriminator scores. Only at 18, we ﬁnd a
slightly wider distribution of intermediate J(m)values, which we assume is partially related to the
fact that the = 18 curve shown in Figure 7a is not converged yet.
Figure 7d shows examples of molecules generated with = 0 (upper panel) and = 50 (lower
panel). While in the ﬁrst case, the GA ﬁnds large molecules with many aromatic rings and long linear
chains, that do not resemble the molecules in the reference data set, the latter case shows molecules
with structures and properties resembling the reference data set. In this case, the distribution of
J(m)is comparable to that of the data set (with 0mean and unit standard deviation), while the
discriminator encounters difﬁculty in correctly classiﬁcation of the GA molecules, indicated by a
mean discriminator score varying around 0.5 across many generations.
5 C ONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
We presented a hybrid GA and ML-based generative model and demonstrated its application in
molecular design. The model outperforms literature approaches in generating molecules with de-
sired properties. A detailed analysis of the data generated by the genetic algorithm allowed us to
8