Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
12:610:81(= 0), respectively, which is almost twice as high es the highest literature value of
7:870:07(See Table 1). Furthermore, we compare to 50,000 random valid S ELFIES strings, which
surprisingly outperforms some existing generative models. The GA-D(t) results are explained in the
next section.
4.2 L ONG TERM EXPERIMENT WITH A TIME -DEPENDENT ADAPTIVE PENALTY
Figure 3: Maximum J(m)values found for 10 independent runs with no discriminator ( = 0) and
5 independent runs with the introduction of a time-dependent adaptive penalty. The full line is the
average of all runs, the shaded areas are the boundaries of all runs and the dashed lines denote the
average of all maximal J(m)values found at any generation.
In Figure 3, we show the results of runs where we use a time-dependent adaptive penalty. During
periods of saturation, the weight of the discriminator predictions is switched from 0 to 1000 until
stagnation is overcome. The genetic algorithm is hence forced to propose new families of molecules
to increaseJ(m). As it can be observed in Figure 3, even after steep decreases in maxJ(m), the
scores recover and potentially reach values higher than in previous plateaus. We observe that this
approach signiﬁcantly outperforms all previous methods in maximizing the objective J(m).
Visual inspection of the highest performing molecules shows that the GA is exploiting deﬁciencies of
the (penalized) logP metric by generating chemically irrelevant motifs such as sulfur chains. While
being of limited relevance for application, this nonetheless shows the that the GA is very efﬁcient
in exploring the chemical space and ﬁnding solutions for a given task. Analysis of these solutions
will help us to better understand and eventually improve objective functions. At the same time, sur-
prising solutions found by an unbiased algorithm can lead to unexpected discovery or boost human
creativity (Lehman et al. (2018)). While exploitative tasks that follow some reference database are
signiﬁcant for questions involving drug design, more explorative behaviour could be beneﬁcial in
domains such as solar cell design (Yan et al. (2018)), ﬂow battery design (Yang et al. (2018)), and
in particular for questions where datas sets are not available, such as design of targets in molecular
beam interferometry (Fein et al. (2019)).
4.3 A NALYSIS OF MOLECULE CLASSES EXPLORED BY THE GA
Figure 4 shows classes of molecules explored by the GA in a trajectory with 1000 generations and
a generation size of 500 (see trajectories in Figure 3). A K-means clustering analysis based in the
RDKit ﬁngerprint bit-vectors with 20 clusters was used to automatically generate labels for the 50
best performing molecules (in terms of their properties J(m)) in each generation. We ﬁnd that the
algorithm starts with a class of relatively small molecules ( 40generations, see class 10), after
which the algorithm explores several different classes of large molecules with e.g. aromatic rings
and conjugates carbon chains (see class 15) and long linear sulfur chains (see class 1). Class 1
includes the molecules with the highest J(m)scores found in this work, exceeding values of 20.
The clustering analysis furthermore helps to analyze the large number of generated molecules. This
allows us to learn from the data and derive design rules to achieve high target properties. In case of
the penalized logP score, we ﬁnd that representative examples (short distance to the cluster center) of
high performing classes contain aromatic rings, conjugated carbon chains and linear sulfur chains,
which can act as design rules for molecules with high penalized logP scores. Using these design rules
to construct molecules of the maximally allowed length consisting of only sulfur chains, conjugated
carbon chains and chains of benzene rings with sulfur bridges yields J(m)scores of 31.79, 8.58 and
10.02, respectively. The J(m)score reached by the linear sulfur chain outperforms the best scores
found by the GA and other generative models.
5