Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
2 R ELATED WORKS
Inverse design is the systematic development of structures with desired properties. In chemistry
(Sanchez-Lengeling & Aspuru-Guzik, 2018), the challenge of inverse design has been tackled as
an optimization problem, among others in the form of variational autoencoders (V AEs), generative
adversarial networks (GANs) and genetic algorithms.
Variational autoencoders and generative adversarial networks V AEs (Kingma & Welling, 2013)
are a widely used method for direct generation of molecular string or graph representations (G ´omez-
Bombarelli et al., 2018). They encode discrete representations into a continuous (latent) space.
Molecules resembling a known structure can be found by searching around the region of the en-
coded point. Making using of the continuous latent representation, it is possible to search via gradi-
ents or Bayesian Optimization (BO). However, the generation of semantically and syntactically valid
molecules is a challenging task. Thus, several follow up works to the V AE have been proposed for
inverse design in chemistry. Among them, CV AE (G ´omez-Bombarelli et al., 2018), GV AE (Kusner
et al., 2017) and SD-V AE (Dai et al., 2018) work directly on string molecular representations. Alter-
natively, JT-V AE (Jin et al., 2018a) as well as CGV AE Liu et al. (2018) work on molecular graphs.
Unlike latent space property optimization, the policy network (PN) based GCPN model (You et al.,
2018) proposes a reinforcement learning (RL)-based method for direct optimization on molecular
graphs. ORGAN (Guimaraes et al., 2017) demonstrate training string-based generative adversarial
networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2014) via RL. Another method based on adversarial training is
VJTNN (Jin et al., 2018b). Segler et al. (2017) ﬁrst introduced molecule generating models based on
language models and reinforcement learning, where actions in an environment are taken to construct
a molecule, receiving reward from an external scoring function. This model has also shown strong
performance in the GuacaMol benchmark (Brown et al. (2019)).
In all the approaches mentioned above, generative models are trained to mimic the reference data
set distributions, thus limiting the exploration ability of V AEs and GANs.
Genetic algorithms & related methods There exist several examples of GA based molecule opti-
mization algorithms in literature (OBoyle et al., 2011; Virshup et al., 2013; Rupakheti et al., 2015;
Jensen, 2019; Sheridan & Kearsley, 1995; Parrill, 1996)). While some of these examples pre-deﬁne
mutations on a SMILES level to ensure validity of the molecules, other approaches use fragment-
based assembly of molecules. GAs are likely to get trapped in regions of local optima (Paszkowicz,
2009). Thus, for selection of the best molecules, (Rupakheti et al., 2015; Jensen, 2019) report mul-
tiple restarts upon stagnation.
We include the aforementioned models as baselines for numerical comparison.
3 GA-D A RCHITECTURE
3.1 O VERVIEW
Our approach is illustrated in Figure 1. Our generator is a genetic algorithm with a population of
moleculesm. In each generation, the ﬁtness of all molecules is evaluated as a linear combination of
molecular propertiesJ(m)and the discriminator score D(m):
F(m) =J(m) +D(m). (1)
Random mutations of high ﬁtness (best performing) molecules replace inferior members, while best-
performing molecules continue to a subsequent generation. The probability of replacing a molecule
is evaluated using a smooth logistic function based on a ranking of ﬁtness among the molecules
of a generation. At the end of each generation, a neural network based discriminator is trained
jointly on molecules generated by the GA and a reference data set . The ﬁtness evaluation accounts
for the discriminator predictions for each molecule. Therefore, the discriminator plays a role in the
selection of the subsequent population.
3.2 M UTATION & C ROSS -OVER RULES
Mutation of molecules to populate subsequent generations is an important element of the GA. A
low degree of mutation can lead to a slow exploration of the chemical space, causing stagnation
2