Electronics 2020 ,9, 2203 3 of 12
the ﬁnal prediction. However, an effective information bridge between shallow and deep layers can
enhance the local features, which may improve the brain tumor segmentation performance. W-Net is
another architecture that resembles the U-Net architecture, which uses two-stage U-Net. However,
the problem with W-Net is the high number of trainable parameters it has, which makes it difﬁcult to
train the model.
Keeping in mind the limitations in the baseline model, in this paper we propose a network named
BU-Net. For brain image segmentation, BU-Net introduces two modules that are embedded in a U-Net
architecture. These modules are residual extended skip (RES) and wide context (WC), which were
inspired by inception net [ 32] and deep lab [ 33] respectively. The following are the contributions made
by the BU-Net,
 Both new modules in BU-Net help to get the contextual information along with aggregation in
the global features.
 Residual extended skip (RES) converts the low-level features to middle-level features.
 It is useful when scale-invariant features are used, which is important in the case of brain tumor
segmentation, as the cancer regions vary from case to case.
 The RES module increases the valid receptive ﬁeld, which remains a problem in previous
techniques, as in those techniques the theoretical receptive ﬁeld is always dominant.
 Two combined loss functions are used to tackle the problem associated with a huge difference in
the percentage of pixels occupied by each class.
BU-Net has exhibited promising results when compared with existing state-of-the-art brain tumor
segmentation techniques.
2. Datasets
In this section, we discuss the publicly available benchmark databases used in this study.
The proposed BU-Net model was evaluated on two benchmark datasets. These datasets are BraTS
2017 and BraTS 2018. The BraTS 2017 dataset consists of images collected from 285 glioma patients,
out of which 210 were HGG cases and the remainder belong to LGG cases. Further, the validation
dataset of BraTS 2017 carries images of 46 patients with unknown grade. The ground truths of the
training data were labeled by the experts, and the labels of validation dataset are not made publicly
available; therefore, the results can only be generated from the online web-server of BraTS. The dataset
is labeled as four main classes which are:
 Enhancing tumor.
 Necrosis and non-enhancing tumor.
 Edema.
 Healthy tissue.
Figure 1 shows the two sample cases from the dataset. The BraTS 2018 dataset contains similar
training images as that of BraTS 2017. The labeling procedure and classes remain the same. The only
difference being made in BraTS 2018 is of the validation dataset. A new validation dataset is made
available which carried images collected from 66 patients from unknown grade.