Electronics 2020 ,9, 2203 2 of 12
post-contrast T1-weighted, and Flair. Different information from these modalities complements one
another for a robust brain tumor segmentation.
Since it is difﬁcult to divide brain tumors manually, a lot of effort is being devoted to develop
a method for automatically segmenting brain tumor regions. It is crucial to separate and interpret
tumors in the medical ﬁeld, and a clear understanding is essential. With advances in medical image
processing, ﬁnding tumor using machine learning has become more reliable and sophisticated than
in the past [ 5]. From a judgmental point of view, it is important that medical experts can trust the
algorithm’s predictions. In the ﬁeld of bioinformatics [ 6–8] and medical imaging [ 9,10], deep learning
algorithms have obtained impressive results. In recent times real-life applications of soft computing
techniques in different ﬁelds have proved that deep learning can have a good impact on human
lives [11–19].
The most common deep learning-based methods in the ﬁeld of medical image segmentation are
U-Net [ 20] and Fully Convolutional Network (FCN) [ 21]. Among them, U-net has proved to be the
most reliable technique in terms of performance. The U-net architecture has a U-symmetrical structure
where the left side performs encoder task and the right side of the architecture performs decoder task.
Another speciﬁcation in this architecture is that the encoder concatenates the corresponding layer of
the decoder. This characteristic allows the resultant feature map to have both low-level and high-level
features. Further, the model performance is improved by integrating features from different levels
while preserving the location information.
The 3-dimensional (3D) segmentation based on MRI [ 22] and the 2-dimensional 2D segmentation
based on slice [ 23] are the main methods for brain tumor segmentation. In the case of MRI-based
3D segmentation, there are few training data with labels [ 3,24,25], and it is difﬁcult to increase the
amount of data. In particular, enormous network parameters and memory issues make it hard to train
3D models.
Havaei et al. [ 26] proposed a speciﬁc multipath convolution neural network (CNN) to segment
the brain tumor region on the 2D sliced data of the MRI image. Besides, they used two training steps
(phases) to deal with unbalanced classes of input data. Shen et al. developed a boundary-aware FCN
to improve the segmentation performance [ 27]. Later, Kamnitsas et al. [ 22] developed a 3D network
called Deep Medic that extracts multi-scale feature maps and incorporates them locally and globally
using a two-path architecture.
On the other hand, training data for 2D segmentation are 155 times more dense (each 3D-MRI
datum contains 155 2D sliced data), so 2D segmentation has drawn attention recently [ 28]. In particular,
patch-based 2D models such as Pereira [ 23] and FCN-based (fully convolutional networks) 2D
models [ 21] such as U-net [ 20] are two representative kinds for 2D brain tumor segmentation.
The patch-based model classiﬁes surrounding patches to determine which class each pixel belongs
to. The pipeline of the patch-based model is generally composed of three main steps: pre-processing,
classiﬁcation using CNNs, and post-processing, which takes time and cannot be carried out
end-to-end [28].
In 2018 Wang et al. proposed a technique to gain long-range dependency of spatial-dimension [ 29].
For this purpose, the weighted sum of all responses was taken to generate a spatial feature response.
Further, in another study, the network learned long-range context with the help of location-sensitive
NL [ 30]. An increase in interest for network architecture such as FCN and U-net has occurred in
recent years. Among them, U-Net is the most widely used architecture due to its high performance.
In the recent reputed publication, the U-Net architecture was declared as a genetic solution algorithm
for research problems related to biomedical image data [ 31]. However, U-net was developed for
segmentation work for binary classes, and the output resolution is smaller than the input resolution
because it does not use convolution with padding. Therefore, U-net cannot be directly applied if
we require similar output resolution as that of input. Further, the U-Net architecture gradually
recovers the downsampling image, and low-level features from shallow layers are shared with the
deep layers. This direct information bridge generates distortion in the information, which affects