Electronics 2020 ,9, 2203 4 of 12
Figure 1. Showing two cases ( a,b) of a brain tumor with multimodal and labeled plots. From left
to right are T1, T2, T1ce (T1c), ﬂair, and the ground truth (labels). In ground truth images there are
3 colors used to represent three different tumor classes. Red represents necrosis and non-enhancing;
green represents edema; and yellow represents an enhancing tumor.
3. Methodology
In this section, we ﬁrst discuss image preprocessing, which is necessary for an input image. Then,
proposed BU-Net is discussed along with the two modules RES and WC, which are included to get
better performance.
3.1. Image Preprocessing
One of the weaknesses of deep learning models is that they are robust to noise; therefore, data
processing is an important task to be carried out before the image is given to the network. For this
purpose, N4ITK algorithm [ 34], a bias correction technique, is used on all images to make them
homogeneous. In the literature many different algorithms are used for the pre-processing of the input
images; however, the majority of the literature suggests that the N41TK algorithm for brain image
pre-processing is the most reliable [ 35,36]. The N41TK algorithm is capable of correcting the bias ﬁeld
of MRI data. Moreover, the intensities at top 1% and bottom 1% are discarded, as done in [ 26]. As a
ﬁnal step, all the images are normalized to a zero mean with unit variance.
3.2. Proposed BU-Net
In previous baseline architecture, no contextual information is shared between the shallow and
deep layers. There is a need to introduce a module which can create an information bridge between
shallow and deep layers so that local and global features of the network can be enhanced. Figure 2
shows the overall architecture of the proposed BU-Net, which includes RES blocks and a WC block.
The architecture takes input images of resolution 256256and outputs the images with the same
dimensions. The left part of the model act as an encoder and the right part of the model acts as a
decoder. The convolution layers with padding are used in BU-Net. This allows getting the same sized
image as the output as that given as input.
The encoder and decoder of the network are divided into blocks. On the encoder side every block
consists of two convolution layers along with a single max-pooling layer and a dropout layer. Every
block of the decoder side starts with the Conv2DTranspose layer applied on the output of the previous
block. The output of Conv2DTranspose layer is concatenated with the output generated from the
associated RES block. Dropout is applied to the concatenated output followed by two convolution
layers. The last block of the decoder includes another convolution layer with six ﬁlters of size 11.
The encoder side performs the contraction process on the image, and the decoder side performs the