Learning Data Augmentation Strategies for Object Detection
Barret Zoph, Ekin D. Cubuk, Golnaz Ghiasi, Tsung-Yi Lin, Jonathon Shlens, Quoc V . Le
Google Research, Brain Team
fbarretzoph, cubuk, golnazg, tsungyi, shlens, qvl g@google.com
Abstract
Data augmentation is a critical component of training
deep learning models. Although data augmentation has
been shown to signiﬁcantly improve image classiﬁcation,
its potential has not been thoroughly investigated for ob-
ject detection. Given the additional cost for annotating
images for object detection, data augmentation may be of
even greater importance for this computer vision task. In
this work, we study the impact of data augmentation on ob-
ject detection. We ﬁrst demonstrate that data augmenta-
tion operations borrowed from image classiﬁcation may be
helpful for training detection models, but the improvement
is limited. Thus, we investigate how learned, specialized
data augmentation policies improve generalization perfor-
mance for detection models. Importantly, these augmenta-
tion policies only affect training and leave a trained model
unchanged during evaluation. Experiments on the COCO
dataset indicate that an optimized data augmentation policy
improves detection accuracy by more than +2.3 mAP , and
allow a single inference model to achieve a state-of-the-art
accuracy of 50.7 mAP . Importantly, the best policy found
on COCO may be transferred unchanged to other detection
datasets and models to improve predictive accuracy. For ex-
ample, the best augmentation policy identiﬁed with COCO
improves a strong baseline on PASCAL-VOC by +2.7 mAP .
Our results also reveal that a learned augmentation pol-
icy is superior to state-of-the-art architecture regulariza-
tion methods for object detection, even when considering
strong baselines. Code for training with the learned policy
is available online.1
1. Introduction
Deep neural networks are powerful machine learning
systems that work best when trained on vast amounts of
data. To increase the amount of training data for neural
networks, much work was devoted to creating better data
Equal contribution.
1github.com/tensorflow/tpu/tree/master/models/
official/detection
5K 10K 20K 40K 80K
training examples051015202530354045mean average precisionFigure 1: Learned augmentation policy systematically
improves object detection performance . Left: Learned
augmentation policy applied to example from COCO
dataset [25]. Right: Mean average precision for RetinaNet
[24] with a ResNet-50 backbone on COCO [25] with and
without learned augmentation policy (red and black, respec-
tively).
augmentation strategies [3, 42, 21]. In the image domain,
common augmentations include translating the image by a
few pixels, or ﬂipping the image horizontally. Most modern
image classiﬁers are paired with hand-crafted data augmen-
tation strategies [21, 44, 16, 18, 56].
Recent work has shown that instead of manually design-
ing data augmentation strategies, learning an optimal policy
from data can lead to signiﬁcant improvements in general-
ization performance of image classiﬁcation models [22, 45,
8, 33, 31, 54, 2, 43, 37, 5]. For image classiﬁcation models,
data can be augmented either by learning a generator that
can create data from scratch [33, 31, 54, 2, 43], or by learn-
ing a set of transformations as applied to already existing
training set samples [5, 37]. For object detection models,
the need for data augmentation is more crucial as collect-
ing labeled data for detection is more costly and common
detection datasets have many fewer examples than image
classiﬁcation datasets. It is, however, unclear how to aug-
ment the data: Should we directly reuse data augmentation
strategies from image classiﬁcation? What should we do
1arXiv:1906.11172v1  [cs.CV]  26 Jun 2019