with the bounding boxes and the contents of the bounding
boxes?
In this work, we create a set of simple transformations
that may be applied to object detection datasets and then
transfer these transformations to other detection datasets
and architectures. These transformations are only used dur-
ing training and not test time. Our transformations include
those that can be applied to the whole image without af-
fecting the bounding box locations (e.g. color transforma-
tions borrowed from image classiﬁcation models), trans-
formations that affect the whole image while changing the
bounding box locations (e.g., translating or shearing of the
whole image), and transformations that are only applied to
objects within the bounding boxes. As the number of trans-
formations becomes large, it becomes non-trivial to man-
ually combine them effectively. We therefore search for
policies speciﬁcally designed for object detection datasets.
Experiments show that this method achieves very good per-
formance across different datasets, dataset sizes, backbone
architectures and detection algorithms. Additionally, we in-
vestigate how the performance of a data augmentation pol-
icy depends on the number of operations included in the
search space and how the effective of the augmentation
technique varies as dataset size changes.
In summary, our main contributions are as follows:
Design and implement a search method to combine
and optimize data augmentation policies for object de-
tection problems by combining novel operations spe-
ciﬁc to bounding box annotations.
Demonstrate consistent gains in cross-validated ac-
curacy across a range of detection architectures and
datasets. In particular, we exceed state-of-the-art re-
sults on COCO for a single model and achieve com-
petitive results on the PASCAL VOC object detection.
Highlight how the learned data augmentation strate-
gies are particularly advantageous for small datasets by
providing a strong regularization to avoid over-ﬁtting
on small objects.
2. Related Work
Data augmentation strategies for vision models are of-
ten speciﬁc dataset or even machine learning architectures.
For example, state-of-the-art models trained on MNIST use
elastic distortions which effect scale, translation, and ro-
tation [42, 4, 47, 40]. Random cropping and image mir-
roring are commonly used in classiﬁcation models trained
on natural images [51, 21]. Among the data augmentation
strategies for object detection, image mirror and multi-scale
training are the most widely used [15]. Object-centric crop-
ping is a popular augmentation approach [27]. Instead ofcropping to focus on parts of the image, some methods ran-
domly erase or add noise to patches of images for improved
accuracy [9, 53, 13], robustness [50, 12], or both [29]. In
the same vein, [48] learns an occlusion pattern for each ob-
ject to create adversarial examples. In addition to cropping
and erasing, [10] adds new objects on training images by
cut-and-paste.
To avoid the data-speciﬁc nature of data augmentation,
recent work has focused on learning data augmentation
strategies directly from data itself. For example, Smart
Augmentation uses a network that generates new data by
merging two or more samples from the same class [22].
Tran et al. generate augmented data, using a Bayesian ap-
proach, based on the distribution learned from the training
set [45]. DeVries and Taylor used simple transformations
like noise, interpolations and extrapolations in the learned
feature space to augment data [8]. Ratner et al., used gen-
erative adversarial networks to generate sequences of data
augmentation operations [37]. More recently, several pa-
pers used the AutoAugment [5] search space with improved
the optimization algorithms to ﬁnd AutoAugment policies
more efﬁciently [17, 23].
While all of the above approaches have worked on clas-
siﬁcation problems, we take an automated approach to ﬁnd-
ing optimal data augmentation policies for object detection.
Unlike classiﬁcation, labeled data for object detection is
more scarce because it is more costly to annotate detection
data. Compared to image classiﬁcation, developing a data
augmentation strategy for object detection is harder because
there are more ways and complexities introduced by distort-
ing the image, bounding box locations, and the sizes of the
objects in detection datasets. Our goal is to use the vali-
dation set accuracy to help search for novel detection aug-
mentation procedures using custom operations that gener-
alize across datasets, dataset sizes, backbone architectures
and detection algorithms.
3. Methods
We treat data augmentation search as a discrete optimiza-
tion problem and optimize for generalization performance.
This work expands on previous work [5] to focus on aug-
mentation policies for object detection. Object detection
introduces an additional complication of maintaining con-
sistency between a bounding box location and a distorted
image. Bounding box annotations open up the possibility of
introducing augmentation operations that uniquely act upon
the contents within each bounding box. Additionally, we
explored how to change the bounding box locations when
geometric transformations are applied to the image.
We deﬁne an augmentation policy as a unordered set of
Ksub-policies. During training one of the Ksub-policies
will be selected at random and then applied to the cur-
rent image. Each sub-policy has Nimage transformations