Figure 4: Percentage improvement due to the learned aug-
mentation policy on mAP, AP50, and AP75, relative to
models trained with baseline augmentation.
Figure 5: Training loss vs. number of training examples for
baseline model (black) and with the learned augmentation
policy (red).
to other perceptual domains. For example, a natural exten-
sion of a learned augmentation policy would be to seman-
tic [28] and instance segmentation [34, 7]. Likewise, point
cloud featurizations [35, 36] are another domain that has
a rich set of possibilities for geometric data augmentation
operations, and can beneﬁt from an approach similar to the
one taken here. Human annotations required for acquiring
training set examples for such tasks are costly. Based on
our ﬁndings, learned augmentation policies are transferable
and are more effective for models trained on limited training
data. Thus, investing in libraries for learning data augmen-
tation policies may be an efﬁcient alternative to acquiring
Figure 6: L 2norm of the weights of the baseline (black)
and our (red) models at the end of training. Note that the L 2
norm of the weights decrease with increasing training set
size. The learned augmentation policy further decreases the
norm of the weights.
additional human annotated data.
Acknowledgments
We thank Ruoming Pang and the rest of the Brain team
for their help.
References
[1] M. Abadi, P. Barham, J. Chen, Z. Chen, A. Davis,
J. Dean, M. Devin, S. Ghemawat, G. Irving, M. Is-
ard, M. Kudlur, J. Levenberg, R. Monga, S. Moore,
D. G. Murray, B. Steiner, P. Tucker, V . Vasudevan,
P. Warden, M. Wicke, Y . Yu, and X. Zheng. Tensor-
ﬂow: A system for large-scale machine learning. In
Proceedings of the 12th USENIX Conference on Oper-
ating Systems Design and Implementation , OSDI’16,
pages 265–283, Berkeley, CA, USA, 2016. USENIX
Association. 4
[2] A. Antoniou, A. Storkey, and H. Edwards. Data
augmentation generative adversarial networks. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1711.04340 , 2017. 1
[3] H. S. Baird. Document image defect models. In
Structured Document Image Analysis , pages 546–556.
Springer, 1992. 1
[4] D. Ciregan, U. Meier, and J. Schmidhuber. Multi-
column deep neural networks for image classiﬁca-
tion. In Proceedings of IEEE Conference on Com-
puter Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 3642–
3649. IEEE, 2012. 2