Journal of Computing Theories and Applications 2024(February) , vol.  1, no. 3, Wijayanti , et al.  302  
 3.2. Preprocessing  
This stage helps identify comprehensive patterns, supports better decision -making, im-
proves performance, and forms the basis for advanced analysis. After combining , the total 
data becomes 3 ,270 with six columns and is stored in the yield_df DataFrame. The following  
preprocessing step involves removing duplicate data to clean the dataset and ensure accuracy 
and speed in the data mining process , removing duplicates using the duplicate() function in 
the pandas ' library in Python. Here, the duplicated() function returns  a Boolean Series that 
marks each row in the yield_df DataFrame as True if the row duplicates  the previous row and 
False if not. The value_counts() function is then used to count the number of True and False 
values produced by duplicated(), see Figure 2. In the merged dataset, 297 duplicate data were 
identified, leaving 2973 data after deletion, as seen in Figure 3. This aims to improve the 
performance and efficiency of data analysis.  
 
Figure  2. Removing duplicates  and its functions . 
 
Figure  3. Total record dataset  before and after deleting duplicate data. 
The next step in data analysis is to identify the presence of empty values. In this test, 
using the yield_df.isnull().sum() function, the results show that no empty values were found 
in the dataset after the previous preprocessing process.  
Then, the next preprocessing step is to remove unused attributes. The combined dataset 
initially had six attributes, but the "item" attribute was removed because it only included one 
object, namely rice. Information attributes about historical crop yields , such as area and pro-
duction value in hectograms per hectare (Hg/Ha) are retained because these variables are 
considered independent variables that can help the regression model understand historical 
patterns of crop yields. Attributes related to weather c onditions, such as rainfall and average 
temperature, are also retained because , in regression analysis, weather conditions become pre-
dictor variables that directly impact  crop yields. In addition, the attribute of pesticide use is 
also maintained because it can provide an understanding of its impact on crop yields. The 
dataset can be analyzed to improve prediction performance by retaining these features in the 
regression model .  
3270
2973
28002850290029503000305031003150320032503300
Before After