Journal of Computing Theories and Applications 2024(February) , vol.  1, no. 3, Wijayanti , et al.  303  
 3.3. Prediction  Method  
This research proposes XGBoost  as a method for predicting rice yields. XGBoost has 
several important parameters , namely n_estimators, random_state, learning_rate. If the n_es-
timators value is high, the model complexity increases, and vice versa, if it is low, the model 
complexity decreases. While a low learning_rate will slow down learning , affecting the trade -
off between model complexity and generalization, vice versa,  it can speed up learning , affect-
ing the trade -off between model complexity and generaliz ation and increasing  the risk of 
overfitting. At the same time,  the random_state parameter is used to control randomness in 
tree generation, ensuring consistent results for repeatable experiments. The value, which can 
be from 0 to infinity, does not affect the model's performance  directly but allows the repro-
duction of the same results using  the same value on re -execution. Table 3 shows the default 
and after XGBoost tuned parameter values.   
Table 3. XGBoost Hyperparameter  Setup . 
Parameter  Defaults Values  Tuned Values  
n_estimators  100 150 
learning_rate  0.3 0.1 
random_state  42 42 
 
In this research, these parameter values can optimize the results and obtain an optimal 
model. This value was obtained from several experiments , and the optimal parameters  were 
chosen because they balance  good and efficient performance. It is important to note that 
XGBoost has the advantage of handling non -linear dependencies and can provide good re-
sults for regression problems such as rice yield prediction. XGBoost can be a powerful choice 
for crop yield prediction tasks by understanding the characteristic s of supporting feature da-
tasets. 
3.4. Evaluation  
In this research, the evaluation of prediction methods was carried out using several met-
rics, such as 𝑅2, MAE, and MSE. Where 𝑅2 is used to measure how well the regression 
model fits observational data. MAE measures the average of the absolute differences between 
predicted and observational values , which gives an idea of how big the overall prediction error 
is. MSE measures the average of the squared differences between predicted and observational 
values , emphasizing  large errors, as errors are squared before being calculated. So, when using 
regression methods, evaluating model performance often involves metrics such as 𝑅2, MAE, 
and MSE as measuring tools to measure the extent to which the model can provide accurate 
predictions.  
4. Results and Analysis  
Feature analysis is carried out before making predictions . Here, a data visualization 
presents the complexity of the relationships between variables in a dataset. One of the 
visualizers used is the correlation heatmap , which is presented in Figure 4. Based on this 
figure, several significant findings regarding the relationship between features in the 
agricultural dataset were found . The strongest negative correlation is between rice yield and 
average temperature (avg_temp) , with a value of -0.68, indicating  that increasing temperature 
is correlated with decreasing crop yield. These findings have important implications in the 
context of climate change. Furthermore, the moderate negative correlation between area size 
and pesticide use draws attention to the efficiency of pesticide use over larger areas or 
different farming practices. However, the very low correlation between pesticide use and crop 
yield (value -0.044) shows the complexity of this relationship, so this study also performed  
tests by eliminating t he pesticide features presented in Table 6 .