Developing Privacy-preserving AI Systems: The
Lessons learned
Huili Chen
Intel Labs
huili.chen@intel.comSiam Umar Hussain
UC San Diego
siamumar@ucsd.eduFabian Boemer
Intel Corporation
fabian.boemer@intel.comEmmanuel Stapf
TU Darmstadt
emmanuel.stapf@trust.tu-darmstadt.de
Ahmad Reza Sadeghi
TU Darmstadt
ahmad.sadeghi@trust.tu-darmstadt.deFarinaz Koushanfar
UC San Diego
farinaz@ucsd.eduRosario Cammarota
Intel Labs
rosario.cammarota@intel.com
Abstract —Advances in customers’ data privacy laws create
pressures and pain points across the entire lifecycle of AI
products. Working ﬁgures such as data scientists and data engi-
neers need to account for the correct use of privacy-enhancing
technologies such as homomorphic encryption, secure multi-
party computation, and trusted execution environment when they
develop, test and deploy products embedding AI models while
providing data protection guarantees. In this work, we share the
lessons learned during the development of frameworks to aid data
scientists and data engineers to map their optimized workloads
onto privacy-enhancing technologies seamlessly and correctly.
I. I NTRODUCTION
Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI), in particular Machine Learning
(ML) algorithms, has advanced various real-world applications
due to its unprecedented capability to perform critical tasks
such as speech/video recognition, natural language processing,
and medical diagnosis, with superior performance compared
with both human beings and expert systems.
Given such superior performance, an increasing number of
technology companies are providing Machine Learning as a
Service (MLaaS) to their customers. In the MLaaS paradigm,
the end-customer, e.g., an institution or a private individual,
sends his private data to the ML remote service and receives
the ﬁnal output. However, this workﬂow raises crucial con-
cerns about customers’ privacy, since: (i)often times the input
data is either personal, particularly in healthcare and medical
domain, or carries business-sensitive information, particularly
in the ﬁnancial space; (ii)the customer of a MLaaS has
no control over the data handed off to the server. As such,
ML service providers are typically assumed to be a trusted
authority, constraining the applicability of MLaaS; (iii)the
input data itself and its metadata can be used to enrich the
model or for other purposes beyond customer’s intended use.
Privacy-Enhancing Machine Learning - often referred to
as Privacy-Preserving Machine Learning (PPML) - is an
emerging ﬁeld that targets to resolve tensions with data pri-
vacy in concurrent MLaaS applications by deploying privacy-
enhancing technologies embedded in such services. In a sim-
pliﬁed view of the problem, there are two parties involved
in a PPML transaction: the customer, e.g., a user, who owns
the input data, and the service provider who owns the MLaaSapplication. The customer holds conﬁdential data and wants to
obtain the result of his desired machine learning application
deployed by the service provider. The service provider has
sufﬁcient computing power to perform the machine learning
task (training/inference). The dataﬂow of a typical PPML
application can be divided into three stages: (i)Data pre-
processing at the data input owner’s side - the processed
data is then securely transmitted to the service provider; (ii)
the service provider executes the target data application - the
resulting data is sent back to the data owner; and (iii)the data
owner (i.e., end user) post-processes the result received from
the service provider.
Note that the objective of PPML is to provide data-level
protection for the customers, either users or third party institu-
tions. Other lines of research focus on protecting the ownership
of the pre-trained models for the ML service providers [1],
[2]. This paper is centered on summarizing the key points for
developing secure, effective, and efﬁcient PPML systems.
II. PPML METHODS IN AI
Various techniques have been developed and optimized to
tackle the challenge in MLaaS data sharing. We refer to
such techniques as PPML building blocks. We categorize the
existing PPML building blocks as follows.
Multi-party Computation (MPC) is a cryptographic prim-
itive that allows the evaluation of an arbitrary function on
private inputs from multiple parties. MPC protocols typically
require the designer to represent the function as a Boolean cir-
cuit. To reduce the computational time of MPC protocols, [3]
proposes MPCircuits that generate optimized Boolean circuits
for MPC realization using customized libraries and hardware
synthesis tools. Garbled Circuit (GC) is a subcategory of
MPC that ensures secure two-party computation [4]. MAX-
elerator [5] is a GC-based hardware accelerator for privacy-
preserving Multiply-Accumulate (MAC) or its repetition.
Zero Knowledge Proof (ZKP) is a cryptographic technique
where a prover convinces a veriﬁer whether a certain math-
ematical statement is true or false without revealing any
underlying data. The nature of ZKP determines that it is
suitable for the usage in PPML. Drynx [6] adopts ZKP to
978-1-7281-1085-1/20/$31.00 ©2020 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Intel Corporation via the Virtual Library. Downloaded on June 06,2021 at 16:28:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.