ensure computation integrity and validate that the encrypted
data are within the given range.
Homomorphic Encryption (HE) allows computation to be
directly performed on encrypted data (ciphertext) without de-
crypting it [7]. HE schemes support two types of computation:
HE addition, and HE multiplication. CryptoNet [8] is the ﬁrst
attempt of deploying the HE primitive for PPML. It approxi-
mates the non-linear activation functions in the neural network
with square polynomial functions. The SEAL library [9] by
Microsoft is used for HE computation.
Differential Privacy (DP) is a rigorous mathematical deﬁni-
tion of privacy in the context of statistical and ML analysis.
By deﬁnition, an algorithm or a process is called deferentially
private if an observer cannot tell whether or not an individual’s
data is included in the original dataset by inspecting the output.
In the context of PPML, DP typically works by injecting noise
to the training database [10].
Federated Learning (FL) is a variant of decentralized learn-
ing where local clients have their own proprietary data. The
ML service provider creates a global model and broadcasts it
to the selected clients. The local models are then updated via
back-propagation using the local dataset. The global model is
updated by aggregating the local updates. Since the client’s
data never leaves his local platform, FL ensures the privacy
of the local participants.
Trusted Execution Environment (TEE) architectures are
hardware-assisted security architectures that guarantee a level
of protection for sensitive services beyond that of commodity
operating systems (OS). In particular, TEE architectures pro-
vide strongly isolated execution contexts, also called TEEs or
enclaves , protected from higher privileged code, including the
OS and even the hypervisor. TEEs are built around hardware
security primitives which are conﬁgured by microcode or
a small trusted code base. Besides runtime isolation, TEEs
also offer security functionalities such as local or remote
attestation, secure data provisioning or secure storage to their
enclaves. Thus, TEE can be utilized to build PPML solutions
by isolation the ML algorithms and privacy-sensitive user data
inside of an enclave.
III. S UPPORTING INFRASTRUCTURE FOR PPML
The effectiveness and efﬁciency of PPML techniques rely
on both software algorithm and hardware architecture. We give
an overview of each component and also discuss the co-design
of PPML infrastructures in this section.
A. Software Infrastructure
GC Optimizations. Various optimization techniques have
been proposed to improve the efﬁciency of GC, including Free-
XOR [11], Row Reduction [12], Half Gate [13], and Garbling
With a Fixed-key Block Cipher [14]. These techniques are
effective since they alleviate the main bottleneck of GC:
generating the optimal Boolean circuit. Take Free-XOR as an
example, it allows for the evaluation of XOR, XNOR, and
NOT gates without any communication or encryption.
HE Optimizations. As for HE, integer encoding schemes [15]
are initially adopted [8]. Later on, the CKKS scheme [16]and Chinese Remainder Theory (CRT) [17] are developed to
support computation on ﬁxed-point, large numbers. Ciphertext
packing is a technique that encrypts a vector of plaintext in
a single ciphertext. As such, homomorphic operations can be
applied to the vectors component-wise in a Single Instruction
Multiple Data (SIMD) manner.
DP Optimizations. In the context of differential privacy, the
Laplacian mechanism adds a random variable to the query
answer to limit the information leakage. The exponential
mechanism randomly selects the query answer from a set
of possible answers based on the parameterized distribution.
Note that traditional techniques that deal with missing data
can be used in conjunction with DP mechanisms to deal with
scenarios where a clean dataset is not available.
FL Optimizations. Aggregation of multiple local clients
can be performed via element-wise average or element-wise
median. It has been shown that the adversary can reconstruct
training samples from the model parameters [18]. Secure
aggregation is a class of secure multi-party computation which
ensures that only the target collaborative computation result
can be learned by the participants. As such, secure aggregation
can be deployed in FL to guarantee that the client’s private data
will not be leaked via his model gradients update [19].
B. Hardware Support
MPC Acceleration. Various accelerators have been proposed
to speedup MPC protocols. MAXelerator [5] is a GC comput-
ing framework speciﬁcally optimized for Multiply-Accumulate
operation, which is the basic block of ML workloads. MAX-
elerator leverages two optimization techniques to improve the
efﬁciency of GC: (i) sequential GC where the same netlist is
garbled for multiple rounds with updated encryption keys; (ii)
static function analysis to decide the most optimized netlist
to garble in every round. While MAXelerator achieves high
throughput for MAC, it has limited application scenarios.
FASE [20] is a generic GC accelerator that is proposed to
address the shortcoming of MAXelerator.
HE Acceleration. HE primitives are computation-bounded
since they typically involve complex lattice operations. Besides
the advancement and optimizations of HE schemes mentioned
in Section III-A, researchers also devote effort to design-
ing hardware architectures for accelerating HE computation.
HEAX [21] presents a novel architecture for number-theoretic
transform (NTT) which is frequently used in HE schemes.
Furthermore, they leverage ciphertext-level as well as ﬁne-
grained modular-level arithmetic optimization to introduce the
ﬁrst architecture design for the CKKS scheme.
TEE-based PPML. Besides cryptographic primitives, TEE
architectures can also be used to construct PPML systems.
Most of the research on TEE-based PPML systems was
conducted making use of Intel SGX, whereas most of the
authors target a MLaaS scenario. In Chiron [22], ML model
training is performed in a Ryoan sandbox, which is based on
SGX, that offers the MLaaS provider the possibility to freely
select, conﬁgure and train the ML models. In MlCapsule [23],
the ML computations are performed in an SGX enclave on
Authorized licensed use limited to: Intel Corporation via the Virtual Library. Downloaded on June 06,2021 at 16:28:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.