before the rst pooling with the decoder after the last deconvolution operation. Here,
the features coming from the encoder are supposed to be lower level features as they
are computed in the earlier layers of the network. On the contrary, the decoder features
are supposed to be of much more higher level, since they are computed at the very deep
layers of the network. Therefore, they go through more processing. Hence, we observe
a possible semantic gap between the two sets of features being merged. We conjecture
that the fusion of these two arguably incompatible sets of features could cause some
discrepancy throughout the learning and thus adversely aect the prediction procedure.
It may be noted that, the amount of discrepancy is likely to decrease gradually as we
move towards the succeeding shortcut connections. This can be attributed to the fact
that, not only the features from the encoder are going through more processing, but also
we are fusing them with decoder features of much juvenile layers.
Therefore, to alleviate the disparity between the encoder-decoder features, we propose
to incorporate some convolutional layers along the shortcut connections. Our hypothesis
is that these additional non-linear transformations on the features propagating from the
encoder stage should account for the further processing done during the by decoder
stage therein. Furthermore, instead of using the usual convolutional layers we introduce
residual connections to them as they make the learning easier [17] and is proven to be
having great potential in medical image analysis [33]. This idea is inspired from the
image to image conversion using convolutional neural networks [39], where pooling layers
are not favorable for the loss of information. Thus, instead of simply concatenating the
feature maps from the encoder stage to the decoder stage, we rst pass them through a
chain of convolutional layers with residual connections, and then concatenate with the
decoder features. We call this proposed shortcut path ` Res path ', illustrated in Fig. 4.
Specically, 33 lters are used in the convolutional layers and 1 1 lters accompany
the residual connections.
Figure 4: Proposed Respath. Instead of combining the the encoder feature maps with the decoder
feature in a straight-forward manner, we pass the encoder features through a sequence of convolutional
layers. These additional non-linear operations are expected to reduce the semantic gap between encoder
and decoder features. Furthermore, residual connections are also introduced as they make the learning
easier and are very useful in deep convolutional networks.
7