However, thorough contemplation of the U-Net architecture and drawing some parallels
to the recent advancement of deep computer vision leads to some useful observations as
described in the following subsections.
3.1 Variation of Scale in Medical Images
In medical image segmentation, we are interested in segmenting cell necluei [36], organs
[4], tumors [3] etc. from images originating from various modalities. However, in most
cases these objects of interest are of irregular and dierent scales. For example, in Figure
2 we have demonstrated that the scale of skin lesions can greatly vary in dermoscopy
images. These situations frequently occur in dierent types medical image segmentation
tasks.
(a)
 (b)
 (c)
Figure 2: Variation of Scale in medical images. Fig. 2a, 2b, 2c are examples of dermoscopy images with
small, medium and large size of lesions respectively. The images have been taken from the ISIC-2018
dataset.
Therefore, a network should be robust enough to analyze objects at dierent scales.
Although this issue has been addressed in several deep computer vision works, to the best
of our knowledge, this issue is still not addressed properly in the domain of medical image
segmentation. Serre et al. [37] employed a sequence of xed Gabor lters of varying scales
to acknowledge the variation of scale in the image. Later on, the revolutionary Inception
architecture [15] introduced Inception blocks, that utilizes convolutional layers of varying
kernel sizes in parallel to inspect the points of interest in images from dierent scales.
These perceptions obtained at dierent scales are combined together and passed on deeper
into the network.
In the U-Net architecture, after each pooling layer and transposed convolutional layer
a sequence of two 3 3 convolutional layers are used. As explained in [34], this series
of two 33 convolutional operation actually resembles a 5 5 convolutional operation.
Therefore, following the approach of Inception network, the simplest way to augment
U-Net with multi-resolutional analysis is to incorporate 3 3, and 77 convolution
operations in parallel to the 5 5 convolution operation, as shown in Figure 3a.
Therefore, replacing the convolutional layers with Inception-like blocks should facil-
itate the U-Net architecture to reconcile the features learnt from the image at dierent
scales. Another possible option is to use strided convolutions [38], but in our experi-
ments it was overshadowed by U-Net using Inception-like blocks. Despite the gain in
performance, the introduction of additional convolutional layers in parallel extravagantly
5