the number of lters in the convolutional layers are doubled. Finally, a progression of
two 33 convolution operations connects the Encoder to the Decoder .
On the contrary, the Decoder rst up-samples the feature map using a 2 2 transposed
convolution operation [32], reducing the feature channels by half. Then again a sequence
of two 33 convolution operations is performed. Similar to the Encoder , this succession
of up-sampling and two convolution operations is repeated four times, halving the number
of lters in each stage. Finally, a 1 1 convolution operation is performed to generate the
nal segmentation map. All convolutional layers in this architecture except for the nal
one use the ReLU (Rectied Linear Unit) activation function [10]; the nal convolutional
layer uses a Sigmoid activation function.
Perhaps, the most ingenious aspect of the U-Net architecture is the introduction of
skip connections. In all the four levels, the output of the convolutional layer, prior to the
pooling operation of the Encoder is transfered to the Decoder . These feature maps are
then concatenated with the output of the upsampling operation, and the concatenated
feature map is propagated to the successive layers. These skip connections allow the
network to retrieve the spatial information lost by pooling operations [33]. The network
architecture is illustrated in Figure 1.
Figure 1: The U-Net Architecture. The model comprises an encoder and a decoder pathway, with skip
connections between the corresponding layers.
Subsequently, the U-Net architecture was extended through a few modications to 3D
U-Net for volumetric segmentation [28]. In particular, the two dimensional convolution,
max pooling, transposed convolution operations were replaced by their three dimensional
counterparts. However, in order to limit the number of parameters, the depth of the
network was reduced by one. Moreover, the number of lters were doubled before the
pooling layers to avoid bottlenecks [34]. The original U-Net [24] did not use batch nor-
malization [35], however, they were experimented with in the 3D U-Net and astonishingly
the results revealed that batch normalization may sometime even hurt the performance
[28].
3 Motivations and High Level Considerations
U-Net has been a remarkable and the most popular Deep Network Architecture in medical
imaging community, dening the state of the art in medical image segmentation [33].
4