(a)
 (b)
 (c)
 (d)
Figure 8: Segmenting images with vague boundaries. This issue is more prominent for Colon Endoscopy
images. U-Net seems to either under-segment (8a), or over-segment (8b) the polyps. MultiResUNet
manages to segment polyps of such situation much better. However, some images are too problematic
even for MultiResUNet, but in those cases as well it performs beter than U-Net (8c). Even in dermoscopy
images, where there exists a clear boundary, U-Net sometimes produced some irregularities along the
boundaries, but MultiResUNet was much more robust (8d).
makes it challenging to distinguish between the region of interest and background in
medical images. As a result, instead of obtaining a continuous segmented region, we are
often left with a collection of fractured segmented regions. At the other extreme, due to
textures and perturbations the plain background sometimes appear similar to the region of
interest. These two cases lead to loss of information and false classications respectively.
Fortunately, the Dermatoscopy image dataset we have used contains images with such
confusing cases, allowing us to analyze and compare the behaviour and performance of
the two models.
In spite of segmenting the images with near consistent background and approximately
undeviating foreground with almost perfection, the baseline U-Net model seems to strug-
gle quite a bit in the presence of perturbations in images (Fig. 9). In images where the
foreground object tend to vary a bit therein, U-Net, was unable to segment the forground
as a continuous region. It rather predicted a set of scattered regions (Fig. 9a), confusing
the forground as background and thus caused the loss of some valuable information. On
the other hand, for images where the background is not uniform, the U-Net model seems
to make some false predictions (Fig. 9b). The more rough the background becomes, the
more false predictions are made (Fig. 9c). Furthermore, in some dreadfully adverse sit-
uations, where due to irregularity the dierence between background and forground are
too subtle, the U-Net model failed to make any predictions at all (Fig. 9d). Although in
such challenging cases the segmentation of MultiResUNet is not perfect, it performs far
superior than the classical U-Net model as shown in Fig. 9. It is worth noting here that
in the initial stages of our experiments, prior to using the ResPath s, our proposed model
was also being aected by such perturbations. Therefore, we conjecture that applying
additional non-linear operations on the encoder feature maps makes it robust against
perturbations.
7.5 MultiResUNet is More Reliable Against Outliers
Often in medical images some outliers are present, which in spite of being visually quite
similar, are dierent from what we are interested in segmenting. Particularly, in the
Fluorescence Microscopy image dataset, there exist some images with bright objects,
that are apparently almost indistinguishable from the actual nuclei. Such an example is
16