ing layers of the encoder and decoder network are connected by skip connections, prior
to a pooling and subsequent to a deconvolution operation respectively. U-Net has been
showing impressive potential in segmenting medical images, even with a scarce amount
of labeled training data, to an extent that it has become the de-facto standard in medical
image segmentation [22]. U-Net and U-Net like models have been successfully used in
segmenting biomedical images of neuronal structures [24], liver [25], skin lesion [26], colon
histology [27], kidney [28], vascular boundary [29], lung nodule [30], prostate [31], etc.
and the list goes on.
In this paper, in parallel to appreciating the capabilities of U-Net, the most popular
and successful deep learning model for biomedical image segmentation, we diligently
scrutinize the network architecture to discover some potential scopes of improvement.
We argue and hypothesize that the U-Net architecture may be lacking in certain criteria
and based on contemporary advancements in deep computer vision we propose some
alterations to it. In the sequel, we develop a novel model called MultiResUNet, an
enhanced version of U-Net, that we believe will signicantly advance the state of the art
in the domain of general multimodal biomedical image segmentation. We put our model
to test using a variety of medical images originating from dierent modalities, and even
with 3D medical images. From extensive experimentation with this diverse set of medical
images, it was found that MultiResUNet overshadows the classical U-Net model in all
the cases even with slightly less number of parameters.
The contributions of this paper can be summarized as follows:
We analyze the U-Net model architecture in depth, and conjecture some potential
opportunities for further enhancements
Based on the probable scopes for improvement, we propose MultiResUNet, which
is an enhanced version of the standard U-Net architecture.
We experiment with dierent public medical image datasets of dierent modalities,
and MultiResUNet shows superior accuracy.
We also experiment with a 3D version of MultiResUNet, and it outperforms the
standard 3D U-Net as well.
Particularly, we examine some very challenging images and observe a signicant
improvement in using MultiResUNet over U-Net.
2 Overview of the UNet Architecture
Similar to FCN [19] and SegNet [20], U-Net [24] uses a network entirely of convolutional
layers to perform the task of semantic segmentation. The network architecture is sym-
metric, having an Encoder that extracts spatial features from the image, and a Decoder
that constructs the segmentation map from the encoded features. The Encoder follows
the typical formation of a convolutional network. It involves a sequence of two 3 3 con-
volution operations, which is followed by a max pooling operation with a pooling size of
22 and stride of 2. This sequence is repeated four times, and after each downsampling
3