increases the memory requirement. Therefore, we improvise with the following ideas bor-
rowed from [34]. We factorize the bigger, more demanding 5 5 and 77 convolutional
layers, using a sequence of smaller and lightweight 3 3 convolutional blocks, as shown
in Figure 3b. The outputs of the 2nd and 3rd 3 3 convolutional blocks eectively ap-
proximate the 55 and 77 convolution operations respectively. We hence take the
outputs from the three convolutional blocks and concatenate them together to extract
the spatial features from dierent scales. From our experiments, it was seen that the
results of this compact block closely resemble that of the memory intensive Inception-like
block decsribed earlier. This outcome is in line with the ndings of [34], as the adjacent
layers of a vision network are expected to be correlated.
Despite that this modication greatly reduces the memory requirement, it is still quite
demanding. This is mostly due to the fact that in a deep network if two convolutional
layers are present in a succession, then the number of lters in the rst one has a quadratic
eect over the memory [15]. Therefore, instead of keeping all the three consecutive
convolutional layers of equal number of lters, we gradually increase the lters in those
(from 1 to 3), to prevent the memory requirement of the earlier layers from exceedingly
propagating to the deeper part of the network. We also add a residual connection because
of their ecacy in biomedical image segmentaion [33], and for the introduction of the
11 convolutional layers, which may allow us to comprehend some additional spatial
information. We call this arrangement a ` MultiRes block ', as shown in Figure 3c.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 3: Devolping the Proposed MultiRes block. We start with a simple Inception like block by using
33, 55 and 77 convolutional lters in parallel and concatenating the generated feature maps (Fig.
3a). This allows us to reconcile spatial features from dierent context size. Instead of using the 3 3,
55 and 77 lters in parallel, we factorize the bigger and more expensive 5 5 and 77 lters as a
succession of 33 lters (Fig. 3b) . Fig 3c illustrates the MultiRes block, where we have increased the
number of lters in the successive three layers gradually and added a residual connection (along with
11 lter for conserving dimensions).
3.2 Probable Semantic Gap between the Corresponding Levels
of Encoder-Decoder
An ingenious contribution of the U-Net architecture was the introduction of shortcut
connections between the corresponding layers before and after the max-pooling and the
deconvolution layers respectively. This enables the network to propagate from encoder
to decoder, the spatial information that gets lost during the pooling operation.
Despite preserving the dissipated spatial features, a 
aw of the skip connections may
be speculated as follows. For instance, the rst shortcut connection bridges the encoder
6