(a)
 (b)
 (c)
 (d)
Figure 9: Segmenting images with irregularities. For images where the foreground is not consistent
throughout, instead of segmenting it as a continuous region, U-Net seems to have predicted a set of
small regions (9a). For images with rough backgrounds U-Net classied them as the foreground (9b),
the more irregular the background, the more false predictions were made (9c). To the other extreme, for
images where dierence between foreground and background is too subtle, U-Net missed the foreground
completely (9d). Though the segmentations produced by MultiResUNet in these challenging cases are
not perfect, they were consistently better than that of the U-Net.
shown in Fig. 10.
Figure 10: Segmenting images containing outliers. In the 
uorescence microscopy images, the exist some
bright particles, visually very similar to the cell nuclei under analysis. Although MultiResUNet can
identify and reject those outliers, U-Net seems to have missclassied them.
It can be observed that the input image is infected with some small particles that
are not actual cell nuclei. However, if we study the segmentation mask generated from
U-Net, it turns out that U-Net has mistakenly predicted those outlier particles to be
cell nuclei. On the other hand, our proposed MultiResUNet seems to be able to reject
those outliers. Since the outliers are pretty tiny, false predictions made by the U-Net
model does not hurt the value of Jaccard Index that much (0 :9317 instead of 0 :9643,
when outliers are ltered out). Nevertheless, being able to segregate these outliers are
of substantial signicance. It can be noted that, similar types of visually similar outliers
were present in other datasets as well, and MultiResUNet was able to segment the images
reliably without making false predictions.
7.6 Note on Segmenting the Majority Class
The Electron Microscopy dataset we used in our experiments is quite interesting and
unorthodox as in this dataset the region of interest under consideration actually comprises
the majority of the images. This is a rare incident since usually the region of interest
consists of a small portion of the image. This brings a dierent type of challenge as in
such a case the models tend to over-segment the images unnecessarily to minimize the
losses during training. A relevant example is presented in Fig. 11.
17