Figure 11: Segmenting the Majority Class. Here we can observe that the region of interest comprises
most part of the image. Despite the values of Jacard Index for both U-Net and MultiResUNet are
quite similar, visually the segmentation mask are very dierent. It can be seen that segmentation mask
generated from MultiResUNet captures most of the ne separating lines, but U-Net tends to miss them.
Moreover, there are some clusters of background pixels which although are missed by U-Net, have been
roughly identied by MultiResUNet. Since the class being segmented is the majority class, the values of
Jacard Index are in
ated.
Here, it can be observed quite astonishingly that the majority of the image is actually
forground (Fig. 11b), with some narrow separations among them by the background, i.e.,
membranes in this context. If we analyze the segmentation predicted by U-Net, it appears
that those ne lines of separation have often been missed (Fig. 11d). MultiResUNet, on
the other hand, have managed to segment the regions with properly dened separations
among them (Fig. 11c). Also, it can be observed that there are some small clusters of
background pixels, which have been captured with some success in the segmentation mask
predicted by MultiResUNet, but are almost non-existent in the segmentation performed
by U-Net. Furthermore, the result generated by MultiResUNet seems to be more immune
to the noises present in the image.
Despite the two segmentations (i.e. the results of MultiResUNet and U-Net) are very
dierent from each other, the values of the respective Jaccard Index are quite alike (0 :8914
and 0:8841 as shown in Fig. 11). This is due to the fact that, the metric Jaccard Index has
been in
ated with the results of segmenting the majority class of the image. Therefore,
the value of Jaccard Index is not that much of a proper representative of accuracy while
segmenting the majority class. Despite predicting much inferior segmentations, for this
reason the Jaccard Index of U-Net are very close to that of MultiResUNet. Thus, among
all the dierent datasets, the improvement in terms of metric has been underwhelming
in this dataset but the predicted segmentations are more accurate visually.
8 Conclusion
In this work, we started by analyzing the U-Net architecture diligently, with the hope
of nding potential rooms for improvement. We anticipated some discrepancy between
the features passed from the encoder network and the features propagating through the
decoder network. To reconcile these two incompatible sets of features, we proposed Res
paths, that introduce some additional processing to make the two feature maps more ho-
mogeneous. Furthermore, to augment U-Net with the ability of multi-resolutiona analysis,
we proposed MultiRes blocks. We took inspirations from Inception blocks and formu-
lated a compact analogous structure, that was lightweight and demanded less memory.
Incorporating these modications, we developed a novel architecture, MultiResUNet.
Among the handful publicly available biomedical image datasets, we selected the ones
18