4 Proposed Architecture
In the MultiResUNet model, we replace the sequence of two convolutional layers with the
proposed MultiRes block as introduced in Section 3.2. For each of the MultiRes blocks,
we assign a parameter W, which controls the number of lters of the convolutional layers
inside that block. To maintain a comparable relation between the numbers of parameters
in original U-Net and the proposed model, we compute the value of Was follows:
W=U (1)
Here,Uis the number of lters in the corresponding layer of the U-Net and is a scaler
coecient. Decomposing WtoUandprovides a convenient way to both controlling
the number of parameters and keeping them comparable to U-Net. We compare our
proposed model with an U-Net, having # filters = [32;64;128;256;512] along the levels,
which are also the values of Uin our model. We selected = 1:67 as it keeps the number
of parameters in our model slightly below that of the U-Net.
In Section 3.2, we pointed out that it is benecial to gradually increase the number of
lters in the successive convolutional layers inside a MultiRes block, instead of keeping
them the same. Hence, we assignW
6
,W
3
andW
2
lters to the three successive
convolutional layers respectively, as this combination achieved the best results in our
experiments. Also it can be noted that similar to the U-Net architecture, after each
pooling or deconvolution operation the value of Wgets doubled.
In addition to introducing the MultiRes blocks, we also replace the ordinary shortcut
connections with the proposed Respaths. Therefore, we apply some convolution opera-
tions on the feature maps propagating from the encoder stage to the decoder stage. In
Section 3.1, we hypothesized that the intensity of the semantic gap between the encoder
and decoder feature maps are likely to decrease as we move towards the inner shortcut
paths. Therefore, we also gradually reduce the number of convolutional blocks used along
theRespaths. In particular, we use 4 ;3;2;1 convolutional blocks respectively along the
fourRes paths. Also, in order to account for the number of feature maps in encoder-
decoder, we use 32 ;64;128;256 lters in the blocks of the four Respaths respectively.
All the convolutional layers except for the output layer, used in this network is ac-
tivated by the ReLU (Rectied Linear Unit) activation function [10], and are batch-
normalized [35]. Similar to the U-Net model, the output layer is activated by a Sigmoid
activation function. We present a diagram of the proposed MultiResUNet model in Fig.
5. The architectural details are described in Table 1.
5 Datasets
Curation of medical imaging datasets are challenging compared to the traditional com-
puter vision datasets. Expensive imaging equipments, sophisticated image acquisition
pipelines, necessity of expert annotation, issues of privacy-all adds to the complexity of
developing medical imaging datasets [22]. As a result, only a few public medical imaging
benchmark datasets exist, and they only contain a handful of images each. In order to as-
sess the ecacy of the proposed architecture, we tried to evaluate it on a variety of image
modalities. More specically, we selected datasets that are as heterogeneous as possible
8