that were drastically dierent from each other. Additionally each of these datasets poses
a separate challenge of its own. The Murphy Lab Fluorescence Microscopy dataset is
possibly the simplest dataset for performing segmentation, having an acute dierence in
contrast between the forground, i.e., the cell nuclei and the background, but contains
some outliers. The CVC-ClinicDB dataset contains colon endoscopy images where the
boundaries between the polyps and the background are so vague that often it becomes
dicult to distinguish even for a trained operator. In addition, the polyps are diverse in
terms of shape, size, structure, orientation etc., making this dataset indeed a challenging
one. On the other hand, the dermoscopy dataset of ISIC-2018 competition contains
images of poor contrast to the extent that sometimes the skin lesions seem identical
to the background and vice versa. Moreover, various types of textures present in both
the background and the foreground make pattern recognition quite dicult. ISBI-2012
electron microscopy dataset presents a dierent type of challenge. In this dataset the
region being segmented covers the majority of the image; thus a tendency is observed
to over-segment the images. The BraTS17 MRI dataset, on the other hand contains
multimodal 3D images, which is a dierent problem alltogether.
For perfect or near perfect images U-Net manages to perform segmentation with
remarkable accuracy. Our proposed architecture performs only slightly better than U-
Net in those cases. However, for intricate images suering from noises, perturbations, lack
of clear boundaries etc., the gain in performance by MultiResUNet dramatically increases.
More specically, for the ve datasets a relative improvement in performance of 10.15%,
5.07%, 2.63%, 1.41%, and 0.62% were observed in using MultiResUNet over U-Net (Table
4). Not only the segmentations generated by MultiResUNet attain higher score in the
evaluation metric, they are also visually more similar to the ground truth. Furthermore,
on the very challenging images U-Net tended to over-segment, under-segment, make false
predictions and even miss the objects completely. On the contrary, in the experiments
MultiResUNet appeared to be more reliable and robust. MultiResUNet managed to
detect even the most subtle boundaries, was resilient in segmenting images with a lot
of perturbations, and was rejectable to the outliers. Even in segmenting the majority
class, where the U-Net tended to over-segment, MultiResUNet managed to capture the
ne details. Furthermore, the 3D adaptation of MultiResUNet performed better than
3D U-Net, which is not just a straightforward 3D implementation of the U-Net, but an
enhanced and improved version. It should be noted that, the segmentations generated by
the proposed MultiResUNet were not perfect, but in most of the cases it outperformed
the classical U-Net by a large margin.
Therefore, we believe our proposed MultiResUNet architecture can be the potential
successor to the classical U-Net architecture. The future direction of this research has
several branches. In this work, we have been motivated to keep the number of parameters
of our model comparable to that of the U-Net model. However, in future we wish to
conduct experiments to determine the best set of hyperparameters for the model more
exhaustively. Moreover, we would like to evaluate our model performance on medical
images originating from other modalities as well. Furthermore, we are interested in
experimenting by applying several domain and application specic pre-processing and
post-processing schemes to our model. We believe fusing our model to a domain specic
expert knowledge based pipeline, and coupling it with proper post-processing stages will
improve our model performance further, and allow us to develop better segmentation
19