object localization algorithms [2]. Jaccard Index for two sets AandBare dened as the
ratio of the intersection and union of the two sets:
Jaccard Index =Intersection
Union=A\B
A[B(4)
In our case, the set Arepresents the ground truth binary segmentation mask Y, and
setBcorresponds to the predicted binary segmentation mask ^Y. Therefore, by taking
the Jaccard Index as the metric, we not only emphasize on precise segmentation, but also
penalize under-segmentation and over-segmentation.
6.5k-Fold Cross Validation
Cross-Validation tests estimate the general eectiveness of an algorithm on an indepen-
dent dataset, ensuring a balance between bias and variance. In a k-Fold cross-validation
test, the dataset Dis randomly split into kmutually exclusive subsets D1;D 2;;Dk
of equal or near equal size [53]. The algorithm is run ktimes subsequently, each time
taking one of the ksplits as the validation set and the rest as the training set. In order to
evaluate the segmentation accuracy of both the baseline U-Net and proposed MultiRe-
sUNet architecture, we performed 5-Fold Cross Validation tests on each of the dierent
datasets.
Since, this is a deep learning pipeline, the best performing result on the validation set
achieved through the total number of epochs (150 in our case) performed is recorded in
each run. Finally, combining the results of all the kruns gives an overall estimation of
the performance of the algorithm.
7 Results
7.1 MultiResUNet Consistently Outperforms U-Net
As described in Section 5 and Section 6 to evaluate the performance of the proposed
architecture, we performed experiments with diversied classes of medical images, each
with a unique challenge of its own. In particular, we have performed 5-fold cross validation
and observed the performance of our proposed MultiResUNet and the baseline, U-Net. In
each run the best results obtained on the validation set through the 150 epochs performed
was noted and they were summarised from the 5 runs to obtain the nal result.
The results of the 5-Fold Cross Validation for both the proposed MultiResUNet model
and baseline U-Net model on the dierent datasets are presented in Table 4. It should be
noted that for better readability the fractional Jaccard Index values have been converted
to percentage ratios (%).
From the table, It can be observed that our proposed model outperforms the U-Net
architecture in segmenting all dierent types of medical images. Most notably, remarkable
improvements are observed for Dermoscopy and Endoscopy images. These images tend to
be a bit less uniform and often they appear confusing even to a trained eye (more details
are discussed in a later section). Therefore, this improvement is of great signicance. For
Fluorescence Microscopy images our model also achieve a 2 :6326% relative improvement
over U-Net, and despite having a lesser number of parameters, still it achieves a relative
13