is able to consider the discriminative power of a complete
sub-network. At the same time, we do not take the mag-
nitude of a channel into consideration, the global discrim-
inative power is the only criterion. Moreover, we pro-
pose an efﬁcient optimization method to obtain the sub-
network. Although directly optimizing discrete variables is
often non-smooth non-convex and NP-hard, our optimiza-
tion method can circumvent these difﬁculties by using the
straight-through estimator (STE) [1].
Automatic Model Compression (AMC) [11] is a pioneer
method using the discrete channel setting, which is opti-
mized by reinforced learning. Different from AMC, our
method is guided by gradients of the loss function when ex-
ploring sub-networks from the original CNN . Our method
can obtain a sub-network efﬁciently due to its differentiable
nature. On ImageNet dataset, our method can discover
a high performance sub-network satisfying given budget
within2%of time for regular training (ﬁnetuning time is
excluded). From this perspective, our method is also related
to differentiable architecture search (DARTS) [27].
Our main contributions are summarized as follows:
1) To compress a model, we apply the discrete gate on
each channel, which ensures that the output from any
sub-networks is correct and unbiased.
2) We use STE to enable back-propagation through dis-
crete variables. To further enlarge the search space
of sub-networks, we replace the discrete gate with its
stochastic version.
3) To ensure we can get the model with the given compu-
tational budget, we further propose resource regular-
ization when exploring potential sub-networks.
4) Extensive experimental results show that our method
achieves state-of-the-art results on CIFAR10 and Ima-
geNet with ResNet and MobileNetV2.
2. Related Works
Model compression recently has drawn a lot of attention
from the compute vision community. In general, current
model compression methods can be separated into the fol-
lowing four categories: weight pruning, structural pruning,
weight quantization, and knowledge distillation [14].
Weight pruning eliminates model parameters without
any assumption on the structure of weights. One of the early
works [8] uses L1orL2magnitude as criterion to remove
weights. Under this setting, parameters lower than a certain
threshold are removed, and weights with small magnitude
are considered not important. A systematic DNN weight
pruning framework [48] has been proposed by using alter-
nating direction method of multipliers (ADMM) [3, 15, 16].
Different from the aforementioned works, SNIP [24] up-
dates the importance of weights by backpropagating gradi-
ents from the loss function. Lottery ticket hypothesis [6]is another very interesting weight pruning algorithm, which
manifests that small high-performance sub-networks exist
within the overparameterized large network at initialization
time. Different from the lottery ticket hypothesis, in re-
thinking the value of network pruning [29], they argue that
ﬁne-tuning a pre-trained model is not necessary and show
that the pruned model with random initialization achieves
better performance. he major drawback of weight level
pruning is that they often require specially designed sparse
matrix multiplication library to achieve acceleration.
Different from weight pruning, structural pruning pro-
vides a natural way to reduce computational costs. The de-
velopment of structural pruning is similar to weight pruning
in that channels with low magnitude are often regarded as
not important [25]. Similar to the idea of magnitude prun-
ing, Group Lasso [45] is also applied on CNNs to struc-
turally make channels or ﬁlters to have all 0values, thus
those channels can be safely removed. GrOWL [47] fo-
cuses on exploring inter-channel relations on top of spar-
sity, and argues that similar channels can share the same
weights. The following researches show that weights with
small magnitude could be important [30], and it’s difﬁcult
for channels under L1regularization to achieve exact zero
values. To compensate this, they propose to get exact zero
values for each channel by using explicit L0regulariza-
tion [30]. Besides simply using channel magnitude as prun-
ing standards, other methods utilize batchnorm to achieve
the similar target, since batchnorm [19] is an indispensable
component in recent neural network designs [9, 17]. For
each channel, batchnorm uses a scaling factor γto adjust
the magnitude of corresponding feature maps. To achieve
the goal of channel pruning, γis regularized to be sparse
andγfell below a predeﬁned threshold will be set to 0dur-
ing model pruning [28]. Other works related to this idea in-
cludes [46, 18, 20]. Unlike previous methods relying on the
magnitude of channels, discrimination-aware pruning [49]
utilizes local discriminative power to help channel pruning.
AMC [11] achieves the goal of channel pruning in a dis-
crete setting by taking the advantages of reinforcing learn-
ing. Collaborative channel pruning [37] focuses on pruning
channels by utilizing Taylor expansion of the loss function.
Our method belongs to this category, the major difference
between our method and previous model pruning methods
is that our method strictly uses the discrete setting of chan-
nels while it can be optimized through gradient descent.
Weight quantization is another direction for model com-
pression, which focuses on reducing the numerical preci-
sion of weights from 32-bit ﬂoat point value to low bit value.
Binary connects [4] and binary neural network [38] push
the full precision weight to binary weight values, making
the model weights become binary values. The connection
between our method and weight quantization is that both of
them use STE to estimate the gradient for discrete value.
1900