hyper-parameter, only a global hyper-parameter is used to
control pruning rate; 3)During training of the parameters
for the gate function, model parameters Ware ﬁxed.
Under this setting, the major advantage of the discrete
gate setting is that the impact of pruned channels are pre-
cisely reﬂected in the value of loss function. If the gates are
relaxed in continuous values, then it doesn’t possess such
good property. In addition, continuous relaxed gate func-
tion causes severe difﬁculty to solve the optimization prob-
lem deﬁned in Eq. (5).
For simplicity, we replace the equality constraint with a
regularization term and redeﬁne the optimization problem
as follows:
min
ΘF(Θ) :=L/parenleftbig
f(x;W,Θ),y/parenrightbig
+λR(1Tg, p1TC),(6)
whereR(·,·)is the speciﬁc regularization function used,
which can be a typical regression loss function such as
MAE or MSE. In practice, both MAE and MSE are not
used, we will talk about the choice of R(·,·)later. The
constraint g∈ {0,1}nis absorbed into the optimization
problem due to the deﬁnition of discrete gate (Eq. (1) and
(4)).
Recently, there are increasing interests in reducing the
ﬂoat point operations (FLOPs) in model pruning literature.
The deﬁnition used in Eq. (6) along with the deﬁnition of
deterministic discrete gate in Eq. (1) can easily transform
the pruning rate constraint in Eq. (5) to FLOPs constraint.
Recall that for a single convolution layer lwith one sample,
the FLOPs calculation can be down as follows:
(FLOPs)l=kl·kl·cl−1
Gl·cl·wl·hl, (7)
whereklis the kernel size, Glis the number of groups, cl−1
andclare the number of input and output channels, wland
hlare width and height, (FLOPs)lis the FLOPs of l-th layer.
By replacing clandcl−1withglandgl−1, we get a new rep-
resentation of FLOPs during searching for sub-networks:
/hatwider(FLOPs)l=kl·kl·1Tgl−1
Gl·1Tgl·wl·hl, (8)
Then combining Eq. (7), Eq. (8) with Eq. (6), the original
R(1Tg, p1TC)is replaced by the FLOPs regularzation:
R(ˆT, pT), (9)
whereˆT=L/summationtext
l=1/hatwider(FLOPs)landT=L/summationtext
l=1(FLOPs)lare re-
mained FLOPs and total FLOPs of the model. Note that
we still use pas the only global hyper-parameter to repre-
sent the remaining fractions of the FLOPs. By incorporating
FLOPs regularization and the objective in Eq. (6), we can
prune the model to arbitrary level of FLOPs.
(a) function value of the regular-
ization
(b) gradients of the regulariza-
tion
Figure 2: The values and gradients of the resource regular-
ization,yis set to0for better visualization.
3.4. Choice of the Regularization Loss
In order to train the parameters of gates properly, the
value of the regularization term should be decreased to near
0in the early stage of gate training, and remain near 0for
the rest of the training process. The reason we want to keep
the regularization term near 0for most time is to ensure the
algorithm have enough time to discover the best possible
sub-architecture with the given constraint. Regular regres-
sion loss like MAE and MSE can’t satisfy this requirement,
since their gradient is either constant or decreasing when
close to 0. To overcome this issue, we propose the follow-
ing regularization loss:
Rlog(x,y) = log(|x−y|+1). (10)
The plot of gradient and value of this function is shown in
Fig. 2. The beneﬁt of this function is that when xis close to
targety, the gradient will increase and keep xclose to the
target value y. The loss function is not differentiable at the
pointx=yby deﬁnition, but sub-gradient can be used here
which has been implemented in major deep learning frame-
works. In practice, the Eq. (10) works well for appropriate
choice of λ, on the contrary, MAE and MSE often fail to
keep the value of the regularization term close to 0.
3.5. Symmetric Weight Decay
To further expand search space, we propose a symmetric
weight decay on the weights of gates, which is inspired by
the subgradient of the regularization loss:
∂Rlog
∂θl,c=/braceleftBigg
ηl·1
|ˆT−pT|+1·ˆT−pT
|ˆT−pT|,ifˆT/ne}ationslash=pT
0, ifˆT=pT(11)
whereηl=k2
l·1Tgl−1
Gl·wl·hl. Eq. (11) indicates that Rlog
works like weight decay with different decay value for each
layer while the decay value is also different for each training
iteration. Since the impact of Rlogonθcan be expressed by
weight decay, the stochasticity of the gates can be increased
in a similar way. Based on above arguments, we can explore
1902