(a)35% FLOPs
 (b)50% FLOPs
 (c)65% FLOPs
 (d)80% FLOPs
(e)35% FLOPs
 (f)50% FLOPs
 (g)65% FLOPs
 (h)80% FLOPs
(i)35% FLOPs
 (j)50% FLOPs
 (k)55% FLOPs
 (l)80% FLOPs
Figure 5: (a)-(d): Test set performance and regularization loss with the progress of gate training. (e)-(h): Pruning rate on
different layers with the progress of gate training. (i)-(l): Evolution of gate randomness during the progress of gate training.
discrepancy between the precise and imprecise estimation
of sub-network during gate training.
4.5. Understanding the Training of Discrete Gates
We draw related ﬁgures about the gate training process
in Fig. 5. Four experiments are conducted given different
values of pfrom0.35to0.8on CIFAR-10 with ResNet-56.
Fig. 5 (a)-(d) show the test performance along with regu-
larization loss. It’s quite clear that there are two stages for
gate training. In the ﬁrst stage, the test accuracy of the sub-
network sharply drops, at the same time, regularization loss
drops too. In the second stage, regularization loss is near
0, the test performance continues to increase until the end
of the training process. This shows that our DMC algorithm
can consistently ﬁnd sub-networks with better performance.
Fig. 5 (e)-(h) show the progress of pruning rate for different
layers. We can see the pruning rate of a layer dramatically
decreases at the beginning. However, within the process
of the second training stage, some pruned channels of cer-
tain layers are recovered. This observation shows that our
method indeed explores the search space instead of stack-
ing at a trivial solution with a ﬁxed sub-network. In Fig.5
(i)-(l), we plot the value of s=/summationtextL
l=1/summationtextCl
c=1|θl,c−0.5|
n . This value
can roughly measure whether the discrete gate is inclined todeterministic ( θis close to 0 or 1) or stochastic ( θis close
to 0.5). At the beginning of training, sdramatically drops,
depicting that increased stochasticity when sampling a sub-
network. After training for a while, there is a turning point
that the gates start to become more deterministic. This is
mainly because that the information from the samples is uti-
lized to reduce the stochasticity and make it more conﬁdent
towards the ﬁnal sub-network.
5. Conclusion
In this paper, we proposed an effective discrete model
compression method to prune CNNs given certain re-
source constraints. By turning deterministic discrete gate to
stochastic discrete gate, moreover, our method can explore
larger search space of sub-networks. To further enlarge the
space, we introduced the symmetric weight decay on the
gate parameters inspired by the fact that regularization loss
can be regarded as weight decay. Our method also beneﬁts
from the exact estimation of sub-networks’ outputs because
of a combination of the precise placement of gates and the
discrete setting. Extensive experiments results on ImageNet
and CIFAR-10 show that our method outperforms state-of-
the-art methods.
1906