Discrete Model Compression with Resource Constraint
for Deep Neural Networks
Shangqian Gao1,3, Feihu Huang1, Jian Pei2, and Heng Huang∗1,3
1Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, University of Pittsburgh, PA, USA
2School of Computing Science, Simon Fraser University, BC, Canada
3JD Finance America Corporation, Mountain View, CA, USA
shg84@pitt.edu, feh23@pitt.edu, jpei@cs.sfu.ca, heng.huang@pitt.edu
Abstract
In this paper, we target to address the problem of com-
pression and acceleration of Convolutional Neural Net-
works (CNNs). Speciﬁcally, we propose a novel structural
pruning method to obtain a compact CNN with strong dis-
criminative power. To ﬁnd such networks, we propose an
efﬁcient discrete optimization method to directly optimize
channel-wise differentiable discrete gate under resource
constraint while freezing all the other model parameters.
Although directly optimizing discrete variables is a complex
non-smooth, non-convex and NP-hard problem, our opti-
mization method can circumvent these difﬁculties by using
the straight-through estimator. Thus, our method is able to
ensure that the sub-network discovered within the training
process reﬂects the true sub-network. We further extend the
discrete gate to its stochastic version in order to thoroughly
explore the potential sub-networks. Unlike many previous
methods requiring per-layer hyper-parameters, we only re-
quire one hyper-parameter to control FLOPs budget. More-
over, our method is globally discrimination-aware due to
the discrete setting. The experimental results on CIFAR-
10 and ImageNet show that our method is competitive with
state-of-the-art methods.
1. Introduction
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have achieved
great success in computer vision tasks [23, 39, 40, 42, 2].
With more and more sophisticated GPU support on CNNs,
the complexity of CNN grows dramatically from several
layers [23, 43] to hundreds of layers [9, 17]. Although these
∗Corresponding Author. This work was partially supported by U.S.
NSF IIS 1836945, IIS 1836938, IIS 1845666, IIS 1852606, IIS 1838627,
IIS 1837956.complex CNNs can achieve strong performance on vision
tasks, there is an unavoidable growth of the computational
cost and model parameters. Such a huge computational bur-
den prohibits the model from being deployed on mobile de-
vices and resource-limited platforms. Even if the model can
be deployed on mobile devices, the battery will be depleted
quickly due to huge computational costs. To tackle such
problems, many efforts [8, 7] have been devoted for get-
ting compact sub-networks from the original computational
heavy model.
Structural pruning, especially channel pruning, is an ef-
ﬁcient way to reduce computational cost since it doesn’t re-
quire any post-processing steps to acquire acceleration. One
of the most challenging parts of structural pruning is how
to deal with the natural discrete conﬁguration of channels
in each layer. Many existing works [31, 37] try to solve
this problem by relaxing discrete values to continuous val-
ues. However, such relaxation may lead to a biased estima-
tion of the corresponding pruning criterion, since you can’t
completely remove the impact of channels with small im-
portance value. Some other methods [28, 34] use the esti-
mation of channel importance to decide whether to prune
a channel, nonetheless, the relative importance of a chan-
nel can be changed due to the choice of the sub-network.
Recently, discrimination-aware pruning [49] has been pro-
posed to explore the impact of discriminative power on
channel pruning. Although this method considers the dis-
criminative power of CNNs by adding classiﬁers on inter-
mediate layers, it does not consider CNN as a whole, which
may result in sub-optimal compression results.
To deal with these challenges, we propose a new method
of using the discrete gate to turn off or turn on certain chan-
nels. By doing so, we can always get the exact model out-
put given different sub-network architectures. Thanks to
the precise output estimation of a sub-network, our method
1899