Transferable Contrastive Network for Generalized Zero-Shot Learning
Huajie Jiang1,2,3,4, Ruiping Wang1,2, Shiguang Shan1,2, Xilin Chen1,2
1Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),
Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing, 100190, China
2University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China
3Shanghai Institute of Microsystem and Information Technology, CAS, Shanghai, 200050, China
4School of Information Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University, Shanghai, 200031, China
huajie.jiang@vipl.ict.ac.cn, {wangruiping, sgshan, xlchen }@ict.ac.cn
Abstract
Zero-shot learning (ZSL) is a challenging problem that
aims to recognize the target categories without seen data,
where semantic information is leveraged to transfer knowl-
edge from some source classes. Although ZSL has made
great progress in recent years, most existing approaches are
easy to overﬁt the sources classes in generalized zero-shot
learning (GZSL) task, which indicates that they learn little
knowledge about target classes. To tackle such problem, we
propose a novel Transferable Contrastive Network (TCN)
that explicitly transfers knowledge from the source classes
to the target classes. It automatically contrasts one image
with different classes to judge whether they are consistent or
not. By exploiting the class similarities to make knowledge
transfer from source images to similar target classes, our
approach is more robust to recognize the target images. Ex-
periments on ﬁve benchmark datasets show the superiority
of our approach for GZSL.
1. Introduction
Object recognition is one of the basic issues in com-
puter vision. It has made great progress in recent years
with the rapid development of deep learning approaches
[18, 33, 30, 13], where large numbers of labeled images are
required, such as ImageNet [28]. However, collecting and
annotating large numbers of images are difﬁcult, especially
for ﬁne-grained categories in speciﬁc domains. Moreover,
such supervised learning approaches can only recognize a
ﬁxed number of categories, which is not ﬂexible. In con-
trast, humans can learn from only a few samples or even
recognize unseen objects. Therefore, learning visual classi-
ﬁers with no need of human annotation is becoming a hot
topic in recent years.
Zero-shot learning (ZSL) aims to learn classiﬁers for the
0
1
0The domestic dog is a member of the 
genusCanis (canines), which forms part 
of the wolf-like canids ... ...
The horse is one of two extant 
subspecies of Equus ferus. It is an odd-
toed ungulate mammal … …
Birds , also known as Aves, are 
characterised by feathers, toothless 
beaked jaws … …HorseDog
Bird
Zebras are several species of African 
equids (horse family) united by their 
distinctive black and white striped 
coats… …
The lion is a species in the family Felidae ; 
it is a muscular, deep-chested cat with a 
short, rounded head … …Zebra
Lion
Source 
ImageClass Semantic Contrastive Value
0.8
0.2Match Not Match 
Not Match 
Similar
DissimilarSource Classes
Target ClassesD
TFigure 1. Illustration diagram that shows the motivations of trans-
ferable contrastive learning. The training images should not on-
ly match their class semantics (discriminative property) but also
have relatively high contrastive values with similar target classes
(transfer property). ‘D’ represents discriminative learning and ‘T’
represents transfer learning.
target categories where no labeled images are accessible. It
is accomplished by transferring knowledge from the source
categories with the help of semantic information. Seman-
tic information can build up the relations among different
classes thus to enable knowledge transfer from source class-
es to target classes. Currently the most widely used seman-
tic information includes attributes [19, 9] and word vectors
[10, 2]. Traditional ZSL approaches usually learn universal
visual-semantic transformations among the source classes
and then apply them to the target classes. In this way, the
visual samples and class semantics can be projected into a
common space, where zero-shot recognition is conducted
by the nearest neighbor approach.
Although ZSL has made great progress in recent years,
the strong assumption that the test images only come from
the target classes is not realistic for practical applications.
Therefore, generalized zero-shot learning (GZSL) [6, 39]
draws much attention recently, where test samples may
come from either source or target classes. However, most
9765