CUBZSL ts tr HAccuracy(%)
3040506070
0.001
0.01
0.1
1
Figure 3. The recognition results on CUB with different value of
α. ‘ZSL’ is the accuracy of zero-shot recognition. ‘ts’, ‘tr’ and ‘H’
are the target-class accuracy, source-class accuracy and harmonic
mean in GZSL.
over, it should also have the ability to prevent the model
from overﬁtting the source classes. To demonstrate these as-
sumptions, we compare our approach with the basic model,
where the knowledge transfer term ( LT) is removed. Ta-
ble 4 shows the recognition results. Although only small
improvements are achieved for ZSL, the improvements for
GZSL are signiﬁcant. This phenomenon demonstrates that
explicit knowledge transfer can effectively tackle the over-
ﬁtting problem, which enables the model to learn the knowl-
edge about the target classes.
Another factor that deserves to be explored is how im-
portant the knowledge transfer is. Therefore, we analyze
the inﬂuence of parameter αto our model and the recogni-
tion results on CUB are shown in Figure 3. It can be seen
that TCN achieves its best performance when αequals to
0.01. We can infer that αshould be small in order to get
good performance. This may be caused by two reasons.
First, the class similarities are fuzzy measures and there is
no accurate deﬁnitions. Second, the source images do not
absolutely match with the target classes. When αincreases,
the performance of source classes drops, as can be seen by
the results of ‘tr’, because the model pays more attention to
the target classes and neglects the accurate source classes.
Since the loss on the source classes ensures the discrimi-
native property of contrastive learning and the loss on the
target classes guarantees the transferable property, we must
balance these terms to obtain a robust recognition model.
4.4. Visualization of Class Similarities
The transferable property of our approach is accom-
plished by leveraging the class similarities to make knowl-
edge transfer in the model learning process. To see what
knowledge has been transferred, we show the class similar-
ities of AWA1 in Figure 4. Because of space constraints,
we select 15 source classes and visualize their similarities
to the target classes. It can be ﬁgured out that leopard is
similar to bobcat so the training samples of leopard can al-
so be utilized to learn the target class bobcat in the traininghorse
blue+whalesheepsealbat
girafferat
bobcatwalrusdolphin
Target Classesantelope
killer+whale
tiger
leopard
humpback+whale
ox
hamster
squirrel
buffalo
zebra
deer
lion
mouse
raccoon
cowSource Classes
00.10.20.30.40.5
Figure 4. The class similarities in AWA1, where 15 source classes
are selected. Each row represents the similarities of one source
class to the target classes.
cowhorse
motorbikeperson
pottedplantsheeptrain
tvmonitordonkeygoatjetskistatue
Target Classesaeroplane
bicycle
bird
boat
bottle
bus
car
cat
chair
diningtable
dog
sofa
monkey
wolf
zebra
centaur
mug
building
bag
carriageSource Classes
00.10.20.30.40.5
Figure 5. The class similarities in APY , where each row shows the
similarities of one source class to the target classes.
phase, thus to enable knowledge transfer. It effectively tack-
les the problem that no training images are available for the
target classes. Through such explicit knowledge transfer,
our model would be more robust to the target. Other class
similarities, i.e. killer+whale is similar to blue+whale ,seal,
walrus anddolphin , are also useful knowledge to transfer in
the contrastive learning process.
The foundation on which our approach works well is
that reasonable class similarities are obtained for knowl-
edge transfer. However, the class similarities may be very
rough for some coarse-grained dataset, such as APY , so it
becomes difﬁcult to transfer knowledge from source classes
to the target classes. That is why low zero-shot recognition
accuracy is obtained on APY for all approaches, as can be
seen from Table 2. To make it intuitive, we show the class
similarities for APY in Figure 5. It can be ﬁgured out that
the relations between source and target classes are less reli-
9771