existing ZSL approaches perform badly on GZSL task be-
cause they are easy to overﬁt the source classes, which indi-
cates that they learn little knowledge about the target class-
es. These approaches learn the models only on the source
categories and ignore the targets. Since the domain shift
problem exists [11], the models learned on the source class-
es may not be suitable to the target classes, which results in
overﬁtting the source categories in the GZSL task.
In order to tackle such problem, we propose to explicitly
transfer the knowledge from the source classes to the tar-
get categories. The key problem for ZSL is that no labeled
images are available for the target categories so we could
not directly train the target image classiﬁers. An intuitive
idea is to learn target classiﬁers from similar source images.
For example, we could leverage the source images ‘horse’
to learn the target class ‘zebra’. Based on this idea, we
propose a novel transferable contrastive network for gen-
eralized zero-shot learning. It automatically contrasts the
images with class semantics to judge whether they are con-
sistent or not. Figure 1 shows the motivations of our ap-
proach, where two key properties for ZSL are considered
in the contrastive learning process: discriminative proper-
ty and transferable property. We maximize the contrastive
values of images with corresponding class semantics and
minimize the inconsistent ones among source classes thus
to ensure that our model is discriminative enough to rec-
ognize different classes. Furthermore, to make the contrast
transferable to the target classes, we utilize the class simi-
larities to transfer knowledge from the source-class images
to similar target classes. In this way, the model will be more
robust to the target categories though no labeled target im-
ages are available to learn the model.
The main contributions of this paper are in two aspects.
First, we propose a novel transferable contrastive network
for GZSL, where a new network structure is designed for
contrastive learning. Second, we consider both the discrim-
inative property and transferable property in the contrastive
learning procedure, where the discriminative property en-
sures to effectively discriminate different classes and the
transferable property guarantees the robustness to the tar-
get classes. Experiments on ﬁve benchmark datasets show
the superiority of the proposed approach.
2. Related Work
2.1. Semantic Information
Semantic information is the key to ZSL. It builds up the
relations between the source and target classes thus to en-
able knowledge transfer. Recently, the most widely used
semantic information in ZSL is attributes [19, 9] and word
vectors [22]. Attributes are general descriptions of objects.
They are accurate but need human experts for deﬁnition and
annotation. Word vectors are automatically learned fromlarge numbers of text corpus which reduces human labor.
However, there is much noise in the texts, which restricts
their performance. In this paper, we use the attributes as the
semantic information since they are more accurate to bridge
the source and target classes.
2.2. Visual­Semantic Transformations
Visual-semantic transformations establish relationships
between the visual space and the semantic space. According
to different projection directions, current ZSL approaches
can be grouped into three types: visual to semantic embed-
dings, semantic to visual embeddings, latent space embed-
dings. We will introduce them in detail below.
Visual to semantic embeddings. These approaches
learn the transformations from the visual space to the se-
mantic space and perform image recognition in the seman-
tic space. In the early age of ZSL, [19, 9] propose to learn
attribute classiﬁers to transfer knowledge from the source to
the target classes. They train each attribute classiﬁer inde-
pendently, which is time-consuming. To tackle such prob-
lem, [1, 2] consider all attributes as a whole and learn label
embedding functions to maximize the compatibilities be-
tween images and corresponding class semantics. Further-
more, [24] proposes to synthesize the semantic representa-
tions of test images by a convex combination of source-class
semantics using the probability outputs of source classiﬁers.
To learn more robust transformations, [23] proposes a deep
neural network to combine attribute classiﬁer learning and
semantic label embedding.
Semantic to visual embeddings. These approaches
learn the transformations from semantic space to the visu-
al space and perform image recognition in the visual space,
which can effectively tackle the hubness problem in ZSL
[8, 29]. [5, 21, 40] predict the visual samplers by learning
embedding functions from the semantic space to the visual
space. [27] adds some regularizers to learn the embedding
function from class semantic to corresponding visual clas-
siﬁers and [35] utilizes knowledge graphs to learn the same
embedding functions. Some other works directly synthesize
the target-class classiﬁers [4] or learn the target-class proto-
types [14] in the visual space by utilizing the class structure
information. [17, 7] exploit the auto-encoder framework to
learn both the semantic to visual and visual to semantic em-
beddings simultaneously. Inspired by the generative adver-
sarial networks, [38] generates the target-class samples in
the feature space and directly learns the target classiﬁers.
Latent space embedding. These approaches encode the
visual space and semantic space into a latent space for more
effective image recognition. Since the predeﬁned semantic
information may be not discriminative enough to classify d-
ifferent classes, [41, 42] propose to use class similarities as
the embedding space and [16] proposes discriminative la-
tent attributes for zero-shot recognition. Moreover, [3] ex-
9766