ploits metric learning techniques, where relative distance is
utilized, to improve the embedding models. In order to learn
robust visual-semantic transformations, [10, 31, 26, 23] u-
tilize deep neural networks to project the visual space and
the semantic space into a common latent space and align the
representations of the same class.
Our approach belongs to the latent space embedding, but
there is a little difference. Traditional methods aim to min-
imize the distance of images and corresponding class se-
mantics in the latent space for image recognition, while our
approach fuses their information for contrastive learning.
2.3. Zero­Shot Recognition
Zero-shot recognition is the last step for ZSL, most of
which can be grouped into two categories. The distance-
based approaches usually exploit the nearest neighbour ap-
proach to recognize the target-class samples [1, 12, 41, 16]
and the classiﬁer-based approaches directly learn the visual
classiﬁers to recognize the target-class images [4, 38]. Our
approach utilizes contrastive values for image recognition.
2.4. Discussions about Relevant Works
Most existing approaches ignore the target classes when
learning the recognition model, so they are prone to overﬁt-
ting the source classes in GZSL task. To tackle this prob-
lem, [38, 43] leverage the semantic information of target
classes to generate image features for training target classi-
ﬁers. Although satisfactory performance has been achieved,
it is difﬁcult to train and use the generative models. While
our approach is easy to learn. Moreover, it is complemen-
tary to such generative approaches. [20] proposes a calibra-
tion network that calibrates the conﬁdence of source class-
es and uncertainty of target classes. Different from it, we
directly transfer knowledge to the target classes, which is
more effective for GZSL. [11] uses all the unlabeled target
images to adjust the models in transductive ZSL settings.
However, these images are often unavailable in practical
conditions, so we perform the inductive ZSL task. [15] pro-
poses adaptive metric learning to make the model suitable
for the target classes. However, the linear model restricts
its performance. Another relevant work is [32], which also
studies the relations between images and class semantics.
Compared with [32], we design a novel network structure
for TCN. Moreover, we explicitly transfer knowledge from
the source images to similar target classes, which makes our
model more robust to the target categories.
3. Approach
The objective of our approach is learning how to con-
trast the image with the class semantics. Figure 2 shows the
general framework of the proposed transferable contrastive
network (TCN). It contains two parts: information fusion
and contrastive learning. Instead of computing the distancebetween images and class semantics using ﬁxed metric for
recognition, we fuse their information and learn a metric
that automatically judges whether the fusions are consisten-
t or not, where high contrastive values should be obtained
between images and corresponding class semantics. In or-
der to make the contrastive mechanism suitable to the tar-
get classes, we explicitly transfer knowledge from source
images to similar target classes since no target images are
available for training. More details will be described below.
3.1. Problem Settings
In zero-shot learning, we are given Ksource classes (de-
noted as Ys) andLtarget classes (denoted as Yt), where
the source and target classes are disjoint, i.e.Ys∩Yt=∅.
We use the index {1,...,K}to represent the source class-
es and{K+ 1,...,K+L}to represent the target class-
es. The source classes contain Nlabeled images D=
{(xi,yi)|xi∈ X,yi∈ Ys}N
i=1, while no labeled images
are available for the target classes. Xrepresents the visual
sample space. To build up the relations between the source
and target classes, semantic information A={ac}K+L
c=1is
provided for each class c∈ Ys∪Yt. The goal of ZSL is to
learn visual classiﬁers of target classes fzsl:X → Ytand
the goal of GZSL is to learn more general visual classiﬁers
of all classes fgzsl:X → Ys∪Yt.
3.2. Contrastive Network
Information Fusion. An intuitive way of contrasting an
image with one class is to fuse their information and judge
how consistent the fusion is. Therefore, we ﬁrst encode the
images and class semantics into the same latent feature s-
pace to fuse their information. As is shown in Figure 2, we
use two branches of neural network to encode the image and
the class semantics into the same feature space respective-
ly, where convolutional neural network (CNN) is utilized to
encode the images and the multilayer perceptrons (MLP) is
utilized to encode the class semantic information (attributes
or word vectors). Then an element-wise product operation
(⊗) is exploited to fuse the information from these two do-
mains. Let f(xi)denote the coding feature of the ith image
andg(aj)represent the coding feature of the jth class se-
mantic, we can get the fused feature zijas:
zij=f(xi)⊗g(aj) (1)
whereajis the class semantic of the jth class. Then we can
feedzijto the next stage to judge how well the image iis
consistent with class j.
Contrastive Learning. Different from previous ap-
proaches that use ﬁxed distance, such as Euclidean distance
or cosine distance, to compute the similarities between im-
ages and classes for image recognition, we design a con-
trastive network that automatically judges how well the im-
age is consistent with a speciﬁc class. Let vijdenote the
9767