Freek Stulp and Stefan Schaal. Hierarchical reinforcement learning with movement primitives. In
11th IEEE-RAS International Conference on Humanoid Robots , 2011.
George Dimitri Konidaris, Scott Kuindersma, Roderic A. Grupen, and Andrew G. Barto. Autonomous
skill acquisition on a mobile manipulator. In Wolfram Burgard and Dan Roth, editors, Proceedings
of the AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , 2011.
George Dimitri Konidaris, Leslie Pack Kaelbling, and Tomás Lozano-Pérez. From skills to symbols:
Learning symbolic representations for abstract high-level planning. Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Research , 61:215–289, 2018.
Jimmy Wu, Xingyuan Sun, Andy Zeng, Shuran Song, Johnny Lee, Szymon Rusinkiewicz, and
Thomas Funkhouser. Spatial action maps for mobile manipulation. In Proceedings of the Robotics:
Science and Systems Conference , 2020.
Ruijie He, Abraham Bachrach, and Nicholas Roy. Efﬁcient planning under uncertainty for a target-
tracking micro-aerial vehicle. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Robotics and
Automation , 2010.
Kaijen Hsiao, Leslie Pack Kaelbling, and Tomas Lozano-Perez. Task-driven tactile exploration. In
Proceedings of the Robotics: Science and Systems Conference , 2010.
Yiyuan Lee, Panpan Cai, and David Hsu. MAGIC: learning macro-actions for online POMDP
planning. In Proceedings of the Robotics: Science and Systems Conference , 2021.
Georgios Theocharous and Leslie Kaelbling. Approximate planning in pomdps with macro-actions.
InAdvances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2004.
Christopher Amato, George D. Konidaris, and Leslie P. Kaelbling. Planning with macro-actions in
decentralized POMDPs. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Autonomous Agents
and Multiagent Systems , 2014.
Christopher Amato, George Konidaris, Leslie Pack Kaelbling, and Jonathan P. How. Modeling and
planning with macro-actions in decentralized pomdps. Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research ,
64:817–859, 2019.
Christopher Amato, George D. Konidaris, Ariel Anders, Gabriel Cruz, Jonathan P. How, and Leslie P.
Kaelbling. Policy search for multi-robot coordination under uncertainty. In Proceedings of the
Robotics: Science and Systems Conference , 2015a.
Christopher Amato, George D. Konidaris, Gabriel Cruz, Christopher A. Maynor, Jonathan P. How,
and Leslie P. Kaelbling. Planning for decentralized control of multiple robots under uncertainty.
InProceedings of the International Conference on Robotics and Automation , pages 1241–1248,
2015b.
Trong Nghia Hoang, Yuchen Xiao, Kavinayan Sivakumar, Christopher Amato, and Jonathan How.
Near-optimal adversarial policy switching for decentralized asynchronous multi-agent systems. In
Proceedings of the International Conference on Robotics and Automation , 2018.
Shayegan Omidshaﬁei, Ali-akbar Agha-mohammadi, Christopher Amato, Shih-Yuan Liu, Jonathan P.
How, and John Vian. Graph-based cross entropy method for solving multi-robot decentralized
POMDPs. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Robotics and Automation , 2016.
Shayegan Omidshaﬁei, Ali-akbar Agha-mohammadi, Christopher Amato, and Jonathan P. How.
Decentralized control of multi-robot partially observable markov decision processes using belief
space macro-actions. The International Journal of Robotics Research , 36(2):231–258, 2017a.
Christian Schroeder de Witt, Jakob Foerster, Gregory Farquhar, Philip H. S. Torr, Wendelin Boehmer,
and Shimon Whiteson. Multi-agent common knowledge reinforcement learning. In Proceedings
of the Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , 2019.
Dongge Han, Wendelin Böhmer, Michael J. Wooldridge, and Alex Rogers. Multi-agent hierarchical
reinforcement learning with dynamic termination. In PRICAI (2) , volume 11671 of Lecture Notes
in Computer Science , pages 80–92. Springer, 2019.
12