case, each robot has three one-step macro-actions: Turn-left ,Turn-right , and Stay, as well as three
multi-step macro-actions: Move-to-small-box(i) andMove-to-big-box(i) navigate the robot to the red
spot below the corresponding box and terminate with the robot facing the box; Push causes the robot
to keep moving forward until arriving at the world’s boundary (potentially pushing the small box or
trying to push the big one). The big box only moves if both agents push it together. Each robot can
only observe the status ( empty ,teammate ,boundary ,small or big box ) of the cell in front of it. A
penalty is issued when any robot hits the boundary or pushes the big box alone.
Overcooked (Fig. 1b - 1c). Three agents must learn to cooperatively prepare a lettuce-tomato-onion
salad and deliver it to the ‘star’ cell. The challenge is that the salad’s recipe (Fig. 1d) is unknown to
agents. With primitive-actions ( move up ,down ,left,right , and stay), agents can move around and
achieve picking, placing, chopping and delivering by standing next to the corresponding cell and
moving against it (e.g., in Fig. 1b, the pink agent can move right and then move up to pick up the
tomato). We describe the major function of macro-actions below and full details (e.g., termination
conditions) are included in Appendix D.2. Each agent’s macro-action set consists of: a) ﬁve one-step
macro-actions that are the same as the primitive ones; b) Chop , cuts a raw vegetable into pieces when
the agent stands next to a cutting board and an unchopped vegetable is on the board, otherwise it does
nothing; c) long-term navigation macro-actions: Get-Lettuce ,Get-Tomato ,Get-Onion ,Get-Plate-1/2 ,
Go-Cut-Board-1/2 andDeliver , which navigate the agent to the location of the corresponding object
with various possible terminal effects (e.g., holding a vegetable in hand, placing a chopped vegetable
on a plate, arriving at the cell next to a cutting board, delivering an item to the star cell, or immediately
terminating when any property condition does not hold, e.g., no path is found or the vegetable/plate is
not found); d) Go-Counter (only available in Overcook-B, Fig. 1c), navigates an agent to the center
cell in the middle of the map when the cell is not occupied, otherwise, it moves to an adjacent cell. If
the agent is holding an object or one is at the cell, the object will be placed or picked up. Each agent
only observes the positions andstatus of the entities within a 5⇥5square centered on the robot.
Warehouse Tool Delivery (Fig. 1e - 1h). In each workshop (e.g., W-0), a human is working on
an assembly task (involving 4 sub-tasks that each takes a number of time steps to complete) and
requires three different tools for future sub-tasks to continue. A robot arm (grey) must ﬁnd tools for
each human on the table (brown) and pass them to mobile robots (green, blue and yellow) who are
responsible for delivering tools to humans. Note that, the correct tools needed by each human are
unknown to robots, which has to be learned during training in order to perform efﬁcient delivery. A
delayed delivery leads to a penalty. We consider variants with two or three mobile robots and two to
four humans to examine the scalability of our methods (Fig. 1f - 1h). We also consider one faster
human (orange) to check if robots can prioritize him (Fig. 1g). Mobile robots have the following
macro-actions: Go-W(i) , moves to the waypoint (red) at workshop i;Go-TR , goes to the waypoint at
the right side of the tool room (covered by the blue robot in Fig. 1g and 1h); and Get-Tool , navigates
to a pre-allocated waypoint (that is different for each robot to avoid collisions) next to the robot arm
and waits there until either receiving a tool or 10 time steps have passed. The robot arm’s applicable
macro-actions are: Search-Tool(i) , ﬁnds tool iand places it in a staging area (containing at most
two tools) on the table, and otherwise, it freezes the robot for the amount of time the action would
take when the area is fully occupied; Pass-to-M(i) , passes the ﬁrst staged tool to mobile robot i; and
Wait-M , waits for 1 time step. The robot arm only observes the type of each tool in the staging area
andwhich mobile robot is waiting at the adjacent waypoints. Each mobile robot always knows its
position and the type of tool that it is carrying, and can observe the number of tools in the staging
area or the sub-task a human is working on only when at the tool room or the workshop respectively.
4.2 Results and Discussions
We evaluate performance of one training trial with a mean discounted return measured by periodically
(every 100 episodes) evaluating the learned policies over 10 testing episodes. We plot the average
performance of each method over 20 independent trials with one standard error and smooth the curves
over 10 neighbors. We also show the optimal expected return in Box Pushing domain as a dash-dot
line. More training details are in Appendix E.
Advantages of learning with macro-actions . We ﬁrst present a comparison of our macro-action-
based actor-critic methods against the primitive-action-based methods in fully decentralized and fully
centralized cases. We consider various grid world sizes of the Box Pushing domain (top row in Fig. 2
and two Overcooked scenarios (bottom row in Fig. 2). The results show signiﬁcant performance
7