quality policy while the centralized Mac-Cen-Q is slow to learn and the decentralized Mac-Dec-Q
is unable to learn. In addition, the stochastic policies in actor-critic methods potentially have better
exploration property so that, in Warehouse domains, Mac-IAC can bypass an obvious local-optima
that Mac-Dec-Q falls into, where the robot arm greedily chooses Wait-M to avoid more penalties.
5 Hardware Experiments
(a)
 (b)
 (c)
 (d)
Figure 5: Collaborative behaviors generated by running the decentralized policies learned by Mac-
IAICC where Turtlebot-0 (T-0) is bounded in red and Turtlebot-1 (T-1) is bounded in blue. (a) After
staging a tape measure at the left, Fetch looks for the 2nd one while Turtlebots approach the table; (b)
T-0 deliveries a tap measure to W-0 and T-1 waits for a clamp from Fetch; (c) T-1 deliveries a clamp
to W-1, while T-0 carries the other clamp and goes to W-0, and Fetch searches for an electric drill; (d)
T-0 deliveries an electric drill (the last tool) to W-0 and the entire delivery task is completed.
We also extend scenario A of the Warehouse Tool Delivery task to a hardware domain (details of
experimental setup are referred to Appendix F). Fig. 5 shows the sequential collaborative behaviors of
the robots in one hardware trial. Fetch was able to ﬁnd tools in parallel such that two tape measures
(Fig. 5a), two clamps (Fig. 5b) and two electric drills, were found instead of ﬁnding all three types of
tool for one human and then moving on to the other which would result in one of the humans waiting.
Fetch’s efﬁciency is also reﬂected in the behaviors such that it passed a tool to the Turtelbot who
arrived ﬁrst (Fig. 5b) and continued to ﬁnd the next tool when there was no Turtlebot waiting beside
it (Fig. 5c). Meanwhile, Turtlebots were clever such that they successfully avoid delayed delivery by
sending tools one by one to the nearby workshop (e.g., T-0 focused on W-0 shown in Fig. 5b and 5d,
and T-1 focused on W-1 shown in Fig. 5c), rather than waiting for all tools before delivering, traveling
a longer distance to serve the human at the diagonal, or prioritizing one of the humans altogether.
6 Conclusion
This paper introduces a general formulation for asynchronous multi-agent macro-action-based policy
gradients under partial observability along with proposing a decentralized actor-critic method (Mac-
IAC), a centralized actor-critic method (Mac-CAC), and two CTDE-based actor-critic methods (Naive
Mac-IACC and Mac-IAICC). These are the ﬁrst approaches to be able to incorporate controllers that
may require different amounts of time to complete (macro-actions) in a general asynchronous multi-
agent actor-critic framework. Empirically, our methods are able to learn high-quality macro-action-
based policies allowing agents to perform asynchronous collaborations in large and long-horizon
problems. Importantly, our most advanced method, Mac-IAICC, allows agents to have individual
centralized critics tailored to the agent’s own macro-action execution. Additionally, the practicality
of our approach is validated in a real-world multi-robot setup based on a warehouse domain. This
work provides a foundation for future macro-action-based MARL algorithm development, including
other policy gradient-based methods as well as methods which also learn the macro-actions.
Acknowledgments
We thank Chengguang Xu and Tian Xia for their participation in hardware experiments. This research
is supported in part by the U.S. Ofﬁce of Naval Research under award number N00014-19-1-2131,
Army Research Ofﬁce award W911NF20-1-0265 and NSF CAREER Award 2044993.
10