.....(SLVRGH0HDQ7HVW5HWXUQ%R[3XVKLQJ[
.....(SLVRGH0HDQ7HVW5HWXUQ%R[3XVKLQJ[
.....(SLVRGH0HDQ7HVW5HWXUQ2YHUFRRNHG$
.....(SLVRGH0HDQ7HVW5HWXUQ2YHUFRRNHG%Figure 2: Decentralized learning and centralized learning with macro-actions vs primitive-actions.
improvements of using macro-actions over primitive-actions. More concretely, in the Box Pushing
domain, reasoning about primitive movements at every time step makes the problem intractable so
the robots cannot learn any good behaviors in primitive-action-based approaches other than to keep
moving around. Conversely, Mac-CAC reaches near-optimal performance, enabling the robots to
push the big box together. Unlike the centralized critic which can access joint information, even
in the macro-action case, it is hard for each robot’s decentralized critic to correctly measure the
responsibility for a penalty caused by a teammate pushing the big box alone. Mac-IAC thus converges
to a local-optima of pushing two small boxes in order to avoid getting the penalty.
In the Overcooked domain, an efﬁcient solution requires the robots to asynchronously work on
independent subtasks (e.g., in scenario A, one robot gets a plate while another two robots pick up and
chop vegetables; and in scenario B, the right robot transports items while the left two robots prepare
the salad). This large amount of independence explains why Mac-IAC can solve the task well. This
also indicates that using local information is enough for robots to achieve high-quality behaviors. As
a result, Mac-CAC learns slower because it must ﬁgure out the redundant part of joint information in
much larger joint macro-level history and action spaces than the spaces in the decentralized case. The
primitive-action-based methods begin to learn, but perform poorly in such long-horizon tasks.
Advantages of having individual centralized critics. Fig. 3 shows the evaluation of our methods
in all three domains. As each agent’s observation is extremely limited in Box Pushing, we allow
centralized critics in both Mac-IAICC and Naive Mac-IACC to access the state (agents’ poses and
boxes’ positions), but use the joint macro-observation-action history in the other two domains.
In the Box Pushing task (the left two in the top row in Fig. 3), Naive Mac-IACC (green) can learn
policies almost as good as the ones for Mac-IAICC (red) for the smaller domain, but as the grid world
size grows, Naive Mac-IACC performs poorly while Mac-IAICC keeps its performance near the
centralized approach. From each agent’s perspective, the bigger the world size is, the more time steps
a macro-action could take, and the less accurate the critic of Naive Mac-IACC becomes since it is
trained depending on any agent’s macro-action termination. Conversely, Mac-IAICC gives each agent
a separate centralized critic trained with the reward associated with its own macro-action execution.
In Overcooked-A (the third one at the top row in Fig. 3), as Mac-IAICC’s performance is determined
by the training of three agents’ critics, it learns slower than Naive Mac-IACC in the early stage but
converges to a slightly higher value and has better learning stability than Naive Mac-IACC in the end.
The result of scenario B (the last one at the top row in Fig. 3) shows that Mac-IAICC outperforms
other methods in terms of achieving better sample efﬁciency, a higher ﬁnal return and a lower variance.
The middle wall in scenario B limits each agent’s moving space and leads to a higher frequency of
macro-action terminations. The shared centralized critic in Naive Mac-IACC thus provides more
noisy value estimations for each agent’s actions. Because of this, Naive Mac-IACC performs worse
with more variance. Mac-IAICC, however, does not get hurt by such environmental dynamics change.
Both Mac-CAC and Mac-IAC are not competitive with Mac-IAICC in this domain.
In the Warehouse scenarios (the bottom row in Fig. 3), Mac-IAC (blue) performs the worst due to its
natural limitations and the domain’s partial observability. In particular, it is difﬁcult for the gray robot
(arm) to learn an efﬁcient way to ﬁnd the correct tools purely based on local information and very
delayed rewards that depend on the mobile robots’ behaviors. In contrast, in the fully centralized
Mac-CAC (orange), both the actor and the critic have global information so it can learn faster in the
early training stage. However, Mac-CAC eventually gets stuck at a local-optimum in all ﬁve scenarios
8