Deep Residual Learning in Spiking Neural Networks
Wei Fang1;2, Zhaofei Yu1;2, Yanqi Chen1;2,
Tiejun Huang1;2, Timothée Masquelier3, Yonghong Tian1;2
1Department of Computer Science and Technology, Peking University
2Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen 518055, China
3Centre de Recherche Cerveau et Cognition, UMR5549 CNRS - Univ. Toulouse 3 , Toulouse, France
Abstract
Deep Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) present optimization difﬁculties for
gradient-based approaches due to discrete binary activation and complex spatial-
temporal dynamics. Considering the huge success of ResNet in deep learning,
it would be natural to train deep SNNs with residual learning. Previous Spiking
ResNet mimics the standard residual block in ANNs and simply replaces ReLU
activation layers with spiking neurons, which suffers the degradation problem
and can hardly implement residual learning. In this paper, we propose the spike-
element-wise (SEW) ResNet to realize residual learning in deep SNNs. We prove
that the SEW ResNet can easily implement identity mapping and overcome the
vanishing/exploding gradient problems of Spiking ResNet. We evaluate our SEW
ResNet on ImageNet, DVS Gesture, and CIFAR10-DVS datasets, and show that
SEW ResNet outperforms the state-of-the-art directly trained SNNs in both ac-
curacy and time-steps. Moreover, SEW ResNet can achieve higher performance
by simply adding more layers, providing a simple method to train deep SNNs.
To our best knowledge, this is the ﬁrst time that directly training deep SNNs
with more than 100 layers becomes possible. Our codes are available at https:
//github.com/fangwei123456/Spike-Element-Wise-ResNet .
1 Introduction
Artiﬁcial Neural Networks (ANNs) have achieved great success in many tasks, including image
classiﬁcation [ 28,52,55], object detection [ 9,34,44], machine translation [ 2], and gaming [ 37,51].
One of the critical factors for ANNs’ success is deep learning [ 29], which uses multi-layers to learn
representations of data with multiple levels of abstraction. It has been proved that deeper networks
have advantages over shallower networks in computation cost and generalization ability [ 3]. The
function represented by a deep network can require an exponential number of hidden units by a shallow
network with one hidden layer [ 38]. In addition, the depth of the network is closely related to the
network’s performance in practical tasks [ 52,55,27,52]. Nevertheless, recent evidence [ 13,53,14]
reveals that with the network depth increasing, the accuracy gets saturated and then degrades rapidly.
To solve this degradation problem, residual learning is proposed [ 14,15] and the residual structure is
widely exploited in “very deep” networks that achieve the leading performance [22, 59, 18, 57].
Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) are regarded as a potential competitor of ANNs for their high
biological plausibility, event-driven property, and low power consumption [ 45]. Recently, deep
learning methods are introduced into SNNs, and deep SNNs have achieved close performance as
ANNs in some simple classiﬁcation datasets [ 56], but still worse than ANNs in complex tasks, e.g.,
classifying the ImageNet dataset [ 47]. To obtain higher performance SNNs, it would be natural to
Corresponding author
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).