Computers 2021 ,10, 16 9 of 15
4.3. Agent Programming Languages Comparison
From the research described in the previous two sections we can observe that there are
many APLs for developing MAS available in the agent-based programming community.
Unfortunately, very often the evaluation of a language is partially or even completely
missing. Some studies such as [ 66] have been done in the past to compare agent languages
with other paradigms, in that case the comparison was with actor-based languages. In their
results the authors have shown that agent languages (speciﬁcally Jason in that work) can
indeed be competitive with more lightweight languages such as actors.
In [67], the authors present an evaluation framework for assessing existing or newly
deﬁned domain-speciﬁc modelling languages for MASs. The evaluation targets both the
language and the corresponding tools and provides both qualitative and quantitative
results.
A comparison between the pseudocode of a well-known algorithm for solving dis-
tributed constraint satisfaction problems and the implementation of such an algorithm in
JADEL is shown in [68].
The work in [ 69] focuses on comparing parallel platforms that support multi-agent
simulations and their execution on high performance resources as parallel clusters.
The authors of [ 70] perform a systematic evaluation of ABMS approaches differen-
tiating the concepts of how complex the model behaviour is and how complicated the
model structure is, and illustrate the non-linear relationship between them. Then, they
evaluate the trade-offs between simple (often theoretical) models and complicated (often
empirically-grounded) models.
4.4. Agent-Based Applications
In this section we list some of the latest applications using agent-based programming.
Our goal here is to show the wide variety of application domains that agents can be useful
in, thus, this list is not exhaustive and not the main focus of our review.
The Multi-Agent Programming Contest (https://multiagentcontest.org/) (MAPC)
is an annual international competition that occurs since 2005. Its purpose is to stimulate
research in multi-agent programming by introducing complex benchmark scenarios that
require coordinated action and can be used to test and compare multi-agent programming
languages, platforms, and tools. Implementations using different agent-based platforms
and languages have been used in the last few years; such as JaCaMo [ 71–73], Jason [ 74,75],
GOAL [76].
Agent-based models to simulate and evaluate the transmission of the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) have been proposed in [ 77,78]. There is an entire research area focused
on using agent-based technologies in the energy industry. For example, in [ 79], MAS
technologies are used for the control of Microgrid, its optimisation and market distribution.
For further reading, there is a survey [ 80] on the applications of MAS in the control and
operation of Microgrids, and a review [ 81] of the state of the art in the application of MAS
to energy optimisation problems.
In [82], an application of ABMS is presented to study the relationships between
human activities and land-use/land-cover changes to support scientiﬁc decisions regarding
reasonable land planning and land use. The model is implemented based on the Repast
modelling platform [83].
In [84], the authors present and illustrate FlowLogo, an interactive modelling environ-
ment for developing coupled agent-based groundwater models. FlowLogo is implemented
in NetLogo and is the ﬁrst integrated software offering a straightforward way to represent
agent behaviours that evolve with groundwater conditions. A systematic survey on ABMS
tools and applications can be found in [8].
A methodological guide to the use of BDI agents in social simulations and an overview
of existing methodologies and tools for using them is provided in [10].
Agents can be used for developing self-managed Internet of Things (IoT) systems
due to their distributed nature, context-awareness and self-adaptation (for further reading