Computers 2021 ,10, 16 6 of 15
it an increased expressive power, and ﬁts with the availability of rich types. In Chromar,
rules are ﬁrst-order abstractions that can both describe a (possibly partial) behaviour of an
individual agent and a synchronised action of two or more agents.
GOAL [ 23] is a declarative agent programming language that uses knowledge base
beliefs and goals to support the decision-making of its cognitive agents. Despite sharing
similar concepts with the BDI model (beliefs, desires/goals), the GOAL language is more
centred towards rule-based decision-making. Agents programs are written in GOAL’s
speciﬁc syntax, but the knowledge of the agent (e.g., rules) are usually represented in
Prolog.
Jason [ 24] is an extension of the AgentSpeak(L) language, based on the BDI agent
model. Agents in Jason react to events in the system by executing actions on the environ-
ment, according to the plans available in each agent’s plan library. One of the extensions in
Jason is the addition of Prolog-like rules that can be added and used in the belief base of
agents.
The JaCaMo platform [ 25,26] is composed of three technologies, Jason, CArtAgO [ 27],
and Moise [ 28], each representing a different abstraction level. Jason is used for program-
ming the agent level, CArtAgO is responsible for the environment level, and Moise for
the organisation level. JaCaMo integrates these three technologies by deﬁning a semantic
link among concepts in different levels of abstraction (agent, environment, and organisa-
tion). The end result is the JaCaMo MAS development platform. It provides high-level
ﬁrst-class support for developing agents, environments, and organisations, allowing the
development of more complex multi-agent systems.
Gwendolen [ 29] initially started as a small subset of Jason in the hopes of developing
veriﬁable agent programs, but has since grown into its own syntax and semantic. Because
it is a language that has been built to support agent veriﬁcation from the ground up, it is
limited in what features it can support, however, the basics of AgentSpeak(L) and BDI are
all present. There is a vast literature in veriﬁcation of agent programs and MAS, but we
consider them out of scope for this review. Gwendolen, apart from being veriﬁable, is still
a viable language for developing general-purpose MASs.
JADE [ 30] is an open source platform for the development of peer-to-peer agent based
applications. Besides the agent abstraction, it also provides: task execution and composition
model, peer-to-peer agent communication based on asynchronous message passing, and a
yellow page service that supports the publish and subscribe discovery mechanism. JADE-
based systems can be distributed across machines with different operational systems, and
has been used by many languages (e.g., Jason and JaCaMo) as a distribution infrastructure.
In [31] the authors present JADEL (JADE Language), an extension of JADE that
provides support for the construction of agents and MAS on top of JADE without having
to use Java directly; subsequently, in [ 32], the authors present Jadescript, an extension
of JADEL. Jadescript is characterised by a strong expressive syntax largely inspired by
modern scripting languages in order to promote readability and to make agent programs
more similar to pseudocode.
Jadex [ 33] allows the programming of intelligent software agents in XML and Java.
The agent abstraction is based on the BDI model, and provides several features such as: a
runtime infrastructure for agents, multiple interaction styles, simulation support, automatic
overlay network formation, and an extensive runtime tool suite.
LightJason, a highly scalable Java-based platform for BDI agent-oriented programming
and simulation is presented in [ 34]. LightJason is based on a logic language which extends
AgentSpeak(L) with lambda-expressions, multi-plan and -rule deﬁnition, explicit repair
actions, multi-variable assignments, parallel execution, and thread-safe variables. Even
though the language is inspired by AgentSpeak(L) and Jason, LightJason is implemented
from scratch.
In [35] an AOP language called Planning based Language for Agents and Compu-
tational Environments (PLACE) adds AI planning capability to agents. PLACE has a
syntactic structure close to BDI, while the planning is done in a Hierarchical Task Network