Computers 2021 ,10, 16 2 of 15
received over a network. By preserving their processing state and the state of the world
around them, agents are also ideally suited to automation applications. Moreover, au-
tonomous agents can operate without user intervention and can be used in applications
such as plant/process automation, workﬂow management, robotics, and others. Another
advantage of agent-based programming is that due to the reasoning cycle present in agents,
it is also possible to provide explanations about the decisions that an agent has made.
The aim of this paper is to review the latest work in agent-based programming, to
help both experts and non-experts users having a better grasp over the current state of the
art in agent-based programming technologies, and to identify future directions of research
in this area. In particular, we focus on the latest agent programming languages, platforms
and frameworks for the development of MASs. Both theoretical and practical papers are
taken into account, and we also brieﬂy discuss recent extensions, existing comparisons,
and applications of agent-base programming.
With respect to other reviews and surveys on APLs in literature [ 3,5–10], our review
focuses on recent developments and considers works presenting new APLs, as well as
works focusing on extending or comparing existing APLs. Moreover, we consider both
theoretical and practical aspects; this helps to have a better understanding of the reality gap
between theoretical and practical APLs. Finally, with respect to previous reviews, we focus
on the entire class of APLs, and not on a speciﬁc area of APLs as in [ 6], where only the
engineering aspects are considered, or in [ 7], where only APLs platforms are considered,
or in [ 8], where only agent-based simulation literature is analysed, or in [ 3,5], where their
focus is in a speciﬁc model of agency (Belief-Desire-Intention—BDI).
This paper is structured as follows. A brief history on agent-based programming is
given in Section 2. In Section 3, the systematic review process followed in this paper is
presented. Section 4 contains the review ﬁndings with the papers found in our search of
the literature. In Section 5, the review’s results are discussed and future directions are
suggested. Finally, in Section 6, the conclusions of the paper are reported.
2. History on Agent-Based Programming
In 1993, Agent-Oriented Programming was ﬁrst introduced [ 11] as a specialisation
of Object-Oriented Programming. Most notably, it discusses the notion of the mental
state of an agent, consisting of its information, decisions, and capabilities. This work also
describes agent programs in the AGENT-0 interpreter (implemented in the Lisp language)
and their communication using speech act theory, the latter is still used to deﬁne agent
communication in several contemporary agent programming languages. Over the years,
many reasoning and cognitive models have been developed for agent-based programming.
In this section, we discuss three particular models that have been fundamental in the design
of many agent programming languages in the past and that are still being used in new
languages these days: Procedural Reasoning System (PRS), BDI, and Situation Calculus.
The Procedural Reasoning System (PRS) [ 12] (implemented in Lisp) deﬁnes a system
capable of reasoning about processes, that is, procedural forms of knowledge. An agent in
this system is then able to use these procedures to select intentions for achieving particular
goals. Unlike in conventional programming languages, these procedures are not invoked
a priori, but they are triggered when they are able to contribute towards some goal or to
react to some situation. While sharing some similarities to AI planners of the time, its main
difference is that it performs partial hierarchical planning in the sense that it interacts with
a dynamic environment during the reasoning process, instead of generating a plan for a
static environment.
The Belief-Desire-Intention (BDI) model [ 13,14] consists of a reasoning process that
aids the decision-making of selecting an appropriate action towards the achievement of
some goal. Its three mental attitudes are: belief—knowledge that the agent believes about
its environment, itself, and other agents; desire—the desired states that the agent wants to
achieve; and intention—a sequence of steps towards the achievement of a desire. These
mental attitudes respectively represent the information, motivational, and deliberative