Computers 2021 ,10, 16 3 of 15
states of the agent. The workﬂow in a generic BDI system is shown in Figure 1 and works
as such: a belief revision function receives input information from the environment (e.g.,
sensors), and it is responsible for updating the belief base. This update can generate more
options that can become current desires based on the belief base and the intentions base. A
ﬁlter is responsible for updating the intentions base, taking into account its previous state
and the current belief base and desire base. Finally, an intention is chosen to be carried
out as an action by the agent. BDI is the most popular model of agency, it has been and
continues to be used in many agent programming languages. AgentSpeak(L) [ 15] is a
language that serves as an abstraction of implemented BDI systems that can be used to
interpret agent programs as horn-clause logic programs. The theory behind this language
has been implemented as a basis for many APLs.
Belief Revision
Function
Beliefs
Desires IntentionsOption Generation
Function
FilterAction Selection
FunctionInput
Output
Figure 1. The BDI model.
Situation Calculus [ 16] is a ﬁrst order language designed to represent changes in
dynamic environments. A situation is a ﬁrst order term representing a sequence of actions.
An initial situation is when no actions have occurred yet. The function do(a,s)results
in a successor situation to safter executing the action a, similar to state transition sys-
tems. Dynamic environments play an important role in agent-based programming, and
as such, Situation Calculus has been used to model how the world changes as a result of
executing actions.
As we will see in Section 4, there are many other models that have inspired agent-
based programming languages, however, these three were the most inﬂuential in the past
history of agent-based programming. Some agent languages share similarities or even
mix concepts from other programming paradigms, such as procedural, imperative, object-
oriented, functional, actor, concurrent, and so on. Comparing the differences or going into
detail about these other paradigms is out of scope of this review, but we still consider agent
languages that combine concepts from different paradigms.
Historically, agent-based programming has been used in a myriad of practical ap-
plications, such as distributed control of electric power grids [ 17], governance of room
allocation [ 18] and of automated machine-to-machine applications (e.g., trafﬁc redirec-
tion) [ 19], and detecting privacy violations [ 20]. In Section 4.4, we cover the more recent
attempts in using APLs for programming practical applications.
3. Review Methodology
We performed a systematic review of the literature in agent programming languages
over the past 5 years (2015–2020). A diagram illustrating our review methodology is shown
in Figure 2. For each searched term, we considered the ﬁrst 10 pages (100 entries) retrieved
by Google Scholar (ordered by relevance), for a total of 400 entries (including duplicates).