Computers 2021 ,10, 16 11 of 15
the history so far and the state of the art in agent programming with a focus on BDI-based
approaches. They identify as a major challenge for future research the integration of AI
techniques in agent programming languages as an important and necessary step to the
widespread acceptance and adoption of AOP .
Recommendation for Further Research
Considering the past 5 years of research on APLs, many novel frameworks, platforms
and models have been proposed. Each one of these, along with new extensions, enriched
the agent-based literature and enlarged the spectrum of possible applications. Nonethe-
less, as rightfully observed in [ 3,5], the major issue in current APLs is not in their set of
features, but in their usability. Generally, there is no desire in learning new languages
when the advantages are not straightforward. In our review, we analysed APLs that were
both expressive and powerful, but with major usability issues; such as the absence of a
(maintained) tool, documentation, and qualitative and quantitative comparisons with other
languages. In our opinion, further research on APLs will have to tackle these usability
issues in order to try to spread the use of APLs outside the agent community.
6. Conclusions
Agent-based programming is a thriving research area of artiﬁcial intelligence. In
this review paper, we have classiﬁed both veteran and recent contributions according to
four different categories: agent-based programming languages, their extensions, the com-
parisons between languages, and ﬁnally, some of the applications using these languages.
For each contribution we brieﬂy reviewed the content and outlined the key results. To
have a better understanding of the current state of art, we did not only focus on the latest
approaches, but we also brieﬂy reviewed the most prominent agent-based programming
languages that are still being maintained.
Every year there are many extensions to existing languages and even entire new
languages being proposed, however, most of them are limited to formal descriptions
without any implementation to support the formal theory. The small subset of approaches
with implementation lack any effective evaluation. Comparing new approaches to the
state of the art is one of the major steps required to advance the area of agent-based
programming. Qualitative and quantitative comparisons can help to identify gaps in
existing languages, which can lead to either improvements or new approaches that are able
to cope with the challenges raised. Moreover, in our review we have also identiﬁed a lack
of real-world applications. In order to widen the use of these languages, it is important that
their usability in the real-world is well documented, thus, we encourage and recommend
more application-based papers that can demonstrate features of agent-based programming
in the real-world.
Funding: This research was funded by the UK Industrial Strategy Challenge Fund (ISCF) deliv-
ered by UK Research and Innovation (UKRI) and managed by Engineering and Physical Sciences
Research Council (EPSRC) under the Robotics and AI for Extreme Environments programme with
grants Robotics and AI in Nuclear (RAIN) Hub (EP/R026084/1), Future AI and Robotics for Space
(FAIR-SPACE) Hub (EP/R026092/1), and Offshore Robotics for Certiﬁcation of Assets (ORCA) Hub
(EP/R026173/1).
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest. The funders had no role in the design
of the study; in the collection, analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or
in the decision to publish the results.
Abbreviations
The following abbreviations are used in this manuscript:
AI Artiﬁcial Intelligence
AOP Agent-Oriented Programming
AOSE Agent-Oriented Software Engineering