Computers 2021 ,10, 16 8 of 15
4.2. Agent Programming Languages Extensions
In the previous section, we reported works presenting novel APLs (2015–2020), along
with works presenting the most inﬂuential APLs ( 2015) that are still maintained. Now,
we consider the most inﬂuential works that have extended existing APLs. We refer to APL
extensions as works that have changed existing APLs internally, either by adding new
features or by building on top of existing APLs, for example, by customising the APL for a
new and speciﬁc scenario.
An enhanced version of Multi-Agent System for Competitive Electricity Markets
(MASCEM) [ 53] is presented in [ 54]. This extended version of the MASCEM simulator
aims at supporting the integration of new and complementary models. The facilitation
in accommodating different tools and mechanisms is provided by important structural
implementation decisions, making MASCEM able to deal with the constantly changing
and highly demanding environment of electricity markets. In particular, the new extension
of MASCEM brings the use of ontologies to support players’ communications.
In [55], the authors present TABSAOND, an extension of PEABS [ 41]. The main
difference between TABSAOND and PEABS is that the former focuses on the design
and implementation of the decision-making processes in non deterministic scenarios. In
addition, simulators are now deployed as mobile apps and online tools.
In [56] a conservative synchronisation model is proposed for the SARL language and
its runtime platform Janus. Since Janus does not make any assumption on the ordering
of the events that are exchanged by the agents, it is not possible to use the Janus platform
for agent-based simulation involving time without providing the platform with a speciﬁc
synchronisation mechanism. A model for such a mechanism is described in their extension.
The authors of [ 57] propose new programming constructs for integrating an advanced
yet rule based emotion model, EMIA [ 58], in line with the 2APL [ 59] agent language.
The combination of both has been carried out by redeﬁning the syntax, semantics and
deliberation cycle of 2APL. This combination mainly focuses on event-based emotion
generation, and the resulting simulation shows high believability in the emotions expressed
by the agent when responding to the real life scenarios.
ARGO [ 60] is a customised Jason architecture for programming embedded robotic
agents using the Javino middleware and perception ﬁlters.
In [61], the authors show how procedural reﬂection in the agent programming lan-
guage meta-APL [ 62] can be used to allow a straightforward implementation of some of
the steps in the deliberation cycle of a BDI agent, by allowing both agent programs and the
agent’s deliberation strategy to be encoded in the same programming language.
An extension [ 63] to Jason and Gwendolen allows the agents in these languages to
communicate with ROS, thus supporting the programming of autonomous agents that
can control and perform high-level decision-making in robotic applications developed in
ROS. The extension is done through an interface that is used as the environment between
the agent and ROS, and the communication between the environment and ROS nodes is
performed using the rosbridge library. The main difference between their work and past
attempts at extending traditional APLs to support ROS is that their approach requires no
additional modiﬁcations in either of the two APLs or ROS, making it usable and portable
to different versions of these tools. Similarly, in [ 64] a framework for using Jason with
ROS in embedded systems is presented and a new architecture is introduced to support
lower-level interactions between ROS and the agent.
Finally, in [ 65] a model for a BDI agent programming framework integrating rein-
forcement learning and an implementation based on the Jason programming language
are introduced. The approach supports the design of BDI agents where some plans can
be explicitly programmed and others instead can be learned by the agent during the
development/engineering stage.