Computers 2021 ,10, 16 10 of 15
about using microservices as agents in IoT [ 85,86]). In [ 87] the authors aim to enhance
the development of IoT applications using agents and software product lines in self-
management systems.
In [88], experiments to validate the programming of autonomous robots using Jade-
script are presented. It presents the novel support for perception handlers that has been
recently introduced in the language to cope with the high data rate of sensors in robotic
applications.
5. Discussion and Future Directions
As we have shown, there exists a wide variety of options for agent-based program-
ming, from more traditional approaches (e.g., BDI) to simulation or planning-based. Some
languages have also attempted to combine concepts from agent-based programming with
other programming paradigms, most prominently from object-oriented programming.
One of the main drawbacks of trying to achieve a wider community of programmers in
agent-based programming is the lack of knowledge and familiarity with its concepts, that
are signiﬁcantly different from other more common paradigms. Agent-based programming
languages that use some of the concepts from these other paradigms can help bring new
programmers that would otherwise be too intimidated. These hybrid languages have their
own niche of applications depending on the concepts that they use, which may sometimes
overlap with the more “pure” agent programming languages, but “pure” approaches are
still necessary to fully tackle all agent programming abstractions (agent, environment,
organisation, interaction, etc.).
Out of the 15 agent programming languages listed in Table 1, ﬁve do not have publicly
available implementation (i.e., the code is not hosted in a public/accessible domain). This
represents a signiﬁcant issue, as it limits the practical usability of the proposed language and
makes it difﬁcult to quantitatively compare other languages against it. Not all extensions to
existing languages require an implementation to be useful, however, having one available
is always positive for the community.
Even though there are several qualitative (e.g., concepts, features) comparisons in
the literature, the use of different models of agency makes it difﬁcult to provide a fair
comparison between the features present in these languages. A more in-depth study has to
be conducted to identify the fundamental features of agent oriented programming, and
more importantly, how these features ﬁt in the different models of agency that existing
programming languages use.
Quantitative (e.g., performance) comparisons of programming languages are trickier
due to the development cycle of having constant updates, which is even more common
in programming languages developed in academia (as most of the agent programming
languages are). Nevertheless, it is important to develop agent-speciﬁc benchmarks that can
be used easily by the community to evaluate new programming languages or extensions to
existing languages.
Most languages offer a range of different examples that showcase their features and
strengths. While these examples are certainly useful to better understand and learn the
language, they are usually not enough to convince new users of the applicability of the
language in real-world applications. Complex and realistic case studies are hard to develop,
but the agent community has available a suite of complex scenarios as part of the annual
MAPC that could be better exploited to test and compare agent programming languages.
Two recent surveys [ 3,5] focused on BDI agent programming outline the limitations
and challenges in the area. In a manifesto [ 3], the author argues that it is necessary to
extend the feature set of current APLs to enable wider adoption of agent technology. The
author also disagrees with past surveys that the lack of more polished methodologies and
tools is not the main factor (although it does contribute to) in the limited adoption of APLs;
instead, the author suggests that there is little to no incentive for developers to make the
change to AOP , as the behaviours currently shown in applications from the literature can be
implemented in more mainstream languages with limited effort. The survey in [ 5] recaps