Computers 2021 ,10, 16 7 of 15
(HTN) planner. In contrast to other AOP languages, actions in PLACE have durations
associated to them, thus, requiring the planner to be able to handle temporal information.
Agents in PLACE have the ability to recover from failures by adapting their activities to
the new situations. For this purpose, a plan repairing mechanism is added that repairs a
plan if the unanticipated events in the environment cause the plan to become unfeasible.
In [36], the Programming Language for Synchronous Agents (PLASA) is proposed.
PLASA is platform-independent and facilitates a rapid implementation of co-operative
applications on multiple physical robots and in dynamic environments. Essentially, PLASA
implements a variant of the Wait-Look-Compute-Move model proposed in [ 37], where
robots move synchronously. It is designed as a high-level programming language, which
allows users to specify the instructions to be performed by robots in a human-readable
language.
Relational Model Multi-Agent System (RMAS) [ 38] is a database-centric approach
for multi-agent systems suitable for the embodiment of reasoning and control in Cyber-
Physical Systems (CPS). Initial implementation of RMAS is proposed by the coupling of
the Matlab environment and the SQLite database language.
SARL’s [ 39] focus is to provide an extensible language that is equipped with the
minimum amount of concepts (i.e., key concepts) required to support AOP . The language
aims to provide abstractions for concurrency, distribution, interaction, decentralisation,
reactivity, autonomy, and dynamic reconﬁguration. To do so it is not based in any model,
but instead it creates its own Domain-Speciﬁc Language (DSL) in order to provide a
reduced and more lightweight core.
4.1.2. ABMS, Robotics, and Others
As recognised in [ 40], there is a gap between Agent-Oriented Software Engineering
(AOSE) methodologies and the development of ABMS. To overcome this issue, in [ 41] an
AOSE process called Process for Developing Efﬁcient Agent-Based Simulators (PEABS) is
proposed. It uses the INGENIAS methodology [ 42] for modelling the speciﬁcation and
designing its structure. It applies an adaptation framework that allows ABMS developers
to obtain simulations with a high efﬁciency for large amounts of data. Another approach
for developing ABMS is presented in [ 43,44], where the authors propose a new cognitive
agent architecture based on the BDI model and integrated into the GAMA modelling
language [ 45]. With respect to previous integration works between BDI and ABMS, in [ 43]
the architecture proposed aims to be ﬂexible and easy to use for non-expert users. Another
work which aims to integrate BDI and ABMS is presented in [ 46], where the authors
present a framework that allows BDI cognitive agents to be embedded in an ABMS system.
Compared to [ 43], reference [ 46] is more general since its objective is to integrate any
BDI-based system with ABMS. The only requirement is that the percepts (or environmental
observations/events) of interest to each agent and the actions that the agent may execute
in the simulation environment can be identiﬁed a priori.
ALLEGRO (=ALGOL in PREGO [ 47,48]) is a programming formalism based on belief
architecture for stochastic domains which is intended as an alternative to GOLOG [ 49] for
high-level control in robotic applications. Another language which is based in GOLOG
and the situation calculus is introduced in [ 50], where a prototype implementation of
Yet Another GOLOG Interpreter (YAGI), an action-based robot and agent programming
language, is presented. YAGI offers bindings for popular robotics frameworks such as
Robot Operating System (ROS) [51] and Fawkes.
In [52] the authors present a Cognitive Affective Agent Programming Framework
(CAAF), a framework based on the belief-desire theory of emotions that enables the
computation of emotions for cognitive agents (i.e., making them cognitive affective agents).
The authors present semantics showing the programming constructs of these agents. With
these constructs, a programmer can build an agent program with cognitive agents that
automatically compute emotions during runs.