Sensors 2019 ,19, 4596 17 of 30
(sEMG and inertial measurement (IM)). Twelve electrodes were used to acquire sEMG signal in a
sampling frequency of 2 kHz. Feature sets such as MAV , WL, 4AR and logVar were extracted using a
sliding window of 256 ms with 50 ms increments. Two sets of the experiment (o ine and real-time)
were performed. Real-time prosthetic hand control was based on o ine observation. Touch Bionics
’robotic hand’ have been used for real-time performance. It shows that the combination of both IM
and sEMG improved the classiﬁcation performance of a prosthetic hand. Additionally, the use of
IM and sEMG reduce number of sensor require to achieve high level of accuracy. Yanjuan et al [ 61]
investigated that both o ine motion classiﬁcation accuracy and real-time motion completion rate are
important to assess the performance of EMG-PR control.
Identifying multiple DOF (hand movements) using a few EMG sensors is one of the necessities for
developing high levels of usability prosthetic hands. Trongmun et al. [ 91] present a signal processing
technique that classiﬁes 17 spontaneous classes of motion from EMG signals using spectral features
and an ANN. Online classiﬁcation experiments were performed on twelve subjects (seven male
and ﬁve female) to assess the reliability of the proposed method. An overall correct classiﬁcation
rate of 83% was achieved, showing the ability to classify 17 movements from six EMG sensors.
Moreover, the classiﬁcation of nine movements could achieve accuracy of up to 92%. EMG pattern
classiﬁcation has been widely studied to decode user-determined for intuitive prosthesis control.
The signiﬁcant breakthrough was occurred with the introduction of surgical procedure to improve
the control of hand prosthesis known as targeted muscle reinnervation (TMR) [ 92]. The real-time
and o ine performance of EMG-PR with TMR patients was presented using a generic electrode
grid. Four amputee subjects (two trans-humeral, two shoulder articulation) that underwent TMR
surgery participated in this study. In a real-time virtual analysis as well as o ine classiﬁcation,
a generic grid-like electrode performed better than the control site (speciﬁc site for electrode placement).
Although TMR has the potential to provide advanced control of wrist and grasp patterns for myoelectric
control, the concept has not yet been a success in implementing it to multiple DOFs for the prosthesis.
For assessing the real-time PR control of TMR based multifunction prostheses, Todd et al. [ 86]
showed the performance outcome based on motion (selection time, completion time and completion
rate). The experiment was performed on both virtual and real prosthesis. The performance was ﬁrst
ascertained by training and testing with a virtual multifunction prosthesis. Later on, the experiment
was carried on three TMR patients with upper-limb prostheses. The mean classiﬁcation accuracy of
88% with standard deviation (SD) of 7% for patients who had undergone TMR surgery and 97% with
standard deviation (SD 2%) for control participants was achieved. Furthermore, the summary of some
studies based on real-time using the virtual reality environment is presented in Table 3.