Sensors 2019 ,19, 4596 8 of 30
for the control (movement) of prosthesis are linear and non-linear regression [ 16], ANN [ 58] and
non-negative matrix factorization [ 40]. The regression method has thus far presented promising results,
permitting direct and spontaneous control to the user and further developments are likely to reinforce
the robustness of regression approach.
4. Real-Time Application of Myoelectric Prosthesis
The high functionality (multiple DOF) and high accuracy are achieved on testing o ine and
real-time collected data from amputees. However, when tested by amputees or patients for real-time
usability, it does not give the same level of accuracy. Moving from the virtual environment to the
real world requires the implementation of prosthetic devices. One of the major challenges that
inﬂuenced the usability of the prosthesis is the lack of robust and a portable embedded system to
implement the EMG- PR algorithms, other challenges include the design of dexterous prosthetic
hands, multichannel electrodes placement, compensation between power consumption, small size,
etc. [ 59]. Various hardware has been implemented to develop prosthetic hands for persons with
disabilities. Hardware chips are designed for ﬁltering EMG signals and other applications such as
grasp detection and human-computer interventions to obtain an accurate signal for prosthetic arm
control. Furthermore, virtual environments allow the user to practice di erent controlling gestures
that the designated prosthetic device supposed to control in real-world [ 60]. Some of the experimental
outcomes on the real-time collected data from amputee, real-time with embedded packages and
real-time using virtual reality environment are discussing in the following Sections 4.1–4.3, respectively.
4.1. Real-Time Collected Data from Amputee
Several research studies on able-bodied and hand amputees have been done to evaluate the consequences
of arm position variation on EMG-PR classification performance. Offline classification accuracy /errors have
shown that arm variation affects the classification performance. To reduce such effect of arm variation,
various classification techniques [ 61] have been proposed. Similarly, classiﬁcation accuracy identiﬁes
the desired movements from several classes of motion. Some of the previous research studies had
shown that o ine classiﬁcation has not a good correlation with real-time performance of EMG-PR [ 61]
control of the prosthesis. However, some of the recent classiﬁcation accuracies on the real-time
performance of amputee data are explained in this section. Nearly all EMG-PR control for real-time
collected data from hand amputee followed the same stages to operate. The features are extracted
from pre-processed EMG data. From the extracted data, the feature is usually selected for training
and control set. Then, the classiﬁcation technique is applied for training classiﬁers and control set
classiﬁers. The general algorithm of this whole system is shown in Figure 2.
In 2003, Karlik et al. [ 62] conducted a study on the classiﬁcation of myoelectric signals for
precise overall control of multifunction prosthesis using Fuzzy clustering neural network architecture.
The author also compared the accuracy of multi-layer perceptron (MLP) having a back-propagation
algorithm and the new fuzzy clustering neural networks (FCCN). The fuzzy clustering involved the
division of input data into several fuzzy parts that intersect each other and thus deﬁned by membership
grade [0,1]. An algorithm was proposed to implement these fuzzy clustering that minimised the cost
function. A comparative assessment shows that using FCNN provides more reliable results than MLP .
The FCNN achieved 98% accuracy with half training time than that of MLP . Later, in 2005, a promising
method by Chan and Englehart [ 63] added into the row of the continuous controllers. The new method
followed a hidden Markov model (HMM) as the data segment classiﬁer. The HMM classiﬁer was a
suitable probabilistic approach for pattern recognition at that time due to the resilience to sequential
myosignal variations. For a four-channel six function design, HMM has more performance accuracy
(94.63%) than MLP with a good level of robustness and quick response.