Sensors 2019 ,19, 4596 2 of 30
three sections the hand, forearm and arm. For the movement of each section, coordinating the relation
of the nervous system, musculoskeletal systems and its surroundings are necessary. To perform various
daily activities, coordination of di erent joints (shoulder, elbow, wrist and ﬁnger joint) is essential,
including a broad range of motions with several degrees of freedom. These coordinated movements
are always redundant and can be beneﬁcial to perform complex tasks. When it comes to an artiﬁcial
hand, all such control features of the normal hand should extensively match, so that the user can
perform their daily needs in a modiﬁed and e ective way. The coordinated control of the biological
hand is quite complex, making it highly di cult to replicate it exactly in any prosthetic hand.
A typical prosthetic hand involves three main connected parts: an input signal acquisition unit,
processing and control unit and an end e ector. Nowadays, almost all high performing artiﬁcial
hands (or prosthesis) use surface electromyography signals (sEMG or myosignals) for controlling
their end e ectors. Surface electromyography records the muscle movements electrically from the
surface of muscle cells when they are electrically or neurologically activated [ 1]. The amplitude of
sEMG signals ranges from 0 to 10 mV (peak to peak) /0 to 1.5 mV (RMS) with dominant energy in the
20–450 Hz band [ 2]. Moreover, the acquisition of the sEMG signal requires proper skin preparation,
and EMG electrodes should be placed after conﬁrming the target muscles (from which the EMG
signal comparable to predeﬁned limb movement can be produced). With the technological and
miniaturization of sensors, dry electrodes that work as transducers for muscular inputs have replaced
traditional gel EMG electrodes and have improved performance [ 3]. On a usability level, sometimes,
muscle fatigue can happen due to the positioning of these dry electrodes on a single target muscle [ 4].
Recently, a modular scheme was developed as a solution, which uses the combination of several
electrodes and channels for accurate quantiﬁcation [ 5,6]. An extension to this is that these electrodes
are replaced with transducers, such as force and resistive sensors, which use only a single channel
acquisition method with fewer disturbances [7,8].
In general, myoelectric hands have evolved a lot to overcome the traditional disadvantages of
acquiring myosignals to satisfy the needs of all levels of amputees. However, the basic control of the
majority of those myo-activated limbs has followed the same operating principles (muscle contractions)
for more than half of a century [ 9,10]. These devices use two types of technical control: pattern
recognition (PR)-based control and non-pattern recognition-based control [ 11]. The conventional
non-pattern recognition method is commonly used and limited to the proportional control (on /o
control). EMG-PR techniques have been developed to increase the dexterity of myoelectric prosthetic
devices, and to overcome the limitations of conventional proportional control. EMG-PR operates by
extracting multiple features from EMG signals rather than entirely relying on EMG amplitude [ 12] (as
EMG amplitude is slow, cumbersome and di cult for users to control their residual muscles movement).
A well-developed artiﬁcial upper limb design comprises of trajectories of a limb and their associated
movement patterns. To delineate this, a control algorithm requires parameters such as kinematics
and models of joints [ 13], motion and activities range [ 11]. Through EMG-based pattern recognition,
researchers are working on the hypothesis that EMG patterns contain much information on intended
movements. Once the EMG patterns are identiﬁed for intended movements using pattern classiﬁcation,
the prosthesis controller will receive the command to implement the movement. Thus, EMG-PR
approach may allow users to control their myoelectric prosthesis more e ortlessly with a broad range
of control.
The use of artiﬁcial hands instead of biological hands with the same degree of dexterity [ 14]
and complexity is a challenging task. However, pattern recognition (PR) technology has played an
important role in controlling myoelectric prosthetic devices for over 20 years [ 15–17]. Pattern recognition
technology provides more natural control, which is easier to learn by user and machine. It also provides
independent control of multiple DOFs using simultaneous, sequential or semi-sequential control, as well
as bringing the prosthesis closer to natural arm functions [ 18]. By applying proper PR-based methods
and signal processing techniques in combination with machine learning algorithms, an amputee’s limb
movement can be accurately decoded and used to control a prosthetic device [ 11,19]. EMG-based PR