Sensors 2019 ,19, 4596 16 of 30
4.3. Real-Time Using Virtual Reality
To be able to control virtual prosthesis and to become familiar with a real-time prosthesis, voluntary
muscle contraction control is very important; this can be done by using a visual feedback system.
The improvement of learning depends on the user and visual feedback system, thus, the feedback
system must allow the user to learn new tasks using their muscles [ 87]. Most of the virtual prosthesis
followed the same stages to operate. Firstly, the EMG signal acquisition takes place using electrodes on
the residual muscle of amputees. Then, the signal is ampliﬁed and ﬁltered to acquire the myoelectric
signal to be used. The interface between the virtual system and acquisition of myoelectric signal is
created, which consists of isolation, pre-processing of the signal in the hardware, personal computer (PC)
communication, communication between PC and MATLAB, processing in software and communication
between MATLAB and virtual world [ 87] (part of MATLAB). The general idea followed by most of the
virtual prosthesis is shown in Figure 4.
 
Figure 4. General representation of virtual prosthesis process. 
 
Figure 4. General representation of virtual prosthesis process.
The continuing the examination of real-time control of prostheses using the myoelectric signal
resulted in a robust scheme pattern recognition [ 29]. Twelve subject data from four channels were
used for real-time control. Unlike the traditional methods involving transient control, which requires
initiation from rest, a continuous stream of class decisions was delivered to the prosthetic device.
Pattern recognition was performed on sliding time windows with 256 ms in duration and with the
LDA classiﬁer. The continuous decision (intended motion) permitted intricate classiﬁcations involving
multiple joints without disruption. The continuous classiﬁer performs very well with a signiﬁcant
gain in accuracy and response time over a wide range of analysis window lengths if accompanied by
majority vote post-processing. Moreover, the control scheme required minimal storage capacity.
Ann et al. [ 88] presented that the target achievement control (TAC) test in the virtual environment
provides a good platform for PR control practice and testing. In a TAC test, virtual prosthesis moved
from an inactive position to the target position. In 2015, Martina and Haripriya [ 89] constructed a
prototype using sEMG signal to record the data from the brachioradialis muscle of forearm to control
the movement of powerpoint slides transmitted in real-time. Furthermore, Agamemnon et al. [ 90]
performed an experiment on 20 able-bodied and two amputees to ﬁnd the outcome of two sensors