Sensors 2019 ,19, 4596 19 of 30
5. Discussion
The ﬁrst pattern recognition control scheme was developed in the late 1960s. By the 1980s,
the approach was more reﬁned by extracting features using autoregression from a smaller number
of input channels. This allowed greater accuracy (nearly 86%), but was unable to achieve that in
real-time. At the beginning of the 1990s, pattern recognition and its accuracy were improved further
with artiﬁcial neural networks. Then, the methodology was shifted to the analysis of real-time scenarios
with a continuous shrinkage to permit precision of roughly above 92%. The inclusion of real-life
constraints and reduction of dynamic error were large discussions after the late 1990s. Since then,
most of the studies attempt to achieve a perfect natural level control in myo prosthesis by the selection
of appropriate classiﬁers and post-processing techniques. It is obvious that the popularity of pattern
recognition methods keeps on increasing, and the research studies are evolving into a more natural
control of artiﬁcial arms. A sudden increase in pattern recognition control can be visible from the
year 2000 onwards. Though there are some ﬂuctuations in the level, with the change in computing
capability of processors, the interest in research on pattern recognition has risen and shown major turn
since 2010.
There are still many challenges to implementing real-time prosthesis, mainly in a wearable
embedded system. First, a solution scheme involves a re-training PR classiﬁer. Presently, this process
includes the restructuring of the training feature matrix, the estimation of variables in the pattern
classiﬁers, and then forming new organization of the testing feature vectors. It is unknown if the
embedded system can control all this approach fast enough for each decision. Second, many components
are incorporated into the EMG-PR algorithm; the interaction between the components and the precise
time control is critical.
At last, it requires a compact combination of all components of the embedded PC. The system
requires to provide the interfaces needed for the collection of data, su cient computing power for
decision making in real-time, e ective memory management and low energy utilization [ 79]. All of the
above-mentioned challenges are less explored.
Most of the above said articles tried to analyse and use repeated data by setting ideal clinical
conditions for classiﬁcation error and accuracy. Moreover, the real-time articles mostly tested their
results with able-bodied subjects. In real amputee life, some unwanted, unrealistic repeatable
contractions can be observed from myo-signals during classiﬁer learning. Those considerations were
the least discussed and identiﬁed. When a user is asked to perform several activities under real-life
conditions, such as varying size loads, orientation and weather, the classiﬁcation error in the real-life
scenario is high from their equivalent able-bodied subject. It is also clear that pattern recognition
systems have yet to obtain an extensive application for numerous reasons such as (1) the absence of
good user interface, (2) uncertainty in classiﬁcation accurateness and control and (3) variations in
patterns over the period. The previous studies have shown practical achievements for the control of
ULPs. Together with this achievement, the advancement of inaccurate classiﬁcation and speed from a
reliable command method is enough to process with less time, less error and minimum mental e ort.
While many classiﬁcation schemes have been analysed, generally, the feature identiﬁcation methods
are stuck to time-domain features and are paired with LDA classiﬁer.
Moreover, none of the pattern recognition systems have been found to be 100% precise. The wrong
classiﬁcations need to be alleviated to make a myoelectric pattern recognition control as a valid choice
for an amputee. Otherwise, users become frustrated, as they are unsuccessful at completing a task due
to unintended prosthesis movement. Ultimately, this can lead to the rejection of the device itself.