Sensors 2019 ,19, 4596 9 of 30
Sensors 2019 , 19, x FOR PEER REVIEW 9 of 27 
  
Figure 2. General pattern followed by the EMG-PR for real-time collected data from amputee. 
In 2003, Karlik et al. [62] conducted a study on the classification of myoelectric signals for precise 
overall control of multifunction prosthesis using Fuzzy clustering neural network architecture. The author also compared the accuracy of multi-la yer perceptron (MLP) having a back-propagation 
algorithm and the new fuzzy clustering neural networks (FCCN). The fuzzy clustering involved the 
division of input data into several fuzzy parts that intersect each other and thus defined by 
membership grade [0,1]. An algorithm was propos ed to implement these fuzzy clustering that 
minimised the cost function. A comparative as sessment shows that using FCNN provides more 
reliable results than MLP. The FCNN achieved 98% accuracy with half training time than that of MLP. Later, in 2005, a promising method by Chan  and Englehart [63] added into the row of the 
continuous controllers. The new method follow ed a hidden Markov model (HMM) as the data 
segment classifier. The HMM classifi er was a suitable probabilistic approach for pattern recognition 
at that time due to the resilience to sequential myosignal variations. For a four-channel six function 
design, HMM has more performance accuracy (94.63%) than MLP with a good level of robustness and quick response.  
Al-Timemy et al. [37] proposed a process for the classification of finger motions for dexterous 
control of the myoelectric prosthesis. The myosig nal was recorded from six traumatic below-elbow 
amputees. TD-AR features were used to extrac t useful information from the segmented EMG 
window. To find the best match of features reduction (to reduce computational power) and 
classifiers, two different feat ures reduction tools (PCA and orthogonal fuzzy neighbourhood 
discriminative approach (OFNDA)) and classifiers (LDA and SVM) were combined to make four different forms. The results show the high accuracy with OFNDA and LDA.  
Furthermore, the studies show that feature reduction plays an important role than a classifier to 
achieve high accuracy with multi EMG channels. In 2013, Pan et al. proposed a solution for partial hand amputees with a functional wrist to predict the finger joint angle using EMG [64]. The 
Figure 2. General pattern followed by the EMG-PR for real-time collected data from amputee.
Al-Timemy et al. [ 37] proposed a process for the classiﬁcation of ﬁnger motions for dexterous
control of the myoelectric prosthesis. The myosignal was recorded from six traumatic below-elbow
amputees. TD-AR features were used to extract useful information from the segmented EMG
window. To ﬁnd the best match of features reduction (to reduce computational power) and classiﬁers,
two di erent features reduction tools (PCA and orthogonal fuzzy neighbourhood discriminative
approach (OFNDA)) and classiﬁers (LDA and SVM) were combined to make four di erent forms.
The results show the high accuracy with OFNDA and LDA.
Furthermore, the studies show that feature reduction plays an important role than a classiﬁer to
achieve high accuracy with multi EMG channels. In 2013, Pan et al. proposed a solution for partial hand
amputees with a functional wrist to predict the ﬁnger joint angle using EMG [ 64]. The experiment was
performed on two amputees. EMG signal was recorded from eight targeted muscles and was sampled
at 2000 Hz frequency. TD feature sets were fed to the LDA classiﬁer to identify seven di erent static
wrist positions. A switching rule, including LDA classiﬁer and 14 state-space models, was proposed
for continuous decoding of ﬁnger joint angles. The average classiﬁcation error rate (CER) was 6.18%,
which demonstrates that forearm movements and the continuous movement of the ﬁnger can be easily
classiﬁed. Similarly, in 2016, Ganesh et al. proposed the combination of ICA and Icasso to minimise
the number of EMG sensors and increased robustness of myoelectric control [12].
Early in 1993, [ 34] an experiment was performed on one amputee using the Hudgins feature set.
These features classiﬁed using ANN classiﬁer with one EMG channel proved that the EMG signal
shows deterministic structure during the beginning of muscle contraction. Riillo et al. [ 65] proposed an
optimization methodology of sEMG based hand gesture classiﬁcation using pre-processing techniques
such as PCA (unsupervised) and CSP (supervised). One trans-radial amputee (right-hand below-elbow
amputee) participated in the experiment. TD features were extracted from segmented data (using