Sensors 2019 ,19, 4596 13 of 30
To access the computer for limbs disabled through their remaining muscles, a real-time assistive
device was designed in 2007 with PR of EMG signals [ 77]. The signals were measured from the
muscles of the lower arm of the subject during di erent wrist motions. The obtained signals were
ﬁltered, and a supervised multi-layer neural network trained by a backpropagation algorithm was
used for the classiﬁcation of the user’s movement and clicking of a cursor. The drawback of that article
was that the researcher focussed more on the qualitative evaluation of performance than presenting
the control implementation. Similarly, Anbin et al. [ 78] proposed the novel combination of signals
(EMG and inertial measurement unit (IMU)) to be used for mouse controller (cursor movements).
LDA classiﬁes the EMG data into several groups of 128 ms time window and 32 ms increment window,
which correspond to the pre-deﬁned computer mouse operations. The results showed an accuracy
of 88%.
In 2007, Bitar et al. [ 48] explained in detail the design of portable Musical Instrument
Digital Interface (MIDI) using a continuous wavelet transform (CWT) decomposition and SVM.
A low-complexity portable dsPIC33FJ256GP710 embedded system was designed that collects and
classiﬁes EMG signals. This embedded system is quite inexpensive and consumes less power.
The output from four-channel was sampled at 1 kHz frequency using the dsPIC’s on-chip A /D
converters. The channel window (ﬁxed-length windows of 0.6 s with 0.3 s overlap) was normalised
by its respective power. The CWT coe cients were computed for each and every channel separately,
and the desired features were extracted. Finally, six class classiﬁcations were performed using the SVM
classiﬁer, and the decision of the classiﬁer transmits the result as labels in real-time using Bluetooth to a
remote interface. Moreover, to control a MIDI-enabled device (mechanical prosthetic hand), these labels
were then converted to MIDI commands. The experiment showed an achieved 91% accuracy.
Ke et al [ 59] presented the latest progress on EMG-PR control of a prosthetic hand. EMG signal
was acquired using an armband with eight-channel electrodes. A powerful embedded system was
introduced to deal with the decoding algorithm of EMG signals. These real-time surface myoelectric
signals decoding and EMG training (onboard) were incorporated in the embedded system to control a
prosthetic hand of six DOFs. The result showed that the possibility of speeding up the movement of a
PR prosthetic arm, making it more suited for daily application, is promising.
In 2013, Xiaorong et al. [ 79] proposed a ﬁrst real-time EMG-PR self-recovery classiﬁcation using a
cumulative sum algorithm (CUSUM) detector. Forty-eight motion artefacts were introduced on 12
real-time testing trials. CUSUM detector successfully detected the 43 artifacts, which lead to 93.5% of the
elimination of misclassiﬁcation caused by motion artefact. Similarly, in 2015, Ann et al. [ 80] compared
the non-adaptive (conventional) and adaptive control (real-time) prediction learning. The experiment
was performed on one trans-humeral prosthesis and three able-bodied subjects. EMG signal acquired
using eight channels sampled at 1 kHz to classify the eight classes of motion. Subjects were asked to
wear a Bento arm (anthropometric robotic arm), which consists of MTT (AX-18 smart robotic arm)
incorporating ﬁve DOF. The result shows the adaptive control decreases the total switching time and
improve myoelectric robotic arm during uninterrupted use by subjects (amputee and normally limbed).
A few articles showed the real-time control of commercially available prostheses for ﬁnding the
user experience with pattern recognition control. Understanding the patient’s experience can help
clinicians and patients who choose prosthetic options. The commercially available EMG-PR control
was interfaced with multiple degrees of freedom DEKA arm [ 81]. This study provided an extensive
description of the user experience of operating a DEKA arm using EMG-PR control. The majority of
the participants preferred the future prospective of EMG-PR as a control measure.
Mastinu et al. [ 82] presented the real-time implementations of PR techniques on dysmelia subjects
(congenital disorder). The subject was asked to use iLimb-ultra (Touch Bionics, UK) for ﬁve consecutive
days during the experiment. This system is known as the artiﬁcial limb controller which includes a
pattern recognition system. The classiﬁcation accuracy and motion test of the system were compared
with di erent classes on motion (open hand, closed hand, side grip, ﬁne grip and pointer) individually.