Sensors 2019 ,19, 4596 3 of 30
methods involve various approaches such as pre-processing, segmentation of data, feature extraction,
feature classiﬁcation and post-processing [20].
All these approaches related to myoelectric pattern recognition in one way or another can be helpful,
but these methods still need further real-time evaluations for their validity [ 6]. Much research has been
done on the myoelectric prosthesis; nevertheless, some of the areas in the ﬁeld need to be improved:
(i) control of multiple degrees of freedoms (DOFs) naturally and intuitively, (ii) two-way communication
with the brain (peripheral nervous system (PNS)) and iii) fast learning. Moreover, several advanced
pattern recognition techniques have been proposed without any real-world user applications [ 21,22].
A large portion of pattern recognition techniques described in the literature is still being applied in
clinical settings. Moreover, the performance of these algorithms is a ected greatly by several factors,
including the positioning of electrodes, the fatigue of the muscle, arm position, surface EMG cross-talk
and muscle contraction. This paper is mainly focused on a review of the major pattern recognition
control approaches for myo-activated prostheses and their real-time amputee applications, and then
suggests some critical directions to follow to improve their performance level while maintaining
quantiﬁable viability.
The research methodology is discussed in Section 2. Section 3 describes the pattern recognition
techniques and systems used today, their merits and demerits if these are hands-on and what extents
need to be innovative for these technologies to be accomplished. Section 4 describes the methods
and analysis of the real-time application of myo-prosthesis. The results are discussed in Section 5.
The issues and advances made concerning this research area are discussed in Section 6. Section 7
concludes and provides an overall analysis of the article.
2. Research Methodology
This paper is a review article that summarises the current state of real-time EMG-PR control of
hand prosthesis. Many classiﬁcation approaches have been proposed to obtain better performance of
the real-time application of myoelectric prosthesis. Despite the fact that the classiﬁcation accuracy
is high (nearly >95%) on o ine measurements, the implementation of classiﬁcation techniques on
prosthetics does not give the same accuracy. The main reason behind preparing this review paper
is to show existing development achieved over the years on real-time usability of hand prosthesis.
More focus is given on PR classiﬁcation techniques, feature extraction technique, embedded processor,
virtual reality and other factors (sampling frequency, window length). Many review paper has been
published on EMG-PR, but in our understanding, this is one of a few review papers on real-time
EMG-PR control of hand prosthesis.
Firstly, the key ideas related to the EMG characteristics are discussed in brief on the introduction.
The process of pattern recognition techniques is presented in Figure 1 and then discussed. Following this,
we will explore the key techniques and research ideas related to the real-time myoelectric pattern
recognition and control. These key ideas were established through a literature survey that attempted
to capture the major achievement in the ﬁeld of classiﬁcation to obtain real-time control of prosthesis,
real-time with embedded PR based prosthetics and real-time using virtual reality. In the ﬁnal sections
of the paper, we speculate on future research directions in this ﬁeld based on our critical analysis of the
current state of the art.
3. Pattern Recognition-Based Myoelectric Control
Myoelectric control systems can be classiﬁed as a pattern recognition control system and
a non-pattern recognition control system. The non-pattern recognition control includes onset
analysis, proportional level control and threshold level control. All of them are easy to implement
in a real system but are limited in their degrees of freedom. From the early 1960s onwards,
pattern recognition-classiﬁcation techniques attracted the attention of the research community working
on controlling artiﬁcial limbs. This approach consists of segmentation of data, feature extraction,
and classiﬁcation of a set of features or patterns for the various mode of myo-activations [ 23,24]. Figure 1