Sensors 2019 ,19, 4596 7 of 30
depend on the selection of features [ 39,52]. As the input data are suddenly changing myosignals,
they have the downside of immediately switching the control from rest to contraction. This prohibits
changeover of the feature set from one to another in less time and an e cient manner.
Moreover, it delays the coordination between multiple tasks utilizing large degrees of freedom
in real-time. As a solution, the wavelet packet-based feature set can classify myoelectric activity in
real-time where the data streams are continuously exhibiting superior performance. A research work
then started on the KNN classiﬁer with a genetic algorithm, upon the trans-radial muscles having the
potential to control a multi-ﬁngered prosthetic hand.
Another classiﬁcation technique mostly used for the EMG signal classiﬁcation is an artiﬁcial
neural network (ANN). An ANN is easily trainable and has the capability of modelling both linear
and non-linear data [ 49]. The SVM classiﬁer, due to its kernel-based characteristics, has gained wide
application in the ﬁeld of myoelectric control. SVM is most popular for performing classiﬁcation as
well as regression using machine learning tasks. SVM is an advanced statistical learning approach
providing an accurate and optimal solution in a short time. The di erent classiﬁers used in various
works of literature have been reported in Tables 1–3.
Although a lot of developments and progress were made in the ﬁeld of EMG-PR, the development
of a DOF prosthesis that could aid in simultaneous prosthetic control is still a challenge. Based on
the literature studies, it indicates that classiﬁcation accuracy can be increased with appropriate use of
EMG channel and feature set.
3.5. Post-Processing for Upper Limb EMG
To overcome the limitations of conventional EMG control [ 11] post-processing has been proposed.
Furthermore, the post-processing stage is next to the classiﬁcation level for the removal of errors and
misclassiﬁcations. The control performance of a multifunctional prosthesis in a practical and laboratory
setting will always show various disparities. To minimise this classiﬁcation error due to unintended
actions during the real-time applications, Simon et al. [ 53] introduced the practice of decision-based
velocity ramp functions as a post-processing method. This function attenuates the speed of action
soon after the classiﬁer decision is altered. Moreover, post-processing approaches give a smooth state
transition from the current motion class to the changeover state. The greatest advantage of this is that it
could be combined with the multi-level real-time continuous control. Some of the other post-processing
techniques are Moving Velocity [ 30], and the majority vote [ 39,54,55]. The majority vote [ 56] has also
shown improvement in real-time EMG-PR control of hand prosthesis.
All advances in pattern recognition schemes with multiple input channels have improved the
overall classiﬁcation accuracy for multifunctional control. Pattern recognition methods inherently
use sequential control, which requires su cient windows (intervals) to extract useful classiﬁcation
features without delay of response time. When the processing window decreases, the performance
window decreases signiﬁcantly. Generally, with a normal pattern recognition algorithm, simultaneous
and proportional control is di cult to achieve. For instance, to grab an object—closing of ﬁngers
together with pronation—an additional combination of classiﬁcation features is required. This may
increase the number of patterns needed to be trained, which in turn creates an undesirable increase in
response time.
Moreover, pattern recognition does not provide proportional control, which is critical for
optimizing the response time. As a classiﬁer is a binary decision control, it cannot inﬂuence the speed
or strength of prosthesis that requires an additional proportional component to the control of signal.
This will make the system more complex and decrease overall power [57].
To overcome the need for a complex device and to provide proportional and simultaneous control,
regression is one of the commonly used methods [ 47]. The regression approach can evaluate number
of control signals continuously from the EMG signal directly. For example, if one control signal assists
wrist rotation then the other control signal evaluates hand opening. Moreover, this approach provides
more user-friendly and spontaneous control of the prosthesis. Some of the regression approach used