Sensors 2019 ,19, 4596 6 of 30
transform (WPT) based features [ 11], short-time Fourier transform (STFT) [ 39] and EMG synergies
by matrix factorization analysis [ 40]. STFT comparing to TD and fractal domain features state EMG
signals better relationships with di erent muscles.
Recently, time-dependent power spectral descriptors (TD-PSD) [ 11] were proposed, which consists
of feature sets (wavelength ration, sparseness, irregularity factor and spectral moments (ﬁrst, second
and fourth)). TD-PSD with force level training shows more robustness of pattern recognition against
force variation than most of the other feature extraction methods [ 41], such as reduced spectral
moments by Vuskovic and Du (VD-MOM), AR +RMS, TD, wavelet and discrete Fourier transform
(DFT) [ 42]. Khushaba [ 43] proposed a temporal-spatial descriptor (TSDs). EMG features set collected
from several intact-limbed and amputees are accepted on multiple sparse and high-density (HD) for
executing multiple degrees of freedom (hand and ﬁnger movements). Time-derivative moments (TDM)
based feature extraction [ 44] is a novel feature set extraction proposed to enhance the performance of
EMG-PR in upper limb motion classiﬁcation. Furthermore, most of the previous studies had focused
on time-domain features to reduce computational di culty. In addition, it does not require additional
levels of data transformation [45].
Usually, after feature extraction, dimensionality reduction (DR) is applied. DR is the process of
removing the number of arbitrary variables under consideration by locating a group of key variables.
When the information is liberally dispersed (scattered) due to the EMG classiﬁcation, there may be a
problem caused by the large variance of the EMG signal. Thus, dimensionality reduction methods can
unite this information more e ectively and solve the problem of feature dimension. Dimensionality
reduction thus helps in saving the computational cost and reduces the level of system complexity [ 46].
Uncorrelated linear discriminant analysis (ULDA), principle component analysis (PCA), and orthogonal
fuzzy neighbourhood discriminative approach (OFNDA) are common dimensionality reduction (DR)
techniques used to reduce the feature space.
3.4. Myoelectric Classiﬁcation
The next stage, followed by feature extraction, is feature classiﬁcation. The information gathered
during feature extraction is fed into the classiﬁcation stage. A classiﬁer should be able to classify the
pattern e ciently in less time to meet the real-time constraints of the prosthesis. Notably, only a few
numbers of studies have compared the potentiality of classiﬁers to meet real-time control.
The myosignals pattern classiﬁcation for explicit movements is more focused on the extraction
of activities from arm muscles. For amputees, due to their amputations, only a few muscles will be
present in the residual limb to extract the feature of signals. For instance, in the case of transhumeral
amputation, the availability of forearm muscles is completely unavailable. Most of the pattern
recognition studies are, therefore, concentrated on trans-radial control. However, several studies tried
to classify ﬁnger movements using multiple features and classiﬁers, such as multi-layer perceptron
and neural network. Usually, in EMG-PR, the classiﬁer performs well on trained (actions) classiﬁcation
patterns. To improve the robustness of PR systems, the untrained classiﬁcation pattern is also equally
important. Furthermore, from the past few years, the detection of untrained actions (novelty detection)
has also been studied. In order to solve the problem of novelty detection [ 47], dierent methods were
proposed and studied, such as the ensemble of one-class support vector data description (SVDD) [ 38],
and modiﬁed boosted random forests [47].
Although various classiﬁcation methods are available, classiﬁcation algorithms include two main
trends: Statistical (LDA and SVM) and Neural (MLP and ANN) [ 48]. The conventional PR method
also depended on KNN and LDA algorithms to categorise arm motions into di erent pattern classes.
LDA scheme is one of the most adopted classiﬁers in the implementation of myoelectric control. LDA
classiﬁer has shown high classiﬁcation accuracy, and it is very simple to implement [ 49]. In KNN
feasibility and precision check of classifying features have done for diverse time windows such as EMG
histogram and noise levels [ 50,51]. In 2001, instead of concentrating fully on the classiﬁer like KNN
or LDA, some authors demonstrated that the pattern classiﬁcation and its accuracy are more deeply