Sensors 2019 ,19, 4596 5 of 30
3.1. Pre Processing of EMG Recorded Signal
Recorded EMG signal is characterised by many interferences, such as signal acquisition noise,
electromagnetic disturbances, signal instability and motion artefact due to electrodes and cables.
Pre-processing is the very ﬁrst step of pattern recognition techniques regarding proper signal analysis
and minimizing the inherent interferences [ 28]. It should be noted that Independent component analysis
(ICA) and Common spatial pattern (CSP) are used as a Pre-processing (ﬁltering) and dimensionality
reduction (after feature extraction).
3.2. Segmentation of Data
The results obtained from the Pre-processed EMG signal (random nature) is not regarded as a
useful input in the pattern recognition technique. Thus, to extract the descriptive features, the window
(segmentation) of the Pre-processed data is required. There are mainly two di erent types of windowing
techniques proposed: overlapping window and non-overlapping (adjacent) window. In overlapped
windowing technique, the former window overlaps over the current window with increment timeless
than the window length itself [ 11]. The window length should be selected properly in real-time,
which could deliver an acceptable delay. Larger window length would provide high classiﬁcation
accuracy but delay in the classiﬁer’s decision. The di erent optimal length used in various works of
literature has been reported in Tables 1–3.
Segmentation of EMG data (using windowing) helps in estimating the intended motion for the
myoelectric classiﬁer. It helps in the decision making of intended motion while new data are being
acquired. Englehart and Hudgins [ 29] used an adjacent, disjoint analysis window length equivalent to
0.25Sample frequency (SF) (256 ms for SF of 1000 Hz) for continuous myoelectric classiﬁcation [ 30].
They also demonstrated that the data segment length of 0.125 SF (128 ms for SF of 1000 Hz) or
even less as 0.03125 SF (32 ms) could be considered, without much reduction in accuracy for the
continuous segmentation of steady-state signal. As with the advanced real-time computation facility
and high-speed processors, data processing could take less than 5 ms, thereby classifying data segment
length could vary from 32 to 25 ms. In this approach, with the time increment less than segment length,
the new segment could slide over the current segment. The segment length must be higher than the
processing period because the mainframe feature set had been calculated and must take a choice earlier
to the next segment. Thus, normally, the denser yet semi-class decisions are made through small
segment increments that help to improve response time and accuracy [31].
3.3. Feature Extraction
Generally, EMG features are extracted in the form of time-domain (TD), frequency domain (FD)
and time-frequency domain (TFD). In the TD, the features are extracted from the variations of signal
amplitude with time [ 32] as per the muscular conditions. Unlike time features, the frequency domain
uses the power spectrum density of the myosignals for extraction [ 33]. On the other hand, the combined
features of time and frequency domain are used for time-frequency extraction (examples such as
short Fourier transform and wavelets). The studies based on feature extractions proposed across
TD, FD and TFD shows the best results using the TD EMG feature. Hudgins [ 34] proposed the four
dierent time-domain features (MAV , WL, ZC, SSC) [ 35] for feature extraction from EMG, and it is
the most adopted one to date in the ﬁeld of myoelectric pattern recognition [ 11]. Willison amplitude
(WAMP) [ 36], Autoregressive (AR) model parameters [ 37] and time domain-auto regression (TD-AR)
are also used to extract feature information. In comparison to other feature extraction methods,
such as Fourier transform and Wavelet Transforms (WT), TD-AR features have achieved higher
classiﬁcation performance for the detection of hand movements with EMG signals [ 37]. Lui and
Huang [ 38] implemented a fourth-order AR model for the EMG feature extraction and showed better
classiﬁcation performance. This approach only includes the trained data (EMG pattern classes) and
rejects all untrained data of the classiﬁer. Some of the recently developed features are Wavelet packet