Sensors 2019 ,19, 4596 21 of 30
Table 4. Some of the challenges of real-time EMG-PR control of hand prosthesis.
Challenges Description
Comfort The socket that is the part of the upper limb prosthesis may interfere with the elbow (a function of the residual joint). If the socket does not ﬁt correctly,
the patient may su er from pain, sores and blisters. Such prostheses will be experienced as heavy and cumbersome [ 96]. Even some prostheses with
appropriately designed sockets, face problems of heat, sweating and chaﬁng.
Appearance Most of the developed upper-limb prostheses do not look natural in appearance. Additionally, the user can ﬁnd the prosthesis uncomfortable to wear.
The user is still unable to control the multiple degrees of freedom simultaneously and consistently.
Function Nowadays, upper limb prostheses perform almost all everyday activities. However, it remains challenging to obtain opening and closing positions of
the hand from the residual limb. This is because residual muscles often used for hand prosthesis are biceps and triceps, which do not convey the
information for closing and opening the hand [97].
Durability Many of the upper limb prostheses are heavy and have short battery life.
Cost Upper limb prosthesis costs around $50,000, which is quite di cult to a ord by amputees from all over the world.
Technology Developed prosthetic devices still lack intuitiveness and reliability between user motion volition and real motion of prosthesis. Similarly, much
training is needed to operate those prosthetic hands.
Processing delay The embedded processor used exhibits some delay (around 3 s), which halt the acquisition of EMG for that delay period.
EMG interferences The transient changes in EMG often result from external interferences, changes in electrode impedance, muscle fatigue and electrode shift, among
others. During practical use, this transient change arising from variations (long- and short-term) in the acquisition environment caused degradation of
the clinical vitality of the device and limited its users’ adoption [11].
Electrode displacement (shift) Electrode displacement occurs each time when users use a prosthesis, electrodes slightly reconcile in a di erent position relative to underlying
musculature. When the user performs some task, due to the loading and positioning of limb, a movement of electrode occurs. Such an electrode shift
can lead to a change in EMG characteristic (recording) of the limb, and thus, make it more di cult to decode the movements [98].
Amputee movement EMG signal from the limb position is mostly recorded when the user is in a static position (sitting), but in a real-time scenario, prosthesis users have to
use the device in di erent positions (walking, climbing stairs). However, the variation in limb position e ect the classiﬁcation performance of
EMG-PR [99].
Muscle contraction forces While performing everyday activities, the same limb assists di erent muscle contraction forces across di erent conditions. Thus, the variation in
muscle contraction force occurs due to the same targeted limb results in myoelectric signal pattern classiﬁcation inconsistency. Hence, it a ects the
EMG-PR control of prosthesis [24].
Limb position variation Variation in limb position occurs while performing a di erent action in everyday life. For upper-limb amputation, the e ects are seen on residual
muscle (located in a prosthetic socket) from which the EMG signal is collected. Additionally, various limb positions lead to the variation in
gravitational force, which leads to the displacement of target muscles. These factors cause variation in EMG signal pattern a ecting the EMG-PR
control of prosthesis performance.