Sensors 2019 ,19, 4596 22 of 30
Future Prospects-Implementation of Real-Time EMG-PR Control
 Electroencephalogram (EEG), and ECog (Electrocortocogram) measures brain signals, and they
could be used to supersede EMG for prostheses control. ECog electrodes are invasive as
they are placed directly inside the head, whereas EEG electrodes are non-invasive, as they are
positioned on the scalp area [ 100], where information regarding the targeted body movements
are measurable [ 101]. EEG and ECog have currently found an application as a brain-machine
interface [ 102], and in theory, can control the movement of the prosthesis similar to the EMG. In
other words, while EMG measures the electric current from muscles and provides the control
signal according to the action intended by subject [ 103], brain-machine interface decodes the
electrical signal generated from the brain and converts them to the control signal for the control
of prostheses [ 104] without using a muscle as an intermediate [ 100]. Unfortunately, due to
the invasiveness (ECog) and the problem associated with electrodes montage stability (EEG),
generalised poor signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) and the poor spatial resolution of the signals, not to
mention the discomfort related to the need of having multiple devices over the subject’s body
(i.e., head and limbs), we believe that, at present, these devices may be better suited for patients
with spinal cord injury where voluntary EMG signals may be not available. It is necessary to
mention that another issue often related to the use of brain signals to drive external devices is the
need of extensive training [105,106] and poor performances of the brain to computer interface.
 The prosthetic control unit should be increased, and appropriate pattern-recognition should be
used for proper handling of the prosthetic device.
 The prosthetic device should be developed using low-cost materials, a ordable to all amputees.
 Intuitiveness can be developed by extracting the signals using ultrasound imaging [ 107],
force myography (FMG), TMR and Implantable myoelectric sensor [108].
 One possible way to minimise or eliminate this drawback of EMG interferences is to develop an
electromagnetic shielding technique [11] and implement the best ﬁltering strategy.
 Rather than depending on existing proposed training, an intelligent adaptive prosthetic system
should be developed and implemented. An intelligent EMG-PR system requires to represent a data
stream accurately in real-time. It shows a possible way to restrict the deﬁciency in the prosthesis
market. With such developments, users’ expectations can be met, and thus, device adoption for
everyday use can be increased.
 Feature extraction is a core of conventional EMG-based pattern recognition control. To achieve
the real-time usability of prosthetic, issues related to the feature extraction should be addressed.
Deep learning (machine learning method based on ANN) may be one possible way to solve
the problem of feature extraction [ 11]. Thus, more research on deep learning in pattern
recognition-based prosthesis control should be conducted.
7. Conclusions
This review paper presents a brief introduction to EMG-PR techniques and explores the work
done on real-time (amputee data, embedded and virtual environment) myo-activated prosthesis based
on pattern recognition control over the years. Through the literature survey, some of the key techniques
required for the improvement of existing real-time application of EMG-PR for hand prosthesis are
presented. Although the perspective of intelligent pattern recognition control methods for the multiple
degrees of freedom for hand prosthesis has been well investigated, their real-time usability is still being
challenged by a number of compounding factors. Natural neuromuscular control of prosthesis should
be proportional and investigate multiple degrees of freedom. However, while reviewing the existing
literature, we have observed that the majority of real-time prosthesis uses EMG, i.e., multiple channels
targeting multiple residual muscles to generate multiple synchronous control signals. The challenges
are even greater than a single degree of freedom due to the proximity of the muscles /electrodes,
etc. This should be well investigated in the future for real-time scenarios. Furthermore, to achieve