examples. By investigating various ways of doing so, we
bridge self-supervised and semi-supervised learning, and
propose a framework of semi-supervised losses arising from
self-supervised learning targets. We call this framework
self-supervised semi-supervised learning or, in short, S4L.
The techniques derived in that way can be seen as new semi-
supervised learning techniques for natural images. Figure 1
illustrates the idea of the proposed S4Ltechniques. We
thus evaluate our models both in the semi-supervised setup,
as well as in the transfer setup commonly used to evalu-
ate self-supervised representations. Moreover, we design
strong baselines for benchmarking methods which learn us-
ing only10% or1%of the labels in ILSVRC-2012.
We further experimentally investigate whether our S4L
methods could further beneﬁt from regularizations pro-
posed by the semi-supervised literature, and discover that
they are complementary, i.e. combining them leads to im-
proved results.
Our main contributions can be summarized as follows:
•We propose a new family of techniques for semi-
supervised learning with natural images that leverage
recent advances in self-supervised learning.
•We demonstrate that the proposed self-supervised
semi-supervised ( S4L) techniques outperform care-
fully tuned baselines that are trained with no unlabeled
data, and achieve performance competitive with previ-
ously proposed semi-supervised learning techniques.
•We further demonstrate that by combining our best
S4Lmethods with existing semi-supervised tech-
niques, we achieve new state-of-the-art performance
on the semi-supervised ILSVRC-2012 benchmark.
2. Related Work
In this work we build on top of the current state-of-the-
art in both ﬁelds of semi-supervised and self-supervised
learning. Therefore, in this section we review the most rel-
evant developments in these ﬁelds.
2.1. Semi­supervised Learning
Semi-supervised learning describes a class of algorithms
that seek to learn from both unlabeled and labeled samples,
typically assumed to be sampled from the same or simi-
lar distributions. Approaches differ on what information to
gain from the structure of the unlabeled data.
Given the wide variety of semi-supervised learning tech-
niques proposed in the literature, we refer to [ 4] for an ex-
tensive survey. For more context, we focus on recent devel-
opments based on deep neural networks.
The standard protocol for evaluating semi-supervised
learning algorithms works as such: (1) Start with a stan-
dard labeled dataset; (2) Keep only a portion of the labels(say,10% ) on that dataset; (3) Treat the rest as unlabeled
data. While this approach may not reﬂect realistic settings
for semi-supervised learning [ 28], it remains the standard
evaluation protocol, which we follow it in this work.
Many of the initial results on semi-supervised learning
with deep neural networks were based on generative mod-
els such as denoising autoencoders [ 31], variational autoen-
coders [ 15] and generative adversarial networks [ 27,33].
More recently, a line of research showed improved results
on standard baselines by adding consistency regularization
losses computed on unlabeled data. These consistency reg-
ularization losses measure discrepancy between predictions
made on perturbed unlabeled data points. Additional im-
provements have been shown by smoothing predictions be-
fore measuring these perturbations. Approaches of these
kind include Π-Model [ 18], Temporal Ensembling [ 18],
Mean Teacher [ 38] and Virtual Adversarial Training [ 22].
Recently, fast-SWA[ 1] showed improved results by train-
ing with cyclic learning rates and measuring discrepancy
with an ensemble of predictions from multiple checkpoints.
By minimizing consistency losses, these models implicitly
push the decision boundary away from high-density parts
of the unlabeled data. This may explain their success on
typical image classiﬁcation datasets, where points in each
clusters typically share the same class.
Two additional important approaches for semi-
supervised learning, which have shown success both in the
context of deep neural networks and other types of models
are Pseudo-Labeling [ 19], where one imputes approximate
classes on unlabeled data by making predictions from a
model trained only on labeled data, and conditional entropy
minimization [ 10], where all unlabeled examples are
encouraged to make conﬁdent predictions on some class.
Semi-supervised learning algorithms are typically [ 28,
22,2,39,1,21] evaluated on small-scale datasets such as
CIFAR-10 [ 17] and SVHN [ 23]. We are aware of very
few examples in the literature where semi-supervised learn-
ing algorithms are evaluated on larger, more challenging
datasets such as ILSVRC-2012 [ 32]. To our knowledge,
Mean Teacher [ 38] currently holds the state-of-the-art result
on ILSVRC-2012 when using only 10% of the labels. Re-
cent concurrent work [ 40,12] presents competitive results
on ILSVRC-2012.
2.2. Self­supervised Learning
Self-supervised learning is a general learning framework
that relies on surrogate (pretext) tasks that can be formu-
lated using only unsupervised data. A pretext task is de-
signed in a way that solving it requires learning of a use-
ful image representation. Self-supervised techniques have a
variety of applications in a broad range of computer vision
topics [ 14,35,7,29,34].
In this paper we employ self-supervised learning tech-
1477