0
 10
 20
 30
 40
 50
Accuracy [%] on 5k val-set
0
10
20
30
40
50Accuracy [%] on full val-set
r = 0.99; p  0.0
0
 10
 20
 30
 40
 50
Accuracy [%] on 1k val-set
0
10
20
30
40
50Accuracy [%] on full val-set
r = 0.99; p  0.0Figure 3. Correlation between validation score on a (custom) validation set of 1000 ,5000 , and50046 images on ILSVRC-2012. Each
point corresponds to a trained model during a sweep for plain supervised baseline for the 1%labeled case. The best model according to
the validation set of 1000 is marked in red. As can be seen, evaluating our models even with only a single validation image per class is
robust, and in particular selecting an optimal model with this validation set works as well as with the full validation set.
learned by “MOAM (full)” transfers slightly better than the
baseline, which used ten times more labelled data: 83.3%
accuracy vs. 83.1%accuracy, respectively. We provide full
details of this experiment in Supplementary Material.
7. Is a Tiny Validation Set Enough?
Current standard practice in semi-supervised learning is
to use a subset of the labels for training on a large dataset,
but still perform model selection using scores obtained on
the full validation set.4But having a large labeled valida-
tion set at hand is at odds with the promised practicality
of semi-supervised learning, which is all about having only
few labeled examples. This fact has been acknowledged
by [31], but has been mostly ignored in the semi-supervised
literature. Oliver et al. [28] questions the viability of tun-
ing with small validation sets by comparing the estimated
model accuracy on small validation sets. They ﬁnd that the
variance of the estimated accuracy gap between two mod-
els can be larger than the actual gap between those models,
hinting that model selection with small validation sets may
not be viable. That said, they did not empirically evaluate
whether it’s possible to ﬁnd the bestmodel with a small val-
idation set, especially when choosing hyperparameters for a
particular semi-supervised method.
We look at the many models we trained for the plain su-
pervised baseline on 1%of ILSVRC-2012. For each model,
we compute a validation score on a validation set of 1000
labeled images ( i.e. one labeled image per class), 5000 la-
beled images ( i.e. ﬁve labeled images per class), and com-
pare these scores to those obtained on a “full-size” valida-
tion set of 50046 labeled images. The result is shown in
Figure 3and it is striking: there is a very strong correlation
4To make matters worse, in the case of ILSVRC-2012, this validation
set is used both to select hyperparameters as well as to report ﬁnal perfor-
mance. Remember that we avoid this by creating a custom validation set
from part of the training set for all hyperparameter selections.between performance on the tiny and the full validation set.
Especially, while in parts there is high variability, those hy-
perparameters which work best do so in either case. Most
notably, the best model tuned on a small validation set is
also the best model tuned on a large validation set. We thus
conclude that for selecting hyperparameters of a model, a
tiny validation set is enough.
8. Discussion and Future Work
In this paper, we have bridged the gap between self-
supervised and semi-supervised learning by suggesting
anS4Lframework which can be used to turn any self-
supervised method into a semi-supervised learning model.
We instantiated two such methods: S4L-Rotation and
S4L-Exemplar and have shown that they perform compet-
itively to methods from the semi-supervised literature on
the challenging ILSVRC-2012 dataset. We further showed
thatS4Lmethods are complementary to existing semi-
supervision techniques, and MOAM, our proposed combi-
nation of those, leads to state-of-the-art performance.
While all of the methods we investigated show promis-
ing results for learning with 10% of the labels on ILSVRC-
2012, the picture is much less clear when using only 1%.
It is possible that in this low data regime, when only 13la-
beled examples per class are available, the setting fades into
the few-shot scenario, and a very different set of methods
would be required for reaching much better performance.
Nevertheless, we hope that this work inspires other re-
searchers in the ﬁeld of self-supervision to consider extend-
ing their methods into semi-supervised methods using our
S4Lframework, as well as researchers in the ﬁeld of semi-
supervised learning to take inspiration from the vast amount
of recently proposed self-supervision methods.
Acknowledgements. We thank the Google Brain Team in
Z¨urich, and especially Sylvain Gelly for discussions.
1483