niques that are designed to learn useful visual representa-
tions from image databases. These techniques achieve state-
of-the-art performance among approaches that learn visual
representations from unsupervised images only. Below we
provided a non-comprehensive summary of the most impor-
tant developments in this direction.
Doersch et al. propose to train a CNN model that
predicts relative location of two randomly sampled non-
overlapping image patches [ 5]. Follow-up papers [ 24,26]
generalize this idea for predicting a permutation of multiple
randomly sampled and permuted patches.
Beside the above patch-based methods, there are self-
supervised techniques that employ image-level losses.
Among those, in [ 41] the authors propose to use grayscale
image colorization as a pretext task. Another example is a
pretext task [ 9] that predicts an angle of the rotation trans-
formation that was applied to an input image.
Some techniques go beyond solving surrogate classiﬁ-
cation tasks and enforce constraints on the representation
space. A prominent example is the exemplar loss from [ 6]
that encourages the model to learn a representation that is
invariant to heavy image augmentations. Another example
is [25], that enforces additivity constraint on visual repre-
sentation: the sum of representations of all image patches
should be close to representation of the whole image. Fi-
nally, [ 3] proposes a learning procedure that alternates be-
tween clustering images in the representation space and
learning a model that assigns images to their clusters.
3. Methods
In this section we present our self-supervised semi-
supervised learning ( S4L) techniques. We ﬁrst provide a
general description of our approach. Afterwards, we intro-
duce speciﬁc instantiations of our approach.
We focus on the semi-supervised image classiﬁcation
problem. Formally, we assume an (unknown) data gen-
erating joint distribution p(X,Y)over images and labels.
The learning algorithm has access to a labeled training set
Dl, which is sampled i.i.d. from p(X,Y)and an unlabeled
training set Du, which is sampled i.i.d. from the marginal
distribution p(X).
The semi-supervised methods we consider in this paper
have a learning objective of the following form:
min
θLl(Dl,θ)+wLu(Du,θ), (1)
whereLlis a standard cross-entropy classiﬁcation loss of
all labeled images in the dataset, Luis a loss deﬁned on un-
supervised images (we discuss its particular instances later
in this section), wis a non-negative scalar weight and θis
the parameters for model fθ(·). Note that the learning ob-
jective can be extended to multiple unsupervised losses.3.1. Self­supervised Semi­supervised Learning
We now describe our self-supervised semi-supervised
learning techniques. For simplicity, we present our ap-
proach in the context of multiclass image recognition, even
though it can be easily generalized to other scenarios, such
as dense image segmentation.
It is important to note that in practice the objective 1is
optimized using a stochastic gradient descent (or a variant)
that uses mini-batches of data to update the parameters θ.
In this case the size of a supervised mini-batch xl,yl⊂Dl
and an unsupervised mini-batch xu⊂Ducan be arbitrary
chosen. In our experiments we always default to simplest
possible option of using minibatches of equal sizes.
We also note that we can choose whether to include the
minibatch xlinto the self-supervised loss, i.e. apply Lselfto
the union of xuandxl. We experimentally study the effect
of this choice in our experiments Section 4.4.
We demonstrate our framework on two prominent self-
supervised techniques: predicting image rotation [ 9] and
exemplar [ 6]. Note, that with our framework, more self-
supervised losses can be explored in the future.
S4L-Rotation. The key idea of rotation self-supervision is
to rotate an input image then predict which rotation degree
was applied to these rotated images. The loss is deﬁned as:
Lrot=1
|R|/summationdisplay
r∈R/summationdisplay
x∈DuL(fθ(xr),r), (2)
whereRis the set of the 4rotation degrees
{0◦,90◦,180◦,270◦},xris the image xrotated by r,
fθ(·)is the model with parameters θ,Lis the cross-entropy
loss. This results in a 4-class classiﬁcation problem.
We follow a recommendation from [ 9] and in a single
optimization step we always apply and predict all four
rotations for every image in a minibatch.
We also apply the self-supervised loss to the labeled im-
ages in each minibatch. Since we process rotated supervised
images in this case, we suggest to also apply a classiﬁcation
loss to these images. This can be seen as an additional way
to regularize a model in a regime when a small amount of
labeled image are available. We measure the effect of this
choice later in Section 4.4.
S4L-Exemplar. The idea of exemplar self-supervision [ 6]
is to learn a visual representation that is invariant to a wide
range of image transformations. Speciﬁcally, we use “In-
ception” cropping [ 37], random horizontal mirroring, and
HSV-space color randomization as in [ 6] to produce 8 dif-
ferent instances of each image in a minibatch. Follow-
ing [16], we implement Luas the batch hard triplet loss [ 13]
with a soft margin. This encourages transformation of the
same image to have similar representations and, conversely,
different images to have diverse representations.
1478