Similarly to the rotation self-supervision case, Luis ap-
plied to all eight instances of each image.
3.2. Semi­supervised Baselines
In the following section, we compare S4Lto several
leading semi-supervised learning algorithms that are not
based on self-supervised objectives. We now describe the
approaches that we compare to.
Our proposed objective 1is applicable for semi super-
vised learning methods as well, where the loss Luis the
standard semi supervised loss as described below.
Virtual Adversarial Training (V AT) [ 22]: The idea is
making the predicted labels robust around input data point
against local perturbation. It approximates the maximal
change in predictions within an ǫvatvicinity of unlabeled
data points, where ǫvatis a hyperparameter. Concretely, the
V AT loss for a model fθis:
Lvat=1
|Du|/summationdisplay
x∈DuKL(fθ(x)/bardblfθ(x+∆x)),(3)
where∆x= argmax
δs.t.|δ|2=ǫKL(fθ(x)/bardblfθ(x+δ)). (4)
While computing ∆xdirectly is not tractable, it can be ef-
ﬁciently approximated at the cost of an extra forward and
backwards pass for every optimization step [ 22].
Conditional Entropy Minimization (EntMin) [ 10]: This
works under the assumption that unlabeled data indeed has
one of the classes that we are training on, even when the par-
ticular class is not known during training. It adds a loss for
unlabeled data that, when minimized, encourages the model
to make conﬁdent predictions on unlabeled data. The con-
ditional entropy minimization loss for a model fθ(treating
fθas a conditional distribution of labels over images) is:
Lentmin=1
|Du|/summationdisplay
x∈Du/summationdisplay
y∈Y−fθ(y|x)logfθ(y|x). (5)
Alone, the EntMin loss is not useful in the context of deep
neural networks because the model can easily become ex-
tremely conﬁdent by increasing the weights of the last layer.
One way to resolve this is to encourage the model predic-
tions to be locally-Lipschitz, which V AT does[ 36]. There-
fore, we only consider V AT and EntMin combined, not just
EntMin alone, i.e.Lu=wvatLvat+wentminLentmin .
Pseudo-Label [19] is a simple approach: Train a model
only on labeled data, then make predictions on unlabeled
data. Then enlarge your training set with the predicted
classes of the unlabeled data points whose predictions are
conﬁdent past some threshold of conﬁdence. Re-train your
model with this enlarged labeled dataset. While [ 28] shows
that in a simple ”two moons” dataset, psuedo-label fails to
learn a good model, in many real datasets this approach does
show meaningful gains.4. ILSVRC-2012 Experiments and Results
In this section, we present the results of our main ex-
periments. We used the ILSVRC-2012 dataset due to its
widespread use in self-supervised learning methods, and to
see how well semi-supervised methods scale.
Since the test set of ILSVRC-2012 is not available, and
numbers from the validation set are usually reported in the
literature, we performed all hyperparameter selection for all
models that we trained on a custom train/validation split of
the public training set. This custom split contains 1231121
training and 50046 validation images. We then retrain the
best model on the full training set ( 1281167 images), pos-
sibly with fewer labels, and report ﬁnal results obtained on
the public validation set ( 50000 images).
We follow standard practice [ 38,30] and perform exper-
iments where class-balanced labels are available for only
10% of the dataset. Note that 10% of ILSVRC-2012 still
corresponds to roughly 128000 labeled images, and that
previous work uses the full (public) validation set for model
selection. While we use a custom validation set extracted
from the training set, using such a large validation set does
not correspond to a realistic scenario, as already discussed
by [31,38,28]. We also want to cover more realistic cases
in our evaluation. We thus perform experiments on 1%of
labeled examples (roughly 13000 labeled images), while
also using a validation set of only 5000 images. We analyze
the impact of validation set size in Section 7.
We always deﬁne epochs in terms of the available labeled
data, i.e. one epoch corresponds to one full pass through the
labeled data, regardless of how many unlabeled examples
have been seen. We optimize our models using stochas-
tic gradient descent with momentum on minibatches of size
256unless speciﬁed otherwise. While we do tune the learn-
ing rate, we keep the momentum ﬁxed at 0.9across all ex-
periments. Table 1summarizes our main results.
4.1. Plain Supervised Learning
Whenever new methods are introduced, it is crucial to
compare them against a solid baseline of existing methods.
The simplest baseline to which any semi-supervised learn-
ing method should be compared to, is training a plain super-
vised model on the available labeled data.
Oliver et al . [28] discovered that reported baselines
trained on labeled examples alone are unfairly weak, per-
haps given that there is not a strong community behind tun-
ing those baselines. They provide strong supervised-only
baselines for SVHN and CIFAR-10, and show that the gap
shown by the use of unlabeled data is smaller than reported.
We observed the same in the case of ILSVRC-2012.
Thus, we aim to provide a strong baseline for future re-
search by performing a relatively large search over train-
ing hyperparameters for training a model on only 10% of
ILSVRC-2012. Speciﬁcally, we try weight-decay values
1479