S4L: Self-Supervised Semi-Supervised Learning
Xiaohua Zhai∗, Avital Oliver∗, Alexander Kolesnikov∗, Lucas Beyer∗
Google Research, Brain Team
{xzhai, avitalo, akolesnikov, lbeyer }@google.com
Abstract
This work tackles the problem of semi-supervised learn-
ing of image classiﬁers. Our main insight is that the ﬁeld of
semi-supervised learning can beneﬁt from the quickly ad-
vancing ﬁeld of self-supervised visual representation learn-
ing. Unifying these two approaches, we propose the frame-
work of self-supervised semi-supervised learning ( S4L)
and use it to derive two novel semi-supervised image classi-
ﬁcation methods. We demonstrate the effectiveness of these
methods in comparison to both carefully tuned baselines,
and existing semi-supervised learning methods. We then
show that S4Land existing semi-supervised methods can
be jointly trained, yielding a new state-of-the-art result on
semi-supervised ILSVRC-2012 with 10% of labels.
1. Introduction
Modern computer vision systems demonstrate outstand-
ing performance on a variety of challenging computer vi-
sion benchmarks, such as image recognition [ 32], object
detection [ 20], semantic image segmentation [ 8],etc. Their
success relies on the availability of a large amount of anno-
tated data that is time-consuming and expensive to acquire.
Many real-world computer vision applications are con-
cerned with visual categories that are not present in standard
benchmark datasets, or with applications of dynamic na-
ture where visual categories or their appearance may change
over time. Unfortunately, building large labeled datasets for
all these scenarios is not practically feasible. Therefore, it
is an important research challenge to design a learning ap-
proach that can successfully learn to recognize new con-
cepts by leveraging only a small amount of labeled exam-
ples. The fact that humans quickly understand new concepts
after seeing only a few (labeled) examples suggests that this
goal is achievable in principle.
Notably, a large research effort is dedicated towards
learning from unlabeled data that, in many realistic ap-
plications, is much less onerous to acquire than labeled
∗equal contribution
Full dataset Labelled images
0° 270°
 hat
... ...270°
 hat 0°Figure 1. A schematic illustration of one of the proposed
self-supervised semi-supervised techniques: S4L-Rotation. Our
model makes use of both labeled and unlabled images. The ﬁrst
step is to create four input images for any image by rotating it by
0◦,90◦,180◦and270◦(inspired by [ 9]). Then, we train a single
network that predicts which rotation was applied to all these im-
ages and, additionally, predicts semantic labels of annotated im-
ages. This conceptually simple technique is competitive with ex-
isting semi-supervised learning methods.
data. Within this effort, the ﬁeld of self-supervised visual
representation learning has recently demonstrated the most
promising results [ 16]. Self-supervised learning techniques
deﬁne pretext tasks which can be formulated using only un-
labeled data, but do require higher-level semantic under-
standing in order to be solved. As a result, models trained
for solving these pretext tasks learn representations that can
be used for solving other downstream tasks of interest, such
as image recognition.
Despite demonstrating encouraging results [ 16], purely
self-supervised techniques learn visual representations that
are signiﬁcantly inferior to those delivered by fully-
supervised techniques. Thus, their practical applicability is
limited and as of yet, self-supervision alone is insufﬁcient.
We hypothesize that self-supervised learning techniques
could dramatically beneﬁt from a small amount of labeled
1476