Sensors 2021 ,21, 4294 2 of 23
available in advance, and learns those known intrusion patterns using supervised learning
algorithms [ 7,8], such as SVM [ 9,10] and Decision Tree [ 11]. Khan et al. [ 12] used a particle
swarm optimization method to select the optimal feature subset from a given dataset in
terms of detection accuracy. The authors then evaluated several machine-learning algo-
rithms such as random forest and neural network as classiﬁers using KDD Cup 99 [ 13] and
NSL-KDD [ 14] datasets. During the last decade, various deep-learning algorithms have
been used for more accurately classifying network attacks. Salama et al. [ 15] leveraged a
deep belief network (DBN) for dimensional reduction and applied SVM to detect the attack
in the NSL-KDD data. Kim et al. [ 16] built a NIDS using LSTM (Long Short-Term Memory)
networks. Alom et al. [ 17] proposed a DBN composed of stacked Restricted Boltzmann
Machines (RBMs). This approach was evaluated with the NSL-KDD data set, and achieved
an accuracy of 97.5%.
However, with the continuous development of new attack techniques, network attacks
keep evolving into new patterns [ 18], and this makes it infeasible to predict previously
unseen attack patterns. Due to unpredictable attack fashions, traditional signature-based
NIDS, relying only on previously known attack patterns, encountered limitations in de-
tecting unknown and sophisticated attacks in real time [ 19]. Moreover, signature-based
methods rely on pre-labeled train data, but the labeling process generally needs tremendous
human efforts.
These limitations were addressed by the anomaly-based approach, which enables us
to quickly detect and respond to unknown attack patterns to stabilize network operation
while reducing human intervention [ 20–24]. The anomaly-based approach generally learns
normal patterns in an unsupervised manner and detects anomaly samples whose patterns
signiﬁcantly deviate from the normal ones. For instance, the one-class SVM method regards
the majority of the data located densely within a speciﬁc area as normal and a few outliers
as abnormal. One-class SVMs [ 23] and OptiGrid clustering-based methods [ 24] were used
to detect attack trafﬁcs.
Several groups of researchers recently developed NIDS using autoencoders , a generative
deep-learning model consisting of an encoder and a decoder [ 25–27]. Given an input of
M-dimensional vector, the encoder compresses it into a latent vector represented as a
N-dimensional vector where M>N, and the decoder subsequently reconstructs the
compressed latent vector back to the M-dimensional vector (see Figure 1). An autoencoder-
based NIDS trained with only normal trafﬁc data is expected to recover any given input as
close as possible to the learned normal patterns. Therefore, we can classify an input instance
as an attack if its reconstruction error is larger than a predeﬁned threshold; otherwise,
we can classify the input instance as normal. In this fashion, an autoencoder-based NIDS
is capable of detecting unknown types of attacks when their patterns deviate from the
learned normal patterns.
Figure 1. The overall process of intrusion detection when using the dimension reduction (i.e.,
Encoder) and reconstruction (i.e., Decoder) methods of autoencoders.
Despite the effectiveness of autoencoders in detecting unknown types of attacks,
the detection performance of an autoencoder-based NIDS can be very sensitive to the