Sensors 2021 ,21, 4294 20 of 23
6. Conclusions
Unsupervised deep-learning algorithms such as autoencoders have been actively
studied for network intrusion detection since it can promptly detect the zero-day attack and
alleviate the labor in labeling greatly [ 25,26]. Although various autoencoder models have
shown to be effective in detecting intrusions, identifying the optimal model architecture
to provide the best detection performance requires tremendous effort, and this hinders
its practical application to NIDS. To address this engineering issue, we examine how the
model architecture and the latent dimension affect the NIDS performance. This paper
particularly focused on the model capacity, depth, and the size of the middle layer which
represents the compressed, latent information of a given data.
We designed and carried out evaluation using a stacked autoencoder model with
variations in model conﬁgurations. Empirical results on three datasets, NSL-KDD, IoTID20,
and N-BaIoT, all collected from conventional and IoT networks, demonstrated that the
model capacity and the latent size inﬂuenced the NIDS performance. Our simple stacked
autoencoder models achieved the best F1-score of 0.895 with the NSL-KDD dataset, which
is comparable to the best performance reported in the previous work [ 26]. In contrast,
the performance does not depend on the model depth in our study. In addition, we
noted that the simple autoencoders work surprisingly well on a particular IoT benchmark
dataset, achieving the performance greater than 99% in accuracy and 0.96 in MCC, which
is promising.
Our experimental results indicate that the model size (in terms of trainable parameters)
and the size of the bottle neck layer have an impact on IDS performance. More speciﬁcally,
a stacked autoencoder model tends to perform better and stable when its model size grows
bigger. We also observe that the selection of the latent size can enhance the performance
efﬁciently. From these ﬁndings, the researchers and practitioners working on NIDS can
have beneﬁted when exploiting their models to enhance the IDS performance without
making major changes to the models. In addition, we discovered that a very small latent size
can characterize the data very well in some cases, such as the IoTID20 dataset in our study.
This may help build a lightweight IDS for IoT devices. For instance, Nykvist et al. [54]
developed an efﬁcient IDS that employed pattern matching algorithms for portable devices
with limited processing power.
Our ﬁndings were drawn from the experiments using a limited set of conﬁgurations
focusing on the model capacity, depth, and latent size. In particular, the impact of the
depth is not fully conﬁrmed in this study, and needs to be further examined using a larger
autoencoder model. To build a large model, it is required to obtain datasets whose input
feature vectors are large, since the input layer of the autoencoder is determined by the
feature vector. Then, the sizes of the hidden layers of an autoencoder decrease down to the
bottleneck layer. Future works can extend our work to cover other aspects of model design
and an even wider variety of conﬁgurations and datasets. We will also look into methods
to estimate the optimal latent size without scanning all possible ranges.
Author Contributions: This research was carried out in collaborations with all authors. Please note
the following details below. Conceptualization, Y.S. and Y.-G.C.; methodology, Y.S., S.H. and Y.-G.C.;
software, Y.S.; validation, Y.S.; formal analysis, Y.S.; investigation, Y.S. and S.H.; resources, Y.S.; data
curation, Y.S.; writing—original draft preparation, Y.S. and S.H.; writing—review and editing, S.H.
and Y.-G.C.; visualization, Y.S.; supervision, S.H. and Y.-G.C.; project administration, Y.-G.C.; funding
acquisition, Y.-G.C. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This work was partly supported by Institute of Information & communications Technology
Planning & Evaluation (IITP) grant funded by the Korea government (MSIT) (No. 2020-0-00952,
Development of 5G Edge Security Technology for Ensuring 5G+ Service Stability and Availability)
and Institute of Information & communications Technology Planning & Evaluation(IITP) grant
funded by the Korea government(MSIT) (No. 2019-0-00421, Artiﬁcial Intelligence Graduate School
Program (Sungkyunkwan University)).
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.