Sensors 2021 ,21, 4294 19 of 23
5.5. Discussions
5.5.1. Model Structure and Performance
This section summarizes and discusses our primary ﬁndings. First, we look at the
relationship between the model structure and performance in terms of the model capacity
and its depth. In general, the (5,64) model—that contains 5 hidden layers and 64 neurons
for the ﬁrst hidden layer—produced the best or near-best performances across all the
benchmark datasets. This indicates that the model capacity inﬂuences the IDS performance;
models with large capacities tend to perform better. However, we did not ﬁnd that the
model depth (i.e., number of hidden layers) is associated with the performance. The model
with less hidden layers (i.e., (5,64) model) outperformed the model with more hidden
layers (i.e., (7,64) model), but the difference was not signiﬁcant.
Second, we assess the IDS performance as the latent size varies. We observe that the
overall intrusion detection performance tends to enhance as the latent dimension grows
up to a certain point and decrease afterwards. This suggests that conﬁguring the latent
size can improve the performance greatly even when the model structure is ﬁxed. The
optimal latent size was diverse depending on the dataset, model capacity, and depth. For
instance, the optimal latent size for the NSL-KDD data was 3 when using the (5,64) model.
The optimal size for the IoTID20 data was 14 with the (5,32) model, but for N-BaIoT data,
it was 28 when using the (5,64) model.
5.5.2. Analysis of Reconstruction Errors and Threshold
Furthermore, we analyzed the distribution of the reconstruction errors in Z-score. The
distributions of the normal and the attack samples are very different between the best and
the worst cases. However, when the models produce identical performance, the samples
are similarly distributed despite the difference in the latent size.
The distribution graphs also demonstrated that the threshold plays a critical role which
determines the IDS performance in unsupervised learning methods (see Figures 7, 11 and 15).
Previous unsupervised learning-based works [ 46,47] generally use mean + standard deviation
as the threshold value, which is equal to Z-score of 1. In our observations, however, the
best threshold differs based on the data, attack types, and the model conﬁgurations. For
example, the best-performing threshold was about Z-score of 3 for the NSL-KDD and the
Philips B120N/10 Baby Monitor datasets, but it was close to 0 for the IoTID20 dataset.
Therefore, it is very challenging to ﬁnd the threshold relevant to the dataset and the model
conﬁguration dynamically.
5.5.3. Threats-to-Validity of Experimental Results
The following factors are the potential threats-to-validity of our experimental results:
selection of model structures and latent dimensions to be compared and the types and
properties of datasets. Since one of the major goals of our experiments is to elucidate the
effect of model structure on IDS performance, selecting model structures to be compared
may affect the validity of the experimental results. To see the impact of model capacity on
IDS performance, we selected the (5,32) and (5,64) models that have the same number of
hidden layers but only differ in the number of trainable parameters. To see the impact of
the number of hidden layers, we compared the (5,64) and (7,64) models that have similar
number of trainable parameters but different number of hidden layers. Similarly, the
proper choice of latent dimensions to be compared is also crucial to analyze their impact
on IDS performance, and we tested all possible latent dimensions for each model structure.
The type of dataset is also an important factor that may affect the validity of the experi-
mental results. To prevent experimental results from being biased to a speciﬁc dataset, we
conducted experiments using three different types of datasets. Furthermore, we performed
multiple runs of experiments for each dataset with random batch sampling of training data
and random initialization of model weights to avoid biased experimental results.