Sensors 2021 ,21, 4294 4 of 23
ensemble learning approaches to detecting the webshell attack in IoT networks. Speciﬁ-
cally, the authors compared the effectiveness of ensemble machine-learning approaches
under several different settings: an ensemble of either homogeneous or heterogeneous
classiﬁcation models. Hemalatha et al. [ 31] proposed a malware detection method based on
deep learning. This method transforms program binary ﬁles into two-dimensional images
and used a pretrained deep-learning model called DenseNet to classify the binary images.
The authors additionally addressed the class imbalance issue typically shown in malware
datasets by employing the reweighted cross-entropy loss function.
2.2. Autoencoders for Feature Reduction
Diverse autoencoder models have been leveraged as feature learning methods and
combined with supervised learning algorithms to detect attack classes. For instance, Li
et al. [ 32] presented an ML-NIDS that uses an autoencoder for dimension reduction and
a DBN for classiﬁcation. The DBN consists of multiple layers of RBMs and an additional
layer of BP neural network as a classiﬁer which distinguishes malicious samples from
normal samples. Their system was evaluated on the KDD Cup 99 dataset, and the results
showed that combining an autoencoder and DBN can achieve better detection accuracy
than working with DBN alone. Tao et al. [ 33] proposed a data fusion approach based on
the Fisher score and deep autoencoder to reduce the dimensionality of data. Using the
KDD Cup 99 dataset, it was conﬁrmed that integrating the deep autoencoder as a feature
extraction method can improve the accuracy of classiﬁcation algorithms such as J48, the
backpropagation neural network, and SVM.
Although the KDD Cup 99 dataset was popularly used to evaluate NIDS in 2000s,
it has shortcomings of contains duplicate records in training and test sets, making it
inadequate for benchmark data [ 8]. Hence, the NSL-KDD data were created by removing
redundancies in the training and test sets of the KDD set [ 14]. Javaid et al. [ 34] developed
an ML-NIDS using a combination of sparse autoencoder and SoftMax regression (SMR)
method. Through evaluations using the NSL-KDD dataset, the authors conﬁrmed that
using an autoencoder as a feature extraction method can improve NIDS performance.
Shone et al. [ 35] proposed a non-symmetric deep autoencoder (NDAE) which provides
unsupervised feature learning and data dimensionality reduction. They developed an
ML-NIDS that combines stacked NDAEs and Random Forest (RF), achieving 97.85%
and 85.42% accuracy for the KDD Cup 99 and NSL-KDD dataset, respectively. This
indicates that the data duplication in the KDD Cup 99 facilitates the anomaly detection
task. Al-Qatf et al. [36] combined sparse autoencoders and SVM, where the autoencoders
perform feature learning and dimensionality reduction and SVM classiﬁes the data as
normal or attack. This approach was evaluated on the NSL-KDD dataset and obtained an
F1-score of 85.28%.
Madani et al. [ 37] evaluated the robustness of autoencoder models against intentional
data poisoning. They analyzed and compared the performance of an autoencoder-based
model and a PCA-based model under adversarial contamination attacks using the NSL-
KDD dataset. The results showed that the autoencoder-based NIDS outperformed the
PCA-based NIDS approximately 15% in detection rate.
Yu et al. [ 38] used a stack of dilated convolutional autoencoders to extract important
features from a large volume of unlabeled trafﬁc data in the CTU-UNB and Contagio-CTU-
UNB datasets which contain normal and botnet network trafﬁc data. Thing et al. [ 39] also
used stacked autoencoders to learn important features for the IEEE 802.11 wireless network
attack classiﬁcation. Zhang et al. [ 40] applied a similar architecture which consists of sparse
stacked autoencoders and binary tree ensemble method. When evaluated on the NSL-KDD
dataset, their approach achieved an F1-score of 91.97%.
In IoT environments, Dutta et al. [ 41] developed an anomaly detection system using a
deep sparse autoencoder, a DNN, and a LSTM followed by a logistic regression classiﬁer
which detects anomalous trafﬁc. The deep sparse autoencoder compresses the input data
to alleviate the computational cost in the classiﬁer. Several network trafﬁc datasets (e.g.,