Sensors 2021 ,21, 4294 3 of 23
architecture and hyperparameter settings of the underlying autoencoder model. Thus, it is
critical to ﬁnd the optimal conﬁgurations of autoencoders that can reach the best detection
performance. Most of the previous papers have reported manually obtained best models
by conducting numerous experiments with particular data sets. Such manual processes
generally take tremendous time and effort and also have to be repeated as data changes.
This may result in considerable delays in the development of an autoencoder-based NIDS
and consequently degrades the practical applicability of autoencoders.
When implementing an autoencoder-based NIDS, it is required to make decisions
related to the following model design issues:
• How many hidden layers and how many neurons for each layer are necessary? Is a
bigger model better for intrusion detection?
• What dimension of the latent layer is appropriate to represent the data? For instance,
the model may not represent the data well if its latent layer has only one neuron. In
that case, the latent layer is likely to be too generic to characterize the data. On the
other hand, the model would not beneﬁt the advantage of generalization that occurs
during the compression/reconstruction process if its latent layer contains an excessive
number of neurons.
• How do we set a threshold that divides the normal and abnormal data, when labeled
data are not available?
• What metrics are best to represent the difference between the input and its output
(e.g., L1, L2, Cross-Entropy)?
To our knowledge, these critical engineering issues have been little studied.
This paper makes three contributions. First, we present the engineering issues in the
application of autoencoders for anomaly-based NIDS. Second, we investigate how the
model size and the latent size of autoencoders have an impact on the intrusion detection
performance. Speciﬁcally, we design and perform experiments to test the efﬁcacy of some
of the aforementioned factors using benchmark datasets that contain attack trafﬁc data
collected from either conventional or IoT networks. Finally, we analyze the experiment
results and report the ﬁndings.
This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews the related work. We describe
the data used for our study in Section 3 and the evaluation methods in Section 4. Section 5
presents our experiment results followed by discussions. We conclude with a summary
and suggestions for future work.
2. Related Work
This section reviews the previous works in ML-NIDS. First, we describe traditional
works that use deep-learning and recent works that employ ensemble learning which can
boost the IDS performance when combined with deep-learning algorithms. Second, we
look into autoencoders for feature extraction to enhance the classiﬁcation performance.
Third, we review autoencoder-based network intrusion detection systems.
2.1. Intrusion Detection with Deep-Learning and Ensemble Learning
There exists literature on network intrusion detection using deep-learning techniques,
such as restricted Boltzmann machine (RBM), deep Boltzmann machine (DBM), deep belief
network (DBN), and deep neural network (DNN). Kim et al. [ 16] proposed an IDS based on
recurrent neural networks (RNN), where a LSTM (long short-term memory) architecture
was applied to the RNN. Tang et al. [ 28] designed an IDS based on deep neural networks
(DNN) for ﬂow-based anomaly detection in software-deﬁned networking environments.
Several intrusion detection methods based on ensemble learning and deep-learning
are presented. Zhang et al. [ 29] proposed ML-NIDS based on multi-dimensional feature
fusion and an ensemble learning approach. This method extracts several basic feature
datasets from raw data and then constructs multiple comprehensive feature datasets by
combining the basic feature datasets. The comprehensive feature datasets are used to train
different base classiﬁers constituting the ensemble learning model. Yong et al. [ 30] studied