Sensors 2021 ,21, 4294 5 of 23
IoT-23 [ 42], LITNET-2020 [ 43] and NetML-2020 [ 44]) collected in IoT environments were
used to evaluate their system.
2.3. Autoencoders for Anomaly Detection
This section reviews the application of autoencoder models that detect network intru-
sions in an unsupervised manner, which is closely related to our approach. Lopez-Martin
et al. [ 45] proposed a classiﬁcation model using conditional variational autoencoders to
detect and classify the ﬁve types of labels (normal, DoS, R2L, Probe, and U2R) in the
NSL-KDD data. In particular, given a labeled training dataset, the decoding network
of the proposed model is additionally trained with the class labels associated with the
trained data logs. When reconstructing from a compressed vector, the decoding network
predicts the class label associated with the reconstructed data features. Thus, this approach
requires pre-labeled data for training, unlike our unsupervised-based approach. The task
of classifying normal labels against the other four labels achieved an F1-score of 0.83.
Aygun et al. [ 26] compared two different autoencoder models for detecting unknown
types of attacks. An autoencoder and a denoising autoencoder were evaluated with
NSL-KDD dataset, and achieved the F1 of 89.51% and 89.28% respectively. To classify a
given data as either normal or abnormal, they stochastically select a threshold, and this
supplements our own study. Mirsky et al. [ 25] employed an ensemble scheme to develop an
ML-NIDS named Kitsune. The proposed model ﬁrst maps the features of a given network
packet into an ensemble of autoencoders. Then each autoencoder reconstructs the packet
features and computes root mean squared error (RMSE) as the reconstruction error. Finally,
the model summarizes the RSMEs from each autoencoder and checks whether the ﬁnal
result exceeds a predeﬁned threshold. In particular, they studied how to distribute the
entire set of data features to each autoencoder and how to derive the ﬁnal decision by
collecting and analyzing the results from each authencoder. Their work was applied to
online intrusion data which are not publicly accessible for comparative evaluation.
These autoencoder-based methods are applied to build NIDS in IoT environments
recently. Meidan et al. [ 46] used deep autoencoders to detect IoT botnet attacks. The
proposed model is composed of a set of autoencoders, each autoencoder learns the normal
network behaviors of the designated IoT device and detects anomalous trafﬁc from the
device.The proposed model was evaluated on a testbed network consisting of nine com-
mercial IoT devices infected by Mirai and BASHLITE botnets. The model achieved a true
positive rate of 100% and a false positive rate of 7%.
Similarly, Shahid et al. [ 47] presented an ML-NIDS to detect anomalous trafﬁc in IoT
networks. To consider device diversity commonly assumed in IoT networks, the proposed
system consists of multiple sparse autoencoders, each dedicated to one designated device
type in a target network environment to be monitored. Each sparse autoencoder is trained
to learn the normal communication pattern of the corresponding type of device. When
new network trafﬁc is observed, every autoencoder in the system ﬁrst compresses and then
reconstructs incoming data as close to the original trafﬁc data as possible. If at least one of
the autoencoders successfully reconstructs the given trafﬁc data, the system considers it
as legitimate; otherwise, if all of the autoencoders fail to reconstruct the given trafﬁc data,
it is considered as anomalous trafﬁc. The authors tested the proposed system with the
dataset collected from IoTPOT [ 48], and the proposed system reported true positive rate of
86.9% to 91.2% depending on a parameter setting, and its false positive rate was from 0.1%
to 0.5%.
As described above, diverse autoencoder models and their ensemble are used for
detecting network intrusions in an unsupervised manner and report promising results in
various evaluation metrics. However, it was not clearly disclosed how a particular model
architecture and its hyperparameters were designed. Unfortunately, the importance of
model conﬁguration is largely overlooked in the previous works. In this article, we evaluate
how the size and the latent dimension of autoencoders inﬂuence the NIDS performance, to
tackle the practical issues explained above.