Sensors 2021 ,21, 4294 8 of 23
4. Approach
This section describes our experiment approach to studying the impact of the deep-
learning model design on the performance of intrusion detection. Speciﬁcally, we test
how the autoencoder model structure and the size of its latent dimension affect the ML-
NIDS performance.
4.1. Overview
Our process to build the optimal autoencoder model is described below and in Figure 2.
Figure 2. The process of building autoencoder models. Train denotes the data for training, and
Validation denotes the data for validation. The process consists of three phases: training, model
selection, and validation.
1. Preprocessing: Given a training data set, we ﬁrst remove attack samples from the
training set so that only normal samples are used to train the autoencoder. Then we
vectorize the data by converting the feature values into numerical vectors using the
min-max normalization. The features are scaled using the minimum and maximum
values obtained from the training set. Additional preprocessing methods applied to
each particular data set are described in detail in Section 3.
2. Training: The autoencoder model is trained to reconstruct any given input as close
as possible to the normal log patterns of the training set and L2 norm is used as
reconstruction loss. Theoretically, the autoencoder model trained with normal logs
is expected to recover any input log as close as possible to the learned normal log
patterns. Due to this, if a given input in fact belongs to an attack class, it is likely
that the recovered output would be signiﬁcantly different from the original input.
This means that the class of an input sample is determined based on the difference
between the input and its output; if the difference is greater than a set threshold, it is
classiﬁed as an attack. Otherwise, it is classiﬁed as normal.
3. Model Selection: At each epoch during the training phase, the Area under the Curve
(AuC) score of the Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curve is calculated using
the validation data which contain the normal and attack logs. The AuC score enables
us to measure the model’s overall performance as the model weights change. During
the training phase, we record the highest AuC score and its corresponding model
weights to obtain the best-performing model. When the training phase is completed,
we use the model weights that resulted in the highest AuC score.
4. Threshold Selection: Since the threshold on the reconstruction distance between an
input and its output divides the normal and abnormal (i.e., attack in this study)
classes, selecting its value has a tremendous impact on the ML-NIDS performance.
We evaluate the model’s performance using the validation set, varying the threshold
value to determine the optimal ﬁgure for the trained model. We use the Z-score of
standard normal distribution as the threshold metric. Using the Z-score instead of
the reconstruction error values before normalization can facilitate the reproduction of
the classiﬁer even when reconstruction error values in unnormalized form change
depending on a data set.