- 14     - thermostats give users an understanding of how they have controlled the automation to get the  
temperature they desire in their homes. Newer programmable thermostats apply machine 
learning to allow residents to better accommodate their schedules and save energy.  
Example 3 : Small automations are part of many successful products, such as automobiles . While 
power steering and automatic transmissions are mature automations that are widely accepted, 
anti-lock brake systems apply the same principles to enable drivers to maintain traction during 
challenging road conditions. Cruise control and adaptive cru ise control are more complex, but 
they give drivers better control over the speed of their vehicles. Newer automations that augment 
human abilities to increase safety include parking assistance, lane following, and collision 
avoidance. Current technology, such as Tesla’s Autopilot, are “ designed to be able to conduct 
short and long distance trips with no action required by the person in the driver’s seat … in 
almost all situations”, but regulatory approval, independent oversight mechanisms, and 
demonstration  of safety are still needed to achieve RST status. Tesla cautions that “c urrent 
Autopilot features require active driver supervision and do not make the vehicle autonomous ” 
(https://www.tesla.com/autopilot ). The promise of advanced automation is to save lives, but critics 
have suggested that Tesla’s unfortunate choice of the term Autopilot may encourage drivers to 
lower their vigilance, thereby leading to more accidents.  
Example 4 : Home appliances, such as dis hwashers, clothes washers/dryers, and ovens allow 
users to choose settings that specify what they want, and then turn control over to sensors and 
timers to govern the process. When well -designed, these machines offer users comprehensible 
and predictable co ntrols that allow them to express their intent with controls that let them stop 
dishwashers to put in another plate or change from baking to broiling to brown their chicken. 
These automations give users better control of these appliances to ensure that the y get what they 
want.  
Example 5 : Well-designed user interfaces in  elevators enable substantial  automation while 
providing appropriate human control. Elevator users approach a simple two -button control panel 
and press up or down. The button lights to indica te that the users’ intent has been recognized. A 
display panel indicates the elevator’s current floor so users can see progress, which lets them 
know how long they will have to wait. The elevator doors open, a tone sounds, and the users can 
step in to pres s a button to indicate their choice of floors. The button lights up to indicate their 
intent is recognized and the door closes.  The floor display shows progress towards the goal. On 
arrival, a tone sounds and the door opens. The automated design which rep laced the human 
operator ensures that doors will only open while on a floor, while triply redundant safety systems 
prevent elevators from falling, even under loss of power or broken cables. Automation 
algorithms coordinate multiple elevators, automatically  adjusting their placement based on time 
of day and changing passenger loads. Override controls allow firefighters or moving crews to 
achieve their goals. There are many refinements, such as detectors to prevent doors from closing 
on passengers, so that th e overall design is Reliable , Safe & Trust worthy . 
Example 6 : Digital cameras in most cell phones display an image of what the users would get if 
they clicked on the large button. The image is updated smoothly as users adjust their position or 
zoom in. At the s ame time, the camera makes automatic adjustments to the aperture and focus,