- 15     - while compensating for shaking hands, a wide range of lighting conditions (high dynamic range), 
and many other factors. Flash can be set to be on or off, or left to the camera to c hoose 
automatically. Users can choose portrait modes, panorama, and video, including slow motion and 
time lapse. Users also can set various filters and once the image is taken they can make further 
adjustments such as brightness, contrast, cropping, and re d-eye elimination. These designs give 
users high degree of control while also providing a high level of automation. Of course, there are 
mistakes, such as when the automatic focus feature puts the focus on a nearby bush, rather than 
the person standing jus t behind it. However, knowledgeable users can touch the desired focus 
point to avoid this mistake.  
The Prometheus Principles help designers develop the comprehensible, predictable, and 
controllable interfaces that support RST systems.  Many of the principl es are embedded in 
Human Interface Guidelines documents, such as Apple’s, which stipulates that “ User Control : … 
people - not apps - are in control” and “ Flexibility : … (give) users complete, fine -grained control 
over their work .” (Apple 2019). These guide lines and others (Shneiderman et al., 2016) that 
emphasize human control offer very different advice than the simplistic pursuit of computer 
autonomy. Designs based on these Prometheus Principles can lead to, what I believe is desired 
by most users: Reliable , Safe & Trust worthy  systems.   
 
5. Summary, limitations , and conclusions  
The HCA I framework  separates the issue of human control from computer automation, making it 
clear that high levels of human control and high levels of automation can be achieved by good 
design.  The design decisions give human operators a clear understanding of the machine state 
and their choices,  guided by  concerns such as the consequences and reversibility  of mistakes. 
Well -designed automation, preserves  human control where appropriate, thereby increasing 
performance  and enabling creative improvements.  
The HCA I framework  suggests w hen computer control for rapid automated action  is necessary , 
when human  desire for mastery  is paramount , and  when there are  dangers of excessive 
automation or excessive human control.  It clarifies design choices for  (1) consumer and 
professional  applications, such as widely -used recommender systems, advertising tools, social 
media platforms, and search engines, which have brought strong benefits to consumers, ( 2) 
consequential applications in medical, legal, environmental, or financial systems that can bring 
substantial benefits and harms, and (3)  life-critical applications such as  cars, airplanes, trains, 
military systems, pacemakers, or intensive care units.  
The HCAI framework  is based on the belief  that people are  different from computers.  Therefore, 
designs which  take advantage of unique computer features including sophisticated algorithms, 
advanced sensors, information abundant d isplays, and powerful effec tors are more likely to 
incre ase performance. Similarly designs and organizational structures which recognize the 
unique capabilities of humans will have advantages such as encouraging innovative use,  
supporting continuous improvement , and promoting breakt hroughs to vastly improved  designs.