- 9     -  
 
Figure 4: Designers need to prevent the failures fr om excessive automation and excessive human 
control ( gray  areas)  
Excessive automation was cited  by the National Transportation Safety Board’s report on the 
deadly 2016 crash of a Tesla  car (2017).  That report cautioned that  “...automation ‘ because we 
can’ does not necessarily make the human -automation system work better. ... This crash is an 
example of what can happen  when automation is introduced ‘ because we can ’ without adequate 
consideration of the human element.”  The Tesla “Au topilot” system name sugges ts greater 
capability than is available. This can encourage drivers to become less vigilant, because 
designers have allowed drivers to ignore safety warnings about paying attention to road 
conditions and other vehicles.  
Similarly, excessive human control a llows people to make deadly mistakes . Automation controls, 
human factors affordances, and prevention of catastrophic failures are established strategies for 
reducing the number of deadly outcomes from “human mistakes”, which should be seen as 
design failur es (Thimbleby, 2020) .  Self-driving  car advocate s stress the goal of preventing  
human errors  that lead to accidents , but even modest  changes  to existing car designs can promote 
safety , such as collision avoidance to slow cars as they approach vehicles just  in front of their 
current position . These modest changes can then be refined and adapted in ways that increase 
safety, eventually leading to less need for driver control, with greater supervisory control from 
regional centers, akin to air -traffic control centers, that manage traffic flow of thousands of cars, 
track frequent near misses, and make changes to road speeds depending on weather and other 
conditions.  
Further ways of preventing excessive human control include car-based  ignition interlock devices 
that conduct breathalyzer tests  to prevent drivers  with high levels of alcohol in their breath  from 
turning on their cars .  Positive Train Control systems  limit engineers from going at high  speeds 
on curves or in terminal areas. Numerous interlocks in aviat ion prevent pilots from making