- 16     - An important research direction is to develop  objective measures of the  levels of control and 
autonomy , tied to diverse tasks. Such measures would  stimulate  more meaningful design 
discussions, which would lead to improv ed guidelines, evaluations, and theories.   
Human responsibility for mistakes is another powerful driver of design advancements such as the 
inclusion of detailed audit trails  and consistent informative feedback about machine state.  Then 
retraining of users and redesign of systems happens rapidly. Difficult questions remain, such as 
dealing with the de-skilling effects that undermine human skills  that may be needed when 
automation fails , and the difficulty of remaining vigilant when user actions become less f requent.   
Ethical questions , such as considerations of responsibility, fairness, and explainability, are 
helpful in developing  general princ iples.  When these general principles are combined with  deep 
knowledge and experience with the complexities of produc t and service design , they can  yield 
actionable guidelines (IEEE, 2019) .  The HC AI framework  lays a foundation for responsibility, 
fairness, and explainability,  but actionable guidelines to achieve these goals  are beyond this 
paper.   
A human -centered RST system , will be (1) reliable  because of  soun d technical practi ces, (2) safe 
because of open management  strategies  that build cultures of safety , and  (3) trust worthy because 
of well-designed  independent oversight struct ures. RST systems will evolve rapidly because 
mechanisms to monitor failures  and near misses  support  creative improvements . 
The goal of this paper is to encourage  artificial intelligence researchers and developers  who 
design  products and services  to shift from  one-dimensional thinking about  levels of 
automation/autonomy to a fresh two-dimen sional  HCA I framework . The HCA I framework  
guides researchers and  designers  in designing  technologies  to give users appropriate control, 
while providing high levels of automation . When successful  these technologies amplify, 
augment, enhance, and empower use rs, giving them dramatic  increases in their performance . 
 
Acknowledgements : Thanks to Michael Bernstein, Linda Candy, Ryan Carrier, Ernest 
Edmonds, Robert Fraser, Harry Hochheiser, Robert Hoffman , Eric Hughes,  Gary Klein, Alan 
Mackworth, Doug Oard,  Catheri ne Plaisant, Jennifer Preece , Robin Murphy, Steven M. Rosen, 
Arnon Rosenthal, Ben Sawyer, Thomas Sheridan, Mark Smith, Harold Thimbleby, Fernanda 
Viegas, Jamie Waese,  Martin Wattenberg,  and David  D. Woods  for comments on early drafts.  
 
References  
Amershi, S., Weld, D., Vorvoreanu, M., Fourney, A., Nushi, B., Collisson, P., ... & Horvitz , E. 
(2019 ). Guidelin es for human -AI interaction. Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems  (Paper 3, 1-13). ACM.  
 
Apple Computer, Inc., H uman Interface Guidelines, Apple, Cupertino, CA (2019). Available at 
https://developer.apple.com/design/human -interface -guidelines/ios/overview/themes/