- 2     -  
Table 1: Summar y of the  widely cited , but mind -limiting  1-dimensional  Sheridan -Verplank levels of  
automation/a utonomy  (Parasuraman et al., 2000 ) 
 
Sheridan & Verplank’s  ten levels of automation/ autonomy have  been widely influential, but 
critics suggested refinements such as  the four  stage s of automation : (1) information acquisition, 
(2) analysis of information, (3) decision or choice of acti on, and (4) execution of action 
(Parasuraman, Sheridan &  Wickens, 2000). These stages refine discussions of each of the levels, 
but the underlying message is that the goal is full automation/autonomy.  
Even Sheridan (2000) commented with concern that “surprisingly, the level descriptions as 
published have been t aken mo re seriously than were expected ” (see Hoffman & Johnson (2019) 
for a detailed history ). However, i n spite of the many critiques, the  1-dimensional  levels of 
automation/ autonomy , which only represents situations where  increased automation must come 
with less human control , is still widely influential. For example,  the US Society of Automotive 
Engineers adopted  the unnecessary trade -off in its  six levels of  autonomy for self -driving cars  
(SAE, 2014; Brooks , 2017) (Table 2).  
 
Level        Description  
   5.     Full autonomy : equal to that of a human driver, in every driving scenario.  
   4.     High automation: Fully autonomous vehicles perform all safety -critical driving functions  
                in certain areas and under deﬁned weather conditions.  
   3.     Conditional automation: Driver shifts “safety critical functions” to the vehicle under  
     certain trafﬁc or environmental conditions.  
   2.     Partial automation:  At least one driver assistance system is automated.   
   Driver is disengaged from physically operating the vehicle  
                (hands off the steering wheel AND foot off the pedal at the same time).  
   1.     Driver assistance:  Most functions are still control led by the driver, but a speciﬁc function  
 (like steering or accelerating) can be done automatically by the car.  
   0.     No Automation:  Human driver controls all: steering, brakes, throttle, power.  
 
 Table 2: Persistent , but still misleading,  1-dimension al thinking about  levels of a utonomy  for self-driving car s 
 (SAE, 2014; Brooks, 2017 )