- 1     - Human -Centered Ar tificial Intelligence: Reliable,  Safe & Trustworthy  
     Ben Shneiderman, ben@cs.umd.edu , Draft February 23, 2020 , version 29  
     University of Maryland, College Park, MD USA  
 
Abstract  
Well -designed t echnologies that offer high levels of human control and high levels of computer 
automation can increase  human performance , leading to wider adoption. The Human -Center ed 
Artificial Intelligence  (HCA I) framework  clarifies  how to  (1) design for high levels of  human 
control and high levels of computer automation so as to increase human performance , (2) 
understand  the situations in which full human control  or full computer control  are necessary, and 
(3) avoid the dangers of excessive human control or excessive  computer control . The methods of 
HCA I are more likely to produce designs that are  Reliable,  Safe & Trustworthy  (RST). 
Achieving these goals will dramatically increase  human performance, while supporting human 
self-efficacy, mastery, creativity, and responsi bility.   
 
Please cite as:  
Shneiderman, Ben, Human -Centered Artificial Intellig ence: Reliable, Safe & Trustworthy , 
arXiv.org  (February 23, 2020 ).  https://arxiv.org/abs/2002.04087v1   (Extract  from fo rthcoming book 
by the same  title) 
Copyright Ben Shneiderman  2020  
 
1. Introduction  
This paper opens up new possibilities by way of a two -dimensional framework  of Human -
Centered Artificial Intelligence (HCAI) that separates  levels of automation/autonomy from levels 
of human control.  The new goal is to seek high levels  of human control AND high levels of 
automation , which is more likely to produce computer applications  that are Reliable,  Safe & 
Trustworthy  (RST). Achieving this goal , especially for complex poorly understood problems,  
will dramatically increase human perform ance, while supporting human self -efficacy, mastery, 
creativity, and responsibility.   
The traditional belief in  computer  autonomy is compelling for m any artificial intelligence (AI) 
researcher s, developers, journalists, and promoters . The goal of computer  autonomy  was central 
in Sheridan and Verpl ank’s (1978)  ten levels from human control to computer  
automation /autonomy  (Table 1) . Their widely cited  one-dimensional  list continues to guide  much 
of the research and development , suggesting that increases in au tomation must come at the cost 
of lowering human control.  Shifting to  HCA I could liberate  design thinking  so as to produce 
computer application s that increase automation, while amplify ing, augment ing, enhancing , and 
empower ing people to innovatively apply systems and creatively refine the m.