- 10     - mistakes, for example, reverse thrust ers on jet engines can only be engaged once the strain gauge 
in the landing gear indicates that the plane is on the ground.   
Home appliances also have guards, such as the interlock on sel f-cleaning oven s to prevent 
homeowners from opening oven doors  when tempe ratures are above 600F degrees.   Poorly 
designed interlocks can be annoying, such as the overly ambitious automobile sy stems that lock 
doors too often. Software -based constraints, suc h as range checking, generalize the interlocks 
and guards, ensuring that  algorithms have permissible inputs and producing only acceptable 
outcomes.  
Interlocks or guards are helpful in preventing mistakes, but additional design and monitoring 
features are n eeds to ensure TRS designs.  T he challenging question is how to integrate  HCA I 
designs  into life-critical  systems like aviation, flexible manufacturing systems , implantable 
pacemakers, and automobiles. There is huge current interest in self -driving, driver less, or 
autonomous cars, which are sometimes described  as allowing passengers to sit back to read or 
sleep, while the car  takes them safely to their destination. This seductive vision is widely 
appealing, especially for its potential improved safety, but there is a growing realization that this 
may be an overstatement of what is possible in the next decade. Most automobile manufacturers 
are wisely proceeding cautiously .  They started  with anti -lock brakes and cruise control  decades 
ago, and now offer  featu res like lane control, parking assist, auto-braking, and collision 
avoidance.  This incremental approach supports development and refinement processes that 
eventually lead to RST designs that gain widespread acceptane.  
The notion of full car autonomy is pro ductively giving way to a human -centered approach, 
which provides appropriate controls to improve safety, while addressing the numerous special 
cases of snow -covered roads, unusual vehicles, vandalism, malicious interference, construction 
zone s, and emerge ncy guidance from police, fire, or ambulance personnel.  As car sensors, 
highway infrastructure, and car -to-car communication improve , strategies to make cars as  safe as 
elevators will  become easier to implement.  
Figure 5  shows the relative positions of 1980 cars, 2020 cars,  self-driving cars, and the proposed 
goal of Reliable, Safe & Trustworthy (RST) cars  in 2040 .