- 5     - themsel ves as operating these devices in ways that give them control so as to accomplish their 
goals. Designers who adopt the HCA I mindset  will emphasize  strategies for enabling diverse 
users to steer, operate , and c ontrol  their highly automated devices, while in viting users to 
exercise their creativity to refine designs.  Well -designed automation can ensure finer human 
finer control, such as in surgical robots that enable surgeons to make more precise incisions in 
difficult to reach organs.  
Succ essful  designs enab le humans to work in interdisciplinary teams, so as to coordinate and 
collaborate with managers, peers, and subordinates. Computers are not teamma tes, collaborators, 
or co-active partners , as Johnson et al.  (2014)  suggest ; computers  should  support human 
activities in ways that reduce workload, raise performance, and ensure safety . The larger design 
issues for RST systems also  promote resilience, clarify responsibility, increase quality , and 
encourage creativity  (Edmonds & Candy, 2002; Giuliani et al., 2010 ; Woods , 2017 ). Still 
broader goals are to ensure privacy, increase cybersecurity, support social justice, and protect the 
environment.  
The HCA I framework  presented in Sectio n 3 guides  designers and researchers to consider new 
possibilities that promot e Reliable , Safe & Trustworthy  systems. After all, most consumers, 
industrial supervisors, physicians, and airplane pilots  are not interested in computer  autonomy;  
what they want are RST systems  to dramatically increase human  performance , while s implifying 
their effort, so they can devote them selves to their higher aspir ations . This paper shows how 
caref ul design leads t o computer applications  that promote  human control while also prov iding 
high levels of automation .  
 
3. The Human -Centered Artificial Intelligence  for RST Systems  
The HCAI framework  in this paper steers designers and researchers to ask fresh questions and 
rethink the nature of automation/autonomy. As designers get beyond thinking of computers as 
our teammates, collaborators, or partners, they are more likely to develop technologies that 
dramatically increase  human performance  by taking advanta ge of unique computer features 
including sophisticated algorithms, advanced sensors, information abundant displays, and 
powerful effectors.  Clarifying human responsibility also guides designers to support human 
capacity to invent  creative solutions in nove l contexts with incomplete knowledge. The HCAI 
framework  clarifies that the goal of design excellence is to promote human self -efficacy, 
mastery, and responsibility, which support the Reliable , Safe & Trustworthy  systems that 
managers and users seek.  
The go als of RST are most relevant fo r life -critical systems, but  there  are many consume r and 
professional  applications : 
Recommender systems : these are widely used in advertising  services , social media platforms, 
and search engines  have brought strong benefits t o consumers ( Konstan & Riedl , 2012) . 
Consequences of m istakes by these systems are usually less serious , possibly even giving 
consumers interesting suggestions of movies, books, or restaurants. However, malicious actors