- 13     - ethical concerns, accountability, explainabil ity, and fairness , but I question its suggestion that a 
system should “endear itself to the user” and “form a full emotional bond .”   
Endsley’s “Guidelines for the design of human -autonomy systems” (2018) has 20 thoughtful 
items that cover human understand ing of autonomous systems, minimizing complexity, and 
supporting situation awareness. Typical guidelines are: “ Use automated assistance for carrying 
out routine tasks rather than higher -level cognitive functions ” and “Provide automation 
transparency,” each  of which is explained in detail.  
 
Successful designs are comprehensible, predictable, and controllable, thereby increasing the 
users’ self -efficacy, leading to Reliable, Safe & Trustwor thy systems. These successes require 
careful design of the fine structure  of interaction, which emerges from validated theories, clear 
principles, and actionable guidelines. In turn, this knowledge is embedded in programming tools 
that support human control over complex processes. I’ll call these design rules the Prometheus 
Principles, after the Greek god who gave fire as a gift to humanity. These potent principles 
include:   
 
- consistent interfaces to allow users to form, express , and revise  intent,  
- continuous visual display of the objects and actions of interest,  
- rapid, increm ental, and reversible actions,  
- informative feedback to acknowledge each user action,  
- progress indicators to show status, and  
- completion reports to confirm accomplishment.   
The design decisions to craft  user interfaces  based on the Prometheus Principles  typically  
involve tradeoffs (Fischer, 2018), so careful study, creative design, and rigorous testing are 
needed. Then implemented designs must be  continuous ly monitored by domain experts  to 
understand problems and refine the designs.   
The examples that fol low clarify the key ideas of supporting users  to express their intent through 
visual interfaces (although auditory and haptic interfaces are also valuable in some situations and 
for users with disabilities) and to get informative feedback about the machine  state, with progress 
indicators  and completion reports  to let users  know status.  Many real -world designs are flawed, 
but these positive examples describe how it is possible to support both high levels of human 
control and high levels of automation:  
Exampl e 2: Simple thermostats allow residents to take better control of the temperature in their 
homes. They can see the room temperature and the current thermostat setting, clarifying what 
they should do to get a higher/lower setting. Then they can hear the hea ting system turn on/off or 
see a light to indicate that their action has produced a response. The basic idea is to give 
residents an awareness of the current state, allow them to reset the control, and then give 
informative feedback that the computer is ac ting on their intent. There may be further feedback 
as the residents see the thermometer rise in response to their action, and maybe an indication 
when their desired goal has been achieved.  Thermostats offer still further benefits – they 
continue to keep the room temperature at the new setting automatically.  In summary, while 
some thermostats may lack the features necessary that give clear feedback, well -designed