- 11     -       
Figure 5: 1980  cars had modest automation with high levels of human control, while 2020  self-driving 
cars have high  automa tion, but inadeq uate  human control.  Achieving  Reliable , Safe  & Trust worthy  (RST) 
self-driving cars by 2040 could be done with  high automation and high human control , while avoiding 
the dangers of excessive automation or excessive human control  
 
The four quadrants may be helpf ul in suggesting differing designs for a product o r service:  
Example 1 : Patient Controlled Analgesia (PCA) devices (Figure 6) allow post -surgical, severe 
cancer, or hospice patients to select the amount and frequency of pain control medication. There 
are d angers and problems with young and old patients, but with good design and management 
PCA devices deliver safe and effective pain control  (Macintyre, 2001) . A simple morphine drip 
bag deaign  for the lower left quadrant (low automation and low human control)  would regularly 
deliver a fixed amount of pain control medication. A more automated design for the lower right 
quadrant (increased automation, but little human control) would provide machine selected doses 
that could vary by time of day, activity, and dat a from body sign sensors, although these do not 
assess perceived pain.  
A human -centered design for the upper left quadrant (higher human control, with low 
automation) would allow patients to squeeze a trigger to control the dosing, frequency, and total 
amount of pain control medication. However, the dangers of overdosing must be controlled by an 
interlock that prevents frequent doses, typically with lockout periods of 6 -10 minutes, and total 
dose limits over 1 -4 hour periods. Finally, a RST design for the upper right quadrant would allow 
users to squeeze a trigger to get more pain medicine, but would use sensors, and machine 
learning to cho ose appropriate doses  based on patient and disease variables , while preventing 
overdosing. Patients would be able to ge t information on why limiting pain medication is 
important with explanations of how they operate the PCA device. The RST design would include 
a hospital control center to monitor usage of hundreds of PCA devices so as to ensure safe 
practices, deal with po wer or other failures, review audit trails, and collect data to improve the 
next generation of PCA devices.