- 7     -  
Designers thought they had to choose a point on the one -dimensional line from human control to 
computer automation.  The implicit messa ge was that  more automation meant less user control.  
The decoupling of these concepts leads to a two -dimensional  HCA I framework , which suggest s 
that achieving high levels of human control and high levels of automation is possible ( yellow 
triangle in Figure 2).   
The des ired goal is often, but not always , to be in the upper right  quadrant . Most  RST systems 
are on the right side. The lower right quadrant is home to relatively well -understood and 
predictable tasks, e.g. automobile automatic transmission or skid control on n ormal highways . 
For poorly understood and complex tasks with varying contexts of use, the upper right quadrant 
is needed. These tasks involve creative decisions, making them currently at the research frontier.  
As contexts of use are standardized (e.g. ele vator shafts) these tasks can become under greater 
computer control with high levels of automation.  
 
Figure 2: Two -dimensional framework  with the goal of  Reliable , Safe  & Trustwo rthy, which is achieved 
by a high level of human cont rol and high level of automa tion (yellow triangle) . 
 
The lower right  quadrant  (Figure 3 ), with high automation and l ow hum an control, is home of 
computer  autonom y requiring rapid action , for example, airbag deployment, anti -lock brakes, 
pacemakers, implantable  defibrillators, or defe nsive weapons systems.  In these applications, 
there is no time  for human intervention or control. Because the price of failure is so high,  these 
applications require extremely careful design, extensive testing, and monitoring  during usage at 
scale  to refin e designs.  Effective and proven designs can become RST systems with higher levels 
of automation and less human supervision.  
The upper left  quadrant , with high human control and low automation, i s the home of human 
autonomy where  human mastery  is desired to  enable competence  building , free exploration , and 
creativity. Examples include bicycle riding, piano playing, baking , or playing with children.