- 6     - can manipulate these systems to infl uence buying habits, change election outcomes, spread 
hateful messages, and reshape attitudes about climate, vaccinations, gun control, etc. Thoughtful 
design that improves user control could  increas e consumer  satisfaction  and limit  malicious use .   
Other applications of  automation include  common user tasks, such as search query completion or 
spell checking. These tasks are carefully designed to preserve user control and avoid annoying 
disruptions, wh ile offering useful assistance.  Heer  (2018)  breaks new gr ound  by offering ways of 
using automation in support of human  control with examples from data cleaning , exploratory 
data visualization, a nd natural language translation.  
Consequ ential applications: Moving up to the middle -range of consequential applications leads 
to medical, legal, environmental, or financial systems that can bring substantial  benefits and  harm s. 
A well-documented  case is  the flawed Google Flu Trends, which was designed to predict flu 
outbreaks, enabling public health officials to assign resources more effectively  (Lazer et al., 2013) . 
The initial success did not persist and after two years , Google withdrew the website , because the 
programmers did not anticipate the ma ny changes in search algorithms, user behavior , and societal 
context . Lazer et al. describe  the harmfu l attitude of programmers as “algorithmic hubris,” 
suggesting that some programmers have unreasonable expectations of their capacity to create 
foolproof autonomous  systems, akin to what happened with the Boeing 737 MAX.  
The financial flash crashes in publi c stock markets and currency exchanges caused by high 
frequency trading algorithms triggered losses of billions of dollars in just a few minutes. 
However, with adequate logs of trades, market managers can often repair the damage. Another 
saving grace f or the middle -range  of consequential  applications  in medical care, portfolio 
management, or legal advice, is that there may be time for alert decision makers to reflect o n the 
algorithm’s  recommendation, consult with colleagues, or probe more deeply to underst and the 
recommendation . 
Life-critic al systems: Moving up to  the challenges of life -critical applications , we find the  
physical devices like self-driving  cars, pacemakers,  and implantable defibrillators, as well as 
complex systems such as military, industrial, and aviation  applicat ions. These  applications  
require  rapid actions and may have  irreversible consequences.  
The one -dimensi onal levels of automation , grew from Sheridan and Verplan k’s early paper , but 
was repeated in many articles and textbooks , including my own  (Figure 1).  
 
Figure 1: One-dimensional thinking suggest that designers must choose between  human control and 
computer automation