Contrastive Unsupervised Representation Learning
kernels is learned and is then used for classiﬁcation in the
second stage; they assume access to labels in both stages.
Similarity/metric learning (Bellet et al. ,2012 ;2013 ) learns
a linear feature map that gives low distance to similar points
and high to dissimilar. While they identify dissimilar pairs
using labels, due to lack of labels we resort to negative sam-
pling and pay the price of class collision. While these works
analyze linear function classes, we can handle arbitrarily
powerful representations. Learning of representations that
are broadly useful on a distribution of tasks is done in mul-
titask learning , speciﬁcally in the learning-to-learn model
(Maurer et al. ,2016 ) but using labeled data.
Recently Hazan & Ma (2016 ) proposed “assumption-free”
methods for representation learning via MDL/compression
arguments, but do not obtain any guarantees comparable
to ours on downstream classiﬁcation tasks. As noted by
Arora & Risteski (2017 ), this compression approach has to
preserve allinput information (e.g. preserve every pixel of
the image) which seems suboptimal.
8. Experimental Results
We report experiments in text and vision domains support-
ing our theory. Since contrastive learning has already shown
to obtain state-of-the-art results on text classiﬁcation by
quick thoughts (QT) in Logeswaran & Lee (2018 ), most of
our experiments are conducted to corroborate our theoret-
ical analysis. The controlled experiments are described in
Appendix D. We also show that our extension to similarity
blocks in Section 6.3can improve QT on a real-world task.
Datasets: Two datasets were used in the controlled exper-
iments. (1) The CIFAR-100 dataset ( Krizhevsky ,2009 )
consisting of 32x32 images categorized into 100 classes
with a 50000/10000 train/test split. (2) Lacking an appropri-
ate NLP dataset with large number of classes, we create the
Wiki-3029 dataset, consisting of 3029 Wikipedia articles
as the classes and 200 sentences from each article as sam-
ples. The train/dev/test split is 70%/10%/20%. To test our
method on a more standard task, we also use the unsuper-
vised part of the IMDb review corpus ( Maas et al. ,2011 ),
which consists of 560K sentences from 50K movie reviews.
Representations trained using this corpus are evaluated on
the supervised IMDb binary classiﬁcation task, consisting of
training and testing set with 25K reviews each. For CIFAR-
100 and Wiki-3029, we simulate the data generation process
described in Section 2. Details are provided in Appendix D.
8.1. Effect of Block Size
As suggested in Section 6.3, a natural extension to the model
would be access to blocks of similar points. We refer to our
method of minimizing the loss in ( 12) asCURL forCon-
trastive Unsupervised Representation Learning and performTable 1. Effect of larger block size on representations. For CIFAR-
100andWIKI-3029 we measure the average binary classiﬁcation
accuracy. IMD Brepresentations are tested on IMD Bsupervised
task. CURL is our large block size contrastive method, QT is the
algorithm from ( Logeswaran & Lee ,2018 ). For larger block sizes,
QT uses all pairs within a block as similar pairs. We use the same
GRU architecture for both CURL and QT for a fair comparison.
DATASET METHOD b=2 b=5 b=1 0
CIFAR-100 CURL 88.1 89.6 89.7
WIKI-3029 CURL 96.6 97.5 97.7
IMD BCURL 89.2 89.6 89.7
QT 86.5 87.7 86.7
experiments on CIFAR-100, Wiki-3029, and IMDb. In Ta-
ble1we see that for CIFAR-100 and Wiki-3029, increasing
block size yields an improvement in classiﬁcation accuracy.
For IMDb, as is evident in Table 1, using larger blocks
provides a clear beneﬁt and the method does better than
QT, which has state-of-the-art performance on many tasks.
A thorough evaluation of CURL and its variants on other
unlabeled datasets is left for future work.
9. Conclusion
Contrastive learning methods have been empirically success-
ful at learning useful feature representations. We provide a
new conceptual framework for thinking about this form of
learning, which also allows us to formally treat issues such
as guarantees on the quality of the learned representations.
The framework gives fresh insights into what guarantees
are possible and impossible, and shapes the search for new
assumptions to add to the framework that allow tighter guar-
antees. The framework currently ignores issues of efﬁcient
minimization of various loss functions, and instead studies
the interrelationships of their minimizers as well as sample
complexity requirements for training to generalize, while
clarifying what generalization means in this setting. Our
approach should be viewed as a ﬁrst cut; possible exten-
sions include allowing tree structure – more generally met-
ric structure – among the latent classes. Connections to
meta-learning and transfer learning may arise.
We use experiments primarily to illustrate and support the
new framework. But one experiment on sentence embed-
dings already illustrates how fresh insights derived from our
framework can lead to improvements upon state-of-the-art
models in this active area. We hope that further progress
will follow, and that our theoretical insights will begin to
inﬂuence practice, including design of new heuristics to
identify semantically similar/dissimilar pairs.