Pattern Recognition  115 (2021) 107885 
Contents  lists available  at ScienceDirect  
Pattern  Recognition  
journal  homepage:  www.elsevier.com/locate/patcog  
LCU-Net:  A novel  low-cost  U-Net  for environmental  microorganism  
image  segmentation  /p82 
Jinghua  Zhang  a , Chen Li a , ∗, Sergey  Kosov  b , Marcin  Grzegorzek  c , Kimiaki  Shirahama  d , 
Tao Jiang e , Changhao  Sun a , f , Zihan  Li a , Hong  Li a 
a Microscopic  Image and Medical Image Analysis Group, College of Medicine  and Biological  Information  Engineering,  Northeastern  University,  Shenyang,  
China 
b Faculty of Data Engineering,  Jacobs University  Bremen, Bremen, Germany  
c Institute of Medical Informatics,  University  of Luebeck, Luebeck, Germany  
d Faculty of Science and Engineering,  Kindai University,  Higashiosaka,  Osaka, Japan 
e Control Engineering  College, Chengdu University  of Information  Technology,  Chengdu,  China 
f Shenyang  Institute of Automation,  Chinese Academy  of Sciences, Shenyang,  China 
a r t i c l e i n f o 
Article history: 
Received  9 January 2020 
Revised 19 September  2020 
Accepted  31 January 2021 
Available  online 13 February  2021 
Keywords:  
Environmental  miroorganisms  
Image segmentation  
Deep convolutional  neural networks  
Low-cost  a b s t r a c t 
In this paper, we propose  a novel Low-cost  U-Net (LCU-Net)  for the Environmental  Microorganism  (EM) 
image segmentation  task to assist microbiologists  in detecting  and identifying  EMs more effectively.  The 
LCU-Net  is an improved  Convolutional  Neural Network  (CNN) based on U-Net, Inception,  and concatenate  
operations.  It addresses  the limitation  of single receptive  ﬁeld setting and the relatively  high memory  
cost of U-Net. Experimental  results show the effectiveness  and potential  of the proposed  LCU-Net  in the 
practical  EM image segmentation  ﬁeld. 
©2 0 2 1 Elsevier  Ltd. All rights reserved.  
1. Introduction  
In industrialized  countries,  industrial  pollution  has been threat-  
ening human  health and environments.  Thus, different  methods  of 
controlling,  reducing,  and eliminating  pollution  are being estab- 
lished. The methods  of eliminating  environmental  pollution  gener- 
ally include  three major categories:  chemical,  physical,  and biolog-  
ical approaches.  By contrast,  the biological  method  is more harm- 
less and eﬃcient  [1] . Environmental  Microorganisms  (EMs) are very 
tiny living beings in our surroundings,  which are natural  decom-  
posers and indicators.  For example,  Actinophrys  can digest the or- 
ganic waste in sludge and increase  the quality  of freshwater;  Ro- 
tifera can decompose  rubbish  in the water and reduce eutrophica-  
tion. Therefore,  EM research  plays a signiﬁcant  role in managing  
environmental  pollution  [2] , and the identiﬁcation  of EMs is the 
basic step for related  research.  
Generally,  there are four traditional  types of EM identiﬁca-  
tion methods.  The ﬁrst is the “chemical  method”,  which is highly 
/p82 This work is supported  by the “National  Natural Science Foundation  of China”
(No. 61806047).  
∗Corresponding  author. 
E-mail address: lichen201096@hotmail.com  (C. Li). accurate  but often results in secondary  pollution  of chemical  
reagents  [3] . The second  strategy  is the “physical  method”.  It also 
has high accuracy  but requires  expensive  equipment  [3] . The third 
is the “molecular  biological  method”,  which distinguishes  EMs by 
sequence  analysis  of gene [4] . This strategy  needs expensive  equip- 
ment, massive  time consumption,  and professional  researcher.  The 
fourth is the “morphological  method”,  which needs a skillful oper- 
ator to observe  EMs under a microscope  and give the EM identities  
by their shape characteristics  [1] . Hence, these traditional  methods  
have their respective  disadvantages  in practical  work. 
Due to the drawbacks  of the traditional  methods  and the excel- 
lent performance  on segmentation  tasks of CNNs, the widely used 
U-Net [5] is ﬁrstly considered  in our work. The training  strategy  
used in U-Net relies on the strong use of data augmentation  to use 
the available  annotated  samples  more eﬃciently  [5] . Besides,  the 
end-to-end  structure  used in U-Net can retrieve  the shallow  infor- 
mation  of the network  [5] . Therefore,  U-Net provides  the high pos- 
sibility to achieve  high accuracy  with our small EM training  data 
set. 
The cost and reliability  of CNN are extremely  important  [6] . 
However,  the adaptability  of U-Net is limited  by its single recep- 
tive ﬁeld setting,  and the memory  cost of U-Net is relatively  high 
in practical  work, so we propose  a novel Low-cost  U-Net (LCU-Net)  
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.patcog.2021.107885  
0031-3203/© 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.