J. Zhang, C. Li, S. Kosov et al. Pattern Recognition  115 (2021) 107885 
Fig. 13. The evaluation  indices of U-Net, U-Net+, U-Net-BI,  U-Net-BI+,  LCU-Net and LCU-Net+.  The blue columns show the evaluation  of segmentation  results generated  
by the networks.  The red columns show the evaluation  of segmentation  results generated  by the networks  with Dense CRF as post-processing.  (For interpretation  of the 
references  to colour in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.) 
the Recall values generated  by U-Net, U-Net-BI,  LCU-Net,  and LCU- 
Net+. This is because  some of the segmentation  results by other 
methods  have many background  parts partitioned  into the fore- 
ground  [2] . What is more serious  is that the whole picture  is par- 
titioned  into the foreground.  We can easily ﬁnd this situation  from 
Fig. 14 . From the deﬁnition  of Recall shown in Table 3 , we can 
realize that as long as the foreground  in the segmentation  result 
contains  the entire real foreground  in GT, the value of Recall is 
1 regardless  of whether  the over-segmentation  problem  is exist- 
ing or not. Therefore,  when we evaluate  the segmentation  results,  
we should not judge them by the value of Recall alone. From the 
above, we should consider  multiple  indices  when we evaluate  the 
segmentation  results.  
To observe  the performance  of these methods  better, we pro- 
vide not only the overall average  indices  in Fig. 15 but also the de- 
tailed indices  of the segmentation  results of each category  of EMs 
under these methods  in Table 5 . Besides,  we also provide  examples  
of the segmentation  results under these methods  in Fig. 14 . 
4.3.3. Comparison  with local-Global  CRF segmentation  
In our previous  work of Local-Global  CRF [2] , we use the EMDS-  
4 data set with 20 categories  of EMs. In contrast  to EMDS-4,  we 
have one more EM category  ( Gymnodinium  ) in EMDS-5  in this pa- 
per. Therefore,  we evaluate  the segmentation  results obtained  by 
LCU-Net+  without  Gymnodinium  here. Furthermore,  there are six models  for segmentation  in [2] to compare:  Per-pixel  RF (noEdges),  
CRF with Potts pairwise  potentials  (Potts),  CRF with contrast-  
sensitive  Potts model (PottsCS),  fully connected  CRF with Gaussian  
pairwise  potentials  (denseCRF),  fully connected  CRF on segmenta-  
tion results by the original  DeepLab  method  [44] (denseCRForg),  
fully convolutional  network  (FCN). Considering  the evaluation  met- 
rics used in our previous  work, we use Average  Recall and Overall  
Accuracy  to evaluate  the performance  of the segmentation  results 
in [2] . The Average  Recall and Overall  Accuracy  values of LCU-Net+  
and our previous  models  are shown in Fig. 16 . 
From Fig. 16 , we can ﬁnd that compared  with our previous  
models,  the Average  Recall is improved  by more than 7% , and the 
Overall  Accuracy  increases  by at least 1% . From this, we can realize 
that the proposed  LCU-Net+  in this paper performs  better than the 
models  in our previous  work [2] . 
4.3.4. Repeatability  tests 
In the repeatability  tests, we add four more repeatability  LCU- 
Net+ experiments  based on the original  experiment.  The overall 
evaluation  indices  of these segmentation  results are provided  in 
Table 6 . From Table 6 , we ﬁnd that all ﬁve LCU-Net+  experiments  
perform  better than the original  U-Net and the evaluation  indices  
of the ﬁve experiments  are approximate.  Therefore,  it is proved  
that LCU-Net+  has good stability  and performance  on the EM im- 
age segmentation  task. 
12