J. Zhang, C. Li, S. Kosov et al. Pattern Recognition  115 (2021) 107885 
Fig. 12. The visual illustration  on TP, FN, FP, and TN used in confusion  matrix with examples  of EM images. 
Table 4 
The memory and time costs of U-Net, U-Net-BI  and LCU-Net.  
Model Memory Cost Time Cost 
Training Time Average Test Time 
U-Net 372,551,680  Byte (355 MB) 2145.38s  (35.76min)  0.05s 
U-Net-BI  426,868,736  Byte (407 MB) 4694.09s  (78.24min)  0.13s 
LCU-Net  108,560,384  Byte (103 MB) 2191.25s  (36.52min)  0.15s 
4.3. Evaluation  of segmentation  methods  
To prove the effectiveness  of the proposed  LCU-Net  method  
for EM image segmentation,  we compare  its segmentation  results 
with other classical  and state-of-the-art  methods  mentioned  in 
Section  2 . 
4.3.1. Evaluation  of different  BLOCKs  
In this part, we make a comparison  between  BLOCK-I  and 
BLOCK-II.  To this end, we carry out a series of experiments  on U- 
Net, U-Net-BI,  and LCU-Net.  
Evaluation  of Memory  and Time Costs To compare  the memory  
and time costs among  U-Net, U-Net-BI,  and LCU-Net,  we provide  
the details in Table 4 . 
From Table 4 , we can ﬁnd that the memory  cost of U-Net is 
355 MB, the training  time of U-Net is around  36 minutes  for 840 
EM images,  and the average  testing time is 0.05s for each test im- 
age. In contrast,  the memory  cost of LCU-Net  is signiﬁcantly  re- 
duced to 103 MB. From Table 4 , we can also ﬁnd that U-Net and 
LCU-Net  have closed training  time around  36 minutes.  Further-  
more, the proposed  LCU-Net  has only 0.1s test time longer than 
that of U-Net. Therefore,  in contrast  to U-Net, the LCU-Net  saves 
70 . 99% memory  cost and has very close training  time. Although  
the average  test time is 0.1s longer than U-Net, the difference  is 
acceptable  in the practical  EM segmentation  work. 
Evaluation  of Segmentation  Performance  To compare  the overall 
performance  of the segmentation  methods,  we provide  the average  
evaluation  indices  in Fig. 13 . 
From Fig. 13 , we can ﬁnd that U-Net achieves  good perfor-  
mance,  but the results of U-Net-BI  and LCU-Net  are even better. Es- 
pecially,  compared  with U-Net, the average  Dice value of LCU-Net  
is increased  by around  1 . 5% ; the average  Jaccard  value of LCU-Net  
makes 1 . 79% improvement;  the improvement  of the average  Recall 
value made by LCU-Net  is 5 . 14% ; for the average  Accuracy,  the im- 
provement  of LCU-Net  is 0 . 15% ; the average  VOE of LCU-Net  is re- 
duced by 2 . 32% . Hence, from these evaluation  indices  by LCU-Net,  
the overall segmentation  performance  is effectively  im proved.  Al- 
though  U-Net-BI  makes slightly  better segmentation  performance  
than LCU-Net,  the memory  cost of LCU-Net  is only about a quar- 
ter of that of U-Net-BI.  Besides,  the segmentation  performance  of 
LCU-Net  is also better than the original  U-Net. 
To further  improve  the segmentation  performance,  we apply 
Dense CRF as the post-processing  after obtaining  the segmenta-  tion results of our networks.  Dense CRF effectively  im proves the 
segmentation  performance.  We provide  the average  evaluation  in- 
dices of U-Net+  (U-Net with Dense CRF as post-processing),  U-Net-  
BI+ (U-Net-BI  with Dense CRF as post-processing),  and LCU-Net+  
(LCU-Net  with Dense CRF as post-processing)  in Fig. 13 . We can 
ﬁnd that Dense CRF effectively  assists these networks  to further  
improve  the segmentation  performance  from Fig. 13 . Besides,  U- 
Net-BI+  and LCU-Net+  still perform  better than U-Net+.  
After evaluating  the overall performance  of these methods,  we 
also provide  the detailed  indices  and examples  of the segmentation  
results of each EM category  under these methods  in Table 5 and 
Fig. 14 , respectively.  
From Table 5 and Fig. 14 , we can ﬁnd that all the segmenta-  
tion results of the improved  methods  can cover the main parts 
of the EMs. Besides,  these improved  methods  have better EM de- 
tail acquisition  capabilities  than U-Net. The problems  of under- 
segmentation  and over-segmentation  are much less in the seg- 
mentation  results by these improved  methods.  Thus, because  of 
the minimum  memory  cost, low time cost, and good segmenta-  
tion performance  with Dense CRF as the post-processing,  we apply 
LCU-Net+  in the EM image segmentation  task. 
4.3.2. Comparison  with other methods  
In this part, we conduct  some comparative  experiments  on 
the task of EM image segmentation.  We mainly  adopt some rep- 
resentative  segmentation  methods  mentioned  in Section  2.1 and 
Section  2.2 , including  Otsu (threshold-based  method),  Canny 
(edge-based  method),  Watershed  (region-based  method),  Re- 
gion Growing  (region-based  method),  MRF (unsupervised  learn- 
ing method),  k -means  (unsupervised  learning  method),  and Seg- 
Net [54] (supervised  learning  method).  Because  the results are of- 
ten insuﬃcient,  we need some post-processing  for the results.  For 
example,  when we use edge-based  methods  to perform  the seg- 
mentation  task, it often needs post-processing,  which includes  di- 
lation, erosion,  and so on, to assist it [55] . To show better segmen-  
tation results of these methods,  we uniformly  used post-processing  
operations,  which include  dilation,  erosion,  ﬂood-ﬁll,  and saving 
the largest region,  to improve  the segmentation  results [55] . To 
evaluate  these methods’  overall performance,  we provide  the av- 
erage evaluation  indices  of these methods  in Fig. 15 . 
From the average  indices  in Fig. 15 , we can ﬁnd that the re- 
sults of our methods  are better than that of other methods.  How- 
ever, we can see that the Recall values in Fig. 15 (d) are higher than 
9