J. Zhang, C. Li, S. Kosov et al. Pattern Recognition  115 (2021) 107885 
Fig. 2. The network structure  of U-Net. 
tive unsupervised  methods  for microorganism  image segmentation,  
such as k -means  [36] and Markov  Random  Field (MRF) [37] . Be- 
sides, U-Net [5] is one of the most representative  supervised  seg- 
mentation  methods  for microorganism  image segmentation.  
The works [24–26]  use unsupervised  methods.  For example,  
[24] evaluates  clustering  and threshold  segmentation  techniques  
on tissue images  containing  tuberculosis  bacilli. The ﬁnal result 
shows that k -means  clustering  ( k = 3 ) is outstanding.  In [25] , a 
comparison  between  CRFs and region-based  segmentation  meth- 
ods is presented.  The ﬁnal result shows that these two kinds of 
microorganism  segmentation  methods  have an average  recognition  
rate higher than 80% . 
The related  works [27–30]  use supervised  methods  in their 
works. For example,  [29] proposes  a segmentation  system  to mon- 
itor the algae in the water. First, image enhancement  (sharpening)  
is applied  using a Retinex  ﬁltering  technique.  Then, segmentation  
is done by using the Support  Vector Machine  (SVM). In [30] , Rift 
Valley Virus is the segmentation  subject.  Because  of the insuﬃ-  
cient data set, they use data augmentation  to assist U-Net in the 
segmentation  work. 
In our previous  work [2] , a supervised  approach  named  Local- 
Global CRF for EM image segmentation  is proposed.  VGG-16  is 
trained  ﬁrst with EM images  to generate  pixel-level  and global-  
level features,  then these features  are used to train Random  Forest 
(RF) classiﬁers,  and after that, these trained  RF classiﬁers  are used 
as unary potentials  by a CRF model. Finally,  with the pairwise  po- 
tentials,  the CRF model is applied  to perform  the EM image seg- 
mentation  task. 
We ﬁnd that few existing  studies  use neural networks  for mi- 
croorganism  image segmentation  from our investigation  of exist- 
ing methods.  Since our data set contains  21 EM classes,  the im- 
ages of different  EM classes  vary greatly.  Therefore,  methods  like 
Otsu, Canny, k -means,  and other methods  may not perform  well. 
Besides,  in recent years, with the extensive  use of neural networks  
in image segmentation,  image segmentation  performance  has been 
greatly  improved.  Therefore,  U-Net, one of the most representative  
neural networks  in image segmentation,  is ﬁrst considered  in our 
work. 3. LCU-Net  based EM image segmentation  method  
3.1. LCU-Net  
Although  U-Net is widely used, its adaptability  is limited  by its 
single receptive  ﬁeld setting,  and its memory  cost is also relatively  
high in practical  work. To address  U-Net’s  limitation,  we propose  
LCU-Net,  a CNN based on U-Net [5] , Inception-V3  [7] , and concate-  
nate operations  [8] . 
3.1.1. Basic knowledge  of U-Net 
As the structure  is shown in Fig. 2 , U-Net is a CNN that is ini- 
tially used to perform  the microscopic  image segmentation  task. 
The training  strategy  of U-Net relies on the strong use of data aug- 
mentation  to make more effective  use of the available  annotated  
samples.  [5] . Besides,  the end-to-end  structure  of U-Net can re- 
trieve the shallow  information  of the network  [5] . 
The structure  of U-Net is symmetrical,  consisting  of a contract-  
ing path (left side) and an expansive  path (right side) [5] . In the 
contracting  path, each downsampling  step contains  a sequence  of 
two 3 ×3 convolution  operations  (each has a rectiﬁed  linear unit 
(ReLU))  followed  by a max-pooling  operation  with the size of 2 ×2 
and stride of 2 pixels. Pooling  operation  with the stride of 2 pix- 
els can change  the feature  map’s size into half of the original.  
In the contracting  path, the downsampling  step is repeated  four 
times, and as the number  of repetitions  increases,  the number  of 
convolution  ﬁlters increases  by twice. As a result, the number  of 
feature  map channels  is double.  In the expansive  path, there are 
three main operations  in each upsampling  step. The ﬁrst is 2 ×2 
up-convolution  operation  (a 2 ×2 upsampling  operation  followed  
by a 2 ×2 convolution  operation).  The second  is copy and con- 
catenate.  It copies the feature  map generated  by the correspond-  
ing layer from the contracting  path and connects  it with the fea- 
ture map generated  from up-convolution.  This operation  can help 
the network  retrieve  the spatial information  lost by pooling  opera- 
tions [38] . The third operation  is a sequence  of two 3 ×3 convolu-  
tion operations  (each has a ReLU). The upsampling  step is repeated  
four times. The segmentation  result is generated  by the network’s  
3