IMIA Yearbook of Medical Informatics 2019131
Artificial Intelligence in Clinical Decision Support: Challenges for Evaluating AI and Practical Implications
and without AI assistance. Once an algo -
rithm is developed, clinical validation of 
its utility is needed. The algorithm may be correct but is it operationally meaningful and useful? Does it fit clinical workflow? Does it still represent up-to-date clinical knowledge? Will it change clinical decisions? What 
level of confidence can be given? A signif
-
icant concern here is that when humans are 
assisted by DSSs, they tend to over-rely and delegate full responsibility to the DSS rather than continuing to be vigilant. This is known as automation bias and can have dangerous consequences when the DSS is wrong or 
fails, or the presenting problem is subtly 
unique. Previous work has demonstrated the effects of automation bias with a prescrib
-
ing DSS that was based on simple rules of 
logic [42]. In this study, the presence of the DSS reduced the verification of prescription safety and increased prescribing errors when 
the DSS was incorrect [43]. With AI, these 
effects of automation bias are likely to be 
exacerbated because of the black box nature 
of many machine learning approaches which are not conducive to verification. Methods are thus needed to mitigate automation bias, 
for example by improving the interpretability 
of machine learning models, explaining how 
an AI came to a conclusion, and training clinicians to maintain vigilance. 
Consideration also needs to be given to the 
various stakeholders involved in processes 
to select AI. Evaluation findings need to be 
communicated in a manner that is under
-
standable and meaningful to clinicians, but 
also to administrators and policymakers. One possible approach to support better selection of AI systems is by labelling. Neither patient nor clinician can be fully comfortable in the use of AI ‘black box’ decision support 
unless they know the system is appropriately 
created and relevant for their situation. Based on the transferability and quality schemas, label structures need to be developed which identify the training population type includ
-
ing demography and treatment setting, the nature of the decisions supported, the clinical environment, and any problems identified. It should be possible to devise a standard popu
-
lation characteristics data set that is verifiable, yet at the same time does not reveal technical design details and thus protects commercial confidence. Indeed population information may become mandatory as health systems are increasingly expecting AI developers to be transparent about the limitations and ethical 
examination of the population data used to 
develop algorithms, how data performance was validated, and how clinicians integrate into care delivery effective treatment and value for money [44]. Reporting to trusted third parties of any suspected adverse out
-
comes would also be valuable. 
Ongoing surveillance of AI: AI will have 
systemic effects in complex sociotech -
nical settings, including aspects such as usage, usability, interpretability, up-to-date capabilities, safety, unintended effects, and ethical issues. Algorithms may affect resource allocation and prioritisation, so the risk of reinforcing bias in care delivery 
must be considered. Of course, the impact 
of AI on patient outcomes and experience and on clinical experience, as well as both organisational and social impacts, all need to be monitored. Over time, the context, treat
-
ment possibilities, and patient population might change. Therefore, once implemented, ongoing surveillance is needed to monitor and recalibrate AI algorithms [45]. This surveillance is also needed for dynamic algo
-
rithms that continuously update themselves based on practice data and published clinical evidence. Another aspect is in detecting and evaluating “hidden” errors – subtle flaws in inferred data or a misconfiguration that may not be as obvious as the financial 
“flash crash” of 2010 [46] which may take 
months to be revealed (as with hand-crafted algorithms [47]). Thus, evaluation is likely to shift from a one-off activity to a continuous process to ensure that the use of AI, including those incorporating dynamic algorithms, is meeting expectations. 
4   Practical Aspects of 
Evaluating AI-enabled 
Clinical Decision Support 
This section examines some of the practical 
aspects of evaluating AI-enabled clinical decision support. It begins by consider
-
ing broad paradigms and frameworks to approach such evaluations. We reviewed existing guidelines for conducting and 
reporting evaluation studies, and concluded 
with exemplar indicators to monitor AI. The aim is to highlight existing approaches that can be readily applied and to identify areas where further work is required to meet the specific needs of current AI. 
Approaching AI evaluation: As we dis
-
cussed in the previous section, evaluating 
AI as a one-off activity will not be sufficient, therefore continuous evaluation or surveil
-
lance might become necessary to monitor the emergent behaviour of AI in complex sociotechnical settings, and the response of its users. Indeed, it may become an ethical imperative as the complexity of interven
-
tions and their effects on sociotechnical interactions become impossible to predict in advance. One paradigm that might be particularly relevant for approaching the evaluation of AI on an ongoing basis is the Learning Healthcare System [48]. 
This paradigm usefully incorporates the 
notion of continuous system improvement using locally generated evidence to inform practice changes. Such learning can occur at different levels including institutional, national, or international. While aspects like algorithm performance may be addressed at institutional level, safety governance might be considered at a national level and the ethical implications of using AI for clinical decision support could be tackled at an 
international level. 
Evaluation guidelines and models: Exist
-
ing resources such as the guidelines for Good 
Evaluation Practice in Health Informatics (GEP-HI) provide a solid foundation for planning and executing evaluation projects [49]. Validity of GEP-HI for AI and its completeness will become apparent through 
application and use. Similarly, the Statement 
on Reporting of Evaluation Studies in Health Informatics (STARE-HI) provides useful principles for publication of evaluation stud
-
ies [50, 51]. These guidelines support design, execution, and reporting of an evaluation study irrespective of the type of the system under study. The evaluation question and the purpose of the study guide the selection of evaluation methods and their application.