IMIA Yearbook of Medical Informatics 2019129
Artificial Intelligence in Clinical Decision Support: Challenges for Evaluating AI and Practical Implications
In this paper, we focus on the present 
role of AI in supporting clinical decisions. 
Evaluation of these machine-learning-based systems has tended to focus on examining the performance of algorithms in laboratory settings. There are a few 
observational studies which have tested 
systems in clinical settings providing a safe environment while patients continue 
to receive standard care [5]. However, little is known about the effects of AI on care delivery and patient outcomes which need to be carefully considered to ensure 
that it is appropriately applied. Like any 
technology, AI will also come with its unintended effects that may disrupt care 
delivery and pose risks to patients [6]. It is clear that the many benefits of AI cannot be realized safely unless AI is responsibly and effectively integrated into clinical 
decision-making and care delivery pro
-
cesses, and risks are effectively identified 
and mitigated. 
While we have witnessed the beginnings 
of mainstream adoption of AI in only the last five years or so, academic researchers within the informatics community have 
studied AI for almost half a century [7-9]. 
However, an enhanced risk is now pre
-
sented by a shift in the environment from draw-down of innovation based on positive evidence to political and commercial pres
-
sures for speedy adoption based on promise, with the call for evidence being presented as self-interested commitment to the status quo [10]. Clearly this disregard of evidence puts patients at risk.
The objective of this paper is to draw 
attention to key considerations for evaluat
-
ing AI in clinical decision support; and to examine challenges and practical implica
-
tions of AI design, development, selection, use, and ongoing surveillance. The paper begins with a historical perspective about the evaluation of AI in healthcare. It then examines key challenges of evaluating AI-enabled clinical decision-support. 
The final section deals with the practi
-
cal aspects of evaluating AI, including 
approaches to evaluation and indicators to monitor AI. It will show that evaluation and ongoing surveillance is central to safe and effective integration of AI in complex sociotechnical settings.2   Evaluation of AI in 
Healthcare – a Historical 
Perspective 
AI in healthcare is not new, and neither is AI 
evaluation; the dedicated journal, Artificial Intelligence in Medicine dates back to the early 1990’ s. AI as a term was used for a collection of established technologies that were called decision support technologies, 
knowledge-based systems, or expert sys
-
tems in earlier years. The health informatics 
community has a rich history and tradition of studying and evaluating the application of AI to solve problems in care delivery. Early applications were focussed on performing diagnosis and making therapy recommenda
-
tions in medical settings. The early versions of AI mostly used symbolic approaches based on rules and knowledge, whereas 
present day AI uses statistical methods 
along with symbolic approaches to disease representation. In the late 1950’ s, McCar
-
thy and colleagues developed the language LISP which was particularly well suited to symbolic approaches [11]. The PROLOG language for logic programming to manage reasoning and decision-making processes with logical structures was developed in the 
1960’ s [12]. In the 1970’ s, there was a big 
wave of the so called first generation of AI in medicine [13], such as Shortliffe’ s work with MYCIN [14], Kulikowski’ s individu
-
alized clinical decision models [15], and de Dombal’ s computer-aided diagnosis of acute abdominal pain [16] which incorporated newer statistical reasoning methods such as probabilistic reasoning and neural networks. 
Within the period covered above, there 
were extensive discussions about the role of AI in medicine, ranging from expert systems replacing doctors, to AI supporting doctors in their clinical decision-making processes, and AI embedded in medical devices. The latter has been successfully applied for sev
-
eral decades, e.g. in ECG machines and ICU equipment such as pumps, and insulin pens.
The need for rigorous evaluation of the 
quality and impact of AI was recognised in the 1980s. While the first publications focussed mainly on methodologies for 
evaluating performance in a laboratory envi
-
ronment, later papers addressed field-testing in clinical settings to examine effects on the 
structure, process, and outcome of care deliv -
ery [17-21]. The 1998 Helsinki workshop of our IMIA Working Group (then called the WG on Technology Assessment and Qual
-
ity Development, and Organizational and Social Issues ) focussed on the importance of 
addressing broader organisational issues and the need to focus on constructive evaluation within the whole lifecycle of information technology (IT) development [22-24]. Two 
books from 2006 which serve as textbooks 
for health IT evaluation methodologies spe
-
cifically address techniques for AI as well 
as potential biases that may compromise an evaluation [25, 26]. Biases introduced during the development of algorithms due to differences between training and real-world 
populations are particularly important for 
machine learning-based systems and are discussed in section 3.
Later, following implementations of AI 
in clinical practice, studies shifted to the clinical impacts of AI [18] and on the related methodological challenges to find adequate clinical endpoints [19]. Building upon evi
-
dence about the benefit of AI in medicine, research then focussed on reviewing the impact of AI on patient outcomes in inpa
-
tient settings [20], in psychiatry [21], and medication safety [22].
The challenges recognised in the early 
days of applying AI were among others: 1) the legal (e.g., who is responsible when the system makes an error?) and ethical issues 
(algorithms dealing with discriminative 
investigations that are highly unethical, see for example [27]); 2) the context including informal information that is not documented in the medical record but is nevertheless part of a doctor’ s mental image about the patient [28]; 3) the transferability of algo
-
rithms from one setting to another both with respect to patient groups and clinical setting (i.e. local technologies/methodologies, local or regional professional culture [29]); 4) brittleness (inability of AI to reason at the boundaries or outside own application range, 
resulting in “sense in – garbage out” [30]; 
and 5) the dynamic nature of professional knowledge development in health care that needs to be captured in dynamic AI. 
Today, there is an increasing and renewed 
interest in using AI, where a new generation