132
IMIA Yearbook of Medical Informatics 2019Magrabi et al.
Very important evaluation criteria for AI 
applications include validity of the system, i.e. correctness in reasoning, usefulness for the clinical practice and effects and impacts on clinical work, care processes, and patient outcomes. With AI applications that are 
based on big data sets, especially genomic, 
biomarker, and phenotype data from across the health system, it is important to ensure sufficient coverage, specificity, and validity of the data. This will be an additional step in the evaluation process with AI systems i.e. to assess and collect evidence on data quality, and is the key point to prevent unin
-
tended consequences and to avoid risks of harmful results. 
Understanding of the comparability of 
the design and development situation with the potential implementation situation is cru
-
cial. Aspects such as the algorithm training data set (clinical situation, physiology, and demography) are critical, as are treatment options and user population (including professional and e-health skills). A lot can be learned from Implementation science; 
for instance Schloemer and Schröder-Bäck 
have created the useful generic PIET model, in which Population, Intervention, (clinical) Environment, and Transfer methods are decomposed [52]. Adaptation of the sub-cat
-
egories of each to fit the AI situation would yield a valuable assessment tool. 
Indicators to monitor AI: Implementation 
of AI in an organisation can have an impact on several aspects of care quality, depending on the clinical area where implemented. 
Existing methodologies for defining indica
-
tors for continuous monitoring of health IT 
help not only to pinpoint AI-specific care quality indicators, but also to define AI-spe
-
cific indicators for AI-quality monitoring and surveillance, for example, the methodology for the Nordic eHealth Indicators which has four major phases including definition of the context of measurement, monitoring goals (e.g. care quality, efficiency, technol
-
ogy quality …etc.), methods for indicator selection, and the collection, analysis, and feedback of data from relevant user groups (Box 1) [53].
Governing AI in healthcare may involve 
trade-offs between risk and rewards. Ques
-
tions on ethics, safety, and human values at stake depend on the type and purpose of use of the technologies, emphasizing the importance of the first two phases of the 
methodology. Peer-reviewed literature on 
AI for specific situations remains one solid source for practical indicator selection and grouping. 
Availability (state of the art) of custom 
AI applications for specific purposes in different contexts of use for different user groups provides the first level of monitoring, important for policy makers for local and national steering. If these data are collected systematically from a whole country, they 
can also be used as benchmarking data by 
policy makers to steer development and by healthcare providers to find best practices and learn about different AI solutions. 
The information system (IS) success 
model also offers an option for grouping indicators to examine AI quality, focussing on system quality, information quality, service quality, use, user satisfaction, and outcomes [54-56]. Each of these are exam
-
ined below: 
System quality: Once implemented, 
AI system requires ongoing surveillance based on a set of measures to recalibrate AI algorithms. Apart from surveillance tar
-
geted directly at AI development, IT System 
quality monitoring includes indicators like (IT) accessibility, reliability, flexibility, integration, response time, ease of learning [55]. Measures and indicators for these are targeted at monitoring and development of the entire socio-technical system where AI is implemented. Function quality is an important part of system quality, particularly when AI components feed other interim processes. AI applications with direct impact on patient health can be approached by the EU directive for medical devices, including 
the requirements for CE marking with tight 
clinical evidence requirements for Class II and III devices according to Regulation 2017/745 [57]. System quality is directly associated with patient safety, and existence of CE marking could be one indicator for AI quality and a proxy for patient safety. 
Information quality may be the most 
important surveillance and monitoring domain for AI algorithms alongside with system quality. It covers quality of data 
used as input for the AI as well as quality 
of the output information (e.g. accuracy, reliability, relevance, completeness) [55]. In addition to these, reproducibility, sensi
-
tivity and specificity of the results, type and severity of errors, observed versus expected error rates, causes of errors, how algorithms respond and what indicators to use if input data characteristics start vary, and the avail
-
ability of data, code, and workflows need to be focussed on, since the algorithms are Box 1   Defining indicators for monitoring AI.
1 Define context for measurement
1.1 Define AI application
 • Identify AI components and functions within operational system
 • Define outputs (which may be inputs to another component) and risks
1.2 Identify service context and boundaries (on micro-, meso- and macro levels).
1.3 Identify key stakeholders.
2 Define monitoring goals (e.g. safety, usability, transparency, up-to-dateness, reliability, patient safety, work process changes).
3 Define methods for indicator selection and categorisation e.g. by reviewing expert knowledge, peer-reviewed literature, or existing indicator work.
4 Define data for repeated measurements, analysis, and feedback from different user groups 
 • Produce objective reports.