2 modified  some existing  method to make the proposed 
method suitable for efficient training and detection.  
YOLO serial  methods and their improved  methods have 
complex network  structure and a larger number of network 
parameters . They require po werful GPU  (graphic processing 
unit) computing power to realiz e the real -time object 
detection.  However , they have limited computing power  and 
limited memory,  and require real -time object detection for 
some  mobile devices and embedded devices (autonomous  
driving  devices,  augmented reality devices  and other smart 
device ) in real -world  applications  [17]. For example, such as 
real-time inference on smart phones  and embedded video 
surveillance, the available com puting resources are limited to 
a com bination of l ow-power embedded GPUs or even just 
embed ded CPUS with limited memory . Therefore, it is a big 
challenge to realize the real -time object detection on 
embedded devices and mobile devices. To solve the problem , 
lightweight object detection  method s are propose d by many 
researchers.  The lightweight methods have comparatively 
simple r network structure and fewer parameters . Therefore, 
they require lower computing reso urces and memory, and 
have faster detection spee d. They are more suitable  for 
deploying on mobile devices and embedded  devices. 
Although they have lower detection accuracy, the accuracy 
can meet the actual demands . Lightweight object detection  
method s based on deep learning have been  applied in many 
fields, including  vehicle  detection  [18-19], pedestri an 
detection  [20], bus passenger object detection  [21], 
agricultural detection  [22], human abnormal behav ior 
detection  [23], etc.  
A number of lightweight object detection methods  have 
already been proposed to improve  detection speed with the 
limitation of hardware platforms  and meanwhile to meet  the 
demand  of high  performance.  Such MobileNet 
series (MobileNetv1 [24],  MobileNetv2  [25], MobileNetv3 
[26]), S queezenet  series (S queezenet  [27], SqueezeNext  [28]), 
Shuff leNet series(ShuffleNet_v1  [29], ShuffleNet_v2  [30]) , 
lightweight YOLO series  [31-41]. MobileNet _v1 method [24]  
constructs lightweight deep neural networks by using 
depthwise separable convolution  instead  of the traditional  
convolution  to reduce  parameters . Based on MobileNet _v1, 
the Mob ileNet _v2  bulids inverted residual module by adding 
the point -wise convolution layer in front of depthwise 
separable convolution  to improve the ability of extracting 
features. MobileNet _v3 redesign s some  computionally -
expens ive layers and introduces the hard swish non linearity  
to improve detection speed . Squeezenet  method  design the 
new network architecture  based on CNN by replacing 3*3 
convolutions with 1*1 convolutions, using squeeze layers to 
decrease the number input chan nels to 3*3 convolutions  and 
downsampling la te in the network to improve detection speed. 
SqueezeNext  method  is proposed based on s queezenet . Its 
neural network architecture is able to achieve  AlexNet’s top -
5 performance with 112  X fewer parameters [ 28]. The 
MobileNet series , squeezenet  series and s huffleNet series are directly  designed  to realize lightweight network. The 
lightweight YOLO series methods are designed  based on 
complete YOLO. They are realized by  suppressing the 
network of complete YOLO method . YOLOv2 -tiny is one of 
lightwe ight YOLO ser ies methods [ 31]. The  complete 
YOLOv2 uses the Darknet19 as backbone network, which 
contains 19 convolution layers and 6 pooling layers. They 
YOLOv2 -tiny method del ete convolution layers in 
Darknet19 network to 9  layer s to reduce the network 
complexity.  YOLOv3 -tiny is proposed by compressing the 
network model of YOLOv3 [13]. It uses seven  layer 
convolution networ ks and six max pooling  layers instead  of 
the ResBlock s tructure  in DarkNet53 network  [40]. It also 
reduce the output branch from the t hree s cale 
prediction s(52×52, 26×26 and  13×13) to two s cale 
prediction s (26 ×26 and 13 ×13). YOLOv4 -tiny [4 1] is also 
one of lightweight YOLO series methods,  and also realized 
based on YOLOv4 [16]. It uses C SPDarknet53 -tiny 
backbone network  instead C SPDarkne t53 backbone network  
of YOL Ov4. The spatial  pyramid  pooling（SPP）and p ath 
aggregation network（PAN et）are also be instead by f eature 
pyramid networks  (FPN) to reduce the detection time. 
Besides, it also uses two s cale prediction s (26 ×26 and 13 ×13) 
instead  of three s cale prediction s. Co mpar ed with YOLOv3 -
tiny, the YOLOv4 -tiny uses the C SPBlock n etwor k to extract 
feature without using the conditional con c onvolution 
networ ks, and introduces the complete  intersection over 
union to select bounding  boxes.  
In this section, we have reviewed re cent developments rela
ted to object detection. In Section 2, we outline the concepts 
and processes of the YOLOv4 -tiny object detection method. I
n Section 3 we describe our proposed method. In Section 4, 
we illustrate and discuss our simulation results.  
II. YOLOv4 -tiny 
A. NETWORK STRUCTURE  
Yolov4 -tiny method is designed based on Yolov4 method to 
make it have faster speed of object detection. The speed of 
object detection for Yolov4 -tiny can reach 371 Frames per 
second using 1080Ti GPU with the accuracy tha t meets the 
deman d of the real application . It greatly increase s the 
feasibility  that object detection  method is d eployed on 
embedded systems or mobile devices . 
The Yolov4 -tiny method uses CSPDarknet53 -tiny network 
as backbone  network to instead  of the CSPDarknet53  
network  that is used in Yolov4 method. The CSPDarknet53 -
tiny network uses the CSPBlock  module in cross stage partial 
network instead of the ResBlock module in r esidual network . 
The CSPBlock  module divides the feature map into two parts, 
and combin es the two parts  by cross stage residual edge. This 
makes the gradient flow can propagate in two different 
network paths to increase the correlation difference  of 
gradient information. The CSPBlock module can e nhance the 
learning ability of convolution net work  comparing w ith 
ResBlock module. Although this increase  computation  by