5 
 
FIGURE  3. Proposed backbone network . 
 
The output feature of designed residual network block is 
fused with shallow feature  of backbone network  by 
element -wise summation  operation , and the fused 
information is used as  the input of next layer in the  
backbone network . The fused process can be expressed as:  
1( ) ( 3,4)l l l l
assist x F x x l−= +     =
        (10) 
where 
l is the index of network layer, 
lx is the output of 
-1l
th layer and also input of 
l th layer, 
l
assistx  is the output 
of our designed residual netwo rk, 
()lF  denotes the 
relationship  between the input and output in the 
l th layer 
network.  This realizes the convergence between deep 
network and shallow network. It makes the network  learn 
more in formation to i mprove detection accuracy and avoids 
the large increase of calculatio n. 
In original  backbone network, the residual network 
module  uses 3x3 convolution kernel s to extract feature.  The 
size of  its receptive field  is also 3x3. Although the small er 
receptive f ield can extract more local information, it losses 
the global  information , which  affect s the accuracy of object 
detection. To extract more global feature, we use two 
consecutive  same 3x3 convolutions to obtain 5x5 receptive 
fields in the auxi liary residual  network block. The auxiliary 
network  transmits the extracted global information to 
backbone network . The backbone network  combines the 
global information obtained by larger  receptive field  and 
local information obtained by smaller receptive field to obtai n more object information. Besides, with the increased  
of network  depth, the semantic information also becomes 
more advanced.  The attention mechanism can focus on 
processing and transmitting the effective features, and 
channel suppresses the invalid featur es. Therefore, we 
introduce the channel attention module and spatial attention 
module into our designed auxiliary network  module to 
extract more effective information. The channel attention 
module focuses on  that ‘what’ is meaningful  given an  input 
image . The spatial attention module focuses on ‘where’ is 
an informative part, which is complementary to the channel 
attention . We directly use the C BAM  (Convolutional Block 
Attention Module)  [42] to realize the channel attention and 
spatial attentio n simultaneou sly. The C BAM can be 
expressed as : 
()
(),c
sF M F F
F M F F=
  =
                      (11) 
where  
C H WFR  denotes input feature map, “
 ” 
expresses element -wise mult iplication, 
''F is the final 
output feature map,
()cM and 
()sM are channel attention 
map and spatial attention map , respectively . 
The 
()cMF  is expressed as : 
()
() ( ) () ( ) ( )cMF
MLP AvgPool F MLP MaxPool F=+
 (12) 
where 
() AvgPool and
() MaxPool denote average -pooling 
operation and max -Pooling operation, respectively . 
()MLP
 denotes  Multi -Layer perceptron  network, 
() is 
the sigmoid function. The 
'()sMF  is expressed as : 
()'
7 7 ' '( [ ( ); ( )])sMF
f MaxPool F AvgPool F=
     (13) 
where 
77f  is the convolution  operation with the kernel 
size of  
77 , 
[ ; ]   denotes concatenate  operation.  
Our complete designed auxiliary network  block used in 
figure  3 is shown in figure 4. It uses two 
33 convolutions 
network to extract the global  features, and channel attention 
and spati al attention to extract more effective information. 
The concatenate  operation is use d to combine the output 
feature obtained from the first convolution network and the 
output feature obtained from the spatial attention . The 
combine d feature  is used  as the output feature of designed 
auxiliary network . In the end, the final output feature o f 
auxiliary network  will be combined with the output feature 
of residual network in backbone network to be used as the 
input feature  of next residual network in backbone ne twork. 
It makes the improved backbone network  can extract the 
global  and local featu re of  detection object, and further  
more improve the accuracy of detection.