1 Real -time object detection meth od for 
embedded devices  
ZICONG JIANG1, LIQUAN ZHAO1, SHUAIYANG LI1 and YANFEI JIA2 
1Key Labora tory of Modern Power System Simulation and Control and Renewable Energy Technology, Ministry of Education, Northeast Electric 
Power University, jilin, jilin 132012 , China  
2College of Electrical and Information  Engineering, Beihua University , Jilin 132013,  China ;  
Corresponding author: Zhao Liquan  (: zhao_liquan@163.com ; Tel.: +86 -150-4320 -1901 ). 
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (61271115)  
ABSTRACT  The “You only look once v4 ” (YOLOv4) is one type of obj ect detection  methods in deep 
learning. YOLOv4 -tiny is proposed based on YOLOv4 to simple the network  structure  and reduce 
parameters , which makes it be suitable for develop ing on the mobile and embedded devices. To improve 
the real -time of object detectio n, a fast obj ect detection method is proposed based on YOLOv4 -tiny. It 
firstly uses two ResBlock -D module s in ResNet -D network  instead  of two CSPBloc k modules in Yolov4 -
tiny, which red uces the computation complexity. Secondly, it designs an auxiliary resid ual network b lock to 
extract more feature  information of object to reduce detection error. In the design of auxiliary network, two 
consecutive  3x3 convolutions are used to obtain 5x5 receptive field s to extract global features, and channel 
attention and sp atial attenti on are also used to extract more effective information. In the end, it merges the 
auxiliary network and backbone network to construct  the whole network structure of improv ed YOLOv4 -
tiny. Simulation results show that the proposed method has fas ter object de tection than YOLOv4 -tiny and 
YOLOv3 -tiny, and almost the same mean value of average precision  as the YOLOv4 -tiny. It is more 
suitable for real-time object detection , especially for developing on embedded  devices . 
INDEX TERMS   Deep learning , real-time obje ct detection , YOLO , auxiliary residual network
I. INTRODUCTION  
Object detection method  based on deep learning mainly 
include s two types:  region proposal -based  two-stage method  
and regression -based one -stage  method  [1-2]. The typical 
two- stage  methods incl ude region -based convolution neural 
network (R -CNN)  method [ 3]. Fast R -CNN [ 4], Faster R -
CNN [ 5] method , region -based fully convolutional networks  
(R-FCN) met hod [6], light head R -CNN method and other 
impro ve method  based on convolution neural  network  [7-8]. 
Although two -stage metho d has higher accuracy than one -
stage method, the one-stage method has faster detection  
speed than two -stage method  [9-10]. The one -stage method is 
more suitable for application in  some conditions that require 
higher real-time.  
The You Only Look Once (YOLO) method [ 11] proposed 
by Redmon , et al.  is the first regression -based o ne stage 
method. Redmon , et al.  also proposed t he You Only Look 
Once  version 2 (YOLOv2)  [12] based on YOLO  by deleting 
fully connected layer and  the last poo ling layer, using  anchor 
boxes  to predict bounding boxes  and designing a new basic 
network named DarkNet -19. The You Only Look Once  
version 3 (YOLOv 3) [13] is the last version of YOLO 
method proposed by R edmon, et al . It introduces f eature pyramid network , a batter basic network  named darknet -53 
and binary cross -entropy loss  to improve  the detection 
accuracy and the ability of detecting smaller object. Due to 
the type of information  fusion employed by YOLOv3  does 
not make full use of low -level information , a weakness 
which restricts its potential application in industry . Therefore, 
Peng,  et al. have proposed the YOLO -Inception  method [ 14], 
one which uses the inception structure  with diversified 
receptive fiel ds, which in turn can provide rich se mantic 
inform ation  and improve the performance  of small object 
detection. Tian has proposed the YOLOv3 -dense method  
[15]. It uses the dense net  method to process feature l ayers 
with low resolution, which effectively  enhances feature 
propagation, promotes f eature reuse,  and improves network 
performance . Two years later, after the authors of YOLOv3  
declare d to give up updating it, Alexey,  et al. proposed the 
YOLOv 4 method [1 6] that has been accept ed by the authors 
of YOLOv 3. It used CSPDarknet53 backbone, s patial 
pyramid pooling  module, PANet path -aggregation neck and 
YOLO3  (anchor based) head as the architecture  of YOLOv4. 
Besides , it also introduced a new method of data 
augm entation mosaic and self -adversarial training, a pplied 
genetic algorithms to select o ptimal hyper -parameters and