Self-Attention Networks Can Process Bounded Hierarchical Languages
Shunyu YaoyBinghui PengzChristos PapadimitriouzKarthik Narasimhany
yPrinceton UniversityzColumbia University
{shunyuy, karthikn}@princeton.edu
{bp2601, christos}@columbia.edu
Abstract
Despite their impressive performance in NLP,
self-attention networks were recently proved
to be limited for processing formal languages
with hierarchical structure, such as Dyckk, the
language consisting of well-nested parenthe-
ses ofktypes. This suggested that natural
language can be approximated well with mod-
els that are too weak for formal languages, or
that the role of hierarchy and recursion in nat-
ural language might be limited. We qualify
this implication by proving that self-attention
networks can process Dyckk;D, the subset of
Dyckkwith depth bounded by D, which ar-
guably better captures the bounded hierarchi-
cal structure of natural language. Speciﬁcally,
we construct a hard-attention network with
D+ 1layers andO(logk)memory size (per
token per layer) that recognizes Dyckk;D, and
a soft-attention network with two layers and
O(logk)memory size that generates Dyckk;D.
Experiments show that self-attention networks
trained on Dyckk;Dgeneralize to longer inputs
with near-perfect accuracy, and also verify the
theoretical memory advantage of self-attention
networks over recurrent networks.1
1 Introduction
Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017) are now the
undisputed champions across several benchmark
leaderboards in NLP. The major innovation of this
architecture, self-attention , processes input tokens
in a distributed way, enabling efﬁcient parallel com-
putation as well as long-range dependency mod-
elling. The empirical success of self-attention in
NLP has led to a growing interest in studying its
properties, with an eye towards a better understand-
ing of the nature and characteristics of natural lan-
guage (Tran et al., 2018; Papadimitriou and Juraf-
sky, 2020).
1Code is available at https://github.com/
princeton-nlp/dyck-transformer .In particular, it was recently shown that self-
attention networks cannot process various kinds of
formal languages (Hahn, 2020; Bhattamishra et al.,
2020a), among which particularly notable is Dyckk,
the language of well-balanced brackets of ktypes.
By the Chomsky-Schützenberger Theorem (Chom-
sky and Schützenberger, 1959), any context-free
language can be obtained from a Dyckklanguage
through intersections with regular languages and
homomorphisms. In other words, this simple lan-
guage contains the essence of all context-free lan-
guages, i.e. hierarchical structure, center embed-
ding, and recursion – features which have been long
claimed to be at the foundation of human language
syntax (Chomsky, 1956).
Consider for example the long-range and nested
dependencies in English subject-verb agreement:
(Laws (the lawmaker )[writes][and revises ])[pass]... .
The sentence structure is captured by Dyck2string
(()[][])[]. Given the state-of-the-art performance of
Transformers in parsing natural language (Zhang
et al., 2020; He and Choi, 2019), the Dyckkblind
spot seems very suggestive. If the world’s best
NLP models cannot deal with this simple language
— generated by a grammar with k+ 2rules and
recognized by a single-state pushdown automaton
— does this not mean that the role of hierarchy and
recursion in natural language must be limited? This
question has of course, been extensively debated
by linguists on the basis of both theoretical and psy-
cholinguistic evidence (Hauser et al., 2002; Frank
et al., 2012; Nelson et al., 2017; Brennan and Hale,
2019; Frank and Christiansen, 2018).
So, what can self-attention networks tell us about
natural language and recursion? Here we pro-
vide a new twist to this question by considering
Dyckk;D, the subset of Dyckkwith nesting depth
at mostD, and show that Transformers can processarXiv:2105.11115v3  [cs.CL]  13 Mar 2023