tionally, adaptive bit-widths is generally applicable to most
key building blocks of deep neural networks, including time-
consuming convolutional and fully-connected layers. Mean-
while, adaptive deployment will also introduce negligible
computation, as discussed in [ 49]. Figure 1illustrates the
basic concept of quantization with adaptive bit-widths.
At the ﬁrst glance, adaptive bit-widths might be trivial
and handy, as weights and activations with diﬀerent pre-
cisions may not diﬀer from each other very much. If so,
model trained under some speciﬁc precision will be able to
directly provide good performance under other bit-widths.
However, as we will see in the following, such naïve method
is not applicable, because important information will be
lost during shrinkage or enlargement of bit-widths in the
neural network. Even more deliberate method of progres-
sively training quantized models with diﬀerent bit-width(s)
fails to achieve the optimal performance, as the ﬁnetuning
process sabotages important property of the model, thus sig-
niﬁcantly diminishes the validation accuracy of the model
when quantized back to the original bit-width.
All the above evidence indicates that quantization with
adaptive bit-widths does not come as free lunch as it might
appear, but is more subtle and involves new mechanisms that
require meticulously designed techniques. In this work, we
try to investigate this topic, and study speciﬁc methods to
train quantized neural networks adaptive to diﬀerent require-
ments. We utilize the state-of-the-art learning-based quanti-
zation method of Scale-Adjusted Training [ 18] as a baseline
scheme for individual-precision quantization. We ﬁnd that
an adaptive model produced by a joint quantization approach
with a key treatment to the clipping level parameters [ 6] is
able to achieve comparable performance with individual-
precision models on several bit-widths. The treatment to
the clipping levels is named Switchable Clipping Level (S-
CL). S-CL accommodates large activation values for high-
precision quantization, and prevents undesired increasing
of clipping levels for low-precision cases. Through some
empirical analysis, we ﬁnd that unnecessarily large clipping
levels might cause large quantization error, and impact the
performance of quantized model, especially on the lowest
precision. To our best knowledge, this work is the ﬁrst
to tackle this problem of producing quantized models with
adaptive bit-widths.
This paper is organized as following. After summarizing
some related works in Section 2, we ﬁrst revisit the recent
work of scale-adjusted training (SAT) [ 18], which is adopted
in our whole study. In Section 4, we ﬁrst illustrate potential
beneﬁts and challenges of quantization with adaptive bit-
widths. Then we propose a joint training approach with
a new technique named switchable clipping level based on
the analysis of some baseline results. In Section 5, we
show that with the proposed techniques, the adaptive models
could achieve comparable accuracies as individual ones ondiﬀerent bit-widths and for a wide range of models including
MobileNet V1/V2 and ResNet50.
2. Related Work
Neural Network Quantization Neural network quanti-
zation has long been studied since the very beginning of the
recent blooming era of deep learning, including binariza-
tion [ 1,7,8,36], quantization [ 20,51,54] and ensemble
method [ 55]. Initially, uniform precision quantization is
adopted inside the whole network, where all layers share the
same bit-width [ 17,19,28,31,32,33,46,52]. Recent work
employs neural architecture search methods for model quan-
tization, which implements mixed-precision strategy where
diﬀerent bit-widths are assigned to diﬀerent layers or even
channels [ 10,26,41,42,44]. [18] analyzes the problem of
eﬃcient training for neural network quantization, and pro-
poses a scale-adjusted training (SAT) technique, achieving
state-of-the-art performance. However, the possibility of
developing a single model applicable at diﬀerent bit-widths
is still not well-examined, and it remains unclear how to
achieve this purpose.
Neural Architecture Search Neural architecture search
(NAS) gains increasing popularity in recent study [ 4,21,24,
27,34,43,45,56]. Speciﬁcally, the searching strategy is
adopted in other aspects of optimizing neural networks, such
as automatic tuning of various training hyper-parameters in-
cluding activation function [ 35] and data augmentation [ 9].
The NAS algorithms also beneﬁt other tasks, such as gen-
erative adversarial networks [ 11], object detection [ 5] and
segmentation [ 23]. As mentioned above, neural architec-
ture search method for quantization is also actively studied
in recent literature. However, NAS is computationally ex-
pensive, and usually requires time-consuming re-training or
ﬁnetuning. Recent work has reduced the searching time by
a large extent through one-shot architecture search [ 2,38].
However, the resulting models are still inﬂexible, prohibit-
ing their application in adaptive scenarios. Generally, con-
ventional NAS methods are more suitable for optimizing a
single model under speciﬁc resource constraints.
Adaptive neural networks Diﬀerent from but related to
NAS, [ 49] proposes to simultaneously train a single model
with diﬀerent width multipliers, to achieve instant adapta-
tion for diﬀerent application requirements. Following this
line, [ 3] explores adjustment of width, depth and kernel
sizes simultaneously, achieving better predictive accuracy
under the same computational constraints through progres-
sive training. [ 48] extends similar strategy to large-size mod-
els, and further employs a NAS algorithm to discover better
models. However, these methods neglect the option of quan-
tization with diﬀerent bit-widths in their strategies, leaving
quantization with adaptive bit-widths an open problem.
2147