AdaBits: Neural Network Quantization with Adaptive Bit-Widths
Qing Jin∗
ByteDance Inc.
jinqingking@gmail.comLinjie Yang∗
ByteDance Inc.
linjie.yang@bytedance.comZhenyu Liao
Kwai Inc.
liaozhenyu2004@gmail.com
Abstract
Deep neural networks with adaptive conﬁgurations have
gained increasing attention due to the instant and ﬂexible
deployment of these models on platforms with diﬀerent re-
source budgets. In this paper, we investigate a novel op-
tion to achieve this goal by enabling adaptive bit-widths
of weights and activations in the model. We ﬁrst examine
the beneﬁts and challenges of training quantized model with
adaptive bit-widths, and then experiment with several ap-
proaches including direct adaptation, progressive training
and joint training. We discover that joint training is able to
produce comparable performance on the adaptive model as
individual models. We also propose a new technique named
Switchable Clipping Level (S-CL) to further improve quan-
tized models at the lowest bit-width. With our proposed
techniques applied on a bunch of models including Mo-
bileNet V1/V2 and ResNet50, we demonstrate that bit-width
of weights and activations is a new option for adaptively
executable deep neural networks, oﬀering a distinct oppor-
tunity for improved accuracy-eﬃciency trade-oﬀ as well as
instant adaptation according to the platform constraints in
real-world applications.
1. Introduction
Recent development of deep learning enables application
of deep neural networks across a wide range of platforms that
present diﬀerent resource constraints. For example, popular
mobile apps such as TikTok and Snapchat on portable de-
vices pose stringent requirements on response latency and
energy consumption, while visual recognition system em-
bedded in a self-driving vehicle [ 13,40] is more demand-
ing on fast and accurate prediction. Besides, for medical
application [ 22,53] applied with portable testing systems,
implementing eﬃcient model will accelerate the diagnosing
process to save time for doctor and patient. The problem
is more serious if other factors are taken into account, such
as aging of hardware, battery conditions, as well as dif-
∗Equal Contribution. Work is done when Qing Jin is an intern at
ByteDance.ferent versions of software systems. To serve applications
under all these scenarios with drastically diﬀerent require-
ments, diﬀerent models tailored for diﬀerent resource bud-
gets can be devised either manually [ 14,15,16,37] or au-
tomatically through neural architecture search [ 39,56,57].
This strategy is beneﬁcial for optimal trade-oﬀs with a ﬁxed
combination of constraints, but is not economical, because
it requires time-consuming training and benchmarking for
each of these models, which prohibits instant adaptation to
favor diﬀerent scenarios. To tackle this problem, recent
work focuses on training a single model that is ﬂexible and
scalable. For example, [ 49] proposes a method where the
number of channels can be adjusted through changing the
width-multiplier in each layer. Inspired by this work, [ 3]
integrates adaptation of depth, width and kernel size alto-
gether, and achieves better trade-oﬀs between performance
and eﬃciency through progressive training. [ 48] adopts the
same strategy with scaling up factors, but uses simultaneous
training algorithm to achieve improved predictive accuracy.
Surprisingly, albeit the above-mentioned methods
achieve the desired ﬂexibility of adaptive deployment, bit-
width of weights and intermediate activations, as another
degree of freedom, is almost overlooked in previous work.
Suppose we can adaptively choose bit-width for a neural net-
work during inference without further training, it will pro-
vide an distinct opportunity for more powerful model com-
pression and acceleration. As an example, compared with
model with full-precision, quantizing MobileNet V2 to 6-bit
compresses the model size by roughly 4.74×and reduces
the BitOPs by 14.25×1, while scaling the model’s channel
numbers by a width-multiplier of 0.35×only shrinks the
model size by 2.06×and cuts down the FLOPs by 5.10×.
Moreover, as presented in [ 18], 6-bit MobileNet V2 demon-
strates improved predictive capability than the full-precision
counterpart, while reducing channel numbers to 0.35×will
signiﬁcantly impair its performance [ 37]. It becomes more
contrastive if other constraints are taken into account, such
as memory cost, latency and energy consumption. Addi-
1According to the IEEE Standard 754, ﬂoating-point number is repre-
sented with 23-bits mantissa, and here we simplify the analysis by approx-
imating the eﬀective BitOPs of ﬂoating-point multiplication with 23-bit
ﬁxed-point multiplication.
1
2146