b1 b2 b3 b4
GPU GPU GPU GPU Train
InferenceDeployb1 b2 b3 b4
TrainGPU
InferenceSwitchDeployFigure 1. Deployment of neural networks with diﬀerent bit-widths according to the computational budget. Left: Individually train several
quantized models with diﬀerent bit-widths for each scenario. Right: Train a single model quantized with adpative bit-widths and switch to
the proper bit-width in real application based on the device condition.
3. Revisiting Scale-Adjusted Training (SAT)
Quantization usually comes with performance degenera-
tion, as the model capacity is signiﬁcantly reduced in com-
parison with the full-precision counterpart. However, a re-
cent study [ 18] demonstrates that a large portion of accuracy
degradation is caused by ineﬃcient training where learning-
based quantization, potentially acting as a regularization,
actually provides an opportunity to improve generalization
capability. The key idea is that quantized models usually
enforce large variance in their weights, which brings about
over-ﬁtting issue during training. Based on this ﬁnding, [ 18]
proposes a simple yet eﬀective method, called scale-adjusted
training (SAT), which scales the weights down to a healthy
level for network optimization. Speciﬁcally, constant scaling
is applied to the quantized weights of linear layers without
BN by
Q∗
ij=1/radicalbig
noutVAR[Qrs]Qij (1)
whereQijis a quantized weight and noutis the number of
output neurons in this layer. By combining with a quan-
tization approach named parameterized clipping activation
(PACT) [ 6], SAT facilitates more eﬃcient training, enabling
quantized models to perform consistently and signiﬁcantly
better than conventional quantization techniques, sometimes
even surpassing their full-precision counterparts. Due to
the numerous algorithms for neural network quantization, it
is diﬃcult, if not impossible, to experiment with diﬀerent
quantization algorithms for the adaptive bit-widths problem.
To this end, we adopt the PACT algorithm with the SAT tech-
nique, which gives the state-of-the-art performance for neu-
ral network quantization, throughout all of our experiments.
For brevity, we refer to this approach as SAT.4. Quantization with Adaptive Bit-widths
In this section, we ﬁrst examine the beneﬁts and chal-
lenges of quantization with adaptive bit-widths. We ex-
plore direct adaptation and progressive quantization as two
straightforward methods towards this goal with unsatisfying
results. We then propose a novel joint quantization approach
to deal with the challenge and achieve the same level perfor-
mance with the adaptive models compared to the individual
models.
4.1. Beneﬁt and Challenges
Neural network quantization provides signiﬁcant reduc-
tion in model size, latency, and energy consumption. Train-
ing a single quantized models executable at diﬀerent bit-
widths poses a great opportunity for ﬂexible and adaptive
deployment since models with larger bit-width are still con-
sistently better than those with smaller bit-width. Actually,
for MobileNet V1/V2, changing the bit-width from 4bit to
8bit can enlarge the model size by 1.7×and the BitOPs by
3.2×, while the predictive accuracy can change by 1.5%
on the ImageNet dataset with SAT [ 18]. From this we can
see that there is a noticeable trade-oﬀ between accuracy and
eﬃciency on quantized models. In the following, we will
ﬁrst investigate two straightforward methods for adaptive
bit-widths, which will reveal some key challenges of this
problem.
4.1.1 Modiﬁed DoReFa Scheme
Before more detailed analysis, we would like to emphasize
a distinct diﬃculty encountered in quantized models with
adaptive bit-widths. The DoReFa scheme [ 51] is adopted
2148