0
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
Layer#
4
6
8
10
12
14MobileNet V1 on ImageNet (SAT)
8 bits
6 bits
5 bits4 bits
Vanilla AdaBits (8 6 5 4)Figure 4. Clipping levels in diﬀerent layers for models trained
individually with diﬀerent bit-widths (solid lines) or trained with
Vanilla AdaBits (dashed line). Note that the clipping level of a
layer refers to the clipping level for the output of this layer. The
outputs of the last layer are not clipped.
named clipping level , and then quantized to discrete num-
bers. Speciﬁcally, an activation value xis ﬁrst clipped to
the interval [0,α], then scaled, quantized and rescaled to
produce the quantized value qas
/tildewidex=1
2/bracketleftBig
|x|−|x−α|+α/bracketrightBig
(5a)
q=αqk/parenleftBig/tildewidex
α/parenrightBig
(5b)
Note that in the original paper of PACT [ 6], the authors
found that diﬀerent bit-widths result in diﬀerent clipping
levels. In the Vanilla AdaBits, the clipping levels of diﬀer-
ent bit-widths are shared, which may potentially disturb the
optimization process of the network.
To understand the underlying mechanism of the degener-
ation at the lowest bit-width, we plot the clipping levels from
diﬀerent layers in models trained individually with diﬀerent
bit-widths. As shown in Figure 4, the clipping levels strongly
correlates with the bit-width. For the individually trained
models, higher bit-widths result in larger values of clipping
levels. In the Vanilla Adabits model, the learned clipping
levels tend to be smaller than those of high-precision cases,
but are larger than those from the model with the lowest bit-
width. To understand the relationship between quantization
error and clipping levels, we study the characteristics using
a synthetic linear layer with 1000 input neurons where the
weights are sampled from N(0,1/1000) and activations are
sampled from a uniform distribution on the interval [0,1].
For each bit-width, the products of the weights and the ac-
tivations are fed to the ReLU function to obtain quantized
outputs with diﬀerent clipping levels. The relative error be-
tween the full-precision outputs and the quantized outputs
are calculated. We plot this quantization error with respect
to the clipping levels in Figure 5. It shows that diﬀerent
bit-widths have diﬀerent behaviors. Quantization error only
increases slowly with increase of clipping level for higherbit-width while it increases signiﬁcantly with increase of
clipping level for lower bit-width. Based on the results from
Figure 4, the clipping levels learned by Vanilla Adabits may
substantially increase the quantization error for the lowest 4
bit, but do not aﬀect those of the other bit-widths much. Note
this is only a qualitative analysis and the quantization errors
shown in Figure 5are not proportional to the quantization
errors in the trained networks.
2.5
 5.0
 7.5
 10.0
 12.5
 15.0
 17.5
 20.0
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40Relative Quantization Error (%)
8 bit
6 bit5 bit
4 bit
Figure 5. Relationship between relative quantization error and the
clipping level αfor diﬀerent bit-widths with a synthetic layer. The
dots denote the optimal values of αfor least quantization error at
diﬀerent bit-widths.
4.2.1 Switchable Clipping Level
The above observation indicates that facilitating proper clip-
ping levels for each bit-width could be a key factor for opti-
mal performance of AdaBits models. One set of shared clip-
ping levels is diﬃcult, if not impossible, to satisfy require-
ments from diﬀerent bit-widths. To this end, we propose a
simple treatment to the clipping levels, named Switchable
Clipping Level (S-CL) , that employs independent clipping
levels for diﬀerent bit-widths in each layer. During training
of quantized models with adaptive bit-widths, S-CL switch
to a corresponding set of clipping levels for each bit-width
in all layers. This avoids the clipping level parameters being
interfered by other bit-widths, especially undesired quanti-
zation error introduced by too large or too small clipping
levels for the current bit-width. In this way, the performance
degeneration issue on the lowest bit-width using Vanilla Ad-
abits can be alleviated.
The model size is almost unchanged with S-CL, which is
a negligible portion of less than 0.1‰. For instance, the byte
size ratio of clipping levels with other trainable parameters
is0.0246‰ for MobileNet V1, 0.0588‰ for MobileNet V2,
and0.0084‰ for ResNet50. Meanwhile, S-CL introduces
almost no runtime overhead. After re-conﬁguring the model
with desired bit-width, it becomes a normal network to run
without additional latency and memory cost. These advan-
tages make it a very practical and economical solution to the
adaptive bit-widths problem.
2151