given application often requires many iterations  as it entails trial and error with  different 
training parameters. The most common technique to reduce training time is tr ansfer 
learning [36]. With respect to traditional CV, the discrete Fourier transform is another 
CV technique which once experienced major popularity but now seems obscure. The 
algorithm can be used to speed up convolutions  as  demonstrated by [37, 38]  and hence 
may again become of major importance.   
However, it must be said that e asier , more domain -specific  tasks than general image 
classification will not re quire as much data (in the order of hundreds or thousands rather 
than millions) . This is still a considerable amount of data and CV techniques  are often 
used to boost training data  through  data augmentation or reduce the data down to a 
particular type of f eature through other pre -processing steps . 
Pre-processing entails transforming the data (usually with traditional CV techniques) 
to allow relationships/patterns to be more easily interpreted before training your model. 
Data augmentation is a common pre -processing task which is used when there is limited 
training data. It can involve performing random rotations, shifts, shears, etc. on the 
images in your training set to effectively increase the number of training images  [19]. 
Another approach is to highlight features of interest before passing the data to a CNN 
with CV -based methods such as background subtraction and segmentation [39]. 
3.3 Making Best Use of Edge Computing  
If algorithms and neural network inferences can be run at the edge, latency, costs, cloud 
storage and processing requirements, and bandwidth requirements are reduced 
compared to cloud -based implementations. Edge computing can also privacy and 
security requirements by avoiding transmission  of sensitive or identifiable data over the 
network.  
Hybrid or composite approaches involving conventional  CV and DL  take great 
advantage of the heterogeneous computing capabilities  available at the edge . A 
heterogeneous compute  architecture consists of a combination of CPUs, 
microcontroller coprocessors, Digital Signal Processors (DSPs), Field Programmable 
Gate Arrays (FPGAs) and AI accelerating devices [31] and can be power efficient by  
assigning different workloads to the most efficient compute engine. Test 
implementations show 10x latency reductions in object detection when DL inferences 
are executed on a DSP versus a CPU  [28].  
Several hybrids  of deep learning and hand -crafted features based approach es have 
demonstrated their benefits in edge applications. For example,  for facial -expression 
recognition , [41] propose a new feature lo ss to embed the information of hand -crafted 
features into the training process of network, which tries to reduce the difference 
between  hand -crafted features and features learned by  the deep neural network . The use 
of hybrid approaches has also been shown to be advantageous in incorporating data 
from other sensors on edge nodes. Such a  hybrid model where th e deep learning is 
assisted by additional sensor sources like synthetic aperture radar (SAR) imagery and 
elevation like synthetic aperture radar (S AR) imagery and elevation  is presented by 
[40]. In the context of 3D robot vision, [42] have shown that combining both linear