Deep Learning  vs. Traditional Computer Vision  
Niall O’ Mahony, Sean Campbell,  Anderson Carvalho, Suman Harapanahalli, 
Gustavo Velasco Hernandez, Lenka Krpalkova,  Daniel Riordan, Joseph Walsh  
IMaR Technology Gateway, Institute of Technology Tralee, Tralee, Ireland  
niall.omahony@research.ittralee.ie  
Abstract. Deep Learning  has pushed the limits of what was possible  in the 
domain of Digital Image Processing . However,  that is not  to say that the 
traditional computer vision techniques which had been undergoing progressive 
development in years prior to the rise of DL have become obsolete.  This paper 
will analyse  the benefits and drawbacks of each approach . The aim of th is paper 
is to promote a discussion on whether  knowledge of classical computer vision 
techniques should be maintained . The paper will also explore  how the two sides 
of computer vision can be combined . Several recent hybrid methodologies are 
reviewed  which have demonstrated the ability to improve computer vision 
performance  and to tackle problems not suited to Deep Learning . For example , 
combining traditional computer vision techniques with Deep Learning  has been  
popular  in emerging domains  such as Panoramic Vision and 3D vision for which  
Deep Learning models have  not yet  been fully optimised . 
Keywords:  Computer Vision , Deep Learning , Hybrid techniques . 
1 Introduction  
Deep Learning ( DL) is used in the domain of digital image processing to solve difficult 
problems ( e.g. image colourization , classification, segmentation and detection ). DL 
methods such as C onvolutiona l Neural Networks  (CNN s) mostly improve prediction 
performance using  big data and plentiful computin g resources  and have pushed the 
boundar ies of what was possible . Problems which were assumed to be unsolvable are 
now being solved with super -human accuracy . Image classification is a prime example 
of this. Since being reignited by Krizhevsky, Sutskever and Hinton in 2012 [1],  DL 
has dominated the domain ever since due to a substantial ly better performance  
compared to traditional methods  . 
Is DL making traditional Computer Vision (CV) techniques obsole te? Has DL 
superseded traditional computer vision? Is there still a need to study traditional CV 
techniques when DL seems to be so effective? These are all question s which have been 
brought up in the community  in recent years   [2], which this paper intends to address .  
Additionally , DL is not going t o solve all CV problems . There are some problems 
where  traditional techniques with global features  are a better solution . The advent of 
DL may open many  doors to do something with traditional techniques to overcome the