implementation of the Winograd Minimal Filtering Algorithm (WMFA) achieve a two -
fold speedup compared to cuDNN  (NVIDIA’s language/API for programming on 
their graphics cards)  without increasing the required memory [49].  The next section 
will include some solutions with novel architectures and pre -processing steps to various 
3D data representations which have been proposed to overcome these challenges.  
Geometric Deep Learning (GDL) deals with the extension of DL techniques to 3D 
data. 3D data can be represented in a variety of different ways  which can be classified 
as Euclidean  or non-Euclidean [50].3D Euclidean -structured data has an underlying 
grid structure that allows for a global parametrization and having a common  system of 
coordinates  as in 2D images . This allows  existing 2D DL paradigms and 2DCNNs can 
be applied to 3D data .  3D Euclidean data is more suitable for analysing  simple rigid 
objects such as, chairs, planes, etc  e.g. with voxel -based approaches  [51]. On the other 
hand, 3D non -Euclidean data do not have the grid ded array structure where there is no 
global parametrization. Therefore, extending classical DL techniques to such 
representations is a challenging task  and has only recently been realized with 
architectures such as Point net [52].  
 Continuous shape information that is useful for recognition is often lost in their 
conversion to a voxel representation. W ith respect to tradit ional CV algorithms,  [53] 
propose a single dimensional feature that can be applied to vo xel CNNs. A novel 
rotation -invariant feature based on mean curvature that improves shape recognition for 
voxel CNNs  was proposed . The method was very suc cessful in that when it was applied 
to the state-of-the-art recent voxel CNN Octnet  architecture a 1% o verall accuracy 
increase on the ModelNet10 dataset  was achieved .  
 
3.6 SLAM  
Visual SLAM is a subset  of SLAM where a vision system is used instead of LiDAR for 
the registration of landmarks in a scene. Visual SLAM has the advantages of 
photogrammetry (rich visual data, low -cost, lightweight and low power consumption) 
without the associated heavy computat ional workload involved in post -processing. The 
visual SLAM problem consists of steps such as environment sensing, data matching, 
motion estimation, as well as location update and registration of new landmarks  [54]. 
Building a model of how visual objects appear in different conditions such as 3D 
rotation, scaling, lighting and extending from that representation using a strong form of 
transfer learning to achieve zero/ one shot  learning  is a challenging problem in this 
domain. Feature extraction and data representation  method s can be useful to reduce the 
amount of training examples needed for an ML model  [55].  
A two -step a pproach is commonly used in image based  localization ; place 
recognition followed by pose estimation . The former computes  a global descriptor for 
each of the images by aggregating local image descriptors, e.g. SIFT, using the bag -of-
words approac h. Each glo bal descriptor is stored in the database together with the 
camera pose of its associated image with respect to the 3D point cloud reference map. 
Similar global descriptor s are extracted from the query image and the closest global