subspace methods and deep convolutional prediction achieves improved performance 
along with several orders of magnitude faster runtime performance compared  to the 
state of the art.  
3.4 Problems Not Suited to Deep Learning  
There are many more changing problems in CV such as: Robotic, augmented reality, 
automatic panorama stitching, virtual reality, 3D modelling, motion stamation , video 
stabilization, motion captu re, video processing and scene understanding which cannot 
simply be easily implemented in a differentiable manner with deep learning but need 
to be solved using the other "traditional" techniques.  
DL excels at solving closed -end classification problems, in  which a wide range of 
potential signals must be mapped onto a limited number of categories, given that there 
is enough data available and the test set closely resembles the training set. However, 
deviations from these assumptions can cause problems and it  is critical to acknowledge 
the problems which DL is not good at. Marcus et al. present ten concerns for deep 
learning, and suggest that deep learning must be supplemented by other techniques if 
we are to reach artificial general intelligence  [43]. As well  as discussing the limitations 
of the training procedure and intense computing and data requirements as we do in our 
paper, key to their discussion is identifying problems where DL performs poorly and 
where it can be supplemented by other techniques .  
One such problem is the limited ability  of DL algorithms  to learn visual relations , 
i.e. identifying whether multiple objects in an image are the same or different. This 
limitation has been demonstrated by [43] who argue that feedback mechanisms 
including attention and perceptual grouping may be the key computational components 
to realising  abstract visual reasoning.   
It is also worth noting that ML models find it difficult to deal with priors, that is, not 
everythin g can be learnt from data,  so some priors must be injected into the models  
[44], [45]. Solutions that have to do with 3D CV need strong priors in order to work 
well, e.g. image -based 3D modelling requires smoothness, silhouette and illumination 
information [46].  
Below are  some emerging fields in CV where  DL faces new challenges and where  
classic CV will have a more prominent role.  
3.5 3D Vision  
3D vision systems are becoming increasingly accessible and as such there has been a 
lot of progress in the design of 3D Convolutional Neural Networks (3D CNNs). This 
emerging field is known as Geometric Deep Learning and has multiple applications 
such as video classification, computer graphics, vision and robotics. This paper will 
focus on 3DCNNs for processing data from 3D Vision System s. Wherein 2D 
convolutional layers the kernel has the  same depth so as to output a 2D matrix, the 
depth of a 3D convolutional kernel must be less than that of the 3D input volume so 
that the output of the convolution is also 3D and so preserve the spatial information.