accuracy provided by geometric reasoning (lines and vanishing points) with the higher 
level of data abstraction and pattern recognition achieved by DL techniques (edge and 
normal maps)  to extract structural and generate layout hypotheses for indoor scenes . In 
sparsely structured scenes , feature -based image alignment methods often fail due to 
shortage  of distinct image features. Instead, direct image alignment methods, such as 
those based on phase correlation, can be applied. Correlation -based image alignment 
techniques based on discriminative correlation filters (DCF)  have been investigat ed 
by [23] who show that the proposed DCF -based methods outper form phase 
correlation -based approaches on these datasets.  
3.8 Dataset Annotation  and Augmentation  
There are arguments against the combination of CV and DL and they summarize to the 
conclusion that we need to re -evaluate our methods from rule -based to data -driven. 
Traditionally, from the perspective of signal processing, we know the operational 
connotations of CV algorithms such as SIFT and SURF method s, but DL leads such 
meaning nowhere, all you need is more data. This can be seen as a huge step forward,  
but may be  also a backward move. Some of the pros and cons of each side of this debate 
have been discussed already in this paper, however, if future -methods are to be purely 
data-driven then focus should be placed on more intelligent methods for dataset 
creation.  
 The fundamental problem of current research is that there is no longer enough data 
for advanced algorithms or models for special applications . Coupling custom datasets 
and DL models  will be the future theme to many research papers. So many researchers’ 
outputs consist of not only algorithms or architectures, but also datasets or methods  to 
amass data. Dataset annotation is a major bottleneck  in the DL workflow which requires 
many hours of manual labelling. Nowhere is this more problematic than in  semantic 
segmentation  applications where every pixel needs to be annotated accurately. There 
are many useful tools available to semi -automate the process  as reviewed by [20], many  
of which take advantage of algorith mic approaches  such as ORB features   [55], polygon 
morphing [63], semi -automatic Area of Interest (AOI) fitting  [55] and all of the above 
[63]. 
The easiest and most common method to overcome limited datasets and reduce 
overfitting of deep learning models for image classification is to artificially enlarge the 
dataset using label -preserving transformations . This process is known as dataset 
augmentatio n and it involves the artificial generation of extra training data from the 
available ones, for example, by cropping, scaling, or rotating images [64]. It is desirable 
for data augmentation procedures to require very little computation  and to be 
implementable within the DL training pipeline so that the transformed images do not 
need to be stor ed on disk . Traditional algorithmic approaches that have been employed 
for dataset augmentation include Principle Component Analysis (PCA) [1], adding 
noise, interpolating or extrapolating  between samples in a feature space [65] and 
modelling  the visual context surrounding objects from segmentation annotations [66].