descriptor  in the database  can be retrieved via an efficient search. The camera pose of 
the closest global descriptor would give us a coarse localization of the query image with 
respect to the reference map. In pose estimation, the exact pose of the query image 
calculated more prec isely with algorithms such as the Perspective -n-Point (PnP) [13] 
and geometric verification [18] algorithms. [56] 
The success of image based  place recognition is largely attributed to the ability to 
extract image feature descriptors. Unfortunately, there is no algor ithm to extract local 
features similar to SIFT for LiDAR scans. A 3D scene is composed of 3D points and 
database images. One approach has associated e ach 3D point to a set of SIFT 
descriptors corresponding to the image features from which the point was tri angulated. 
These descriptors can then be averaged into a single SIFT descriptor that describes the 
appearance of that point  [57]. 
Another approach constructs multi -modal f eatures from RGB -D data rather than the 
depth processing. For the depth processing part, they adopt the well-known  
colourization method based on surface normals, since it has been proved to be effective 
and robust across tasks  [58]. Another alternative approach ut ilizing traditional CV 
techniques  present s the Force Histogram Decomposition (FHD), a graph -based 
hierarchical descriptor that allows the spatial relations and shape information between 
the pairwise structural subparts of objects  to be characterized . An ad vantage of this 
learning procedure is its compatibility with traditional bags -of-features frameworks, 
allowing for hybrid representations gathering structural and local features  [59]. 
 
3.7 360 camera s 
A 360 camera, also known as  an  omnidirectional or spherical  or panoramic  camera is 
a camera with a 360-degree  field of view  in the horizontal plane, or with a visual field 
that covers (approximately) the entire sphere. Omnidirectional cameras are important 
in applications suc h as robotics  where large visual field coverage is needed . A 360 
camera can replace multiple monocular cameras  and eliminate blind spots which 
obviously advantageous in omnidirectional Unmanned Ground Vehicles (UGVs) and 
Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs).  Thanks to the imaging characteristic of spherical 
cameras, each image captures the 360◦ panorama  of the scene, eliminating the 
limitation on available steering choices. One of the major challenges with spherical 
images is the heavy barrel distortion due to t he ultra-wide -angle fisheye lens, which 
complicates the implementation of conventional human vision inspired methods such 
as lane detection and trajectory tracking. Additional pre-processing  steps such as prior 
calibration and deworming  are often required.  An alternative approach which has been 
presented by [60], who circumvent  these pre-processing  steps by formulating 
navigation as a classification problem on finding the optimal potential path orientation 
directly based on the raw, uncalibrated spherical images.   
Panorama stitching is an other open research problem  in this area.  A real -time 
stitchi ng methodology [61]  uses a group of deformable meshes  and the final image  and 
combine the inputs using a robust pixel -shader. Another approach  [62], combine the