and training time . With  all the state -of-the-art approaches in CV employing this 
methodology, the workflow of the CV engineer has changed dramatically  where the 
knowledge and expertise in extracting hand -crafted features has been replaced by 
knowledge and expertise in iterating thro ugh deep learning architectures  as depicted in 
Fig. 1.  
 
 
Fig. 1.  (a) Traditional Computer Vision workflow vs. (b) Deep Learning wo rkflow . Figure from [8]. 
 
The development of CNNs  has had a tremendous influence in the field of CV in recent 
years and is responsible for a big jump in the ability to recognize objects  [9]. This burst 
in progress has been enabled by a n increase in computing power, as well as an increase 
in the amount of data available for training neural networks.  The recent explosion in 
and wide -spread adoption of various deep -neural network architectures for CV is 
apparent in the fact that the semina l paper ImageNet Classification with Deep 
Convolutional Neural Networks has been cited over 3000 times [2].  
CNN s make use of kernels (also known as filters), to detect features (e.g. edges) 
throughout an image. A kernel is just a matrix of values, called weights, which  are 
trained to detect specific features. As their name indicates, the main idea behind the 
CNNs  is to spatially convolve the kernel on a given input image check if the feature it 
is meant to detect is present.  To provide a value representing how confident it is that a 
specific feature is present, a convolution operation is carried out by computing the  dot 
product of the kernel and the input area where kernel is overlapped (the area of the 
original image the kernel is looking at is known as the receptive field [10]). 
To facilitate the learning of kernel  weights , the convolution layer’s output is   
summed  with a bias term and then fed to a non -linear activation function. Activation 
Functions are usually non -linear func tions like Sigmoid, TanH  and ReLU (Rectified 
Linear Unit). Depending on the nature of data and classification tasks, these activation 
functi ons are selected accordingly  [11]. For example,  ReLUs are known to have more 
biological representation  (neurons in th e brain either fire or they don’t). As a result, it 
yields favourab le results for image recognition tasks  as it is less susceptible to  the 
vanishing gradient problem and it produces sparser, more efficient representations  [7].