DL is sometimes overkill  as often traditional CV techniques can solve a problem 
much more efficiently and in fewer lines of code than DL . Algorithms  like SIFT and 
even simple colour thresholding and pixel counting algorithms are not class -specific, 
that is, they are very general and perform the same for any image . In contrast , features 
learned from a deep neural net are specific  to your train ing dataset  which, if not well 
constructed, probably won’t perform well for images different from the training set . 
Therefore , SIFT  and other algorithms  are often used for applications such as  image 
stitching/3D mesh reconstruction  which  don’t require specific class knowledge. These 
tasks have been shown to be achievable by training large datasets , however this requires 
a huge research effort and it is not practical to go through this effort for a closed  
application . One needs to practice common sense when it comes to choosing which 
route to take for a given CV application. For example, to classify two classes of product 
on an assembly line conveyor belt , one with red paint  and one with blue paint . A deep 
neural  net will work given that enough  data can be collected to train from. However,  
the same can be achieved  by using simple colour thresholding . Some  problems can be 
tackled with  simpler and faster techniques.  
What if a DNN perform s poorly outside o f the training data ? If the training dataset 
is limited,  then the machine may overfit to the training data and  not be able to generalize 
for the task  at hand . It would be too difficult to manually tweak the parameters of the 
model  because  a DNN  has million s of parameters inside of it  each with complex inter -
relationships . In this way, DL model s have been criticised to be a black box  in this way 
[5]. Traditional CV has full transparency and the one can  judge whether your solution 
will work outside of a training environment.  The CV engineer can  have insight s into a 
problem that they can transfer to their  algorithm  and if anything fails, the parameters 
can be tweaked to perform well for a wider range of images.  
Today, the traditional techniques are used when the problem can be simplified so 
that they can be deployed on low cost  microcontrollers or to limit the problem for deep 
learning techniques by highlighting certain features in data, augmenting data  [19] or 
aiding in dataset annotation   [20]. We will discuss later in this paper how many image 
transformatio n techniques can be used to improve your neural net training. Finally, 
there  are many more cha llenging problems in CV such as: Robotic s [21], augmented 
reality  [22], automatic panorama stit ching  [23], virtual reality  [24], 3D modelling  [24], 
motion estimation  [24], video stabilization  [21], motion capture  [24], video processing  
[21] and scene understanding  [25] which cannot simply be easily implemented in a 
differentiable manner with deep learning but benefit from solutions  using "traditional" 
techniques.  
3 Challenges for Traditional C omputer Vision  
3.1 Mixing Hand -Crafted Approaches  with DL for Better Performance  
There are clear trade -offs between traditional CV and deep learning -based 
approaches. Classic CV algorithms are well-established , transparent , and optimized for