Conclusion  
A lot of the CV techniques invented in the past 20 years have become irrelevant in 
recent years because of DL. However, knowledge is never obsolete and there is always 
something worth learning from e ach generation of innovation. That knowledge can give 
you more intuitions and tools to use especially when you wish to deal with 3D CV 
problems for example. Knowing only DL for CV will dramatically limit the kind of 
solutions in a CV engin eer’s arsenal.  
In this paper  we have laid down m any arguments for why traditional CV techniques 
are still very much useful  even in the age of DL . We have compared and contrasted 
traditional CV and DL for typical  applications and d iscussed how s ometimes traditional 
CV can be considered as an alternative in situations  where DL  is overkill for a specific 
task.  
The paper also highlight ed some areas where traditional CV techniques remain 
relevant  such as being utilized in hybrid approaches to improv e performance . DL 
innovations are driving exciting breakthroughs for the IoT  (Internet of Things) , as well 
as hybrid techniques that combine the technologies with traditional algorithms. 
Additionally, we reviewed how traditional CV techniques can actually improve DL 
performance in a wide range of applications from reducing training time, processing 
and data requirements to being applied in emerging fields such as SLAM, Panoramic -
stitching, Geometric Deep Learning and 3D vision where DL  is not yet well 
established . 
The digital image processing domain has undergone some very dramatic changes 
recently and in a very short period . So much so it has led us to question whether the CV 
techniques that were in vogue prior to the AI explosion are still relevant. This paper 
hopefully highlight  some cases where traditional CV techniques are useful and that 
there is something still to gain from the years of effort put in to their develop ment even 
in the age of data -driven intelligence.   
References  
1.  Krizhevsky A, Sutskever I, Hinton GE (2012) ImageNet Classification with Deep 
Convolutional Neural Networks. NIPS’12 Proc 25th Int Conf Neural Inf Process Syst 
1:1097 –1105  
2.  Nash W, Drummond T, Birbilis N (2018) A Review of Deep Learning in the Study of 
Materials Degradation. npj Mater Degrad 2:37. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41529 -018-
0058 -x 
3.  Bonaccorso G (2018) Machine Learning Algorithms Popular Algorithms for Data 
Science and Machine Learning, 2nd Editi on. Packt Publishing Ltd  
4.  Mahony NO, Murphy T, Panduru K, et al (2017) Improving controller performance in 
a powder blending process using predictive control. In: 2017 28th Irish Signals and 
Systems Conference (ISSC). IEEE, pp 1 –6 
5.  O’Mahony N, Murphy  T, Panduru K, et al (2017) Real -time monitoring of powder blend 
composition using near infrared spectroscopy. In: 2017 Eleventh International 
Conference on Sensing Technology (ICST). IEEE, pp 1 –6