due to enabling advancements in processing hardware [7]. Self-organisation and the 
exploitation of interactions between small units have proven to perform better than 
central control, particularly for complex non -linear process models in that better fault 
tolerance and adaptability to new data is achievable [7]. 
 
2.2 Advantages  of Deep Learning  
Rapid p rogression s in DL and improvements  in device capabilities including 
computing power, memory capacity, power consumption, image sensor resolution, and 
optics have improved the performance and cost -effectiveness of  further quickened  the 
spread  of vision -based application s. Compared to traditional CV techniques, DL 
enable s CV engineers to achieve  greater accuracy in tasks such as image  classification , 
semantic segmentation , object detection  and Simultaneous Localization and Mapping 
(SLAM) . Since neural networks used in DL are trained rather than programmed,  
applications using this approach often require less expert analysis and fine-tuning  and 
exploit  the tremendous amount o f video data available in today’s systems.  DL also 
provides superior flexibility  because CNN  models  and frameworks can be re -trained 
using a custom dataset  for any use case, contrary  to CV algorithms, which tend to be 
more domain -specific.  
 
Taking  the prob lem of object detection on a mobile robot  as an example, we can  
compare  the two types of algorithms for computer vision:  
 
The traditional  approach is  to use well -established  CV techniques such as  feature 
descriptors (SIFT, SURF, BRIEF, etc.) for object detection. Before the emergence of 
DL, a step called feature extraction  was carried out for tasks such as image  
classification . Features are small “interesting”, descriptive or informative patches i n 
images. Several CV algorithms , such as  edge detection, corner detection  or threshold 
segmentation  may be involved in this step . As many features  as practicable are 
extracted from images and these features form a definition (known as a bag -of-words) 
of each object class . At the deployment stage , these definitions are search ed for in other 
images. If a significant number of features from one bag -of-words are in  another image, 
the image is classified as containing that specific object (i.e. chair, horse, etc .). 
The difficulty with this traditional approach is that it is necessary  to choose which 
features are important  in each given image.  As the number of classes to classify 
increases, feature extraction  becomes more and more cumbersome . It is up to the CV 
engineer’s judgment and a long trial and error process to decide which features best 
describe  different classes of objects. Moreover, each feature  definition requires dealing 
with a plethora of parameters, all of which must  be fine -tuned by  the CV engineer . 
DL introduced the concept of end -to-end learning where the machine is  just given a 
dataset of images  which have been annotated with what classes of object are present in 
each image  [7].  Thereby a DL m odel is ‘trained’ on the given data , where  neural 
networks discover  the underlying patterns in classes of images and automatically works 
out the most descriptive and salient features with respect to each specific class of object 
for each object. It has been well -established  that DNN s perform  far better than 
traditional algorithms, albeit with  trade -offs with respect to computing requirements