many challenges DL brings  (e.g. compu ting power, time, accuracy, characteristics and 
quantity of inputs, and among others) . 
 
This paper will provide a comparison of  deep learning  to the more traditional hand -
crafted feature definition approaches which dominated CV prior to it. There has been 
so much progress in Deep Learning in recent years that it is impossible for this paper 
to capture the many facets and sub -domains of Deep Lea rning which are tackling the 
most pertinent problems in CV today. This paper will review traditional algorithmic 
approaches in CV, and more particularly, the applications in which they have been used 
as an adequate substitute for DL, to complement DL and to tackle problems DL cannot.  
The paper will then move on to review some of the recent activities in combining 
DL with  CV, with a focus on the state -of-the-art techniques for emerging technology 
such as  3D perception,  namely object registration, object det ection and semantic 
segmentation of 3D point clouds. Finally , developments and possible directions of 
getting the performance of 3D DL to the same heights as 2D DL are discussed along 
with an outlook on the impact the increased use of 3D will have on CV in  general.  
2 A Comparison of Deep Learning  and Traditional Computer 
Vision  
2.1 What is Deep Learning  
To gain a fundamental understanding of DL we need to consider the difference  between 
descriptive analysis and predictive analysis.  
Descriptive  analysis involves defining a comprehensible mathematical model which 
describes the phenomenon that we wish to observe. This entails collecting data about a 
process , forming hypotheses  on patterns in the data  and validating these hypotheses  
through comparing the out come of descriptive models we form with the real outcome 
[3]. Producing such models is precarious however because there is always a risk of un -
modelled variables that scientists and engineers neglect to include due to ignorance or 
failure to understand some complex, hidden or non -intuitive phenomena  [4].  
Predictive  analysis  involves the discovery of rules that underlie a phenomenon and 
form a predictive model which minimise the error between the actual and the predicted 
outcome considering all possible interfering factors [3]. Machine learning rejects the 
traditional programming paradigm where problem analysis is replaced by a training 
framework where the system is fed a large number of training patterns (sets of inputs 
for which the desired outputs are known) which it learns and uses t o compute new 
patterns [5].  
DL is a subset of machine learning . DL is based largely on Artificial Neural 
Networks (ANNs), a computing paradigm inspired by the functioning of the human 
brain. Like the human brain, it is composed of many computing cells or ‘neurons’ that 
each perform  a simple operation and interact  with each other to make a decision  [6]. 
Deep Learning is all about learning  or ‘credit assignment’ across many layers of a 
neural network accurately, efficiently and without supervision and is of recent interest