To speed up the training process and reduce the amount of memory consumed by 
the network, the convolutional layer is often followed by a pooling layer to remove 
redundancy present in the input feature. For example, max pooling moves a window 
over the input and  simply outputs the maximum value in that window effectively 
reducing  to the important pixels in an image  [7]. As shown in Fig. 2 , deep CNNs may 
have several pairs of convolutional and pooling layers . Finally, a  Fully Connected 
layer flattens the previous layer volume into a feature vector and then an output layer 
which computes the scores (confidence or probabilities) for th e output classes/features 
through a dense network. This output is then passed to a regression function such as 
Softmax  [12], for example, which  maps everything to a vector whose elements sum 
up to one  [7].  
 
Fig. 2.  Building blocks of a CNN. Figure from [13] 
But DL is still only a tool of CV For example, the most common neural network used 
in CV is the  CNN. But what is a convolution? It’s in fact a widely used image 
processing technique (e.g. see  Sobel edge detection ). The advantages of DL are clear,  
and it would be beyond the scope of this paper to review the state -of-the-art. DL is 
certainly not the panacea for all problems either, as we will see in following sections of 
this paper, there are problems and applications where the more conventional CV 
algorithms are more suitable . 
 
 
2.3 Advantages of Traditional  Computer Vision Techniques  
This section will detail how the t raditional feature -based  approaches such as those listed 
below have been shown to be useful in improving performance in CV tasks : 
• Scale Invariant Feature Transform (SIFT)  [14] 
• Speeded Up Robust Features (SURF) [15] 
• Features from Accelerated Segment Test (FAST)  [16] 
• Hough transforms  [17] 
• Geometric hashing  [18] 
 
Feature descriptors such as SIFT  and SURF  are generally combined with traditional 
machine learning classification algorithms such as Support Vector Machines and K -
Nearest Neighbours  to solve the aforementioned CV problems .