performance and power efficiency, while DL offers greater accuracy and versa tility at 
the cost of  large amounts of computing resources.   
Hybrid approaches combine traditional CV and deep learning  and offer the 
advantages traits of both methodologies. They are especially practical in high 
performance  systems which need to be implem ented quickly . For example, in a security 
camera, a CV algorithm can efficiently detect faces or other features [26] or moving 
objects  [27] in the scene. These detections can then be passed to a DNN for identity 
verification or object classification . The DNN need only be applied on a small patch of 
the image  saving significant computing resources  and training effort  compared to what 
would be required to process the entire frame.  
The fusion of Machine Learning metr ics and Deep Network have become very 
popular, due to the simple fact that it can generate better models.  Hybrid vision 
processing implementation s can introduce  performance advantage and ‘ can deliver a 
130X -1,000X reduction in multiply -accumulate operation s and about 10X 
improvement in frame rates compared to a pure DL solution. Furthermore, the hybrid 
implementation uses about half of the memory bandwidth and requires significantly 
lower CPU resources ’ [28].  
3.2 Overcoming the Challenges of Deep Learning  
There are also challenges introduced by DL. The latest DL approaches may achieve 
substantially better accuracy;  however  this jump comes at the cost of billions of 
additional math operations and an increased requirement for processing power.  DL 
requires a these  computing resources f or training and to a lesser extent for inference.  It 
is essential to have dedicated hardware (e.g. high -powered GPUs [29] and TPUs [30] 
for training and AI accelerated platforms such as VPUs for inference [31]) for 
developers of AI.  
Vision process ing results using DL are also dependent on image resolution. 
Achieving adequate performance in object classification, for example, requires high-
resolution  images or video – with the consequent increase in the amount of data that 
needs to be processed, sto red, and transferred. Image resolution is especially important 
for applications in which it is necessary to detect and classify objects in the distance , 
e.g. in security camera  footage . The frame reduction techniques discussed previously 
such as using SIFT  features [26, 32]  or optical flow for moving objects [27] to first 
identify a region of interest are useful with respect to image resolution and also with 
respect to reducing t he time and data required for training . 
DL needs big data.  Often millions of data records are required. For example, 
PASCAL  VOC Dataset consists of 500K images with 20 object categories  [26][33], 
ImageNet consists of 1.5 million images with 1000 object categories  [34] and Microsoft 
Common Objects in Context (COCO) consists of 2.5 million images with 91 object 
categories  [35]. When big datasets  or high computing facility are unavailable,  
traditional methods will come into play.  
Training a DNN takes a very long time. Depending on computing hardware 
availability , training can take a matter of hours or days. Moreover, training for any