access to the full text of many publications still typically requires
strict and dedicated agreements with each publisher. The major
advantage of working with publishers is that they have often
already converted the articles from a document format such asPDF into an easy-to-parse format such as HyperText MarkupLanguage (HTML). In contrast, articles on preprint servers and
patents are typically available with fewer restrictions, but are
commonly available only as PDF ﬁles. It remains dif ﬁcult to
properly parse text from PDF ﬁles in a reliable manner, even when
the text is embedded in the PDF. Therefore, new tools that can
easily and automatically convert such content into well-structuredHTML format with few residual errors would likely have a major
impact on the ﬁeld. Finally, online sources of information such as
Wikipedia can serve as another type of data source. However, suchonline sources are often more dif ﬁcult to verify in terms of
accuracy and also do not contain as much domain-speci ﬁc
information as the research literature.
Software libraries for NLP
Applying NLP to a raw dataset involves multiple steps. These steps
include retrieving the data, various forms of “pre-processing ”
(sentence and word tokenization, word stemming and lemmatiza-
tion, featurization such as word vectors or part of speech tagging),
and ﬁnally machine learning for information extraction (e.g.,
named entity recognition, entity-relationship modeling, question
and answer, or others). Multiple software libraries exist to aid in
materials NLP, as described in Table 5. We note that although
many of these steps can in theory be performed by general-
purpose NLP libraries such as NLTK
256, SpaCy257, or AllenNLP258,
the specialized nature of chemistry and materials science text(including the presence of complex chemical formulas) often leadsto errors. For example, researchers have developed specialized
codes to perform preprocessing that better detect chemical
formulas (and not split them into separate tokens or applystemming/lemmatization to them) and scienti ﬁc phrases and
notation such as oxidation states or symbols for physical units.
Similarly, chemistry-speci ﬁc codes for extracting entities are
better at extracting the names of chemical elements (e.g.,
recognizing that “He”likely represents helium and not a male
pronoun) and abbreviations for chemical formulas. Finally, wordembeddings that convert words such as “manganese ”into
numerical vectors for further data mining are more informative
when trained speci ﬁcally on materials science text versus moregeneric texts, even when the latter datasets are larger
259. Thus,
domain-speci ﬁc tools for NLP are required in nearly all aspects of
the pipeline. The main exception is that the architecture of the
speci ﬁc neural network models used for information extraction
(e.g., LSTM, BERT, or architectures used to generate wordembeddings such as word2vec or GloVe) are typically notmodi ﬁed speci ﬁcally for the materials domain. Thus, much of
the materials and chemistry-centric work currently regards data
retrieval and appropriate preprocessing. A longer discussion of
this topic, with speci ﬁc examples, can be found in refs.
260,261.
Applications
NLP methods for materials have been applied for information
extraction and search (particularly as applied to synthesisprediction) as well as materials discovery. As the domain is rapidlygrowing, we suggest dedicated reviews on this topic by Olivetti
et al.
261and Kononova et al.260for more information.
One of the major uses of NLP methods is to extract datasets
from the text in published studies. Conventionally, such datasets
required manual entry of datasets by researchers combing theliterature, a laborious and time-consuming process. Recently,software tools such as ChemDataExtractor
262and other meth-
ods263based on more conventional machine learning and rule-
based approaches have enabled automated or semi-automated
extraction of datasets such as Curie and Néel magnetic phasetransition temperatures
264, battery properties265, UV-vis spectra266,
and surface and pore characteristics of metal-organic frame-works
267. In the past few years, DL approaches such as LSTMs and
transformer-based models have been employed to extract various
categories of information268, and in particular materials synthesis
information269 –271from text sources. Such data have been used to
predict synthesis maps for titania nanotubes272, various binary and
ternary oxides273, and perovskites274.
Databases based on natural language processing have also
been used to train machine learning models to identify materialswith useful functional properties, such as the recent discovery of
the large magnetocaloric properties of HoBe
2275. Similarly,
Cooper et al.276demonstrated a “design to device approach ”
for designing dye-sensitized solar cells that are co-sensitizedwith two dyes
276. This study used automated text mining to
compile a list of candidate dyes for the application along with
measured properties such as maximum absorption wavelengths
and extinction coef ﬁcients. The resulting list of 9431 dyes
extracted from the literature was downselected to 309 candi-dates using various criteria such as molecular structure andability to absorb in the solar spectrum. These candidates were
evaluated for suitable combinations for co-sensitization, yielding
33 dyes that were further downselected using density functionaltheory calculations and experimental constraints. The resulting 5dyes were evaluated experimentally, both individually and incombinations, resulting in a combination of dyes that not only
outperformed any of the individual dyes but demonstrated
performance comparable to exi sting standard material. This
study demonstrates the possibility of using literature-basedextraction to identify materials candidates for new applications
from the vast body of published work, which may have nevertested those materials for the desired application.
It is even possible that natural language processing can directly
make materials predictions without intermediary models. In a
study reported by Tshitoyan et al.
259(as shown in Fig. 5), word
embeddings (i.e., numerical vectors representing distinct words)trained on materials science literature could directly predictmaterials applications through a simple dot product between thetrained embedding for a composition word (such as PbTe) and an
application words (such as thermoelectrics). The researchers
demonstrated that such an approach, if applied in the past usinghistorical data, may have subsequently predicted many recentlyTable 5. Software packages for applying DL to natural language
processing.
Software name Link Ref.
Borges https://github.com/CederGroupHub/Borges270
ChemDataExtractor http://chemdataextractor.org262
ChemicalTagger https://github.com/BlueObelisk/
chemicaltagger369
ChemListem https://bitbucket.org/rscapplications/
chemlistem/370
ChemSpot https://github.com/rockt/ChemSpot371
LBNLP https://github.com/lbnlp/lbnlp268
mat2vec https://github.com/materialsintelligence/
mat2vec259
MaterialsParser https://github.com/CederGroupHub/
MaterialParser271
OSCAR4 https://github.com/BlueObelisk/oscar4372
Synthesis Project https://www.synthesisproject.org272
tmChem https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/research/
bionlp/Tools/tmchem/373K. Choudhary et al.
17
Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences npj Computational Materials (2022)    59