between these features. To overcome this, a second model was
trained to generate a coarse mask corresponding to thedeformed region in the material. Overlaying this mask withpredictions from the ﬁrst model selects the dislocations,
enabling them to be distinguished from γ/C0γ
0interfaces.
Stan, Thompson, and Voorhees applied Pixelwise DL to
characterize dendritic growth from serial sectioning and synchro-tron computed tomography data
225. Both of these techniques
generate large amounts of data, making manual analysisimpractical. Conventional image processing approaches, utilizingthresholding, edge detectors, or other hand-crafted ﬁlters, cannot
effectively deal with noise, contrast gradients, and other artifactsthat are present in the data. Despite having a small training set oflabeled images, SegNet automatically segmented these imageswith much higher performance.
Object/entity recognition, localization, and tracking
Object detection or localization is needed when individual
instances of recognized objects in a given image need to bedistinguished from each other. In cases where instances do notoverlap each other by a signi ﬁcant amount, individual instances
can be resolved through post-processing of semantic segmenta-tion outputs. This technique has been applied extensively todetect individual atoms and defects in microstructural images.
Madsen et al. applied pixelwise DL to detect atoms in simulated
atomic-resolution TEM images of graphene
226. A neural network
was trained to detect the presence of each atom as well as predict
its column height. Pixelwise results are used as seeds forwatershed segmentation to achieve instance-level detection.Analysis of the arrangement of the atoms led to the autonomouscharacterization of defects in the lattice structure of the material.Interestingly, despite being trained only on simulations, the modelsuccessfully detected atomic positions in experimental images.
Maksov et al. demonstrated atomistic defect recognition and
tracking across sequences of atomic-resolution STEM images ofWS
2227. The lattice structure and defects existing in the ﬁrst framewere characterized through a physics-based approach utilizing
Fourier transforms. The positions of atoms and defects in the ﬁrst
frame were used to train a segmentation model. Despite onlyusing the ﬁrst frame for training, the model successfully identi ﬁed
and tracked defects in the subsequent frames for each sequence,even when the lattice underwent signi ﬁcant deformation.
Similarly, Yang et al.
228used U-net architecture (as shown in
Fig.4) to detect vacancies and dopants in WSe 2in STEM images
with model accuracy of up to 98%. They classi ﬁed the possible
atomic sites based on experimental observations into ﬁve
different types: tungsten, vanadium substituting for tungsten,selenium with no vacancy, mono-vacancy of selenium, and di-vacancy of selenium.
Roberts et al. developed DefectSegNet to automatically identify
defects in transmission and STEM images of steel includingdislocations, precipitates, and voids
229. They provide detailed
information on the model ’s design, training, and evaluation. They
also compare measurements generated from the model to
manual measurements performed by several different human
experts, demonstrating that the measurements generated by DLare quantitatively more accurate and consistent.
Kusche et al. applied DL to localize defects in panoramic SEM
images of dual-phase steel
230. Manual thresholding was applied to
identify dark defects against the brighter matrix. Regions contain-
ing defects were classi ﬁed via two neural networks. The ﬁrst neural
network distinguished between inclusions and ductile damage inthe material. The second classi ﬁed the type of ductile damage (i.e.,
notching, martensite cracking, etc.) Each defect was alsosegmented via a watershed algorithm to obtain detailed
information on its size, position, and morphology.
Applying DL to localize defects and atomic structures is a
popular area in materials science research. Thus, several otherrecent studies on these applications can be found in theliterature
231 –234.
In the above examples pixelwise DL, or classi ﬁcation models are
combined with image analysis to distinguish individual instancesof detected objects. However, when several adjacent objects of
Fig. 4 Deep-learning-based algorithm for atomic site classi ﬁcation. a Deep neural networks U-Net model constructed for quanti ﬁcation
analysis of annular dark- ﬁeld in the scanning transmission electron microscope (ADF-STEM) image of V-WSe 2.bExamples of training dataset
for deep learning of atom segmentation model for ﬁve different species. cPixel-level accuracy of the atom segmentation model as a function
of training epoch. dMeasurement accuracy of the segmentation model compared with human-based measurements. Scale bars are 1 nm
[Reprinted according to the terms of the CC-BY license ref.228].
K. Choudhary et al.
14
npj Computational Materials (2022)    59 Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences