within the data. In this sense, physics-based regularization can
assist. Physics-based deep learning can also aid in inverse design
problems, a challenging but important task84,85. On the ﬂip side,
deep Learning using Graph Neural Nets and symbolic regression(stochastically building symbolic expressions) has even been used
to“discover ”symbolic equations from data that capture known
(and unknown) physics behind the data
86, i.e., to deep learn a
physics model rather than to use a physics model to constrain DL.
OVERVIEW OF APPLICATIONS
Some aspects of successful DL application that require materials-
science-speci ﬁc considerations are:
(1) acquiring large, balanced, and diverse datasets (often on the
order of 10,000 data points or more),
(2) determing an appropriate DL approach and suitable vector
or graph representation of the input samples, and
(3) selecting appropriate performance metrics relevant to
scienti ﬁc goals.
In the following sections we discuss some of the key areas of
materials science in which DL has been applied with available linksto repositories and datasets that help in the reproducibility and
extensibility of the work. In this review we categorize materials
science applications at a high level by the type of input dataconsidered: 11 atomistic, 12 stoichiometric, 13 spectral, 14 image,
and 15 text. We summarize prevailing machine learning tasks and
their impact on materials research and development within eachbroad materials data modality.
APPLICATIONS IN ATOMISTIC REPRESENTATIONS
In this section, we provide a few examples of solving materials
science problems with DL methods trained on atomistic data. The
atomic structure of material usually consists of atomic coordinatesand atomic composition information of material. An arbitrary
number of atoms and types of elements in a system poses a
challenge to apply traditional ML algorithms for atomisticpredictions. DL-based methods are an obvious strategy to tackle
this problem. There have been several previous attempts to
represent crystals and molecules using ﬁxed-size descriptors such
as Coulomb matrix
87–89, classical force ﬁeld inspired descriptors
(CFID)90–92, pair-distribution function (PRDF), Voronoi tessella-
tion93–95. Recently graph neural network methods have been
shown to surpass previous hand-crafted feature set28.
DL for atomistic materials applications include: (a) force- ﬁeld
development, (b) direct property predictions, (c) materials screen-
ing. In addition to the above points, we also elucidate upon someof the recent generative adversarial network and complimentary
methods to atomistic aproaches.
Databases and software libraries
In Table 1we provide some of the commonly used datasets used
for atomistic DL models for molecules, solids, and proteins. Wenote that the computational methods used for different datasets
are different and many of them are continuously evolving.
Generally it takes years to generate such databases usingconventional methods such as density functional theory; incontrast, DL methods can be used to make predictions with
much reduced computational cost and reasonable accuracy.
Table 1we provide DL software packages used for atomistic
materials design. The type of models includes general property
(GP) predictors and interatomic force ﬁelds (FF). The models have
been demonstrated in molecules (Mol), solid-state materials (Sol),or proteins (Prot). For some force ﬁelds, high-performance large-
scale implementations (LSI) that leverage paralleling computing
exist. Some of these methods mainly used interatomic distancesto build graphs while others use distances as well as bond-angle
information. Recently, including bond angle within GNN has beenshown to drastically improve the performance with comparablecomputational timings.
Force- ﬁeld development
Theﬁrst application includes the development of DL-based force
ﬁelds (FF)
96,97/interatomic potentials. Some of the major advan-
tages of such applications are that they are very fast (on the orderof hundreds to thousands times
64) for making predictions and
solving the tenuous development of FFs, but the disadvantage is
they still require a large dataset using computationally expensive
methods to train.
Models such as Behler-Parrinello neural network (BPNN) and its
variants98,99are used for developing interatomic potentials that
can be used beyond just 0 K temperature and time-dependentbehavior using molecular dynamics simulations such as fornanoparticles
100. Such FF models have been developed for
molecular systems, such as water, methane, and other organicmolecules
99,101as well as solids such as silicon98, sodium102,
graphite103, and titania ( TiO 2)104.
While the above works are mainly based on NNs, there has also
been the development of graph neural network force- ﬁeld
(GNNFF) framework105,106that bypasses both computational
bottlenecks. GNNFF can predict atomic forces directly usingautomatically extracted structural features that are not onlytranslationally invariant, but rotationally-covariant to the coordi-nate space of the atomic positions, i.e., the features and hence thepredicted force vectors rotate the same way as the rotation ofcoordinates. In addition to the development of pure NN-basedFFs, there have also been recent developments of combiningtraditional FFs such as bond-order potentials with NNs and ReaxFFwith message passing neural network (MPNN) that can help
mitigate the NNs issue for extrapolation
82,107.
Direct property prediction from atomistic con ﬁgurations
DL methods can be used to establish a structure-property
relationship between atomic structure and their properties with
high accuracy28,108. Models such as SchNet, crystal graph
convolutional neural network (CGCNN), improved crystal graphconvolutional neural network (iCGCNN), directional messagepassing neural network (DimeNet), atomistic line graph neuralnetwork (ALIGNN) and materials graph neural network (MEGNet)shown in Table 1have been used to predict up to 50 properties of
crystalline and molecular materials. These property datasets areusually obtained from ab-initio calculations. A schematic of suchmodels shown in Fig. 2. While SchNet, CGCNN, MEGNet are
primarily based on atomic distances, iCGCNN, DimeNet, andALIGNN models capture many-body interactions using GCNN.
Some of these properties include formation energies, electronic
bandgaps, solar-cell ef ﬁciency, topological spin-orbit spillage,
dielectric constants, piezoelectric constants, 2D exfoliation ener-gies, electric ﬁeld gradients, elastic modulus, Seebeck coef ﬁcients,
power factors, carrier effective masses, highest occupied mole-cular orbital, lowest unoccupied molecular orbital, energy gap,zero-point vibrational energy, dipole moment, isotropic polariz-ability, electronic spatial extent, internal energy.
For instance, the current state-of-the-art mean absolute error for
formation energy for solids at 0 K is 0.022 eV/atom as obtained by
the ALIGNN model
65. DL is also heavily being used for predicting
catalytic behavior of materials such as the Open Catalyst Project109
which is driven by the DL methods materials design. There is anongoing effort to continuously improve the models. Usuallyenergy-based models such as formation and total energies aremore accurate than electronic property-based models such asbandgaps and power factors.K. Choudhary et al.
5
Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences npj Computational Materials (2022)    59