are disabled randomly during training, resulting in the evaluation
of a different subset of the network at each training step. When a
similar randomization procedure is also applied to the prediction
procedure, the methodology becomes Monte-Carlo dropout291.
Repeating such randomization multiple times produces a dis-tribution over the outputs, from which mean and variance are
determined for each prediction. Another example of using a
dropout approach to approximate Bayesian inference in deepGaussian processes is the work of Gal and Ghahramani
292.
Deep ensemble methodologies293 –296combine deep learning
modelling with ensemble learning. Ensemble methods utilize
multiple models and different random initializations to improvepredictability. Because of the multiple predictions, statisticaldistributions of the outputs are generated. Combining such
results into a Gaussian distribution, con ﬁdence intervals are
obtained through variance evaluation. Such a multi-modelstrategy allows the evaluation of aleatory uncertainty when
sufﬁcient training data are provided. For areas without suf ﬁcient
data, the predicted mean and variance will not be accurate, butthe expectation is that a very large variance should be estimated,clearly indicating non-trustable predictions. Monte-Carlo Dropout
and Deep Ensembles approaches can be combined to further
improve con ﬁdence in the predicted outputs.
Quantile regression can be utilized with DL
297.I nt h i s
approach, the loss function is used in a way that allows to
predict for the chosen quantile a (between 0 and 1). A choice of
a=0.5 corresponds to evaluating the Mean Absolute Error (MAE)
and predicting the median of the distribution. Predicting for two
more quantile values (amin and amax) determines con ﬁdence
intervals of width amax −amin. For instance, predicting for amin =
0.1 and amax =0.8 produces con ﬁdence intervals covering 70% of
the population. The largest drawback of using quantile to estimate
prediction intervals is the need to run the model three times, one
for each quantile needed. However, a recent implementation inTensorFlow allows to simultaneously obtain multiple quantiles inone run.
Lastly, Gaussian Processes (GP) can be used within a DL
approach as well and have the side bene ﬁt of providing UQ
information at no extra cost. Gaussian processes are a family ofinﬁnite-dimensional multivariate Gaussian distributions comple-
tely speci ﬁed by a mean function and a ﬂexible kernel function
(prior distribution). By optimizing such functions to ﬁt the training
data, the posterior distribution is determined, which is later used
to predict outputs for inputs not included in the training set.
Because the prior is a Gaussian process, the posterior distributionis Gaussian as well
298, thus providing mean and variance
information for each predicted data. However, in practice standard
kernels under-perform299. In 2016, Wilson et al.300suggested
processing inputs through a neural network prior to a Gaussianprocess model. This procedure could extract high-level patternsand features, but required careful design and optimization. In
general, Deep Gaussian processes improve the performance of
Gaussian processes by mapping the inputs through multipleGaussian process ‘layers ’. Several groups have followed this
avenue and further perfected such an approach (ref.
299and
references within). A common drawback of Bayesian methods is aprohibitive computational cost if dealing with large datasets
292.
LIMITATIONS AND CHALLENGES
Although DL methods have various fascinating opportunities for
materials design, they have several limitations and there is much
room to improve. Reliability and quality assessment of datasets
used in DL tasks are challenging because there is either a lack ofground truth data, or there are not enough metrics for global
comparison, or datasets using similar or identical set-ups may not
be reproducible
301. This poses an important challenge in relying
upon DL-based prediction.Material representations based on chemical formula alone by
deﬁnition do not consider structure, which on the one hand
makes them more amenable to work for new compounds for
which structure information may not be available, but on theother hand, makes it impossible for them to capture phenomenasuch as phase transitions. Properties of materials depend
sensitively on structure to the extent that their properties can
be quite opposite depending on the atomic arrangement, like adiamond (hard, wide-band-gap insulator) and graphite (soft, semi-metal). It is thus not a surprise that chemical formula-based
methods may not be adequate in some cases
159.
Atomistic graph-based predictions, although considered a full
atomistic description, are tested on bulk materials only and not for
defective systems or for multi-dimensional phases of spaceexploration such as using genetic algorithms. In general, thisunderscores that the input features must be predictive for the
output labels and not be missing some key information. Although
atomistic graph neural network models such as atomistic linegraph neural network (ALIGNN) have achieved remarkableaccuracy compared to previous atomistic based models, the
model errors still need to be further brought down to reach
something resembling deep learning ‘chemical-accuracies. ’
In terms of images and spectra, the experimental data are too
noisy most of the time and require much manipulation beforeapplying DL. In contrast, theory-based simulated data represent analternate path forward but may not capture realistic scenarios
such as the presence of structured noise
217.
Uncertainty quanti ﬁcation for deep learning for materials
science is important, yet only a few works have been published
in this ﬁeld. To alleviate the black-box38nature of the DL
methods, a package such as GNNExplainer302has been tried in
the context of the material. Such attempts at greater interpret-
ability will be important moving forward to gain the trust of thematerials community.
While training-validation-test split strategies were primarily
designed in DL for image classi ﬁcation tasks with a certain
number of classes, the same for re gression models in materials
science may not be the best approach. This is because it is
possible that during the training the model is seeing amaterial very similar to the test set material and in reality it isdifﬁcult to generalize the model. Best practices need to be
developed for data split, normalization, and augmentation to
avoid such issues
289.
Finally, we note an important technological challenge is to
make a closed-loop autonomous materials design and synthesisprocess
303,304that can include both machine learning and
experimental components in a self-driving laboratory305. For an
overview of early proof of principle attempts see306. For example,
in an autonomous synthesis experiment the oxidation state ofcopper (and therefore the oxide phase) was varied in a sample ofcopper oxide by automatically ﬂowing more oxidizing or more
reducing gas over the sample and monitoring the charge state of
the copper using XANES. An algorithmic decision policy was thenused to automatically change the gas composition for asubsequent experiment based on the prior experiments, with no
human in the loop, in such a way as to autonomously move
towards a target copper oxidation state
307. This simple proof of
principle experiment provides just a glimpse of what is possiblemoving forward.
DATA AVAILABILITY
The data from new ﬁgures are available on reasonable request from the
corresponding author. Data from other publishers are not available from the
corresponding author of this work but may be available by reaching thecorresponding author of the cited work.K. Choudhary et al.
19
Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences npj Computational Materials (2022)    59