computing, and, for some applications, are reaching an accuracy
level comparable to physics-based or computational models.
Moreover, entering a new domain of materials science and
performing cutting-edge research requires years of education,training, and the development of specialized skills and intuition.Fortunately, we now live in an era of increasingly open data andcomputational resources. Mature, well-documented DL librariesmake DL research much more easily accessible to newcomersthan almost any other research ﬁeld. Testing and benchmarking
methodologies such as under ﬁtting/over ﬁtting/cross-valida-
tion
15,16,37are common knowledge, and standards for measuring
model performance are well established in the community.
Despite their many advantages, DL methods have disadvan-
tages too, the most signi ﬁcant one being their black-box nature38
which may hinder physical insights into the phenomena under
examination. Evaluating and increasing the interpretability andexplainability of DL models remains an active ﬁeld of research.
Generally a DL model has a few thousand to millions ofparameters, making model interpretation and direct generationof scienti ﬁc insight dif ﬁcult.
Although there are several good recent reviews of ML
applications in MSE
15–17,19,39–49, DL for materials has been
advancing rapidly, warranting a dedicated review to cover theexplosion of research in this ﬁeld. This article discusses some of
the basic principles in DL methods and highlights major trendsamong the recent advances in DL applications for materialsscience. As the tools and datasets for DL applications in materialskeep evolving, we provide a github repository ( https://github.
com/deepmaterials/dlmatreview ) that can be updated as new
resources are made publicly available.
GENERAL MACHINE LEARNING CONCEPTS
It is beyond the scope of this article to give a detailed hands-on
introduction to Deep Learning. There are many materials forthis purpose, for examp le, the free online book “Neural
N e t w o r k sa n dD e e pL e a r n i n g ”by Michael Nielsen ( http://
neuralnetworksanddeeplearning.com ), Deep Learning by Good-
fellow et al.
21, and multiple online courses at Coursera, Udemy,
and so on. Rather, this article aims to motivate materialsscientist researchers in the types of problems that are amenableto DL, and to introduce some of the basic concepts, jargon, and
materials-speci ﬁc databases and software (at the time of
writing) as a helpful on-ramp to help get started. With this inmind, we begin with a very basic introduction to Deep learning.Artiﬁcial intelligence (AI)
13is the development of machines and
algorithms that mimic human intelligence, for example, byoptimizing actions to achieve certain goals. Machine learning(ML) is a subset of AI, and provides the ability to learn withoutexplicitly being programmed for a given dataset such as playingchess, social network recommendation etc. DL, in turn, is thesubset of ML that takes inspiration from biological brains and usesmultilayer neural networks to solve ML tasks. A schematic of AI-ML-DL context and some of the key application areas of DL in thematerials science and engineering ﬁeld are shown in Fig. 1.
Some of the commonly used ML technologies are linear
regression, decision trees, and random forest in which generalizedmodels are trained to learn coef ﬁcients/weights/parameters for a
given dataset (usually structured i.e., on a grid or a spreadsheet).
Applying traditional ML techniques to unstructured data (such
as pixels or features from an image, sounds, text, and graphs) ischallenging because users have to ﬁrst extract generalized
meaningful representations or features themselves (such ascalculating pair-distribution for an atomic structure) and thentrain the ML models. Hence, the process becomes time-consum-ing, brittle, and not easily scalable. Here, deep learning (DL)techniques become more important.
DL methods are based on arti ﬁcial neural networks and
allied techniques. According to the “universal approximation
theorem ”
50,51, neural networks can approximate any function
to arbitrary accuracy. However, it is important to note thatthe theorem doesn ’t guarantee that the functions can be
learnt easily
52.
NEURAL NETWORKS
Perceptron
A perceptron or a single arti ﬁcial neuron53is the building block of
artiﬁcial neural networks (ANNs) and performs forward propaga-
tion of information. For a set of inputs [ x1,x2,..., xm] to the
perceptron, we assign ﬂoating number weights (and biases to shift
wights) [ w1,w2,..., wm] and then we multiply them correspond-
ingly together to get a sum of all of them. Some of the commonsoftware packages allowing NN trainings are: PyTorch
54, Tensor-
ﬂow55, and MXNet56. Please note that certain commercial
equipment, instruments, or materials are identi ﬁed in this paper
in order to specify the experimental procedure adequately. Suchidenti ﬁcation is not intended to imply recommendation or
endorsement by NIST, nor is it intended to imply that the
Fig. 1 Schematic showing an overview of arti ﬁcial intelligence (AI), machine learning (ML), and deep learning (DL) methods and its
applications in materials science and engineering. Deep learning is considered a part of machine learning, which is contained in an umbrella
term arti ﬁcial intelligence.
K. Choudhary et al.
2
npj Computational Materials (2022)    59 Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences1234567890():,;