reported thermoelectric materials; they also presented a list of
potentially interesting thermoelectric compositions using theknown literature at the time. Since then, several of thesepredictions have been tested either computationally
277 –282or
experimentally283as potential thermoelectrics. Such approaches
have recently been applied to search for understudied areas ofmetallocene catalysis
284, although challenges still remain in such
direct approaches to materials prediction.
UNCERTAINTY QUANTIFICATION
Uncertainty quanti ﬁcation (UQ) is an essential step in evaluating
the robustness of DL. Speci ﬁcally, DL models have been criticized
for lack of robustness, interpretability, and reliability and the
addition of carefully quanti ﬁed uncertainties would go a long way
towards addressing such shortcomings. While most of the focus inthe DL ﬁeld currently goes into developing new algorithms or
training networks to high accuracy, there is increasing attention toUQ, as exempli ﬁed by the detailed review of Abdar et al.
285.
However, determining the uncertainty associated with DL predic-tions is still challenging and far from a completely solved problem.
The main drawback to estimating UQ when performing DL is
the fact that most of the currently available UQ implementationsdo not work for arbitrary, off-the-shelf models, without retrainingor redesigning. Bayesian NNs are the exception; however, theyrequire signi ﬁcant modi ﬁcations to the training procedure, are
computationally expensive compared to non-Bayesian NNs, andbecome increasingly inef ﬁcient the larger the datasize gets. A
considerable fraction of the current research in DL UQ focusesexactly on such an issue: how to evaluate uncertainty without
requiring computationally expensive retraining or DL code
modi ﬁcations. An example of such an effort is the work of Mi
et al.
286, where three scalable methods are explored, to evaluate
the variance of output from trained NN, without requiring anyamount of retraining. Another example is Teye, Azizpour, andSmith ’s exploration of the use of batch normalization as a way to
approximate inference in Bayesian models
287.Before reviewing the most common methods used to evaluate
uncertainty in DL, let us brie ﬂy point out key reasons to add UQ
to DL modeling. Reaching high accuracy when training DL
models implicitly assume the availability of a suf ﬁciently large
and diverse training dataset. Unfortunately, this rarely occurs inmaterial discovery applications
288. ML/DL models are prone to
perform poorly on extrapolation289. It is also extremely dif ﬁcult
for ML/DL models to recognize ambiguous samples290.I n
general, determining the amount of data necessary to train aDL to achieve the required accuracy is a challenging problem.Careful evaluation of the uncertainty associated with DL
predictions would not only increase reliability in predicted
results but would also provide guidance on estimating theneeded training dataset size as well as suggesting what new datashould be added to reach the target accuracy (uncertainty-guided decision). Zhang, Kailkhura, and Han ’sw o r ke m p h a s i z e s
how including a UQ-motivated reject option into the DL modelsubstantially improves the performance of the remainingmaterial data
288. Such a reject option is associated with the
detection of out-of-distribution samples, which is only possible
through UQ analysis of the predicted results.
Two different uncertainty types are associated with each ML
prediction: epistemic uncertainty and aleatory uncertainty. Epis-temic uncertainty is related to insuf ﬁcient training data in part of
the input domain. As mentioned above, while DL is very effectiveat interpolation tasks, they can have more dif ﬁculty in extrapola-
tion. Therefore, it is vital to quantify the lack of accuracy due to
localized, insuf ﬁcient training data. The aleatory uncertainty,
instead, is related to parameters not included in the model. Itrelates to the possibility of training on data that our DL perceivesas very similar but that are associated with different outputsbecause of missing features in the model. Ideally, we would likeUQ methodologies to distinguish and quantify both types ofuncertainties separately.
The most common approaches to evaluate uncertainty using DL
are Dropout methods, Deep Ensemble methods, Quantile regres-sion, and Gaussian Processes. Dropout methods are commonlyused to avoid over ﬁtting. In this type of approach, network nodes
Fig. 5 A schematic showing the application of skip-gram variation of Word2vec for predicting context words. a Network for training word
embeddings for natural language processing application. A one-hot encoded vector at left represents each distinct word in the corpus; therole of a hidden layer is to predict the probability of neighboring words in the corpus. This network structure trains a relatively small hiddenlayer of 100 –200 neurons to contain information on the context of words in the entire corpus, with the result that similar words end up with
similar hidden layer weights (word embeddings). Such word embeddings can transform wordsin text form into numerical vectors that may beuseful for a variety of applications. bprojection of word embeddings for various materials science words, as trained on a corpus scienti ﬁc
abstracts, into two dimensions using principle components analysis. Without any explicit training, the word embeddings naturally preserve
relationships between chemical formulas, their common oxides, and their ground state structures. [Reprinted according to the terms of theCC-BY license ref.
259].
K. Choudhary et al.
18
npj Computational Materials (2022)    59 Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences