There have been libraries of such descriptors developed such as
MatMiner151and DScribe158. Some examples of such models are
given in Table 2. Such representations are especially useful for
experimental datasets such as those for superconducting materi-
als where the atomic structure is not tabulated. However, theserepresentations cannot distinguish different polymorphs of asystem with different point groups and space groups. It has been
recently shown that although composition-based representations
can help build ML/DL models to predict some properties likeformation energy with remarkable accuracy, it does not necessa-rily translate to accurate predictions of other properties such as
stability, when compared to DFT ’s own accuracy
159.
SPECTRAL MODELS
When electromagnetic radiation hits materials, the interaction
between the radiation and matter measured as a function of thewavelength or frequency of the radiation produces a spectro-scopic signal. By studying spectroscopy, researchers can gain
insights into the materials ’composition, structural, and dynamic
properties. Spectroscopic techni ques are foundati onal in materi-
als characterization. For instance, X-ray diffraction (XRD) hasbeen used to characterize the crystal structure of materials for
more than a century. Spectroscopic analysis can involve ﬁttingquantitative physical models (for example, Rietveld re ﬁnement)
or more empirical approaches such as ﬁtting linear combina-
tions of reference spectra, such as with x-ray absorption near-
edge spectroscopy (XANES). Both approaches require a high
degree of researcher expert ise through careful design of
experiments; speci ﬁcation, revision, and iterative ﬁtting of
physical models; or the availability of template spectra of known
materials. In recent years, with the advances in high-throughput
experiments and computational data, spectroscopic data hasmultiplied, giving opportunities for researchers to learn from the
data and potentially displace the conventional methods in
analyzing such data. This section covers emerging DL applica-
tions in various modes of spectro scopic data analysis, aiming to
offer practice examples and insights. Some of the applicationsare shown in Fig. 3.
Databases and software libraries
Currently, large-scale and element-diverse spectral data mainly
exist in computational databases. For example, in ref.
160, the
authors calculated the infrared spectra, piezoelectric tensor, Born
effective charge tensor, and dielectric response as a part of the
JARVIS-DFT DFPT database. The Materials Project has establishedthe largest computational X-ray absorption database (XASDb),
Fig. 3 Example applications of deep learning for spectral data. a Predicting structure information from the X-ray diffraction374, Reprinted
according to the terms of the CC-BY license374. Copyright 2020. bPredicting catalysis properties from computational electronic density of
states data. Reprinted according to the terms of the CC-BY license202. Copyright 2021.K. Choudhary et al.
9
Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences npj Computational Materials (2022)    59