In addition to molecules and solids, property predictions
models have also been used for bio-materials such as proteins,which can be viewed as large molecules. There have been severalefforts for predicting protein-based properties, such as binding
afﬁnity
66and docking predictions110.
There have also been several applications for identifying
reasonable chemical space using DL methods such as autoenco-ders
111and reinforcement learning112 –114for inverse materials
design. Inverse materials design with techniques such as GAN
deals with ﬁnding chemical compounds with suitable properties
and act as complementary to forward prediction models. Whilesuch concepts have been widely applied to molecular systems,
115,
recently these methods have been applied to solids as well116 –120.
Fast materials screening
DFT-based high-throughput methods are usually limited to a few
thousands of compounds and take a long time for calculations,
DL-based methods can aid this process and allow much fasterpredictions. DL-based property prediction models mentionedabove can be used for pre-screening chemical compounds.
Hence, DL-based tools can be viewed as a pre-screening tool for
traditional methods such as DFT. For example, Xie et al. usedCGCNN model to screen stable perovskite materials
67as well
hierarchical visualization of materials space121. Park et al.122used
iCGCNN to screen ThCr 2Si2-type materials. Lugier et al. used DL
methods to predict thermoelectric properties123. Rosen et al.124
used graph neural network models to predict the bandgaps ofmetal-organic frameworks. DL for molecular materials has been
used to predict technologically important properties such as
aqueous solubility
125and toxicity126.It should be noted that the full atomistic representations and
the associated DL models are only possible if the crystal structure
and atom positions are available. In practice, the precise atompositions are only available from DFT structural relaxations orexperiments, and are one of the goals for materials discovery
instead of the starting point. Hence, alternative methods have
been proposed to bypass the necessity for atom positions inbuilding DL models. For example, Jain and Bligaard
127proposed
the atomic position-independent descriptors and used a CNN
model to learn the energies of crystals. Such descriptors include
information based only on the symmetry (e.g., space group andWyckoff position). In principle, the method can be applieduniversally in all crystals. Nevertheless, the model errors tend to
be much higher than graph-based models. Similar coarse-grained
representation using Wyckoff representation was also used byGoodall et al.
128. Alternatively, Zuo et al.129started from the
hypothetical structures without precise atom positions, and used a
Bayesian optimization method coupled with a MEGNet energy
model as an energy evaluator to perform direct structuralrelaxation. Applying the Bayesian optimization with symmetryrelaxation (BOWSR) algorithm successfully discovered ReWB(Pca2
1) and MoWC 2(P6 3/mmc) hard materials, which were then
experimentally synthesized.
APPLICATIONS IN CHEMICAL FORMULA AND SEGMENT
REPRESENTATIONS
One of the earliest applications for DL included SMILES for
molecules, elemental fractions and chemical descriptors for solids,
and sequence of protein names as descriptors. Such descriptorslack explicit inclusion of atomic structure information but are still
(a) CGCNN (b) ALIGNN
(c) MEGNet (d) iCGCNN
Fig. 2 Schematic representations of an atomic structure as a graph. a CGCNN model in which crystals are converted to graphs with nodes
representing atoms in the unit cell and edges representing atom connections. Nodes and edges are characterized by vectors corresponding
to the atoms and bonds in the crystal, respectively [Reprinted with permission from ref.67Copyright 2019 American Physical Society],
bALIGNN65model in which the convolution layer alternates between message passing on the bond graph and its bond-angle line graph.
cMEGNet in which the initial graph is represented by the set of atomic attributes, bond attributes and global state attributes [Reprinted with
permission from ref.33Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society] model, diCGCNN model in which multiple edges connect a node to
neighboring nodes to show the number of Voronoi neighbors [Reprinted with permission from ref.122Copyright 2019 American Physical
Society].K. Choudhary et al.
7
Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences npj Computational Materials (2022)    59