materials or equipment identi ﬁed are necessarily the best
available for the purpose.
Activation function
Activation functions (such as sigmoid, hyperbolic tangent (tanh),
rectiﬁed linear unit (ReLU), leaky ReLU, Swish) are the critical
nonlinear components that enable neural networks to compose
many small building blocks to learn complex nonlinear functions.For example, the sigmoid activation maps real numbers to the
range (0, 1); this activation function is often used in the last layer
of binary classi ﬁers to model probabilities. The choice of activation
function can affect training ef ﬁciency as well as ﬁnal accuracy
57.
Loss function, gradient descent, and normalization
The weight matrices of a neural network are initialized randomly
or obtained from a pre-trained model. These weight matrices are
multiplied with the input matrix (or output from a previous layer)
and subjected to a nonlinear activation function to yield updatedrepresentations, which are often referred to as activations orfeature maps. The loss function (also known as an objective
function or empirical risk) is calculated by comparing the output of
the neural network and the known target value data. Typically,network weights are iteratively updated via stochastic gradientdescent algorithms to minimize the loss function until the desired
accuracy is achieved. Most modern deep learning frameworks
facilitate this by using reverse-mode automatic differentiation
58to
obtain the partial derivatives of the loss function with respect to
each network parameter through recursive application of the
chain rule. Colloquially, this is also known as back-propagation.
Common gradient descent algorithms include: Stochastic
Gradient Descent (SGD), Adam, Adagrad etc. The learning rate is
an important parameter in gradient descent. Except for SGD, all
other methods use adaptive learning parameter tuning. Depend-ing on the objective such as classi ﬁcation or regression, different
loss functions such as Binary Cross Entropy (BCE), Negative Log
likelihood (NLLL) or Mean Squared Error (MSE) are used.
The inputs of a neural network are generally scaled i.e.,
normalized to have zero mean and unit standard deviation.Scaling is also applied to the input of hidden layers (using batch or
layer normalization) to improve the stability of ANNs.
Epoch and mini-batches
A single pass of the entire training data is called an epoch, and
multiple epochs are performed until the weights converge. In DL,datasets are usually large and computing gradients for the entire
dataset and network becomes challenging. Hence, the forward
passes are done with small subsets of the training data calledmini-batches.
Under ﬁtting, over ﬁtting, regularization, and early stopping
During an ML training, the dataset is split into training,
validation, and test sets. The test set is never used during the
training process. A model is said to be under ﬁtting if the model
performs poorly on the trainin g set and lacks the capacity to
fully learn the training data. A model is said to over ﬁti ft h e
model performs too well on the training data but does not
perform well on the validation data. Over ﬁtting is controlled
with regularization techniqu es such as L2 regularization,
dropout, and early stopping
37.
Regularization discourages the model from simply memorizing
the training data, resulting in a model that is more generalizable.
Over ﬁtting models are often characterized by neurons that have
weights with large magnitudes. L2 regularization reduces the
possibility of over ﬁtting by adding an additional term to the loss
function that penalizes the large weight values, keeping the valuesof the weights and biases small during training. Another popularregularization is dropout
59in which we randomly set the
activations for an NN layer to zero during training. Similar to
bagging60, the use of dropout brings about the same effect of
training a collection of randomly chosen models which prevents
the co-adaptations among the neurons, consequently reducing
the likelihood of the model from over ﬁtting. In early stopping,
further epochs for training are stopped before the model over ﬁts
i.e., accuracy on the validation set ﬂattens or decreases.
CONVOLUTIONAL NEURAL NETWORKS
Convolutional neural networks (CNN)61can be viewed as a
regularized version of multilayer perceptrons with a stronginductive bias for learning translation-invariant image representa-
tions. There are four main components in CNNs: (a) learnable
convolution ﬁlterbanks, (b) nonlinear activations, (c) spatial
coarsening (via pooling or strided convolution), (d) a prediction
module, often consisting of fully connected layers that operate ona global instance representation.
In CNNs we use convolution functions with multiple kernels or
ﬁlters with trainable and shared weights or parameters, instead of
general matrix multiplication. These ﬁlters/kernels are matrices
with a relatively small number of rows and columns that convolve
over the input to automatically extract high-level local features in
the form of feature maps. The ﬁlters slide/convolve (element-wise
multiply) across the input with a ﬁxed number of strides to
produce the feature map and the information thus learnt is passed
to the hidden/fully connected layers. Depending on the input
data, these ﬁlters can be one, two, or three-dimensional.
Similar to the fully connected NNs, nonlinearities such as ReLU
are then applied that allows us to deal with nonlinear and
complicated data. The pooling operation preserves spatialinvariance, downsamples and reduces the dimension of each
feature map obtained after convolution. These downsampling/
pooling operations can be of different types such as maximum-
pooling, minimum-pooling, average pooling, and sum pooling.
After one or more convolutional and pooling layers, the outputsare usually reduced to a one-dimensional global representation.
CNNs are especially popular for image data.
GRAPH NEURAL NETWORKS
Graphs and their variantsClassical CNNs as described above are based on a regular grid
Euclidean data (such as 2D grid in images). However, real-life datastructures, such as social networks, segments of images, word
vectors, recommender systems, and atomic/molecular structures,
are usually non-Euclidean. In such cases, graph-based non-Euclidean data structures become especially important.
Mathematically, a graph Gis de ﬁned as a set of nodes/vertices
V, a set of edges/links, Eand node features, X:G=(V,E,X)
62–64and
can be used to represent non-Euclidean data. An edge is formedbetween a pair of two nodes and contains the relation information
between the nodes. Each node and edge can have attributes/
features associated with it. An adjacency matrix Ais a square
matrix indicating connections between the nodes or not in the
form of 1 (connected) and 0 (unconnected). A graph can be of
various types such as: undirected/directed, weighted/unweighted,
homogeneous/heterogeneous, static/dynamic.
An undirected graph captures symmetric relations between
nodes, while a directed one captures asymmetric relations such
that Aij≠Aji. In a weighted graph, each edge is associated with a
scalar weight rather than just 1s and 0s. In a homogeneous graph,
all the nodes represent instances of the same type, and all theedges capture relations of the same type while in a hetero-
geneous graph, the nodes and edges can be of different types.
Heterogeneous graphs provide an easy interface for managingK. Choudhary et al.
3
Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences npj Computational Materials (2022)    59