the same class touch or overlap each other in the image, this
approach will falsely detect them to be a single, larger object. In
this case, DL models designed for the detection or instance
segmentation can be used to resolve overlapping instances. Inone such study, Cohn and Holm applied DL for instance-levelsegmentation of individual particles and satellites in dense
powder images
235. Segmenting each particle allows for computer
vision to generate detailed size and morphology informationwhich can be used to supplement experimental powdercharacterization for additive manufacturing. Additionally, over-
laying the powder and satellite masks yielded the ﬁrst method for
quantifying the satellite content of powder samples, which cannotbe measured experimentally.
Super-resolution imaging and auto-tuning experimental
parameters
The studies listed so far focus on automating the analysis of
existing data after it has been collected experimentally. However,
DL can also be applied during experiments to improve the quality
of the data itself. This can reduce the time for data collection orimprove the amount of information captured in each image.Super-resolution and other DL techniques can also be applied
in situ to autonomously adjust experimental parameters.
Recording high-resolution electron microscope images often
require large dwell times, limiting the throughput of microscopy
experiments. Additionally, during imaging, interactions betweenthe electron beam and a microscopy sample can result inundesirable effects, including charging of non-conductive samples
and damage to sensitive samples. Thus, there is interest in using
DL to arti ﬁcially increase the resolution of images without
introducing these artifacts. One method of interest is applying
generative adversarial networks (GANs) for this application.
De Haan et al. recorded SEM images of the same regions of
interest in carbon samples containing gold nanoparticles at two
resolutions
236. Low-resolution images recorded were used as
inputs to a GAN. The corresponding images with twice theresolution were used as the ground truth. After training the GAN
reduced the number of undetected gaps between nanoparticles
from 13.9 to 3.7%, indicating that super-resolution was successful.Thus, applying DL led to a four-fold reduction of the interactiontime between the electron beam and the sample.
Ede and Beanland collected a dataset of STEM images of
different samples
237. Images were subsampled with spiral and
‘jittered ’grid masks to obtain partial images with resolutions
reduced by a factor up to 100. A GAN was trained to reconstructfull images from their corresponding partial images. The results
indicated that despite a signi ﬁcant reduction in the sampling area,
this approach successfully reconstructed high-resolution imageswith relatively small errors.
DL has also been applied to automated tip conditioning for SPM
experiments. Rashidi and Wolkow trained a model to detectartifacts in SPM measurements resulting from degradation in tip
quality
238. Using an ensemble of convolutional neural networks
resulted in 99% accuracy. After detecting that a tip has degraded,the SPM was con ﬁgured to automatically recondition the tip
in situ until the network indicated that the atomic sharpness of
the tip has been restored. Monitoring and reconditioning the tip is
the most time and labor-intensive part of conducting SPMexperiments. Thus, automating this process through DL can
increase the throughput and decrease the cost of collecting data
through SPM.
In addition to materials characterization, DL can be applied to
autonomously adjust parameters during manufacturing. Scimeet al. mounted a camera to multiple 3D printers
239. Images of the
build plate were recorded throughout the printing process. A
dynamic segmentation convolutional neural network was trained
to recognize defects such as recoater streaking, incompletespreading, spatter, porosity, and others. The trained model
achieved high performance and was transferable to multipleprinters from three different methods of additive manufacturing.
This work is the ﬁrst step to enabling smart additive manufactur-
ing machines that can correct defects and adjust parametersduring printing.
There is also growing interest in establishing instruments and
laboratories for autonomous experimentation. Eppel et al. trainedmultiple models to detect chemicals, materials, and transparentvessels in a chemistry lab setting
240. This study provides a rigorous
analysis of several different approaches for scene understanding.
Models were trained to characterize laboratory scenes withdifferent methods including semantic segmentation and instancesegmentation, both with and without overlapping instances. Themodels successfully detected individual vessels and materials in avariety of settings. Finer-grained understanding of the contents of
vessels, such as segmentation of individual phases in multi-phase
systems, was limited, outlining the path for future work in thisarea. The results represent an important step towards realizingautomated experimentation for laboratory-scale experiments.
Microstructure representation learning
Materials microstructure is often represented in the form of multi-
phase high-dimensional 2D/3D images and thus can readily
leverage image-based DL methods to learn robust, low-dimensional microstructure representations, which can subse-quently be used for building predictive and generative models tolearn forward and inverse structure-property linkages, which aretypically studied across different length scales (multi-scale
modeling). In this context, homogenization and localization refer
to the transfer of information from lower length scales to higherlength scales and vice-versa. DL using customized CNNs has beenused both for homogenization, i.e., predicting the macroscaleproperty of material given its microstructure information
221,241,242,
as well as for localization, i.e., predicting the strain distribution
across a given microstructure for a loading condition243.
Transfer learning has also been widely used for analyzing
materials microstructure images; methods for improving the useof transfer learning to materials science applications remain anarea of active research. Goetz et al. investigated the use ofunsupervised domain adaptation as an alternative to simply ﬁne-
tuning a pre-trained model
244. In this technique a model is ﬁrst
trained on a labeled dataset in the source domain. Next, adiscriminator model is used to train the model to generatedomain-agnostic features. Compared to simple ﬁne-tuning,
unsupervised domain adaptation improved the performance of
classi ﬁcation and segmentation neural networks on materials
science datasets. However, it was determined that the highestperformance was achieved when the source domain was morevisually similar to the target (for example, using a different set ofmicrostructural images instead of ImageNet.) This highlights the
utility of establishing large, publicly available datasets of
annotated images in materials science.
Kitaraha and Holm used the output of an intermediate layer of a
pre-trained convolutional neural network as a feature representa-
tion for images of steel surface defects and Inconnel fracturesurfaces
245. Images were classi ﬁed by defect type or fracture
surface orientation using unsupervised DL. Even though nolabeled data was used to train the neural network or the
unsupervised classi ﬁer, the model found natural decision bound-
aries that achieved a classi ﬁcation performance of 98% and 88%
for the defect classes and fracture surface orientations, respec-tively. Visualization of the representations through principalcomponent analysis (PCA) and t-distributed stochastic neighbor-
hood embedding (t-SNE) provided qualitative insights into the
representations. Although the detailed physical interpretation ofthe representations is still a distant goal, this study provides toolsK. Choudhary et al.
15
Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences npj Computational Materials (2022)    59