for investigating patterns in visual signals contained in image-
based datasets in materials science.
Larmuseau et al. investigated the use of triplet networks to
obtain consistent representations for visually similar images ofmaterials
246. Triplet networks are trained with three images at a
time. The ﬁrst image, the reference, is classi ﬁed by the network.
The second image, called the positive, is another image with the
same class label. The last image, called the negative, is an image
from a separate class. During training the loss function includeserrors in predicting the class of the reference image, the difference
in representations of the reference and positive images, and the
similarity in representations of the reference and negative images.
This process allows the network to learn consistent representa-
tions for images in the same class while distinguishing imagesfrom different classes. The triple network outperformed an
ordinary convolutional neural network trained for image classi ﬁca-
tion on the same dataset.
In addition to investigating representations used to analyze
existing images, DL can generate synthetic images of materials
systems. Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) are currently the
predominant method for synthetic microstructure generation.
GANs consist of a generator, which creates a synthetic micro-structure image, and a discriminator, which attempts to predict if a
given input image is real or synthetic. With careful application,
GANs can be a powerful tool for microstructure representationlearning and design.
Yang and Li et al.
247,248developed a GAN-based model for
learning a low-dimensional embedding of microstructures, which
could then be easily sampled and used with the generator of the
GAN model to generate realistic, statistically similar microstructureimages, thus enabling microstructural materials design. The model
was able to capture complex, nonlinear microstructure character-
istics and learn the mapping between the latent design variablesand microstructures. In order to close the loop, the method was
combined with a Bayesian optimization approach to design
microstructures with optimal optical absorption performance. The
discovered microstructures were found to have up to 17% better
property than randomly sampled microstructures. The uniquearchitecture of their GAN model also facilitated generator
scalability to generate arbitrary-sized microstructure images and
discriminator transferability to build structure-property prediction
models. Yang et al.
249recently combined GANs with MDNs
(mixture density networks) to enable inverse modeling inmicrostructural materials design, i.e., generate the microstructure
for a given desired property.
Hsu et al. constructed a GAN to generate 3D synthetic solid
oxide fuel cell microstructures
250. These microstructures were
compared to other synthetic microstructures generated by
DREAM.3D as well as experimentally observed microstructures
measured via sectioning and imaging with PFIB-SEM. Synthetic
microstructures generated from the GAN were observed toqualitatively show better agreement to the experimental micro-
structures than the DREAM.3D microstructures, as evidenced by
the more realistic phase connectivity and lower amount of
agglomeration of solid phases. Additionally, a statistical analysis
of various features such as volume fraction, particle size, andseveral other quantities demonstrated that the GAN microstruc-
tures were quantitatively more similar to the real microstructures
than the DREAM.3D microstructures.
In a similar study, Chun et al. generated synthetic microstruc-
tures of high energy materials using a GAN
251. Once again, a
synthetic microstructure generated via GAN showed better
qualitative visual similarity to an experimentally observed micro-
structure compared to a synthetic microstructure generated via atransfer learning approach, with sharper phase boundaries and
fewer computational artifacts. Additionally, a statistical analysis of
the void size, aspect ratio, and orientation distributions indicatedthat the GAN produced microstructures that were quantitatively
more similar to real materials.
Applications of DL to microstructure representation learning
can help researchers improve the performance of predictivemodels used for the applications listed above. Additionally, usinggenerative models can generate more realistic simulated micro-
structures. This can help researchers develop more accurate
models for predicting material properties and performancewithout needing to synthesize and process these materials,signi ﬁcantly increasing the throughput of materials selection
and screening experiments.
Mesoscale modeling applications
In addition to image-based characterization, deep learning
methods are increasingly used in mesoscale modeling. Daiet al.
252trained a GNN successfully trained to predict magnetos-
triction in a wide range of synthetic polycrystalline systems with
around 10% prediction error. The microstructure is represented by
a graph where each node corresponds to a single grain, and theedges between nodes indicate an interface between neighboring
grains. Five node features (3 Euler angles, volume, and the number
of neighbors) were associated with each grain. The GNNoutperformed other machine learning approaches for propertyprediction of polycrystalline materials by accounting for interac-
tions between neighboring grains.
Similarly, Cohn and Holm present preliminary work applying
GNNs to predict the occurrence of abnormal grain growth (AGG)in Monte Carlo simulations of microstructure evolution
253. AGG
appears to be stochastic, making it notoriously dif ﬁcult to predict,
control, and even observe experimentally in some materials. AGGhas been reproduced in Monte Carlo simulations of materialsystems, but a model that can predict which initial microstructures
will undergo AGG has not been established before. A dataset of
Monte Carlo simulations was created using SPPARKS
254,255.A
microstructure GNN was trained to predict AGG in individual
simulations, with 75% classi ﬁcation accuracy. In comparison, an
image-based only achieved 60% accuracy. The GNN also providedphysical insight to understanding AGG and indicated that only 2neighborhood shells are needed to achieve the maximum
performance achieved in the study. These early results motivate
additional work on applying GNNs to predict the occurrence inboth simulated and real materials during processing.
NATURAL LANGUAGE PROCESSING
Most of the existing knowledge in the materials domain is
currently unavailable as structured information and only exists as
unstructured text, tables, or images in various publications. Thereexists a great opportunity to use natural language processing(NLP) techniques to convert text to structured data or to directly
learn and make inferences from the text information. However,
as a relatively new ﬁeld within materials science, many
challenges remain unsolved in this domain, such as resolvingdependencies between words and phrases across multiple
sentences and paragraphs.
Datasets for NLP
Datasets relevant to natural language processing include peer-
reviewed journal articles, articles published on preprint serverssuch as arXiv or ChemRxiv, patents, and online material such asWikipedia. Unfortunately, accessing or parsing most such datasets
remains dif ﬁcult. Peer-reviewed journal articles are typically
subject to copyright restrictions and thus dif ﬁcult to obtain,
especially in the large numbers required for machine learning.
Many publishers now offer text and data mining (TDM) agree-
ments that can be signed online, allowing at least a limited,restricted amount of work to be performed. However, gaining
K. Choudhary et al.
16
npj Computational Materials (2022)    59 Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences