function (RDC) and used a deep neural network model to predict
the Fe K-edge XANES spectra for arbitrary local environments.
In addition to learn the structure-spectra or spectra-structure
relationships, a few works have also explored the possibility ofrelating spectra to other material properties in a non-trivial way.The DOSnet proposed by Fung et al.
202(Fig. 3b) uses the
electronic DOS spectra calculated from DFT as inputs to a CNNmodel to predict the adsorption energies of H, C, N, O, S and theirhydrogenated counterparts, CH, CH
2,C H 3, NH, OH, and SH, on
bimetallic alloy surfaces. This approach extends the previousd-band theory
203, where only the d-band center, a scalar, was
used to correlate with the adsorption energy on transition metals.Similarly, Kaundinya et al.
204used Atomistic Line Graph Neural
Network (ALIGNN) to predict DOS for 56,000 materials in theJARVIS-DFT database using a direct discretized spectrum (D-
ALIGNN), and a compressed low-dimensional representation using
an autoencoder (AE-ALIGNN). Stein et al.
205tried to learn the
mapping between the image and the UV-vis spectrum of thematerial using the conditional variational encoder (cVAE) withneural network models as the backbone. Such models cangenerate the UV-vis spectrum directly from a simple materialimage, offering much faster material characterizations. Predictinggas adsorption isotherms for direct air capture (DAC) are also animportant application of spectra-based DL models. There havebeen several important works
206,207for CO 2capture with high-
performance metal-organic frameworks (MOFs) which are impor-tant for mitigating climate change issues.
IMAGE-BASED MODELS
Computer vision is often credited as precipitating the current
wave of mainstream DL applications a decade ago
208. Naturally,
materials researchers have developed a broad portfolio ofapplications of computer vision for accelerating and improvingimage-based material characterization techniques. High-levelmicroscopy vision tasks can be organized as follows: imageclassi ﬁcation (and material property regression), auto-tuning
experimental imaging hyperparameters, pixelwise learning (e.g.,semantic segmentation), super-resolution imaging, object/entityrecognition, localization, and tracking, microstructure representa-tion learning.
Often these tasks generalize across many different imaging
modalities, spanning optical mi croscopy (OM), scanning elec-
tron microscopy (SEM) techniques, scanning probe microscopy(SPM, as in scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) or atomicforce microscopy (AFM), and transmission electron microscopy(TEM) variants, including scanning transmission electron micro-scopy (STEM).
The images obtained with these techniques range from
capturing local atomic to mesoscale structures (microstructure),the distribution and type of defects, and their dynamics which arecritically linked to the functionality and performance of thematerials. Over the past few decades, atomic-scale imaging hasbecome widespread and near-routine due to aberration-correctedSTEM
209. The collection of large image datasets is increasingly
presenting an analysis bottleneck in the materials characterizationpipeline, and the immediate need for automated image analysisbecomes important. Non-DL image analysis methods have driventremendous progress in quantitative microscopy, but often imageprocessing pipelines are brittle and require too much manualidenti ﬁcation of image features to be broadly applicable. Thus, DL
is currently the most promising solution for high-performance,high-throughput automated analysis of image datasets. For agood overview of applications in microstructure characterizationspeci ﬁcally, see
210.Databases and software libraries
Image datasets for materials can come from either experiments
or simulations. Software librari es mentioned above can be used
to generate images such as STM/STEM. Images can also be
obtained from the literature. A few common examples for image
datasets are shown below in Table 4. Recently, there has been a
rapid development in the ﬁeld of image learning tasks for
materials leading to several useful packages. We list some of
them in Table 4.
Applications in image classi ﬁcation and regression
DL for images can be used to automatically extract information
from images or transform images into a more useful state. The
bene ﬁts of automated image analysis include higher throughput,
better consistency of measurements compared to manualanalysis, and even the ability to measure signals in images thathumans cannot detect. The bene ﬁts of altering images include
image super-resolution, denoising, inferring 3D structure from 2D
images, and more. Examples of the applications of each task aresummarized below.
Image classi ﬁcation and regression
Classi ﬁcation and regression are the processes of predicting one
or more values associated with an image. In the context of DL the
only difference between the two methods is that the outputs ofclassi ﬁcation are discrete while the outputs of regression models
are continuous. The same network architecture may be used for
both classi ﬁcation and regression by choosing the appropriate
activation function (i.e., linear for regression or Softmax forclassi ﬁcation) for the output of the network. Due to its simplicity
image classi ﬁcation is one of the most established DL techniques
available in the materials science literature. Nonetheless, thistechnique remains an area of active research.
Modarres et al. applied DL with transfer learning to auto-
matically classify SEM images of different material systems
211.
They demonstrated how a single approach can be used to identify
a wide variety of features and material systems such as particles,
ﬁbers, Microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) devices, and more.
The model achieved 90% accuracy on a test set. Misclassi ﬁcations
resulted from images containing objects from multiple classes,
which is an inherent limitation of single-class classi ﬁcation. More
advanced techniques such as those described in subsequentsections can be applied to avoid these limitations. Additionally,
they developed a system to deploy the trained model at scale to
process thousands of images in parallel. This approach is essentialfor large-scale, high-throughput experiments or industrial applica-
tions of classi ﬁcation. ImageNet-based deep transfer learning has
also been successfully applied for crack detection in macroscalematerials images
212,213, as well as for property prediction on small,
noisy, and heterogeneous industrial datasets214,215.
DL has also been applied to characterize the symmetries of
simulated measurements of samples. In ref.216, Ziletti et al.
obtained a large database of perfect crystal structures, introduced
defects into the perfect lattices, and simulated diffraction patternsfor each structure. DL models were trained to identify the space
group of each diffraction patterns. The model achieved high
classi ﬁcation performance, even on crystals with signi ﬁcant
numbers of defects, surpassing the performance of conventionalalgorithms for detecting symmetries from diffraction patterns.
DL has also been applied to classify symmetries in simulated
STM measurements of 2D material systems
217. DFT was used to
generate simulated STM images for a variety of material systems.
A convolutional neural network was trained to identify which oftheﬁve 2D Bravais lattices each material belonged to using the
simulated STM image as input. The model achieved an average
F1 score of around 0.9 for each lattice type.
K. Choudhary et al.
12
npj Computational Materials (2022)    59 Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences