REVIEW ARTICLE OPEN
Recent advances and applications of deep learning methods in
materials science
Kamal Choudhary1,2,3✉, Brian DeCost4, Chi Chen5, Anubhav Jain6, Francesca Tavazza1, Ryan Cohn7, Cheol Woo Park8,
Alok Choudhary9, Ankit Agrawal9, Simon J. L. Billinge10, Elizabeth Holm7, Shyue Ping Ong5and Chris Wolverton8
Deep learning (DL) is one of the fastest-growing topics in materials data science, with rapidly emerging applications spanning
atomistic, image-based, spectral, and textual data modalities. DL allows analysis of unstructured data and automated identi ﬁcation
of features. The recent development of large materials databases has fueled the application of DL methods in atomistic prediction
in particular. In contrast, advances in image and spectral data have largely leveraged synthetic data enabled by high-quality
forward models as well as by generative unsupervised DL methods. In this article, we present a high-level overview of deep learningmethods followed by a detailed discussion of recent developments of deep learning in atomistic simulation, materials imaging,
spectral analysis, and natural language processing. For each modality we discuss applications involving both theoretical and
experimental data, typical modeling approaches with their strengths and limitations, and relevant publicly available software anddatasets. We conclude the review with a discussion of recent cross-cutting work related to uncertainty quanti ﬁcation in this ﬁeld
and a brief perspective on limitations, challenges, and potential growth areas for DL methods in materials science.
npj Computational Materials            (2022) 8:59 ; https://doi.org/10.1038/s41524-022-00734-6
INTRODUCTION
“Processing-structure-property-performance ”is the key mantra in
Materials Science and Engineering (MSE)
1. The length and time
scales of material structures and phenomena vary signi ﬁcantly
among these four elements, adding further complexity2. For
instance, structural information can range from detailed knowl-edge of atomic coordinates of elements to the microscale spatialdistribution of phases (microstructure), to fragment connectivity
(mesoscale), to images and spectra. Establishing linkages between
the above components is a challenging task.
Both experimental and computational techniques are useful to
identify such relationships. Due to rapid growth in automation in
experimental equipment and immense expansion of computa-
tional resources, the size of public materials datasets has seenexponential growth. Several large experimental and computa-tional datasets
3–10have been developed through the Materials
Genome Initiative (MGI)11and the increasing adoption of Findable,
Accessible, Interoperable, Reusable (FAIR)12principles. Such an
outburst of data requires automated analysis which can be
facilitated by machine learning (ML) techniques13–20.
Deep learning (DL)21,22is a specialized branch of machine
learning (ML). Originally inspired by biological models of
computation and cognition in the human brain23,24, one of DL ’s
major strengths is its potential to extract higher-level features
from the raw input data.
DL applications are rapidly replacing conventional systems in
many aspects of our daily lives, for example, in image and speech
recognition, web search, fraud detection, email/spam ﬁltering,
ﬁnancial risk modeling, and so on. DL techniques have beenproven to provide exciting new capabilities in numerous ﬁelds
(such as playing Go25, self-driving cars26, navigation, chip design,
particle physics, protein science, drug discovery, astrophysics,
object recognition27, etc).
Recently DL methods have been outperforming other machine
learning techniques in numerous scienti ﬁcﬁelds, such as
chemistry, physics, biology, and materials science20,28–32.D L
applications in MSE are still relatively new, and the ﬁeld has not
fully explored its potential, implications, and limitations. DL
provides new approaches for investigating material phenomenaand has pushed materials scientists to expand their traditional
toolset.
DL methods have been shown to act as a complementary
approach to physics-based methods for materials design. While
large datasets are often viewed as a prerequisite for successful DL
applications, techniques such as transfer learning, multi- ﬁdelity
modelling, and active learning can often make DL feasible for
small datasets as well
33–36.
Traditionally, materials have been designed experimentally
using trial and error methods with a strong dose of chemical
intuition. In addition to being a very costly and time-consuming
approach, the number of material combinations is so huge that it
is intractable to study experimentally, leading to the need for
empirical formulation and computational methods. While compu-
tational approaches (such as density functional theory, molecular
dynamics, Monte Carlo, phase- ﬁeld, ﬁnite elements) are much
faster and cheaper than experiments, they are still limited by
length and time scale constraints, which in turn limits their
respective domains of applicability. DL methods can offer
substantial speedups compared to conventional scienti ﬁc
1Materials Science and Engineering Division, National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD 20899, USA.2Theiss Research, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.
3DeepMaterials LLC, Silver Spring, MD 20906, USA.4Material Measurement Science Division, National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD 20899, USA.
5Department of NanoEngineering, University of California San Diego, San Diego, CA 92093, USA.6Energy Technologies Area, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA,
USA.7Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA.8Department of Materials Science and Engineering,
Northwestern University, Evanston, IL 60208, USA.9Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL 60208, USA.10Department of
Applied Physics and Applied Mathematics and the Data Science Institute, Fu Foundation School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Columbia Univers ity, New York, NY 10027,
USA.✉email: kamal.choudhary@nist.govwww.nature.com/npjcompumats
Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences
1234567890():,;