A similar CNN was utilized by Wang et al.173for fast identi ﬁcation
of metal-organic frameworks (MOFs), where experimental spectral
noise was extracted and then synthesized into the theoretical XRD
for training data augmentation.
An alternative idea was proposed by Dong et al.174. Instead of
recognizing only phases from the CNN, a proposed “parameter
quanti ﬁcation network ”(PQ-Net) was able to extract physico-
chemical information. The PQ-Net yields accurate predictions forscale factors, crystallite size, and lattice parameters for simulatedand experimental XRD spectra. The work by Aguiar et al.
175took a
step further and proposed a modular neural network architecture
that enables the combination of diffraction patterns and chemistrydata and provided a ranked list of predictions. The ranked listpredictions provide user ﬂexibility and overcome some aspects of
overcon ﬁdence in model predictions. In practical applications, AI-
driven XRD identi ﬁcation can be bene ﬁcial for high-throughput
materials discovery, as shown by Maffettone et al.
176. In their work,
an ensemble of 50 CNN models was trained on synthetic data
reproducing experimental variations (missing peaks, broadening,peaking shifting, noises). The model ensemble is capable ofpredicting the probability of each category label. A similar data
augmentation idea was adopted by Oviedo et al.
177, where
experimental XRD data for 115 thin- ﬁlm metal-halides were
measured, and CNN models trained on the augmented XRD dataachieved accuracies of 93% and 89% for classifying dimensionality
and space group, respectively.
Although not a DL method, an unsupervised machine learning
approach, non-negative matrix factorization (NMF), is showing
great promise for yielding chemically relevant XRD spectra from
time- or spatially-dependent sets of diffraction patterns. NMF isclosely related to principle component analysis in that it takes aset of patterns as a matrix and then compresses the data by
reducing the dimensionality by ﬁnding the most important
components. In NMF a constraint is applied that all thecomponents and their weights must be strictly positive. Thisoften corresponds to a real physical situation (for example, spectra
tend to be positive, as are the weights of chemical constituents).
As a result, it appears that the mathematical decomposition oftenresults in interpretable, physically meaningful, components andweights, as shown by Liu et al. for PDF data
178. An extension of
this showed that in a spatially resolved study, NMF could be used
to extract chemically resolved differential PDFs (similar to theinformation in EXAFS) from non-chemically resolved PDF mea-
surements
179. NMF is very quick and easy to apply and can be
applied to just about any set of spectra. It is likely to becomewidely used and is being implemented in the PDFitc.org websiteto make it more accessible to potential users.
Other than XRD, the XAS, Raman, and infrared spectra, also
contain rich structure-dependent spectroscopic information aboutthe material. Unlike XRD, where relatively simple theories andequations exist to relate structures to the spectral patterns, the
relationships between general spectra and structures are some-
what elusive. This dif ﬁculty has created a higher demand for
machine learning models to learn structural information from
other spectra.
For instance, the case of X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS),
including the X-ray absorption near-edge spectroscopy (XANES)and extended X-ray absorption ﬁne structure (EXAFS), is usually
used to analyze the structural information on an atomic level.
However, the high signal-to-noise XANES region has no equationfor data ﬁtting. DL modeling of XAS data is fascinating and offers
unprecedented insights. Timoshenko et al. used neural networks
to predict the coordination numbers of Pt
180and Cu181in
nanoclusters from the XANES. Aside from the high accuracies, theneural network also offers high prediction speed and new
opportunities for quantitative XANES analysis. Timoshenko
et al.
182further carried out a novel analysis of EXAFS using DL.
Although EXAFS analysis has an explicit equation to ﬁt, the studyis limited to the ﬁrst few coordination shells and on relatively
ordered materials. Timoshenko et al.182ﬁrst transformed the
EXAFS data into 2D maps with a wavelet transform and thensupplied the 2D data to a neural network model. The model can
instantly predict relatively long-range radial distribution functions,
offering in situ local structure analysis of materials. The advent of
high-throughput XAS databases has recently unveiled more
possibilities for machine learning models to be deployed using
XAS data. For example, Zheng et al.
161used an ensemble learning
method to match and fast search new spectra in the XASDb. Later,
the same authors showed that random forest models outperform
DL models such as MLPs or CNNs in directly predicting atomic
environment labels from the XANES spectra183. Similar approaches
were also adopted by Torrisi et al.184In practical applications,
Andrejevic et al.185used the XASDb data together with the
topological materials database. They constructed CNN models to
classify the topology of materials from the XANES and symmetry
group inputs. The model correctly predicted 81% topological and
80% trivial cases and achieved 90% accuracy in material classes
containing certain elements.
Raman, infrared, and other vibrational spectroscopies provide
structural ﬁngerprints and are usually used to discriminate and
estimate the concentration of components in a mixture. For
example, Madden et al.186have used neural network models to
predict the concentration of illicit materials in a mixture using the
Raman spectra. Interestingly, several groups have independently
found that DL models outperform chemometrics analysis in
vibrational spectroscopies187,188. For learning vibrational spectra,
the number of training spectra is usually less than or on the order
of the number of features (intensity points), and the models can
easily over ﬁt. Hence, dimensional reduction strategies are
commonly used to compress the information dimension using,for example, principal component analysis (PCA)
189,190.D L
approaches do not have such concerns and offer elegant and
uniﬁed solutions. For example, Liu et al.191applied CNN models to
the Raman spectra in the RRUFF spectral database and show that
CNN models outperform classical machine learning models such
as SVM in classi ﬁcation tasks. More DL applications in vibrational
spectral analysis can be found in a recent review by Yang et al.192.
Although most current DL work focuses on the inverse problem,
i.e., predicting structural information from the spectra, some
innovative approaches also solve the forward problems bypredicting the spectra from the structure. In this case, the
spectroscopy data can be viewed simply as a high-dimensional
material property of the structure. This is most common in
molecular science, where predicting the infrared spectra
193,
molecular excitation spectra194, is of particular interest. In the
early 2000s, Selzer et al.193and Kostka et al.195attempted
predicting the infrared spectra directly from the molecular
structural descriptors using neural networks. Non-DL models can
also perform such tasks to a reasonable accuracy196. For DL
models, Chen et al.197used a Euclidean neural network (E(3)NN) to
predict the phonon density of state (DOS) spectra198from atom
positions and element types. The E(3)NN model captures
symmetries of the crystal structures, with no need to perform
data augmentation to achieve target invariances. Hence the E(3)
NN model is extremely data-ef ﬁcient and can give reliable DOS
spectra prediction and heat capacity using relatively sparse data of
1200 calculation results on 65 elements. A similar idea was also
used to predict the XAS spectra. Carbone et al.199used a message
passing neural network (MPNN) to predict the O and N K-edge
XANES spectra from the molecular structures in the QM9
database7. The training XANES data were generated using the
FEFF package200. The trained MPNN model reproduced all
prominent peaks in the predicted XANES, and 90% of the
predicted peaks are within 1 eV of the FEFF calculations. Similarly,
Rankine et al.201started from the two-body radial distributionK. Choudhary et al.
11
Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences npj Computational Materials (2022)    59