nodes and edges of different types as well as their associated
features. When input features or graph topology vary with time,
they are called dynamic graphs otherwise they are considered
static. If a node is connected to another node more than once it istermed a multi-graph.
Types of GNNs
At present, GNNs are probably the most popular AI method for
predicting various materials properties based on structuralinformation
33,65–69. Graph neural networks (GNNs) are DL methods
that operate on graph domain and can capture the dependence
of graphs via message passing between the nodes and edges ofgraphs. There are two key steps in GNN training: (a) we ﬁrst
aggregate information from neighbors and (b) update the nodes
and/or edges. Importantly, aggregation is permutation invariant.Similar to the fully connected NNs, the input node features, X
(with embedding matrix) are multiplied with the adjacency matrix
and the weight matrices and then multiplied with the nonlinearactivation function to provide outputs for the next layer. This
method is called the propagation rule.
Based on the propagation rule and aggregation methodology,
there could be different variants of GNNs such as Graphconvolutional network (GCN)
70, Graph attention network (GAT)71,
Relational-GCN72, graph recurrent network (GRN)73, Graph isomer-
ism network (GIN)74, and Line graph neural network (LGNN)75.
Graph convolutional neural networks are the most popular GNNs.
SEQUENCE-TO-SEQUENCE MODELS
Traditionally, learning from sequential inputs such as text involves
generating a ﬁxed-length input from the data. For example, the
“bag-of-words ”approach simply counts the number of instances
of each word in a document and produces a ﬁxed-length vector
that is the size of the overall vocabulary.
In contrast, sequence-to-sequence models can take into
account sequential/contextual information about each word
and produce outputs of arbitrary length. For example, in named
entity recognition (NER), an input sequence of words (e.g., a
chemical abstract) is mapped to an output sequence of “entities ”
or categories where every word in the sequence is assigned a
category.
An early form of sequence-to-sequence model is the recurrent
neural network, or RNN. Unlike the fully connected NN architec-
ture, where there is no connection between hidden nodes in thesame layer, but only between nodes in adjacent layers, RNN has
feedback connections. Each hidden layer can be unfolded and
processed similarly to traditional NNs sharing the same weight
matrices. There are multiple types of RNNs, of which the most
common ones are: gated recurrent unit recurrent neural network(GRURNN), long short-term memory (LSTM) network, and clock-
work RNN (CW-RNN)
76.
However, all such RNNs suffer from some drawbacks, includ-
ing: (i) dif ﬁculty of parallelization and therefore dif ﬁculty in
training on large datasets and (ii) dif ﬁculty in preserving long-
range contextual information due to the “vanishing gradient ”
problem. Nevertheless, as we will later describe, LSTMs have
been successfully applied to various NER problems in thematerials domain.
More recently, sequence-to-sequence models based on a
“transformer ”architecture, such as Google ’s Bidirectional Enco-
der Representations from Transformers (BERT) model
77,h a v e
helped address some of the issues of traditional RNNs. Rather
than passing a state vector that is iterated word-by-word, such
models use an attention mechanism to allow access to allprevious words simultaneously without explicit time steps. This
mechanism facilitates parallelization and also better preserves
long-term context.GENERATIVE MODELS
While the above DL frameworks are based on supervised machine
learning (i.e., we know the target or ground truth data such as inclassi ﬁcation and regression) and discriminative (i.e., learn
differentiating features between various datasets), many AI tasks
are based on unsupervised (such as clustering) and are generative(i.e., aim to learn underlying distributions)
78.
Generative models are used to (a) generate data samples similar
to the training set with variations i.e., augmentation and for
synthetic data, (b) learn good generalized latent features, (c) guide
mixed reality applications such as virtual try-on. There are varioustypes of generative models, of which the most common are: (a)variational encoders (VAE), which explicitly de ﬁne and learn
likelihood of data, (b) Generative adversarial networks (GAN),
which learn to directly generate samples from model ’s distribu-
tion, without de ﬁning any density function.
A VAE model has two components: namely encoder and
decoder. A VAE ’s encoder takes input from a target distribution
and compresses it into a low-dimensional latent space. Then the
decoder takes that latent space representation and reproducesthe original image. Once the network is trained, we can generatelatent space representations of various images, and interpolate
between these before forwarding them through the decoder
which produces new images. A VAE is similar to a principalcomponent analysis (PCA) but instead of linear data assumption in
PCA, VAEs work in nonlinear domain. A GAN model also has two
components: namely generator, and discriminator. GAN ’s gen-
erator generates fake/synthetic data that could fool the discrimi-nator. Its discriminator tries to distinguish fake data from real ones.
This process is also termed as “min-max two-player game. ”We
note that VAE models learn the hidden state distributions duringthe training process, while GAN ’s hidden state distributions are
prede ﬁned. Rather GAN generators serve to generate images that
could fool the discriminator. These techniques are widely used forimages and spectra and have also been recently applied to atomicstructures.
DEEP REINFORCEMENT LEARNING
Reinforcement learning (RL) deals with tasks in which a
computational agent learns to make decisions by trial and error.
Deep RL uses DL into the RL framework, allowing agents to makedecisions from unstructured input data
79. In traditional RL,
Markov decision process (MDP) is used in which an agent at
every timestep takes action to receive a scalar reward andtransitions to the next state according to system dynamics tolearn policy in order to maximize returns. However, in deep RL,
the states are high-dimensional (such as continuous images or
spectra) which act as an input to DL methods. DRL architecturescan be either model-based or model-free.
SCIENTIFIC MACHINE LEARNING
The nascent ﬁeld of scienti ﬁc machine learning (SciML)
80is
creating new opportunities across all paradigms of machine
learning, and deep learning in particular. SciML is focused on
creating ML systems that incorporate scienti ﬁc knowledge and
physical principles, either directly in the speci ﬁc form of the model
or indirectly through the optimization algorithms used for
training. This offers potential improvements in sample andtraining complexity, robustness (particularly under extrapolation),and model interpretability. One prominent theme can be found in
ref.
57. Such implementations usually involve applying multiple
physics-based constraints while training a DL model81–83. One of
the key challenges of universal function approximation is that a
NN can quickly learn spurious features that have nothing to do
with the features that a researcher could be actually interested in,
K. Choudhary et al.
4
npj Computational Materials (2022)    59 Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences