4
FIG. 4. Overview of the link between quantum models and kernel methods. The strategy with which data is
encoded into quantum states is a feature map from the space of data to the feature space F\of density matrices" . In
this space, quantum models can be expressed as a linear model whose decision boundary is dened by the measurement.
According to kernel theory, an alternative feature space with the same kernel is the RKHS F, whose vectors are functions
arising from xing one entry of the kernel (i.e., the inner product of data-encoding density matrices). The RKHS is equivalent
to the space of quantum models, which are linear models in the data-encoding feature space. These connections can be used
to study the properties of quantum models as learners, which turn out to be largely determined by the kernel, and therefore
by the data-encoding strategy.
the quantum kernel (see Section VI A). The famous representer theorem uses this to show that \optimal models"
(i.e., those that minimise the cost) can be written in terms of the quantum kernel as
fopt(x)=M
/summation.disp
m=1mtr[(xm)(x)]=tr/bracketleft.alt4/parenleft.alt4M
/summation.disp
m=1m(xm)/parenright.alt4(x)/bracketright.alt4; (1)
wherexm;m=1;:::;M is the training data and m∈R(see Section VI B). Looking at the expression in the round
brackets, this enables us to say something about optimal measurements for quantum models:
2. Quantum models that minimise typical machine learning cost functions have measurements that can
be written as \kernel expansions in the data", M=∑mm(xm).
In other words, we are guaranteed that the best measurements for machine learning tasks only have Mdegrees of
freedom {m}, rather than the O(22n)degrees of freedom needed to express a general measurement on a standard
n-qubit quantum computer. Even more, if we include a regularisation term into the cost function, the kernel denes
entirely which models are actually penalised or preferred by regularisation. Since the kernel only depends on the
way in which data is encoded into quantum states, one can conclude that data encoding fully denes the minima of
a given cost function used to train quantum models (see Section VI C).
But how can we ndthe optimal model in Eq. (1)? We could use the near-term approach to quantum machine
learning and simply train an ansatz, hoping that it learns the right measurement. But as illustrated in Figure 5,
variational training typically only searches through a small subspace of all possible quantum models/measurements.
This has a good reason: to train a circuit that can express any quantum model (and is hence guaranteed to nd the
optimal one) would require parameters for all O(22n)degrees of freedom, which is intractable for all but toy models.
However, also here kernel theory can help: not only is the optimal measurement dened by M/uni226A22ndegrees of
freedom, nding the optimal measurement has the same favourable scaling (see Section VI D) if we switch to a
kernel-based training approach.
3. The problem of nding the optimal measurement for typical machine learning cost functions trained
withMdata samples can be formulated as an M-dimensional optimisation problem.
If the loss is convex, as is common in machine learning, the optimisation problem is guaranteed to be convex as well.
Hence, under rather general assumptions, we are guaranteed that the \hard" problem of picking the best quantum
model shown in Eq. (1) is tractable and of a simple structure, even without reverting to variational heuristics. In
addition, convexity { the property that there is only one global minimum { may help with trainability problems like
the notorious \barren plateaus" [ 16] in variational circuit training. If the loss function is the hinge loss, things reduce
to a standard support vector machine with a quantum kernel, which is one of the algorithms proposed in [ 4] and [ 5].