16
Using Theorem 3 we know that all quantum models can be expressed by measurements ∑k
k(xk), and hence by
functions in the RKHS.
In fact, the above observation applies to anylinear model in a feature space that gives rise to the quantum kernel
(see Theorem 4.21 in [20]).
As a rst taste of how the connection of quantum models and kernel theory can be exploited for quantum machine
learning, consider the question whether quantum models are universal function approximators. If quantum models
are universal, the RKHS of the quantum kernel must be universal (or dense in the space of functions we are interested
in). This leads to the denition of a universal kernel (see [20] Denition 4.52):
Denition 6 (Universal kernel) .A continuous kernel on a compact metric space Xis called universal if the
RKHSFofis dense in C(X), i.e., for every function gin the set of functions C(X)mapping from elements in
Xto a scalar value, and for all >0there exists an f∈Fsuch that
/parallel.alt1f−g/parallel.alt1∞≤: (54)
The reason why this is useful is that there are a handful of known necessary conditions for a kernel to be universal,
for example if its feature map is injective (see [ 20] for more details). This immediately excludes quantum models
dened on the data domain X=Rwhich use single-qubit Pauli rotation gates of the form eix(witha Pauli matrix)
to encode data: since such rotations are 2 -periodic, two dierent x;x′∈Xget mapped to the same data-encoding
state(x). In other words, and to some extent trivially so, on a data domain that extends beyond the periodicity of a
quantum model we never have a chance for universal function approximation. Another example for universal kernels
are kernels of the form (x;x′)=∑∞
k=1ck/uni27E8x′;x/uni27E9k(see [ 20] Corollary 4.57). Vice versa, the universality proof for a
type of quantum model in [ 26] suggests that some quantum kernels of the form (1) are universal in the asymptotic
limit of exponentially large circuits.
I want to nish with a nal note about the relation between \wavefunctions" and functions in the RKHS of
quantum systems (see also the appendix of [ 4]). Quantum states are sometimes called \wavefunctions", since an
alternative denition of the Hilbert space of a quantum system is the space of functions f(⋅)= (⋅)which map a
measurement outcome icorresponding to basis state /divides.alt0i/uni27E9to an \amplitude"  (i)=/uni27E8i/divides.alt0 /uni27E9. (The dual basis vector /uni27E8i/divides.alt0
can here be understood as the evaluating functional iwhich returns this amplitude.) Hence, the Hilbert space
of a quantum system can be written as a space of functions mapping from {i}→ C. But the functions that we
are interested in for machine learning are functions in the data , not in the possible measurement outcomes. This
means that the Hilbert space of the quantum system is only equivalent to the RKHS of a quantum machine learning
model if we associate data with the measurement outcomes. This is true for many proposals of generative quantum
machine learning models [18, 28], and it would be interesting to transfer the results to this setting.
VI. TRAINING QUANTUM MODELS
While the question of universality addresses the expressivity of quantum models, the remaining sections will look
at questions of trainability and optimisation, for which the kernel perspective has the most important results to oer.
Notably, we will see that the optimal measurements of quantum models for typical machine learning cost functions
only have relatively few degrees of freedom. Similarly, the process of nding these optimal models (i.e., training over
the space of all possible quantum models) can be formulated as a low-dimensional optimisation problem. Most of
the results are based on the fact that for kernel methods, the task of training a model is equivalent to optimising
over the model's corresponding RKHS.
A. Optimising quantum models is equivalent to optimising over the RKHS
In machine learning we want to nd optimal models, or those that minimise the cost functions derived from
learning problems. This process is called training . From a learning theory perspective, training can be phrased as
regularised empirical risk minimisation , and the problem of training quantum models can be cast as follows:
Denition 7 (Regularised empirical risk minimisation of quantum models) .LetX;Ybe data input and output
domains,pa probability distribution on Xfrom which data is drawn, and L∶X×Y×R→[0;∞)a loss function that
quanties the quality of the prediction of a quantum model f(x)=tr[(x)M]. Let
RL(f)=/integral.dispX×YL(x;y;f(x))dp(x;y) (55)