5
FIG. 5. Kernel-based training vs. variational training. Training a quantum model as dened here tries to nd the
optimal measurement Moptover all possible quantum measurements. Kernel theory guarantees that in most cases this optimal
measurement will have a representation that is a linear combination in the training data with coecients =(1;:::;M).
Kernel-based training therefore optimises over the parameters directly, eectively searching for the best model in an
M-dimensional subspace spanned by the training data (blue). We are guaranteed that Mopt
=Mopt, and if the loss is convex
this is the only minimum, which means that kernel-based training will nd the best measurement out of all measurements.
Variational training parametrises the measurement instead by a general ansatz that depends on Kparameters =(1;:::;K),
and tries to nd the optimal measurement Mopt
in the subspace explored by the ansatz. This -subspace is not guaranteed
to contain the globally optimal measurement Mopt, and optimisation is usually non-convex. We are therefore guaranteed
that kernel-based training nds better or the same minima to variational training, but at the expense of having to compute
pairwise distances of data points for training and classication.
Altogether, approaching quantum machine learning from a kernel perspective can have profound implications for
the way we think about it. Firstly, most quantum models can be formulated as general support vector machines (in
the sense of [ 20]) with a kernel evaluated on a quantum computer. As a corollary, we know that the measurements
of optimal quantum models live in a low-dimensional subspace spanned by the training data, and that we can train
in that space. Kernel-based training is guaranteed to nd better minima { or as phrased here, measurements {
than variational circuit training, at the expense of having to evaluate pair-wise distances of data points in feature
space. (In the conclusion I will discuss how larger fault-tolerant quantum computers could potentially help with
this as well!). Secondly, if the kernel denes the model, and the data encoding denes the kernel, we have to be
very aware of the data encoding strategy we use in quantum machine learning { a step that has often taken the
backseat over other parts of quantum models. Thirdly, since quantum models can always be rewritten as a classical
model plus quantum kernel, the separation between classical and quantum machine learning lies only in the ability
of quantum computers to implement classically hard kernels. The rst steps into investigating such separations have
been made in papers like [ 11,12], but it is still unclear whether any useful applications turn out to be enabled solely
by quantum computers.
The remainder of the paper will essentially follow the structure of this synopsis to discuss every statement in more
mathematical detail.
III. QUANTUM COMPUTING, FEATURE MAPS AND KERNELS
Let us start by laying the ground work for the kernel perspective on quantum machine learning. First I review
the link between the process of encoding data into quantum states and feature maps, and construct the \quantum
kernel" that we will use throughout the manuscript. I will then give some examples of data-encoding feature maps
and quantum kernels, including a general description that allows us to understand these kernels via Fourier series.
A. Encoding data into quantum states is a feature map
First, a few important concepts from quantum computing, which can be safely skipped by readers with a
background in the eld. Those who deem the explanations to be too casual shall be referred to the wonderful script
by Michael Wolf [21].
Quantum state. According to quantum theory, the state of a quantum system is fully described by a
length-1 vector /divides.alt0 /uni27E9(or, more precisely, a ray represented by this vector) in a complex Hilbert space
H. The notation /divides.alt0⋅/uni27E9can be intimidating, but simply reminds of the fact that the Hilbert space has an
inner product /uni27E8⋅;⋅/uni27E9, which for Hilbert spaces describing quantum systems is denoted as /uni27E8⋅/divides.alt0⋅/uni27E9, and that its
vectors constitute \the right side" of the inner product. Quantum theory textbooks then introduce the