2
FIG. 2. Interpreting a quantum circuit as a machine learning model. After encoding the data with the routine Sx,
a quantum circuit \processes" the embedded input, followed by a measurement (left). The processing circuit may depend on
classically trainable parameters, as investigated in near-term quantum machine learning with variational circuits , or it may
consist of standard quantum routines such as amplitude amplication or quantum Fourier transforms. The expected outcome
of the measurement Mis interpreted as the model's prediction, which is deterministic (generative models, which would
consider the measurement samples as outputs, are not considered here). Since the processing circuit only changes the basis in
which the measurement is taken, it can conceptually be understood as part of the measurement procedure (right). In this
sense, quantum models consist of two parts, the data encoding/embedding and the measurement. Training a quantum model
is the problem of nding the measurement that minimises a data-dependent cost function. Note that while the measurement
could depend on trainable parameters I will not consider trainable embedding circuits here.
networks.1
A lot of the results presented here are of theoretical nature, but have important practical implications. Under-
standing quantum models as kernel methods means that the expressivity, optimisation and generalisation behaviour
of quantum models is largely dened by the data-encoding strategy or quantum embedding which xes the kernel.
Furthermore, it means that while the kernel itself may explore high-dimensional state spaces of the quantum system,
quantum models can be trained and operated in a low-dimensional subspace. In contrast to the popular strategy of
variational models (where a quantum algorithm depends on a tractable number of classical parameters that are
optimised), we do not have to worry about nding the right variational circuit ansatz, or about how to avoid barren
plateaus problems [16, 17] { but pay the price of having to compute pairwise distances between data points.
For classical machine learning research, the kernel perspective can help to demystify quantum machine learning.
A medium-term benet may also derive from quantum computing's extensive tools that describe information in
high-dimensional spaces, and possibly from interesting new kinds of kernels derived from physics. In the longer term,
quantum computers promise access to fast linear algebra processing capabilities which are in principle able to deliver
the polynomial speed-up that allows kernel methods to process big data without relying on approximations and
heuristics.
The manuscript is aimed at readers coming from either a machine learning orquantum computing background,
but assumes an advanced level of mathematical knowledge of Hilbert spaces and the like (and there will be a lot of
Hilbert spaces). Instead of giving lengthy introductions to both elds at the beginning, I will try to explain relevant
concepts such as quantum states, measurements, or kernels as they are needed. Since neither kernel methods nor
quantum theory are easy to digest, the next section will summarise all the main insights from a high-level point of
view to connect the dots right from the start.
A nal side note may be useful: quantum computing researchers love to precede any concept with the word
\quantum". In a young and explorative discipline like quantum machine learning (there we go!), this leads to very
dierent ideas being labeled as \quantum kernels", \quantum support vector machines", \quantum classiers" or
even \quantum neural networks". To not add to this state of confusion I will { besides standard technical terms
{ only use the \quantum" prex if a quantity is explicitly computed by a quantum algorithm (instead of being a
mathematical construction in quantum theory). I will therefore speak of \quantum models" and \quantum kernels",
but try to avoid constructions like \quantum feature maps" and \quantum reproducing kernel Hilbert space".
II. SUMMARY OF RESULTS
First, a quick overview of the scope. Quantum algorithms have been proposed for many jobs in supervised machine
learning, but the majority of them replace the model , such as a classier or generator, with an algorithm that runs on
1In some sense, many near-term approaches to quantum machine learning can be understood as a kernel method with a special kind of
kernel, where the model (and possibly even the kernel [ 14]) are trained like neural networks. This mix of both worlds makes quantum
machine learning an interesting mathematical playground beyond the questions of asymptotic speedups that quantum computing
researchers tend to ask by default.