20
Theorem 7 (RKHS and Regularization Operators) .For every RKHS with reproducing kernel there exists a
corresponding regularization operator ∶F→D(whereDis an inner product space) such that for all f∈F,
/uni27E8(x;⋅);f(⋅)/uni27E9D=f(x); (82)
and in particular
/uni27E8(x;⋅);(x′;⋅)/uni27E9D=(x;x′): (83)
Likewise, for every regularization operator ∶F→D, whereFis some function space equipped with a dot product,
there exists a corresponding RKHS Fwith reproducing kernel such that these two equations are satised.
In short, the quantum kernel or data-encoding strategy does not only tell us about universality and optimal
measurements, it also xes the regularisation properties in empirical risk minimisation. Which data encoding actually
leads to which regularisation property is still an interesting open question for research.
D. Picking the best quantum model is a low-dimensional (convex) optimisation problem
Besides the representer theorem, a second main achievement of kernel theory is to recognise that optimising the
empirical risk of convex loss functions over functions in an RKHS can be formulated as a nite-dimensional convex
optimisation problem (or in less cryptic language, optimising over extremely large spaces is surprisingly easy when
we use training data, something noted in [12] before).
The fact that the optimisation problem is nite-dimensional { and we will see the dimension is equal to the
number of training data { is important, since the feature spaces in which the model classies the data are usually
very high-dimensional, and possibly even innite-dimensional. This is obviously true for the data-encoding feature
space of quantum computations as well { which is precisely why variational quantum machine learning parametrise
circuits with a small number of trainable parameters instead of optimising over all unitaries/measurements. But
even if we optimise over all quantum models, the results of this section guarantee that the dimensionality of the
problem is limited by the size of the training data set.
The fact that optimisation is convex means that there is only one global minimum, and that we have a lot of
tools to nd it [ 29] - in particular, more tools than mere gradient descent. Convex optimisation problems can be
roughly solved in time O(M2)in the number of training data. Although prohibitive for large datasets, it makes the
optimisation guaranteed to be tractable (and below we will see that quantum computers could in principle help to
train with a runtime of O(M)).
Let me make the statement more precise. Again, it follows from the fact that optimising over the RKHS of the
quantum kernel is equivalent to optimising over the space of quantum models.
Theorem 8 (Training quantum models can be formulated as a nite-dimensional convex program) .LetXbe a
data domain and Yan output domain, L∶X×Y×R→[0;∞)be a loss function, Fthe RKHS of the quantum kernel
over a non-empty convex set Xwith the reproducing kernel . Furthermore, let ≥0be a regularisation parameter
andD={(xm;ym);m=1;:::;M }⊂X×Ya training data set. The regularised empirical risk minimisation problem
is nite-dimensional, and if the loss is convex, it is also convex.
Proof. Recall that according to the Representer Theorem 5, the solution to the regularised empirical risk minimisation
problem
fopt=inf
f∈F/parallel.alt1f/parallel.alt12
F+^RL(f) (84)
has a representation of the form
fopt(x)=/summation.disp
mmtr[(xm)(x)]: (85)
We can therefore write
^RL(f)=1
M/summation.disp
mL(xm;ym;/summation.disp
m′m′(xm;xm′)): (86)
If the lossLis convex, then this term is also convex, and it is M-dimensional since it only involves the Mdegrees of
freedomm.