15
FIG. 9. Intuition for the functions living in the reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS). The RKHS Fcontains
functions that are linear combinations of kernel functions where one \slot" is xed in a possible data sample xk∈X. This
illustration of one such function f∈F, using a Gaussian kernel, shows how the kernel regulates the \smoothness" of the
functions in F, as a wider kernel will simplify f. Since the RKHS is equivalent to the space of linear models that it has been
derived from, the kernel fundamentally denes the class of functions that the linear model can express.
Denition 5 (Reproducing kernel Hilbert space) .LetX≠/uni2205. The reproducing kernel Hilbert space of a kernel
overXis the Hilbert space Fcreated by completing the span of functions f∶X→R,f(⋅)=(x;⋅),x∈X(i.e.,
including the limits of Cauchy series). For two functions f(⋅)=∑ii(xi;⋅),g(⋅)=∑jj(xj;⋅)∈F, the inner
product is dened as
/uni27E8f;g/uni27E9F=/summation.disp
ijij(xi;xj); (47)
withi;j∈R.
Note that according to Theorem 1 the \size" of the space of common quantum models, and likewise the RKHS of
the quantum kernel, are fundamentally limited by the generators of the data-encoding gates. If we consider as the
quantum kernel, the denition of the inner product reveals with
/uni27E8(x;⋅);(x′;⋅)/uni27E9F=(x;x′); (48)
thatx→(x;⋅)is a feature map of this kernel (but one mapping data to functions instead of matrices, which feels a
bit odd at rst). In this sense, Fcan be regarded as an alternative feature space to F. The name of this unique
feature space comes from the reproducing property
/uni27E8f;(x;⋅)/uni27E9F=f(x)for allf∈F; (49)
which also shows that the kernel is the evaluation functional xwhich assigns ftof(x). An alternative denition
of the RKHS is the space in which the evaluation functional is bounded, which gives the space a lot of favourable
properties from a mathematical perspective.
To most of us, the denition of an RKHS is terribly opaque when rst encountered, so a few words of explanation
may help (see also Figure 9). One can think of the RKHS as a space whose elementary functions (x;⋅)assign a
distance measure to every data point. Functions of this form were also plotted in Figure 7 and 8. By feeding another
data pointx′into this \similarity measure", we get the distance between the two points. As a vector space, Falso
contains linear combinations of these building blocks. The functions living in Fare therefore linear combinations of
data similarities, just like for example kernel density estimation constructs a smooth function by adding Gaussians
centered in the data. The kernel then regulates the \resolution" of the distance measure, for example by changing
the variance of the Gaussian.
Once one gets used to this denition, it is immediately apparent that the functions living in the RKHS of the
quantum kernel are what we dened as quantum models:
Theorem 4. Functions in the RKHS Fof the quantum kernel are linear models in the data-encoding feature space
Fand vice versa.
Proof. The functions in the RKHS of the quantum kernel are of the form f(⋅)=∑k
k(xk;⋅), withxk∈X. We get
f(x)=/summation.disp
k
k(xk;x) (50)
=/summation.disp
k
ktr/bracketleft.alt1(xk)(x)/bracketright.alt (51)
=tr/bracketleft.alt4/summation.disp
k
k(xk)(x)/bracketright.alt4 (52)
=tr[M(x)]: (53)