11
B. Fourier representation of the quantum kernel
It is suspicious that all embeddings plotted in Figure 7 have a periodic, trigonometric structure. This is a
fundamental characteristic of how physical parameters enter quantum states. To see this we will dene a general class
of embeddings (also called \time-evolution encoding") that is used a lot in near-term quantum machine learning, and
which includes all examples above if we allow for classical pre-processing of the features. This strategy assumes that
X=RNfor some arbitrary N(whose relation to the number of qubits ndepends on the embedding), which means
that I will stick to the bold notation. The embedding of xiis executed by gates of the form e−ixiGiwhereGiis
di≤2n-dimensional Hermitian operator called the generating Hamiltonian . For the popular choice of Pauli rotations,
Gi=1
2with the Pauli operator ∈{z;y;z}. The gates can be applied to dierent qubits as in rotation encoding,
or to the same qubits, and to be general we allow for arbitrary quantum computations between each encoding gate.
Refs. [ 25] and [ 26] showed that the Dirac vectors /divides.alt0(x)/uni27E9can be represented in terms of periodic functions of
the formeixi!, where!∈Rcan be interpreted as a frequency. The frequencies involved in the construction of the
data-encoding feature vectors are solely determined by the generating Hamiltonians {Gi}of the gates that encode
the data. For popular choices of Hamiltonians, the frequencies !are integer-valued, which means that the feature
space is constructed from Fourier basis functions eixin;n∈Z. This allows us to describe and analyse the quantum
kernel with the tools of Fourier analysis.
Let me state the result for the simplied case that each input xiis only encoded once, and that all the encoding
Hamiltonians are the same ( G1=⋅⋅⋅=GN=G). The proof is deferred to Appendix A, which also shows how our
example of Pauli-X encoding can be cast as a Fourier series.
Theorem 1 (Fourier representation of the quantum kernel) .LetX=RNandS(x)be a quantum circuit that
encodes the data inputs x=(x1;:::;xN)∈Xinto an-qubit quantum state S(x)/divides.alt00/uni27E9=/divides.alt0(x)/uni27E9via gates of the form
e−ixiGfori=1;:::;N . Without loss of generality Gis assumed to be a d≤2n-dimensional diagonal operator with
spectrum1;:::;d. Between such data-encoding gates, and before and after the entire encoding circuit, arbitrary
unitary evolutions W(1);:::;W(N+1)can be applied, so that
S(x)=W(N+1)e−ixNGW(N):::W(2)e−ix1GW(1): (26)
The quantum kernel (x;x′)can be written as
(x;x′)=/summation.disp
s;t∈
eisxeitx′cst; (27)
where 
⊆RN, andcst∈C. For every s;t∈
we have−s;−t∈
andcst=c∗
−s−t, which guarantees that the quantum
kernel is real-valued.
While the conditions of this theorem may sound restrictive at rst, it includes a fairly general class of quantum
models. The standard way to control a quantum system is to apply an evolution of Hamiltonian Gfor timet, which
is exactly described by the form e−itG. The time tis associated with the input to the quantum computer (which
may be the original input x∈Xor the result of some pre-processing, in which case we can just redene the dataset
to be the pre-processed one). In short, most quantum kernels will be of the form shown in Eq. (27).
Importantly, for the class of Pauli generators, the kernel becomes a Fourier series:
Corollary 1.1 (Fourier series representation of the quantum kernel) .For the setting described in Theorem 1, if
the eigenvalue spectrum of Gis such that any dierence i−jfori;j=1;:::;d is inZ, then 
becomes the
set ofN-dimensional integer-valued vectors n=(n1;:::;nN),n1;:::nN∈Z. In this case the quantum kernel is a
multi-dimensional Fourier series,
(x;x′)=/summation.disp
n;n′∈
einxein′x′cn;n′; (28)
Expressions (27) and (28) reveal a lot about the structure of quantum kernels, for example that they are not
necessarily translation invariant, (x;x′)≠g(x−x′), unless the data-encoding strategy leads to cst=~cstst=csand
(x;x′)=/summation.disp
s∈
eis(x−x′)~cs: (29)
Sincee−ixiGeix′
iG=e−i(xi−x′
i)G, this is true for all data embeddings that encode each original input into a separate
physical subsystem, like rotation encoding introduced above.
It is an interesting question if this link between data embedding and Fourier basis functions given to us by physics
can help design particularly suitable kernels for applications, or be used to control smoothness properties of the
kernel in a useful manner.