21
Now let us turn to the regularisation term and try to show the same. Consider
/parallel.alt1f/parallel.alt12
F=/summation.disp
m;m′mm′tr/bracketleft.alt2(xm)(xm′)/bracketright.alt2=/summation.disp
m;m′mm′(xm;xm′)=TK; (87)
where K∈RM×Mis the kernel matrix or Gram matrix with entries Km;m′=(xm;xm′), and=(1;:::;M)is
the vector of coecients m. Since Kis by denition of the kernel positive denite, this term is also convex. Both
andKare furthermore nite-dimensional.
Together, training a quantum model to nd the optimal solution from Eq. (66) can be done by solving the
optimisation problem
inf
∈RM1
M/summation.disp
mL(xm;ym;/summation.disp
m′m′(xm;xm′))+TK; (88)
which optimises over Mtrainable parameters, and is convex for convex loss functions.
Asupport vector machine is a special case of kernel-based training which uses a special convex loss function,
namely the hinge loss, for L:
L(f(x);y)=max(0;1−f(x)y); (89)
where one assumes that y∈{−1;1}. As derived in countless textbooks, the resulting optimisation problem can be
constructed from geometric arguments as maximising the \soft" margin of the closest vectors to a decision boundary.
Under this loss, Eq. (88) reduces to
opt=max
/summation.disp
mm−1
2/summation.disp
m;m′mm′ymym′(xm;xm′): (90)
Training a support vector machine with hinge loss and a quantum kernel is equivalent to nding the general
quantum model that minimises the hinge loss. The \quantum support vector machine" in [ 4,5] is therefore not one
of many ideas to build a hybrid classier, it is a generic blueprint of how to train quantum models in a kernel-based
manner.
VII. SHOULD WE SWITCH TO KERNEL-BASED QUANTUM MACHINE LEARNING?
The fact that quantum models can be formulated as kernel methods with a quantum kernel raises an important
question for current quantum machine learning research: how do kernel-based models, i.e., solutions to the problem
in Eq. (88), compare to models whose measurements are trained variationally? Let us revisit Figure 5 in light of the
results of the previous section.
We saw in Section VI D how kernel-based training optimises the measurement over a subspace spanned by M
encoded training inputs by nding the best coecients m,m=1:::M . We also saw in Section VI B that this
subspace contains the globally optimal measurement. Variational training instead optimises over a subspace dened
by the parametrised ansatz, which may or may not overlap with the training-data subspace, and could therefore not
have access to the global optimum. The advantages of kernel-based training are therefore that we are guaranteed to
nd the globally optimal measurement over all possible quantum models. If the loss is convex, the optimisation
problem is furthermore of a favourable structure that comes with a lot of guarantees about the performance and
convergence of optimisation algorithms. But besides these great properties, in classical machine learning with big
data, kernel methods were superseded by neural networks or approximate kernel methods [ 30] because of their
poor scaling. Training involves computing the pair-wise distances between all training data in the Gram matrix
of Eq. (88), which has at least a runtime of O(M2)in the number of training samples M.7In contrast, training
neural networks takes time O(M)that only depends linearly on the number of training samples. Can the training
of variational quantum circuits oer a similar advantage over kernel-based training?
The answer is that it depends. So far, training variational circuits with gradient-based methods on hardware
is based on so-called parameter-shift rules [ 31,32] instead of backpropagation. This strategy introduces a linear
scaling with the number of parameters /divides.alt0/divides.alt0, and the number of circuits that need to be evaluated to train a variational
7Note that this is also true when using the trained model for predictions, where we need to compute the distance between a new input
to any training input in feature space as shown in Eq. (66). However, in maximum margin classiers, or support vector machines in
the stricter sense, most mcoecients are zero, and only the distances to a few \support vectors" are needed.