3
FIG. 3. Quantum models as linear models in a feature space. A quantum model can be understood as a model that
maps data into a feature space in which the measurement denes a linear decision boundary. This feature space is not
identical to the Hilbert space of the quantum system. Instead we can dene it as the space of complex matrices enriched with
the Hilbert-Schmidt inner product { which is the space where density matrices live in.
a quantum computer. These algorithms { I will call them quantum models { usually consist of two parts: the data
encoding, which maps data inputs xto quantum states /divides.alt0(x)/uni27E9(eectively embedding them into the space of quantum
states), and a measurement M. Statistical properties of the measurement are then interpreted as the output of the
model. Training a quantum model means to nd the measurement which minimises a cost function that depends on
training data. This overall denition is fairly general, and it includes most near-term supervised quantum machine
learning algorithms as well as many more complex, fault-tolerant quantum algorithms (see Figure 2). Throughout
this manuscript I will interpret the expected measurement { or in practice, the average over measurement outcomes {
as a prediction, but the results may carry over to other settings, such as generative quantum models (e.g., [ 18]). I
will also consider the embedding xed and not trainable as proposed in [14, 19].
The bridge between quantum machine learning and kernel methods is formed by the observation that quantum
models map data into a high-dimensional feature space, in which the measurement denes a linear decision
boundary as shown in Figure 3. Note that for this to hold we need to dene the data-encoding density matrices
(x)=/divides.alt0(x)/uni27E9/uni27E8(x)/divides.alt0as the feature \vectors"2instead of the Dirac vectors /divides.alt0(x)/uni27E9(see Section V A). This was rst
proposed in Ref. [ 5]. Density matrices are alternative descriptions of quantum states as Hermitian operators which
are handy because they can also express probability distributions over quantum states (in which case they are
describing so-called mixed instead of pure states). We can therefore consider the space of complex matrices enriched
with the Hilbert-Schmidt inner product as the feature space of a quantum model and state:
1. Quantum models are linear models in the \feature vectors" (x).
As famously known from support vector machines [ 20], linear models in feature spaces can be eciently evaluated
and trained if we have access to inner products of feature vectors, which is a function in two data points x;x′
called the kernel . Kernel theory essentially uses linear algebra and functional analysis to derive statements about
the expressivity, trainability and generalisation power of linear models in feature spaces directly from the kernel.
For us this means that we can learn a lot about the properties of quantum models if we study inner products
(x;x′)=tr[(x′)(x)], or, for pure states, (x;x′)=/divides.alt0/uni27E8(x′)/divides.alt0(x)/uni27E9/divides.alt02(see in particular Ref. [ 12]). I will call these
functions \quantum kernels'.
To understand what kernels can tell us about quantum machine learning, we need another important concept from
kernel theory: the reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS). An RKHS is an alternative feature space of a kernel {
and therefore reproduces all \observable" behaviour of the machine learning model. More precisely, it is a feature
space of functionsx→gx(⋅)=(x;⋅), which are constructed from the kernel. The RKHS contains one such function
for every input x, as well as their linear combinations (for example, for the popular Gaussian kernel these linear
combinations are sums of Gaussians centered in the individual data points). In an interesting { and by no means
trivial { twist, these functions happen to be identical to the linear models in feature space. For quantum machine
learning this means that the space of quantum models and the RKHS of the quantum kernel contain exactly the
same functions (see Section V B). What we gain is an alternative representation of quantum models, one that only
depends on the quantity tr [(x′)(x)](see Figure 4).
This alternative representation can be very useful for all sorts of things. For example, it allows us to study the
universality of quantum models as function approximators by investigating the universality of the RKHS, which in
turn is a property of the quantum kernel. But probably the most important use is to study optimisation: minimising
typical cost functions over the space of quantum models is equivalent to minimising the same cost over the RKHS of
2The term feature vectors derives from the fact that they are elements of a vector space, not that they are vectors in the sense of the
space CNorRN.