Supervised quantum machine learning models are kernel methods
Maria Schuld
Xanadu, Toronto, ON, M5G 2C8, Canada
With near-term quantum devices available and the race for fault-tolerant quantum computers in
full swing, researchers became interested in the question of what happens if we replace a supervised
machine learning model with a quantum circuit. While such \quantum models" are sometimes
called \quantum neural networks", it has been repeatedly noted that their mathematical structure
is actually much more closely related to kernel methods: they analyse data in high-dimensional
Hilbert spaces to which we only have access through inner products revealed by measurements.
This technical manuscript summarises and extends the idea of systematically rephrasing supervised
quantum models as a kernel method. With this, a lot of near-term and fault-tolerant quantum models
can be replaced by a general support vector machine whose kernel computes distances between
data-encoding quantum states. Kernel-based training is then guaranteed to nd better or equally
good quantum models than variational circuit training. Overall, the kernel perspective of quantum
machine learning tells us that the way that data is encoded into quantum states is the main ingredient
that can potentially set quantum models apart from classical machine learning models.
I. MOTIVATION
The mathematical frameworks of quantum computing and kernel methods are strikingly similar: both describe
how information is processed by mapping it to vectors that live in potentially inaccessibly large spaces, without the
need of ever computing an explicit numerical representation of these vectors (Figure 1). This similarity is particularly
obvious { and as we will see, useful { in quantum machine learning , an emerging research eld that investigates how
quantum computers can learn from data [ 1{3]. If the data is \classical" as in standard machine learning problems,
quantum machine learning algorithms have to encode it into the physical states of quantum systems. This process is
formally equivalent to a feature map that assigns data to quantum states (see [ 4,5] but also earlier notions in [ 6{8]).
Inner products of such data-encoding quantum states then give rise to a kernel, a kind of similarity measure that
forms the core concept of kernel theory.
The natural shape of this analogy sparked more research in the past years, for example on training generative
quantum models [ 9], constructing kernelised machine learning models [ 10], understanding the separation between the
computational complexity of quantum and classical machine learning [ 5,11,12] or revealing links between quantum
machine learning and maximum mean embeddings [ 13] as well as metric learning [ 14]. But despite the growing
amount of literature, a comprehensive review of the link between quantum computation and kernel theory, as well
as its theoretical consequences, is still lacking. This technical manuscript aims at lling the gap by summarising,
formalising and extending insights scattered across existing literature and \quantum community folklore". The
central statement of this line of work is that quantum algorithms optimised with data can fundamentally be
formulated as a classical kernel method whose kernel is computed by a quantum computer. This statement holds
both for the popular class of classically trained variational near-term algorithms (e.g., [ 15]) as well as for more
sophisticated fault-tolerant algorithms trained by a quantum computer (e.g., [ 6]). It will be apparent that once the
right \spaces" for the analysis are dened (as rst proposed in [ 5]), the theory falls into place itself. This is in stark
contrast to the more popular, but much less natural, attempt to force quantum theory into the shape of neural
FIG. 1. Quantum computing and kernel methods are based on a similar principle. Both have mathematical
frameworks in which information is mapped into and then processed in high-dimensional spaces to which we have only limited
access. In kernel methods, the access to the feature space is facilitated through kernels or inner products of feature vectors.
In quantum computing, access to the Hilbert space of quantum states is given by measurements, which can also be expressed
by inner products of quantum states.arXiv:2101.11020v2  [quant-ph]  17 Apr 2021