22
quantum model therefore grows with O(/divides.alt0/divides.alt0M). If the number of parameters in an application grows suciently
slowly with the dataset size, variational circuits will almost be able to match the good scaling behaviour of neural
networks, which is an important advantage over kernel-based training. But if, like in neural networks, the number
of parameters in a variational ansatz grows linearly with the number of data, variational quantum models end
up having the same quadratic scaling as the kernel-based approach regarding the number of circuits to evaluate.
Practical experiments with 10 −20 parameters and about 100 data samples show that the constant overhead of
gradient calculations on hardware make kernel-based training in fact much faster for small-scale applications.8In
addition, there is no guarantee that the nal measurement is optimal, we have high-dimensional non-convex training
landscapes, and the additional burden of choosing a good variational ansatz. In conclusion, the kernel perspective is
not only a powerful and theoretically appealing alternative to think about quantum machine learning, but may also
speed up current quantum machine learning methods signicantly.
As a beautiful example of the mutually benecial relation of quantum computing and kernel methods, the story
does not end here. While all of the above is based on models evaluated on a quantum computer but trained classically,
convex optimisation problems happen to be exactly the kind of thing quantum computers are good at [ 33]. We
can therefore ask whether quantum models could not in principle be trained by quantum algorithms. \In principle"
alludes to the fact that such algorithms would likely be well beyond the reach of near-term devices, since training is
a more complex aair that requires fully error-corrected quantum computers which we do not have yet.
The reasons why quantum training could help to lower this scaling are hidden in results from the early days of
quantum machine learning, when quantum-based training was actively studied in the hope of nding exponential
speedups for classical machine learning [ 6,34,35]. While these speedups only hold up under very strict assumptions
of data loading oracles, they imply quadratic speedups for rather general settings (see also Appendix B). They can
be summarised as follows: given a feature map implemented by a fault-tolerant quantum computer, we can train
kernel methods in time that grows linearly in the data. If a kernel can be implemented as a quantum computation
(like the Gaussian kernel [ 7]), this speedup would also hold for \classical models" { which are then merely run on a
quantum computer.
Of course, fault-tolerant quantum computers may still take many years to develop and are likely to have a large
constant overhead due to the expensive nature of quantum error correction. But in the longer term, this shows that
the use of quantum computing is not only to implement interesting kernels. Quantum computers have the potential
to become a game changer for kernel-based machine learning in a similar way to how GPU-accelerated hardware
enabled deep learning.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I want to thank Johannes Jakob Meyer, Nathan Killoran, Olivia di Matteo and Filippo Miatto, Nicolas Quesada
and Ilya Sinayskiy for their time and helpful comments.
[1] P. Wittek, Quantum machine learning: what quantum computing means to data mining (Academic Press, 2014).
[2]J. Biamonte, P. Wittek, N. Pancotti, P. Rebentrost, N. Wiebe, and S. Lloyd, Quantum machine learning, Nature 549,
195 (2017).
[3] M. Schuld and F. Petruccione, Supervised learning with quantum computers (Springer, 2018).
[4]M. Schuld and N. Killoran, Quantum machine learning in feature hilbert spaces, Physical Review Letters 122, 040504
(2019).
[5]V. Havl  cek, A. D. C orcoles, K. Temme, A. W. Harrow, A. Kandala, J. M. Chow, and J. M. Gambetta, Supervised
learning with quantum-enhanced feature spaces, Nature 567, 209 (2019).
[6]P. Rebentrost, M. Mohseni, and S. Lloyd, Quantum support vector machine for big data classication, Physical Review
Letters 113, 130503 (2014).
[7]R. Chatterjee and T. Yu, Generalized coherent states, reproducing kernels, and quantum support vector machines, arXiv
preprint arXiv:1612.03713 (2016).
[8]M. Schuld, A. Bocharov, K. Svore, and N. Wiebe, Circuit-centric quantum classiers, arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.00633
(2018).
[9]J.-G. Liu and L. Wang, Dierentiable learning of quantum circuit born machines, Physical Review A 98, 062324 (2018).
[10]C. Blank, D. K. Park, J.-K. K. Rhee, and F. Petruccione, Quantum classier with tailored quantum kernel, npj Quantum
Information 6, 1 (2020).
8Seehttps://pennylane.ai/qml/demos/tutorial_kernel_based_training.html .