JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015 2
(a)
(b)
Fig. 2. (a) Periodicity. The trafﬁc volume in the road changes periodically
within one week. (b) Trend. The trafﬁc volume in the road has tendency
change within one day.
dynamic change of trafﬁc condition but ignore the spatial
dependence, so that the change of trafﬁc condition is not
restricted by the road network and we cannot predict the
state of trafﬁc data accurately. To characterize the spatial
features better, some studies [14], [15], [16] introduce a
convolution neural network for spatial modeling; however,
a convolutional neural network is commonly used for Eu-
clidean data [17] such as images, regular grids, and so on.
Such models cannot work under the context of an urban
road network with a complex topological structure so in
essence they cannot describe the spatial dependence.
To solve the above problems, we propose a new trafﬁc
forecasting method called the temporal graph convolutional
network (T-GCN), which is used for trafﬁc forecasting task
based on urban road network. Our contributions are three-
fold:
(1) We propose the T-GCN model by combining the
graph convolutional network and gated recurrent unit.
The graph convolutional network is used to capture the
topological structure of the road network to model spatial
dependence. The gated recurrent unit is used to capture the
dynamic change of trafﬁc data on the roads to model tem-
poral dependence. The T-GCN model can also be applied to
other spatio-temporal forecasting tasks.
(2) The forecasting results of the T-GCN model show
a steady state under different prediction horizons, which
indicates that the T-GCN model can not only achieve short-
term prediction but can also be used for long-term trafﬁc
prediction tasks.
(3) We evaluate our approach using the taxi speed data
of the Luohu District in Shenzhen and Los-loop datasets.
The results show that our approach reduces the prediction
error by approximately 1.5 %-57.8%compared to all baseline
methods, which demonstrates that the T-GCN model has
superiority in trafﬁc forecasting.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II
reviews relevant research about trafﬁc forecasting. Section
III introduces the details of our method. In section IV , we
evaluate the predictive performance of the T-GCN by real-
world trafﬁc dataset, including design of model parameters,
prediction results analysis, perturbation analysis, and modelinterpretation. We conclude the paper in Section V .
2 R ELATED WORK
Intelligent trafﬁc system trafﬁc forecasting is one of the
major research issues today. The existing trafﬁc forecasting
methods can be divided into two categories: the model-
driven approach and the data-driven approach. First, the
model-driven approach mainly explains the instantaneous
and steady-state relationships among trafﬁc volume, speed,
and density. Such methods require comprehensive and de-
tailed system modeling based on prior knowledge. The rep-
resentative methods contain the queuing theory model [18],
the cell transmission model [19], the trafﬁc velocity model
[20], the microscopic fundamental diagram model [21], and
so on. In reality, trafﬁc data is inﬂuenced by many factors
and it is difﬁcult to obtain an accurate trafﬁc model. The
existing models cannot accurately describe the variations
of trafﬁc data in complex real-world environments. In ad-
dition, the construction of these models requires signiﬁcant
computing capability [22] and is easily constrained by trafﬁc
disturbances and sampling point spacing, etc.
Second, data-driven approaches infer the variation ten-
dency based on statistical regularity of the data and is
eventually used to predict and evaluate the trafﬁc state [23],
[24]. This type of method does not analyze the physical
properties and dynamic behavior of the trafﬁc system and
has high ﬂexibility. The earlier method includes the histor-
ical average model [2], in which the average value of the
trafﬁc volume in historical periods is used as the prediction
value. This method does not require any assumptions and
the calculation is simple and fast but it cannot ﬁt well with
temporal features and the prediction precision is low. With
the continuous deepening of research on trafﬁc forecasting,
a large number of methods with higher prediction precision
have emerged, which can be mainly divided into a paramet-
ric model and nonparametric model [25], [26].
The parametric model presupposes the regression func-
tion, the parameters are determined through processing the
original data, and then realizing the trafﬁc forecasting is
based on the regression function. The time series model,
the linear regression model [27], [28], and the Kalman ﬁl-
tering model are common methods. The time series model
ﬁts the observed time series into a parametric model to
predict future data. As early as 1976, Box and Jenkins
[5] proposed the Autoregressive Integrate Moving Average
Model (ARIMA), which is the most widely used time series
model. In 1995, Hamed et al. [6] used the ARIMA model to
predict the trafﬁc volume in urban arterials. To improve the
prediction precision of the model, different variants were
produced, including Kohonen ARIMA [29], subset ARIMA
[30], seasonal ARIMA [31], and so on. Lippi et al. [32]
compared the support vector regression model with the
seasonal ARIMA model and found that the SARIMA model
has better results in trafﬁc congestion. The linear regression
model builds a regression function based on historical trafﬁc
data to predict trafﬁc ﬂow. In 2004, Sun et al. [27] solves
the problem of interval forecasting using the local linear
model, and obtain better result on the real-world trafﬁc
dataset. The Kalman ﬁltering model predicts future trafﬁc
conditions based on the trafﬁc state of the previous moment