JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015 3
and the current moment. In 1984, Okutani et al. [7] used
the Kalman ﬁltering theory to establish the trafﬁc ﬂow state
prediction model. Subsequently, some studies [33], [34] used
the Kalman ﬁltering model to realize trafﬁc prediction tasks.
The traditional parametric model has a simple algorithm
and convenient calculation. However, these models depend
on the assumption of stationary, cannot reﬂect the nonlin-
earity and uncertainty characteristics of trafﬁc data, and
cannot overcome the interference of random events such
as trafﬁc accidents. The nonparametric model solves these
problems well and only requires enough historical data to
learn the statistical regularity from trafﬁc data automatically.
The common nonparametric model includes: the k-nearest
neighbor model [10], the support vector regression model
[8], [9], [35], the Fuzzy Logic model [36], the Bayesian
network model [11], the neural network model, and so on.
In recent years, with the rapid development of deep
learning [37], [38], [39], the deep neural network models
have received attention because they can capture the dy-
namic characteristics of trafﬁc data well and achieve the
best results at present. According to whether or not spatial
dependence is considered, models can be divided into two
categories. Some methods consider temporal dependence
only, e.g., Park et al. [40] used Feed Forward NN to im-
plement trafﬁc ﬂow prediction tasks. Huang et al. [12]
proposed a network architecture consisting of a deep belief
network (DBN) and a regression model and veriﬁed that
the network can capture random features from trafﬁc data
on multiple datasets and this model improved prediction ac-
curacy in trafﬁc forecasting. In addition, since the recurrent
neural network (RNN) and its variants have long short-term
memory (LSTM) and the gated recurrent unit (GRU) can
effectively use the self-circulation mechanism, they can learn
temporal dependence well and achieve better prediction
results [13], [41].
These models take the temporal feature into account but
ignore the spatial dependence, so that the change of trafﬁc
data is not constrained by the urban road network and thus
they cannot accurately predict the trafﬁc state on the road.
Making full use of the spatial and temporal dependence is
the key to solving trafﬁc forecasting problems. To better
characterize spatial features, many studies had made im-
provements on this basis. Lv et al. [42] proposed a SAE
model to capture the spatio-temporal feature from trafﬁc
data and realize short-term trafﬁc ﬂow predictions. Zhang
et al. [14] proposed a deep learning model called ST-ResNet,
which designed residual convolutional networks for each
attribute based on the temporal closeness, period, and trend
of crowd ﬂows, and then three networks and external factors
were dynamically aggregated to predict the inﬂow and
outﬂow of crowds in each region of a city. Wu et al. [15]
designed a feature fusion architecture for short-term predic-
tion by combining CNN and LSTM. A 1-dimensional CNN
was used to capture spatial dependence and two LSTMs
were used to mine the short-term variability and periodic-
ity of trafﬁc ﬂow. Cao et al. [16] proposed an end-to-end
model called ITRCN, which converted interactive network
trafﬁc into images and used CNN to capture interactive
functions of trafﬁc, used GRU to extract temporal features,
and proved that the prediction error of this model is 14.3%
and 13.0% higher than that of GRU and CNN, respectively.Ke et al. [43] proposed a new deep learning method called
the fusion convolutional long short-term memory network
(FCL-Net), taking into account spatial dependence, tempo-
ral dependence, and exogenous dependence for short-term
passenger demand forecasting. Yu et al. [44] used the Deep
Convolutional Neural Network(DCNN) to capture spatial
dependence, used LSTM to capture temporal dynamics, and
demonstrated the superiority of the SRCN model through
experiments on Beijing trafﬁc network data.
Although the above methods introduced the CNN to
model spatial dependence and made great progress in trafﬁc
forecasting tasks, the CNN is essentially suitable for Eu-
clidean space, such as images, regular grids, etc., and has
limitations on trafﬁc networks with a complex topological
structure, and thus cannot essentially characterize the spa-
tial dependence. Therefore, this type of method also has
certain defects. In recent years, with the development of
the graph convolutional network model [45], which can
be used to capture structural feature of graph network,
provides a good solution for the above problem. Li et al.
[46] proposed a DCRNN model, which captures the spatial
feature through random walks on graphs, and the temporal
feature through encoder-decoder architecture.
Based on this background, in this paper we propose a
new neural network approach that can capture the complex
temporal and spatial features from trafﬁc data, and can then
be used for trafﬁc forecasting tasks based on an urban road
network.
3 M ETHODOLOGY
3.1 Problem Deﬁnition
In this paper, the goal of the trafﬁc forecasting is to predict
the trafﬁc information in a certain period of time based
on the historical trafﬁc information on the roads. In our
method, the trafﬁc information is a general concept which
can be trafﬁc speed, trafﬁc ﬂow, and trafﬁc density. Without
loss of generality, we use trafﬁc speed as a example of trafﬁc
information in experiment section.
Deﬁnition 1: road network G. We use an unweighted
graphG= (V;E)to describe the topological structure of
the road network, and we treat each road as a node, where
V is a set of road nodes, V=fv1;v2;;vNg, N is the
number of the nodes, and E is a set of edges. The adjacency
matrix A is used to represent the connection between roads,
A2RNN. The adjacency matrix contains only elements of
0 and 1. The element is 0 if there is no link between roads
and 1 denotes there is a link.
Deﬁnition 2: feature matrix XNP. We regard the trafﬁc
information on the road network as the attribute feature of
the node in the network, expressed as X2RNP, where P
represents the number of node attribute features (the length
of the historical time series) and Xt2RNiis used to
represent the speed on each road at time i. Again, the node
attribute features can be any trafﬁc information such as
trafﬁc speed, trafﬁc ﬂow, and trafﬁc density.
Thus, the problem of spatio-temporal trafﬁc forecasting
can be considered as learning the mapping function f on
the premise of road network topology G and feature matrix