JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015 1
T -GCN: A Temporal Graph Convolutional
Network for Trafﬁc Prediction
Ling Zhao, Yujiao Song, Chao Zhang, Yu Liu, Pu Wang, Tao Lin, Min Deng and Haifeng Li, Member, IEEE
Abstract —Accurate and real-time trafﬁc forecasting plays an important role in the Intelligent Trafﬁc System and is of great signiﬁcance
for urban trafﬁc planning, trafﬁc management, and trafﬁc control. However, trafﬁc forecasting has always been considered an open
scientiﬁc issue, owing to the constraints of urban road network topological structure and the law of dynamic change with time, namely,
spatial dependence and temporal dependence. To capture the spatial and temporal dependence simultaneously, we propose a novel
neural network-based trafﬁc forecasting method, the temporal graph convolutional network (T -GCN) model, which is in combination
with the graph convolutional network (GCN) and gated recurrent unit (GRU). Speciﬁcally, the GCN is used to learn complex topological
structures to capture spatial dependence and the gated recurrent unit is used to learn dynamic changes of trafﬁc data to capture
temporal dependence. Then, the T -GCN model is employed to trafﬁc forecasting based on the urban road network. Experiments
demonstrate that our T -GCN model can obtain the spatio-temporal correlation from trafﬁc data and the predictions outperform
state-of-art baselines on real-world trafﬁc datasets. Our tensorﬂow implementation of the T -GCN is available at
https://github.com/lehaifeng/T -GCN.
Index Terms —Trafﬁc forecasting, Temporal Graph Convolutional Network (T -GCN), spatial dependence, temporal dependence.
F
1 I NTRODUCTION
WITH the development of the Intelligent Trafﬁc Sys-
tem, trafﬁc forecasting has received more and more
attention. It is a key part of an advanced trafﬁc manage-
ment system and is an important part of realizing trafﬁc
planning, trafﬁc management, and trafﬁc control. Trafﬁc
forecasting is a process of analyzing trafﬁc conditions on
urban roads, including ﬂow, speed, and density, mining
trafﬁc patterns, and predicting the trends of trafﬁc on roads.
Trafﬁc forecasting can not only provide a scientiﬁc basis
for trafﬁc managers to sense trafﬁc congestions and limit
vehicles in advance but also provide security for urban
travelers to choose appropriate travel routes and improve
travel efﬁciency [1], [2], [3]. However, trafﬁc forecasting has
always been a challenge task due to its complex spatial and
temporal dependences:
(1) Spatial dependence. The change in trafﬁc volume is
dominated by the topological structure of the urban road
network. The trafﬁc status at upstream roads impact trafﬁc
status at downstream roads through the transfer effect, and
the trafﬁc status at downstream roads impact trafﬁc status
at upstream through the feedback effect [4]. As shown
in Figure 1, due to the strong inﬂuence between adjacent
roads, the short-term similarity is changed from state 1
(the
L. Zhao, Y. Song, M. Deng, and H. Li are with School of Geosciences and
Info-Physics, Central South University, Changsha 410083, China.
Corresponding author: H.Li lihaifeng@csu.edu.cn
C. Zhang are with School of Computational Science and Engineering,
Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 30332, USA.
Y. Liu are with with Institute of Remote Sensing and Geographic Infor-
mation System, Peking University, Beijing, China.
W. Pu are with with School of Trafﬁc Transportation Engineering, Central
South University, Changsha 410083, China.
L. Tao are with College of Biosystems Engineering and Food Science,
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China.
Preprint. Work in progress.
Fig. 1. Spatial dependence is restricted by the topological structure of
the road network. Due to the strong inﬂuence between adjacent roads,
the short-term trafﬁc ﬂow similarity is changed from state 1
to state 2
.
upstream road is similar to the midstream road) to state 2
(the upstream road is similar to the downstream road).
(2) Temporal dependence. The trafﬁc volume changes
dynamically over time and is mainly reﬂected in periodicity
and trend. As shown in Figure 2(a), the trafﬁc volume on
Road 1 shows a periodic change over a week. As shown in
Figure 2(b), the trafﬁc volume in one day will also change
over time; for example, the trafﬁc volume will be affected by
the trafﬁc condition of the previous moment or even longer.
There are many existing trafﬁc forecasting methods,
some of which consider temporal dependence, including the
Autoregressive Integrated Moving Average (ARIMA) model
[5], [6], the Kalman ﬁltering model [7], the support vector
regression machine model [8], [9], the k-nearest neighbor
model [10], the Bayesian model [11], and partial neural
network model [12], [13]. The above methods consider thearXiv:1811.05320v3  [cs.LG]  31 Dec 2018