JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015 8
(a)
 (b)
Fig. 8. (a) The RMSE of the T -GCN model lower than the GCN model,
which considers spatial feature only, indicating the effectiveness of the T -
GCN to capture spatial feature. (b) The RMSE of the T -GCN model lower
than the GRU model, which considers temporal feature only, indicating
the effectiveness of the T -GCN to capture temporal feature.
precision than those based on single factor (GCN, GRU), in-
dicating that the T-GCN model can capture spatial and tem-
poral feature from trafﬁc data. For example, for the 15-min
trafﬁc forecasting, the RMSE is reduced by approximately
57.8%compared with the GCN model, which considers only
spatial feature and for 30-min trafﬁc forecasting, the RMSE
of the T-GCN model is reduced by 57.6 %, indicating that the
T-GCN model can capture spatial dependence. Compared
with the GRU model, which considers only temporal fea-
tures, for 15-min and 30-min trafﬁc forecasting, the RMSE
of the T-GCN model is decreased by approximately 3.3 %
and 2.9 %, indicating that the T-GCN model can capture
temporal dependence well.
(3) Long-term prediction ability. No matter how the
horizon changes, the T-GCN model can obtain the best
prediction performance through training and the prediction
results have less tendency to change, indicating that our
approach is insensitive to prediction horizons. Thus, we
know that the T-GCN model can be used not only for short-
term prediction but also for long-term prediction. Figure
9(a) shows the change of RMSE and Accuracy at different
prediction horizons, which represent the prediction error
and precision of the T-GCN model, respectively. It can be
seen that the trends of error increase and precision decrease
are small, with a certain degree of stability. Figure 9(b)
shows the comparison of RMSE for baselines at different
horizons. We observe that the T-GCN model can achieve the
best results regardless of the prediction horizon.
4.5 Perturbation Analysis and Robustness
There is inevitably noise during the data collection process
in the real world. To test the noise immunity of the T-
GCN model, we test the robustness of the model through
perturbation analysis experiments.
We add two types of commonly random noise to the
data during the experiment. The random noise obeys the
Gaussian distribution N2(0;2)(2(0:2;0:4;0:8;1;2))
and the Poisson distribution P()(2(1;2;4;8;16)) and
then we normalize the values of the noise matrices turn
to[0;1]. Using different evaluation metrics, the results are
shown as following. Figure 10(a) shows the results of adding
Gaussian noise on SZ-taxi dataset, where the horizontal axis
represents , the vertical axis represents the change of each
evaluation metrics, and different colors indicate different
metrics. Similarly, Figure 10(b) shows the results of adding
(a)
(b)
Fig. 9. (a) Under different prediction horizons, the change of RMSE
and Accuracy are small, indicating that our approach is insensitive to
prediction horizons. (b) Under different prediction horizons, the T -GCN
model has lowest RMSE error compared to baseline methods.
Poisson noise on SZ-taxi. 10(c) and 10(d) are the results of
adding Gaussian noise and Poisson noise based on Los-loop
dataset. It can be seen that the metrics change little whatever
the noise distribution is. Thus, the T-GCN model is robust
and is able to handle high noise issues.
4.6 Model Interpretation
To better understand the T-GCN model, we select one road
on SZ-taxi dataset and visualize prediction results of the test
set. Figure 11, Figure 12, Figure 13, and Figure 14 show the
visualization results for prediction horizons of 15 minutes,
30 minutes, 45 minutes, and 60 minutes, respectively. These
results show:
(1) The T-GCN model predicts poorly at the peak. We
speculate that the main cause is that the GCN model deﬁnes
a smooth ﬁlter in the Fourier domain and captures spatial
feature by constantly moving the ﬁlter. This process leads
to a small change in the overall prediction results, which
makes the peak smoother.
(2) There is a certain error between the real trafﬁc in-
formation and the prediction results. One error is mainly
because when there are no taxis on the roads, there will be
no information record with a zero value. The other error is
because when the trafﬁc information value is small, a small
difference can cause a big relative error.
(3) Regardless of the prediction horizons, the T-GCN
model can always achieve better results. The T-GCN model