JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015 9
(a)
 (b)
(c)
 (d)
Fig. 10. Perturbation analysis. The horizontal axis represents or,
the vertical axis represents prediction results, and different colors mean
different metrics. (a) The results of adding Gaussian perturbation on SZ-
taxi. (b) The results of adding Poisson perturbation on SZ-taxi. (c) The
results of adding Gaussian perturbation on Los-loop. (d) The results of
adding Poisson perturbation on Los-loop.
can capture the spatio-temporal features and obtain the
variation trend of trafﬁc information on the road. Moreover,
The T-GCN model detect the start and end of the rush hour
and make prediction results with similar pattern with the
real trafﬁc speed. Those properties are helpful for predicting
trafﬁc congestion and other trafﬁc phenomena.
5 C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we propose a novel neural network-based ap-
proach for trafﬁc forecasting called T-GCN, which combines
the GCN and the GRU. We use a graph network to model
the urban road network in which the nodes on the graph
represent roads, the edges represent the connection rela-
tionships between roads, and the trafﬁc information on the
roads is described as the attribute of the nodes on the graph.
On one hand, the GCN is used to capture the topological
structure of the graph to obtain the spatial dependence;
on the other hand, the GRU model is used to capture the
dynamic change of node attribute to obtain the temporal
dependence. Eventually the T-GCN model is used to tackle
spatio-temporal trafﬁc forecasting tasks. When evaluated on
two real-world trafﬁc datasets and compared with the HA
model, the ARIMA model, the SVR model, the GCN model,
and the GRU model, the T-GCN model achieves the best
prediction results under different prediction horizons. In
addition, the perturbation analysis illustrates the robustness
of our approach. In summary, the T-GCN model can success-
fully capture the spatial and temporal features from trafﬁc
data and is not limited to trafﬁc forecasting, but can also be
applied to other spatio-temporal tasks.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by the National Science Foun-
dation of China [grant numbers 41571397, 41501442, and
51678077], and by Natural Science Foundation of Hunan
Province (2016JJ3144 and 2016JJ2006).
Fig. 11. The visualization results for prediction horizon of 15 minutes.
Fig. 12. The visualization results for prediction horizon of 30 minutes.
Fig. 13. The visualization results for prediction horizon of 45 minutes.
Fig. 14. The visualization results for prediction horizon of 60 minutes.