Figure 2. Illustration of architectures of BiSeNet [ 28] and our
proposed approach. (a) presents Bilateral Segmentation Network
(BiSeNet [ 28]), which use an extra Spatial Path to encode spatial
information. (b) demonstrates our proposed method, which use a
Detail Guidance module to encode spatial information in the low-
level features without an extra time-cosuming path.
adding an additional path to get low-level features is time-
consuming, and the auxiliary path is always lack of low-
level information guidance.
To this end, we propose a novel hand-craft network for
the purpose of faster inference speed, explainable structure,
and competitive performance to that of existing methods.
First, we design a novel structure, called Short-Term Dense
Concatenate module (STDC module), to get variant scal-
able receptive ﬁelds with a few parameters. Then, the STDC
modules are seamlessly integrated into U-net architecture
to form the STDC network, which greatly promote network
performance in semantic segmentation task.
In details, as shown in Figure 3, we concatenate response
maps from multiple continuous layers, each of which en-
codes input image/feature in different scales and respec-
tive ﬁelds, leading to multi-scale feature representation. To
speed up, the ﬁlter size of layers is gradually reduced with
negligible loss in segmentation performance. The details
structure of STDC networks can be found in Table 2.
In the phase of decoding, as shown in Figure 2(b), in-
stead of utilizing an extra time-consuming path, Detail
Guidance are adopted to guide the low-level layers for the
learning of spatial details. We ﬁrst utilize Detail Aggre-
gation module to generate detail ground-truth. Then, the
binary cross-entropy loss and dice loss are employed to op-
timize the learning task of detail information, which is con-
sidered as one type of side-information learning. It should
be noted that this side-information is not required in the in-
ference time. Finally, the spatial details from low-level lay-
ers and semantic information from deep layers are fused to
predict the semantic segmentation results. The whole archi-
tecture of our method is shown in Figure 4.
Our main contributions can be summarized as follows:
• We design a Short-Term Dense Concatenate module
(STDC module) to extract deep features with scalable
receptive ﬁeld and multi-scale information. This mod-
ule promotes the performance of our STDC networkwith affordable computational cost.
• We propose the Detail Aggregation module to learn the
decoder, leading to more precise preservation of spatial
details in low-level layers without extra computation
cost in the inference time.
• We conduct extensive experiments to present the ef-
fectiveness of our methods. The experiment results
present that STDC networks achieve new state-of-
the-art results on ImageNet, Cityscapes and CamVid.
Speciﬁcally, our STDC1-Seg50 achieves 71.9% mIoU
on the Cityscapes testset at a speed of 250.4 FPS on
one NVIDIA GTX 1080Ti card. Under the same ex-
periment setting, our STDC2-Seg75 achieves 76.8%
mIoU at a speed of 97.0 FPS.
2. Related Work
2.1. Efﬁcient Network Designs
Model design plays an important role in computer vi-
sion tasks. SqueezeNet [ 16] used the ﬁre module and
certain strategies to reduce the model parameters. Mo-
bileNet V1 [ 13] utilized depth-wise separable convolution
to reduce the FLOPs in inference phase. ResNet [ 9] [10]
adopted residual building layers to achieve outstanding per-
formance. MobileNet V2 [ 25] and ShufﬂeNet [ 29] used
group convolution to reduce computation cost while main-
taining comparable accuracy. These works are particularly
designed for the image classiﬁcation tasks, and their exten-
sions to semantic segmentation application should be care-
fully tuned.
2.2. Generic Semantic Segmentation
Traditional segmentation algorithms, e.g., threshold se-
lection, super-pixel, utilized the hand-crafted features to as-
sign pixel-level labels in images. With the development of
convolution neural network, methods [ 3,1,32,14] based
on FCN [ 23] achieved impressive performance on various
benchmarks. The Deeplabv3 [ 3] adopted an atrous spa-
tial pyramid pooling module to capture multi-scale context.
The SegNet [ 1] utilized the encoder-decoder structure to re-
cover the high-resolution feature maps. The PSPNet [ 32]
devised a pyramid pooling to capture both local and global
context information on the dilation backbone. Both dila-
tion backbone and encoder-decoder structure can simulta-
neously learn the low-level details and high-level seman-
tics. However, most approaches require large computation
cost due to the high-resolution feature and the complicate
network connections. In this paper, we propose an efﬁcient
and effective architecture which achieves good trade-off be-
tween speed and accuracy.
2.3. Real­time Semantic Segmentation
Recently, there are fast-growing practical applications
for real-time semantic segmentation. In this circumstance,
9717