Figure 4. Overview of the STDC Segmentation network. ARM denotes Attention Reﬁne module , and FFM denotes Feature Fusion Module
in [28]. The operation in the dashed red box is our STDC network. The operation in the dashed blue box is Detail Aggregation Module .
(a) Input  (b) Spatial Path (c) Stage3 (d) Stage3D
Figure 5. Visual explanations for features in the spatial path and
Stage 3 without and with Detail Guidance . The column with sub-
script Ddenotes results with Detail Guidance . The visualization
shows that spatial path can encode more spatial detail, e.g., bound-
ary, corners, than backbone’s low-level layers, while our Detail
Guidance module can do the same thing without extra computa-
tion cost.
as a binary segmentation task. We ﬁrst generate the de-
tail map ground-truth from the segmentation ground-truth
by Laplacian operator as shown in Figure 4(c). As illus-
trated in Figure 4(a), we insert the Detail Head in Stage 3
to generate the detail feature map. Then we use the detail
ground-truth as the guidance of detail feature map to guide
the low-level layers to learn the feature of spatial details. As
shown in Figure 5(d), the feature map with detail guidance
can encode more spatial details than aforementioned result
presented in Figure 5(c). Finally, the learned detail features
are fused with the context features from the deep block of
the decoder for segmentation prediction.
Detail Ground-truth Generation: We generate the binary
detail ground-truth from the semantic segmentation ground-
truth by our Detail Aggregation module, as shown in dashed
blue box of Figure 4(c). This operation can be carried out
by 2-D convolution kernel named Laplacian kernel and a
trainable 1×1convolution. We use the Laplacian opera-
tor shown in Figure 4(e) to produce soft thin detail featuremaps with different strides to obtain mult-scale detail infor-
mations. Then we upsample the detail feature maps to the
original size and fuse it with a trainable 1×1convolution
for dynamic re-wegihting. Finally, we adopt a threshold
0.1to convert the predicted details to the ﬁnal binary detail
ground-truth with boundary and corner informations.
Detail Loss: Since the number of detail pixels is much
less than the non-detail pixels, detail prediction is a class-
imbalance problem. Because weighted cross-entropy al-
ways leads to coarse results, following [ 7], we adopt binary
cross-entropy and dice loss to jointly optimize the detail
learning. Dice loss measures the overlap between predict
maps and ground-truth. Also, it is insensitive to the number
of foreground/background pixels, which means it can alle-
viating the class-imbalance problem. So for the predicted
detail map with the height Hand the width W, the detail
lossLdetail is formulated as follows:
Ldetail(pd,gd) =Ldice(pd,gd)+Lbce(pd,gd)(4)
wherepd∈RH×Wdenotes the predicted detail and gd∈
RH×Wdenotes the corresponding detail ground-truth. Lbce
denotes the binary cross-entropy loss while Ldicedenotes
the dice loss, which is given as follows:
Ldice(pd,gd) = 1−2/summationtextH×W
ipi
dgi
d+ǫ
/summationtextH×W
i(pi
d)2+/summationtextH×W
i(gi
d)2+ǫ
(5)
whereidenotes the i-th pixel and ǫis a Laplace smoothing
item to avoid zero division. In this paper we set ǫ= 1.
As shown in Figure 4(b), we use a Detail Head to pro-
duce the detail map, which guide the shallow layer to en-
code spatial information. Detail Head includes a 3×3
9720