Rethinking BiSeNet For Real-time Semantic Segmentation
Mingyuan Fan*, Shenqi Lai*, Junshi Huang†, Xiaoming Wei†, Zhenhua Chai,
Junfeng Luo, Xiaolin Wei
Meituan
{fanmingyuan, laishenqi, huangjunshi, weixiaoming, chaizhenhua,
luojunfeng, weixiaolin02 }@meituan.com
Abstract
BiSeNet [ 28,27] has been proved to be a popular two-
stream network for real-time segmentation. However, its
principle of adding an extra path to encode spatial informa-
tion is time-consuming, and the backbones borrowed from
pretrained tasks, e.g., image classiﬁcation, may be inefﬁ-
cient for image segmentation due to the deﬁciency of task-
speciﬁc design. To handle these problems, we propose a
novel and efﬁcient structure named Short-Term Dense Con-
catenate network (STDC network) by removing structure re-
dundancy. Speciﬁcally, we gradually reduce the dimension
of feature maps and use the aggregation of them for im-
age representation, which forms the basic module of STDC
network. In the decoder, we propose a Detail Aggrega-
tion module by integrating the learning of spatial informa-
tion into low-level layers in single-stream manner. Finally,
the low-level features and deep features are fused to pre-
dict the ﬁnal segmentation results. Extensive experiments
on Cityscapes and CamVid dataset demonstrate the effec-
tiveness of our method by achieving promising trade-off
between segmentation accuracy and inference speed. On
Cityscapes, we achieve 71.9% mIoU on the test set with
a speed of 250.4 FPS on NVIDIA GTX 1080Ti, which is
45.2% faster than the latest methods, and achieve 76.8%
mIoU with 97.0 FPS while inferring on higher resolution
images. Code is available at https://github.com/
MichaelFan01/STDC-Seg .
1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation is a classic and fundamental
topic in computer vision, which aims to assign pixel-
level labels in images. The prosperity of deep learning
greatly promotes the performance of semantic segmentation
by making various breakthroughs [ 18,27,22,4], coming
with fast-growing demands in many applications, e.g., au-
tonomous driving, video surveillance, robot sensing, and so
*Equal contribution.
†Co-corresponding author.Fast-SCNNICNetDABNet
DFANet BDFANet A'DFANet A
BiSeNetV1 ABiSeNetV1 B
BiSeNetV2BiSeNetV2 -L
DF1 -Seg-d8DF1-SegDF2 -Seg1DF2 -Seg2
STDC1 -Seg50STDC1 -Seg75
STDC2 -Seg50STDC2 -Seg75
CASGAS FasterSegSFNetHMSeg
TinyHMSeg
66687072747678
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200 220 240 260 280
InferenceSpeed(FPS)MeanIoU(%)
Figure 1. Speed-Accuracy performance comparison on the
Cityscapes testset. Our methods are presented in red dots while
other methods are presented in blue dots. Our approaches achieve
state-of-the-art speed-accuracy trade-off.
on. These applications motivate researchers to explore ef-
fective and efﬁcient segmentation networks, particularly for
mobile ﬁeld.
To fulﬁll those demands, many researchers propose to
design low-latency, high-efﬁciency CNN models with sat-
isfactory segmentation accuracy. These real-time seman-
tic segmentation methods have achieved promising perfor-
mance on various benchmarks. For real-time inference,
some works, e.g., DFANet [ 18] and BiSeNetV1 [ 28] choose
the lightweight backbones and investigate ways of feature
fusion or aggregation modules to compensate for the drop
of accuracy. However, these lightweight backbones bor-
rowed from image classiﬁcation task may not be perfect for
image segmentation problem due to the deﬁciency of task-
speciﬁc design. Besides the choice of lightweight back-
bones, restricting the input image size is another commonly
used method to promote the inference speed. Smaller in-
put resolution seems to be effective, but it can easily ne-
glect the detailed appearance around boundaries and small
objects. To tackle this problem, as shown in Figure 2(a),
BiSeNet [ 28,27] adopt multi-path framework to combine
the low-level details and high-level semantics. However,
9716