Figure 3. (a) General STDC network architecture. ConvX opera-
tion refers to the Conv-BN-ReLU. (b) Short-Term Dense Concate-
nate module (STDC module) used in our network. Mdenotes the
dimension of input channels, Ndenotes the dimension of output
channels. Each block is a ConvX operation with different kernel
size. (c) STDC module with stride=2.
there are two mainstreams to devise efﬁcient segmentation
methods. (i) lightweight backbone. DFANet [ 18] adopted
a lightweight backbone to reduce computation cost and de-
vised a cross-level feature aggregation module to enhance
performance. DFNet [ 21] utilized “Partial Order Pruning”
algorithm to obtain a lightweight backbone and efﬁcient
decoder. (ii) multi-branch architecture. ICNet [ 31] de-
vised the multi-scale image cascade to achieve good speed-
accuracy trade-off. BiSeNetV1 [ 28] and BiSeNetV2 [ 27]
proposed two-stream paths for low-level details and high-
level context information, separately. In this paper, we pro-
pose an efﬁcient lightweight backbone to provide scalable
receptive ﬁeld. Furthermore, we set a single path decoder
which uses detail information guidance to learn the low-
level details.
3. Proposed Method
BiSeNetV1 [ 28] utilizes lightweight backbones, e.g.,
ResNet18 and spatial path as encoding networks to form
two-steam segmentation architecture. However, the classi-
ﬁcation backbones and two-stream architecture may be in-
efﬁcient due to the structure redundancy. In this section, we
ﬁrst introduce the details of our proposed STDC network.
Then we present the whole arhitecture of our single-stream
method with detail guidance.
3.1. Design of Encoding Network
3.1.1 Short-Term Dense Concatenate Module
The key component of our proposed network is the Short-
Term Dense Concatenate module (STDC module). Fig-
ure3(b) and (c) illustrate the layout of STDC module.
Speciﬁcally, each module is separated into several blocks,STDC module Block1 Block2 Block3 Block4 Fusion
RF(S = 1) 1×13×35×57×71×1,3×3
5×5,7×7
RF(S = 2) 1×13×37×711×113×3
7×7,11×11
Table 1. Receptive Field of blocks in our STDC module. RFde-
notes Receptive Field, Smeans stride, Note that if stride=2, the
1×1RFof Block1 is turned into 3×3RFby Average Pool
operation.
and we use ConvX ito denote the operations of i-th block.
Therefore, the output of i-th block is calculated as follows:
xi=ConvX i(xi−1,ki) (1)
wherexi−1andxiare the input and output of i-th block,
separately. ConvX includes one convolutional layer, one
batch normalization layer and ReLU activation layer, and
kiis the kernel size of convolutional layer.
In STDC module, the kernel size of ﬁrst block is 1, and
the rest of them are simply set as 3. Given the channel
number of STDC module’s output N, the ﬁlter number of
convolutional layer in i-th block is N/2i, except the ﬁlters
of last convolutional layer, whose number is the same to
that of previous convolutional layer. In image classiﬁca-
tion tasks, its a common practice to using more channels in
higher layers. But in semantic segmentation tasks, we fo-
cus on scalable receptive ﬁeld and multi-scale informations.
Low-level layers need enough channels to encode more
ﬁne-grained informations with small receptive ﬁeld, while
high-level layers with large receptive ﬁeld focus more on
high-level information induction, setting the same channel
with low-level layers may cause information redundancy.
Down-sample is only happened in Block2. To enrich the
feature information, we concatenate x1toxnfeature maps
as the output of STDC module by skip-path. Before con-
catenation, the response maps of different blocks in STDC
module is down-sampled to the same spatial size by aver-
age pooling operation with 3×3pooling size, as shown in
Figure 3(c). In our setting, the ﬁnal output of STDC module
is:
xoutput=F(x1,x2,...,xn) (2)
wherexoutput denotes the STDC module output, Fis the
fusion operation in our method, while x1,x2,...,xnare fea-
ture maps from all nblocks. In the consideration of efﬁ-
ciency, we adopt concatenation as our fusion operation. In
our method, we use the STDC module in 4blocks.
Table 1presents the receptive ﬁeld of blocks in STDC
module, and xoutput thus gathers multi-scale information
from all blocks, We claim that our STDC module has two
advantages: (1) we elaborately tune the ﬁlter size of blocks
by gradually decreasing in geometric progression manner,
leading to signiﬁcant reduction in computation complexity.
(2) the ﬁnal output of STDC module is concatenated from
9718