StyleGAN2 OursStyleGAN2
 latent interpolation!Ours
 latent interpolation!Averaged Central
Figure 1: Examples of “texture sticking”. Left: The average of images generated from a small
neighborhood around a central latent (top row). The intended result is uniformly blurry because
all details should move together. However, with StyleGAN2 many details (e.g., fur) stick to the
same pixel coordinates, showing unwanted sharpness. Right: From a latent space interpolation
(top row), we extract a short vertical segment of pixels from each generated image and stack them
horizontally (bottom). The desired result is hairs moving in animation, creating a time-varying ﬁeld.
With StyleGAN2 the hairs mostly stick to the same coordinates, creating horizontal streaks instead.
exhibits a more natural transformation hierarchy, where the exact sub-pixel position of each feature is
exclusively inherited from the underlying coarse features.
It turns out that current networks can partially bypass the ideal hierarchical construction by drawing
on unintentional positional references available to the intermediate layers through image borders
[25,31,58], per-pixel noise inputs [ 29] and positional encodings, and aliasing [ 5,61]. Aliasing,
despite being a subtle and critical issue [ 38], has received little attention in the GAN literature.
We identify two sources for it: 1) faint after-images of the pixel grid resulting from non-ideal
upsampling ﬁlters2such as nearest, bilinear, or strided convolutions, and 2) the pointwise application
of nonlinearities such as ReLU [ 52] or swish [ 40]. We ﬁnd that the network has the means and
motivation to amplify even the slightest amount of aliasing and combining it over multiple scales
allows it to build a basis for texture motifs that are ﬁxed in screen coordinates. This holds for all ﬁlters
commonly used in deep learning [61, 51], and even high-quality ﬁlters used in image processing.
How, then, do we eliminate the unwanted side information and thereby stop the network from using
it? While borders can be solved by simply operating on slightly larger images, aliasing is much harder.
We begin by noting that aliasing is most naturally treated in the classical Shannon-Nyquist signal
processing framework, and switch focus to bandlimited functions on a continuous domain that are
merely represented by discrete sample grids. Now, successful elimination of all sources of positional
references means that details can be generated equally well regardless of pixel coordinates, which
in turn is equivalent to enforcing continuous equivariance to sub-pixel translation (and optionally
rotation) in all layers. To achieve this, we describe a comprehensive overhaul of all signal processing
aspects of the StyleGAN2 generator [ 30]. Our contributions include the surprising ﬁnding that current
upsampling ﬁlters are simply not aggressive enough in suppressing aliasing, and that extremely
high-quality ﬁlters with over 100dB attenuation are required. Further, we present a principled solution
to aliasing caused by pointwise nonlinearities [ 5] by considering their effect in the continuous domain
and appropriately low-pass ﬁltering the results. We also show that after the overhaul, a model based
on 11 convolutions yields a strong, rotation equivariant generator.
Once aliasing is adequately suppressed to force the model to implement more natural hierarchical
reﬁnement, its mode of operation changes drastically: the emergent internal representations now
include coordinate systems that allow details to be correctly attached to the underlying surfaces. This
promises signiﬁcant improvements to models that generate video and animation. The new StyleGAN3
generator matches StyleGAN2 in terms of FID [ 23], while being slightly heavier computationally. Our
implementation and pre-trained models are available at https://github.com/NVlabs/stylegan3
Several recent works have studied the lack of translation equivariance in CNNs, mainly in the context
of classiﬁcation [ 25,31,58,5,33,61,12,63,51]. We signiﬁcantly expand upon the antialiasing
2Consider nearest neighbor upsampling. If we upsample a 4 4 image to 88, the original pixels will be
clearly visible, allowing one to reliably distinguish between even and odd pixels. Since the same is true on all
scales, this (leaked) information makes it possible to reconstruct even the absolute pixel coordinates. With better
ﬁlters such as bilinear or bicubic, the clues get less pronounced, but are nevertheless evident for the generator.
2