Alias-Free Generative Adversarial Networks
Tero Karras
NVIDIA
tkarras@nvidia.comMiika Aittala
NVIDIA
maittala@nvidia.comSamuli Laine
NVIDIA
slaine@nvidia.com
Erik Härkönen
Aalto University and NVIDIA
erik.harkonen@aalto.fiJanne Hellsten
NVIDIA
jhellsten@nvidia.com
Jaakko Lehtinen
NVIDIA and Aalto University
jlehtinen@nvidia.comTimo Aila
NVIDIA
taila@nvidia.com
Abstract
We observe that despite their hierarchical convolutional nature, the synthesis
process of typical generative adversarial networks depends on absolute pixel coor-
dinates in an unhealthy manner. This manifests itself as, e.g., detail appearing to
be glued to image coordinates instead of the surfaces of depicted objects. We trace
the root cause to careless signal processing that causes aliasing in the generator
network. Interpreting all signals in the network as continuous, we derive generally
applicable, small architectural changes that guarantee that unwanted information
cannot leak into the hierarchical synthesis process. The resulting networks match
the FID of StyleGAN2 but differ dramatically in their internal representations, and
they are fully equivariant to translation and rotation even at subpixel scales. Our
results pave the way for generative models better suited for video and animation.
1 Introduction
The resolution and quality of images produced by generative adversarial networks (GAN) [ 19]
have seen rapid improvement recently [ 27,11,29,30]. They have been used for a variety of
applications, including image editing [ 42,47,37,20,34,3], domain translation [ 62,32,53,36], and
video generation [ 49,15,21]. While several ways of controlling the generative process have been
found [ 8,26,10,36,22,2,7,41,6], the foundations of the synthesis process remain only partially
understood.
In the real world, details of different scale tend to transform hierarchically. For instance, moving
a head causes the nose to move, which in turn moves the skin pores on it. The structure of a
typical GAN generator is analogous: coarse, low-resolution features are hierarchically reﬁned by
upsampling layers, locally mixed by convolutions, and new detail is introduced through nonlinearities.
We observe that despite this superﬁcial similarity, current GAN architectures do not synthesize
images in a natural hierarchical manner: the coarse features mainly control the presence of ﬁner
features, but not their precise positions. Instead, much of the ﬁne detail appears to be ﬁxed in
pixel coordinates. This disturbing “texture sticking” is clearly visible in latent interpolations (see
Figure 1 and our accompanying videos on the project page https://nvlabs.github.io/stylegan3 ),
breaking the illusion of a solid and coherent object moving in space. Our goal is an architecture that
This work was done during an internship at NVIDIA.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).