Generated image
Internal representations
Latent interpolation
StyleGAN2
StyleGAN3
-
T
StyleGAN3
-
R
InputFigure 6: Example internal representations (3 feature maps as RGB) in StyleGAN2 and our generators.
accidentally preferring to see the front teeth at certain pixel locations. Concurrent work has identiﬁed
that aliasing is detrimental for such generalization [51].
Our alias-free generator architecture contains implicit assumptions about the nature of the training
data, and violating these may cause training difﬁculties. Let us consider an example. Suppose we
have black-and-white cartoons as training data that we (incorrectly) pre-process using point sampling
[38], leading to training images where almost all pixels are either black or white and the edges are
jagged. This kind of badly aliased training data is difﬁcult for GANs in general, but it is especially at
odds with equivariance: on the one hand, we are asking the generator to be able to translate the output
smoothly by subpixel amounts, but on the other hand, edges must still remain jagged and pixels only
black/white, to remain faithful to the training data. The same issue can also arise with letterboxing of
training images, low-quality JPEGs, or retro pixel graphics, where the jagged stair-step edges are a
deﬁning feature of the aesthetic. In such cases it may be beneﬁcial for the generator to be aware of
the pixel grid.
In future, it might be interesting to re-introduce noise inputs (stochastic variation) in a way that
is consistent with hierarchical synthesis. A better path length regularization would encourage
neighboring features to move together, not discourage them from moving at all. It might be beneﬁcial
to try to extend our approach to equivariance w.r.t. scaling, anisotropic scaling, or even arbitrary
homeomorphisms. Finally, it is well known that antialiasing should be done before tone mapping. So
far, all GANs — including ours — have operated in the sRGB color space (after tone mapping).
Attention layers in the middle of a generator [ 60] could likely be dealt with similarly to non-linearities
by temporarily switching to higher resolution – although the time complexity of attention layers
may make this somewhat challenging in practice. Recent attention-based GANs that start with a
tokenizing transformer (e.g., VQGAN [ 18]) may be at odds with equivariance. Whether it is possible
to make them equivariant is an important open question.
Potential negative societal impacts of (image-producing) GANs include many forms of disinfor-
mation, from fake portraits in social media [ 24] to propaganda videos of world leaders [ 43]. Our
contribution eliminates certain characteristic artifacts from videos, potentially making them more
convincing or deceiving, depending on the application. Viable solutions include model watermarking
[59] along with large-scale authenticity assessment in major social media sites. This entire project
consumed 92 GPU years and 225 MWh of electricity on an in-house cluster of NVIDIA V100s. The
new StyleGAN3 generator is only marginally costlier to train or use than that of StyleGAN2.
6 Acknowledgments
We thank David Luebke, Ming-Yu Liu, Koki Nagano, Tuomas Kynkäänniemi, and Timo Viitanen for
reviewing early drafts and helpful suggestions. Frédo Durand for early discussions. Tero Kuosmanen
for maintaining our compute infrastructure. AFHQ authors for an updated version of their dataset.
Getty Images for the training images in the BEACHES dataset. We did not receive external funding or
additional revenues for this project.
10