Nature Medicine
Brief Communication https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-023-02475-5Methods
Supervised learning and reinforcement learning
For the supervised learning, we fine-tuned a convolutional neural net -
work for classification of seven different categories of the HAM10000 
dataset, as described previously14. For RL, we created a deep Q -learning 
model consisting of a multilayer perceptron that receives as input a 
one-dimensional state vector from the feature vectors and probabilities 
of the supervised model. For the patient-centered scenario, we normal -
ized the input vector to account for the context of multiple lesions (the 
lesion state vector was divided position-wise by the average across all 
lesion vectors of the same patient). Python language (v.3.8) was used to conduct all experiments. The RL models were implemented using 
TensorFlow v.2.8, together with a set of packages: NumPy (v.1.20.3), 
Scikit-Learn (v.1.1.2), pandas (v.1.3.4) and OpenAI Gym (v.0.23.1).
The RL models predict the Q -value for each possible action. 
Depending on the RL model, the action space was either selecting a 
diagnosis (seven actions) or selecting a management option, ranging 
from two actions (dismiss or excise) to four actions (dismiss, monitor, 
treat locally and excise), depending on the type of scenario. The RL 
models were trained following Mnih et al.11 using an exploration–exploi -
tation strategy, a replay buffer and a target Q -network with a lower 
update rate to stabilize the training process11. Huber loss was adopted 
as the loss function and the weights of the Q -network were updated 
using the Adam optimizer with a learning rate of 0.025. To improve 
generalization, we added dropout layers with a probability of 0.05. We 
tested different configurations for the Q -network (number and size 
of the hidden layers and combination of the input state), buffer size, 
episode length, update rates for the Q-network and the target model, 
and exploration ε . The best Q -network models consisted of a multilayer 
perceptron with a 256-unit fully connected layer with a ReLu activa -
tion that processes the features of the supervised model, followed 
by the concatenation of its output with the logits. The concatenation 
is fed to the output layer, which has the same units as the number of 
possible actions and a linear activation. The replay buffer size was set 
to 10,000 and the update rates for the Q - and target networks were 
set to 4 and 8,000 iterations, except in the patient-centered model 
where the updates were set to 35 and 5,800 iterations. We also ran 
experiments with several episode lengths, ranging from 250 to 12, 
except in the patient-centered model where the episodes had a vary -
ing length depending on the number of lesions per patient. We found 
that the episode length had a marginal effect on the performance of 
the RL model. In the case of the patient-centered model, we found 
that ordering the lesions according to malignancy probability inside 
the episode led to better performances. Finally, the ε  was set to 0.2. 
We also found that modifications to the reward table resulted in only 
minor changes or degradation of results compared to the originally 
designed reward table.
We used the HAM10000 dataset to train all RL models, except in 
the patient-centered scenario1. To track the evolution of the models, we 
split the original HAM10000 set into a single 80/20 partition, of which 
the latter was used as the validation set. Because of the relatively small 
number of patients and the high variability in the number of lesions per 
patient, the patient-centered dataset was used to train and evaluate the 
RL model based on a 20-fold cross-validation strategy.
The reward table for the basic RL model was created in advance in 
consensus by three expert dermatologists (H.K., P.T., V.R.). To compare 
the reward model with the threshold model in different clinical sce -
narios, we asked 12 dermatologists with extensive experience in treat -
ing neoplastic skin lesions to provide us with their reward tables and thresholds for each scenario. Because two of the 12 experts provided 
incomplete information (they did not specify thresholds for either the 
binary scenario or the scenario with the additional treatment option), 
we had a total of ten expert assessments available. Treatment decisions 
using the threshold model followed a preference-based hierarchy. The 
model initially determined if the predicted melanoma probability exceeded the excision threshold. If not, it considered the overall malig -
nancy probability and then the probabilities of basal cell carcinoma and 
actinic keratosis/intraepidermal carcinoma. The median values of the 
rewards and thresholds were used for the SL model and the RL model, respectively. For the low-threshold approach in the patient-centered scenario, we used the minimum value rather than the median value of the ten thresholds reported by the experts.
Entropy
We calculated the Shannon entropy as a measure of uncertainty in 
the predictions of the machine learning models using the following 
formula, where H is entropy, X is a discrete random variable with pos-
sible probabilities (p) ranging from p1 to pn, and i is an index variable:
H(X)=H(p1,….,pn)=−n
∑
i=1pilog2pi
Datasets
The publicly available HAM10000 dataset was used to train the SL 
model and the RL model1.
The ISIC 2018 challenge test set was used as an independent test 
set for the reader study and for the external validation of the SL model 
and the RL model3.This set includes 1,511 retrospectively collected 
dermatoscopic images from different sites including Austria (n  = 928), 
Australia (n  = 267), Turkey (n  = 117), New Zealand (n  = 87), Sweden 
(n = 92) and Argentina (n  = 20) to ensure diversity of skin types. The 
mean age of patients was 50.8 years (s.d.: 17.4 years), and 46.2% of 
patients were female. The ground truth was routine pathology evalu-
ation (n  = 786), biology (that is, >1.5 years of sequential dermatoscopic 
imaging without changes; n  = 458), expert consensus in inconspicuous 
cases that were not excised or biopsied (n = 260) and in vivo confocal 
images (n = 7). Fewer than ten cases with ambiguous histopathologic 
reports were excluded. For the patient-centered scenario, we used der -
matoscopic images of 7,375 lesions from 524 patients (mean: 51.1 years, 
s.d.: 11.8 years, 46.6% females). Images were collected either at the 
University Department of Dermatology, Medical University of Vienna 
(n = 4,839) or at a dermatology practice in Vienna (n  = 2,536). The 
consecutive dataset included 55 melanomas, all of which were either 
noninvasive (in situ) or microinvasive (<0.8 mm invasion thickness, 
tumor stage T1a). Most benign lesions that were selected for monitor -
ing by the treating dermatologists were nevi (n  = 7,213). The remaining 
benign lesions were keratinocytic lesions (n  = 53), dermatofibromas 
(n = 31), or vascular lesions (n = 20) and other benign lesions (n = 3).
Interaction platform, raters and reader study
We used the web-based platform DermaChallenge, which was devel -
oped at the Medical University of Vienna, as the interface for the reader 
study16.The platform is split into a back end and front end, and both 
are deployed on a stack of standard web technologies (Linux, Apache, 
MariaDB and PHP). The front end is optimized for mobile devices 
(mobile phones and tablets) but can also be used on any other platform 
via a JavaScript-enabled web browser. Readers were recruited by using 
mailing lists and social media posts from the International Society of Dermoscopy. To participate in the study, raters had to register with a 
username, a valid email address and a password. In addition, we asked 
for age (age groups spanning 10 years), sex, country and profession. 
The readers’ task was to diagnose the unknown test images first without 
and then with decision support based on either the SL model or the RL 
model. The images were presented in batches of ten selected randomly 
from the test set of 1,511 images. We drew a stratified random sample 
to ensure a predefined class distribution of three nevi, two melanomas 
and one example of each other class. Readers could repeat the survey 
with different batches at their own discretion. The study was online 
from 17th November 17th 2022 to 2nd February 2023. During this time, 
we collected 613 complete tests from 89 dermatologists.