An Empirical Study of Spatial Attention Mechanisms in Deep Networks
Xizhou Zhu1,2†∗Dazhi Cheng2†∗Zheng Zhang2∗Stephen Lin2Jifeng Dai2
1University of Science and Technology of China
2Microsoft Research Asia
ezra0408@mail.ustc.edu.cn
{v-dachen,zhez,stevelin,jifdai }@microsoft.com
Abstract
Attention mechanisms have become a popular compo-
nent in deep neural networks, yet there has been little ex-
amination of how different inﬂuencing factors and meth-
ods for computing attention from these factors affect per-
formance. Toward a better general understanding of atten-
tion mechanisms, we present an empirical study that ab-
lates various spatial attention elements within a generalized
attention formulation, encompassing the dominant Trans-
former attention as well as the prevalent deformable convo-
lution and dynamic convolution modules. Conducted on a
variety of applications, the study yields signiﬁcant ﬁndings
about spatial attention in deep networks, some of which run
counter to conventional understanding. For example, we
ﬁnd that the comparison of query and key content in Trans-
former attention is negligible for self-attention, but vital for
encoder-decoder attention. On the other hand, a proper
combination of deformable convolution with key content
saliency achieves the best accuracy-efﬁciency tradeoff in
self-attention. Our results suggest that there exists much
room for improvement in the design of attention mecha-
nisms.
1. Introduction
Attention mechanisms enable a neural network to fo-
cus more on relevant elements of the input than on irrel-
evant parts. They were ﬁrst studied in natural language
processing (NLP), where encoder-decoder attention mod-
ules were developed to facilitate neural machine transla-
tion [ 2,28,14]. In computing the output for a given query
element ( e.g., a target word in the output sentence), cer-
tain key elements ( e.g., source words in the input sentence)
are prioritized according to the query. Later, self-attention
modules were presented for modeling intra-sentence rela-
∗Equal contribution. †This work was done when Xizhou Zhu and Dazhi
Cheng were interns at Microsoft Research Asia.tions [ 6,26,30,31,36], where both the key and query
are from the same set of elements. In a milestone pa-
per [ 36], the Transformer attention module is presented,
superseding past works and substantially surpassing their
performance. The success of attention modeling in NLP
has led to its adoption in computer vision, where differ-
ent variants of Transformer attention are applied to recog-
nition tasks such as object detection and semantic segmen-
tation [ 20,38,17,22,46,13], where the query and key are
visual elements such as image pixels or regions of interest.
In determining the attention weight assigned to a certain
key for a given query, there exist just a few properties of the
input that are commonly considered. One is the content of
the query. For the case of self-attention, the query content
may be the features at the query pixel in an image, or of a
word in a sentence. Another is the content of the key, where
a key may be a pixel within a local neighborhood of the
query, or another word within the sentence. The third is the
relative position of the query and key.
Based on these input properties, there are four possible
attention factors from which the attention weight for a key
with respect to a query is determined, as these factors must
account for information about the key. Speciﬁcally, these
factors are (1) the query and key content, (2) the query con-
tent and relative position, (3) the key content only, and (4)
the relative position only. In the latest version of Trans-
former attention [ 10], attention weights are expressed as a
sum of four terms ( E1,E2,E3,E4), one for each of these at-
tention factors as illustrated in Fig. 1. The nature of the de-
pendencies involved with these terms vary. For example, the
ﬁrst two ( E1,E2) are sensitive to the query content. While,
the latter two ( E3,E4) do not account for query content, but
rather they mainly capture salient key elements and exploit
global positional biases, respectively. Although attention
weights can be decomposed into terms based on these fac-
tors, their relative signiﬁcance in various inference prob-
lems has not been closely examined in the literature. More-
over, prevalent modules like deformable convolution [ 9,47]
1
6688