attention mechanism spatial properties query content key content relative position complexity
Transformer attentionE1 dense, global /check /check O(N2
sC+NsC2)
E2 dense, global /check /check O(N2
sC+NsC2)
E3 dense, global /check O(NsC2)
E4 dense, global /check O(N2
sC+NsC2)
Regular convolution sparse, local /check O(NsC2Nk)
Deformable convolution sparse, global /check /check O(NsC2Nk)
Dynamic convolution sparse, local /check /check O(NsCNgNk+NsC2)
Table 1. Comparison of different attention mechanisms. Nsdenotes number of spatial elements, i.e. width by height for images, and
number of tokens for text; Cdenotes representation dimension; Nkdenotes kernel size of convolution ( Nk= 3×3for images and
Nk= 3for text, by default); Ngdenotes number of feature groups in dynamic convolution.
theE2term, it is based on the query content and relative
position, as E2=z⊤
qU⊤
mVR
mRk−q, whereRk−qencodes the
relative position k−qby projecting it to a high-dimensional
representation through computing sine and cosine functions
of different wavelengths1[36].VR
mis a learnable embed-
ding matrix for the encoded relative position Rk−q. This
term allows the network to adaptively determine where to
assign high attention weights based on the query content. It
may help to disentangle appearance from spatial transfor-
mations in image recognition, as illustrated in Fig. 1(b).
TheE3andE4terms are irrelevant to the query content.
TheE3term involves key content only, as E3=u⊤
mVC
mxk,
whereumis a learnable vector. It captures salient key con-
tent which should be focused on for the task, and is irrel-
evant to the query. An illustration is shown in Fig. 1(c).
As for the E4term, it involves relative position only, as
E4=v⊤
mVR
mRk−q, wherevmis a learnable vector. It cap-
tures global positional bias between the key and query ele-
ments, as illustrated in Fig. 1(d).
It is widely believed that query-sensitive prioritization,
especially the query and key content compatibility term E1,
is the key to the success of Transformer attention. Thus, in
some recent variants [ 38,22,43,13], onlyE1is kept, while
the other terms are all removed.
In Transformer attention, both WmandW′
min Eq. ( 1)
are learnable. W′
mprojects the features of xkto a relatively
low dimension for reducing computational overhead, and
Wmprojects the aggregated features back to the same di-
mension as yq.
Regular and deformable convolution
Regular and deformable convolution can be deemed
as special instantiations of spatial attention mechanisms,
where subsets of the attention factors are involved.
In regular convolution, given a query element, a ﬁxed
number of key elements ( e.g.,3×3) are sampled, accord-
ing to predetermined positional offsets with respect to the
query. From the perspective of Eq. ( 1), the attention weight
of regular convolution can be expressed as
1For 2-d image data, we separately encode the x-axis relative position
RX
k−qand y-axis relative position RY
k−q, and concatenate them to be the
ﬁnal encoding Rk−q= [RX
k−q,RY
k−q].Aregular
m(q,k) =/braceleftBigg
1ifk=q+pm
0else,(3)
where each sampled key element is of a separate attention
head ( e.g.,3×3regular convolution corresponds to 9 atten-
tion heads), and pmdenotes the offset for the m-th sampling
position. In addition, the weight W′
min Eq. ( 1) is ﬁxed as
identity, leaving Wmas learnable. In regular convolution,
only relative position is involved, without learnable parame-
ters for adapting attention to content. The supporting key re-
gionΩqis restricted to a local window centered at the query
position and determined by the convolution kernel size.
In deformable convolution [ 9,47], learnable offsets are
added to adjust the sampling positions of the key elements,
so as to capture spatial transformations. The learnable off-
sets are predicted based on the query content, and are thus
dynamic to the input. The key and the query elements are
from the same set. It can also be incorporated into the gen-
eralized attention formulation as a special instantiation of
self-attention, where the attention weight is
Adeform
m(q,k,x q) =G(k,q+pm+w⊤
mxq), (4)
wherepmalso denotes a predetermined offset, and w⊤
mxq
projects the query content xqto a deformation offset ac-
cording to a learnable vector wm2.G(a,b)is the bilin-
ear interpolation kernel in N-d space, which can be de-
composed into 1-d bilinear interpolations as G(a,b) =/producttextN
n=1g(an,bn), whereanandbndenote the n-th dimen-
sion ofaandbrespectively, and g(an,bn) = max(0 ,1−
|an−bn|). Similar to regular convolution, the weight W′
m
in Eq. ( 1) is ﬁxed as identity.
In deformable convolution, the attention factors are
query content and relative position. The supporting key
regionΩqcan span over all the input elements due to the
introduced learnable offsets, while non-zero weights are as-
signed to a sparse set of key elements where bilinear inter-
polation is performed.
Dynamic convolution
Dynamic convolution [ 39] is recently proposed to re-
place the Transformer attention module in self-attention,
2Following [ 9], the learning rate of wmis set to 0.1 times that of other
parameters to stabilize training.
6691