and is claimed to be simpler and more efﬁcient. It is built
upon depth-wise separable convolution [ 19] with shared dy-
namic kernel weights, which are predicted based on the
query content. In depth-wise separable convolution, a stan-
dard convolution is factorized into a depth-wise convolution
and a1×1convolution called a point-wise convolution, for
reducing computation and model size. In depth-wise convo-
lution, a single ﬁlter is applied to each input channel, which
is ﬁxed for all positions. In dynamic convolution, the kernel
weights for the depth-wise convolution are dynamically pre-
dicted from the input features, followed by a Softmax nor-
malization. For computational savings, the input channels
are divided into several groups, where each group shares the
same dynamic kernel weights. In the system of [ 39], an or-
thogonal module called the gated linear unit (GLU) [ 11] is
applied before the dynamic convolution module to improve
accuracy. We include the GLU to respect the original de-
sign.
Dynamic convolution can also be incorporated into the
general attention formulation in Eq. ( 1) with minor modi-
ﬁcations, where each input feature channel is of a separate
attention head. It can be expressed as
yq=Cin/summationdisplay
c=1Wc/bracketleftbig/summationdisplay
k∈ΩqAdynamic
c(q,k,x q)·xk,c/bracketrightbig
, (5)
wherecenumerates the channels of the input features ( Cin
channels in total), xk,cdenotes the feature value at the c-th
channel of xk, andWcis of the1×1point-wise convolu-
tion.Adynamic
c(q,k,xq)is the attention weight speciﬁed by
the dynamic kernel in depth-wise convolution, written as
Adynamic
c(q,k,x q) =/braceleftBigg
Kj,c ifk=q+pj
0 else,(6)
wherepjdenotes the j-th sampling position in the dynamic
kernel, and Kj,cis the corresponding kernel weight. Zero
attention weight is assigned to keys outside of the kernel.
The kernel weight Kj,cis predicted from the input features,
and is shared among channels in the same group, as
Kj,c=Kshare
j,g∝exp/parenleftbig
d⊤
j,gxq/parenrightbig
, g=⌈c
Cin/Ng⌉. (7)
The input features are divided into Nggroups (Ng= 16 by
default). Kshare
j,g denotes the dynamic kernel weight for the
g-th group, and dj,gis the corresponding learnable weight
vector.Kshare
j,g is normalized by/summationtextNk
j=1Kshare
j,g= 1, where
Nkdenotes the number of elements in the dynamic kernel.
In dynamic convolution, attention assignment is based
on the query content and relative position factor. The sup-
porting key region Ωqis restricted to a local window around
the query position covered by the dynamic kernel.
Comparing attention mechanisms
Tab. 1compares the three attention mechanisms dis-
cussed above. Transformer attention exploits comprehen-
sive content and position information from both query andkey. The E1,E2andE4terms require computation propor-
tional to the product of the query and key element num-
bers, because they involve a traversal of each query-key
pair. The E3term captures key content only, and thus in-
volves computation linear to the key element number. In
neural machine translation, the key and query elements are
commonly dozens of words in a sentence, so the computa-
tional overheads of E1,E2andE4are comparable to E3. In
image recognition, the key and query elements consist of
numerous pixels in an image. The computational overheads
ofE1,E2andE4are thus much heavier than E3. Note that
when the four terms are put together, some computational
overhead can be shared among them.
Similar to the E2term, deformable convolution also is
based on query content and relative position. But de-
formable convolution samples just a sparse set of key el-
ements for each query, and the complexity is linear to the
query element number. Deformable convolution is thus
much faster to compute than E2for image recognition, and
is comparable in speed to E2for machine translation.
Dynamic convolution also relies on query content and
relative position. The attention weights of key elements are
assigned by the dynamic convolution kernel, based on the
query content. Non-zero attention weights only exist in a
local range covered by the dynamic kernel. The computa-
tional overhead is proportional to the product of the kernel
size and query element number. Compared to the E2term,
the computational overhead can be considerably lower if the
kernel size is much smaller than the key element number.
We seek to further disentangle the effects of different at-
tention factors, and to facilitate comparison to other instan-
tiations of spatial attention that use a subset of the factors.
Thus, manual switches are introduced into the Transformer
attention module, which enable us to manually activate / de-
activate particular terms. This is expressed as
ˆATrans
m(q,k,zq,xk)∝exp/parenleftbig4/summationdisplay
j=1βTrans
jEj/parenrightbig
, (8)
where{βTrans
j}takes values in {0,1}to control the activa-
tion of corresponding terms, and ˆATrans
m(q,k,zq,xk)is nor-
malized by/summationtext
k∈ΩqˆATrans
m(q,k,zq,xk) = 1 .
Incorporating attention modules into deep networks
We incorporate various attention mechanisms into deep
networks to study their effects. There are different design
choices in inserting the modules, e.g., whether to connect
them in series or in parallel, and where to place the mod-
ules in the backbone network. We empirically observed the
results to be quite similar for different well-considered de-
signs. In this paper, we select the design choices in Fig. 2.
Detailed descriptions are provided in the Appendix, and
a brief introduction is presented here. For the object de-
tection and semantic segmentation tasks, ResNet-50 [ 18] is
chosen as the backbone and just the self-attention mecha-
6692