(a) query and key content (b) query content and relative position (c) key content only (d) relative position onlyquerykey
query key
relative positionquery key
relative position
query keykey
key
query key
relative positionquery key
relative positionFigure 1. Illustration of different attention terms. The color bar above a sampling point denotes its content feature. The existence of content
features and/or relative position indicates that the term uses them for attention weight calculation.
and dynamic convolution [ 39], though seemingly orthogo-
nal to Transformer attention, also employ mechanisms that
focus on certain parts of an input. Whether these modules
can all be viewed from a uniﬁed perspective and how their
operational mechanisms differ also have not been explored.
In this work, we perceive Transformer attention, de-
formable convolution, and dynamic convolution modules as
various instantiations of spatial attention, involving differ-
ent subsets of the attention factors and accounting for these
factors in different ways. Towards disentangling the effects
of different attention factors and mechanisms, we present
an empirical study of spatial attention, in which various el-
ements of attention mechanisms are ablated within a gen-
eralized attention formulation. This investigation is con-
ducted on a variety of applications, namely neural machine
translation, semantic segmentation, and object detection.
From this study, we ﬁnd that: 1) In the Transformer atten-
tion module, the query-sensitive terms, especially the query
and key content term, play a minor role in self-attention.
But in encoder-decoder attention, the query and key con-
tent term is vital. 2) Though deformable convolution uti-
lizes an attention mechanism based only on the query con-
tent and relative position term, it operates more effectively
and efﬁciently on image recognition than the counterpart in
Transformer attention. 3) In self-attention, the factors of
query content & relative position and key content only are
the most important. A proper combination of deformable
convolution and the key content only term in Transformer
attention delivers higher accuracy than that of the Trans-
former attention module, with much lower computational
overhead on image recognition tasks.
The observations made in this paper challenge the con-
ventional understanding of current spatial attention mecha-
nisms. For example, it is widely believed that their success
can mainly be attributed to query-sensitive attention, espe-
cially the query and key content term. This understanding
perhaps originates from the initial success of the encoder-
decoder attention module in neural machine translation.
Thus, in some recent variants [ 38,22,43,13], like the
non-local block [ 38] and criss-cross attention module [ 22],
only the query and key content term is kept, with all the
other terms removed. These modules still function well
in self-attention applications, which strengthen this percep-
tion. However, our study suggests that this understanding isincorrect. We ﬁnd that these attention modules with only
query-sensitive terms actually perform on par with those
with only query-irrelevant terms. Our study further sug-
gests that this degeneration is likely due to the design of
the attention modules, rather than an inherent characteris-
tic of self-attention, since deformable convolution is found
to exploit query content & relative position effectively and
efﬁciently in image recognition tasks.
This empirical analysis suggests that there is much room
for improvement in the design of spatial attention mecha-
nisms in deep networks. Its ﬁndings are used in this pa-
per to make some initial headway in this direction, and it is
hoped that this study will spur further investigation into the
operational mechanisms used in modeling spatial attention.
2. Related Work
Development and application of attention-based mod-
ules. The ﬁeld of NLP has witnessed steady development of
attention mechanisms in recent years [ 2,28,14,36,34,10].
Starting from the introduction of an attention module in
neural machine translation [ 2], various attention factors and
weight assignment functions based on these factors have
been utilized. In [ 28], the inner product of vectors encod-
ing query and key contents is recommended for computing
attention weights, and absolute spatial positions are incor-
porated as an attention factor. In [ 14], the weight assign-
ment additionally accounts for the inner product of spatial
positions encoded in high-dimensional vectors. The land-
mark work of Transformer [ 36] set a new standard, and its
latest variants use relative positions instead of absolute posi-
tions for better generalization ability [ 34,10]. In this paper,
we conduct the empirical study on the latest instantiation of
Transformer attention [ 10] from this family of works.
Motivated by their success in NLP tasks [ 2,28,14,6,26,
30,31,36], attention mechanisms have also been employed
in computer vision applications such as relational reasoning
among objects [ 3,33], image captioning [ 41], image gener-
ation [ 45,42], image recognition [ 20,38,17,22,46,13],
and video recognition [ 48,40]. In vision, the key and
query refer to visual elements, but aside from that, most
of these works use a formulation similar to Transformer at-
tention. Since the effects of different attention module ele-
ments may vary with the target application, we conduct the
empirical study on three different tasks that have been in-
6689