ﬂuenced greatly by attention modeling, namely neural ma-
chine translation in NLP, and object detection and semantic
segmentation in computer vision.
Aside from Transformer attention, there are variants of
convolution, such as deformable convolution [ 9,47] and
dynamic convolution [ 39], that also can be viewed as types
of attention mechanisms which operate on a subset of the
attention factors using different attention weight functions.
They also are included in the study for examination.
It is worth mentioning a dual form of spatial attention,
called channel-wise feature attention [ 37,44,21,13]. As
different feature channels encode different semantic con-
cepts, these works seek to capture the correlations among
these concepts through activation/deactivation of certain
channels. Meanwhile, in the spatial domain, relationships
among elements at different spatial positions are modeled,
with the same attention weights on feature channels as-
signed to related spatial positions. The development of
channel-wise feature attention has been focused on cer-
tain image recognition tasks, like semantic segmentation
and image classiﬁcation. In this paper, our empirical
study speciﬁcally examines spatial attention mechanisms
designed for broad application.
Analysis of spatial attention mechanisms. There ex-
ists relatively little analysis of spatial attention mecha-
nisms despite their prevalence in deep networks. This re-
search has largely been conducted by visualizing or an-
alyzing the learned attention weights of a whole atten-
tion module on only NLP tasks [ 15,35,16,23]. Many
works [ 15,35,16] suggest that attention weight assignment
in encoder-decoder attention plays a role similar to word
alignment in traditional approaches [ 1,7,27,5]. The im-
plicit underlying assumption in these works is that the input
elements accorded high attention weights are responsible
for the model outputs. However, recent research casts doubt
on this assumption [ 23], ﬁnding that attention weights do
not correlate well with feature importance measures, and
that counterfactual attention weight conﬁgurations do not
yield corresponding changes in prediction.
In this paper, we conduct the ﬁrst comprehensive empir-
ical study on the elements of spatial attention modules over
both NLP and computer vision tasks. Different attention
factors and weight assignment functions are carefully dis-
entangled, with their effects directly measured by the ﬁnal
performance on these tasks.
3. Study of Spatial Attention Mechanisms
To facilitate our study, we develop a generalized atten-
tion formulation that is able to represent various module
designs. We then show how the dominant attention mecha-
nisms can be represented within this formulation, and how
ablations can be conducted using this formulation with re-
spect to different attention module elements.Generalized attention formulation
Given a query element and a set of key elements, an at-
tention function adaptively aggregates the key contents ac-
cording to attention weights that measure the compatibility
of query-key pairs. To allow the model to attend to key con-
tents from different representation subspaces and different
positions, the outputs of multiple attention functions (heads)
are linearly aggregated with learnable weights. Let qindex
a query element with content zq, andkindex a key element
with content xk. Then the multi-head attention feature yqis
computed as
yq=M/summationdisplay
m=1Wm/bracketleftbig/summationdisplay
k∈ΩqAm(q,k,zq,xk)⊙W′
mxk/bracketrightbig
, (1)
wheremindexes the attention head, Ωqspeciﬁes the
supporting key region for the query, Am(q,k,zq,xk)
denotes the attention weights in the m-th attention
head, and WmandW′
mare learnable weights. Usu-
ally, the attention weights are normalized within Ωq, as/summationtext
k∈ΩqAm(q,k,zq,xk) = 1 .
In encoder-decoder attention, the key and the query are
from two different sets of elements, where in most applica-
tions the two sets of elements need to be properly aligned.
For example, in the encoder-decoder attention of neural ma-
chine translation, the key and the query elements corre-
spond to the words in the input and the output sentences,
respectively, where proper alignment is necessary for cor-
rect translation. Meanwhile, in self-attention, the key and
the query are from the same set of elements. For exam-
ple, both the key and the query are of words in the input or
output sentence. In such scenarios, the self-attention mech-
anism is expected to capture intra-relationships among the
elements, and usually the query and the key contents are
modeled by the same set of features, i.e.,x=z.
Transformer attention
In the most recent instantiation of the Transformer at-
tention module [ 10], the attention weight of each query-key
pair is computed as the sum of four terms {Ej}4
j=1that are
based on different attention factors, as
ATrans
m(q,k,zq,xk)∝exp/parenleftbig4/summationdisplay
j=1Ej/parenrightbig
, (2)
normalized by/summationtext
k∈ΩqATrans
m(q,k,zq,xk) = 1 where the
supporting key region Ωqspans the key elements ( e.g., the
whole input sentence). By default, 8attentional heads are
utilized in this paper.
TheE1andE2terms are sensitive to the query content.
TheE1term measures the compatibility of the query and
key content, as E1=z⊤
qU⊤
mVC
mxk, whereUm,VC
mare
learnable embedding matrices for the query and key con-
tent, respectively. It enables the network to focus more
on the keys compatible with the query in terms of content.
A possible outcome is the correspondence between similar
query and key elements, as illustrated in Fig. 1(a). For
6690