Thesplit() function splits a tensor into two halves along the
channel dimension. NN() is (any) neural network where
the input and the output have the same shape. The concat()
function concatenates two tensors along the channel dimen-
sion. The reverse computation of additive coupling can be
easily derived.
We observe that a ﬂow model with additive coupling lay-
ers is sufﬁcient to handle the style transfer task in exper-
iments. Moreover, the additive coupling is more efﬁcient
and stable than the afﬁne coupling in model training. There-
fore, we employ additive coupling instead of afﬁne coupling
as the expressive transformation layer in PFN.
Invertible 1 ×1 convolution. Since the additive coupling
layer only processes a half of the feature maps, it is nec-
essary to permute the channel dimensions of feature maps,
so that each dimension can affect all the other dimensions
[5,6]. We follow Glow [ 28] to use a learnable invertible
1×1 convolution layer for ﬂexible channel permutation, as
yi,j=Wxi,j. (3)
Wis the weight matrix of shape c×c, wherecis the channel
dimension of tensor xandy. Its reverse function is xi,j=
W−1yi,j.
Actnorm. We follow Glow [ 28] to use the activation
normalization layer (Actnorm) as an alternative to batch
normalization [ 21]. Actnorm performs per-channel afﬁne
transformation on tensor x, as
yi,j=w⊙xi,j+b, (4)
wherei,jdenote a spatial position on the tensor. wandb
are the scale and bias parameters of afﬁne transformation,
and they are learnable in model training. The reverse funci-
ton isxi,j= (yi,j−b)/w.
In addition to the three reversible transformations, the
squeeze operation is inserted into certain parts of PFN to
reduce the spatial size of 2D feature maps. The squeeze
operation splits the features into smaller patches along the
spatial dimension and then concatenates the patches along
the channel dimension.
4.3. Unbiased Content­Style Separation
Which style transfer module should ArtFlow use to
achieve the unbiased style transfer? To answer this ques-
tion, we ﬁrst make a theoretical analysis of the biases of
two popular style transfer modules, i.e., the adaptive in-
stance normalization in AdaIN, and the whitening and col-
oring transforms in WCT.
The mechanism of the universal style transfer meth-
ods can be regarded as a natural evolution of the bilin-
ear model proposed by Tenenbaum and Freeman in [ 52],
which separates an image into a content factor Cand a
style factor Sand then makes style transfer by replacingthe style factor Sin the content image with that in the tar-
get image. Similarly, the universal style transfer methods
assume that the content information and the style infor-
mation in the deep feature space are disentangled explic-
itly [ 20,32,31,40,2,1,56,22,60] or implicitly [ 4,45].
For example, AdaIN [ 20] separates deep features into nor-
malized feature maps and mean/std vectors, which can be
regarded as the content factor Cand style factor S, respec-
tively.
Following the theoretical framework of the Bilinear
Model [ 52], we can deﬁne the unbiased style transfer as:
Deﬁnition 1 Suppose we have a bilinear style transfer
modulefcs=C(fc)S(fs), whereC,S denote the con-
tent factor and the style factor in the bilinear model, re-
spectively. fcsis an unbiased style transfer module if
C(fcs) =C(fc)andS(fcs) =S(fs).
Based on Def. 1, we have the following two theorems.
Theorem 1 The adaptive instance normalization in AdaIN
is an unbiased style transfer module.
Theorem 2 The whitening and coloring transform in WCT
is an unbiased style transfer module.
The proofs for Theorems 1and2can be found in the supple-
mentary material. The Style Decorator in Avatar-Net [ 45]
does not ﬁt the bilinear model, while the empirical analy-
sis in Sec. 3.2shows that Style Decorator is a biased style
transfer module .
In addition to the theoretical analyses, we also quanti-
tatively verify the unbiased property of the transfer mod-
ules in AdaIN and WCT. Quantitatively studying the prop-
erty of popular style transfer modules is an unsolved ques-
tion because the auto-encoder used by existing universal
style transfer methods has signiﬁcant image reconstruction
errors and may be biased towards styles as discussed in
Sec. 3.2. Consequently, the produced style transfer results
using auto-encoders cannot precisely reﬂect the effects of
the style transfer modules upon deep features. The pro-
posed PFN addresses this issue. Speciﬁcally, if we take the
forward inference and the reverse inference of the proposed
PFN as the encoder and decoder, respectively, we can obtain
a lossless and unbiased “auto-encoder” for style transfer,
which can avoid the inﬂuence of the image reconstruction
error and the biased image recovery brought by the decoder.
By using the proposed PFN as the lossless feature projec-
tor/inverter, we make a quantitative analysis about the con-
tent and style reconstruction errors of the transfer modules
in AdaIN and WCT. Fig. 7demonstrates two ﬁndings: 1)
Considering (a) vs. (b) and (c) vs. (d), the proposed PFN can
indeed make lossless and unbiased content and style recon-
struction while the auto-encoder based on VGG19 cannot.
866