(a) Input (b) Round 1 (c) Round 20 (d) Round 40
Figure 4. Multiple rounds of image encoding and decoding using
the auto-encoder of AdaIN [ 20].
causes of Content Leak. We make the aforementioned pre-
analysis by answering two questions: What Content Leak is
and why Content Leak happens.
3.1. What is Content Leak?
For a style transfer algorithm, Content Leak occurs be-
cause the stylization results lose some content information.
Although the existing state-of-the-art style transfer algo-
rithms, e.g., AdaIN [ 20], WCT [ 32], and Avatar-Net [ 45],
can produce good style transfer results, they still suffer from
the Content Leak issue. Since it is hard to directly extract
the content information from the stylized image and com-
pare it with the input content image, we adopt an alterna-
tive way to show empirical evidence of the Content Leak
phenomenon. More speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst perform the style
transfer with an input content-style pair based on a style
transfer algorithm. We then take the stylized image as the
new content and repeatedly perform the style transfer pro-
cess for 20 times. Fig. 1shows the results of our exper-
iments for AdaIN (row 1), WCT (row 2), and Avatar-Net
(row 3). According to Fig. 1, when we perform style trans-
fer for 20 rounds, we can hardly recognize any detail of the
content image. Such an empirical evidence indicates that
the Content Leak phenomenon occurs in all AdaIN, WCT,
and Avatar-Net. In the following, we discuss the causes of
the Content Leak, which imply that the Content Leak issue
also exists in other state-of-the-art style transfer algorithms.
3.2. Why Does Content Leak Happen?
Taking AdaIN [ 15], WCT [ 32], and Avatar-Net [ 45] as
three representatives of style transfer algorithms, we study
the causes of the Content Leak phenomenon.
Reconstruction error. A straightforward explanation to
Content Leak is that the decoder of existing style transfer
algorithms cannot achieve lossless image reconstruction of
the input content image. For example, all AdaIN, WCT,
and Avatar-Net adopt VGG19 [ 47] as the encoder and train
a structurally symmetrical decoder to invert the features of
VGG19 back to the image space. Although an image recon-
struction loss [ 32] or a content loss [ 20] is used to train the
decoder, Li et al. [32] acknowledge that the decoder is far
from perfect due to the loss of spatial information brought
by the pooling operations in the encoder. Consequently, theaccumulated image reconstruction error may gradually dis-
turb the content details and lead to the Content Leak.
Biased decoder training. The above-mentioned recon-
struction error can only partially explain the Content Leak
phenomenon. In addition, biased decoder training is an-
other cause. We take the training scheme of AdaIN as an
example to explain how its loss function settings lead to
Content Leak. AdaIN trains the decoder with a weighted
combination of a content loss Lcand a style loss Ls, where
Lc=/bardblF(G(t))−t/bardbl2, (1)
Ls=/summationdisplay
i=1...L/bardblµ(φi(G(t)))−µ(φi(s))/bardbl2 (2)
+/summationdisplay
i=1...L/bardblσ(φi(G(t)))−σ(φi(s))/bardbl2.
Heretdenotes the output of the adaptive instance normal-
ization,FandGrepresent the encoder and the decoder,
respectively, φidenotes a layer in VGG19 used to com-
pute the style loss, and µ,σ represent the mean and stan-
dard deviation of feature maps, respectively. Due to Ls, the
decoder is trained to trade off between LcandLs, rather
than trying to reconstruct images perfectly. Fig. 3shows
the training loss curves of AdaIN with and without Ls.
When we train the decoder of AdaIN with only Lc, the con-
verged value of Lc(cyan curve) is signiﬁcantly smaller than
training with the weighted combination of LcandLs(blue
curve). Consequently, the auto-encoder of AdaIN is biased
towards rendering more artistic effects, which causes Con-
tent Leak. Fig. 4shows the image reconstruction results
by propagating through the auto-encoder of AdaIN for 50
rounds. We take the output of the auto-encoder in the previ-
ous round as the input of the next round and perform image
reconstruction repeatedly. With the increase of the infer-
ence rounds, weird artistic patterns gradually appear in the
produced results, which indicates that the auto-encoder of
AdaIN may memorize image styles in training and bias to-
wards the training styles in inference.
Biased style transfer module. Biased style transfer mod-
ule is another cause of the Content Leak. We take the Style
Decorator in Avatar-Net as an example. For the normalized
content feature fcand style feature fs, the key mechanism
of the Style Decorator is motivated by the deep image anal-
ogy [ 35], which is composed of two steps. In the ﬁrst step,
the algorithm ﬁnds a corresponding patch in fsfor every
patch infcaccording to the content similarity between two
patches. In the next step, fcsis formed by replacing patches
infcwith the corresponding patches in fs. Since such a
patch replacement is irreversible, fccannot be recovered
fromfcs, which makes fcsbe biased towards style and con-
sequently causes the Content Leak phenomenon.
We summarize and illustrate three main causes of Con-
tent Leak in Fig. 5. While the reconstruction error may dis-
turb the content information in the output image, the biased
864