ArtFlow: Unbiased Image Style Transfer via Reversible Neural Flows
Jie An1∗Siyu Huang2∗Yibing Song3Dejing Dou2Wei Liu4Jiebo Luo1
1University of Rochester2Baidu Research3Tencent AI Lab4Tencent Data Platform
{jan6,jluo }@cs.rochester.edu {huangsiyu,doudejing }@baidu.com
yibingsong.cv@gmail.com wl2223@columbia.edu
Abstract
Universal style transfer retains styles from reference
images in content images. While existing methods have
achieved state-of-the-art style transfer performance, they
are not aware of the content leak phenomenon that the im-
age content may corrupt after several rounds of stylization
process. In this paper, we propose ArtFlow to prevent con-
tent leak during universal style transfer. ArtFlow consists
of reversible neural ﬂows and an unbiased feature transfer
module. It supports both forward and backward inferences
and operates in a projection-transfer-reversion scheme. The
forward inference projects input images into deep features,
while the backward inference remaps deep features back to
input images in a lossless and unbiased way. Extensive ex-
periments demonstrate that ArtFlow achieves comparable
performance to state-of-the-art style transfer methods while
avoiding content leak.
1. Introduction
Neural style transfer aims at transferring the artistic
style from a reference image to a content image. Start-
ing from [ 11,13], numerous works based on iterative op-
timization [ 12,44,30,34] and feed-forward networks [ 23,
53,3,63] improve style transfer from either visual qual-
ity or computational efﬁciency. Despite tremendous efforts,
these methods do not generalize well for multiple types
of style transfer. Universal style transfer (UST) is pro-
posed to improve this generalization ability. The represen-
tative UST methods include AdaIN [ 20], WCT [ 32], and
Avatar-Net [ 45]. These methods are continuously extended
by [15,22,60,1,45,33,40,31,2,56]. While achieving
favorable results as well as generalizations, these methods
are limited to disentangling and reconstructing image con-
tent during the stylization process. Fig. 1shows some ex-
amples. Existing methods [ 32,20,45] effectively stylize
∗J. An and S. Huang contribute equally. This work is done when J.
An is an intern in Tencent AI Lab. The code is available at https://
github.com/pkuanjie/ArtFlow .
AdaIN WCT
(a) Content (c) Round 1 (d) Round 20 (b) Style
Avatar-Net
Figure 1. Content leak visualization. Existing style transfer meth-
ods are not effective to preserve image content after several rounds
of stylization process as shown in (d), although their performance
is state-of-the-art in the ﬁrst round as shown in (c).
content images in (c). However, image contents are cor-
rupted after several rounds of stylization process where we
send the reference image and the output result into these
methods. We deﬁne this phenomenon as content leak and
provide an analysis in the following:
Content leak appears due to the design of UST methods
that usually consist of three parts: the ﬁrst part is a ﬁxed en-
coder for image embedding, the second part is a learnable
decoder to remap deep features back to images, and the third
part is a style transfer module based on deep features. We
observe that the ﬁrst part is ﬁxed. The appearance of content
leak indicates the accumulated image reconstruction errors
brought by the decoder, or the biased training process of ei-
ther the decoder or the style transfer module. Speciﬁcally,
the content leaks of WCT [ 32] and its variants [ 31,40,56]
is mainly caused by the image reconstruction error of the
decoder. The content leak of AdaIN series [ 20,22,60] and
Avatar-Net [ 45] are additionally caused by the biased de-
coder training and a biased style transfer module, respec-
tively. Sec. 3shows more analyses.
In this work, we propose an unbiased style transfer
framework called ArtFlow to robustify exisiting UST meth-
ods upon overcoming content leak. Different from the
prevalent encoder-transfer-decoder structure, ArtFlow in-
862