JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015 3
acronym description
IoT Internet of Things
CV Computer Vision
NLP Natural Language Processing
CNN Convolutional Neural Network
RNN Recurrent Neural Network
DNN Deep Neural Network
GNN Graph Neural Networks
RL Reinforcement Learning
PTM Pretraining Modeling
FL Federated Learning
FRL Federated Reinforcement Learning
KD Knowledge Distillation
QA Question Answering
NAS Neural Architecture Search
PQ Product Quantization
TABLE 1: Description of popular acronyms in our survey.
(GNN) and reinforcement learning (RL) models that are
deployed on edge;
We conclude the paper in Section 6 with some possible
future directions and challenges.
2 C LOUD AI
AI has achieved the tremendous development in the recent
years, even outperformed the human performance in a
range of open-source competition benchmarks [29], [30].
One main reason behind this success is the beneﬁt from
the cloud computing, i.e.,the large-scale distributed cluster,
which greatly accelerate the training of AI models. We term
them as cloud AI . Considering the real-world AI applications
depend on the information carriers such as image and text,
we review some computing hardwares and cloud models in
the areas of CV , NLP and web services as exemplars.
2.1 AI Computing Hardware in Cloud Computing
There are many factors on hardware and software as well
as the customer-friendly resource management technology
(e.g., the virtualization technology [31]–[33]) to thrive on the
great success of cloud computing. We kindly refer readers
to [1] for a complete analysis. In this part, we specially recap
some computing hardware from the mainstream companies,
which plays the crucial roles in the AI ﬂourish.
2.1.1 CPU
The high performance of Central Processing Unit (CPU) is
important to accelerate the computing-intensive AI tasks.
In the last decade, there are many excellent breakthroughs
in the processor design. As one exemplar in Intel, the Core
i9-7920X CPU is the fastest processor for the general compu-
tation in the Core X-series processors. The competitor AMD
released the Ryzen-series of products like Ryzen 5 2600 and
Ryzen 9 3900X, both for desktops and IoTs based on the Zen
micro-architecture. Recently, the AMD Ryzen Threadripper
3990X that has the best performance is the ﬂagship of Ryzen
series especially designed for the edge machine learning.
We enumerate their release time of above CPU processors
in Fig. 2 according to the time-varying website ranking2of
Intel and AMD, but without any business purposes. Note
2. https://benchmarks.ul.com/compare/best-cpusthat, the general CPU server is slow for the large-scale train-
ing of DNNs, and thus some speciﬁc speedup technologies
from the task scheduling are usually deployed [34] or mixed
with the following modules [35], [36].
2.1.2 GPU
Graphics Processing Unit (GPU) was originally designed
to create images for computer graphics and video games.
In early 2010, researchers found that GPUs can be used to
accelerate calculations of DNNs, based on which AlexNet
achieved a great success in the ImageNet challenge [37]. The
GPU behind AlexNet is Nvidia GeForce GTX 580, which
is a high-end graphics card launched by NVIDIA in 2010.
Subsequently, NVIDIA released the Tesla K80 and Tesla
P100 that further improved the computation performance.
Recently, Tesla V100 as well as Tesla A100 again catches
the eyes due to the impressive PTM [38]–[40] in language
understanding and image generation tasks. We similarly
include the release time of some popular GPUs in Fig. 2
according to the time-varying open ranking3.
2.1.3 TPU and DPU
Tensor Processing Unit (TPU) is a dedicated integrated cir-
cuit developed and used in Google Cloud, which is superior
in the DNN computation. Its ﬁrst generation is identiﬁed by
the high-bandwidth loop [41] and the second generation is
known by faster cost-effective mixed precision training [42].
The third generation provides signiﬁcant performance ben-
eﬁts over TPUv2 and ﬁts better in the larger-scale net-
work architecture. In Google I/O 2021, Google launches
the latest TPUv4 with nearly two times performance over
TPUv3. Data Processsing Unit (DPU) is a recently proposed
programmable specialized electronic circuit for data-centric
computing, which frees the computing load of CPU or
GPU in the hardware aspect4. It is practically useful for the
acceleration of AI models in face of the expensive loading
and ofﬂoading cost of large-scale neural networks like PTM.
2.2 Computer Vision
Among various research areas, CV is a longstanding ﬁeld,
which asks computers to derive the semantics from digital
images, videos, and other visual inputs. In this part, we
review some classical tasks, i.e.,, Image Recognition, Object
Detection and Image Segmentation.
Image recognition involves analyzing images and iden-
tifying objects, actions, and other elements in order to draw
conclusions. In the 1880s, the predecessor of CNN “neocog-
nitron” was proposed. Then, Lecun et al., [43] proposed the
CNN operator and successfully applied it to handwritten
digital character recognition, with an error rate of less than
1%. In 2012, AlexNet [37] won the ImageNet competition
[44] and incorporated many enticing techniques such as
ReLU nonlinearity, dropout, and data augmentation. Fol-
lowing AlexNet, deeper structures like VGG-16 [45] and
GoogleNet [46] were explored. To better handle gradient
vanishing issue, ResNet [47] used a skip-connection scheme
3. https://analyticsindiamag.com/top-10-gpus-for-deep-learning-
in-2021/
4. https://blogs.nvidia.com/blog/2020/05/20/whats-a-dpu-data-
processing-unit/