JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015 1
Edge-Cloud Polarization and Collaboration: A
Comprehensive Survey for AI
Jiangchao Y ao, Shengyu Zhang, Y ang Y ao, Feng Wang, Jianxin Ma, Jianwei Zhang, Yunfei Chu, Luo Ji,
Kunyang Jia, Tao Shen, Anpeng Wu, Fengda Zhang, Ziqi Tan, Kun Kuang, Chao Wu, Fei Wu ,Senior
Member, IEEE, Jingren Zhou, Fellow, IEEE, Hongxia Y ang Member, IEEE,
Abstract —Inﬂuenced by the great success of deep learning via cloud computing and the rapid development of edge chips, research in
artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) has shifted to both of the computing paradigms, i.e., cloud computing and edge computing. In recent years, we
have witnessed signiﬁcant progress in developing more advanced AI models on cloud servers that surpass traditional deep learning
models owing to model innovations (e.g., Transformers, Pretrained families), explosion of training data and soaring computing
capabilities. However, edge computing, especially edge and cloud collaborative computing, are still in its infancy to announce their
success due to the resource-constrained IoT scenarios with very limited algorithms deployed. In this survey, we conduct a systematic
review for both cloud and edge AI. Speciﬁcally, we are the ﬁrst to set up the collaborative learning mechanism for cloud and edge
modeling with a thorough review of the architectures that enable such mechanism. We also discuss potentials and practical
experiences of some on-going advanced edge AI topics including pretraining models, graph neural networks and reinforcement
learning. Finally, we discuss the promising directions and challenges in this ﬁeld.
Index Terms —Cloud AI, Edge AI, Edge-Cloud Collaboration, Hardware.
F
1 I NTRODUCTION
Cloud computing concerns the provisioning of adequate
resources to construct a cost-efﬁcient computing paradigm
for numerous applications [1] while edge computing can
offer low-latency services. For cloud computing, it has ﬂour-
ished for a long period in the past decades and achieved a
great success in the market, e.g.,Amazon EC2, Google Cloud
and Microsoft Azure. According to the recent analysis [2],
the global cloud computing market size was valued at USD
274.79 billion in 2020 and is expected to grow at a compound
annual growth rate of 19.1% from 2021 to 2028. Concomi-
tantly, Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI), especially the compute-
intensive Deep Learning [3], has enjoyed the tremendous
development with the explosion of cloud computing. Nev-
ertheless, the rapid increase of Internet of Things (IoT) [4]
raises an inevitable issue of the data transfer from the edges
to the data centers in an unprecedented volume. Speciﬁcally,
about 850 ZB data is generated by IoT at the network
edge by 2021, but the trafﬁc from worldwide data centers
only reaches 20.6 ZB [5]. This drives the emergence of the
decentralized computing paradigm, edge computing, which
turns out to be an efﬁcient and well-recognised solution
to reduce the transmission delay. Similarly in algorithmic
application layer of edge computing, there is an urgent need
J. Yao, Y. Yao, F. Wang, J. Ma, J. Zhang, Y. Chu, L. Ji, K. Jia, J. Zhou and
H. Yang are with DAMA Academy, Alibaba Group.
E-mail:fjiangchao.yjc, yy222244, wf135777, jason.mjx, zhangjian-
wei.zjw, fay.cyf, jiluo.lj, kunyang.jky, jingren.zhou, yang.yhx g@alibaba-
inc.com
S. Zhang, T. Shen, A. Wu, F. Zhang, Z. Tan, K. Kuang and C. Wu are
with Zhejiang University. F. Wu is with Institute of Artiﬁcial Intelli-
gence, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China and Shanghai Institute for
Advanced Study, Zhejiang University, Shanghai, China
E-email:fsyzhang, tao.shen, anpwu, fdzhang, tanziqi, kunkuang,
chao.wu, wufeig@zju.edu.cn
Wu, F. and Yang, H. are corresponding authors.to push the AI frontiers to the edges so as to fully unleash
the potential of the modeling beneﬁts [6].
The existing two computing paradigms, cloud comput-
ing and edge computing, polarize the algorithms of AI
into different directions to ﬁt their physical characteristics.
For the former, the corresponding algorithms mainly focus
on the model performance in generalization [7], robust-
ness [8], fairness [9] and generation [10], [11] etc., span-
ning from computer vision (CV), natural language process
(NLP) to other industrial applications. To achieve better
performances, a large amount of research from the perspec-
tives of the data, the model, the loss and the optimizer
is devoted to exploring the limit under the assumption
of sufﬁcient computing power and storage. For example,
the impressive Generative Pre-trained Transformer 3 (GPT-
3) that has 175 billion parameters and is trained on the
hundred-billion scale of data, can produce human-like texts.
The AlphaFold [12] with the elaborate network design for
the amino acid sequence is trained with a hundred of GPUs
and makes the astounding breakthrough in highly accurate
protein structure prediction. Nowadays, cloud computing is
continuously advancing AI widespread to various scientiﬁc
disciplines and impact our daily lives.
However, in terms of edge computing, it is still in its
infancy to announce the success due to the constrained IoT
resources. There are several critical limitations to design AI
algorithms that run on IoT devices while maintaining the
model accuracies. The most critical factor is the processing
speed for the applicability of any edge application [13]. We
usually use throughput and latency for the measurement,
which respectively count the processing rate and character-
ize the time interval between a single input and its response.
Second, memory like RAM and cache is the critical resource
for building AI edge applications. Machine learning algo-arXiv:2111.06061v3  [cs.LG]  23 May 2022