JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015 13
in the academic area. The only dataset8is released for the
Mobile Edge Intelligence in recommendation. The reasons
for the real-world open-source datasets are two-fold. On one
hand, the ﬁne-grained features on the edge side like the user
real-time in-app scrolling, are usually not transmitted to the
cloud due to the communication cost and the instant serving
bottleneck. That is to say, we cannot completely understand
the characteristics of data on the edge side by only training
the model on the current cloud-based datasets. On the
other hand, for the interactive scenarios like Luoxi [217], it
requires the speciﬁc data collection to guarantee the distri-
bution consistency between the training and the test. Simply
simulation on the cloud-based dataset by decomposition
cannot recover the real-world scenarios. Therefore, more
open-source benchmark datasets contributed to this area
will promote the research and industrial development.
6.1.2 Platform
The software platform is critical to explore the edge-cloud
collaboration, since it is expensive to construct a collabora-
tion environment and simulate the heterogeneous edges and
the communication noise. However, it is still in its vacancy
to build the well-established platforms that are friendly to a
range of algorithmic study. For example, in FL, we have to
handle the uncontrollable number of local models uploaded
from the edge devices in the real-world scenarios, which
may affect the convergence of the training [28]. Besides, a
systematic analysis on the model training, deployment and
evaluation are still lack, which is critical to measure the
methods. The current open platforms mainly considering
the algorithmic implementation like Luoxi9. In the future, it
will be quite useful to establish the fully functional platform
for the open comparison from both academia and industry.
6.2 Applications
6.2.1 Recommendation
Recommendation systems enable users to ﬁnd and explore
information easily and become increasingly important in
a wide range of online applications such as e-commerce,
micro-video portals, and social media sites. Despite the huge
success, modern recommender systems still suffer from the
user-oriented bias/fairness issue [346], [347], privacy leak-
age [348], [349] and high-latency response [350]. For exam-
ple, centralized on-cloud training will be inevitably biased
towards some privileged users, such as active users, result-
ing in an enlarged performance gap or unfairness among
users. Embracing edge-cloud collaborative learning [216]
opens up possibilities to address these issues. Expressly,
edge training (cloud !edge) permits personalization that
is free from biased collaborative ﬁltering. Edge models can
fully leverage edge features and provide low-latency ser-
vices, such as dynamic interest modeling, and re-rank. As a
counterpart, upon edge models, on-cloud training (edge !
cloud) beneﬁts from privileged distillation without access to
sensitive user data, achieving both privacy protection and
full personalization.
8. https://tianchi.aliyun.com/dataset/dataDetail?dataId=109858
9. https://github.com/luoxi-model/luoxi models6.2.2 Auto-driving
Essentially, a vehicle entirely controlled by machines with-
out any human input will possess the acclaimed banner of
being autonomous. Nowadays, an important aspect of self-
driving vehicles integrating with the cloud is the capability
of using the over-the-air electronic communications [351].
As well as various sensors for detecting the outside world,
the vehicle will be equipped with on-board computer pro-
cessors and electronic-oriented memory technology, and can
communicate with the cloud via a communication device
[352]. Besides data communication, edge-cloud collabora-
tive learning techniques will further enhance autonomous
driving on safety, functionality, and privacy [353]. Initially
trained on clouds, edge machine learning models (cloud
!edge) can interpret real-time raw data, make decisions
based on the derived insights, and learn from the feedback
from real-time road conditions. Real-time model adaptation
is essential for safety and efﬁciency improvement, and acci-
dents and trafﬁc congestion reduction. Raw data like driving
records might contain sensitive contents. Edge models can
hereby enhance the centralized training with privacy.
6.2.3 Games
Video games have soared as one of the most popular ways
to spend time. To ensure a seamless gaming experience,
existing games struggle to ﬁgure out the work division
of cloud computing and edge computing [354]–[356]. With
edge-cloud collaborative learning, we can leverage the ad-
vantages of both sides. On the edge side, we can do more
personalization and responsive actions that are sensitive to
latency. For example, in sandbox games where the game-
play element is to give players a great degree of creativity
and freedom on task completion and Non-Player-Character
interaction, personalized AI for the dialogue generation and
action-taking are an enticing element. Edge training permits
such personalization by taking player behaviors, decisions,
and preferences as input. Meanwhile, we can maintain the
interactive feedback of edges and the cloud during both
training and inference by transferring latent representations
or leaving highly intensive but latency-insensitive training
tasks for the cloud. Such a bidirectional collaboration brings
more creation and freedom to users, ensures a seamless user
experience, and opens up new possibilities for advanced
gaming systems, such as the Metaverse [357], [358].
6.2.4 IoT Security
Internet of Things security refers to the protection of edges
and networks from malicious attacks [359]. Most existing
IoT systems are vulnerable to attacks [360], where threats in
IoT include (but are not limited to) lack of proper data en-
cryption and malicious software. Currently, some promising
explorations [361], [362] have been developed for the secure
resource management in the blockchain networks, which is
an important future direction in the context of edge/cloud
computing. However, in a larger landscape, it still requires
more consideration about the safety trade-off in the edge-
cloud collaboration. On the one hand, collaborative learn-
ing transfers model parameters, latent representations, and
back-propagated gradients between edge-edge and edge-
cloud, avoiding the communication attack on transferred