JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015 8
recent privacy concerns, the latency requirements or the
personalization [6]. For example, for the patient data, it is
private and sensitive to open for the training and serving
of AI models. This motivates the development of federated
learning, which distributes the training to the local server
for the purpose of privacy and aggregates the ﬁnal model in
the cloud server. From this perspective, federated learning
is a classical edge-cloud “collaboration” that makes AI more
practical. Actually, there are some similar exemplars about
the different forms of collaboration and to sum all, we can
categorize them into two sets: privacy-primary collaboration
and efﬁciency-primary collaboration ( cf.Figure 5).
4.1 Privacy-Primary Collaboration: Federated Learning
As aforementioned above, the collaboration of FL is privacy-
primary in the sense that raw data of each client is stored
locally and will not be exchanged or transferred [28]. Typi-
cally, FL can be roughly divided into two lines of works, i.e.,
cross-device and cross-silo , respectively. In cross-device FL,
there are substantial devices like phones, laptops, or IoT. In
cross-silo FL, differently, there are organizations where data
silos naturally exist. Another categorization given by [197]
divides FL into horizontal FL, vertical FL and federated
transfer learning, according to how data of different partici-
pants overlaps. In modern FL frameworks, there are several
challenges that hinder effective edge-cloud collaboration. In
this paper, we focus on three major challenges, i.e., data
heterogeneity, communication efﬁciency and attacks on FL.
4.1.1 Statistical Heterogeneity
The real-world data samples are not usually independent
and identically distributed over numerous devices [198],
resulting in heterogeneous edge models and gradients. Typ-
ically, there are ﬁve sources of data heterogeneity: 1) Fea-
ture skew : The marginal distribution of features may differ
between edges. 2) Label skew : The marginal distribution
of labels may differ between edges. 3) Same label, different
features : The conditional distribution of features given labels
may differ between edges. 4) Same features, different labels :
The conditional distribution of labels given features may
differ between edges. For example, the symbol Xrepresents
correct in many countries and incorrect in some others
(e.g., Japan); and 5) Quantity skew : Clients can store dras-
tically varying volumes of data. Unfortunately, real-world
FL datasets present a mix of these phenomenons, and it
is an urgent need to drive measures to alleviate statistical
heterogeneity for edge-cloud collaboration. In this nascent
research area, FL personalization addresses this issue by
introducing a two-stage collaboration framework. The ﬁrst
stage is to collaboratively build a global model, followed by
a customization stage for each customer with the client’s
private data [199]. Recently, several methods have been
proposed to achieve personalization, enhanced by transfer
learning, meta training, and KD techniques. A learning-
theoretic framework with generalization guarantees is pre-
sented by [200]. Wang et al. [201] construct different per-
sonalization strategies, including the model graph, and the
training hyperparameters for different edges. Jiang et al.
[202] build connections between FL and meta-learning, and
interpret FedAvg as a popular algorithm, Reptile [203]. Shenet al. [204] presents an FL method based on KD and transfer
learning that allows clients to train their own model inde-
pendently with the local private data. Instead of training one
global model, Masour et al. [200] consider device clustering
and learn one model per cluster.
4.1.2 Communication Efﬁciency
Communication cost is an important factor when deploying
FL to the real-world scenarios given the limited communi-
cation budget. Many algorithms [205]–[207] have explored
to improve the communication efﬁciency by accelerating
the convergence rate of the training model or introducing
a hierarchical counterpart of federated learning. Specially,
the latter perspective is scalably in many practical cases by
introducing the intermediate servers to perform the partial
aggregation. The subsequent improvement regarding the
dynamic resource allocation and the task management to
save the transmission cost in this hierarchy are also ex-
plored [208], [209]. In the future, with the development of
the unmanned aerial vehicles, it is possible to achieve the
near-instant super-connectivity for federated learning in a
more communication-efﬁcient manner [210], [211].
4.1.3 Attacks on FL
Current FL protocol designs are usually vulnerable to at-
tackers inside and outside of the system, yielding the pri-
vacy and the robustness at risk. There are two serious threats
to FL privacy and robustness [218]: 1) poisoning attacks
against robustness; and 2) inference attacks against privacy.
The impact of poisoning attacks on the FL model is deter-
mined by the extent to which the backdoor players partici-
pate in the assaults, as well as the amount of training data
poisoned. Model poisoning attacks seek to prevent global
model learning [219] or hide a backdoor trigger into the
global model [220]. These attacks contaminate the changes
of local models before these changes are uploaded to the
server. The Byzantine attack [219] is a form of untargeted
model poisoning attack that uploads arbitrary and harmful
model changes to the server that fools the global model.
Though FL protects data privacy by shielding off local
data from being directly accessed, FL still suffers from pri-
vacy risks due to inference attacks . For example, Deep Leak-
age from Gradient [221] presents an optimization approach
that can retrieve the raw images and texts critical for model
improvement. Existing studies in privacy-preserving FL are
often built on traditional privacy-preserving approaches,
including: (1) homomorphic encryption [222]; (2) Secure Mul-
tiparty Computation , [223]; and (3) differential privacy [224].
To protect against an honest-but-curious opponent, Hardy
et al. [225] used FL on data encrypted by the homomor-
phic technique. Yao et al. [226] introduces a collaborative
computation on their inputs without disclosing them to
one another. Given the resource limits of mobile devices,
it is expected that privacy-protection solutions must be
computationally inexpensive, communication-efﬁcient and
resistant to failure. Truex et al. [227] present a FL system
under the protection of the local differential privacy frame-
work, while minimizing the overwhelming impact of noise.