(Continued from previous page)
Conclusion: The results suggest that the bioactive compounds found in the ethanolic extracts and essential oils from
Ocimum basilicum and Thymus algeriensis , with diverse antioxidant, antimicrobial and anticancer activities, may have
beneficial applications in nutraceuti cal and pharmaceutical technologies.
Keywords: Ocimum basilicum ,Thymus algeriensis , Essential oil, Ethanolic extract, Antioxidant activity, Antimicrobial activity,
Anticancer activity
Background
Among the numerous medicinal plants, some prevalent
species are particularly popular in folk medicine due to
their antioxidant properties and health benefits [ 1]. The
Lamiaceae family is one of the most extensively studied
plant families containing members with proven human
health benefits. Antimicrobial [ 2–4], antioxidant [ 5,6],
anti-inflammatory, anti-depressive, and antiproliferative
effects [ 7,8] have been demonstrated for the active com-
pounds found in many plants from this family. Rose-
mary, thyme, basil, and sage are famous members of the
Lamiaceae family and are among the most commonly
used plants in traditional Mediterranean remedies,
mainly for the treatment of gastritis, infections, derma-
titis, bronchitis, and inflammation [ 3,4,9,10].
Ocimum basilicum, an aromatic herb that belongs to
the Lamiaceae family and the Nepetoideae subfamily [ 9],
has been used in folk medicine for the treatment of
gastrointestinal and respiratory diseases [ 10]. This spe-
cies was also reported as having beneficial effects on kid-
ney malfunctions, warts and worm infestations [ 10].
Various chemical functionalities characteristic of antho-
cyanins, flavonoids, monoterpenes, phenolic acids and
their esters, phenylpropanoid derivatives, phytosterols,
tannins, and triterpenes have been identified in different
O. basilicum extracts [ 11,12]. Essential oils extracted
from its leaves and flowers can be used as flavouring
agents in food, medicine and cosmetics [ 10,11].
Another renowned genus of the Lamiaceae family is
theThymus genus. It contains approximately 215 to 350
species that are remarkably predominant in the Mediter-
ranean area [ 13,14]. The aerial parts and the volatile
components of Thymus species are traditionally used as
herbal teas and condiments and for numerous medicinal
purposes, e.g., as antispasmodic, antibacterial, antiviral,
expectorant and antioxidant agents [ 15]. Compounds in
several classes have been identified in Thymus species,
such as carvacrol, thymol, geraniol, γ-terpineol, thujone
and linalool [ 16].
The aim of this study was to investigate the chemical
composition and biological activities of essential oils and
ethanolic extracts from Ocimum basilicum and Thymus
algeriensis cultivated in the Algerian Saharan Atlas
(Laghouat region).Materials and methods
Plant materials
Ocimum basilicum and Thymus algeriensis were har-
vested in their flowering stage between April and May
2016 in the area of the Algerian Saharan Atlas (Laghouat
region). The species were characterized at the Department
of Biology, Faculty of Science, University of Laghouat
(Algeria), and the voucher specimens were banked at the
Laboratory of Process Engineering, University of Laghouat,
with the numbers LGP Ob/04/16 and LGP Ta/05/16, re-
spectively. The plant materials were air-dried for 15 days
and stored at room temperature (25 ± 2 °C) without expos-
ure to direct sunlight.
Preparation of the ethanolic extracts
Dried plant aerial parts (leaves) were pulverized. Each 15 g
of ground sample was placed into a separate Erlenmeyer
flask. Then, 100 mL of ethanol (100%) was added, and the
samples were incubated in a water bath at 55 °C for 6 h.
Separation of the extraction mixture from the residue was
achieved by filtration through Whatman No. 1 filter paper.
Each plant residue was re-extracted in triplicate with etha-
nol. After filtration, the two portions were mixed. The re-
sidual solvent in the ethanolic extracts were removed
under reduced pressure at 48 –49 °C using a rotary evapor-
ator (Rotavapor IKA VB 10, Germany). Water in the ex-
tracts was lyophilized using a freeze dryer (Thermo Savant
Modulyo D, USA) for 8 h at −50 °C and 0.040 mbar. The
yields of these fractions were 20.16% ( Ocimum basilicum )
and 15.78% ( Thymus algeriensis ).
Total phenolic content
The total phenolic content was determined with Folin-
Ciocalteu reagent using the method described by Single-
ton et al. [ 17]. Briefly, to 200 μLo fe a c hs a m p l e( t h r e er e p -
licates), 1 mL of 10% (v/v) Folin-Ciocalteu reagent and
800μLo fN a 2CO 3(7.5%, w/v) were added and incubated
at 25 °C for 30 min. The absorbance of each sample was
measured at 760 nm using a spectrophotometer (OPTI-
ZEN 2120 UV). An ethanol solution of gallic acid was
tested in parallel to obtain a calibration curve. Values were
expressed as milligrams of gallic acid equivalents per gram
of dry weight (mg GAE/g dry weight).Rezzoug et al. BMC Complementary and Alternative Medicine          (2019) 19:146 Page 2 of 10