MTI-Net: Multi-Scale Task Interaction
Networks for Multi-Task Learning
Simon Vandenhende1, Stamatios Georgoulis2, and Luc Van Gool1;2
KU Leuven/ESAT-PSI1ETH Zurich/CVL2
Abstract. In this paper, we argue about the importance of considering
task interactions at multiple scales when distilling task information in a
multi-task learning setup. In contrast to common belief, we show that
tasks with high anity at a certain scale are not guaranteed to retain
this behaviour at other scales, and vice versa. We propose a novel archi-
tecture, namely MTI-Net, that builds upon this nding in three ways.
First, it explicitly models task interactions at every scale via a multi-
scale multi-modal distillation unit. Second, it propagates distilled task
information from lower to higher scales via a feature propagation mod-
ule. Third, it aggregates the rened task features from all scales via a
feature aggregation unit to produce the nal per-task predictions.
Extensive experiments on two multi-task dense labeling datasets show
that, unlike prior work, our multi-task model delivers on the full potential
of multi-task learning, that is, smaller memory footprint, reduced number
of calculations, and better performance w.r.t. single-task learning. The
code is made publicly available1.
Keywords: Multi-Task Learning, Scene Understanding
1 Introduction and prior work
The world around us is 
ooded with complex problems that require solving a
multitude of tasks concurrently. An autonomous car should be able to detect
all objects in the scene, localize them, understand what they are, estimate their
distance and trajectory, etc., in order to safely navigate itself in its surroundings.
In a similar vein, an intelligent advertisement system should be able to detect
the presence of people in its viewpoint, understand their gender and age group,
analyze their appearance, track where they are looking at, etc., in order to
provide personalized content. The examples are countless. Understandably, this
calls for ecient computational models in which multiple learning tasks can be
solved simultaneously.
Multi-task learning (MTL) [2,37] tackles this problem. Compared to the
single-task case, where each individual task is solved separately by its own net-
work, multi-task networks theoretically bring several advantages to the table.
First, due to their layer sharing, the resulting memory footprint is substantially
1https://github.com/SimonVandenhende/Multi-Task-Learning-PyTorcharXiv:2001.06902v5  [cs.CV]  8 Jul 2020