MTI-Net: Multi-Scale Task Interaction Networks for Multi-Task Learning 5
Backbone
Scale
1/32Multi-Modal
Distillation
Scale 1/32Scale
1/16Multi-Modal
Distillation
Scale 1/16Scale
1/8Multi-Modal
Distillation
Scale 1/8Scale
1/4 Initial T ask PredictionsMulti-Modal
Distillation
Scale 1/4
Backbone
Multi-Modal
Distillation
(Sec. 2.1)
Feature
Propagation
Module (Sec 2. 4)
Feature
Propagation
ModuleInitial T ask Predictions
Feature
Propagation
ModuleInitial T ask PredictionsFeature
Aggregation 
(Sec. 2.5)
Feature
Aggregation 
Initial T ask
PredictionsMulti-Scale
Multi-Modal
Distillation
(Sec 2.3)
Fig. 1: An overview of dierent MTL architectures as described in Section 2.
(Left) The architecture used in PAD-Net [47] and PAP-Net [51]. Features
extracted from a backbone network are used to make initial task predictions. The
task features are combined through a distillation unit before making the nal
task predictions. (Right) The architecture of the proposed MTI-Net . Starting
from a backbone that extracts multi-scale features, initial task predictions are
made at each scale. The task features are distilled separately at every scale,
allowing our model to capture task interactions at multiple scales, i.e. receptive
elds. After distillation, the distilled task features from all scales are aggregated
to make the nal task predictions. To boost performance, we extend our model
with a feature propagation mechanism that passes distilled information from
lower resolution task features to higher ones.
For brevity, we adopt the following notations. Backbone features : the shared
features (at the last layer) of the backbone network; Task features : the task-
specic feature representations (at the last layer) of each task-specic head;
Distilled task features : the task features after multi-modal distillation; Initial task
predictions : the per-task predictions at the front-end of the network; Final task
predictions : the network outputs. Note that, backbone features, task features
and distilled task features can be dened at a single scale or multiple scales.
2.2 Task interactions at dierent scales
The approaches described in Section 2.1 follow a common pattern: they perform
multi-modal distillation at a xed scale, i.e. the backbone features. This rests on
the assumption that all relevant task interactions can solely be modeled through
a single lter operation with specic receptive eld. For all we know, this is not
always the case. In fact, tasks can in
uence each other dierently for dierent
receptive eld sizes. Consider, for example, Figure 2a. The local patches in the
depth map provide little information about the semantics of the scene. However,
when we enlarge the receptive eld, the depth map reveals a person's shape,
hinting at the scene's semantics. Note that the local patches can still provide
valuable information, e.g. to improve the local alignment of edges between tasks.