MTI-Net: Multi-Scale Task Interaction Networks for Multi-Task Learning 9
Table 1: Our multi-task learning benchmarks. We predict ve tasks on PASCAL.
On NYUD-v2 we only consider semantic segmentation and depth, but include
edges and normals as auxiliary tasks. Distilled labels are marked with *.
Dataset Edge Seg Parts Normals Saliency Depth
PASCAL X X X X * X*
NYUD-v2 X X X X
original number of channels C. We then apply a softmax function along the task
dimension to generate a task attention mask. The attended features are concate-
nated and further processed to reduce the number of channels from NCtoC.
The output is a shared representation based on information from all tasks.
Renement through Squeeze-And-Excitation . The use of a shared repre-
sentation can degrade performance when tasks are unrelated. We resolve this
situation by applying a per-task channel gating function to the shared repre-
sentation. This eectively allows each task to select the relevant features from
the shared representation. The channel gating mechanism is implemented here
as a squeeze-and-excitation (SE) block [14]. This is due to the fact that SE has
shown great potential in MTL (e.g. [29]), yet other gating mechanisms could be
used instead. After applying the SE module, the rened task features are added
as a residual to the original task features.
2.5 Feature aggregation
The multi-scale, multi-modal distillation described in Section 2.3 results in dis-
tilled task features at every scale. The latter are upsampled to the highest scale
and concatenated, resulting in a nal feature representation for every task. The
nal task predictions are found by decoding these nal feature representations by
task-specic heads again. All implementation details are discussed in Section 3.
It is worth mentioning that our model has the possibility to add auxiliary tasks
in the front-end of the network, similar to PAD-Net [47]. In our case however,
the auxiliary tasks are predicted at multiple scales.
3 Experiments
3.1 Experimental setup
Datasets . We perform our experimental evaluation on the PASCAL [8] and
NYUD-v2 [40] datasets. Table 1 contains the tasks that we considered for each
dataset. We use the original 795 train and 654 test images for the NYUD-v2
dataset. For PASCAL, we use the split from PASCAL-Context [4] which has
annotations for semantic segmentation, human part segmentation and edge de-
tection. We obtain the surface normals and saliency labels from [29], that distilled
them from pre-trained state-of-the-art models [1,3].