8 S. Vandenhende et al.
Task Features 1
Previous Scale
Task Features 2
Previous Scale
Task Features N
Previous ScaleSE
SESE
++
+f(.)
Softmaxx
Dimension 
ReductionC x H x W
CN x H x W CN x H x WC x H x WFeature
Harmonization
Module
Fig. 3: Our Feature Propagation Module. First, task features from a lower scale
are concatenated and mapped to a shared representation by the feature harmo-
nization module. The task features are then rened by extracting information
from the shared representation through squeeze-and-excitation (SE) [14], and
are added as a residual to the original ones. Finally, these rened task features
will be concatenated with the backbone features of the preceding higher scale.
features through multi-modal distillation at each individual scale separately.
However, as the higher resolution scales have a limited receptive eld, the front-
end of the network could have a hard time to make good initial task predictions
at these scales, which in turn, would lead to low quality task features there. To
remedy this situation we introduce a feature propagation mechanism, where the
backbone features of a higher resolution scale are concatenated with the task
features from the preceding lower resolution scale, before feeding them to the
task-specic heads of the higher resolution scale to get the task features there.
A trivial implementation for our Feature Propagation Module (FPM) would
be to just upsample the task features from the previous scale and pass them to
the next scale. We opt for a dierent approach however, and design the FPM
to behave similarly to the multi-modal distillation unit of Section 2.3, in order
to model task interactions at this stage too. Figure 3 gives an overview of our
FPM. We rst use a feature harmonization block to combine the task features
from the previous scale to a shared representation. We then use this shared
representation to rene the task features from the previous scale, before passing
them to the next scale. The renement happens by selecting relevant information
from the shared representation through a squeeze-and-excitation block [14]. Note
that, since we rene the features from a single shared representation, instead of
processing each task independently as done in the multi-modal distillation unit
of Section 2.3, the computational cost is signicantly smaller.
Feature harmonization . The FPM receives as input the task features from N
tasks of shape CHW. Our feature harmonization module combines the re-
ceived task features into a shared representation. In particular, the set of Ntask
features is rst concatenated and processed by a learnable non-linear function f.
The output is split into Nchunks along the channel dimension, that match the