4 S. Vandenhende et al.
features of the initial predictions. Note that this process happens at each scale
separately in order to capture the unique task interactions that happen at each
individual scale, as discussed above. To tackle the limited eld-of-view at higher
scales of the backbone network, which can hinder task predictions at these scales,
we propose to propagate distilled task information from the lower scales. At the
nal stage, the distilled features of each task from all scales are aggregated to
arrive at the nal task predictions.
Our contributions are threefold: (1) we propose to explicitly consider multi-
scale interactions when distilling information across tasks in multi-task networks;
(2) we introduce an architecture that builds upon this idea with dedicated mod-
ules, i.e. multi-scale multi-modal distillation (Section 2.1), feature propagation
across scales (Section 2.4), and feature aggregation (Section 2.5); (3) we over-
come a common obstacle of performance degradation in multi-task networks, and
observe that tasks can mutually benet from each other, resulting in signicant
improvements w.r.t their single-task counterparts.
2 Method
2.1 Multi-task learning by multi-modal distillation
Visual tasks can be related. For example, they can share complementary informa-
tion (surface normals and depth can directly be derived from each other), act as a
regularizer for one another (using RGB-D images to predict scene semantics [11]
improves the quality of the prediction due to the available depth information),
and so on. Motivated by this observation, recent MTL methods [47,50,51] tried
to explicitly distill information from other tasks, as a complementary signal to
improve task performance. Typically, this is achieved by combining an existing
backbone network, that makes initial task predictions, with a multi-step decod-
ing process (see Figure 1 (left)).
In more detail, the shared features of the backbone network are processed
by a set of task-specic heads, that produce an initial prediction for every task.
We further refer to the backbone and the task-specic heads as the front-end of
the network. The task-specic heads produce a per-task feature representation
of the scene that is more task-aware than the shared features of the backbone
network. The information from these task-specic feature representations is then
combined via a multi-modal distillation unit, before making the nal task pre-
dictions. As shown in Figure 1, it is possible that some tasks are only predicted
in the front-end of the network. The latter are known as auxiliary tasks, since
they serve as proxies in order to improve the performance on the nal tasks.
Prior works only dier in the way that the task-specic feature represen-
tations are combined. PAD-Net [47] distills information from other tasks by
applying spatial attention to these features, before adding them as a residual.
PAP-Net [51] recursively combines the pixel anities from these features during
the decoding step. Zhang et al. [50] sequentially predict one task in order to
rene its features based on the features of the other task.