MTI-Net: Multi-Scale Task Interaction Networks for Multi-Task Learning 15
A Supplementary Materials
A.1 Dierence with Cross-Stitch Networks
Cross-stitch networks [31] also share features at multiple scales. However, the
intended purpose, and implementation dier signicantly from MTI-Net. We
analyze the most notable points here.
{Cross-stitch networks model task interactions at the encoding stage by softly
sharing features between task-specic encoders, before branching out to task-
specic decoders without further interaction. Dierently, MTI-Net operates
at the decoding stage fusing task features close to the output that contain
more disentangled task information. The latter is arguably better for distill-
ing task information in structured output tasks with co-occurring patterns.
{Cross-stitch Networks distil task information sequentially layer-by-layer, greed-
ily modeling interactions at a local scale. In contrast, MTI-Net models task
interactions in parallel, globally fusing information across all scales (cf. FA
module). The benets are two-fold, i.e. enabling the modeling of long-term
relationships, and allowing for the use of sucient context information which
is crucial in dense prediction tasks [3].
{The model size of cross-stitch networks increases linearly with the number
of tasks, thus scaling poorly to multiple tasks. Instead, MTI-Net provides
a more computationally ecient alternative (see resource analysis), that is
much closer to the single-task model size.
A.2 Training setup
We include additional details of the training setup used for each experiment. We
considered two dierent multi-scale backbone networks, i.e. HRNet and FPN.
For HRNet, we use bilinear upsampling and concatenation followed by two con-
volutional layers to decode the multi-scale features in the feature aggregation
unit. For FPN, the feature aggregation module decodes the multi-scale features
as in panoptic feature pyramid networks [17]. In both cases, the non-linear func-
tion that produces the task attention mask in the FPM is implemented as two
basic residual blocks { that aggressively reduce the number of channels { followed
by a 11 convolutional layer.
NYUD-v2 We applied the data augmentation strategy of PAD-Net [47]. The
RGB and depth images were randomly scaled with the selected ratio in f1;1:2;1:5g,
and randomly horizontally 
ipped. The model was trained for 80 epochs with an
Adam optimizer with initial learning rate 1e-4 and batches of size 6. We used a
poly learning rate decay scheme.