MTI-Net: Multi-Scale Task Interaction Networks for Multi-Task Learning 3
afterwards). By doing so, they fail to capture commonalities and dierences
among tasks, that are likely fruitful for one another (e.g. depth discontinuities
are usually aligned with semantic edges). Arguably, this might be the reason for
the only moderate performance improvements achieved by this group of works
(see [29]). To alleviate this issue, a few recent works rst employed a multi-task
network to make initial task predictions, and then leveraged features from these
initial predictions in order to further improve each task output { in a one-o
or recursive manner. In particular, Xu et al. [47] proposed to distil information
from the initial predictions of other tasks, by means of spatial attention, before
adding it as a residual to the task of interest. Zhang et al. [50] opted for se-
quentially predicting each task, with the intention to utilize information from
the past predictions of one task to rene the features of another task at each
iteration. In [51], they extended upon this idea. They used a recursive procedure
to propagate similar cross-task and task-specic patterns found in the initial
task predictions. To do so, they operated on the anity matrices of the initial
predictions, and not on the features themselves, as was the case before [47,50].
Although better performance improvements have been reported in these
works, albeit for specic datasets (see [47]), they are all based on the princi-
ple that the interactions between tasks, which are essential in the distillation or
propagation procedures described above, only happen at a xed, local or global,
scale2. For all we know, however, this is not always the case. In fact, two tasks
with high pattern anity at a certain scale are not guaranteed to retain this
behaviour at other scales, and vice versa. Take for example the tasks of seman-
tic segmentation and depth estimation, and consider the case where two cars
at dierent distances are in front of our camera's viewpoint, with one partially
occluding the other.
Looking at the local scale (i.e. patch level), the discontinuity in depth labels
in the region in-between cars suggests that a similar pattern should be present
in the semantic labels, i.e. there should be a change of semantic labels in the
exact same region, despite the fact that this is incorrect. However, looking at
the global scale this ambiguity can be resolved. An analogous observation can
be made if we swapped the order of tasks, and went from global to local scale.
We conclude that pattern anities should not be considered at the task level
only, as existing works do [47,50,51], but be conditioned on the scale level too
(for a more detailed discussion visit Section 2.2).
In this paper, we go beyond these limitations and explicitly consider inter-
actions at separate scales when propagating features across tasks. We propose a
novel architecture, namely MTI-Net, that builds upon this idea. Starting from
a multi-scale feature representation of the input image, generated from an o-
the-shelf backbone network (e.g. [23,45]), we make an initial prediction for each
task at each considered scale (four scales in our case). Next, for each task we
distill information from other tasks by means of spatial attention to rene the
2With the exception of [50], where a rst attempt for multi-scale processing happens
at the decoding stage, in a strict sequential manner. Note that, their approach is
only suitable for a pair of tasks, and can not be extended to multi-task learning.