14 S. Vandenhende et al.
Input ImageSingle Task
Semantic Segmentation
 Human Parts
 Surface Normals
 Edge Detection
 Saliency Estimation
Ours
 Single Task
 Ours
Fig. 4: Qualitative results on PASCAL. We compare the predictions made
by a set of single-task models (rst row for every image) against the predictions
made by our MTI-Net (second row for every image). Dierences can be seen for
semantic segmentation, edge detection and saliency estimation.
task models. The reason for the increased amount of parameters is the use of a
shallow backbone, and the small number of tasks (i.e. 2). Furthermore, we sig-
nicantly outperform PAD-Net in terms of FLOPS and multi-task performance.
This is due to the fact that PAD-Net performs the multi-modal distillation at
a single higher scale (1/4) with 4 Cchannels,Cbeing the number of back-
bone channels at a single scale. Instead, we perform most of the computations
at smaller scales (1/32, 1/16, 1/8), while operating on only Cchannels at the
higher scale (1/4). On PASCAL, we signicantly improve on all three metrics
compared to the single-task models. We also outperform ASTMT in terms of
FLOPS and multi-task performance, as the latter has to perform a separate
forward pass per task.
4 Conclusion
We have shown the importance of modeling task interactions at multiple scales,
enabling tasks to maximally benet each other. We achieved this by introduc-
ing dedicated modules on top of an o-the-shelf multi-scale feature extractor,
i.e. multi-scale multi-modal distillation, feature propagation across scales, and
feature aggregation. Our multi-task model delivers on the full potential of multi-
task learning, i.e. smaller memory footprint, reduced number of calculations and
better performance. Our experiments show that our multi-task models consis-
tently outperform their single-tasking counterparts by medium to large margins.
Acknowledgment The authors acknowledge support by Toyota via the
TRACE project and MACCHINA (KULeuven,C14/18/065).