6 S. Vandenhende et al.
(a) Three local patches from a
depth map. Depending on the
patch size, i.e. receptive eld,
depth information can be utilized
dierently by other tasks, e.g. se-
mantic segmentation and edges.
0.50.60.7
Dilation dMatching local pixel aﬃnitiesSemantics/Edges
Semantics/Depth
Edges/Depth(b) To quantify task interactions w.r.t. scale,
pixel anities on the label space of each
task, as dened in [51], are calculated in local
patches. The correspondences in the anity
patterns between tasks are plotted as a func-
tion of the patch size, i.e. kernel dilation.
Fig. 2: Unlike the common belief, in this paper we question whether task inter-
actions remain constant across all scales (see Section 2.2).
To quantify the degree to which tasks share common local structures w.r.t.
the size of the receptive eld, we conduct the following experiment. We measure
the pixel anity in local patches on the label space of each task, using kernels
of xed size. The size of the receptive eld can be selected by choosing the
dilation for the kernel. We consider the tasks of semantic segmentation, depth
estimation and edge detection on the NYUD-v2 dataset. A pair of semantic
pixels is considered similar when both pixels belong to the same category. For
the depth estimation task, we threshold the relative dierence between pairs
of pixels; pixels below the threshold are similar. Once the pixel anities are
calculated for every task, we measure how well similar and dissimilar pairs are
matched across tasks. We repeat this experiment using dierent dilations for the
kernel, eectively changing the receptive eld. Figure 2b illustrates the result.
A rst observation is that anity patterns are matched well across tasks, with
up to 65% of pair correspondence in some cases. This indicates that dierent
tasks can share common structures in parts of the image. This is in agreement
with a similar observation made earlier by [51]. A second observation is that
the degree to which the anity patterns are matched across tasks is dependent
on the receptive eld, which in turn, corresponds to the used dilation. This
validates our initial assumption that the statistics of task interactions do not
always remain constant, but rather depend on the scale, i.e. receptive eld.