RecVAE: a New Variational Autoencoder for Top-N
Recommendations with Implicit Feedback
Ilya Shenbin
ilya.shenbin@gmail.com
Samsung-PDMI Joint AI Center,
Steklov Institute of Mathematics at
St. Petersburg, RussiaAnton Alekseev
anton.m.alexeyev@gmail.com
Samsung-PDMI Joint AI Center,
Steklov Institute of Mathematics at
St. Petersburg, RussiaElena Tutubalina
tutubalinaev@gmail.com
Samsung-PDMI Joint AI Center,
Steklov Institute of Mathematics at
St. Petersburg, Russia
Valentin Malykh
valentin.malykh@phystech.edu
Neural Systems and Deep Learning
Laboratory, Moscow Institute of
Physics and Technology, RussiaSergey I. Nikolenko
sergey@logic.pdmi.ras.ru
Samsung-PDMI Joint AI Center,
Steklov Institute of Mathematics at
St. Petersburg, Russia
ABSTRACT
Recent research has shown the advantages of using autoencoders
based on deep neural networks for collaborative filtering. In par-
ticular, the recently proposed Mult-VAE model, which used the
multinomial likelihood variational autoencoders, has shown excel-
lent results for top-N recommendations. In this work, we propose
theRecommender VAE (RecVAE) model that originates from our
research on regularization techniques for variational autoencoders.
RecVAE introduces several novel ideas to improve Mult-VAE , in-
cluding a novel composite prior distribution for the latent codes,
a new approach to setting the βhyperparameter for the β-VAE
framework, and a new approach to training based on alternat-
ing updates. In experimental evaluation, we show that RecVAE
significantly outperforms previously proposed autoencoder-based
models, including Mult-VAE and RaCT , across classical collabo-
rative filtering datasets, and present a detailed ablation study to
assess our new developments. Code and models are available at
https://github.com/ilya-shenbin/RecVAE .
CCS CONCEPTS
•Computing methodologies →Latent variable models ;Learn-
ing from implicit feedback ;Regularization ; Neural networks; •In-
formation systems →Learning to rank .
KEYWORDS
deep learning, collaborative filtering, variational autoencoders
ACM Reference Format:
Ilya Shenbin, Anton Alekseev, Elena Tutubalina, Valentin Malykh, and Sergey
I. Nikolenko. 2020. RecVAE: a New Variational Autoencoder for Top-N
Recommendations with Implicit Feedback. In The Thirteenth ACM Inter-
national Conference on Web Search and Data Mining (WSDM ’20), Feb-
ruary 3–7, 2020, Houston, TX, USA. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 9 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3336191.3371831
WSDM ’20, February 3–7, 2020, Houston, TX, USA
©2020 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
This is the author’s version of the work. It is posted here for your personal use. Not
for redistribution. The definitive Version of Record was published in The Thirteenth
ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining (WSDM ’20), February
3–7, 2020, Houston, TX, USA , https://doi.org/10.1145/3336191.3371831.1 INTRODUCTION
Matrix factorization ( MF) has become the industry standard as
the foundation of recommender systems based on collaborative
filtering. However, there are certain general issues that arise with
this family of models. First, the number of parameters in any matrix
factorization model is huge: it linearly depends on the number
of both users and items, which leads to slow model learning and
overfitting. Second, to make a prediction for a new user/item based
on their ratings, one has to run an optimization procedure in order
to find the corresponding user/item embedding. Third, only a small
amount of ratings are known for some (often for a majority of)
users and items, which could also lead to overfitting. This makes
it necessary to heavily regularize matrix factorization models, and
standard L1orL2regularizers are hard to tune.
Recently proposed models such as the Collaborative Denoising
Autoencoder (CDAE ) [39] partially solve these issues by using a
parameterized function which maps user feedback to user embed-
dings. It performs regularization in an alternative way and makes
it possible to predict item ratings for new users without additional
iterative training. The Variational Autoencoder for Collaborative Fil-
tering (Mult-VAE) [ 22] is a subsequent improvement of CDAE that
extends it to multinomial distributions in the likelihood, which are
more suitable for recommendations.
In this work, we propose the Recommender VAE (RecVAE) model
for collaborative filtering with implicit feedback based on the varia-
tional autoencoder (VAE) and specifically on the Mult-VAE approach.
RecVAE presents a number of important novelties that together
combine into significantly improved performance. First, we have
designed a new architecture for the encoder network. Second, we
have introduced a novel composite prior distribution for the latent
code zin the variational autoencoder. The composite prior is a
mixture of a standard Gaussian prior and the latent code distri-
bution with parameters fixed from the previous iteration of the
model (Section 3.3), an idea originating from reinforcement learn-
ing where it is used to stabilize training [ 13,30]. In the context
of recommendations, we have also found that this prior improves
training stability and performance. Third, we have developed a new
approach to setting the hyperparameter βfor the Kullback-Leibler
term in the objective function (Section 3.4). We have found thatarXiv:1912.11160v1  [cs.IR]  24 Dec 2019