WSDM ’20, February 3–7, 2020, Houston, TX, USA Shenbin et al.
βshould be user-specific, β=β(xu), and should depend on the
amount of data (implicit feedback) available for a given user.
Finally, we introduce a novel approach for training the model.
InRecVAE , training is done by alternating updates for the encoder
and decoder (see Section 3.5). This approach has two important
advantages. First, it allows to perform multiple updates of the en-
coder (a more complex network) for every update of the decoder (a
very simple, single-layer network that contains item embeddings
and biases). Second, it allows to use corrupted inputs (following the
general idea of denoising autoencoders [ 16,31]) only for training
the encoder while still training the decoder on clean input data. This
is again beneficial for the final model training due to the differing
complexities of the encoder and decoder.
As a result of the above novelties, our model significantly outper-
forms all autoencoder-based previous works and shows competitive
or better results in comparison with other models across a variety of
collaborative filtering datasets, including MovieLens-20M (ML-20M),
Netflix Prize Dataset , and Million Songs Dataset (MSD).
The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we review the
crucial components and approaches we are to employ in the pro-
posed methods as well as other relevant prior art. In Section 3 we
describe the basic Mult-VAE approach and our modifications. Sec-
tion 4 contains the results of a comprehensive experimental study
for our model, and Section 5 concludes the paper.
2 BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
2.1 Variational autoencoders and their
extensions
The variational autoencoder (VAE) [ 19,28] is a deep latent variable
model able to learn complex distributions. We begin with a brief
exposition of the basic assumptions behind VAE that have been
extended for collaborative filtering in Mult-VAE and will be further
extended in this work with RecVAE . First, under the assumption
that the dataset belongs to a low-dimensional manifold embed-
ded in a high-dimensional space, the marginal likelihood function
can be expressed via a latent code zaspθ(x)=∫
pθ(x|z)p(z)dz.
Since the marginal likelihood function is intractable, it is usually
approximated with the evidence lower bound (ELBO):
logpθ(x)≥L V AE =
Eqϕ(z|x)h
logpθ(x|z)−KL
qϕ(z|x)

p(z)i
,(1)
where KLis the Kullback-Leibler divergence, p(z)is the prior dis-
tribution, qϕ(z|x)is a variational approximation of the posterior
distribution defined as a parameterized function with ϕ, and θare
the parameters of pθ(x|z). This technique, known as amortized
inference , provides additional regularization and allows to obtain
variational parameters with a closed form function.
Variational autoencoders can be used not only as generative mod-
els but also for representation learning. β-VAE [ 10] is a modification
of VAE designed to learn so-called disentangled representations by
adding a regularization coefficient to the Kullback-Leibler term in
the evidence lower bound. The objective function of β-VAE can still
be considered as a valid ELBO with additional approximate poste-
rior regularization that rescales the Kullback-Leibler divergence informula (1) above by a factor of β[12, 24]:
Lβ-V AE =Eqϕ(z|x)h
logpθ(x|z)−βKL
qϕ(z|x)

p(z)i
.(2)
Denoising variational autoencoders (DVAE) [ 16,31], similar to
denoising autoencoders, are trying to reconstruct the input from
its corrupted version. The ELBO in this model is defined as
logpθ(x)≥L DVAE =
Eqϕ(z|˜x)Ep(˜x|x)h
logpθ(x|z)−KL
qϕ(z|˜x)

p(z)i
.(3)
It differs from VAE by the additional expectation Ep(˜x|x), where
p(˜x|x)is a noise distribution, usually Bernoulli or Gaussian. Similar
to how denoising autoencoders are more robust and generalize
better than regular autoencoders, DVAE improves over the perfor-
mance of the basic VAE and makes it possible to learn more robust
approximate posterior distributions.
The Conditional Variational Autoencoder (CVAE) [ 32] is another
VAE extension which is able to learn complex conditional distribu-
tions. Its ELBO is as follows:
logpθ(x|y)≥L CV AE =
Eqϕ(z|x,y)h
logpθ(x|z,y)−KL
qϕ(z|x,y)

pθ(z,y)i
,(4)
which is the same as the ELBO for regular VAE shown in (1)but with
all distributions conditioned on y.VAE with Arbitrary Conditioning
(VAEAC) [ 17], based on CVAE, solves the imputation problem for
missing features, which is in many ways similar to collaborative
filtering. It has an ELBO similar to (4)where the variable are the
unobserved features xband the condition is x1−bfor some binary
mask b:
logpθ,b(xb|x1−b,b)≥
LV AEAC =Eqϕ(z|x,b)h
logpθ(xb|z,x1−b,b)−
−KL
qϕ(z|x,b)

pθ(z|x1−b,b)i
;(5)
an important point here is that the mask bcan be different and even
have different number of ones (unobserved features) for different
inputs x. However, this approach cannot be directly applied to the
implicit feedback case, which we consider in this work.
2.2 Autoencoders and Regularization for
Collaborative Filtering
LetUandIbe the sets of users and items respectively in a collab-
orative filtering problem. Consider the implicit feedback matrix
X∈{0,1}|U|×|I|, where xui=1if the uth user positively inter-
acted with (liked, bought, watched etc.) the ith item (movie, good,
article etc.) and xui=0otherwise. We denote by xuthe feedback
vector of user u.
The basic idea of the Collaborative Denoising Autoencoder (CDAE )
model [ 39] is to reconstruct the user feedback vector xufrom its
corrupted version ˜xu. The corrupted vector ˜xuis obtained by ran-
domly removing (setting to zero) some values in the vector xu. The
encoder part of the model maps ˜xuto the hidden state. In CDAE,
both encoder and decoder are single neural layers (so the model
itself is basically a feedforward neural network with one hidden