Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9, 909 7 of 29
alter an input by using adversarial samples generating methods. The accessing of the model’s internal
weight for white-box attacks corresponds to a strong adversarial capability.
Black-box Attacks The adversaries have no knowledge about target model fin black-box
attacks. They instead analyze the model’s vulnerability by using information about the past
input/output pairs, e.g., the adversaries attack a model by inputting a series of adversarial samples and
observing corresponding outputs. Black-box Attacks can be divided into non-adaptive, adaptive and
strict black-box attacks.
 Non-Adaptive Black-Box Attack. The adversaries can only access to the training data distribution
mof target model f. Therefore, adversaries choose a training procedure train0for model f0,
and train a local model on samples from the data distribution mto approximate the target model.
Then, adversaries generate adversarial samples by using white-box attack strategies on model f0
and apply these samples to model fto lead misclassiﬁcation.
 Adaptive Black-Box Attack. The adversaries cannot access to any information about the target
model but can access the model fas an oracle. In this case, adversaries query the target model
to obtain output label yby inputting data X, and then adversaries choose a training procedure
train0and a model f0to train a local model on tuples (X,y)obtained from querying the target
model. Finally, adversaries apply adversarial samples generated by the white-box attack on local
model f0to the target model.
 Strict Black-Box Attack. The adversaries cannot access to the data distribution qbut can collect
input–output pairs (X,y)from the target model. It differs from the adaptive black-box attack in
that it cannot change the inputs to observe the changes in outputs.
Compared with the white-box attacks, the black-box attacks do not need to learn the randomness
ror parameters qof the target model. The target for adversaries is using data distribution mto train
a local model f0in non-adaptive attacks and querying the target model by using carefully selected
dataset in adaptive attacks.
2.2.2. Adversarial Goals
The adversarial goals can be inferred from the uncertainties of models. According to the impact
on models’ output integrity, adversarial goals can be divided into four categories, i.e., conﬁdence
reduction, misclassiﬁcation, targeted misclassiﬁcation, and source/target misclassiﬁcation.
 Conﬁdence Reduction. The adversaries attempt to reduce the conﬁdence of prediction for the
target model, e.g., the adversarial samples of a “stop” sign is predicted with lower conﬁdence.
 Misclassiﬁcation. The adversaries attempt to change the output classiﬁcation of input to any
class different from the original class, e.g., an adversarial sample of a “stop” sign is predicted to
be any class different from the “stop” sign.
 Targeted Misclassiﬁcation. The adversaries attempt to change the output classiﬁcation of the
input to a special target class, e.g., any adversarial samples inputted into a classiﬁer is predicted
to be a “go” sign.
 Source/Target Misclassiﬁcation. The adversaries attempt to change the output classiﬁcation of a
special input to a special target class, e.g., a “stop” sign is predicted to be a “go” sign.
3. Adversarial Attacks
Unlike other attack techniques, adversarial attack techniques mainly occur in the adversarial
samples generation process. Since adversarial attacks can occur in the training and testing stages,
this section describes adversarial attack techniques in detail in the training and testing stages,
respectively.