Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9, 909 21 of 29
from 89.4% to 17.9% by using adversarial training. Huang et al. [ 40] increased the robustness of
the model by punishing misclassiﬁed adversarial samples. Tramèr et al. [ 41] proposed ensemble
adversarial training which can increase the diversity of adversarial samples. However, it is unrealistic
to introduce all unknown attack samples into the adversarial training, which leads to the limitation of
adversarial training.
5.1.2. Gradient Hiding
A natural defense against gradient based attacks presented in [41] and attacks using adversarial
crafting method such as FGSM. This method hides information about model gradient from the
adversaries, i.e., if a model is non-differentiable (e.g., a decision tree, a nearest neighbor classiﬁer, or a
random forest), the gradient-based attack is invalid. However, by learning the proxy black-box model
with gradient and using the adversarial samples generated by this model [ 21], the method can easily
be fooled in this case.
5.1.3. Blocking the Transferability
Since the transferability attribute holds even if the classiﬁers have a different architecture or are
trained on the disjoint dataset, the key to preventing the black-box attack is to prevent the transferability
of adversarial samples. Hosseini et al. [ 42] proposed a three-step NULL Labeling method, in order to
prevent the adversarial samples from one network to another network. Its main idea is adding a new
NULL label to the dataset, and classify them to NULL label by training classiﬁer to resist adversarial
attacks. This method generally includes three main steps, i.e., initial training target classiﬁer, computing
NULL probabilities, and adversarial training, as is shown in Figure 15.
Figure 15. Illustration of the original and null labeling methods on an image from the MNIST dataset,
and three adversarial examples with different perturbations. The classiﬁer assigns a probability vector
to each image. With more perturbation, the NULL labeling method assigns a higher probability to
the NULL label, while the original labeling increases the probabilities of other labels (Image Credit:
Hosseini et al. [42]).
The advantage of this method is marking the perturbation input as an empty label rather than
classifying it as the original label. At present, this method is one of the most effective defense methods