Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9, 909 20 of 29
Zhou et al. [ 38] studied an interesting example of an actual adversarial attack and found that
infrared light completely invisible to humans can also be used to generate disturbances. As is shown
in Figure 14, the adversary installed some infrared LED on the cap peak, which could illuminate the
attacker’s face with some points from the camera angle, but people nearby would not notice. With this
technique, they successfully attacked the facial authentication system in white-box settings.
Figure 14. The cap with some infrared LED (Image Credit: Zhou et al. [38]).
This method differs from other attack methods in two aspects. Firstly, this method does not
directly optimize perturbation. They established a model describing the infrared points generated by
LED lamps with position, radius, and brightness of the points as parameters. Therefore, the optimizer
optimized the model parameters to accurately search for disturbances close to the real infrared points.
Secondly, they developed a real-time feedback system for adversaries to adjust the LED position to
help adversaries better achieve disturbance. Therefore, adversaries do not need to print disturbance
for each target; instead, they only need to adjust the device to attack different targets.
5. Defense Strategy
Researchers have proposed a number of adversarial attack defense strategies, which can be
divided into the three main categories, i.e., modifying data, modifying models and using auxiliary
tools. We describe them in details, respectively.
5.1. Modifying Data
These strategies refer to modifying the training dataset in the training stage or changing the input
data in the testing stage, including adversarial training, gradient hiding, blocking the transferability,
data compression, and data randomization.
5.1.1. Adversarial Training
The adversarial samples are introduced into the training dataset to improve the robustness of
the target model by training model with the legalized adversarial samples. Szegedy et al. [ 6] ﬁrstly
injected the adversarial samples and modiﬁed its labels to make the model more robust in the face
of the adversaries. Goodfellow et al. [ 15] reduced the misidentiﬁcation rate on the MNIST dataset