Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9, 909 12 of 29
from API access to facial recognition services. The attack successfully tested facial recognition
using multiple neural network models, including softmax regression, multilayer perceptron
(MLP), and stacked denoising autoencoder network (DAE). When accessing to the model and
the name, the adversaries can recover the face images. The reconstruction results of these three
algorithms are shown in Figure 5. Because of the richness of the deep learning model structure,
the model inversion attacks can only recover a small number of prototype samples that are similar
to the actual data of the deﬁned classes.
 Model Extraction. Tramèr et al. [ 23] proposed a simple attack method, a strict black-box attack,
to extract the target model for popular models, such as logistic regression, neural network,
and decision tree. Adversaries can build a local model which has a similar function with the target
model. The author demonstrated the model extraction attack against online ML service providers
such as BigML and Amazon Machine Learning. The ML APIs provided by the ML-as-Service
providers return exact conﬁdence values and class labels. Since the adversaries do not have
any information about the model or the distribution of training data, he can attempt to solve
mathematically for unknown parameters or features given the conﬁdence value and equations by
querying d+1 random d-dimensional inputs for unknown d+1 parameters.
Figure 5. The reconstruction results of model inversion attacks (Image Credit: Fredrikson et al. [22]).
4. Adversarial Attack Applications
Since adversarial attack technologies have been applied to academia and industry, this section
describes the applications of adversarial attack in several ﬁelds, including computer vision, natural
language processing, cyberspace security, and the physical world.
4.1. Computer Vision
In this section, we discuss the applications of adversarial attack in computer vision ﬁeld. We will
describe the applications of adversarial attack in image classiﬁcation, semantic image segmentation,
and object detection, respectively.
4.1.1. Image Classiﬁcation
In image classiﬁcation, researchers have proposed a large number of adversarial attack methods.
We list the relevant articles and their main ideas of their methods in Table 1.