Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9, 909 23 of 29
Figure 16. An overview of defense mechanism based on a transfer of knowledge contained in
probability vectors through distillation (Image Credit: Papernot et al. [14]).
However, the effectiveness of defense distillation cannot be guaranteed in black-box attacks.
Therefore, Papernot et al. [50] proposed extensible defense distillation technology.
5.2.3. Feature Squeezing
Feature squeezing is a model enhancement technique [ 51], whose main idea is to reduce
the complexity of the data representation, thereby reducing the adversarial interference due to
low sensitivity. There are two heuristic methods, one is to reduce the color depth at the pixel
level, i.e., to encode the color with fewer values; the other is using a smooth ﬁlter on the image,
i.e., multiple inputs are mapped to a single value, thus making the model safer under noise and
confrontational attack. Although this technique can effectively prevent adversarial attacks, it also
reduces the accuracy of the classiﬁcation of real samples.
5.2.4. Deep Contractive Network (DCN)
Gu et al. [ 52] introduced a kind of deep compression network, which uses noise reduction
automatic encoder to reduce the adversarial noise. Based on this phenomenon, DCN adopted a
smoothing penalty similar to a Convolutional Autoencoder (CAE) [ 89] in the training process, and was
proved to have a certain defensive effect against attacks such as L-BGFS [6].
5.2.5. Mask Defense
Gao et al. [ 53] proposed to insert a mask layer before processing the classiﬁed network model.
This mask layer trained the original images and corresponding adversarial samples and encoded the
differences between these images and the output features of the previous network model layer. It is
generally believed that the most important weight in the additional layer corresponds to the most
sensitive feature in the network. Therefore, in the ﬁnal classiﬁcation, these features are masked by
forcing the additional layers with a primary weight of zero. In this way, the deviation of classiﬁcation
results caused by adversarial samples can be shielded.
5.2.6. Parseval Networks
Cisse et al. [ 20] proposed a network called Parseval as a defensive method against adversarial
attacks. This network adopts hierarchical regularization by controlling the global Lipschitz constant of
the network. Considering the network can be viewed as a combination of functions at each layer, it is
possible to have robust positive ions for small input perturbations by maintaining a small Lipschitz
constant for these functions, they proposed to control the spectral norm of the network weight matrix