Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9, 909 22 of 29
against the adversarial attacks, which accurately resists the adversarial attacks, as well as does not
affect the classiﬁcation accuracy of the original data.
5.1.4. Data Compression
Dziugaite et al. [ 43] found that JPG compression method can improve a large number of network
model recognition accuracy declined caused by FGSM attack disturbance. Das et al. [ 44] used a
similar JPEG compression method to study a defense method against FGSM and DeepFool attacks.
However, these image compression technologies still cannot serve as an effective defense against
more powerful attacks, such as Carlini & Wagner attacks [ 24]. Similarly, the Display Compression
Technology (DCT) compression method [ 44] used in the ﬁght against universal disturbance attacks [ 87]
has also been proved to be insufﬁcient. The biggest limitation of these defense methods based on data
compression is that a large amount of compression will lead to a decrease in the accuracy of original
image classiﬁcation, while a small amount of compression is often not enough to remove the impact of
disturbance.
5.1.5. Data Randomization
Xie et al. [ 45] demonstrated that the operation of random resizing adversarial samples can reduce
the effectiveness of adversarial samples. Similarly, adding some random textures to the adversarial
samples can also reduce their deception to the network model. Wang et al. [ 46] used a data conversion
module separated from the network model to eliminate the possible adversarial disturbance in the
image, and conducted data expansion operations in the training process, such as adding some Gaussian
randomization processing, which could slightly improve the robustness of the network model.
5.2. Modifying Model
We can modify the neural network model, such as regularization, defensive distillation, feature
squeezing, deep contractive network and mask defense.
5.2.1. Regularization
This method aims to improve the generalization ability of the target model by adding regular
terms which are known as penalty terms to the cost function and make the model have good
adaptability to resist attacks on an unknown dataset in prediction. Biggio et al. [ 8] used a regularization
method to limit the vulnerability of data when training the SVM model. The articles [ 47–49] used
regularization method to improve the robustness of the algorithm and achieved good results in
resisting adversarial attacks.
5.2.2. Defensive Distillation
Papernot et al. [ 14] proposed a defensive distillation method to resist attacks on the basis of
distillation technology [ 88]. The original distillation technology aims to compress the large-scale model
into small-scale and retain the original accuracy, while the defensive distillation does not change
the scale of the model, and produces a model with a smoother output surface and less sensitivity to
disturbance to improve the robustness of the model. As is shown in Figure 16, they ﬁrstly trained an
initial network Fon data Xwith a softmax temperature of T, and then used the probability vector F(X),
which includes additional knowledge about classes compared to a class label, predicted by network F
to train a distilled network Fdat temperature Ton the same data X. The authors demonstrated using
defensive distillation can reduce the success rate of adversarial attack by 90%.