Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9, 909 6 of 29
Figure 3. The classiﬁcation of adversarial capabilities.
Training Stage Capabilities
Attacks in the training stage attempt to inﬂuence or corrupt a target model directly by changing
the dataset used for training. In this case, the most straightforward and weakest attack is to access
part or all of the training data. The attack strategies in the training stage based on the adversarial
capabilities can be divided into three categories:
 Data Injection. The adversary does not have any access to the training data and learning
algorithms but has the ability to add new data to the training dataset. The adversary can corrupt
the target model by inserting adversarial samples into the training dataset.
 Data Modiﬁcation. The adversary does not have access to the learning algorithms but has access
to full training data. The adversary can poison the training data by modifying the data before it is
used for training the target model.
 Logic Corruption. The adversary has access to meddle with the learning algorithms of the
target model.
Testing Stage Capabilities
The adversarial attacks during the testing stage do not tamper with the target model but force it to
produce incorrect outputs. In addition, the effectiveness of such attacks mainly depends on the amount
of information about the model available to the adversaries. In testing time, the attacks can be divided
into white-box attacks and black-box attacks. Before discussing these attacks, we suppose that there is
a target model fthat is trained on input pair (X,y)from the data distribution mwith a randomized
training procedure train having randomness r(e.g., random weight initialization, dropout, etc.).
The model parameters qare learned after training, i.e.,
q train (f,X,y,r) (1)
Now, we describe the white-box attacks and black-box attacks in the testing stage in
detail, respectively.
White-box Attacks In white-box attacks, the adversaries have total knowledge about the target
model f, including algorithm train , data distribution m, and model parameters q. The adversaries
identify the most vulnerable feature space of target model fby utilizing available information, and then