Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9, 909 9 of 29
Figure 4. Adversarial crafting framework. This is an adversarial sample generative process for image
classiﬁcation using the Deep Neural Network (DNN), which can be generalized for any supervised
learning algorithm (Image Credit: Papernot et al. [14]).
Suppose Xis an input sample, fis a trained DNN classiﬁcation model, the objective of the
adversary is to generate an adversarial sample X0=dX+Xby adding a perturbation dXwith X,
so that f(X0) =Y0where Y06=f(X)is the target output that depends on the adversary’s objective.
This framework includes two steps:
 Direction Sensitivity Estimation. The adversary evaluates the sensitivity of the change to each
input feature by identifying directions in the data manifold around sample Xin which the model
fis most sensitive and likely to result in a class change.
 Perturbation Selection. The adversary then exploits the knowledge of sensitive information to
select a perturbation dXin order to obtain an adversarial perturbation which is most efﬁcient.
Note that both two steps replace XbydX+Xat the beginning of each new iteration until the
disturbed sample is satisﬁed with the adversarial goal.
The total perturbation used to generate an adversarial sample from an original sample needs
to be as small as possible, which is the key to ensure that the adversarial sample is not recognized
by human eyes. Suppose the norm kkis used to describe the differences between points in the
DNN input ﬁeld, the adversarial samples in model fcan be formalized as a solution to the following
optimization problem:
X=X+arg min
dXfkdXk:f(X+dX)6=f(X)g (3)
It is difﬁcult to ﬁnd closed solutions since most DNN models make Formula (3) nonlinear and
non-convex. Now, we discuss the methods used in the two steps above in detail.
Direction Sensitivity Estimation
Direction sensitivity estimation aims to ﬁnd the dimensions of Xthat produce expected adversarial
performance with minimal disturbance, which can be generally achieved by changing the input
components of Xand evaluating the sensitivity of the trained DNN model fto these changes. Some
current techniques of direction sensitivity estimation are described below.
 L-BFGS. Szegedy et al. [ 6] ﬁrstly introduced the term adversarial sample and formalized the
minimization problem, as shown in Formula (3) to search for an adversarial sample. Since this
problem is complex, they turned to solve a simpliﬁed problem, that is, to ﬁnd the minimum loss
function additions, so that the neural network could make a false classiﬁcation, which transformed
the problem into a convex optimization process. Although this method has good performance, it
is expensive to calculate the adversarial samples.