Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9, 909 4 of 29
as well as the adversarial capabilities and goals; in Section 3, we analyze the adversarial attack
methods in training stage and testing stage, respectively. In Section 4, we sort out the applications of
adversarial attack technologies in four ﬁelds, including computer vision, natural language processing,
cyberspace security, and physical world. In Section 5, we conclude the existing defense methods
against adversarial attacks. We conclude in Section 6.
2. Adversarial Samples and Adversarial Attack Strategies
In this section, we mainly introduce the adversarial samples and the adversarial attack strategies,
including the causes and characteristics of adversarial samples, as well as the capabilities and goals of
the adversarial attacks.
2.1. Adversarial Example (AE)
Szegedy et al. [ 6] ﬁrstly proposed the concept of adversarial samples, which are constructed by
adding tiny perturbations that could not be recognized by human eyes to the input samples of the
model, and caused the adversarial images to be misclassiﬁed by the target model with high conﬁdence.
Suppose there is a machine learning model Mand an original sample xthat can be classiﬁed correctly,
i.e.,M(x) =ytrue; by adding a slight perturbation to x, the adversary could construct an adversarial
sample x0which is similar to xbut can be misclassiﬁed by M, i.e., M(x0)6=ytrue. Figure 1 shows the
adversarial process [15].
Figure 1. The model considers the original image as a “panda” (57.7%). Indeed, the image added a
tiny perturbation is classiﬁed as a “gibbon” by the same model (99.3%), while the human eyes cannot
identify the difference (Image Credit: Goodfellow et al. [15]).
2.1.1. Causes of Adversarial Examples
Researchers have proposed some explanations for the existence of adversarial samples. Some [ 58]
believe that the reason is the over-ﬁtting or under-regularization of the model led to the insufﬁcient
generalization ability that learning models predict unknown data, while others [ 21] consider that the
adversarial samples are caused by the extreme nonlinearity of the deep neural network. However,
Goodfellow et al. [ 15] added perturbation to the input of a regularization model and a linear model
which has enough dimensions, and demonstrated that both models’ effectiveness of defending
adversarial attacks were not signiﬁcantly improved.
Goodfellow et al. [ 15] believe that the cause of adversarial samples is the linear behavior in high
dimensional space. In a high dimensional linear classiﬁer, each input feature is normalized, so that
slight perturbation for one dimension of each input will not change the overall prediction of the
classiﬁer, while small perturbations to all dimensions of the inputs will lead to effective change. As is
shown in Figure 2, the score of class “1” is increased from 5% to 88% by adding or subtracting 0.5 from