Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9, 909 25 of 29
Figure 18. Three different training methods for HGD. The square boxes stand for data blobs, the circles
and ovals stand for networks. D stands for denoiser. The Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) is the
model to be defended. The parameters of CNN are shared and ﬁxed (Image Credit: Liao et al. [57]).
6. Conclusions
Since Szegedy et al. proposed that machine learning algorithms are vulnerable to adversarial
attacks, researchers have conducted a large number of studies on adversarial attacks and defense
methods and produced good results. In this paper, the causes and characteristics of adversarial samples,
as well as the adversarial capabilities and goals of the adversaries, are ﬁrst described. In addition,
we review the adversarial attacks carried out in the training stage and the testing stage of the target
model, respectively. Among them, the training stage adversarial attacks can be implemented in
three ways: modifying the training dataset, label manipulation, and input feature manipulation.
However, such attacks, which occur during the training stage, are not common in the real world.
There are two kinds of the testing stage adversarial attacks: the white-box attacks and black-box attacks.
For the white-box attacks, in the process of carrying out the attacks, the adversaries can obtain the
algorithm, parameters, structure, and other information of the target model and use this information
to generate the adversarial samples. Hence, compared with the black-box attacks, the white-box
attacks have higher success rates, which can enable the target model to achieve an error rate of
approximately 89–99%. Although the attack success rates of black-box attacks, which lead to an
error rate of roughly 84–96%, are not as good as that of white-box attacks, since black-box attacks
do not need to know any information of the target model, the adversarial attacks can be carried out
by utilizing the transferability of adversarial samples, model inversion and model extraction. As a
consequence, the black-box attacks have better applicability in the real world and may well become a
research focus in future research. Furthermore, we summarize the application of adversarial attacks in
four ﬁelds and existing defense methods against adversarial attacks. Although some defense methods
have been proposed by researchers to deal with adversarial attacks and achieved good results, which
can reduce the success rate of adversarial attack by 70%–90%, they are generally aimed at a speciﬁc
type of adversarial attacks, and there is no defense method to deal with multiple or even all types
of attacks. Therefore, the key to ensuring the security of AI technology in various applications is to
deeply research the adversarial attack technology and propose more efﬁcient defense strategies.
Author Contributions: Writing—original draft preparation, S.Q.; writing—review and editing, Q.L.; supervision,
S.Z.; project administration, C.W.
Funding: This research was funded by the Sichuan Science and Technology Program (Grant No. 2018FZ0097,
No. 2018GZDZX0006, No. 2017GZDZX0002 and No. 2018GZ0085).
Acknowledgments: We would like to thank Goodfellow et al., Zhang et al., Papernot et al., Fredrikson et al.,
Xie et al., Wei et al., Liu et al., Hu et al., Akhtar et al., Eykholt et al., Gu et al., Zhou et al., Hosseini et al.,
Samamgouei et al.and Liao et al. for their pictures cited in our paper.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.