Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9, 909 17 of 29
visual conditions. Hu et al. [ 77] proposed a model called MalGAN to generate malware adversarial
samples. As is shown in Figure 9, this model contains three DNN models, i.e., generator, discriminator
and substitute model. By utilizing the transitivity of the adversarial samples, MalGAN constructs a
substitute model that can simulate the target model and generates the adversarial malware samples
composed of API call sequences to bypass the malware detection systems.
Figure 9. The architecture of MalGAN (Image Credit: Hu et al. [77]).
In the articles [ 31,32], they replaced DNN in MalGAN with RNN. Grosse et al. [ 33] showed
how to build an effective adversarial attack method on the neural network used as the classiﬁcation
of Android malware. In articles [ 78,79], successful cases of adversarial attacks against the malware
classiﬁcation based on deep learning are proposed.
4.3.3. Intrusion Detection
Huang et al. [ 34] carried out the experiments of adversarial attacks on the software deﬁned
networking (SDN) based deep learning detection system. They proposed a new kind of adversarial
attack, which takes advantage of the vulnerability of deep learning classiﬁer in an SDN environment.
Three typical deep learning models combined with four different adversarial tests have been conducted
in the simulation for complete analysis in their work.
4.4. Attack in Physical World
4.4.1. Spooﬁng Camera
Kurakin et al. [ 16] ﬁrst demonstrated that the threat of adversarial attack also exists in the physical
world. To prove it, they printed out adversarial images and took snapshots with the phone’s camera.
These images were input into the TensorFlow Camera Demo app using the Inception model of Google
for object classiﬁcation. The results showed that these images were largely misclassiﬁed even seen
by the camera. As is shown in Figure 10, they took a clean image from the dataset (a) and used it to
generate adversarial images with various sizes of adversarial perturbation. Then, they printed clean
and adversarial images and used the TensorFlow Camera Demo app to classify them. A clean image (b)
is recognized correctly as a “washer” when perceived through the camera, while adversarial images (c)
and (d) are misclassiﬁed.