Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9, 909 11 of 29
speciﬁc to the task loss function, i.e., using the gradient information of the differentiable loss
function of the network to generate disturbance. They demonstrated that HOUDINI can be used
to deceive not only an image classiﬁcation network but also a speech recognition network.
Perturbation Selection
An adversary can use the target model’s sensitivity for input information to evaluate the
dimension of target misclassiﬁcation that is most likely to cause minimal disturbance. The methods of
disturbing input dimension can be of two categories:
 Perturb all the input dimensions. Goodfellow et al. [ 15] proposed a method to interfere with
each input dimension, but the amount of interference to calculate the gradient sign direction by
the FGSM method is small. This method effectively reduces the Euclidean distance between the
original samples and the corresponding adversarial samples.
 Perturb the selected input dimension. Papernot et al. [ 17] chose a more complex process
involving the saliency map and only selected a limited number of input dimensions to perturb.
This method effectively reduces the amount of perturbation with the input features when
generating adversarial samples.
The ﬁrst method is suitable for rapidly generating a large number of adversarial samples, but
it is more easily detected because of its relatively large disturbance. The second method reduces the
perturbation at the price of higher calculation cost.
3.2.2. Black-Box Attacks
As shown in Section 2.2.1, black-box attacks can be divided into non-adaptive, adaptive and strict
black-box attacks.
In the non-adaptive and strict black-box scenario, the adversaries cannot access the internal
structure and parameters of the target model but can train a local substitute model which approximates
the decision boundary of the target model by accessing the target model through the API interfaces.
In particular, the machine learning models in the cloud environment are more accessible by API
interfaces. Once the substitute model is trained with high conﬁdence, any white box attack strategies
can be applied to the substitute model to generate adversarial samples and then deceives the target
model by using the transferability of adversarial samples.
In the adaptive black-box scenario, adversaries cannot access the model but can observe the
output corresponding to speciﬁc input and establish a substitute model similar to the target model by
querying the target model as an oracle. The effectiveness of Oracle attack is closely related to the input
and query times of asking the target model.
There are mainly three categories of black-attack methods:
 Utilizing Transferability. Papernot et al. [ 21] used cross-model transferability of adversarial
samples to carry out black-box attack, which used synthetic input generated by the adversary
to train a local substitute model and used this substitute model to make adversarial samples,
which could be misclassiﬁed by the original target model. The articles [ 14,62] demonstrated
that adversarial attacks can lead the misclassiﬁcation reach 84.24% on MetaMind, an online
DNN training model, and then the author used this method on the Amazon cloud service which
achieves logical regression, and the misclassiﬁcation can reach 96%. The greedy heuristic followed
by the adversaries is to prioritize the samples when querying oracle labels to obtain a substitute
DNN model that approximates decision boundaries of the target model.
 Model Inversion. Fredrikson et al. [ 22] tried to eliminate the limitations of their previous
work [ 63] and proved that, for a black-box model, adversaries also can predict the genetic markers
of patients. These model inversion attacks use machine learning (ML) APIs to infer sensitive
features that are used as decision tree models for lifestyle surveys and as input to recover images