Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9, 909 5 of 29
each dimension in a speciﬁc direction of the original sample x, which proves that the linear models are
vulnerable to the adversarial samples.
Figure 2. The probability of class “1” before and after perturbation. Before perturbating, the score of
class “1” is 5%; however, the score is increased to 88% by adding or subtracting 0.5 from each dimension
in a speciﬁc direction of the original sample (Image Credit: Zhang et al. [59]).
2.1.2. Characteristics of Adversarial Examples
Adversarial samples have three basic characteristics [ 59], i.e., transferability, regularization effect,
and adversarial instability.
 Transferability. When constructing adversarial samples for an attack against one target model
M1, it is unnecessary to obtain the architecture or parameters of model M1if the adversary has
knowledge of M2, as long as model M2is trained to perform the task that model M1performs as
well.
 Advsarial instability. After physical transformation, such as translation and rotation, it is easy to
lose its own adversarial for adversarial samples. In this case, adversarial samples will be correctly
classiﬁed by target models.
 Regularization effect. Adversarial training [ 15] is a regularization method that can reveal the
defects of models and improve the robustness of samples. Compared to other regularization
methods, the cost of constructing adversarial samples is expensive.
2.2. Adversarial Capabilities and Goals
The security of machine learning models is measured by the capabilities and goals of adversaries.
This section describes the adversarial capabilities and goals, respectively.
2.2.1. Adversarial Capabilities
The term Adversarial Capabilities refers to the amount of information about the target model
that can be obtained and used by the adversary. Obviously, the adversaries who have access to more
information are strictly “stronger” than others. The classiﬁcation of adversarial capabilities is shown in
Figure 3. We discuss the range of adversarial capabilities as they relate to training and testing stages.