Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9, 909 8 of 29
3.1. Training Stage Adversarial Attacks
As shown in Section 2.2.1, the adversarial capabilities in the training stage can be divided as data
injection, data modiﬁcation, and logical corruption. Corresponding to different capabilities, training
stage adversarial attacks can generally be carried out in three ways:
 Modify Training Dataset. Barreno et al. [ 7] ﬁrstly proposed the term poisoning attacks, a common
adversarial attack method. They changed the original distribution of training data by modifying
or deleting training data or injecting adversarial samples, in order to make the learning algorithm
logically changed. Kearns et al. [ 60] showed that, when the model’s prediction error is smaller
than #, the probability bof maximum tolerance to modify the training dataset should satisfy:
b#
#+1(2)
 Label Manipulation. If an adversary only has the capabilities to modify the training labels with
some or all knowledge of the target model, he needs to ﬁnd the most vulnerable labels. Perturbing
labels randomly, one of the most basic methods to modify labels, refers to select a label from the
random distribution as the label of training data. Biggio et al. [ 8] showed that randomly ﬂipping
40% of training labels is enough to reduce the performance of classiﬁers using SVMs.
 Input Feature Manipulation. In this case, the adversaries are powerful enough to manipulate
labels as well as the input features of training points analyzed by the learning algorithm.
This scenario also assumes that the adversaries have knowledge of the learning algorithm.
Biggio et al. [11] and Mei et al. [13] showed the adversaries injected malicious data generated
carefully to change the distribution of training dataset. Therefore, the decision boundary of the
trained model changes accordingly, which reduces the accuracy of the model in the test stage,
even, leads the model to output the speciﬁed misclassiﬁcation labels. Kloft et al. [ 9] showed that
inserting malicious points into a training dataset can gradually change the decision boundary of
an anomaly detection classiﬁer. Similar works have been done in articles [10,12].
3.2. Testing Stage Adversarial Attacks
In the testing stage, the adversaries cannot modify the training dataset but can access the target
model to obtain effective information, so as to attack the model and lead the model to misclassify in
prediction. According to the amount of target model knowledge an adversary obtains, the adversarial
attacks in the test stage can be divided into white-box attacks and black-box attacks.
3.2.1. White-Box Attacks
In white-box attacks, the adversaries know the structure and parameters of the target model,
although it is difﬁcult to achieve in practice, once the adversaries access to the target model, it will
pose a great threat to a machine learning model, as an adversary can construct adversarial samples
by analyzing the structure of the target model to carry out attacks. Papernot et al. [ 14] introduced
an adversarial crafting framework, which can be divided into two steps, i.e., direction sensitivity
estimation and perturbation selection—as is shown in Figure 4.