Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9, 909 15 of 29
Figure 7. The overall framework of the Uniﬁed and Efﬁcient Adversary (UEA). They formulate the
high-level class loss [ 45] with the proposed low-level multi-scale feature loss into GAN framework
to jointly train a better generator. For the coming images or video frames, the generator is to output
the corresponding adversarial images or frames to simultaneously fool the different kinds of object
detectors (Image Credit: Wei et al. [28]).
4.2. Natural Language Processing
We discuss the applications of adversarial attacks in testing classiﬁcation and machine translation
of natural language processing ﬁeld.
4.2.1. Text Classiﬁcation
Liang et al. [ 30] proposed an algorithm to generate adversarial text samples using character-level
CNN [ 70]. They demonstrated the problem of directly using algorithms like FGSM to produce
adversarial text samples, i.e., the output result is scrambled text which is easily recognized as a noise
sample by human eyes. The Shared TextFool code base [ 71] can be used to produce adversarial text
samples, with the main idea of modifying existing words in the text samples through their synonyms
and spelling errors.
Hossein et al. [ 72] showed that the strategic insertion of punctuation marks with selected words
can deceive classiﬁers and that toxic annotations can be bypassed when the model is used as a ﬁle
manager.
Samanta et al. [ 73] proposed a new method for generating adversarial text samples by modifying
the original samples. This method modiﬁes the original text sample by deleting or replacing important
or prominent words in the text and introducing new words into the text samples. Experimental results
conducted by the authors on IMDB movie review datasets for emotion analysis and Twitter datasets
for gender detection show the effectiveness of the proposed method.
4.2.2. Machine Translation
Belinkov et al. [ 29] showed that character-level neural machine translation (NMT) was too
sensitive to random character manipulation, and they used a black-box heuristic to generate
character-level adversarial examples. The author showed that the most advanced models are
vulnerable to advertisement adversarial attacks even after the deployment of spell checkers. However,
Zhao et al. [ 74] searched and generated black-box adversarial samples in the coding sentence space by
perturbation of potential representation.
Ebrahimi et al. [ 75] proposed to use gradient estimation method to sort the adversarial operations
and use a greedy search or beam search method to search the adversarial samples. The authors also
proposed two speciﬁc types of attacks to remove or change a word in a translation.