55 Leveraging Artificial Intelligence in Marketing for Social Good—An Ethical Perspective  
1 3
relationship management. However, augmented consump-
tion or overconsumption undermines the transition to sus-
tainability, resulting in calls for sufficiency-oriented life-
styles and to “consume better but less” (Wiedmann et al., 
2020, p. 4). Likewise, approaches focusing sufficient con-
sumption (e.g., Gossen et al., 2019 ), mindful consumption 
(e.g., Bahl et al., 2016; Sheth et al., 2011), sustainable 
consumption (e.g., White et al., 2019 ) and marketing (e.g., 
Hunt, 2011; Sheth & Parvatiyar, 2021), and consumption 
ethics (e.g., Carrington et al., 2021) have become the focus 
of scholarly attention. In this context, White et al. (2019, 
p. 23) argued that “marketing and sustainability are inex-
tricably intertwined”, although goals and assumptions of 
both seem incompatible at first sight. AI can be a powerful 
force in reconciling marketing activities with sustainabil-
ity and social good objectives.
Data-driven segmentation and targeting approaches can 
bring together tailored persuasive appeals and offerings 
and consumers in relation to their predisposition to ethical 
and sustainable consumption and products. The sophisti-
cation and computational power of AI applications allow 
to account for the complex interrelationships between 
supply-side (e.g., marketing mix) and demand-side factors 
(e.g., consumer demographics and personality, decision-
making processes) in respect to ethical and sustainable 
consumption. For instance, price, product, and sustain-
ability attributes are differentially valued in dependence 
of consumers’ self-other orientations (Ross & Milne, 
2020). Moreover, the purchases of sustainable products 
using green-identity labels can decrease when combined 
with price discounts (Schwartz et al., 2020). Brands’ ethi-
cal attributes and strengths (i.e., cause-related marketing 
and corporate social responsibility) further exert stronger 
influences in the choice phase than in the consideration 
(set formation) phase of the consumer decision journey 
(Schamp et al., 2019). In general, a multitude of social, 
structural, and individual factors can strengthen or atten-
uate consumers’ sustainable consumption intentions and 
behavior (White et al., 2019). Particularly, psychologi-
cal factors can become barriers to behavioral change and 
“dragons of inaction” (Gifford, 2011, p. 290).
This anecdotal evidence already alludes to one oppor -
tunity to harness AI for societal and environmental well-
being, that is, psychological targeting. Psychological 
targeting facilitates to identify consumers predisposed 
to sustainable and ethical products and attributes based 
on their psychological traits and to tailor respective per -
suasive appeals (e.g., Matz, Appel, et al., 2019; Matz, 
Menges, et al., 2019 ; Matz, Segalin, et al., 2019), for 
example, by emphasizing specific product attributes or 
using green-identity and eco labels. Given the possibil-
ity to predict income from digital footprints (e.g., Matz, 
Menges et al., Matz, Appel, et al., 2019), marketers can also personalize prices by deriving consumers’ willing -
ness to pay for environmentally friendly products. That 
also helps to streamline promotion and price policies, par -
ticularly, against the backdrop of the moderating effect of 
price on the relation between green-identity labeling and 
consumer behavioral responses (Schwartz et al., 2020 ). 
These opportunities relate to the stance of promoting 
social and environmental good (i.e., beneficence), but 
marketers are also obliged to avoid misuse of psycho-
logical targeting and corresponding harm to individuals 
(i.e., non-maleficence). Therefore, marketers should avoid 
targeting vulnerable groups or consumers who are prone 
to addictive and compulsive behaviors (Matz & Netzer, 
2017) or compulsive buying, which can be inferred from 
psychological factors (e.g., O’Guinn & Faber, 1989). As 
aforementioned, discriminatory treatment of individuals 
and groups by AI systems such as targeting vulnerable 
groups can arise from biased or skewed underlying data 
and/or misspecified models (Barredo Arrieta et al., 2020; 
Morley et al., 2020). To prevent such unfavorable (i.e., 
non-maleficence) and unfair (i.e., justice) outcomes that 
undermine the beneficent purpose of AI applications, mar -
keters should gain a certain understanding of data inputs 
(e.g., features taken into account or data distributions) and 
AI functionalities (i.e., intelligibility). Marketers’ aware-
ness of potentially biased data or AI models is a crucial 
step of this non-trivial task, since they are likely to be 
held accountable (Huang & Rust, 2021b). Data scientists 
and AI developers should contribute by leveraging their 
methodological expertise to identify and correct biases 
and errors.
As personalized, psychologically tailored messages and 
appeals can serve as nudges, so can recommendations gener -
ated by AI systems for consumer decision-making processes 
(e.g., Burr et al., 2018; Milano et al., 2020). Basically, AI-
based recommender systems should follow the same ration-
ale as psychological targeting. Based on comprehensive 
purchase (history) and user data, recommendations could 
nudge consumers to sustainable products or at least offer 
sustainable alternatives to conventional products. That is, 
recommender systems should balance exploration of (new 
sustainable) items and exploitation of existing preferences 
for their recommendations (Milano et al., 2021). In this 
way, diversity of product offerings could be increased in 
terms of environmental friendliness, material footprint, and 
sustainability (e.g., fast- vs. slow fashion items). Further -
more, customer data can be leveraged to mitigate compulsive 
buying tendencies (i.e., daily or highly frequent purchases, 
repeated purchases of comparable or identical products etc.) 
by providing respective notices to customers. For this pur -
pose, interventions in the form of nudges to reason could be 
applied. These informational nudges do not affect behav -
ior directly, but attempt to change minds by increasing