52 E. Hermann 
1 3
or prioritization in respect to income or profitability can be 
problematic, aggravate existing inequalities, or harm cus-
tomers (e.g., Libai et al., 2020; Matz & Netzer, 2017; Matz 
et al., 2017). Personalization of offerings or the whole mar -
keting mix could “segment a population so that only some 
segments are worthy of receiving some opportunities or 
information, re-enforcing existing social (dis)advantages” 
(Mittelstadt et al., 2016 , p. 9). As mentioned above, biased 
AI predictions, unfair and unequal treatments and targeting 
can result from biases in and skewness of underlying data 
(Barredo Arrieta et al., 2020; Morley et al., 2020). Biased 
and skewed data can be due to over- and underrepresenta-
tion of certain demographic groups or sensitive features, 
inclusion of misleading proxy features (Barredo Arrieta 
et al., 2020), or sparse (small) data for certain individuals/
groups, phenomena, and features (Rich & Gureckis, 2019). 
Imbalances in customer data and corresponding data- and 
AI-driven discrimination and biases can also stem from 
customers’ increasing unwillingness to share data online 
and/or with companies due to privacy concerns (Du et al., 
2021 ). Finally, endogeneity in data and feedback loops can 
bias AI predictions. That is, (biased) data lead to (biased) 
predictions that inform decisions, which, in turn, serve as 
data inputs (De Bruyn et al., 2020). In light of these mul-
tiple sources of biases, diligence and monitoring along the 
entire data lifecycle and in respect to AI development (e.g., 
model specification) are advisable if not indispensable. 
Therefore, marketers, data scientists, and AI developers 
could team up with ethicists. The “gold standard … would 
be an ethicist … as a dedicated member of the develop-
ment team” (McLennan et al., 2020, p. 488).
Taken together, customers can be differently targeted and 
affected by AI. Consequent discrimination and amplification 
of existing inequalities can, in turn, diminish social good 
and well-being, which establishes the connection to the 
beneficence  and non-maleficence  principles. For the sake 
of completeness, we also have to note that recent research 
showed that algorithms can be employed as discrimination 
detectors and to de-bias human judgments (Kleinberg et al., 
2018, 2020).
On the company level, recommender systems can dis-
criminate firms by decreasing the variety of products con-
sumers explore and purchase (i.e., sales diversity) and by 
increasing market share concentration for popular products 
(Lee & Hosaganar, 2019). Besides, the rise of multisided 
e-commerce platforms deploying AI-generated recommen-
dations can endanger traditional retailers that do not par -
ticipate in these platforms by undermining their business 
models and impeding market access (Milano et al., 2021).
As in the case with the non-maleficence principle, black 
box AI can obfuscate biased inputs and outputs of AI sys-
tems and thus hamper judgments of justice.Explicability
Explicability might be the most prevalent and controversial 
principle of AI ethics due to the black box nature of AI sys-
tems, their opacity, and lack of accountability (Ananny & 
Crawford, 2018; Milano et al., 2020; Mittelstadt et al., 2016; 
Rai, 2020; Rudin, 2019; Thiebes et al., 2020). Correspond-
ingly, calls for interpretable and explainable AI (XAI) are 
growing louder, particularly, when high-stake decisions and 
sensitive, personal data are involved (Barredo Arrieta et al., 
2020; De Bruyn et al., 2020; Gunning et al., 2019; Proserpio 
et al., 2020; Rai, 2020; Rudin, 2019). In the literature, differ -
ent nomenclature and concepts including intelligibility, com-
prehensibility, interpretability, explainability, and transpar -
ency are used interchangeably and inconsistently (Barredo 
Arrieta et al., 2020), and are partly misconceived (Rudin, 
2019). For instance, Rai (2020) defined XAI as “the class of 
systems that provide visibility into how an AI system makes 
decisions and predictions and executes its actions” (pp. 
137–138). On the other hand, Rudin (2019) conceptualized 
XAI as a second (post hoc) model to explain the initial first 
black box model and thus advocated inherently interpretable 
models (i.e., interpretable AI) instead of XAI. De Bruyn 
et al. (2020) summed up explainable and interpretable AI as 
methods to explain AI systems’ intentions, data inputs and 
sources, and the relation between inputs and outputs, so that 
results such as predictions, classifications, and recommen-
dations could be understood by human experts. In a com -
prehensive review, Barredo Arrieta et al. (2020) identified 
intelligibility (i.e., human understanding of a model’s func-
tion without any need for explaining its internal structure or 
underlying data processing algorithm) as the focal concept 
related to XAI. This finding further corroborates the focus 
on intelligibility by Floridi et al. (2018). Given that intel-
ligibility can have an enabling function for the other ethical 
principles, a lack thereof (i.e., black box AI) could impede 
individuals’ judgments about beneficence, non-maleficence, 
justice, and autonomy. That could particularly shape indi-
viduals’ self-determination and decisions about whether to 
delegate decisions to AI systems at all (i.e., meta-autonomy).
For customers, simple explanations of how AI works (i.e., 
intelligibility as the epistemological dimension) might be 
more effective and satisfying than complicated ones causing 
information overload, irritation, and frustration (Rai, 2020). 
In light of direct or indirect consequences of AI-based per -
sonalization, targeting, and recommendation applications, 
customers have a legitimate interest in knowing who to 
hold accountable (i.e., accountability as the ethical dimen-
sion) for adverse, biased, or discriminatory outcomes of 
AI predictions. This will acquire increasing importance if 
AI systems and algorithms are considered and conceptual-
ized as value-laden rather than neutral (e.g., Martin, 2019). 
That, again, relates to potential biases of AI developers, the