51 Leveraging Artificial Intelligence in Marketing for Social Good—An Ethical Perspective  
1 3
incorrectly deemed true (i.e., customers adopt recommen-
dations). Following this classification, type II problems 
(false negative) could negatively impact companies (e.g., 
cross-selling), since customers favor their own intuitions and 
do not adopt superior algorithm-based recommendations. 
This (behavioral) phenomenon has been conceptualized 
as algorithm aversion (e.g., Dietvorst et al., 2015, 2018). 
Reliance on algorithms can not only impact companies 
indirectly through their customers, but also directly when 
used for setting real-time prices for products and services 
(Hansen et al., 2021). Tacit collusions among algorithms—
that is, neither communication between algorithms nor ex 
ante design or instruction to collude—(e.g., Calvano et al., 
2020) or misspecified models overestimating price sensitivi-
ties (e.g., Hansen et al., 2021) can make algorithms charge 
supra-competitive prices. That eventually harms companies 
in their entirety, customers, and at worst society at large due 
to increasing overall price levels.
Again, black box AI in respect to the extent of data cap-
ture, data quality, model specification, among other things, 
complicate the judgments of non-maleficence and the deci-
sion of whether to rely on algorithmic predictions for both 
customers and companies. While the perspective on algo-
rithm-driven decision-making focuses on decision outcomes, 
the autonomy  principles rather entails the process view of 
decision-making.
Autonomy
Consumer autonomy is central to consumer choice and 
defined as “consumers’ ability to make and enact decisions 
on their own, free from external influences imposed by other 
agents” (Wertenbroch et al., 2020, p. 430). In the AI ethics 
context, autonomy relates to a meta-autonomy or decide-to-
delegate model. That is, “humans should always retain the 
power to decide which decisions to take” on their own or 
when to cede decision-making control (Floridi et al., 2018, 
p. 698). In general, freedom of choice and self-determina-
tion can be seen as intrinsic good or right contributing to 
individuals’ well-being (Burr et al., 2020). Human agency 
(i.e., autonomous decisions) and human oversight are focal 
requirements of autonomy in relation to AI applications 
(Morley et al., 2020).
On the company level, governance mechanism should 
be implemented to keep humans in the loop (e.g., Thiebes 
et al., 2020). That is particularly important when AI sys-
tems are operating in ethically or morally salient contexts 
(e.g., Jotterand & Bosco, 2020), which could be the case for 
developing and deploying feeling AI (Huang & Rust, 2021b) 
or humanized AI (Kaplan & Haenlein, 2019) in marketing. 
To date, the development of artificial moral agents is still 
in its infancy (e.g., Cervantes et al., 2020). However, it is 
not unlikely that future (emotionally intelligent) AI systems and applications in service and customer relationship man-
agement will encounter moral decisions, ethical issues, or 
emotionally charged customer interactions. To effectively 
apply AI in the latter situation necessitates AI systems’ 
understanding of emotions beyond simple recognition. Until 
AI systems turn from “psychopaths” recognizing and fak -
ing emotions into emotionally intelligent and moral agents, 
human agency will be crucial (De Bruyn et al., 2020, p. 96).
On the customer level, AI applications can shape deci-
sion-making processes. Personalization, psychological 
targeting, and recommender systems can serve as adap-
tive, structural, or informational nudges (Burr et al., 2018; 
Floridi, 2016; Milano et al., 2020; Sunstein, 2016). These 
kind of interventions influence customers’ choice sets—the 
choice architecture (Thaler & Sunstein, 2008) -, or infor -
mation related to choices and eventually preferences and 
decisions. Customers’ autonomy is impacted in such a way 
that decisions are delegated to AI systems at the information 
collection stage of the decision-making process, particularly, 
(pre-)filtering of information and options customers are 
exposed to. That can be beneficial due to resource efficiency 
(e.g., time, cognitive resources) and tailored content (Burr 
et al., 2018), but also detrimental to customers in case of 
aversion of or overreliance on AI systems’ recommendations 
(e.g., Banker & Khetani, 2019; Dietvorst et al., 2015, 2018) 
or due to manipulated or deceptive content (e.g., Burr et al., 
2018; Milano et al., 2020). An informed and conscious deci-
sion of humans (as customers or company representatives) of 
whether to delegate their decision-making power to AI sys-
tems and applications would again demand a certain degree 
of understanding of AI functionalities (i.e., intelligibility).
Justice
Human judgments can be biased and discriminating, 
and so the predictions of AI applications and algorithms 
constructed by humans can be biased and result in dis-
crimination as well (Kleinberg et al., 2018, 2020). AI can 
fall victim to the same errors and biases that humans do, 
reproduce, and amplify them (Rich & Gureckis, 2019). 
Among other things, AI-powered personalization strate-
gies in marketing (e.g., Huang & Rust, 2021b), psycho-
logical targeting (e.g., Matz & Netzer, 2017; Matz et al., 
2017; Matz, Appel, et al., 2019; Matz, Menges, et al., 
2019; Matz, Segalin, et al., 2019), and customer prioriti-
zation in customer relationship management (e.g., Libai 
et al., 2020) could discriminate certain customer groups 
against others on the basis of demographic, psychological, 
and economic factors. Particularly, gender, age, and racial 
disparities, prejudices, and stereotypes can be reinforced 
by AI systems and applications (Bol et al., 2020; Datta 
et al., 2015 ; Lambrecht & Tucker, 2019 ; Obermeyer et al., 
2019). Moreover, targeting of vulnerable customer groups