56 E. Hermann 
1 3
individuals’ responsiveness to genuine evidence (Levy, 
2017). Such evidence can take the form of underlining the 
individual or environmental consequences of excessive or 
compulsive buying. Stressing the impact of certain purchase 
decisions can spur consumer to rethink consumption pat-
terns and account for social norms, social desirability, and 
system justification beliefs (e.g., Gifford, 2011; White et al., 
2019). Comparably, recent prior research revealed that mak -
ing consumers reflect their personal possessions and recall 
their recent use of it can diminish the desire to shop impul-
sively (Dholakia et al., 2018).
To minimize interferences with customers’ autonomy, 
informational nudges (i.e., changes of the nature of infor -
mation consumer are exposed to) should be preferred over 
structural nudges (i.e., changes of the choice architecture 
consumers are exposed to), although the former are less 
successful than the latter (Floridi, 2016). In general, the AI 
applications illustrated above suggest that the development, 
design, and deployment of AI should focus on the creation 
of new opportunities and capabilities to foster societal and 
environmental well-being. That is the core of the positive 
computing perspective (Burr et al., 2020). Whether eth-
ics have to be embedded in the design process in a rather 
structural (i.e., ethics by design) or informational way (i.e., 
pro-ethical design) (Floridi, 2016) does not only depend on 
autonomy and accountability (i.e., explicability) if AI is mis-
used or fails. It is also dependent on the subjective nature 
of well-being (and utilities) and eventually on customers’ 
acceptance and behavioral responses. An embedded ethics 
approach guiding AI developers of how to translate ethical 
principles into practice through ethics training and exchange 
with ethicists (Brey, 2000; McLennan et al., 2020; Moor, 
2005) should be contemplated to take on this challenge.
Directions for Future Research
The AI-for-social-good perspective in marketing opens up 
various research opportunities (see Fig.  3). First, future 
research should examine which degree of intelligibility and 
transparency of respective AI applications and systems best 
matches the tension between customers’ cognitive abilities 
(e.g., Rai, 2020), information needs, and potential tradeoffs 
between disclosure of non-human nature and efficiency/
performance of AI (e.g., Ishowo-Oloko et al., 2019; Luo 
et al., 2019; Rai, 2020). Second, safeguards along the entire 
data lifecycle as well as for AI development and deploy -
ment to minimize the risk of biased data and AI predictions 
and treatments should be investigated. Embedded ethics 
approaches (e.g., McLennan et al., 2020) that bring together 
marketers, data scientists, AI developers, and ethicists seem 
promising. However, appropriate and efficient organizational 
governance structures and decision-making processes might be in demand. Partly or fully automated internal auditing 
mechanisms (e.g., Floridi et al., 2018; Rahwan, 2018) could 
serve as monitoring measures and both internal and external 
compliance evidence. Third, the autonomy principle raises 
research question on at least two counts. Assuming that the 
whether is a matter of time, companies and AI developers 
have to craft policies of how  to endow AI with (a certain) 
degree of ethical judgment competence for ethically salient 
contexts, decisions, and customer interactions (e.g., health 
care robots, emotionally intelligent AI in general). Besides, 
customers have to retain their decisional power and auton-
omy. In other words, AI-created choice architectures should 
be free from coercive, deceptive, and paternalistic structures. 
That might be even more important when it comes to con-
sumption and purchases that are personally relevant or for 
which humans are deemed more competent than artificial 
agents (e.g., Granulo et al., 2021; Longoni & Cian, 2021). 
If AI-shaped customer decisions and behavior in the aggre-
gate take effect on societal and environmental level, humans 
and even society have to be kept in the loop (e.g., Rahwan, 
2018). Finally, on a national or supranational level, binding 
ethical and socio-legal governance and policies (e.g., Cath, 
2018; Stahl et al., 2021; Theodorou & Dignum, 2020) have 
to be conceived to commit companies to develop and deploy 
AI in an ethical way in order to promote social good while 
preventing any harm. Otherwise, one could run the risk of 
“creating a supermarket of principles and values, where pri-
vate and public actors may shop for the kind of ethics that 
is best retrofitted to justify their behaviours” (Floridi, 2019, 
p. 262).
Conclusion
This paper synthesizes the mounting research areas of AI 
ethics and AI in marketing. By scrutinizing the validity of 
ethical principles related to AI in the marketing context and 
across stakeholders, we show that ethical principles interde-
pend and collide, partly, in dependence of the stakeholders 
concerned. Particularly, beneficence and non-maleficence  
cannot be taken for granted, since the advances of AI appli-
cations in marketing are likely to increase individual and 
aggregate consumption. Besides, explicability (i.e., intel-
ligibility and accountability) turns out to enable the other 
ethical principles. Ethical challenges and interdependen-
cies between ethical principles might increase with levels 
of intelligence and humanization of AI. Thus, a principled, 
deontological approach to AI ethics, which implies to refrain 
from AI applications contravening ethical principles, does 
not account for the complexity of the future AI development 
and pervasiveness from an ethical perspective. Therefore, 
we suggest to complement ethical considerations of AI in