53 Leveraging Artificial Intelligence in Marketing for Social Good—An Ethical Perspective  
1 3
corresponding need of a certain degree of human oversight, 
and hence to the autonomy and justice principles. Eventu-
ally, companies should be responsible for the AI systems 
they develop and deploy and obliged to deal with the respec-
tive ethical implications or challenges.
Concepts remedying the black box issue of AI are not 
undisputed. For instance, transparency can interfere with 
privacy concerns and proprietary boundaries aiming at facil-
itating exclusivity or competitive advantages. Furthermore, 
transparency can be subject to cognitive (i.e., information 
overload, lack of understanding), technical (i.e., methodo-
logical and technical complexity), and temporal restrictions 
(i.e., rapid advancements and development cycles) (Ananny 
& Crawford, 2018). Moreover, explainable AI methods could 
provide explanations that are too complicated for humans to 
comprehend, not faithful to what original models compute, 
or insufficiently detailed to understand what models are 
doing (Rudin, 2019). Besides, transparency and disclosure 
of AI identities can compromise performance and efficiency 
of AI systems such as bots (e.g., customer purchases). That 
raises the question whether intelligent machines should hide 
their non-human nature for the sake of efficiency and how 
to weigh costs and benefits of transparency (Ishowo-Oloko 
et al., 2019; Luo et al., 2019). Finally, explaining customer 
why they received certain recommendations—for example, 
since the item presented is the most popular one among 
users—might amplify desirability of a choice alternative and reinforces its popularity. Thereby, variety of alternatives and 
plurality of choices can decline, which hampers competi-
tion and negatively affects companies (Milano et al., 2020). 
Our preceding assessment reveals several interdependencies 
between ethical principles, which we illustrate subsequently.
Interdependencies Between Ethical Principles 
and Levels of Intelligence
As our conceptual analyses have shown, ethical principles 
related to AI in marketing interact and collide and thus can-
not be judged in isolation, but in relation to each other. First, 
explicability can be considered as enabling principle for 
beneficence, non-maleficence, justice, and autonomy, while 
the latter two determine beneficence and non-maleficence  
as well (see Fig.  3). Second, AI systems and applications 
can be beneficent and maleficent at the same time, depend-
ing on which stakeholders are concerned. Even an inverse 
relation between beneficence and non-maleficence does not 
seem unlikely. For example, increased AI-based personali-
zation strategies satisfy customer needs (customer benefit) 
which increases company sales (company benefit), but also 
raises the aggregate consumption level, which harms the 
environment and society at large (societal and environmental 
harm). Furthermore, the benefits of personalization for both 
customers and companies (whose potential might increase 
with the amount of customer data) can be compromised by 
Fig. 3  Interdependencies of ethical principles and levels of intelligence and future research questions