48 E. Hermann 
1 3
Three other points might need clarification. First, privacy 
is often referenced as a principle on its own. However, the 
privacy theme in AI and technology ethics regularly empha-
sizes that infringements of privacy, breaches of data protec-
tion, and misuse of data have to be avoided in the adoption 
of AI and technology. That is, harms and risks in respect to 
personal data and privacy have to be limited and prevented, 
which is pivotal to the non-maleficence principle. There-
fore, we follow Floridi et al. (2018) and subsume privacy 
under the non-maleficence principle. Second, synthesizing 
transparency, intelligibility, responsibility, and account-
ability as explicability  accounts for the interrelationships 
of these themes (e.g., Coeckelbergh, 2020; de Laat, 2018; 
Lepri et al., 2018; Martin, 2019; Morley et al., 2020). Judg-
ments about the responsibility or accountability for AI-based 
decision outcomes necessitate a certain understanding of the 
underlying processes leading to these decisions (i.e., trans-
parency or intelligibility). That is, transparency can be a key 
enabler of and prerequisite for accountability (Lepri et al., 
2018). Third, we concur with prior research that consid-
ers trust as an outcome of ethical principles (e.g., Thiebes 
et al., 2020) and AI characteristics (e.g., Glikson and Wol-
ley, 2020). Besides, others scholars even claim that “one 
needs to either change ‘trustworthy AI’ to ‘reliable AI’ or 
remove it altogether” (Ryan, 2020, p. 2765). Therefore, 
we refrained from presenting trust  as an ethical principle 
in itself. In our following conceptual analysis, we examine the ethical principles and controversies related to AI in the 
marketing context.
The Ethics of AI in Marketing
We investigate the ethical implications and concerns of using 
AI in marketing from the standpoint of multiple stakehold-
ers encompassing the company, customer, and societal and 
environmental perspectives (see Fig.  2). Thereby, we scruti-
nize the validity and applicability of ethical principles across 
different stakeholder levels, and whether tensions between 
ethical principles emerge due to different stakeholder inter -
ests. This multiperspectivity further accounts for the AI-for-
social-good perspective stressed by prior AI ethics literature 
(e.g., Cowls et al., 2021; Floridi et al., 2018, 2020; Taddeo 
& Floridi, 2018). Correspondingly, we rely our analyses on 
the applied AI ethics typology suggested by this stream of 
research, that is, beneficence, non-maleficence, autonomy, 
justice, and explicability (Floridi et al., 2018; Morley et al., 
2020 ). Since we aim to provide an epistemological picture 
on AI ethics in marketing, the list of AI applications we 
cover does not claim to be exhaustive. We also refrain from 
providing technical or methodological details on respective 
AI applications and systems (for brief overviews of differ -
ent AI methods such as machine or deep learning, see for 
Fig. 2  Multi-stakeholder model 
of AI ethics in marketing