44 E. Hermann 
1 3
2020; Floridi et al., 2018, 2020; Hagendorff, 2020; Jobin 
et al., 2019; McLennan et al., 2020; Mittelstadt, 2019; Mit-
telstadt et al., 2016; Morley et al., 2020; Stahl et al., 2021). 
To date, the AI ethics landscape is rather fragmented and 
entails recurring principles (Jobin et al., 2019) that are of 
high-order, deontological nature (Hagendorff, 2020). Trans-
lating these principles into business practice by simultane-
ously accounting for different stakeholder interests might 
demand tradeoffs, for instance, between need satisfaction 
due to personalization of offerings and privacy (e.g., Rust, 
2020) or between customer prioritization and non-discrim-
ination (e.g., Libai et al., 2020). That becomes particularly 
important when the objectives of AI should be to promote 
social good (beneficence) and prevent any harm (non-
maleficence)—the call for and stance of AI for (social) good 
(Cowls et al., 2021; Floridi et al., 2018, 2020; Taddeo & 
Floridi, 2018).
To the best of our knowledge, our conceptual analysis 
is the first study to systematically apply the ethical prin-
ciples related to AI to AI applications in marketing from 
a multi-stakeholder perspective. Our systematic conceptual 
assessment of the ethics of AI in marketing is informed by 
a comprehensive review of the literatures on both AI ethics 
and AI in marketing and provides two important contribu-
tions to both streams of research. First, we reveal interde-
pendencies and tensions of ethical principles in dependence 
of the stakeholders concerned. Particularly, the principles 
beneficence and non-maleficence are interrelated and judged 
differently across the customer, company, and societal and 
environmental levels. We further identify explicability (i.e., 
intelligibility and accountability) as enabling ethical princi -
ple. Moreover, ethical challenges and interdependencies are 
likely to intensify with increasing levels of intelligence and 
humanization of AI. To still harness and not miss opportu-
nities provided by AI in marketing, the prevailing princi-
pled, deontological approach to AI ethics should be sup-
plemented by a utilitarian perspective weighing benefits and 
costs across stakeholders. Second, we provide insights of 
how AI in marketing can be leveraged to promote social and 
environmental well-being and thus to reconcile the ethical 
principles of beneficence and non-maleficence. Our sugges-
tions add knowledge to the scholarly work on AI for social 
good and sustainable consumption and marketing. The AI-
for-social-good perspective stresses that AI-based solutions 
have the potential to tackle societal problems (e.g., Floridi 
et al., 2020)—among them, sustainable development as a 
focal challenge and objective of our time (Vinuesa et al., 
2020 ). Given that marketing and consumption are part of our 
everyday lives, AI in marketing following the AI-for-social-
good perspective can strive for and substantially contribute 
to sustainable development. In light of the environmental 
imperative (Kotler, 2011) and in the tradition of social mar -
keting which its 50-year history (Kotler & Zaltman, 1971), companies increasingly pursue the transition to sustainable 
business and marketing practices (White et al., 2019). In the 
same vein, customers are concerned with the environmen-
tal and social impact of their purchases (Vadakkepatt et al., 
2021) and demand sustainable products and services (Kotler, 
2011). Therefore, AI in marketing that fosters environmental 
and social good can create win–win–win situations for com-
panies, customers, and society at large (Vlačić et al., 2021).
The remainder of our study is structured as follows. After 
delineating our methodological approach and briefly illus-
trating the role and uses of AI in marketing, we present an 
overview of the rapidly expanding research on AI ethics. 
Afterward, we consolidate both perspectives by applying 
selected ethical principles to AI applications in marketing. 
We conclude our investigation with suggestions of how to 
harness AI in marketing for promoting societal and environ-
mental well-being and with directions for future research.
Methodology
To identify relevant scholarly work on AI ethics and AI in 
marketing, we conducted a systematic search of published 
papers. First, we performed a keyword search of elec-
tronic databases (Web of Science, EBSCO, and Google 
Scholar) using the following keywords: “ethic*,” “guide-
lines,” “principles,” “framework,” (for AI ethics) and “mar -
keting,” “service,” “retailing,” “consumer,” “customer,” 
(for AI in marketing) each in combination with “artificial 
intelligence,” “AI,” “artificial,” “machine learning,” “algo-
rithm*,” “robot*.” Second, we searched review and seminal 
articles in both fields (e.g., Davenport et al., 2020; Huang & 
Rust, 2021b; Kaplan & Haenlein, 2019; and Floridi et al., 
2018; Jobin et al., 2019; Mittelstadt, 2019, respectively), 
examining their references and applying an ancestry tree 
search by screening all papers citing these articles. Third, 
we performed manual search of journal outlets that turned 
out to be major sources for journal articles dealing with AI 
in marketing and business (e.g., Journal of the Academy of 
Marketing Science, Journal of Business Research, Journal of 
Interactive Marketing, Journal of Service Research, Journal 
of Marketing; and particularly special issues on AI or robots 
in these journals) and AI ethics (i.e., Ethics and Informa-
tion Technology, Minds and Machines, Nature Machine 
Intelligence, Science and Engineering Ethics). This search 
procedure and screening of abstracts and titles lead to the 
selection of 300 potentially eligible articles (148 for AI in 
marketing and 152 for AI ethics), which were then reviewed 
in more detail. The systematic examination of the literatures 
on AI ethics and AI in marketing allows us to identity the 
focal areas of application of AI in marketing and to map 
the most relevant and appropriate ethical principles related 
to AI. Both are then synthesized to inform our conceptual