46 E. Hermann 
1 3
In a comprehensive review, Jobin and et al. ( 2019 ) con -
tent-analyzed the principles and guidelines for ethical AI 
issued by private, public, and research institutions. Remark -
ably, no single ethical principle is referenced in all 84 docu-
ments being analyzed. However, there is convergence around 
the principles transparency, justice and fairness, non-malef-
icence, responsibility, and privacy, which are featured in 
more than half of all documents. Among these principles, 
transparency constitutes the most prevalent one with refer -
ences in 73 out of 84 documents, followed by justice and 
fairness (referenced in 68 documents), non-maleficence  
(referenced in 60 documents), responsibility (referenced in 
60 documents),  and privacy (referenced in 47 documents).
Besides, Jobin et al. (2019) draw the following notewor -
thy conclusions. First, the prevalence of transparency could 
be partly explained by the reasoning that “is not an ethical 
principle in itself but a proethical condition for enabling or 
impairing other ethical practices or principles”, as suggested 
earlier by Turilli and Floridi ( 2009 , p. 105). Second, the fre -
quent occurrences of justice and fairness, non-maleficence, 
and privacy reflect a cautious view on potential risks of AI. 
Third, the more frequent references to non-maleficence as 
compared to beneficence imply the moral obligation to avoid 
any negative impact of AI and could imply a certain nega-
tivity bias. Fourth, the principle trust constitutes a critical 
ethical issue in AI governance. However, it is not without 
opposition and ambiguity, particularly, whether trust is a 
principle in itself or rather an outcome of other foundational 
principles (e.g., Floridi, 2019; Glikson & Wolley, 2020; 
Ryan, 2020; Thiebes et al., 2020). Although the principle 
solidarity refers to redistributing the benefits of AI to not 
jeopardize social cohesion (Jobin et al., 2019), it is featured 
in only 6 out of 84 documents. In light of significant dif -
ferences in distributions of wealth and incomes within and 
between countries and economies (e.g., Piketty, 2014, 2020), 
prosperity and burdens created by AI should be shared to 
avoid further inequalities. That is, solidarity should be con-
sidered as a focal ethical principle of AI (Luengo-Oroz, 
2019).
The principles solidarity and beneficence  already hint 
at the need to harness the advantageous effects of AI on a 
societal level. Hence, the discourse on AI ethics also focuses 
ethical frameworks for AI for (social) good (Floridi et al., 
2018, 2020; Taddeo & Floridi, 2018). In this context, Floridi 
et al. (2018) condensed five ethical principles: beneficence, 
non-maleficence, autonomy, justice, and explicability.
While beneficence entails to the promotion of well-being 
as well as social, environmental, and common good (Jobin 
et al., 2019; Thiebes et al., 2020), the tenet of non-malef-
icence cautions against the potentially negative aspects of 
AI. It emphasizes the importance of safety, security, and 
privacy as well as the prevention of risks and any harm—
both accidentally/unintentionally (overuse) and deliberately (misuse) caused (Floridi et al., 2018; Jobin et al., 2019). 
Although beneficence and non-maleficence seem logically 
equivalent, they are not opposite ends of a continuum but 
coexist (Floridi et al., 2018). The principle autonomy refers 
to self-determination and the power to and whether to decide 
in an uncoerced way. That is, it concerns balancing human 
and AI agency and decision-making power (Floridi et al., 
2018; Morley et al., 2020). Justice advocates fairness and the 
avoidance of unwanted/unfair biases and discrimination, also 
amending past inequalities (Jobin et al., 2019; Morley et al., 
2020; Thiebes et al., 2020). Justice further relates to shar -
ing benefits and prosperity and fostering solidarity (Floridi 
et al., 2018). Thus, the conceptual scope encompasses the 
solidarity principle, as opposed to its infrequent occurrence 
in official documents as indicated above (Jobin et al., 2019). 
Finally, explicability (also often conceptualized as trans-
parency) means intelligibility, that is, how AI works (the 
epistemological sense), and accountability, that is, who is 
responsible for the way AI works (the ethical sense). It com-
plements and enables the preceding four principles. In other 
words, understanding of the functionalities (i.e., intelligibil -
ity) and responsibilities (i.e., accountability) informs evalua-
tions of and judgments of the other principles by facilitating 
understanding if and how AI benefits or harms individuals 
and society (beneficence and non-maleficence), anticipat-
ing AI systems’ predictions to decide about human and AI 
agency (autonomy) and ensuring accountability in case of 
failures or biases (justice) (Floridi et al., 2018; Thiebes et al., 
2020). This is in line with the reasoning that transparency  
constitutes a pro-ethical condition for enabling other ethical 
principles (Turilli & Floridi, 2009 ). Explicability  (particu -
larly, intelligibility) gains in importance against the back -
drop of the black box nature and opacity of AI systems and 
applications (e.g., Ananny & Crawford, 2018; Milano et al., 
2020; Mittelstadt et al., 2016; Rudin, 2019; Thiebes et al., 
2020), since black box AI could thwart evaluations of benefi -
cence, non-maleficence, justice, and autonomy.
The first four principles are akin to bioethical principles 
(Beauchamp & Childress, 2013). This comes as no sur -
prise, because bioethics closely resemble digital ethics in 
the way new forms of agents, patients, and environments 
are addressed. Thus, bioethical principles meet the ethical 
challenges caused by AI quite well (Floridi et al., 2018). 
An ethical approach to AI contributes to solve the tension 
between leveraging the benefits and preventing or at least 
mitigating potential harms of AI—a “dual advantage” for 
society (Floridi et al., 2018, p. 694).
A unifying characteristic of the discourse on AI ethics 
is the focus on high-level ethical principles and little refer -
ence to philosophical ethical theories (Stahl et al., 2021). 
However, the suitability and practicability of a predomi-
nantly principled approach is called into question (e.g., 
Hagendorff, 2020; Mittelstadt, 2019; Theodorou & Dignum,