54 E. Hermann 
1 3
privacy and data protection issues (e.g., Rust, 2020). Under 
certain conditions, AI applications can be both beneficent 
and non-maleficent. Assuming that sensitive health data are 
gathered after obtaining informed consent, treated confi-
dentially, and used conscientiously, medical AI (e.g., Lon-
goni et al., 2019; Yun et al., 2021) has the potential to pro-
mote individual well-being and preventing harm, which, in 
turn, benefits health care systems and thus society at large. 
Besides, customer service robots can ameliorate customer 
experience and reverse information technology service work 
offshoring (i.e., through botsourcing) while addressing the 
technology inequality phenomenon by reducing access bar -
riers for seniors (Xiao & Kumar, 2021).
Ethical issues related to AI are not static and uniform but 
differ across areas of application, technological sophistica-
tion, and pervasiveness. Following Moor (2005), we assume 
that ethical challenges and tensions (can) increase with the 
level of intelligence and degree of humanization of AI (see 
Fig. 3). As conceptualizations of the AI development stages 
are multi-faceted and deviate (Davenport et al., 2020; Huang 
& Rust, 2021b; Kaplan & Haenlein, 2019), they are also 
subject to temporal change (Stahl et al., 2021), and transi-
tions between stages are rather fluid. Therefore, we simplisti-
cally refer to increasing levels of intelligence capturing the 
transition from cognitive (analytical, mechanical) to emo -
tional (feeling) and social intelligence of AI systems and 
applications and an increasing degree of humanization. We 
suggest that beneficence of AI increases with the level of 
intelligence and humanization of AI (e.g., targeted customer 
need identification and satisfaction), but so do the issues 
related to explicability (e.g., black box AI, accountability 
in case of failures). Ethical challenges in respect to justice  
and autonomy can increase, but do not necessarily have to. 
For instance, AI could serve as discrimination detectors 
(Kleinberg et al., 2018, 2020). However, the need for human 
agency and oversight is assumed to increase, particularly, 
when (rather opaque) AI is operating in ethically salient 
contexts. Whether non-maleficence will be achieved in the 
future depends on the extent of customer data gathering and 
treatment of sensitive data, among other things. Increasing 
levels of emotional/social intelligence and humanization of 
AI are related to anthropomorphism (Epley et al., 2007; Kim 
et al., 2019; Waytz, Cacioppo, et al., 2010; Waytz, Gray, 
et al., 2010) as well as mind perception of and attribution 
of experience/warmth and agency/competence to AI (e.g., 
Choi et al., 2020; Fiske et al., 2007; Gray et al., 2007; Waytz, 
Cacioppo, et al., 2010; Waytz, Gray, et al., 2010). Intense 
use of and interaction with human-like AI could lead to psy -
chological ownership and emotional attachment (e.g., More-
wedge, 2021; Morewedge et al., 2021; Shu & Peck, 2011). 
Both psychological phenomena might have detrimental psy -
chological effects if AI deployment gets out of control and/
or overreliance occurs. In a similar vein, extensive use could end up in (perceived) dehumanization of users (e.g., Castelo 
et al., 2019; Haslam, 2006; Haslam & Loughnan, 2014).
From a purely deontological perspective, AI appli-
cations could be entirely called into question when 
non-maleficence cannot be taken for granted. In conse-
quence, promising opportunities to serve customers and 
beneficence on the customer and company levels would 
be missed. Thus, a principled, deontological AI ethics 
approach with normative imperatives and maxims could 
to be inappropriate to account for colliding principles. 
A “deontologically inspired tick-box exercise” (Hagen-
dorff, 2020, p. 112) might be ill-suited to scrutinize such 
far reaching ethical concerns. Instead, a utilitarian per -
spective weighing benefits and costs across all stakehold-
ers—for instance, utilitarian calculations based on ethical 
foresight (e.g., Floridi & Strait, 2020)—could comple-
ment high-level ethical principles. While the deontologi-
cal perspective proves valuable in providing guidelines 
oriented on and aligned to human values, the utilitarian 
approach could better account for multiple values, objec-
tives, and utilities at the individual, group, and societal 
levels. AI applications and systems could incorporate 
multi-objective maximum-expected-utility concepts that 
are aligned to human values and ethical principles (e.g., 
Vamplew et al., 2018). The technological design and 
implementation of such concepts is anything but trivial 
and challenging on two counts. First, utilities to be opti-
mized are difficult to grasp and determine or differ across 
stakeholders (Butkus, 2020). Second, the nascent stage 
of artificial moral agency still demands human agency. 
Eventually, humans are in charge of determining to which 
ethical principles and human values AI applications and 
systems (and their utility functions) should be aligned. 
Besides, decisions about AI design approaches to equip 
AI applications and systems with ethical judgments com-
petences have to be taken by humans. Initially, humans 
have to determine whether AI systems base their ethical 
decision-making on pre-defined ethical theories (top-
down), on more flexible self-learning mechanisms based 
on certain values (bottom-up), or on a combination of 
both (hybrid) (Bonnemains et al., 2018; Cervantes et al. 
2020). In the following section, we provide thoughts and 
ideas of how to align AI applications in marketing with 
ethical principles to promote social and environmental 
good.
AI in Marketing for Social and Environmental 
Good
As delineated above, AI in marketing can additionally 
fuel consumption due to personalized marketing mix 
measures, psychological targeting, and effective customer