49 Leveraging Artificial Intelligence in Marketing for Social Good—An Ethical Perspective  
1 3
instance Campbell et al., 2020; De Bruyn et al., 2020; Hagen 
et al., 2020; Ma & Sun, 2020).
Beneficence
A focal advantage of leveraging AI in marketing is the 
opportunity to personalize and customize products and ser -
vices and the entire marketing mix to maximize engagement, 
relevance and persuasion, as well as customer satisfaction 
(Huang & Rust, 2021a, 2021b; Kumar et al., 2019; Puntoni 
et al., 2021). For example, predicting individuals’ psycho-
logical traits from their digital footprints and smartphone 
data (e.g., Gladstone et al., 2019; Stachl et al., 2020; Youyou 
et al., 2015) offers substantial opportunities for psychologi-
cal targeting by crafting psychologically tailored advertising 
and persuasive appeals (Hagen et al., 2020; Matz & Netzer, 
2017; Matz et al., 2017; Matz, Appel, et al., 2019; Matz, 
Menges, et al., 2019; Matz, Segalin, et al., 2019). Recent 
research showed that even individuals’ income can be pre -
dicted from their Facebook Likes and status updates with 
an accuracy of up to r  = 0.43 (Matz, Menges et al., Matz, 
Appel, et al., 2019). Digital customer data in the form of 
user-generated content can be further employed to identify 
customer needs by means of AI (Timoshenko & Hauser, 
2019). Furthermore, AI-based recommender systems can 
benefit both companies and customers. Recommender sys-
tems refer to (algorithmic) functions that use information 
about customer preferences (e.g., products) as inputs to pre-
dict how customers would rate certain items under evalua-
tion (e.g., new products available) and how they would rank 
a set of items individually or as a bundle (Milano et al., 
2020 ). In the case of collaborative filtering as one dominant 
form of recommender systems, recommendations are based 
on customers’ past behavior, choices, and preferences, and 
on preferences of other customers that are structurally simi-
lar to them (Cappella, 2017). Recommender systems help 
e-commerce companies and online retailers to turn brows-
ers into buyers, foster cross-selling, and personalize offer -
ings and browsing experience. On the other hand, customers 
profit from them through information (pre-)filtering as well 
as higher quality and efficiency of purchase decisions (e.g., 
Banker & Khetani, 2019; Lee & Hosaganar, 2019; Lu et al., 
2015; Shankar, 2018).
In sum, both companies and customers can gain from per -
sonalized recommendations, products, services, persuasive 
appeals, and marketing mix in general. These supply- and 
demand-side benefits result from better addressing and serv -
ing customers’ cognitive and affective needs and preferences 
on the one hand and resource efficiency (i.e., time and costs) 
on the other hand. Thus, beneficence on the company and 
customer levels can be assumed. Besides, the use of AI in 
marketing is linked to a clear benefit and not developed and 
employed for the sake of it. In other words, it has a clear purpose, which implies justification as one requirement for 
beneficence (Morley et al., 2020). Of course, one has to point 
out that the notion of goodness, which is at the core of the 
beneficence  principle, is far from being objective both on 
the individual and superordinate levels (D’ Acquisto, 2020). 
On the individual (customer) level, predictions of future 
choices based on patterns of customers’ past choices and 
preferences of similar other customers through recommender 
systems can be considered as a surrogate for social influence 
(Cappella, 2017). Customers’ evaluations of recommender 
systems’ beneficence might differ (or worsen) if they would 
be aware of these indirect social influences by understanding 
recommender systems’ underlying processes and function-
alities (i.e., intelligibility). However, black box AI can be an 
obstacle to such an understanding.
Potential irreconcilability of what is deemed good for 
individuals (e.g., customers) and what goodness means on 
a superordinate level (e.g., society, environment) tends also 
to arise in the case of AI applications in marketing. That is, 
the unconditional beneficence of these AI applications can 
be questioned on the societal and environmental level.
In essence and simplified terms, AI applications in mar -
keting pursue sales objectives and increase consumption. 
While consumption satisfies needs and is thus beneficial 
on the individual (customer) level (e.g., Csikszentmiha-
lyi, 2000), it simultaneously deplete resources, negatively 
impacts the environment, and drives climate change (e.g., 
Swim et al., 2011; Wiedmann et al., 2020). Consumption 
externalities, which are not self-correcting and inhibit 
growth, emerge (Dasgupta & Ehrlich, 2013). For instance, 
clothing consumption, partly due to the rise of fast fashion 
models, results in a tremendous environmental impact of the 
fashion industry and its supply chain operations. It ranges 
from 79 trillion liters of water consumption per year and 4–5 
billion tons  CO2 emissions annually (8–10% of global  CO2 
emissions) to over 92 million tons of textiles waste per year 
(Niinimäki et al., 2020 ). These issues could be aggravated by 
recommender systems and inherent information exploitation 
versus exploration strategies. For example, Amazon, whose 
e-commerce platform relies on AI-driven recommender sys-
tems and collaborative filtering (Milano et al., 2020 ), had 
a relative carbon footprint of 122.8 g of  CO2 equivalents 
(including packaging, transportation, purchased electric-
ity, fossil fuel emissions from direct operations etc.) per 
dollar of gross merchandise sales in 2019 (Amazon, 2020) 
and net sales of $386.1 billion in 2020 (Amazon, 2021). 
Even if one assumes that both the relative carbon footprint 
(due to decarbonization efforts and investments) and sales 
(due to customers’ return to offline channels and shopping 
when the Covid-19 pandemic will impose less restrictions) 
might decrease in 2021, the carbon footprint of the world’s 
largest e-commerce company amounts to dozens of tons of 
 CO2 emissions annually. Generally, e-commerce and online