50 E. Hermann 
1 3
retailing can have more detrimental environmental impacts 
and larger ecological footprints due to packaging, product 
returns, last mile transportation, and shopping basket sizes 
as compared to traditional retailing and shopping (e.g., 
Escursell et al., 2021; Pålsson et al., 2015; Shahmoham-
madi et al., 2020; van Loon et al., 2015). Moreover, AI-
enabled personalized mobile marketing (e.g., Tong et al., 
2020) and in-store communication and technology (e.g., 
Dekimpe et al., 2020; Grewal, Noble, et al., 2020; van Esch 
et al., 2021) can prompt unplanned offline purchases and 
impulsive buying, which, in turn, amplify consumption and 
its environmental drawbacks. Finally, information and com-
munication technologies, applications, and systems related 
to AI themselves can have rebound effects caused by energy 
consumption and emissions of AI development, production, 
and deployment (e.g., Belkhir & Elmeligi, 2018; Dhar, 2020; 
Lange et al., 2020).
On the individual level, exploitation of customer infor -
mation that AI systems already possess constitutes the 
optimal (standard) strategy to maximize individual utility 
by satisfying preferences. Conversely, AI systems’ explora-
tory recommendations of new alternatives (e.g., sustainable 
items) might be the strategy with greatest expected utilities 
on a societal level (Milano et al., 2021). The environmental 
impact and material footprint of consumption (Wiedmann 
et al., 2015) that could be additionally fueled by AI applica-
tions in marketing contravene the beneficence principle of 
promoting well-being of humans and the planet. The nega-
tive externalities further establish the connection to the non-
maleficence principle that advocate the prevention of any 
risk and harm due to overuse or misuse of AI (Floridi et al., 
2018).
Non‑Maleficence
In terms of the potentially adverse consequences of intensi-
fied, AI-driven consumption on the societal and environ-
mental level, the judgments of beneficence and non-malef-
icence are akin. That is, AI applications do not necessarily 
advance the environmental good (beneficence principle not 
met) but can impair it (non-maleficence principle not met). 
In contrast, these ethical judgments do not coincide on the 
company and customer levels. That means, AI applications 
could be beneficent and maleficent at the same time (Milano 
et al., 2021).
Of particular importance in respect to non-maleficence of 
AI are personal privacy, accuracy, as well as data protection 
and quality (e.g., Floridi et al., 2018; Morley et al., 2020). 
Privacy risks can arise (1) when data are collected with-
out informed consent of customers, (2) after storage when 
they are leaked or de-anonymized (i.e., data breaches), or 
(3) when AI systems draw inferences from both the indi-
vidual customer data (directly) or interaction data with other customers (indirectly). The latter particularly pertains to col -
laborative filtering (Milano et al., 2020). Given the exten-
sive use of customer information and data-driven, analytical 
approaches in marketing, marketing scholars and practition-
ers have been and are highly concerned with privacy issues 
(e.g., Bleier et al., 2020; Martin & Murphy, 2017; Martin & 
Palmatier, 2020; Martin et al., 2020; Okazaki et al., 2020; 
Stewart, 2017; Thomaz et al., 2020). The massive amounts 
of data feeding AI systems and applications potentiates pri-
vacy and data protection issues, as discussed for algorithms 
(e.g., Mittelstadt et al., 2016), recommender systems (e.g., 
Milano et al., 2020), and psychological targeting (e.g., Matz, 
Appel, et al., 2019; Matz, Menges, et al., 2019; Matz, Sega-
lin, et al., 2019), among other things. Supranational regula-
tions such as the European Union’s General Data Protec-
tion Regulation (GDPR) attempt to counter these issues 
by requiring data protection impact assessment (Art. 35 
GDPR) and data protection by design and by default (Art. 25 
GDPR). The latter stipulates that companies have to proac-
tively integrate privacy protection into the design, develop-
ment, and application of data-driven technologies and to set 
privacy defaults to reasonable levels of protection (Andrew 
& Baker, 2021; Matz, Appel, et al., 2019; Matz, Menges, 
et al., 2019; Matz, Segalin, et al., 2019).
Since ethical issues related to privacy and data protection 
are extensively discussed elsewhere (e.g., Floridi & Taddeo, 
2016; Mittelstadt & Floridi, 2016), we want to briefly hint 
at the tension and potential tradeoff between the scale and 
scope of data capture and privacy concerns. That means that 
predictive validity and accuracy of AI predictions increase 
with the amount of input data, which, however, could inter -
fere with data protection and privacy. In the marketing con-
text, personalization of marketing measures and customer 
privacy trade off (Rust, 2020). Accuracy of results predicted 
by AI applications also rests upon the quality and integrity 
of data. AI systems’ inferences are as reliable as the underly -
ing data. Biases, inaccuracies, errors, and mistakes inherent 
in the data could lead to biased results and false conclusions 
(Barredo Arrieta et al., 2020; Morley et al., 2020), which, in 
turn, could be maleficent for both customers and companies 
(e.g., Banker & Khetani, 2019). Besides, algorithmic deci-
sions based on (potentially spurious) correlations found in 
large data sets could be problematic. That can be the case 
when causality is not established prior to actions, and actions 
are then directed to individuals, although the knowledge gen-
erated concerns populations (Mittelstadt et al., 2016). Infe-
rior predictions and recommendations can be particularly 
adverse for customers if they depend too much on algorithm-
generated recommendations that could then diminish their 
well-being (Banker & Khetani, 2019). Banker and Khetani 
(2019 ) refer to this phenomenon as algorithm overreliance 
and frame it as a type I problem (false positive). That means 
that false propositions (i.e., inferior recommendations) are