Sensors 2022 ,22, 4062 3 of 20
this subject is part of a vast VERTPOM research project which wants to develop positive
energy territories through the design of smart electricity grids. The VERTPOM project will
maintain an optimized balance between the energy available from production regarding
uses by applying a set of algorithms for forecasting and simulating the levels of power
production and consumption on the various distribution systems. It treats an actual
database. The use of artiﬁcial intelligence networks, such as machine and deep learning, is
preferred. The key challenge of this project is to simulate all possible scenarios allowing
a positive production/consumption balance. Hence, the main objectives of VERTPOM
are anticipating the power requirement according to all the parameters available in the
area such as climatology, scheduled events and consumption in order to make the best
decision regarding consumption priorities among renewable and conventional energies.
Moreover, it should optimize the peak consumption and interact intelligently with the
consumer-player. So the aim of all previous objectives is to develop a set of digital tools for
power management, to design adequate smartgrids for energy suppliers and consumers
and to guarantee the safety of electrical infrastructures.
Smart meter
ConsumersIndustrial consumers
Public buildingsPhotovoltaic sources
Wind sources
Electric vehiclesTraditional sources
of electricityEnergy storage
Public lighting
Smart meters,
control,
data concentratorcontrol
Figure 1. The smart grid context: VERTPOM project.
3. Materials and Methods
To predict the energy consumption, we suggest a framework based on three neural net-
work models as discussed earlier. So to explain the methodology of our work, the ﬂowchart
shown in Figure 2 gives different steps used to construct the proposed predictive models.
Before discussing the forecast, we should understand how important analysing and
preprocessing data are for time series. They can make or break the forecast. Thus, the main
challenge to forecasting is preprocessing data into the appropriate form.
3.1. Data Analysis
The processed data used in this work represent the average power consumption of an
area in Péronne city. There are several zones; a measurement unit in each zone allows us to
record the energy consumption data. These data are logged by measurement tools from the
VERPOM team with a sampling rate of 30 min.
The measured values depend on several factors:
• Nature of consumers: inhabitants, factories, hospitals, ofﬁces, etc.;
• Climatology: humidity, temperatures, sunshine, wind speed, etc.;
• Days of the week, weekends, holidays, etc.