Sensors 2022 ,22, 4062 2 of 20
autoregressive integrated moving average (ARIMA) [ 9]. The machine learning models
consist of three methodologies: Decision Tree (DT), Support Vector Machine (SVM) and
Artiﬁcial Neural Network (ANN) [ 10]. Finally, as a breakthrough in artiﬁcial intelligence,
deep learning approaches automatically perform in treating highly nonlinear features via
a cascade of multiple layers. Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) and Back-Propagation
Neural Network (BPNN) are two popular algorithms used for predicting time series [ 11].
So, a forecasting system based BPNN is widely used by researchers, due to its strong
adaptability and computing ability. However, it also has some shortcomings, such as the
ﬁnal training result which can easily fall into a local extremum [ 12]. RNN can remember the
historical information and choose whether to retain this information for the current output.
Nevertheless, it fails to maintain the long temporal dependence because of the serious
vanishing/exploding gradient problem [ 13]. To alleviate these problems, an improved
version of RNN, named long short-term memory network (LSTM) is proposed. The LSTM
network is based on the introduction of a cell memory in the RNN which presents a promis-
ing solution to inhibit the gradient disappearance [ 14]. Their contribution is particularly
manifest in the case of long sequences of events. It has also demonstrated a signiﬁcant
improvement in terms of forecasting stability. The LSTM can give more stable forecasting
power in time-series prediction compared to traditional RNN [ 15]. In this paper, an LSTM
network based algorithm for forecasting power consumption is presented. Indeed, LSTM
models are currently widely used as the most robust approach to dealing with sequential
data. Their contribution is especially obvious in the case of rather long sequences of events.
Time series analysis and forecasting are currently at the beginning of their potential. It
should be noted that, in the case of the construction of global models for the time series,
the LSTM models allow the creation of high-performance models, both for point forecasts
and long-term forecasts [ 16]. The fundamental question is then how powerful and accurate
these newly introduced techniques are when compared with traditional approaches. In this
work, a dynamic model based on time series analysis and the LSTM is proposed to forecast
the power consumption, detect the power peaks, and then shed the load. The aim of this
prediction is to maintain the power balance between producers and consumers to ensure
the security of the electrical grid. In order to make full use of the various data in the power
consumption and achieve accurate predictions, different deep learning-based algorithms
were proposed, which comprise the LSTM, the GRU, and the Drop-GRU models. In the
proposed model, the GRU module is exploited to model dynamic changes in historical
power consumption data for better learning potential characteristics in time sequence
data, and the dropout process is used as a weight regularization technique for reducing
overﬁtting. In an analogous way, the LSTM method is chosen due to its ability to preserve
and train the characteristics of the provided data for a long period of time. Therefore, this
technique has achieved a signiﬁcant success in recent years. Indeed, the paper provides
in-depth guidance on data processing and training of LSTM models for a set of power
consumption time series data. Moreover, a comparison study between GRU, Drop-GRU,
and LSTM models concerning their performance in reducing error rates is performed.
The article is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the context of this work. Section 3
explains the methodology adopted in this study. Firstly, it provides the general framework
of the proposed predictive models. Then it gives, step by step, the implementation process
of the proposed algorithms; it covers the dataset processing description, the parameters
and the evaluation indices. Section 4 shows the experimental detail, the results analysis
and the performance evaluation of the LSTM networks in comparison to the GRU and the
Drop-GRU models. Finally, Section 5 concludes this work.
2. Context of This Work
The working subject presented in this manuscript falls within the framework of the
development of a monitoring platform related to energy management on the consumer
side. It also aims to improve the energy efﬁciency of public infrastructure and optimize
the electrical networks. Figure 1 illustrates the general context of this project. Indeed,