Citation: Mahjoub, S.; Chriﬁ-Alaoui,
L.; Marhic, B.; Delahoche, L.
Predicting Energy Consumption
Using LSTM, Multi-Layer GRU and
Drop-GRU Neural Networks. Sensors
2022 ,22, 4062. https://doi.org/
10.3390/s22114062
Academic Editor: Hossam A. Gabbar
Received: 1 May 2022
Accepted: 25 May 2022
Published: 27 May 2022
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁl-
iations.
Copyright: © 2022 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
sensors
Article
Predicting Energy Consumption Using LSTM, Multi-Layer
GRU and Drop-GRU Neural Networks
Sameh Mahjoub1,2,*
, Larbi Chriﬁ-Alaoui1
, Bruno Marhic1and Laurent Delahoche1
1Laboratory of Innovative Technology (LTI, UR 3899), University of Picardie Jules Verne, 80000 Amiens, France;
larbi.alaoui@u-picardie.fr (L.C.-A.); bruno.marhic@u-picardie.fr (B.M.); laurent.delahoche@u-picardie.fr (L.D.)
2Control & Energy Management Laboratory (CEMLab), University of Sfax, Sfax 3029, Tunisia
*Correspondence: sameh.mahjoub@u-picardie.fr
Abstract: With the steep rise in the development of smart grids and the current advancement in
developing measuring infrastructure, short term power consumption forecasting has recently gained
increasing attention. In fact, the prediction of future power loads turns out to be a key issue to
avoid energy wastage and to build effective power management strategies. Furthermore, energy
consumption information can be considered historical time series data that are required to extract all
meaningful knowledge and then forecast the future consumption. In this work, we aim to model
and to compare three different machine learning algorithms in making a time series power forecast.
The proposed models are the Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM), the Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU)
and the Drop-GRU. We are going to use the power consumption data as our time series dataset and
make predictions accordingly. The LSTM neural network has been favored in this work to predict the
future load consumption and prevent consumption peaks. To provide a comprehensive evaluation of
this method, we have performed several experiments using real data power consumption in some
French cities. Experimental results on various time horizons show that the LSTM model produces
a better result than the GRU and the Drop-GRU forecasting methods. There are fewer prediction
errors and its precision is ﬁner. Therefore, these predictions based on the LSTM method will allow us
to make decisions in advance and trigger load shedding in cases where consumption exceeds the
authorized threshold. This will have a signiﬁcant impact on planning the power quality and the
maintenance of power equipment.
Keywords: neural networks; time series; LSTM; GRU; Drop-GRU; energy consumption prediction;
load shedding
1. Introduction
Power consumption forecasting has been considered as a key challenging topic for
smart grid planning, electricity market development, and the sustainability of power. Re-
cent research shows that precise power prediction provides important guidance to the
power suppliers and consumers to improve power management, secure the grid and con-
trol the load [ 1]. So, with the recent development of sophisticated machine learning-based
methods and especially deep learning algorithms, a large number of researchers in diverse
disciplines have focused on these techniques [ 2]. Thus, time series analysis has become
a popular research area. Its development has a great impact on our daily life [ 3]. It can
be used to track how a sensor value, economic variable or weather report changes over
time. It is also applied everywhere to forecast future outcomes based on recorded historical
data in several ﬁelds such as weather prediction [ 4], air pollution prediction [ 5] and stock
market prediction [ 6]. In this context, many prediction methods have been proposed in
the literature. From an academic point of view, these methods can be divided into three
categories: statistical analysis, machine learning and deep learning. The statistical models
include various methods such as Markov chain (MC) [ 7], exponential smoothing [ 8] and
Sensors 2022 ,22, 4062. https://doi.org/10.3390/s22114062 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/sensors