where Yiis the i-th response candidate and riis its
cosine similarity score. Source Xcan be truncated,
and we limit the context lengths to the most recent
256 tokens in our experiments. We randomly sam-
ple several system responses from the corpus as
negative samples. Although it may not be a true
negative sample, it is common to train a ranker and
evaluate its results (Henderson et al., 2019a).
5 Evaluation Datasets
We pick up several datasets, OOS, DSTC2, GSIM,
and MWOZ, for downstream evaluation. The ﬁrst
three corpora are not included in the pre-trained
task-oriented datasets. For MWOZ, to be fair, we
do not include its test set dialogues during the pre-
training stage. Details of each evaluation dataset
are discussed in the following:
•OOS (Larson et al., 2019): The out-of-scope in-
tent dataset is one of the largest annotated intent
datasets, including 15,100/3,100/5,500 samples
for the train, validation, and test sets, respectively.
It covers 151 intent classes over ten domains, in-
cluding 150 in-scope intent and one out-of-scope
intent. The out-of-scope intent means that a user
utterance that does not fall into any of the prede-
ﬁned intents. Each of the intents has 100 training
samples.
•DSTC2 (Henderson et al., 2014): DSTC2 is a
human-machine task-oriented dataset that may
include a certain system response noise. It has
1,612/506/1117 dialogues for train, validation,
and test sets, respectively. We follow Paul et al.
(2019) to map the original dialogue act labels
to universal dialogue acts, which results in 19
different system dialogue acts.
•GSIM (Shah et al., 2018a): GSIM is a human-
rewrote machine-machine task-oriented corpus,
including 1500/469/1039 dialogues for the train,
validation, and test sets, respectively. We com-
bine its two domains, movie and restaurant do-
mains, into one single corpus. It is collected by
Machines Talking To Machines (M2M) (Shah
et al., 2018b) approach, a functionality-driven
process combining a dialogue self-play step and
a crowdsourcing step. We map its dialogue act la-
bels to universal dialogue acts (Paul et al., 2019),
resulting in 13 different system dialogue acts.
•MWOZ (Budzianowski et al., 2018): MWOZ is
the most common benchmark for task-orienteddialogues, especially for dialogue state tracking.
It has 8420/1000/1000 dialogues for train, vali-
dation, and test sets, respectively. Across seven
different domains, in total, it has 30 (domain,
slot) pairs that need to be tracked in the test set.
We use its revised version MWOZ 2.1, which has
the same dialogue transcripts but with cleaner
state label annotation.
6 Results
For each downstream task, we ﬁrst conduct the
experiments using the whole dataset, and then we
simulate the few-shot setting to show the strength
of our TOD-BERT. We run at least three times with
different random seeds for each few-shot exper-
iment to reduce data sampling variance, and we
report its mean and standard deviation for these
limited data scenarios. We investigate two ver-
sions of TOD-BERT; one is TOD-BERT-mlm that
only uses MLM loss during pre-training, and the
other is TOD-BERT-jnt, which is jointly trained
with the MLM and RCL objectives. We compare
TOD-BERT with BERT and other baselines, in-
cluding two other strong pre-training models GPT-
2 (Radford et al., 2019) and DialoGPT (Zhang et al.,
2019). For a GPT-based model, we use mean pool-
ing of its hidden states as its output representation,
which we found it is better than using only the last
token.
6.1 Linear Probe
Before ﬁne-tuning each pre-trained models, we ﬁrst
investigate their feature extraction ability by prob-
ing their output representations. Probing methods
are proposed to determine what information is car-
ried intrinsically by the learned embeddings (Ten-
ney et al., 2019). We probe the output representa-
tion using one single-layer perceptron on top of a
“ﬁxed” pre-trained language model and only ﬁne-
tune that layer for a downstream task with the same
hyper-parameters. Table 3 shows the probing re-
sults of domain classiﬁcation on MWOZ, intent
identiﬁcation on OOS, and dialogue act prediction
on MWOZ. TOD-BERT-jnt achieves the highest
performance in this setting, suggesting its represen-
tation contains the most useful information.
6.2 Intent Recognition
TOD-BERT outperforms BERT and other strong
baselines in one of the largest intent recognition