encoder as its model architecture. Unlike BERT,
TOD-BERT incorporates two special tokens for
user and system to model the corresponding dia-
logue behavior. A contrastive objective function
of response selection task is combined during pre-
training stage to capture response similarity. We
select BERT because it is the most widely used
model in NLP research recently, and our uniﬁed
datasets can be easily applied to pre-train any ex-
isting language models.
We test TOD-BERT on task-oriented dialogue
systems on four core downstream tasks, including
intention recognition, dialogue state tracking, dia-
logue act prediction, and response selection. What
we observe is: TOD-BERT outperforms BERT
and other strong baselines such as GPT-2 (Radford
et al., 2019) and DialoGPT (Zhang et al., 2019) on
all the selected downstream tasks, which further
conﬁrms its effectiveness for improving dialogue
language understanding. We ﬁnd that response
contrastive learning is beneﬁcial, but it is currently
overlooked not well-investigated in dialogue pre-
training research. More importantly, TOD-BERT
has a stronger few-shot ability than BERT on each
task, suggesting that it can reduce the need for
expensive human-annotated labels. TOD-BERT
can be easily leveraged and adapted to a new task-
oriented dialogue dataset. Our source code and data
processing are released to facilitate future research
on pre-training and ﬁne-tuning of task-oriented di-
alogue1.
2 Related Work
General Pre-trained Language Models, which
are trained on massive general text such as
Wikipedia and BookCorpus, can be roughly di-
vided into two categories: uni-directional or bi-
directional attention mechanisms. GPT (Radford
et al., 2018) and GPT-2 (Radford et al., 2019) are
representatives of uni-directional language models
using a Transformer decoder, where the objective
is to maximize left-to-right generation likelihood.
These models are commonly applied in natural lan-
guage generation tasks. On the other hand, BERT
(Devlin et al., 2018), RoBERTa (Liu et al., 2019),
and their variances are pre-trained using a Trans-
former encoder with bi-directional token prediction.
These models are usually evaluated on classiﬁca-
tion tasks such as GLUE benchmark (Wang et al.,
2018) or span-based question answering tasks (Ra-
1github.com/jasonwu0731/ToD-BERTjpurkar et al., 2016).
Some language models can support both uni-
directional and bi-directional attention, such as
UniLM (Dong et al., 2019). Conditional language
model pre-training is also proposed. For exam-
ple, CTRL (Keskar et al., 2019) is a conditional
Transformer model, trained to condition on control
codes that govern style, content, and task-speciﬁc
behavior. Recently, multi-task language model pre-
training with uniﬁed sequence-to-sequence gener-
ation is proposed. Text-to-text Transformer (T5)
(Raffel et al., 2019) uniﬁes multiple text modeling
tasks and achieves the promising results in various
NLP benchmarks.
Dialogue Pre-trained Language Models are
mostly trained on open-domain conversational data
from Reddit or Twitter for dialogue response gener-
ation. Transfertransfo (Wolf et al., 2019) achieves
good performance on ConvAI-2 dialogue competi-
tion using GPT-2. DialoGPT (Zhang et al., 2019) is
an extension of GPT-2 that is pre-trained on Reddit
data for open-domain response generation. Con-
veRT (Henderson et al., 2019a) pre-trained a dual
transformer encoder for response selection task on
large-scale Reddit (input, response) pairs. PLATO
(Bao et al., 2019) uses both Twitter and Reddit data
to pre-trained a dialogue generation model with
discrete latent variables. All of them are designed
to cope with the response generation task for open-
domain chatbots.
Pretraining for task-oriented dialogues, on the
other hand, has few related works. Budzianowski
and Vuli ´c (2019) ﬁrst apply the GPT-2 model to
train on response generation task, which takes sys-
tem belief, database result, and last dialogue turn
as input to predict next system responses. It only
uses one dataset to train its model because few pub-
lic datasets have database information available.
Henderson et al. (2019b) pre-trained a response
selection model for task-oriented dialogues. They
ﬁrst pre-train on Reddit corpora and then ﬁne-tune
on target dialogue domains, but their training and
ﬁne-tuning code is not released. Peng et al. (2020)
focus on the natural language generation (NLG)
task, which assumes dialogue acts and slot-tagging
results are given to generate a natural language re-
sponse. Pre-training on a set of annotated NLG
corpora can improve conditional generation quality
using a GPT-2 model.