TOD-BERT: Pre-trained Natural Language Understanding for
Task-Oriented Dialogue
Chien-Sheng Wu, Steven Hoi, Richard Socher, and Caiming Xiong
Salesforce Research
[cswu, shoi, rsocher, cxiong]@salesforce.com
Abstract
The underlying difference of linguistic pat-
terns between general text and task-oriented
dialogue makes existing pre-trained language
models less useful in practice. In this work,
we unify nine human-human and multi-turn
task-oriented dialogue datasets for language
modeling. To better model dialogue behav-
ior during pre-training, we incorporate user
and system tokens into the masked language
modeling. We propose a contrastive objec-
tive function to simulate the response selec-
tion task. Our pre-trained task-oriented dia-
logue BERT (TOD-BERT) outperforms strong
baselines like BERT on four downstream task-
oriented dialogue applications, including in-
tention recognition, dialogue state tracking, di-
alogue act prediction, and response selection.
We also show that TOD-BERT has a stronger
few-shot ability that can mitigate the data
scarcity problem for task-oriented dialogue.
1 Introduction
Pre-trained models with self-attention encoder ar-
chitectures (Devlin et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2019)
have been commonly used in many NLP appli-
cations. Such models are self-supervised based
on a massive scale of general text corpora, such
as English Wikipedia or books (Zhu et al., 2015).
By further ﬁne-tuning these representations, break-
throughs have been continuously reported for vari-
ous downstream tasks, especially natural language
understanding.
However, previous work (Rashkin et al., 2018;
Wolf et al., 2019) shows that there are some deﬁ-
ciencies in the performance to apply ﬁne-tuning
on conversational corpora directly. One possible
reason could be the intrinsic difference of linguistic
patterns between human conversations and writing
text, resulting in a large gap of data distributions
(Bao et al., 2019). Therefore, pre-training dialoguelanguage models using chit-chat corpora from so-
cial media, such as Twitter or Reddit, has been
recently investigated, especially for dialogue re-
sponse generation (Zhang et al., 2019) and retrieval
(Henderson et al., 2019b). Although these open-
domain dialogues are diverse and easy-to-get, they
are usually short, noisy, and without speciﬁc chat-
ting goals.
On the other hand, a task-oriented dialogue
has explicit goals (e.g. restaurant reservation or
ticket booking) and many conversational interac-
tions. But each dataset is usually small and scat-
tered because obtaining and labeling such data is
time-consuming. Moreover, a task-oriented dia-
logue has explicit user and system behaviors where
a user has his/her goal, and a system has its be-
lief and database information, which makes the
language understanding component and dialogue
policy learning more important than those chit-chat
scenarios.
This paper aims to prove this hypothesis: self-
supervised language model pre-training using task-
oriented corpora can learn better representations
than existing pre-trained models for task-oriented
downstream tasks. We emphasize that what we care
about the most is not whether our pre-trained model
can achieve state-of-the-art results on each down-
stream task since most of the current best models
are built on top of pre-trained models, and ours can
easily replace them. We avoid adding too many
additional components on top of the pre-training
architecture when ﬁne-tuning in our experiments.
We collect and combine nine human-human and
multi-turn task-oriented dialogue corpora to train
a task-oriented dialogue BERT (TOD-BERT). In
total, there are around 100k dialogues with 1.4M
utterances across over 60 different domains. Like
BERT (Devlin et al., 2018), TOD-BERT is formu-
lated as a masked language model and uses a deep
bidirectional Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017)arXiv:2004.06871v3  [cs.CL]  1 Oct 2020