Figure 1: Dialogue pre-training based on Transformer
encoder with user and system special tokens. Two ob-
jective functions are used: masked language modeling
and response contrastive learning.
limited by hardware. We also try different nega-
tive sampling strategies during pre-training such
as local sampling (Saeidi et al., 2017), but do not
observe signiﬁcant change compared to random
sampling.
Overall pre-training loss function is the
weighted-sum of Lmlm andLrcl, and in our exper-
iments, we simply sum them up. We gradually
reduce the learning rate without a warm-up period.
We train TOD-BERT with AdamW (Loshchilov
and Hutter, 2017) optimizer with a dropout ratio
of 0.1 on all layers and attention weights. GELU
activation functions (Hendrycks and Gimpel,
2016) is used. Models are early-stopped using
perplexity scores of a held-out development set,
with mini-batches containing 32 sequences of
maximum length 512 tokens. Experiments are
conducted on two NVIDIA Tesla V100 GPUs.
4 Downstream Tasks
We care the most in this paper whether TOD-BERT,
a pre-trained language model using aggregated task-
oriented corpora, can show any advantage over
BERT. Therefore, we avoid adding too many addi-
tional components on top of its architecture when
ﬁne-tuning on each downstream task. Also, we
use the same architecture with a similar number of
parameters for a fair comparison. All the model
parameters are updated with a gradient clipping to
1.0 using the same hyper-parameters during ﬁne-
tuning. We select four crucial task-oriented down-
stream tasks to evaluate: intent recognition, dia-
logue state tracking, dialogue act prediction, and
response selection. All of them are core compo-
nents in modularized task-oriented systems (Wen
et al., 2016).
Intent recognition task is a multi-class classiﬁ-
cation problem, where we input a sentence Uandmodels predict one single intent class over Ipossi-
ble intents.
Pint=Softmax (W1(F(U)))2RI; (3)
where Fis a pre-trained language model and we
use its [CLS] embeddings as the output represen-
tation. W12RIdBis a trainable linear mapping.
The model is trained with cross-entropy loss be-
tween the predicted distributions Pintand the true
intent labels.
Dialogue state tracking can be treated as a
multi-class classiﬁcation problem using a prede-
ﬁned ontology. Unlike intent, we use dialogue
history X(a sequence of utterances) as input and a
model predicts slot values for each (domain, slot)
pair at each dialogue turn. Each corresponding
value vj
i, thei-th value for the j-th (domain, slot)
pair, is passed into a pre-trained model and ﬁxed
its representation during training.
Sj
i=Sim(Gj(F(X)); F(vj
i))2R1; (4)
where Sim is the cosine similarity function, and
Sj2Rjvjjis the probability distribution of the
j-th (domain, slot) pair over its possible values.
Gjis the slot projection layer of the jslot, and
the number of layers jGjis equal to the number
of (domain, slot) pairs. The model is trained with
cross-entropy loss summed over all the pairs.
Dialogue act prediction is a multi-label classi-
ﬁcation problem because a system response may
contain multiple dialogue acts, e.g., request and
inform at the same time. Model take dialogue his-
tory as input and predict a binary result for each
possible dialogue act:
A=Sigmoid (W2(F(X)))2RN; (5)
where W22RdBNis a trainable linear mapping,
Nis the number of possible dialogue acts, and each
value in Ais between [0;1]after a Sigmoid layer.
The model is trained with binary cross-entropy loss
and the i-th dialogue act is considered as a triggered
dialogue act if Ai>0:5.
Response selection is a ranking problem, aiming
to retrieve the most relative system response from
a candidate pool. We use a dual-encoder strategy
(Henderson et al., 2019b) and compute similarity
scores between source Xand target Y,
ri=Sim(F(X); F(Yi))2R1; (6)