There does not appear to be an obvious pattern when ﬁne-tunin g with all available training data,
although the largest observed difference is between “basel ine” and “reverse”. This does appear con-
sistent with our hypothesis that with sufﬁcient training da ta, T5 is able to learn arbitrary mappings
between document relevance and target words. In the data-po or regime, the results are also con-
sistent with our hypotheses. With both 2k and 20k total sampl es, the baseline mapping achieves
the highest effectiveness. In the 2k condition, the conﬁden ce intervals computed from different
samples mostly overlap (with the exception of subwords), so we do not have the beneﬁt of greater
certainty that comes with statistical signiﬁcance. On the 2 0k condition, our target word manipula-
tions all signiﬁcantly reduce effectiveness. We note that t he 95% conﬁdence intervals are smaller
with more data, which illustrates the greater instability i n effectiveness when training on smaller
datasets (which is expected).
It is clear that the T5 model is taking advantage of latent sem antic or linguistic knowledge in pre-
dicting relevance. In both the 2k and 20k settings, the subwo rds condition performs worse than the
BM25 baseline (and the 20k score is actually lower than the 2k score). In this condition, T5 exhibits
difﬁculty in achieving any predictive power at all. There ar e at least two potential factors at play:
we are removing all semantic associations, as the subwords a re meaningless token fragments, and
furthermore, we are forcing the model to produce tokens in an order (and context) that it has not
encountered during pretraining. We are unable to tease apar t the effects currently, but either expla-
nation is consistent with our intuitions. For all other targ et word manipulations, we are at least able
to beat the BM25 baseline. Finally, our experiments are inco nclusive regarding the importance of
having a polarity scale in the low-data regime. Quite clearl y, reversing “true” and “false” has a large
impact, but T5 is more effective learning targets that are se mantically related but do not present a
polarity contrast (“apple” and ”orange”) than targets that encode an unrelated polarity contrast (“hot”
and “cold”).
5 Conclusion
The main contribution of this paper is to introduce a novel ge neration-based approach to the doc-
ument ranking task using pretrained sequence-to-sequence models. Our models outperform a
classiﬁcation-based approach, especially in the data-poo r regime with limited training data. We
attempt to explain these observations in terms of hypothese s about the knowledge that a model gains
from pretraining vs. ﬁne-tuning on task-speciﬁc data. Thes e hypotheses are operationalized into
target word probing experiments, where we demonstrate that the model is indeed exploiting knowl-
edge from its ability to generate ﬂuent natural language tex t. Exactly how remains an open research
question and the focus of our ongoing work.
6 Acknowledgments
This research was supported in part by the Canada First Resea rch Excellence Fund and the Natural
Sciences and Engineering Research Council (NSERC) of Canad a. In addition, we would like to
thank Google Cloud for credits to support this work.
References
[1] N. Asadi and J. Lin. Effectiveness/efﬁciency tradeoffs for candidate generation in multi-stage
retrieval architectures. In Proceedings of the 36th Annual International ACM SIGIR Conf er-
ence on Research and Development in Information Retrieval ( SIGIR 2013) , pages 997–1000,
2013.
[2] P. Bajaj, D. Campos, N. Craswell, L. Deng, J. Gao, X. Liu, R . Majumder, A. McNamara,
B. Mitra, T. Nguyen, M. Rosenberg, X. Song, A. Stoica, S. Tiwa ry, and T. Wang. MS MARCO:
A human generated MAchine Reading COmprehension dataset. arXiv:1611.09268 , 2016.
[3] J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova. BERT: Pr e-training of deep bidirectional
transformers for language understanding. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computational Ling uistics: Human Language Tech-
nologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers) , pages 4171–4186, June 2019.
7