trained reranking models [12]. We do not train our models on t his dataset, and use all its queries and
relevance judgments as a held-out test set; thus, our evalua tion adopts a zero-shot transfer setting.
3.2 Training and Inference
We ﬁne-tune our T5 models (base, large, and 3B) with a constan t learning rate of 10−3for 100k
iterations with class-balanced batches of size 128. To simp lify our training procedure (and related
hyperparameters) as well as to eliminate the need for conver gence checks, we simply trained for a
ﬁxed number of iterations, selected based on the computatio nal demands of our largest model and
the (self-allotted) time for running experiments. We repor t results using the model state at the ﬁnal
checkpoint. This procedure is consistent with the advice of Kaplan et al. [6] and recommendations
by Dodge et al. [4], since we quantify effectiveness for a par ticular computational budget. We did
not experiment with T5-11B due to its computational cost.
We use a maximum of 512 input tokens and one output token. In th e MS MARCO passage dataset,
none of the inputs have to be truncated when using this length . We use Google’s TPU v3s to train
and run inference. Training T5 base, large, and 3B take appro ximately 12, 48, and 160 hours overall,
respectively, on a single TPU.
We use greedy decoding during inference. Since we only use th e logits of one decoding step, beam
search or top- krandom sampling [5] would give the same results as greedy dec oding.
Because Robust04 contains full-length documents, it is not feasible to directly apply our method
to the entire text at once due to the length restrictions of the model. To ad dress this issue, we ﬁrst
segment each document into passages by applying a sliding wi ndow of 10 sentences with a stride
of 5. We then obtain a relevance probability for each passage by classifying it independently. We
select the highest probability among these passages as the r elevance probability of the document.
3.3 Baselines
We compare our method against the following baselines:
BM25 : For baseline bag-of-words retrieval, we use the BM25 imple mentation in the Anserini open-
source IR toolkit [17],2which is based on Lucene. We adopt all the default settings. A t inference
time, we retrieve the top 1000 documents per query.
BM25+RM3 : To examine the effects of query expansion, we applied the BM 25+RM3 model as
described in Yang et al. [18], where it is shown to be a competi tive baseline for (pre-BERT) neural
ranking models. We use the implementation in Anserini, with all default settings.
BM25+BERT-large : We additionally compare our method against the BERT-large condition from
Nogueira et al. [10], which is a two-stage pipeline with bag- of-words retrieval (BM25) followed by
a BERT reranker. Architecturally, it is the same as our metho d, the only difference being BERT
vs. T5 as the reranking model. Nogueira et al. [10] can be char acterized as the baseline of the best
methods from the ofﬁcial MS MARCO passage leaderboard; all h igher-ranked submissions can be
described as improvements upon this basic approach, and thu s it represents a fair yet competitive
comparison point. Note that we did not apply reranking on top of BM25+RM3 because RM3 is
known to reduce effectiveness when evaluated using these re levance judgments [11].
4 Results and Analysis
4.1 Main Results
Main results on the development set of the MS MARCO passage re trieval task are shown in Table 1,
comparing BERT-large [9] and T5 models of different sizes. R esults in bold are signiﬁcantly better
(p <0.01) than BERT-large, based on the Student’s paired t-test. Note that the training of T5-3B did
not appear to have converged yet, even after exhausting our c omputational budget (see Section 3.2).
In other words, we suspect that T5-3B remains under-trained at the checkpoint we used for evalu-
ation, and it is likely that effectiveness would continue to rise given more computational resources.
2http://anserini.io/
3