Target Token Training Size
Type Positive Negative 2k 20k all
Baseline true false .238±.025 .261±.011 .355
Reverse false true .222±.014 .235±.021 .340
Antonyms hot cold .205±.032 .216±.013 .353
Related Words apple orange .217±.024 .234±.005 .358
Unrelated Words hot orange .202±.021 .212±.001 .351
Subwords _ab _de .163±.027 .151±.046 .348
Table 4: Results on the development set of the MS MARCO passag e dataset comparing different
target word manipulations.
This explanation, we believe, also answers the ﬁrst questio n. With plenty of training data, BERT has
no trouble learning the ﬁnal fully-connected layer (mappin g latent representations to decisions), even
from scratch (i.e., random initialization). However, face d with few training examples, BERT still
must learn the classiﬁcation layer, but without any beneﬁt f rom pretraining—and our experiments
above (see Table 3) show that it is unable to adequately do so. In contrast, in a low-data regime,
T5 can “fall back” on pretrained neural machinery used for ge nerating ﬂuent textual output. In
other words, our experiments suggest that the pretraining o bjective used in T5 can transfer well to
generating relevance labels.
To turn our intuition into a testable hypothesis, we can vary the target words used as the prediction
targets and manipulate their “linguistic relatedness”—to deliberately “disrupt” linguistic knowledge
that may be captured in the models. As Puri and Catanzaro [13] have shown, the choice of target
words impacts effectiveness. Recall that in our baseline, “ true” indicates a relevant document and
“false”, a non-relevant document. We tried the following co ntrastive variants:
•“Reverse”. We swap the target words; that is, “false” indicates a releva nt document and “true”,
a non-relevant document. If the model is indeed exploiting l atent knowledge about linguistic
relations, then forcing the model to make opposite associat ions on the same polarity scale should
lower effectiveness with respect to the baseline.
•“Antonyms”. We map a relevant document to “hot” and a non-relevant docume nt to “cold”. This
preserves the use of adjectives at opposite ends of a polarit y scale, but a scale that is completely
unrelated to relevance. If the model were exploiting latent knowledge, we would expect effective-
ness to be lower than the baseline.
•“Related Words”. We map a relevant document to “apple” and a non-relevant docu ment to
a related word “orange”. These words are semantically relat ed, but do not present a polarity
contrast as before. We would expect effectiveness to be lowe r than the baseline.
•“Unrelated Words”. We map a relevant document to “hot” and a non-relevant docume nt to a
completely unrelated word “orange”. Thus, we force the mode l to build an arbitrary semantic
mapping. We would expect effectiveness to be lower than the b aseline and also lower than using
related words.
•“Subwords”. We map a relevant document to the subword “_ab” and a non-rele vant document to
the subword “_de” (note that we carefully select single toke ns after tokenization by SentencePiece
to avoid the need to combine multiple logits). Here, we have r emoved all “semantics” from the
input-to-output mapping. We would expect effectiveness to be lower than the baseline and the
above conditions.
Using these target word conﬁgurations, we conducted experi ments on T5-base with either 1k (or
10k) positive and 1k (or 10k) negative instances sampled fro m the full MS MARCO passage dataset,
same as in Section 4.2. Once again, for each of the conditions , we repeated the experiment ﬁve times,
drawing different samples every time. For reference, we als o ﬁne-tuned with all available data. We
note that the effectiveness of T5-base is different from the one reported in Table 1 because we used
slightly different hyperparameters which were more comput ationally efﬁcient: here, we trained for
40k steps using a batch of size 256. Experimental results are shown in Table 4, with means and 95%
conﬁdence intervals.
6