arXiv:2003.06713v1  [cs.IR]  14 Mar 2020Document Ranking with a Pretrained
Sequence-to-Sequence Model
Rodrigo Nogueira,∗Zhiying Jiang,∗and Jimmy Lin
David R. Cheriton School of Computer Science
University of Waterloo
Abstract
This work proposes a novel adaptation of a pretrained sequen ce-to-sequence
model to the task of document ranking. Our approach is fundam entally different
from a commonly-adopted classiﬁcation-based formulation of ranking, based on
encoder-only pretrained transformer architectures such a s BERT. We show how a
sequence-to-sequence model can be trained to generate rele vance labels as “target
words”, and how the underlying logits of these target words c an be interpreted as
relevance probabilities for ranking. On the popular MS MARC O passage ranking
task, experimental results show that our approach is at leas t on par with previous
classiﬁcation-based models and can surpass them with large r, more-recent mod-
els. On the test collection from the TREC 2004 Robust Track, w e demonstrate a
zero-shot transfer-based approach that outperforms previ ous state-of-the-art mod-
els requiring in-dataset cross-validation. Furthermore, we ﬁnd that our approach
signiﬁcantly outperforms an encoder-only model in a data-p oor regime (i.e., with
few training examples). We investigate this observation fu rther by varying target
words to probe the model’s use of latent knowledge.
1 Introduction
A simple, straightforward formulation of ranking is to conv ert the task into a classiﬁcation problem,
and then sort the candidate items to be ranked based on the pro bability that each item belongs to
the desired class. Applied to the document ranking problem i n information retrieval—where given
a query, the system’s task is to return a ranked list of docume nts from a large corpus that maximizes
some ranking metric such as average precision or nDCG—the si mplest formulation is to deploy a
classiﬁer that estimates the probability each document bel ongs to the “relevant” class, and then sort
all the candidates by these estimates.
Deep transformer models pretrained with language modeling objectives, exempliﬁed by BERT [3],
have proven highly effective in a variety of classiﬁcation a nd sequence labeling tasks in NLP.
Nogueira and Cho [9] were the ﬁrst to demonstrate its effecti veness in ranking tasks. Since it is
impractical to apply inference to every document in a corpus with respect to a query, these tech-
niques are typically applied to rerank a list of candidates. In a typical end-to-end system, these
candidates are from the results of a keyword search based on a “classic” IR scoring function such
as BM25 [15]. This gives rise to the standard multi-stage pip eline architecture of keyword retrieval
followed by reranking using one or more machine learning mod els [1, 10].
The contribution of this work is to adapt a pretrained sequen ce-to-sequence model (in our case,
T5 [14]) to the task of document reranking. To our knowledge, this is a novel use of this class
of models that has not been previously described in the liter ature. In a data-rich regime, with lots
of training examples, our method can outperform a pure class iﬁcation-based encoder-only approach.
∗Equal contribution.