However, the sequence-to-sequence model appears to be far m ore data-efﬁcient: our approach shines
in a data-poor regime and signiﬁcantly outperforms BERT wit h limited training examples. The main
advantage of our approach, we believe, is that by “connectin g” ﬁne-tuned latent representations of
relevance to related output “target words”, we can exploit t he model’s latent knowledge (e.g., of
semantics, linguistic relations, etc.) that has been honed through pretraining. We describe probing
experiments that attempt to verify our intuitions by delibe rately altering the target words to capture
different aspects of “semantic relatedness”.
2 Method
Our reranking method is based on T5 [14], which is a sequence- to-sequence model that uses a similar
masked language modeling objective as BERT to pretrain its e ncoder–decoder architecture. In this
model, all target tasks are cast as sequence-to-sequence ta sks. For our task, the input sequence is:
Query:qDocument: dRelevant: (1)
whereqanddare the query and document texts, respectively. The model is ﬁne-tuned to produce the
words “true” or “false” depending on whether the document is relevant or not to the query. That is,
“true” and “false” are the “target words” (i.e., ground trut h predictions in the sequence-to-sequence
transformation).
At inference time, to compute probabilities for each query– document pair (in a reranking setting), we
apply a softmax only on the logits of the “true” and “false” to kens. Hence, we rerank the documents
according to the probabilities assigned to the “true” token . We arrived at this particular approach
after some trial and error. Other approaches, for example, r eranking documents according to the
logit of the “true” token or using logits of all tokens to comp ute the softmax, were not effective, i.e.,
the retrieval metrics were close to zero.
Note that T5 tokenizes sequences using the SentencePiece mo del [7], which might split a word
into subwords. We choose target words (“true” and “false”) t hat are represented as single tokens;
thus each class is represented by a single logit. In the case w here target words are split in multiple
subwords, we would need a method to aggregate their logits in to a single score; it is best to avoid
this complexity in the design of the reranking setup.
3 Experimental Setup
3.1 Datasets
We use the following datasets in our experiments:
MS MARCO passage [2] is a passage ranking dataset with 8.8M passages obtained from the top
10 results retrieved from the Bing search engine (from 1M que ries). Note that for terminological
consistency, we refer to each “unit” in the corpus as a docume nt, even though they are in reality
paragraph-length passages. The training set contains appr oximately 500k pairs of query and relevant
documents. Each query has one relevant passage, on average. Non-relevant documents for training
are also provided as part of the training dataset. The develo pment and test sets contain approximately
6,900 queries each, but relevance labels are only publicly a vailable for the development set. We
have not (yet) submitted our runs to the ofﬁcial MS MARCO lead erboard because our primary goal
in this work is to conduct initial comparisons between T5 and BERT-based models. As a matter
of good experimental practice, we limit ofﬁcial submission s as to not “probe” the unseen test set
unnecessarily. After sufﬁcient model reﬁnement, we will pr oceed with ofﬁcial submissions to verify
the quality of our models.
Robust04 [16] represents the test collection from the TREC 2004 Robus t Track. It comprises 250
queries, with relevance judgments on a collection of 528K do cuments (TREC Disks 4 and 5), whose
average length is 2,800 characters or 460 words. We use the to pic “titles” (short keyword phrases,
much like the input to a search engine) as queries to our bag-o f-words retrieval methods (see Sec-
tion 3.3) and the topic “descriptions” (sentence-length st atements of information needs) as input
to our sequence-to-sequence models. These topic descripti ons are more similar to MS MARCO’s
natural language questions, and others have found that usin g them improves the effectiveness of pre-
2