2k samples 20k samples
BM25 + BERT-base .127±.058 .201±.012
BM25 + T5-base .238±.025 .261±.011
Table 3: Comparisons between T5 and BERT trained with differ ent numbers of training instances.
Results report means and 95% conﬁdence intervals over ﬁve tr ials.
adopt a different architecture than CEDR and Birch, but effe ctiveness clearly improves as the size
of the T5 model increases. Therefore, while our T5-based app roach achieves better results, it is
entirely possible that the improvements are due to simply ha ving a bigger model, as opposed to any
intrinsic advantages over a classiﬁcation-based approach . Since we do not have pretrained T5 and
BERT models of comparable sizes, it is difﬁcult to conduct a f air empirical comparison.
Another interesting dimension of size is, of course, the amo unt of training data available. In a
data-poor regime with only a modest amount of training data, it appears that T5 can learn far more
effectively than BERT. To demonstrate this, we ﬁne-tuned BE RT-base and T5-base with either 1k
(or 10k) positive and 1k (or 10k) negative instances sampled from the full MS MARCO passage
dataset. These two “base” models were selected due to their m ore modest computational demands
for ﬁne-tuning. We trained them using a batch size of 32 for th ree epochs. For BERT, we used a
learning rate 10−6and no warm-up step. For T5, we used a learning rate of 10−3. For each condition
(2k or 20k samples in total), we repeated the experiment ﬁve t imes, drawing different samples each
time. The results are reported in Table 3, with means and 95% c onﬁdence intervals.
As expected, effectiveness signiﬁcantly improves as we ﬁne -tune the models with more data. We
see clearly that with the same amount of limited training data, T5 is signiﬁcantly more effective than
BM25. In fact, with only 1k positive and 1k negative training instances, BERT performs worse than
the BM25 baseline. With 20k training instances in total, BER T is able to modestly improve upon
BM25, but remains six points behind T5 ﬁne-tuned on the same a mount of data. Interestingly, T5 is
able to achieve roughly 45% of the possible gain in effective ness over the BM25 baseline with only
4% of the training data.
4.3 Target Word Probing Experiments
Our experimental results immediately raise two questions:
1. Why is our approach more data-efﬁcient than BERT? That is, why does T5 signiﬁcantly outper-
form BERT when ﬁne-tuned with few training examples?
2. How is our approach fundamentally different from classiﬁ cation, given that the softmax in our
case reduces the model down to a binary decision? That is, ask ing the model to decide between
two output tokens seems no different from relevance classiﬁ cation.
We believe these two issues are closely related. Speciﬁcall y addressing the second question: At a
high level, both neural models are learning latent represen tations important to the task at hand (in
this case, relevance classiﬁcation), starting with a pretr ained model, and then mapping these latent
representations into task-speciﬁc decisions. Thus, end-t o-end task performance depends on a com-
bination of the knowledge imparted via pretraining (alread y present at the start) and the knowledge
gained via ﬁne-tuning on task-speciﬁc data. In the classiﬁc ation-based approach using BERT, the
end-to-end model relies on a single fully-connected layer t o map the latent representation (i.e., from
the[CLS] token) into this binary decision. While the approach can exp loit pretrained knowledge
when ﬁne-tuning the latent representations, the ﬁnal mappi ng (i.e., the fully-connected layer) needs
to be, essentially, learned from scratch (since it is random ly initialized).
In contrast, T5 can exploit both pretrained knowledge and kn owledge gleaned from ﬁne-tuning in
learning the proper task-speciﬁc latent representations a s well as the mapping to relevance decisions.
Unlike the fully-connected layer in the classiﬁcation-bas ed approach, T5 can exploit the part of the
network used for producing output. Embedded in that neural m achinery is latent knowledge about
semantics, linguistic relations, and other features that a re necessary to generate ﬂuent text. In other
words, T5 has access to an additional source of knowledge tha t BERT does not.
5