446 G. Katz et al.
Another important aspect of Marabou’s veriﬁcation strategy is deduction—
speciﬁcally, the derivation of tighter lower and upper variable bounds. The moti-vation is that such bounds may transform piecewise-linear constraints into lin-
ear constraints, by restricting them to one of their linear segments. To achieve
this, Marabou repeatedly examines linear and non-linear constraints, and alsoperforms network-level reasoning, with the goal of discovering tighter variable
bounds.
Next, we describe Marabou’s main components (see also Fig. 1).
2.1 Simplex Core ( Tableau and BasisFactorization Classes)
The simplex core is the part of the system responsible for making the variable
assignment satisfy the linear constraints. It does so by implementing a variant
of the simplex algorithm [3]. In each iteration, it changes the assignment of some
variable x, and consequently the assignment of any variable ythat is connected
toxby a linear equation. Selecting xand determining its new assignment is
performed using standard algorithms—speciﬁcally, the revised simplex method
in which the various linear constraints are kept in implicit matrix form, and thesteepest-edge and Harris’ ratio test strategies for variable selection.
Creating an eﬃcient simplex solver is complicated. In Reluplex, we delegated
the linear constraints to an external solver, GLPK. Our motivation for imple-menting a new custom solver in Marabou was twofold: ﬁrst, we observed in
Reluplex that the repeated translation of queries into GLPK and extraction of
results from GLPK was a limiting factor on performance; and second, a blackbox simplex solver did not aﬀord the ﬂexibility we needed in the context of DNN
veriﬁcation. For example, in a standard simplex solver, variable assignments are
typically pressed against their upper or lower bounds, whereas in the context ofa DNN, other assignments might be needed to satisfy the non-linear constraints.
Another example is the deduction capability, which is crucial for eﬃciently ver-
ifying a DNN and whose eﬀectiveness might depend on the internal state of the
simplex solver.
2.2 Piecewise-Linear Constraints ( PiecewiseLinearConstraint
Class)
Throughout its execution, Marabou maintains a set of piecewise-linear con-
straints that represent the DNN’s non-linear functions. In iterations devoted tosatisfying these constraints, Marabou looks for any constraints that are not sat-
isﬁed by the current assignment. If such a constraint is found, Marabou changes
the assignment in a way that makes that constraint satisﬁed. Alternatively, inorder to guarantee eventual termination, if Marabou detects that a certain con-
straint is repeatedly not satisﬁed, it may perform a case-split on that constraint:
a process in which the piecewise-linear constraint ϕis replaced by an equivalent
disjunction of linear constraints c
1∨...∨cn. Marabou considers these disjuncts
one at a time and checks for satisﬁability. If the problem is satisﬁable when ϕis