448 G. Katz et al.
Several recent papers have proposed veriﬁcation schemes that rely on DNN-
level reasoning [ 5,23]. Marabou supports this kind of reasoning as well, by stor-
ing the initial network topology and performing deduction steps that use this
information as part of its iterative search. DNN-level reasoning is seamlessly
integrated into the search procedure by (1) initializing the DNN-level reasonerswith the most up-to-date information discovered during the search, such as vari-
able bounds and the state of piecewise-linear constraints; and (2) feeding any
new information that is discovered back into the search procedure. PresentlyMarabou implements a symbolic bound tightening procedure [ 23]: based on net-
work topology, upper and lower bounds for each hidden neuron are expressed
as a linear combination of the input neurons. Then, if the bounds on the inputneurons are suﬃciently tight (e.g., as a result of past deductions), these expres-
sions for upper and lower bounds may imply that some of the hidden neurons’
piecewise-linear activation functions are now restricted to one of their linear
segments. Implementing additional DNN-level reasoning operations is work in
progress.
2.4 The Engine ( Engine and SmtCore Classes)
The main class of Marabou, in which the main loop resides, is called the Engine .
The engine stores and coordinates the various solution components, includingthe simplex core and the piecewise-linear constraints. The main loop consists,
roughly, of the following steps (the ﬁrst rule that applies is used):
1. If a piecewise-linear constraint had to be ﬁxed more than a certain number
of times, perform a case split on that constraint.
2. If the problem has become unsatisﬁable, e.g. because for some variable a
lower bound has been deduced that is greater than its upper bound, undo a
previous case split (or return UNSAT if no such case split exists).
3. If there is a violated linear constraint, perform a simplex step.
4. If there is a violated piecewise-linear constraint, attempt to ﬁx it.
5. Return SAT(all constraints are satisﬁed).
The engine also triggers deduction steps, both at the neuron level and at the
network level, according to various heuristics.
2.5 The Divide-and-Conquer Mode and Concurrency ( DnC.py )
Marabou supports a divide-and-conquer (D&C) solving mode, in which the
input region speciﬁed in the original query is partitioned into sub-regions. The
desired property is checked on these sub-regions independently. The D&C modenaturally lends itself to parallel execution, by having each sub-query checked
on a separate node. Moreover, the D&C mode can improve Marabou’s overall
performance even when running sequentially: the total time of solving the sub-queries is often less than the time of solving the original query, as the smaller
input regions allow for more eﬀective deduction steps.