The Marabou Framework for Veriﬁcation
and Analysis of Deep Neural Networks
Guy Katz1(B), Derek A. Huang2, Duligur Ibeling2,
Kyle Julian2, Christopher Lazarus2, Rachel Lim2,
Parth Shah2, Shantanu Thakoor2, Haoze Wu2,
Aleksandar Zelji´ c2, David L. Dill2,
Mykel J. Kochenderfer2, and Clark Barrett2
1The Hebrew University of Jerusalem,
Jerusalem, Israel
guykatz@cs.huji.ac.il
2Stanford University, Stanford, USA
{huangda,duligur,kjulian3,clazarus,parth95,thakoor,
haozewu,zeljic,dill,mykel,clarkbarrett }@stanford.edu,
rachelim@cs.stanford.edu
Abstract. Deep neural networks are revolutionizing the way complex
systems are designed. Consequently, there is a pressing need for tools and
techniques for network analysis and certiﬁcation. To help in addressing
that need, we present Marabou , a framework for verifying deep neural
networks. Marabou is an SMT-based tool that can answer queries about
a network’s properties by transforming these queries into constraint sat-
isfaction problems. It can accommodate networks with diﬀerent activa-
tion functions and topologies, and it performs high-level reasoning on the
network that can curtail the search space and improve performance. Italso supports parallel execution to further enhance scalability. Marabou
accepts multiple input formats, including protocol buﬀer ﬁles generated
by the popular TensorFlow framework for neural networks. We describethe system architecture and main components, evaluate the technique
and discuss ongoing work.
1 Introduction
Recent years have brought about a major change in the way complex systems are
being developed. Instead of spending long hours hand-crafting complex software,
many engineers now opt to use deep neural networks (DNNs )[6,19]. DNNs are
machine learning models, created by training algorithms that generalize from aﬁnite set of examples to previously unseen inputs. Their performance can often
surpass that of manually created software as demonstrated in ﬁelds such as image
classiﬁcation [ 16], speech recognition [ 8], and game playing [ 21].
Despite their overall success, the opacity of DNNs is a cause for concern,
and there is an urgent need for certiﬁcation procedures that can provide rig-
orous guarantees about network behavior. The formal methods community has
c/circlecopyrtThe Author(s) 2019
I. Dillig and S. Tasiran (Eds.): CA V 2019, LNCS 11561, pp. 443–452, 2019.https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-25540-4
_26