The Marabou Framework for Veriﬁcation and Analysis of DNNs 445
core was tailored for a smooth integration with the Marabou framework and
eliminates much of the overhead in Reluplex due to the use of GLPK.
– Multiple interfaces for feeding queries into the solver. A query’s neural net-
work can be provided in a textual format or as a protocol buﬀer ( protobuf )
ﬁle containing a TensorFlow model; and the property can be either compiledinto the solver, provided in Python, or stored in a textual format. We expect
these interfaces will simplify usage of the tool for many users.
– Support for network-level reasoning and deduction. The earlier Reluplex tool
performed deductions at the level of single constraints, ignoring the input
network’s topology. In Marabou, we retain this functionality but also include
support for reasoning based on the network topology, such as symbolic boundtightening [ 23]. This allows for eﬃcient curtailment of the search space.
Marabou is available online [ 14] under the permissive modiﬁed BSD license.
EngineMarabou
SAT
UNSATSearch:
Simplex Core
Piecewise-Linear Constraints
Deduction:
Constraint-Level Reasoning
Network-Level ReasoningInput
Interfaces
Divide and
ConquerQuery
Fig. 1. The main components of Marabou.
2 Design of Marabou
Marabou regards each neuron in the network as a variable and searches for a
variable assignment that simultaneously satisﬁes the query’s linear constraintsand non-linear constraints. At any given point, Marabou maintains the current
variable assignment, lower and upper bounds for every variable, and the set of
current constraints. In each iteration, it then changes the variable assignmentin order to (1) correct a violated linear constraint, or (2) correct a violated
non-linear constraint.
The Marabou veriﬁcation procedure is sound and complete, i.e. the afore-
mentioned loop eventually terminates. This can be shown via a straightforward
extension of the soundness and completeness proof for Reluplex [ 12]. However,
in order to guarantee termination, Marabou only supports activation functions
that are piecewise-linear. The tool already has built-in support for the ReLU
function and the Max function max ( x
1,...,x n), and it is modular in the sense
that additional piecewise-linear functions can be added easily.