444 G. Katz et al.
taken initial steps in this direction, by developing algorithms and tools for neural
network veriﬁcation [ 5,9,10,12,18,20,23,24]. A DNN veriﬁcation query consists
of two parts: (i) a neural network, and (ii) a property to be checked; and its
result is either a formal guarantee that the network satisﬁes the property, or a
concrete input for which the property is violated (a counter-example). A veriﬁca-tion query can encode the fact, e.g., that a network is robust to small adversarial
perturbations in its input [ 22].
A neural network is comprised of neurons , organized in layers. The network
is evaluated by assigning values to the neurons in the input layer, and then using
these values to iteratively compute the assignments of neurons in each succeeding
layer. Finally, the values of neurons in the last layer are computed, and this is thenetwork’s output. A neuron’s assignment is determined by computing a weighted
sum of the assignments of neurons from the preceding layer, and then applying
to the result a non-linear activation function, such as the Rectiﬁed Linear Unit
(ReLU) function, ReLU( x) = max (0 ,x). Thus, a network can be regarded as a
set of linear constraints (the weighted sums), and a set of non-linear constraints
(the activation functions). In addition to a neural network, a veriﬁcation query
includes a property to be checked, which is given in the form of linear or non-
linear constraints on the network’s inputs and outputs. The veriﬁcation problemthus reduces to ﬁnding an assignment of neuron values that satisﬁes all the
constraints simultaneously, or determining that no such assignment exists.
This paper presents a new tool for DNN veriﬁcation and analysis, called
Marabou . The Marabou project builds upon our previous work on the Reluplex
project [ 2,7,12,13,15,17], which focused on applying SMT-based techniques to
the veriﬁcation of DNNs. Marabou follows the Reluplex spirit in that it applies anSMT-based, lazy search technique: it iteratively searches for an assignment that
satisﬁes all given constraints, but treats the non-linear constraints lazily in the
hope that many of them will prove irrelevant to the property under consideration,and will not need to be addressed at all. In addition to search, Marabou performs
deduction aimed at learning new facts about the non-linear constraints in order
to simplify them.
The Marabou framework is a signiﬁcant improvement over its predecessor,
Reluplex. Speciﬁcally, it includes the following enhancements and modiﬁcations:
– Native support for fully connected and convolutional DNNs with arbitrary
piecewise-linear activation functions. This extends the Reluplex algorithm,which was originally designed to support only ReLU activation functions.
– Built-in support for a divide-and-conquer solving mode, in which the solver is
run with an initial (small) timeout. If the timeout is reached, the solver par-
titions its input query into simpler sub-queries, increases the timeout value,
and repeats the process on each sub-query. This mode naturally lends itselfto parallel execution by running sub-queries on separate nodes; however, it
can yield signiﬁcant speed-ups even when used with a single node.
– A complete simplex-based linear programming core that replaces the exter-
nal solver (GLPK) that was previously used in Reluplex. The new simplex