Generative Adversarial Network in Medical Imaging: A Review
Xin Yia,, Ekta Waliaa,b, Paul Babyna
aDepartment of Medical Imaging, University of Saskatchewan, 103 Hospital Dr, Saskatoon, SK, S7N 0W8 Canada
bPhilips Canada, 281 Hillmount Road, Markham, Ontario, ON L6C 2S3, Canada
Abstract
Generative adversarial networks have gained a lot of attention in the computer vision community due to their capability of data
generation without explicitly modelling the probability density function. The adversarial loss brought by the discriminator provides
a clever way of incorporating unlabeled samples into training and imposing higher order consistency. This has proven to be useful
in many cases, such as domain adaptation, data augmentation, and image-to-image translation. These properties have attracted
researchers in the medical imaging community, and we have seen rapid adoption in many traditional and novel applications, such as
image reconstruction, segmentation, detection, classiﬁcation, and cross-modality synthesis. Based on our observations, this trend
will continue and we therefore conducted a review of recent advances in medical imaging using the adversarial training scheme
with the hope of beneﬁting researchers interested in this technique.
Keywords: Deep learning, Generative adversarial network, Generative model, Medical imaging, Review
1. Introduction
With the resurgence of deep learning in computer vision
starting from 2012 (Krizhevsky et al., 2012), the adoption of
deep learning methods in medical imaging has increased dra-
matically. It is estimated that there were over 400 papers pub-
lished in 2016 and 2017 in major medical imaging related con-
ference venues and journals (Litjens et al., 2017). The wide
adoption of deep learning in the medical imaging community
is due to its demonstrated potential to complement image inter-
pretation and augment image representation and classiﬁcation.
In this article, we focus on one of the most interesting recent
breakthroughs in the ﬁeld of deep learning - generative adver-
sarial networks (GANs) - and their potential applications in the
ﬁeld of medical imaging.
GANs are a special type of neural network model where
two networks are trained simultaneously, with one focused on
image generation and the other centered on discrimination. The
adversarial training scheme has gained attention in both academia
and industry due to its usefulness in counteracting domain shift,
and e ectiveness in generating new image samples. This model
has achieved state-of-the-art performance in many image gener-
ation tasks, including text-to-image synthesis (Xu et al., 2017),
super-resolution (Ledig et al., 2017), and image-to-image trans-
lation (Zhu et al., 2017a).
Unlike deep learning which has its roots traced back to the
1980s (Fukushima and Miyake, 1982), the concept of adversar-
ial training is relatively new with signiﬁcant recent progress (Good-
fellow et al., 2014). This paper presents a general overview of
Corresponding author
Email addresses: xiy525@mail.usask.ca (Xin Yi),
ewb178@mail.usask.ca (Ekta Walia), Paul.Babyn
@saskhealthauthority.ca (Paul Babyn)GANs, describes their promising applications in medical imag-
ing, and identiﬁes some remaining challenges that need to be
solved to enable their successful application in other medical
imaging related tasks.
To present a comprehensive overview of all relevant works
on GANs in medical imaging, we searched databases including
PubMed, arXiv, proceedings of the International Conference on
Medical Image Computing and Computer Assisted Intervention
(MICCAI), SPIE Medical Imaging, IEEE International Sympo-
sium on Biomedical Imaging (ISBI), and International confer-
ence on Medical Imaging with Deep Learning (MIDL). We also
incorporated cross referenced works not identiﬁed in the above
search process. Since there are research publications coming
out every month, without losing generality, we set the cut o 
time of the search as January 1st, 2019. Works on arXiv that
report only preliminary results are excluded from this review.
Descriptive statistics of these papers based on task, imaging
modality and year can be found in Figure 1.
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. We
begin with a brief introduction of the principles of GANs and
some of its structural variants in Section 2. It is followed by
a comprehensive review of medical image analysis tasks using
GANs in Section 3 including but not limited to the ﬁelds of ra-
diology, histopathology and dermatology. We categorize all the
works according to canonical tasks: reconstruction, image syn-
thesis, segmentation, classiﬁcation, detection, registration, and
others. Section 4 summarizes the review and discusses prospec-
tive applications and identiﬁes open challenges.
Preprint submitted to Journal of L ATEX Templates September 5, 2019arXiv:1809.07294v4  [cs.CV]  4 Sep 2019