2.2. Challenges in optimizing GANs
The above GAN training objective is regarded as a saddle
point optimization problem (Yadav et al., 2018) and the train-
ing is often accomplished by gradient-based methods. G and
D are trained alternately from scratch so that they may evolve
together. However, there is no guarantee of balance between
the training of G and D with the JS divergence. As a conse-
quence, one network may inevitably be more powerful than the
other, which in most cases is D. When D becomes too strong
as opposed to G, the generated samples become too easy to be
separated from real ones, thus reaching a stage where gradients
from D approach zero, providing no guidance for further train-
ing of G. This happens more frequently when generating high
resolution images due to the di culty of generating meaningful
high frequency details.
Another problem commonly faced in training GANs is mode
collapse, which, as the name indicates, is a case when the dis-
tribution pg(x) learned by G focuses on a few limited modes of
the data distribution pr(x). Hence instead of producing diverse
images, it generates a limited set of samples.
2.3. Variants of GANs
2.3.1. Varying objective of D
In order to stabilize training and also to avoid mode col-
lapse, di erent losses for D have been proposed, such as f-
divergence (f-GAN) (Nowozin et al., 2016), least-square (LS-
GAN) (Mao et al., 2016), hinge loss (Miyato et al., 2018), and
Wasserstein distance (WGAN, WGAN-GP) (Arjovsky et al.,
2017; Gulrajani et al., 2017). Among these, Wasserstein dis-
tance is arguably the most popular metric. As an alternative to
the real /fake discrimination scheme, Springenberg (2015) pro-
posed an entropy based objective where real data is encour-
aged to make conﬁdent class predictions (CatGAN, Figure 3
b). In EBGAN (Zhao et al., 2016) and BEGAN (Berthelot et al.,
2017) (Figure 3 c), the commonly used encoder architecture for
discriminator is replaced with an autoencoder architecture. D’s
objective then becomes matching autoencoder loss distribution
rather than data distribution.
GANs themselves lack the mechanism of inferencing the
underlying latent vector that is likely to encode the input. There-
fore, in ALI (Dumoulin et al., 2016) and BiGAN (Donahue
et al., 2016) (Figure 3 d), a separate encoder network is incor-
porated. D’s objective then becomes separating joint samples
(xg;zg) and ( xr;zr). In InfoGAN (Figure 3 e), the discrimina-
tor outputs the latent vector that encodes part of the seman-
tic features of the generated image. The discriminator maxi-
mizes the mutual information between the generated image and
the latent attribute vector the generated image is conditioned
upon. After successful training, InfoGAN can explore inherent
data attributes and perform conditional data generation based
on these attributes. The use of class labels has been shown to
further improve generated image’s quality and this information
can be easily incorporated into D by enforcing D to provide
class probabilities and use cross entropy loss for optimization
such as used in ACGAN (Odena et al., 2016) (Figure 3 f).2.3.2. Varying objective of G
In the vanilla GAN, G transforms noise zto sample xg=
G(z). This is usually accomplished by using a decoder network
to progressively increase the spatial size of the output until the
desired resolution is achieved as shown in Figure 2. Larsen
et al. (2015) proposed a variational autoencoder network (V AE)
as the underlying architecture of G (V AEGAN, Figure 3 g),
where it can use pixel-wise reconstruction loss to enforce the
decoder part of V AE to generate structures to match the real
images.
The original setup of a GAN does not have any restrictions
on the modes of data it can generate. However, if auxiliary
information were provided during the generation, the GAN can
be driven to output images with desired properties. A GAN in
this scenario is usually referred as a conditional GAN (cGAN)
and the generation process can be expressed as xg=G(z;c).
One of the most common conditional inputs cis an image.
pix2pix, the ﬁrst general purpose GAN based image-to-image
translation framework was proposed by Isola et al. (2016) (Fig-
ure 4 a). Further, task related supervision was introduced to the
generator. For example, reconstruction loss for image restora-
tion and Dice loss (Milletari et al., 2016) for segmentation. This
form of supervision requires aligned training pairs. Zhu et al.
(2017a); Kim et al. (2017) relaxed this constraint by stitching
two generators together head to toe so that images can be trans-
lated between two sets of unpaired samples (Figure 4 b). For
the sake of simplicity, we chose CycleGAN to represent this
idea in the rest of this paper. Another model named UNIT (Fig-
ure 4 c) can also perform unpaired image-to-image transform
by combining two V AEGANs together with each one respon-
sible for one modality but sharing the same latent space (Liu
et al., 2017a). These image-to-image translation frameworks
are very popular in the medical imaging community due to their
general applicability.
Other than image, the conditional input can be class la-
bels (CGAN, Figure 3 h) (Mirza and Osindero, 2014), text de-
scriptions (Zhang et al., 2017a), object locations (Reed et al.,
2016a,b), surrounding image context (Pathak et al., 2016), or
sketches (Sangkloy et al., 2016). Note that ACGAN mentioned
in the previous section also has a class conditional generator.
2.3.3. Varying architecture
Fully connected layers were used as the building block in
vanilla GAN but later on, were replaced by fully convolutional
downsampling /upsampling layers in DCGAN (Radford et al.,
2015). DCGAN demonstrated better training stability hence
quickly populated the literature. As shown in Figure 2, the gen-
erator in DCGAN architecture works on random input noise
vector by successive upsampling operations eventually gener-
ating an image from it. Two of its important ingredients are
BatchNorm (Io e and Szegedy, 2015) for regulating the ex-
tracted feature scale, and LeakyRelu (Maas et al., 2013) for pre-
venting dead gradients. Very recently, Miyato et al. (2018) pro-
posed a spectral normalization layer that normalized weights
in the discriminator to regulate the scale of feature response
values. With the training stability improved, some works have
3