Table 3: A brief summary of quantitative measures used in the reviewed publications listed in Tables 1, 4, 5 and 6.
Abbr. Measures Remarks
Overall image quality without reference
M1 Human observer Gold standard but costly and hard to scale
M2 Breuleux et al. (2011) Kernel density function Estimate the probability density of the generated data and compute the log likelihood of real test data under this distribution
M3 Salimans et al. (2016) Inception score Measure the generated images’ diversity and visual similarity to the real images with the pretrained Inception model
M4 Goodfellow et al. (2014) JS divergence Distance measure between two distributions (used for comparison between normalized color histogram computed from a large
batch of image samples)
M5 Wasserstein distance Distance measure between two distributions (used for comparison between normalized color histogram computed from a large
batch of image samples)
M6 Matkovic et al. (2005) GCF Global contrast factor
M7 K ¨ohler et al. (2013) Qv Vessel-based quality metric (noise and blur) for fundus image
M8 Niemeijer et al. (2006) ISC Image structure clustering, a trained classiﬁer based to di erentiate normal from low quality fundus images
M9 Shan et al. (2018) Perceptual loss Di erence of features extracted from a pre-trained VGG net
M10 Shan et al. (2018) Texture loss Gram matrix which is basically the correlation of low-level features, deﬁned as style in style transfer literature
Overall image quality with respect to a groundtruth
M11 NMSE /MAE /MSE (Normalized) mean absolute /square error with respect to a given groundtruth
M12 PSNR /SNR (Peak) signal to noise ratio with respect to a given groundtruth
M13 Wang et al. (2004) SSIM Structural similarity with respect to a given groundtruth
M14 Sheikh and Bovik (2004) VIF Visual information ﬁdelity with regard to a given groundtruth
M15 Wang and Bovik (2002) UQI Universal quality index with regard to a given groundtruth
M16 Sheikh et al. (2005) IFC Information Fidelity Criterion
M17 Zhang et al. (2011) FSIM A low-level feature based image quality assessment metric with regard to a given groundtruth
M18 Zhang et al. (2018b) LPIPS Learned perceptual image patch similarity
M19 Pluim et al. (2003) Mutual information Commonly used in cross modality registration in evaluating the alignment of two images
M20 NMI /MI (Normalized) median intensity, used to measure color consistancy of histology images
M21 Lee Rodgers and Nicewander (1988) Cross correlation Global correlation between two images
M22 Low (2010) Clinical measure Dose di erence, gamma analysis for CT
M23 Seitzer et al. (2018) SIS Semantic interpretability score, essentially the dice loss of a pre-trained downstream segmentor
Local image quality
M24 Line proﬁle Measure the loss of spatial resolution
M25 Noise level Standard deviation of intensities in a local smooth region
M26 CBR Contrast to background ratio, measure the local contrast loss
M27 Kinahan and Fletcher (2010) SUV Standard uptake value, a clinical measure in oncology for local interest region, should not vary too much in reconstruction
M28 NPS Noise power spectrum
Image quality analysis by auxiliary task
M29 Task speciﬁc statistics Down stream task (e.g. for coronary calcium quantiﬁcation)
M30 Classiﬁcation Down stream task
M31 Detection Down stream task (e.g. for lesion /hemorrhage)
M32 Segmentation Down stream task
M33 Cross modality registration Down stream task
M34 Depth estimation Down stream task
the training to improve accuracy at the boundaries. Zhang et al.
(2018d) found that using only cycle loss in the cross modality
synthesis was insu cient to mitigate geometric distortions in
the transformation. Therefore, they employed a shape consis-
tency loss that is obtained from two segmentors (segmentation
network). Each segmentor segments the corresponding image
modality into semantic labels and provides implicit shape con-
straints on the anatomy during translation. To make the whole
system end-to-end trainable, semantic labels of training im-
ages from both modalities are required. Zhang et al. (2018c)
and Chen et al. (2018a) proposed using a segmentor also in the
cycle transfer using labels in only one modality. Therefore, the
segmentor is trained o ine and ﬁxed during the training of the
image transfer network. As reviewed in Section 2, UNIT and
CycleGAN are two equally valid frameworks for unpaired cross
modality synthesis. It was found that these two frameworks per-
formed almost equally well for the transformation between T1
and T2-weighted MR images (Welander et al., 2018). Papers
related to cross modality medical image synthesis are summa-
rized in Table 5.
3.2.3. Other conditional synthesis
Medical images can be generated by constraints on segmen-
tation maps, text, locations or synthetic images etc. This is use-
ful to synthesize images in uncommon conditions, such as lung
nodules touching the lung border (Jin et al., 2018b). More-
over, the conditioned segmentation maps can also be generated
from GANs (Guibas et al., 2017) or from a pretrained segmen-
tation network (Costa et al., 2017a), by making the generationa two stage process. Mok and Chung (2018) used cGAN to
augment training images for brain tumour segmentation. The
generator was conditioned on a segmentation map and gener-
ated brain MR images in a coarse to ﬁne manner. To ensure
the tumour was well delineated with a clear boundary in the
generated image, they further forced the generator to output the
tumour boundaries in the generation process. The full list of
synthesis works is summarized in Table 6.
3.3. Segmentation
Generally, researchers have used pixel-wise or voxel-wise
loss such as cross entropy for segmentation. Despite the fact
that U-net (Ronneberger et al., 2015) was used to combine both
low-level and high-level features, there is no guarantee of spa-
tial consistency in the ﬁnal segmentation map. Traditionally,
conditional random ﬁeld (CRF) and graph cut methods are usu-
ally adopted for segmentation reﬁnement by incorporating spa-
tial correlation. Their limitation is that they only take into ac-
count pair-wise potentials which might cause serious boundary
leakage in low contrast regions. On the other hand, adversarial
losses as introduced by the discriminator can take into account
high order potentials (Yang et al., 2017a). In this case, the dis-
criminator can be regarded as a shape regulator. This regular-
ization e ect is more prominent when the object of interest has
a compact shape, e.g. for lung and heart mask but less use-
ful for deformable objects such as vessels and catheters. This
regulation e ect can be also applied to the internal features of
the segmentor to achieve domain (di erent scanners, imaging
protocols, modality) invariance (Kamnitsas et al., 2017; Dou
9