lesion class resulted in better performance in lesion classiﬁca-
tion than using a uniﬁed GAN (ACGAN) for all classes. The
underlying reason remains to be explored. Furthermore, Fin-
layson et al. (2018) argue that images generated from GANs
may serve as an e ective augmentation in the medium-data
regime, but may not be helpful in a high or low-data regime.
3.5. Detection
The discriminator of GANs can be utilized to detect abnor-
malities such as lesions by learning the probability distribution
of training images depicting normal pathology. Any image that
falls out of this distribution can be deemed as abnormal. Schlegl
et al. (2017) used the exact idea to learn a manifold of normal
anatomical variability and proposed a novel anomaly scoring
scheme based on the ﬁtness of the test image’s latent code to
the learned manifold. The learning process was conducted in
an unsupervised fashion and e ectiveness was demonstrated
by state-of-the-art performance of anomaly detection on opti-
cal coherence tomography (OCT) images. Alex et al. (2017)
used GAN for brain lesion detection on MR images. The gen-
erator was used to model the distribution of normal patches
and the trained discriminator was used to compute a posterior
probability of patches centered on every pixel in the test image.
Chen and Konukoglu (2018) used an adversarial auto-encoder
to learn the data distribution of healthy brain MR images. The
lesion image was then mapped to an image without a lesion by
exploring the learned latent space, and the lesion could be high-
lighted by computing the residual of these two images. We can
see that all the detection studies targeted for abnormalities that
are hard to enumerate.
In the image reconstruction section, it has been observed
that if the target distribution is formed from medical images
without pathology, lesions within an image could be removed
in the CycleGAN-based unpaired image transfer due to the dis-
tribution matching e ect. However, it can be seen here that if
the target and source domain are of the same imaging modal-
ity di ering only in terms of normal and abnormal tissue, this
adverse e ect can actually be exploited for abnormality detec-
tion Sun et al. (2018).
3.6. Registration
cGAN can also be used for multi-modal or uni-modal im-
age registration. The generator in this case will either generate
transformation parameters, e.g. 12 numbers for 3D a ne trans-
formation, deformation ﬁeld for non-rigid transformation or di-
rectly generate the transformed image. The discriminator then
discriminates aligned image pairs from unaligned image pairs.
A spatial transformation network (Jaderberg et al., 2015) or a
deformable transformation layer (Fan et al., 2018) is usually
plugged in between these two networks to enable end-to-end
training. Yan et al. (2018b) performed prostate MR to transrec-
tal ultrasound (TRUS) image registration using this framework.
The paired training data was obtained through manual registra-
tion by experts. Yan et al. (2018b) employed a discriminator
to regularize the displacement ﬁeld computed by the generatorand found this approach to be more e ective than the other reg-
ularizers in MR to TRUS registration. Mahapatra et al. (2018a)
used CycleGAN for multi-modal (retinal) and uni-modal (MR)
deformable registration where the generator produces both the
transformed image and the deformation ﬁeld. Mahapatra et al.
(2018c) took one step further and explored the idea of joint
segmentation and registration with CycleGAN and found their
method performs better than the separate approaches for lung
X-ray images. Tanner et al. (2018) employed CycleGAN for
deformable image registration between MR and CT by ﬁrst
transforming the source domain image to the target domain and
then employing a mono-modal image similarity measure for the
registration. They found this method can achieve at best sim-
ilar performance with the traditional multi-modal deformable
registration methods.
3.7. Other works
In addition to the tasks described in the aforementioned sec-
tions, GANs have also been applied in other tasks discussed
here. For instance, cGAN has been used for modelling patient
speciﬁc motion distribution based on a single preoperative im-
age (Hu et al., 2017c), highlighting regions most accountable
for a disease (Baumgartner et al., 2017) and re-colorization
of endoscopic video data (Ross et al., 2018). In (Mahmood
et al., 2018) pix2pix was used for treatment planning in radio-
therapy by predicting the dose distribution map from CT image.
WGAN has also been used for modelling the progression of
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) in MRI. This is achieved by isolating
the latent encoding of AD and performing arithmetic operation
in the latent space (Bowles et al., 2018b).
4. Discussion
In the years 2017 and 2018, the number of studies applying
GANs has risen signiﬁcantly. The list of these papers reviewed
for our study can be found on our1GitHub repository.
About 46% of these papers studied image synthesis, with
cross modality image synthesis being the most important appli-
cation of GANs. MR is ranked as the most common imaging
modality explored in the GAN related literature. We believe
one of the reasons for the signiﬁcant interest in applying GANs
for MR image analysis is due to the excessive amount of time
spent on the acquisition of multiple sequences. GANs hold the
potential to reduce MR acquisition time by faithfully generating
certain sequences from already acquired ones. A recent study
in image synthesis across di erent MR sequences using Colla-
GAN shows the irreplaceable nature of exogenous contrast se-
quence, but reports the synthesis of endogenous contrast such
as T1, T2, from each other with high ﬁdelity (Lee et al., 2019).
A second reason for the popularity of GANs in MR might be
because of large number of publicly available MR datasets as
shown in Table 7.
1https: //github.com /xinario /awesome-gan-for-medical-imaging
15