(a) low dose CT denoising
 (b) Cross modality transfer (MR !CT)
 (c) Vessel to fundus image
(d) Skin lesion synthesis
 (e) Organ segmentation
 (f) Domain adaptation
(g) Abnormality Detection
Figure 5: Example applications using GANs. Figures are directly cropped from the corresponding papers. (a) Left side shows the noise contaminated low dose CT
and right side shows the denoised CT that well preserved the low contrast regions in the liver (Yi and Babyn, 2018). (b) Left side shows the MR image and right side
shows the synthesized corresponding CT. Bone structures were well delineated in the generated CT image (Wolterink et al., 2017a). (c) The generated retinal fundus
image have the exact vessel structures as depicted in the left vessel map (Costa et al., 2017b). (d) Randomly generated skin lesion from random noise (a mixture of
malignant and benign) (Yi et al., 2018). (e) An organ (lung and heart) segmentation example on adult chest X-ray. The shapes of lung and heart are regulated by
the adversarial loss (Dai et al., 2017b). (f) The third column shows the domain adapted brain lesion segmentation result on SWI sequence without training with the
corresponding manual annotation (Kamnitsas et al., 2017). (g) Abnormality detection of optical coherence tomography images of the retina (Schlegl et al., 2017).
3.2. Medical Image Synthesis
Depending on institutional protocols, patient consent may
be required if diagnostic images are intended to be used in a
publication or released into the public domain (Clinical Prac-
tice Committee, 2000). GANs are widely for medical image
synthesis. This helps overcome the privacy issues related to di-
agnostic medical image data and tackle the insu cient number
of positive cases of each pathology. Lack of experts annotat-
ing medical images poses another challenge for the adoption
of supervised training methods. Although there are ongoing
collaborative e orts across multiple healthcare agencies aim-
ing to build large open access datasets, e.g. Biobank, the Na-
tional Biomedical Imaging Archive (NBIA), The Cancer Imag-
ing Archive (TCIA) and Radiologist Society of North America
(RSNA), this issue remains and constrains the number of im-
ages researchers might have access to.
Traditional ways to augment training sample include scal-
ing, rotation, ﬂipping, translation, and elastic deformation (Simard
et al., 2003). However, these transformations do not account
for variations resulting from di erent imaging protocols or se-
quences, not to mention variations in the size, shape, locationand appearance of speciﬁc pathology. GANs provide a more
generic solution and have been used in numerous works for
augmenting training images with promising results.
3.2.1. Unconditional Synthesis
Unconditional synthesis refers to image generation from ran-
dom noise without any other conditional information. Tech-
niques commonly adopted in the medical imaging community
include DCGAN, WGAN, and PGGAN due to their good train-
ing stability. The ﬁrst two methods can handle an image reso-
lution of up to 256 256 but if higher resolution images are
desired, the progressive technique proposed in PGGAN is a
choice. Realistic images can be generated by directly using
the author released code base as long as the variations between
images are not too large, for example, lung nodules and liver
lesions. To make the generated images useful for downstream
tasks, most studies trained a separate generator for each individ-
ual class; for example, Frid-Adar et al. (2018) used three DC-
GANs to generate synthetic samples for three classes of liver
lesions (cysts, metastases, and hemangiomas); generated sam-
ples were found to be beneﬁcial to the lesion classiﬁcation task
7