SGAN. Three popular image-to-image translation cGANs (pix2pix,
CycleGAN, and UNIT) are shown in Figure 4. For a more in-
depth review and empirical evaluation of these di erent variants
of GAN, we refer the reader to (Huang et al., 2018; Creswell
et al., 2018; Kurach et al., 2018).
3. Applications in Medical Imaging
There are generally two ways GANs are used in medical
imaging. The ﬁrst is focused on the generative aspect, which
can help in exploring and discovering the underlying structure
of training data and learning to generate new images. This prop-
erty makes GANs very promising in coping with data scarcity
and patient privacy. The second focuses on the discriminative
aspect, where the discriminator D can be regarded as a learned
prior for normal images so that it can be used as regularizer or
detector when presented with abnormal images. Figure 5 pro-
vides examples of GAN related applications, with examples (a),
(b), (c), (d), (e), (f) that focus on the generative aspect and ex-
ample (g) that exploits the discriminative aspect. In the follow-
ing subsections, in order to help the readers ﬁnd applications
of their interest, we categorized all the reviewed articles into
canonical tasks: reconstruction, image synthesis, segmentation,
classiﬁcation, detection, registration, and others.
3.1. Reconstruction
Due to constraints in clinical settings, such as radiation dose
and patient comfort, the diagnostic quality of acquired medical
images may be limited by noise and artifacts. In the last decade,
we have seen a paradigm shift in reconstruction methods chang-
ing from analytic to iterative and now to machine learning based
methods. These data-driven learning based methods either learn
to transfer raw sensory inputs directly to output images or serve
as a post processing step for reducing image noise and remov-
ing artifacts. Most of the methods reviewed in this section are
borrowed directly from the computer vision literature that for-
mulate post-processing as an image-to-image translation prob-
lem where the conditioned inputs of cGANs are compromised
in certain forms, such as low spatial resolution, noise contam-
ination, under-sampling, or aliasing. One exception is for MR
images where the Fourier transform is used to incorporate the
raw K-space data into the reconstruction.
The basic pix2pix framework has been used for low dose
CT denoising (Wolterink et al., 2017b), MR reconstruction (Chen
et al., 2018b; Kim et al., 2018; Dar et al., 2018b; Shitrit and
Raviv, 2017), and PET denoising (Wang et al., 2018b). A pre-
trained VGG-net (Simonyan and Zisserman, 2014) was further
incorporated into the optimization framework to ensure per-
ceptual similarity (Yang et al., 2017b; Yu et al., 2017; Yang
et al., 2018a; Armanious et al., 2018c; Mahapatra, 2017). Yi
and Babyn (2018) introduced a pretrained sharpness detection
network to explicitly constrain the sharpness of the denoised
CT especially for low contrast regions. Mahapatra (2017) com-
puted a local saliency map to highlight blood vessels in super-
resolution process of retinal fundus imaging. A similar idea was
explored by Liao et al. (2018) in sparse view CT reconstruc-
tion. They compute a focus map to modulate the reconstructedoutput to ensure that the network focused on important regions.
Besides ensuring image domain data ﬁdelity, frequency domain
data ﬁdelity is also imposed when raw K-space data is available
in MR reconstruction (Quan et al., 2018; Mardani et al., 2017;
Yang et al., 2018a).
Losses of other kinds have been used to highlight local im-
age structures in the reconstruction, such as the saliency loss to
reweight each pixel’s importance based on its perceptual rel-
evance (Mahapatra, 2017) and the style-content loss in PET
denoising (Armanious et al., 2018c). In image reconstruction
of moving organs, paired training samples are hard to obtain.
Therefore, Rav `ı et al. (2018) proposed a physical acquisition
based loss to regulate the generated image structure for endomi-
croscopy super resolution and Kang et al. (2018) proposed to
use CycleGAN together with an identity loss in the denoising
of cardiac CT. Wolterink et al. (2017b) found that in low dose
CT denoising, meaningful results can still be achieved when re-
moving the image domain ﬁdelity loss from the pix2pix frame-
work, but the local image structure can be altered. Papers relat-
ing to medical image reconstruction are summarized in Table 1.
It can be noticed that the underlying methods are almost the
same for all the reconstruction tasks. MR is special case as it
has a well deﬁned forward and backward operation, i.e. Fourier
transform, so that raw K-space data can be incorporated. The
same methodology can potentially be applied to incorporate the
sinogram data in the CT reconstruction process but we have not
seen any research using this idea as yet probably because the
sinogram data is hard to access. The more data used, either
raw K-space or image from other sequence, the better are the
reconstructed results. In general, using adversarial loss pro-
duces more visually appealing results than using pixel-wise re-
construction loss alone. But using adversarial loss to match the
generated and real data distribution may make the model hal-
lucinate unseen structures. Pixel-wise reconstruction loss helps
to combat this problem if paired samples are available, and if
the model was trained on all healthy images but employed to
reconstruct images with pathologies, the hallucination problem
will still exist due to domain mismatch. Cohen et al. (2018)
have conducted extensive experiments to investigate this prob-
lem and suggest that reconstructed images should not be used
for direct diagnosis by radiologists unless the model has been
properly veriﬁed.
However, even though the dataset is carefully curated to
match the training and testing distribution, there are other prob-
lems in further boosting performance. We have seen various
dierent losses introduced to the pix2pix framework as shown
in Table 2 to improve the reconstructed ﬁdelity of local struc-
tures. There is, however, no reliable way of comparing their
eectiveness except for relying on human observer or down-
stream image analysis tasks. Large scale statistical analysis
by human observer is currently lacking for GAN based recon-
struction methods. Furthermore, public datasets used for im-
age reconstruction are not tailored towards further medical im-
age analysis, which leaves a gap between upstream reconstruc-
tion and downstream analysis tasks. New reference standard
datasets should be created for better comparison of these GAN-
based methods.
6