Another 37% of these studies fall into the group of recon-
struction and segmentation due to the popularity of image-to-
image translation frameworks. Adversarial training in these
cases imposes a strong shape and texture regulation on the gen-
erator’s output which makes it very promising in these two tasks.
For example, in liver segmentation from 3D CT volumes, the
incorporation of adversarial loss signiﬁcantly improves the seg-
mentation performance on non-contrast CT (has fuzzy liver bound-
ary) than graph cut and CRF (Yang et al., 2017a).
Further 8% of these studies are related to classiﬁcation. In
these studies, the most e ective use case was to combat domain
shift. For the studies that used GAN for data augmentation in
classiﬁcation, most focused on generating tiny objects that can
be easily aligned, such as nodules, lesions and cells. We be-
lieve it is partly due to the relatively smaller content variation of
these images compared to the full context image which makes
the training more stable with the current technique. Another
reason might be related to the computation budget of the re-
search since training on high resolution images requires a lot
of GPU time. Although there are studies that applied GAN on
synthesizing whole chest-X-ray (Madani et al., 2018a,b), the
eectiveness has only been shown on fairly easy tasks, e.g.
cardiac abnormality classiﬁcation and on a medium size data
regime, e.g. a couple of thousand images. With the advent
of large volume labeled datasets, such as the CheXpert (Irvin
et al., 2019), it seems there is diminishing return in the employ-
ment of GANs for image generation, especially for classiﬁca-
tion. We would like to argue that GANs are still useful in the
following two cases. First, nowadays the training of a deep neu-
ral network heavily relies on data augmentation to improve the
network’s generalizability on unseen test data and reduce over-
ﬁtting. However, existing data augmentation operations are all
manually designed operations, e.g. rotation, color jittering, and
can not cover the whole variation of the data. Cubuk et al.
(2018) recently proposed to learn an augmentation policy with
reinforcement learning but the search space still consisted of ba-
sic hand-crafted image processing operations. GANs, however,
can allow us to sample the whole data distribution which o ers
much more ﬂexibility in augmenting the training data (Bowles
et al., 2018a). For example, styleGAN, is able to generate high
resolution realistic face images with unprecedented level of de-
tails. This could be readily applied to chest X-ray datasets to
generate images of a pathology class that has su cient number
of cases. Second, it is well known that medical data distribu-
tion is highly skewed with its largest mass centered on common
diseases. It is impossible to accumulate enough training data
for rare diseases, such as rheumatoid arthritis, sickle cell dis-
ease. But radiologists have been trained to detect these diseases
in the long tail. Thus, another potential of GANs will be in
synthesizing uncommon pathology cases, most likely through
conditional generation with the conditioned information being
speciﬁed by medical experts either through text description or
hand drawn ﬁgures.
The remaining studies pertaining to detection, registration
and other applications are so limited that it is hard to draw any
conclusion.4.1. Future challenges
Alongside many positive utilities of GANs, there are still
challenges that need to be resolved for their employment to
medical imaging. In image reconstruction and cross modality
image synthesis, most works still adopt traditional shallow ref-
erence metrics such as MAE, PSNR, or SSIM for quantitative
evaluation. These measures, however, do not correspond to the
visual quality of the image. For example, direct optimization of
pixel-wise loss produces a suboptimal (blurry) result but pro-
vides higher numbers than using adversarial loss. It becomes
increasingly di cult to interpret these numbers in horizontal
comparison of GAN-based works especially when extra losses
as shown in Table 2 are incorporated. One way to alleviate this
problem is to use down stream tasks such as segmentation or
classiﬁcation to validate the quality of the generated sample.
Another way is to recruit domain experts but this approach is
expensive, time consuming and hard to scale. Recently, Zhang
et al. (2018b) proposed learned perceptual image path similar-
ity (LPIPS), which outperforms previous metrics in terms of
agreement with human judgements. It has been adopted in
MedGAN (Armanious et al., 2018c) for evaluation of the gener-
ated image quality but it would be interesting to see its e ective-
ness for di erent types of medical images as compared to sub-
jective measures from experienced human observers in a more
extensive study. For natural images, the unconditional gener-
ated sample quality and diversity is usually measured by incep-
tion score (Salimans et al., 2016), the mean MS-SSIM metric
among randomly chosen synthetic sample pairs (Odena et al.,
2016), or Fr ´echet Inception distance (FID) (Heusel et al., 2017).
The validity of these metrics for medical images remains to be
explored.
Cross domain image-to-image translation can be achieved
with both paired and unpaired training data and it o ers many
prospective applications in medical imaging as has already been
seen in section 3.2.2. Unpaired training does not have the data
ﬁdelity loss term therefore there is no guarantee of preserva-
tion of small abnormality regions during the translation process.
Cohen et al. (2018) warn against the use of generated images for
direct interpretation by doctors. They observe that trained Cy-
cleGAN networks (for unpaired data) can be subject to bias due
to matching the generated data to the distribution of the target
domain. This system bias comes into being when target do-
main images in the training set have an over or under represen-
tation of certain classes. As an example of exploitation of this
eect, Mirsky et al. (2019) demonstrate the possibility of ma-
licious tampering of 3D medical imaging using 3D conditional
GANs to remove and inject solitary pulmonary nodule into pa-
tient’s CT scans. This system bias also exists in paired cross
domain image-to-image translation with the data ﬁdelity loss
but only happens when the model was trained on normal im-
ages but tested on abnormal images. Cautions should be taken
in training of the translation model and new methods should be
proposed to faithfully preserve local abnormal regions.
4.2. Interesting future applications
Similar to other deep learning neural network models, var-
ious applications of GANs demonstrated in this paper have di-
16