Figure 5: Testing performance for the unprotected turn (top row) and merge (bottom row) environments. Left:
we plot the distribution of episodic reward and their 1st and 99th percentile as a function of . Red line indicates
the reward incurred for a collision. The policy function successfully learned to be more risk-averse as !0.
Middle : the number of steps to complete an episode increases as decreases, due to the more conservative
behavior of the learned policy. Right : average episodic standard deviation of future return estimated by the
critic, as a function of .
variance will always be positive. See Fig. 1 for the diagram of our network model. The input to our
network is 16dimensional and consists of encoding the closest vehicles around ego (in sorted order)
and their states: (x;y)position, heading, and velocity. The actor consists of 3 hidden ReLU layers
with 32 hidden units each. The output of the actor is ego’s acceleration. The critic network consists
of 4 hidden layers with 64 hidden units each. We did not ﬁnd the performance to be particularly
sensitive to the choice of number of layers and layer size. See Appendix for more details.
Off-policy training is performed with an experience replay buffer of up to 106fs;a;r;s0gtuples.
The learning rate for both the actor and the critic is 0:0001 , and the minibatch size is 512. The
same action is executed 4times in a row for a total of 400ms. Exploration noise is Gaussian with
a standard deviation of 2.0. Input mean and variance for normalization is calculated in an online
moving average fashion. is randomly sampled from [0:01;1:0]. Training is run until convergence
for 5000 episodes, where each episode can last up to 30 seconds in simulation (300 timesteps).
4.3 Testing Performance
We now look at WCPG performs on test environments4. Results are shown for the two environments
in Fig. 5. In the left panel, we can see that as decreases, the policy becomes risk-averse and more
robust, reducing the probability of collisions. In the middle, we can see that smaller s leads to more
conservative behavior (e.g. waiting for a wider gap), increasing the time-to-completion for both
environments. Finally, the right panel shows that the critic’s own estimate of uncertainty grows with
an increasing . This also means that the actor also has a higher risk-tolerance with an increasing .
4.4 Extrapolation Performance
A challenging test is in the ability for policies to extrapolate, where the parameters of testing en-
vironments are “out-of-distribution” or extrapolated from the training distribution. Speciﬁcally, we
signiﬁcantly increase the upper-bound of non-ego agents’ velocity by an additional 15m/s and the
spawn rate upwards of 8%. The total number of spawned agents is also increased (up to 4 additional
agents) to make the scene denser.
Tables 1, 2 show the performance of WCPG and baselines on the extrapolation environments. We
report collision rates for 100 random trials. Our results are highlighted in green. The training results
are reported in the ﬁrst row of each environment. We compare with 4 state-of-the-art algorithms in
DDPG, proximal policy optimization (PPO) [9], C51/Rainbow [22, 10], and D4PG [26]. We used
open source implementations from OpenAI and Dopamine5. For DDPG training, we used default
parameters, but ensured that the model architecture, batch size, exploration noise, number of updates
and other parameters matched that of the WCPG training parameters. PPO training was performed
4The random seeds for the testing environments are different compared to training environments.
5https://github.com/openai/baselines, https://github.com/google/dopamine.
6