7
of CARTs around the current best CNN architecture Ab. After
that, the generated CNN architectures Aare evaluated by
using the ensemble predictor of QCARTs. Thus, the adaptive
predictor can balance the global tendency and local information
in the ﬁtness landscape, where the combination of KCARTs
predicts the global average landscape and that of Qdiverse
CARTs in a small area reﬁnes the local landscape. The details of
the prediction process in a generation are shown in Algorithm 4.
D. Strength and Weakness of E2EPP
As have been introduced in Subsection II-B, the limitations
of the existing performance predictors are the non-end-to-end
nature, the strict assumption on the smoothness of the learning
curve, and the availability of the large training samples. The
proposed method has been carefully designed to address these
limitations.
The proposed algorithm is end-to-end and does not rely on
the learning curve no matter whether it is smooth or not. Firstly,
the end-to-end nature is more convenient in practice because
we do not need to prepare the training data in predicting the
performance of each CNN. Secondly, because the proposed
algorithm does not need to ﬁt the learning curve, the predicted
performance is better than the existing approaches based on
the learning curve. This is theoretically evidenced by the
universal approximation theorem [56] that the learning curve-
based approaches can achieve promising performance only
when the learning curve is smooth. However, in practice, the
learning curve is not always smooth.
On the other hand, the proposed algorithm does not require
a large number of training samples. Most existing approaches
employing deep learning techniques succeed subject to the
availability of a large amount of training data. In the CNN
performance prediction, such training data is collected by
training a lot of CNNs from scratch. However, the training is
time-consuming even if performing on GPUs, while the main
goal of designing performance predictors is to save the time
of training CNNs. If we put enough time to collect a sufﬁcient
amount of training data, the performance predictor design will
lose its original purpose. In the proposed method, we use
the random forest as the base operator to learn the mapping
between the CNN architecture and its performance. The reason
is that random forest can achieve a promising performance on
limited amount of training data, which has been theoretically
proven and practically investigated [45], [46].
Unfortunately, the weakness of the proposed algorithm is
the unknown of the minimal number of training samples for
achieving promising performance, while the minimal number
is case by case for different tasks. In practice, we need to use
an incremental strategy to sample training samples until the
desired performance is achieved.
IV. E XPERIMENT DESIGN
In order to verify the effectiveness and efﬁciency of the
proposed performance predictor, a series of experiments are
carefully designed and performed. Although the proposed
performance predictor aims at speeding up the ﬁtness evaluation
of EDL, the ultimate goal of the performance predictor isAlgorithm 4: Performance Predicting
Input: TheKtrained CARTs, the selected features ids
Iof each CART, the current best CNN Ab, the
number of most diverse prediction Q, the
generated architectures Ato be evaluated.
Output: The ﬁtness values of A.
1Y ;;
2Ab
encoded EncodeAbbased on the details shown in
Subsection III-A;
3fori 1toKdo
4CART Select thei-th CART from CARTs;
5x FromAb
encoded select the elements whose ids
are inIi;
6y UseCART predict the classiﬁcation accuracy
onx;
7Y Y[x;
8end
9Y Order the elements in Y;
10ICART
selected Uniformly select QCARTs based on Y;
11fori 1tojAjdo
12Fi the mean prediction of Qselected CARTs
(ICART
selected ) onjAij;
13end
14ReturnF.
to ﬁnd the best CNN architecture that achieves a promising
classiﬁcation performance on the image data at hand. Therefore,
two experiments are performed in this paper: 1) investigating
the classiﬁcation performance of the proposed performance
predictor with AE-CNN, and 2) inspecting the efﬁciency
of the proposed performance predictor. In this section, the
selected peer competitors and benchmark datasets, as well as
the parameter settings for these two types of experiments, are
detailed.
A. Peer Competitors
In comparing the classiﬁcation performance, the chosen
peer competitors are divided into three different categories:
the state-of-the-art CNNs whose architectures are manually
designed, the state-of-the-art CNN architecture designs based
on non-evolutionary algorithms (mainly based on reinforcement
learning), and the state-of-the-art EDL algorithms. The ﬁrst
category covers DenseNet [50], ResNet [54], Maxout [57],
VGG [58], Network in Network [59], Highway Network [60],
All-CNN [61], FractaNet [62]. Considering the promising
performance of ResNet, we use its two different versions:
ResNet with the depths of 101 and 1;202, respectively.
For the convenience of the discussion, they are denoted as
ResNet (depth=101) and ResNet (depth=1,202), respectively.
The second category consists of NAS [9], MetaQNN [8],
EAS [9], and Block-QNN-S [10]. The third category includes
Genetic CNN [11], Large-scale Evolution [12], Hierarchical
Evolution [13], and CGP-CNN [14]. Considering the proposed
performance predictor is introduced in a case study of AE-CNN,
AE-CNN combined with E2EPP (denoted as AE-CNN+E2EPP)
is chosen to perform this experiment.