6
Algorithm 2: Encoding A CNN Architecture
Input: The CNN architecture A, the maximal number
Bnof DBs and RBs, the maximal number Np
of PBs.
Output: The encoded architecture information.
1blist ;;
2plist ;;
3l Calculate the number of blocks in A;
4forfori 1toldo
5block Get thei-th block ofA;
6 ifblock is a RB then
7 Put1intoblist;
8 Put the values of the outandamount ofblock
intoblist;
9 else if block is a DB then
10 Put the values of the k,outandamount of
block intoblist;
11 else
12 ifblock is a maximal pooling layer then
13 Put1toplist;
14 else
15 Put0toplist;
16 end
17 Putitoplist;
18 end
19end
20Put zero toblistuntiljblistj= 3Nb;
21Put zero toplistuntiljplistj= 2Np;
22Returnblist[plist.
into a triplet as [ type,out,amount ], where the block type
for RBs is set to 1, and that for DBs are set to 12,20and40
whenkis equal to 12,20and40, respectively. Noting that
the parameter of infor each RB/DB is not encoded because it
can be calculated by the outof its previous RB/DB, and the
smaller number of decision variables could result in a better
performance for regression model when the training data is
limited [46]. For the following 2Npvariables, each pooling
layer is encoded into a pair as [pooling type, layer position],
themaximal andmean pooling types are presented by 1 and
0, respectively. If a CNN architecture has bRBs and DBs,
andpPBs, then its 3b+ 1-th to 3Nb-th variables are set to
zeros, and its 3Nb+ 2p+ 1-th to 3Nb+ 2Np-th variables are
set to zeros as well. Therefore, the performance predictor by
using random forest is based on the input data with 3Nb+2Np
discrete decision variables, and the output is a continuous value
within the range of [0;1]. Algorithm 2 shows the details of
encoding a CNN architecture into the data that can be directly
used by the random forest, and jjis a countable operator.
B. Training of the Random Forest
A large number of CARTs are generated in the predictor
pool. Each CART is trained by the whole training data with a
random subset of features (i.e. discrete variables), where each
discrete variable is assigned a probability of 0.5 in order to
maximize the diversity of the predictor pool [55]. Each nodeof a CART presents a rectangle region in the decision space.
The mean squared error of the output of those samples in that
region (node) determines whether this node needs splitting or
not (i.e., whether the mean squared error decrease is smaller
than a set threshold Ts[51], and if so, this node is a leaf node).
WhenKCARTs are obtained, the predictor pool is ready for
the optimizer. The details of training the CARTs are shown in
Algorithm 3.
Algorithm 3: Performance Predictor Training
Input: TheKCARTs, the encoded training data
Dtrain , the feature number m.
Output: TheKtrained CARTs and their selected
feature ids.
1I ;;
2fori 1toKdo
3CART Select thei-th CART from CARTs;
4v2Rm Randomly generated a vector from
[0;1];
5Ii Collect the position of the elements whose
values are greater than 0.5 in v;
6 TrainCART on the features whose ids are in Ii;
7I I[Ii;
8end
Output: TheKtrained CARTs and the corresponding
selected feature ids I.
C. Performance Prediction
Since the computational cost of training a single CNN is
very high, it is impractical to obtain any new training data
for the predictor pool during the optimization process. Thus,
those predictors cannot be updated or validated, which is
the main challenge of ofﬂine SAEAs [40]. To deal with the
lack of training data, a large number of surrogate models are
employed as ensemble members in a recent ofﬂine SAEA
[44]. The results indicate that a selective ensemble surrogate
can effectively improve the robustness of the obtained solution
when the new training data is unavailable. Also, those ensemble
members are adaptively combined in each generation to provide
local information on the current population. Motivated by
the combination strategy that was originally proposed in our
previous work [44] for addressing decision variables having
continuous values, we employ it to update the random forest-
based predictor in every generation in the proposed algorithm,
i.e., we choose QCARTs from the predictor pool and then
use their average prediction as the ﬁtness value. Although the
decision variables of the proposed algorithm are discrete, it is
experimentally found that the combination strategy still works
well.
In each generation, all of the Ktrained CARTs re-estimated
the performance on the CNN Abthat has the best-predicted
ﬁtness value; and then Qout of theKCARTs are uniformly
selected from the Kordered CARTs based on their prediction
values onAb. TheQCARTs are combined as the ensemble
performance predictor to evaluate both parent and offspring
population. Such selection is based on the performance diversity