15
Yaochu Jin (M’98-SM’02-F’16) received the B.Sc.,
M.Sc., and Ph.D. degrees from Zhejiang University,
Hangzhou, China, in 1988, 1991, and 1996 respec-
tively, and the Dr.-Ing. degree from Ruhr University
Bochum, Germany, in 2001.
He is currently a Professor in Computational Intel-
ligence, Department of Computer Science, University
of Surrey, Guildford, U.K., where he heads the Nature
Inspired Computing and Engineering Group. He is
also a Finland Distinguished Professor funded by
the Finnish Agency for Innovation (Tekes) and a
Changjiang Distinguished Visiting Professor appointed by the Ministry of
Education, China. His research interests include computational intelligence,
computational neuroscience, and computational systems biology. He is
particularly interested in nature-inspired, real-world driven problem-solving.
He has (co)authored over 200 peer-reviewed journal and conference papers
and been granted eight patents on evolutionary optimization.
Dr Jin is the Editor-in-Chief of the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COG-
NITIVE AND DEVELOPMENTAL SYSTEMS and Complex & Intelligent
Systems. He is an IEEE Distinguished Lecturer (2017-2019) and was the Vice
President for Technical Activities of the IEEE Computational Intelligence
Society (2014-2015). He is the recipient of the 2014 and 2016 IEEE
Computational Intelligence Magazine Outstanding Paper Award, and the 2017
IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation Outstanding Paper Award.
He is a Fellow of IEEE.
Gary G. Yen (S’87-M’88-SM’97-F’09) received a
Ph.D. degree in electrical and computer engineering
from the University of Notre Dame in 1992. Currently
he is a Regents Professor in the School of Electrical
and Computer Engineering, Oklahoma State Univer-
sity (OSU). Before joined OSU in 1997, he was
with the Structure Control Division, U.S. Air Force
Research Laboratory in Albuquerque. His research
interest includes intelligent control, computational
intelligence, conditional health monitoring, signal
processing and their industrial/defense applications.
Dr. Yen was an associate editor of the IEEE Control Systems Magazine,
IEEE Transactions on Control Systems Technology ,Automatica ,Mechantronics ,
IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man and Cybernetics, Parts A and B and
IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks . He is currently serving as an associate
editor for the IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation and the IEEE
Transactions on Cybernetics . He served as the General Chair for the 2003
IEEE International Symposium on Intelligent Control held in Houston, TX and
2006 IEEE World Congress on Computational Intelligence held in Vancouver,
Canada. Dr. Yen served as Vice President for the Technical Activities in 2005-
2006 and then President in 2010-2011 of the IEEE Computational intelligence
Society. He was the founding editor-in-chief of the IEEE Computational
Intelligence Magazine , 2006-2009. In 2011, he received Andrew P Sage Best
Transactions Paper award from IEEE Systems, Man and Cybernetics Society
and in 2014, he received Meritorious Service award from IEEE Computational
Intelligence Society .
Mengjie Zhang (M’04-SM’10-F’18) received the
B.E. and M.E. degrees from Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Research Center, Agricultural University of Hebei,
Hebei, China, and the Ph.D. degree in computer
science from RMIT University, Melbourne, VIC,
Australia, in 1989, 1992, and 2000, respectively.
He is currently Professor of Computer Science,
Head of the Evolutionary Computation Research
Group, and the Associate Dean (Research and Inno-
vation) in the Faculty of Engineering. His current
research interests include evolutionary computation,
particularly genetic programming, particle swarm optimization, and learning
classiﬁer systems with application areas of image analysis, multi-objective
optimization, feature selection and reduction, job shop scheduling, and transfer
learning. He has published over 350 research papers in refereed international
journals and conferences. Prof. Zhang is a Fellow of Royal Society of
New Zealand and have been a Panel member of the Marsden Fund (New
Zealand Government Funding). He is also a senior member of IEEE and
a member of ACM. He is currently chairing the IEEE CIS Intelligent
Systems and Applications Technical Committee, and the immediate Past
Chair for the IEEE CIS Emergent Technologies Technical Committee and the
Evolutionary Computation Technical Committee, and a member of the IEEE
CIS Award Committee. He is a vice-chair of the IEEE CIS Task Force on
Evolutionary Feature Selection and Construction, a vice-chair of the Task Force
on Evolutionary Computer Vision and Image Processing, and the founding
chair of the IEEE Computational Intelligence Chapter in New Zealand. He is
also a committee member of the IEEE NZ Central Section.