4
while a PB consists of only one pooling layer. Each DU, RU,
or PB differs in terms of the parameter settings. The parameters
of a DU are the sizes of input and output (denoted by inand
out, respectively), while those of an RU are the same as those
of a DU, in addition to an increasing factor (denoted by k). The
parameter of a PB is only the pooling type (i.e., the maximal
ormean pooling type) because its other parameters are all set
to ﬁxed values. Because a DB/RB is composed of multiple
DUs/RUs, the parameters of a DB/RB are the corresponding
parameters of a DU/RU and the amount (denoted by amount )
of DUs/RUs in a DB/RB. In addition, as the DBs, RBs and PBs
compose a CNN with an order, an extra parameter (denoted by
id) is also used to represent the corresponding position in the
CNN. Obviously, a CNN generated by AE-CNN is composed
of sequential blocks which may be the DUs, RUs or PBs. When
the block is an RB, the parameters are the id,amount ,inand
out; when the block is a DB, the parameters are id,amount ,
k,inandout; when the block is a PB, the parameter is the
pooling type denoted by type. Noting that the inof the current
RB/DB should be equal to the outof its previous RB/DB for
the reason of constructing a valid CNN.
3) Random Forest: Compared with other learning algorithms,
such as neural networks, the random forest has the advantages
of directly accepting the discrete data as input, almost having
no extra parameters to tune and not relying on a large amount
of training data [50]. These advantages are the exact reason for
employing the random forest in this work. Random forest [45]
is an ensemble learning method by operating a set of decision
trees for classiﬁcation and regression tasks [46]. During the
training of random forest, each decision tree randomly selects
a part of the whole feature set and then learns the mapping
from the selected features to the corresponding target. During
the predicting process, each decision tree selects the same
features as it selects in the training phase, and then output
the corresponding prediction. The random forest uses the
average output of the selected decision trees as its ﬁnal output.
Randomly selecting a part of the whole feature set is also the
famous random subspace method [47], which has been shown
to be simple yet effective.
B. Related Work
The existing performance predictors can be classiﬁed into
two different categories: performance predictors based on the
learning curve and end-to-end performance predictors, both
of which are based on the training-predicting computational
paradigm. The representatives of these two types are the Freeze-
thaw Bayesian Optimization (FBO) algorithm [29] and the
Peephole algorithm [32].
The FBO algorithm uses a regression model based on
Bayesian Optimization to predict the performance of a CNN.
The regression model is built based on the data sampled from
the learning curve regarding the ﬁrst tepochs, i.e., a series of
data pairs in different training epochs and the corresponding
performance at these epochs. After the regression model that
has been optimized by the Bayesian Optimization method, it is
used to predict the performance of the same CNN at the T-th
epoch where T >t . The Peephole algorithm uses a number ofCNN architectures and their corresponding performances that
have been achieved by training the CNNs with Tepochs, as
the training samples to train a long-short time memory neural
network [33]. The trained neural network directly predicts the
performance of a new CNN based its architecture, which is
called the end-to-end mechanism because the end in the input
is the raw data while the end in the output is the classiﬁcation
accuracy. Because the architecture cannot be directly used as
the input data of the neural network, the Peephole algorithm
employs the word vector technique to map the CNN architecture
to a numerical value.
The major advantage of the FBO algorithm remains in the
trained-CNN-free nature, i.e., it does not need any trained
CNNs in advance. Because training a CNN is time-consuming,
varying from several days to weeks, the FBO algorithm is
efﬁcient. However, it will not be effective when the learning
curve is not smooth because the curve ﬁtting works under the
assumption that the curve is smooth. In recent deep learning
applications, the learning curve is usually not smooth because
a schedule of learning rates is usually used. Once the learning
rate is changed, the learning curve will have a non-smooth
segment. Another limitation of the FBO algorithm is the non-
end-to-end nature (i.e., in predicting the performance of each
CNN, a part of the training data regarding this CNN must be
collected for training the predictor), which requires much more
labour work when it is used. Owing to the end-to-end nature,
the Peephole algorithm is more convenient for use. However,
the major drawback of Peephole remains in the requirement
of a large number of training samples, which results in added
computational complexity of collecting train samples exceeding
the EDL without using performance predictors. For example,
Peephole used over 8;000fully trained CNN architectures as
the training data. However, EDLs generally achieve promising
performance by evaluating only hundreds of individuals. If we
have enough computational resources to evaluate the 8;000
CNN architectures, we will not need to develop the performance
predictor. Such a limitation is largely caused by its adopted
regression mode, i.e., the neural network-based algorithm,
which typically highly relies on a large amount of labelled
training data.
The proposed performance predictor has the advantages of
the end-to-end manner and relying upon only limited training
data, which address both limitations of the existing performance
predictors discussed above.
III. P ROPOSED ALGORITHM
As mentioned, the main challenge of EDL is the high
computational cost of evaluating a single CNN architecture.
Inspired by ofﬂine SAEAs, we use random forest [46] as the
ﬁtness predictor to replace the expensive ﬁtness evaluation.
For a better understanding, Fig. 1 shows the framework of the
proposed performance predictor as well as the associated EDL.
The random forest-based performance predictor is learned from
a number of different CNN architectures that have been trained
for a classiﬁcation task with their accuracy. Compared with
the CNN training process, the random forest construction and
prediction is computationally cheaper and can be repeatedly