1
Surrogate-Assisted Evolutionary Deep Learning
Using an End-to-End Random Forest-based
Performance Predictor
Yanan Sun, Member, IEEE, Handing Wang, Member, IEEE, Bing Xue, Member, IEEE,
Yaochu Jin, Fellow, IEEE, Gary G. Yen, Fellow, IEEE, and Mengjie Zhang, Fellow, IEEE
Abstract —Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have shown
remarkable performance in various real-world applications. Un-
fortunately, the promising performance of CNNs can be achieved
only when their architectures are optimally constructed. The
architectures of state-of-the-art CNNs are typically hand-crafted
with extensive expertise in both CNNs and the investigated data,
which consequently hampers the widespread adoption of CNNs
for less experienced users. Evolutionary deep learning (EDL) is
able to automatically design the best CNN architectures without
much expertise. However, existing EDL algorithms generally
evaluate the ﬁtness of a new architecture by training from
scratch, resulting in the prohibitive computational cost even
operated on high-performance computers. In this paper, an end-
to-end ofﬂine performance predictor based on the random forest
is proposed to accelerate the ﬁtness evaluation in EDL. The
proposed performance predictor shows promising performance
in term of the classiﬁcation accuracy and the consumed compu-
tational resources when compared with 18 state-of-the-art peer
competitors by integrating it into an existing EDL algorithm as a
case study. The proposed performance predictor is also compared
with the other two representatives of existing performance predic-
tors. The experimental results show the proposed performance
predictor not only signiﬁcantly speeds up the ﬁtness evaluations,
but also achieves the best prediction among the peer performance
predictors.
Index Terms —evolutionary deep learning, performance pre-
dictor, surrogate model, random forest, convolutional neural
network.
I. I NTRODUCTION
This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation
of China under Grant 61803277, in part by the Fundamental Research Funds
for the Central Universities, in part by the National Natural Science Fund
of China for Distinguished Young Scholar under Grant 61625204, and in
part by the Marsden Fund of New Zealand Government under Contracts
VUW1209, VUW1509 and VUW1615, Huawei Industry Fund E2880/3663, and
the University Research Fund at Victoria University of Wellington 209862/3580,
and 213150/3662.
Y . Sun is with the College of Computer Science, Sichuan University,
Chengdu 610065, China, and also with the School of Engineering and Computer
Science, Victoria University of Wellington, Wellington 6140, New Zealand
(e-mail: ysun@scu.edu.cn).
B. Xue, and M. Zhang are with the School of Engineering and
Computer Science, Victoria University of Wellington, PO Box 600,
Wellington 6140, New Zealand (e-mails: bing.xue@ecs.vuw.ac.nz; and
mengjie.zhang@ecs.vuw.ac.nz).
H. Wang is with School of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Xidian University, Xi’an
710071, China. (e-mail: hdwang@xidian.edu.cn).
Y . Jin is with the Department of Computer Science, University of Surrey,
Guildford GU2 7XH, U.K. (e-mail: yaochu.jin@surrey.ac.uk).
G. Yen is with the School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Oklahoma
State University, Stillwater, OK 74078 USA (e-mail:gyen@okstate.edu).
H. Wang and B. Xue are the corresponding authors.CONVOLUTIONAL Neural Networks (CNNs) [1], [2], as
the most dominant deep learning approaches [3], have
been demonstrating their promising performance in addressing
various real-world applications, such as image classiﬁcation [4],
speech understanding [5], and natural language processing [6],
to name a few. It is well known that the performance of CNNs
highly relies upon their architectures, and a new architecture
must be redesigned if the addressed data has been changed.
Unfortunately, designing architecture with the best performance
for the investigated data requires extensive expertise in both the
CNNs and the data domain [7], which is not necessarily held
by the interested users. Designing the best CNN architecture
for the given data can be seen as an optimization problem,
which can be mathematically formulated by (1):
arg max
AL(A;Dtrain;Dtest)s:t: 2 (1)
whererefers to the parameters related to the architectures
of CNNs, such as the number of convolutional layers and the
conﬁgurations of pooling layers; refers to the parameter
space,Adenotes the CNN algorithm Aadopting the architec-
ture parameters , andLmeans the performance measure of A
on the test data Dtestafter it has been trained on the training
dataDtrain . Generally, is with discrete values, e.g., the
conﬁgurations of both convolutional and pooling layers must be
integers, which results in the architecture optimization not being
well-addressed by the exact optimization algorithms. To address
this challenge, researchers have developed algorithms (e.g., [8]–
[14]) to design the best CNN architecture by effectively solving
the problems represented in (1). Among these algorithms,
the evolutionary algorithm-based ones, which are called the
evolutionary deep learning algorithms (EDLs), are much
preferred because EDLs generally consume less computational
resource than other CNN architecture design algorithms [11]–
[14], while still can achieve the promising results. For example,
on the CIFAR10 dataset [15], the evolutionary algorithm-based
Automatic Evolving CNN (AE-CNN) algorithm ﬁnds the best
CNN architectures by consuming 22 days using three Graphics
Processing Units (GPUs), and achieves the classiﬁcation error
rate of 4:7%. However, the reinforcement learning-based neural
architecture search method [9] consumes 28 days using 800
GPUs, while achieves the classiﬁcation error rate of 6:01%
which is a worse result than AE-CNN.