12
This means that the predicted values of E2EPP have minimal
prediction errors, which is consistent with the quantitative
analysis shown in Table III. From Figs. 5a, 5b and 5c that
show the results performed on CIFAR100 by FBO, Peephole
and E2EPP, respectively, it can be seen that FBO and Peephole
achieve the similar results that have a wide spread of points
around the line of y=x, while the results of E2EPP have the
closer distance to the line y=x. This also shows the same
conclusion from the quantitative analysis observed in Table IV.
D. Comparison to Radial Basis Network (RBN)
In order to demonstrate the promising performance of the
random forest employed by the proposed E2EPP performance
predictor, the comparison to RBN is performed, and the results
are shown and analyzed in this subsection.
Speciﬁcally, an RBN is a three-layer neural network, except
that the activation function of each unit in the hidden layer is
a Gaussian function, and the output layer is a linear weight
summation of the output of the hidden layer. The RBN is
often used for regression tasks, which is similar to the function
of random forest used in the proposed E2EPP performance
predictor. Another reason for choosing RBN here for the
comparison is that RBN is the base of our previous work [44]
that motivates the design of E2EPP in this paper. For a fair
comparison, we only replace the random forest by an RBN,
while the other parts are kept the same as that used for the
experiment shown in Subsection V-A. For the convenience of
the discussions, we denote the RBN used by the AE-CNN
algorithm as AE-CNN+RBN.
In the comparison, we only show the classiﬁcation accuracies
on CIFAR10 and CIFAR100, but not showing the consumed
GPU days since the performance of both AE-CNN+E2EPP
and AE-CNN+RBN does not rely on GPUs. The number of
GPU days shown in Table II of AE-CNN+E2EPP is used for
measuring the validity of the generated CNN architectures
during the evolutionary process. In addition, the number of
hidden units of the RBN is set to the same as the input size
based on the conventions of practice [44]. The comparison
results are shown in Table V.
TABLE V
THE COMPARISON OF AE-CNN+E2EPP AND AE-CNN+RBN IN TERMS OF
THE CLASSIFICATION ACCURACY (%) ON THE CIFAR10 AND CIFAR100
BENCHMARK DATASETS .
CIFAR10 CIFAR100
AE-CNN + E2EPP 94.70 77.98
AE-CNN + RBN 82.33 70.20
It can be seen from Table V that AE-CNN+E2EPP achieves
the classiﬁcation accuracies of 94.70% and 77.98% on CI-
FAR10 and CIFAR100, respectively, while AE-CNN+RBN
achieves those of 82.33% and 70.20%, respectively. This
implies that the random forest employed in the proposed
E2EPP performance predictor is better than RBN. In fact,
it is easy to ﬁnd the proof of this conclusion, when the RBN
is used, the mean and standard deviations of the Gaussian
functions are calculated based on the training data. However,
the training data in E2EPP is encoded with some numericalnumbers that do not refer to the real meaning. In addition, the
RBN has been well-known to be suitable for continuous data,
while the training data in E2EPP is discrete. In summary, AE-
CNN+E2EPP outperforms AE-CNN+RBN on the CIFAR10
and CIFAR100 benchmark datasets.
As can be seen above, we have performed four groups of
experiments that are carefully designed to verify the promising
performance of the proposed E2EPP performance predictor.
Particularly, the ﬁrst is for investigating whether E2EPP
could enable EDL to achieve the competitive performance in
designing the CNN architectures. The second validates whether
E2EPP could accelerate EDL or not. The third quantitatively
and qualitatively investigates whether E2EPP could outperform
the existing approaches regarding the performance prediction,
and the fourth investigates whether the random forest employed
in E2EPP could perform better than the RBN that is another
commonly used regression model. In addition to the third
one, all the others are performed in the case of AE-CNN.
All the experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness
and efﬁciency of the proposed E2EPP performance predictor.
From these experimental results, we can recognize that the
performance predictor is indeed able to speed up EDL, and the
end-to-end nature is convenient to use in practice by avoiding
manual interventions during the performing of EDL. In addition,
the random forest, as an ensemble approach, achieves the
promising performance but relying on only limited training
samples, which is a good characteristic especially in EDL where
sufﬁcient training data is not easy to obtain. Furthermore, the
random forest could directly use the discrete number as its
input, which is also another good characteristic in predicting
the performance of CNNs when the architecture information is
used as the input data. This implies that the ensemble methods
depend on discrete input data may be a proper choice in
designing the performance predictors, which is not only suitable
to EDL but also other deep learning model selection methods.
VI. C ONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
The goal of this paper was to develop an effective and
efﬁcient end-to-end performance predictor, named E2EPP, to
speed up evolutionary deep learning algorithms in designing
the best CNN architectures for given tasks. This goal has
been achieved by proposing a random forest-based ofﬂine
surrogate model. In order to enable the random forest to accept
the CNN architectures as its input data, we also develop an
encoding schema that is able to uniquely map the description
of a CNN architecture into a numerical decision variable. In
addition, we took the advantage of random forest in terms
of the ensemble characteristic that each tree in the random
forest randomly selects a subspace of the whole features as its
training data. Furthermore, in order to improve the diversity
of used off-line model, only a part of the decision trees
in the random forest is selected based on their prediction
on the best individual to do the prediction, which in turn
enhances the accuracy of the predicted values. The proposed
performance predictor is ﬁrstly examined by integrating it
into an existing evolutionary deep learning algorithm, which is
called AE-CNN+E2EPP, on CIFAR10 and CIFAR100. Through