5
Data collection
E2EPP
EDLData 1
Data 2
Data NClassifier 
accuracy 1
Classifier 
accuracy 2
Classifier 
accuracy NCART 1 CART 2 CART kRandom 
feature 
selectionRandom 
feature 
selectionRandom 
feature 
selection
InitializationArchitecture 
discoveringFitness 
predictionSelectionPredictor 
selectionPredictor 
combinationEncodingEncoding
Encoding
Encoding
Decision variables: CNN 
architectures Training Objective Predictor pool
Stop?Output 
optimum
Fig. 1. Main frame of the proposed algorithm.
used throughout the evolutionary optimization. Thus, the high
computational cost in EDL can be relieved.
As shown in Fig. 1 that is composed of three blocks,
i.e., the data collection, E2EPP and EDL. The proposed
E2EPP performance predictor is part of EDL. Firstly, a set of
training data is collected for training the random forest-based
predictor, where the collection is achieved by performing the
corresponding EDL without using E2EPP. Each data sample
is composed of the CNN architecture and the corresponding
classiﬁcation accuracy that is obtained by training the CNN
from scratch. Secondly, those architectures are encoded into
discrete code (shown in Subsection III-A ) for building the
random forest-based predictor pool with a large number (say
K) regression trees (denoted as CARTs) [51] (shown in
Subsection III-B ). During each generation of the EDL, the
newly generated CNN architecture is encoded as the input to
the random forest, and then its performance is predicted by
using the adaptive combination of CARTs from the predictor
pool (shown in Subsection III-C ). When the EDL terminates,
the CNN architecture that has the best prediction performance
is output. Noting that there is no further CNN training during
the optimization process.
Since the CNN architecture is presented as discrete variables,
random forest [52], which is suited for discrete regression
tasks and also relies on only limited labelled data [53], is
adopted as the ﬁtness predictor in the proposed algorithm.
Also, as a selective ensemble of CARTs considering both
global and local landscape, the random forest-based predictor
is adaptively updated over the generations of the evolutionary
search, where the population is distributed in different local
regions and a ﬁxed random forest cannot guarantee accuracyin those local regions. In the following subsections, we will
ﬁrst introduce the details of encoding of the CNN architectures
to the proper format for the random forest, training of the
random forest, and ﬁtness prediction using the trained random
forest in Subsections III-A ,III-B andIII-C , respectively. Then,
the strength and the weakness of the proposed performance
predictor are summarized in Subsection III-D.
A. Encoding
The encoding operates on the trained CNNs whose architec-
tures are randomly initialized. To collect this data, we use AE-
CNN to randomly generate a set of valid CNN architectures.
A valid CNN architecture means that this architecture can
be trained with a predeﬁned training routine without any
exceptions such as the out-of-memory errors causing a zero
classiﬁcation accuracy. Based on the description shown in
Subsection II-A2, the collected training data are summarized
as below:
1)RBs and DBs: Each generated CNN architecture is
composed of four RBs and four DBs at most, the number
of output channels of each block varies between [32;512]
that is set based on the conventions of state-of-the-art
CNNs [50], [54].
2)PBs: Each generated CNN architecture contains four
pooling layers at most. There are two types of PBs: MAX
and MEAN.
Generally, we encode a CNN architecture into a chromosome
with3Nb+ 2Npdiscrete variables, when the maximal number
of RBs and DBs is Nband the maximal number of PBs is
Np. For the ﬁrst 3Nbvariables, each RB or DB is encoded