4501 A survey of deep meta-learning  
1 3
3.5  Relation networks
In contrast to previously discussed metric-based techniques, Relation networks (Sung et al. 
2018) employ a trainable similarity metric, instead of a pre-defined one (e.g. cosine simi-
larity as used in matching networks (Vinyals et al. 2016)). More specifically, matching net-
works consist of two chained, neural network modules: the embedding network/module f/u1D74B 
which is responsible for embedding inputs, and the relation network g/u1D753 which computes 
similarity scores between new inputs x and example inputs xi of which we know the labels. 
A classification decision is then made by picking the class of the example input which 
yields the largest relation score (or similarity). Note that Relation networks thus do not use 
the idea of class prototypes, and simply compare new inputs x to all example inputs xi in 
the support set, as done by, e.g., matching networks (Vinyals et al. 2016).
More formally, we are given a support set Dtr
Tj with some examples (xi,yi) , and a new 
(previously unseen) input x . Then, for every combination (x,xi) , the Relation network pro-
duces a concatenated embedding [f/u1D74B(x), f/u1D74B(xi)] , which is the vector obtained by concatenat-
ing the respective embeddings of x and xi . This concatenated embedding is then fed into 
the relation module g/u1D753 . Finally, g/u1D753 computes the relation score between x and xi as
The predicted class is then ̂y=yarg maxiri . This entire process is shown in Fig.  9. Remark -
ably enough, Relation networks use the Mean-Squared Error (MSE) of the relation scores, 
rather than the more standard cross-entropy loss. The MSE is then propagated backwards 
through the entire architecture (Fig. 9).
The key advantage of Relation networks is their expressive power, induced by the usage 
of a trainable similarity function. This expressivity makes this technique very powerful. As 
a result, it yields better performance than previously discussed techniques that use a fixed 
similarity metric.
3.6  Graph neural networks
Graph neural networks (Garcia and Bruna 2017) use a more general and flexible approach 
than previously discussed techniques for N-way, k-shot classification. As such, graph neu-
ral networks subsume Siamese (Koch et al. 2015) and prototypical networks (Snell et al. 
2017). The graph neural network approach represents each task Tj as a fully-connected 
graph G=(V,E) , where V is a set of nodes/vertices and E a set of edges connecting nodes. 
In this graph, nodes vi correspond to input embeddings f/u1D73D(xi) , concatenated with their one-
hot encoded labels yi , i.e., vi=[ f/u1D73D(xi),yi] . For inputs x from the query set (for which we 
do not have the labels), a uniform prior over all N possible labels is used: y=[1
N,…,1
N] . 
Thus, each node contains an input and label section. Edges are weighted links that connect 
these nodes.
The graph neural network then propagates information in the graph using a number 
of local operators. The underlying idea is that label information can be transmitted from 
nodes of which we do have the labels, to nodes for which we have to predict labels. Which 
local operators are used, is out of scope for this paper, and the reader is referred to Garcia 
and Bruna (2017) for details.(10) ri=g/u1D753([f/u1D74B(x), f/u1D74B(xi)]).