4518 M. Huisman et al.
1 3
forget gate, ft , determines what part of the cell state should be forgotten, and is computed 
in a similar fashion, but with different weights.
To prevent an explosion of meta-learner parameters, weight-sharing is used, in a simi-
lar fashion to LSTM optimizers proposed by Andrychowicz et al. (2016) (Sect.  5.2). This 
implies that the same update rule is applied to every weight at a given time step. The exact 
update, however, depends on the history of that specific parameter in terms of the previous 
learning rate, loss, etc. For simplicity, second-order derivatives were ignored, by assuming 
the base-learner’s loss does not depend on the cell state of the LSTM optimizer. Batch nor -
malization was applied to stabilize and speed up the learning process.
In short, LSTM optimizers can learn to optimize a base-learner by maintaining a one-
to-one correspondence over time between the base-learner’s weights and the LSTM cell 
state. This allows the LSTM to exploit commonalities in the tasks, allowing for quicker 
optimization. However, there are simpler approaches (e.g. MAML Finn et al. 2017) that 
outperform this technique.
5.4  Reinforcement learning optimizer
Li and Malik (2018) proposed a framework that casts optimization as a reinforcement 
learning problem. Optimization can then be performed by existing reinforcement learning 
techniques. At a high-level, an optimization algorithm g takes as input an initial set of 
weights /u1D73D0 and a task Tj with the corresponding loss function LTj , and produces a sequence 
of new weights /u1D73D1,…,/u1D73DT , where /u1D73DT is the final solution found. On this sequence of pro-
posed new weights, we can define a loss function L that captures unwanted properties (e.g. 
slow convergence, oscillations, etc.). The goal of learning an optimizer can then be formu-
lated more precisely as follows. We wish to learn an optimal optimizer
The key insight is that the optimization can be formulated as a Partially Observable 
Markov Decision Process (POMDP). Then, the state corresponds to the current set of 
weights /u1D73Dt , the action to the proposed update at time step t, i.e., /u1D6E5/u1D73Dt , and the policy to the 
function that computes the update. With this formulation, the optimizer g can be learned by 
existing reinforcement learning techniques. In their paper, they used a recurrent neural net-
work as an optimizer. At each time step, they feed it observation features, which depend on 
the previous set of weights, loss gradients, and objective functions, and use guided policy 
search to train it.
In summary, Li and Malik (2018) made the first step towards general optimization 
through reinforcement learning optimizers, which were shown able to generalize across 
network architectures and data sets. However, the base-learner architecture that was 
used was quite small. The question remains whether this approach can scale to larger 
architectures.
5.5  MAML
Model-agnostic meta-learning (MAML) (Finn et  al. 2017) uses a simple gradient-based 
inner optimization procedure (e.g. stochastic gradient descent), instead of more com-
plex LSTM procedures or procedures based on reinforcement learning. The key idea of 
MAML is to explicitly optimize for fast adaptation to new tasks by learning a good set (19) g∗=argming/u1D53CTj∽p(T),/u1D73D0∽p(/u1D73D0)[L(g(LTj,/u1D73D0))]