4512 M. Huisman et al.
1 3
4.6  Conditional neural processes (CNPs)
In contrast to previous techniques, a conditional neural process (CNP) (Garnelo et al. 2018) 
does not rely on an external memory module. Instead, it aggregates the support set into a 
single aggregated latent representation. The general architecture is shown in Fig.  18. As we 
can see, the conditional neural process operates in three phases on task Tj . First, it observes 
the support set Dtr
Tj , including the ground-truth outputs yi . Examples (xi,yi)∈Dtr
Tj are 
embedded using a neural network h/u1D73D into representations ri . Second, these representations 
are aggregated using operator a to produce a single representation r of Dtr
Tj (hence it is 
model-based). Third, a neural network g/u1D753 processes this single representation r , new inputs 
x , and produces predictions ̂y.
Let the entire conditional neural process model be denoted by Q/u1D723 , where /u1D6E9 is a set of all 
involved parameters {/u1D73D ,/u1D753} . The training process is different compared to other techniques. 
Let xTj and yTj denote all inputs and corresponding outputs in Dtr
Tj . Then, the first 
𝓁∽U(0,…,k⋅N−1) examples in Dtr
Tj are used as a conditioning set Dc
Tj (effectively split-
ting the support set into a true training set and a validation set). Given a value of /u1D4C1 , the goal 
is to maximize the log-likelihood (or minimize the negative log-likelihood) of the labels yTj 
in the entire support set Dtr
Tj
Conditional neural processes are trained by repeatedly sampling various tasks and values 
of /u1D4C1 , and propagating the observed loss backwards.
In summary, conditional neural processes use compact representations of previously 
seen inputs to aid the classification of new observations. Despite its simplicity and ele-
gance, a disadvantage of this technique is that it is often outperformed in few-shot settings 
by other techniques such as matching networks (Vinyals et al. 2016) (see Sect. 3.3).
4.7  Neural statistician
A neural statistician (Edwards and Storkey 2017) differs from earlier approaches as it 
learns to compute summary statistics, or meta-features, of data sets in an unsupervised 
manner. These latent embeddings (making the approach model-based) can then later be (12) L(/u1D723)=−/u1D53CTj∽p(T)/bracketleft.s2
/u1D53C𝓁∽U(0,…,k ⋅N−1)/parenleft.s2
Q/u1D723(yTj/uni007C.varDc
Tj,xTj)/parenright.s2/bracketright.s2
.Fig. 18  A schematic view of 
how conditional neural processes 
work. Here, h denotes a network 
outputting a representation for 
an observation, a denotes an 
aggregation function for these 
representations, and g denotes 
a neural network that makes 
predictions for unlabelled obser -
vations, based on the aggregated 
representation. Source: Garnelo 
et al. (2018)