4502 M. Huisman et al.
1 3
By exposing the graph neural network to various tasks Tj , the propagation mecha-
nism can be altered to improve the flow of label information in such a way that predic-
tions become more accurate. As such, in addition to learning a good input representation 
function f/u1D73D , graph neural networks also learn to propagate label information from labeled 
examples to unlabeled inputs.
Graph neural networks achieve good performance in few-shot settings (Garcia and 
Bruna 2017) and are also applicable in semi-supervised and active learning settings.
3.7  Attentive recurrent comparators
Attentive recurrent comparators (Shyam et al. 2017) differ from previously discussed tech-
niques as they do not compare inputs as a whole, but by parts. This approach is inspired 
by how humans would make a decision concerning the similarity of objects. That is, we 
shift our attention from one object to the other, and move back and forth to take glimpses 
of different parts of both objects. In this way, information of two objects is fused from 
the beginning, whereas other techniques (e.g., matching networks (Vinyals et  al. 2016) 
and graph neural networks (Garcia and Bruna 2017)) only combine information at the end 
(after embedding both images) (Shyam et al. 2017).
Given two inputs xi and x , we feed them in interleaved fashion repeatedly into a recur -
rent neural network (controller): xi,x,… ,xi,x . Thus, the image at time step t is given by 
It=xi if t is even else x . Then, at each time step t, the attention mechanism focuses on a 
square region of the current image: Gt=attend (It,/u1D6FAt) , where /u1D6FAt=Wght−1 are attention 
Fig. 10  Processing in an attentive recurrent comparator. At every time step, the model takes a glimpse of 
a part of an image and incorporates this information into the hidden state ht . The final hidden state after 
taking various glimpses of a pair of images is then used to compute a class similarity score. Source: Shyam 
et al. (2017)