4484 M. Huisman et al.
1 3
different levels: an inner- and an outer-level. At the inner-level, a new task is presented, and 
the agent tries to quickly learn the associated concepts from the training observations. This 
quick adaptation is facilitated by knowledge that it has accumulated across earlier tasks at 
the outer-level. Thus, whereas the inner-level concerns a single task, the outer-level con-
cerns a multitude of tasks.
Historically, the term meta-learning has been used with various scopes. In its broadest 
sense, it encapsulates all systems that leverage prior learning experience in order to learn 
new tasks more quickly (Vanschoren 2018). This broad notion includes more traditional 
algorithm selection and hyperparameter optimization techniques for Machine Learning 
(Brazdil et al. 2008). In this work, however, we focus on a subset of the meta-learning field 
which develops meta-learning procedures to learn a good inductive bias for (deep) neural 
networks.1 Henceforth, we use the term Deep Meta-Learning to refer to this subfield of 
meta-learning.
The field of Deep Meta-Learning is advancing at a quick pace, while it lacks a coherent, 
unifying overview, providing detailed insights into the key techniques. Vanschoren (2018) 
has surveyed meta-learning techniques, where meta-learning was used in the broad sense, 
limiting its account of Deep Meta-Learning techniques. Also, many exciting developments 
in deep meta-learning have happened after the survey was published. A more recent survey 
by Hospedales et al. (2020) adopts the same notion of deep meta-learning as we do, but 
aims for a broad overview, omitting technical details of the various techniques.
We attempt to fill this gap by providing detailed explications of contemporary Deep 
Meta-Learning techniques, using a unified notation. More specifically, we cover modern 
techniques in the field for supervised and reinforcement learning, that have achieved state-
of-the-art performance, obtained popularity in the field, and presented novel ideas. Extra 
attention is paid to MAML (Finn et  al. 2017), and related techniques, because of their 
impact on the field. We show how the techniques relate to each other, detail their strengths 
and weaknesses, identify current challenges, and provide an overview of promising future 
research directions. One of the observations that we make is that the network complexity 
is highly related to the few-shot classification performance (see Fig.  1). One might expect 
that in a few-shot setting, where only a few examples are available to learn from, the num-
ber of network parameters should be kept small to prevent overfitting. Clearly, the figure 
shows that this does not hold, as techniques that use larger backbones tend to achieve better 
performance. One important factor might be that due to the high amount of tasks that have 
been seen by the network, we are in a setting where similarly large amounts of observations 
have been evaluated. This result suggests that the size of the network should be taken into 
account when comparing algorithms.
This work can serve as an educational introduction to the field of Deep Meta-Learn-
ing, and as reference material for experienced researchers in the field. Throughout, we 
will adopt the taxonomy used by Vinyals (2017), which identifies three categories of Deep 
Meta-Learning approaches: (i)  metric-, (ii)  model-, and (iii)  optimization-based meta-
learning techniques.
The remainder of this work is structured as follows. Sect.  2 builds a common foun-
dation on which we will base our overview of Deep Meta-Learning techniques. Sec-
tions  3, 4, and  5 cover the main metric-, model-, and optimization-based meta-learn-
ing techniques, respectively. Section  6 provides a helicopter view of the field and 
1 Here, inductive bias refers to the assumptions of a model which guide predictions on unseen data (Mitch-
ell 1980).