4507 A survey of deep meta-learning  
1 3
4.3  Memory‑augmented neural networks (MANNs)
The key idea of memory-augmented neural networks  (MANNs) (Santoro et  al. 2016) is 
to enable neural networks to learn quickly with the help of an external memory. The main 
controller (the recurrent neural network interacting with the memory) then gradually accu-
mulates knowledge across tasks, while the external memory allows for quick task-specific 
adaptation. For this, Santoro et  al. (2016) used Neural Turing Machines (Graves et  al. 
2014). Here, the controller is parameterized by /u1D73D and acts as the long-term memory of the 
memory-augmented neural network, while the external memory module is the short-term 
memory.
The workflow of memory-augmented neural networks is displayed in Fig.  13. Note that 
the data from a task is processed as a sequence, i.e., data are fed into the network one by 
one. The support set is fed into the memory-augmented neural network first. Afterwards, 
the query set is processed. During the meta-train phase, training tasks can be fed into the 
network in arbitrary order. At time step t, the model receives input xt with the label of the 
previous input, i.e., yt−1 . This was done to prevent the network from mapping class labels 
directly to the output (Santoro et al. 2016).
The interaction between the controller and memory is visualized in Fig.  14. The idea is 
that the external memory module, containing representations of previously seen inputs, can 
be used to make predictions for new inputs. In short, previously obtained knowledge is lev -
eraged to aid the classification of new inputs. Note that neural networks also attempt to do 
this, however, their prior knowledge is slowly accumulated into the network weights, while 
an external memory module can directly store such information.
Given an input xt at time t, the controller generates a key kt , which can be stored in 
memory matrix M and can be used to retrieve previous representations from memory 
matrix M. When reading from memory, the aim is to produce a linear combination of 
stored keys in memory matrix M, giving greater weight to those which have a larger cosine 
similarity with the current key kt . More specifically, a read vector wr
t is created, in which 
each entry i denotes the cosine similarity between key kt and the memory (from a previous 
input) stored in row i, i.e., Mt(i) . Then, the representation rt=∑
iwr
t(i)M (i) is retrieved, 
which is simply a linear combination of all keys (i.e., rows) in memory matrix M.
Predictions are made as follows. Given an input xt , memory-augmented neural networks 
use the external memory to compute the corresponding representation rt , which could be 
fed into a softmax layer, resulting in class probabilities. Across tasks, memory-augmented 
neural networks learn a good input embedding function f/u1D73D and classifier weights, which 
can be exploited when presented with new tasks.
To write input representations to memory, Santoro et al. (2016) propose a new mecha-
nism called Least Recently Used Access (LRUA). LRUA either writes to the least, or most 
recently used memory location. In the former case, it preserves recent memories, and in 
the latter, it updates recently obtained information. The writing mechanism works by keep-
ing track of how often every memory location is accessed in a usage vector wu
t , which is 
updated at every time step according to the following update rule: wu
t∶=/u1D6FEwu
t−1+wr
t+ww
t , 
where superscripts u,  w and r refer to usage, write and read vectors, respectively. In words, 
the previous usage vector is decayed (using parameter /u1D6FE ), while current reads ( wr
t ) and 
writes ( ww
t ) are added to the usage. Let n be the total number of reads to memory, and 
/u1D4C1u(n) ( /u1D4C1u for ‘least used’) be the n-th smallest value in the usage vector wu
t . Then, the least-
used weights are defined as follows: