4535 A survey of deep meta-learning  
1 3
can have very flexible internal dynamics, but lack generalization ability to more distant 
tasks than the ones used at meta-train time (Finn and Levine 2018). Optimization-based 
approaches have shown greater generalizability, but are in general computationally expen-
sive, as they optimize a base-learner for every task (Finn and Levine 2018; Hospedales 
et al. 2020).
Table  2 provides a concise, tabular overview of these approaches. Many techniques have 
been proposed for each one of the categories, and the underlying ideas may vary greatly, 
even within the same category. Table  3, therefore, provides an overview of all methods and 
key ideas that we have discussed in this work, together with their applicability to super -
vised learning (SL) and reinforcement learning (RL) settings, key ideas, and benchmarks 
that were used for testing them. Table  5 displays an overview of the 1- and 5-shot classifi-
cation performances (reported by the original authors) of the techniques on the frequently 
used miniImageNet benchmark. Moreover, it displays the used backbone (feature extrac-
tion module) as well as the final classification mechanism. From this table, it becomes 
clear that the 5-shot performance is typically better than the 1-shot performance, indicating 
that data scarcity is a large bottleneck for achieving good performance. Moreover, there is 
a strong relationship between the expressivity of the backbone and the performance. That 
is, deeper backbones tend to give rise to better classification performance. The best per -
formance is achieved by MetaOptNet, yielding a 1-shot accuracy of 64.09% and a 5-shot 
accuracy of 80.00%. Note however that MetaOptNet used a deeper backbone than most of 
the other techniques.
6.2  Open challenges and future work
Despite the great potential of Deep Meta-Learning techniques, there are still open chal-
lenges, which we discuss here.
Figure  1 in Sect.  1 displays the accuracy scores of the covered meta-learning techniques 
on 1-shot miniImageNet classification. Techniques that were not tested in this setting by the 
original authors are omitted. As we can see, the performance of the techniques is related 
to the expressivity of the used backbone (ordered in increasing order on the x-axis). For 
example, the best-performing techniques, LEO and MetaOptNet, use the largest network 
architectures. Moreover, the fact that different techniques use different backbones poses 
a problem as it is difficult to fairly compare their classification performance. An obvious 
question arises to which degree the difference in performance is due to methodological 
improvements, opposed to the fact that a better backbone architecture was chosen. For this 
reason, we think that it would be useful to perform a large-scale benchmark test where 
techniques are compared when they use the same backbones. This would also allow us to 
get a more clear idea of how the expressivity of the feature extraction module affects the 
performance.
Another challenge of Deep Meta-Learning techniques is that they can be susceptible 
to the memorization problem (meta-overfitting), where the neural network has memorized 
tasks seen at meta-training time and fails to generalize to new tasks. More research is 
required to better understand this problem. Clever task design and meta-regularization may 
prove useful to avoid such problems (Yin et al. 2020).
Another problem is that most of the meta-learning techniques discussed in this work 
are evaluated on narrow benchmark sets. This means that the data that the meta-learner 
used for training are not too distant from the data used for evaluating its performance. As 
such, one may wonder how well these techniques are able to adapt to more distant tasks.