4534 M. Huisman et al.
1 3
need of computing higher-order derivatives. LEO (Rusu et al. 2018) tries to improve the 
robustness of MAML by optimizing in lower-dimensional parameter space through the 
use of an encoder-decoder architecture. Lastly, R2-D2, LR-D2 (Bertinetto et al. 2019), and 
Lee et al. (2019) use simple classical machine learning methods (ridge regression, logistic 
regression, SVM, respectively) as a classifier on top of a learned feature extractor.
A key advantage of optimization-based approaches is that they can achieve better per -
formance on wider task distributions than, e.g., model-based approaches (Finn and Levine 
2018). However, optimization-based techniques optimize a base-learner for every task that 
they are presented with and/or learn the optimization procedure, which is computationally 
expensive (Hospedales et al. 2020).
Optimization-based meta-learning is a very active area of research. We expect future 
work to be done in order to reduce the computational demands of these methods and 
improve the solution quality and level of generalization. We think that benchmarking and 
reproducibility research will play an important role in these improvements.
6  Concluding remarks
In this section, we give a helicopter view of all that we discussed, and the field of Deep 
Meta-Learning in general. We will also discuss challenges and future research.
6.1  Overview
In recent years, there has been a shift in focus in the broad meta-learning community. Tra-
ditional algorithm selection and hyperparameter optimization for classical machine learn-
ing techniques (e.g. Support Vector Machines, Logistic Regression, Random Forests, etc.) 
have been augmented by Deep Meta-Learning, or equivalently, the pursuit of self-improv -
ing neural networks that can leverage prior learning experience to learn new tasks more 
quickly. Instead of training a new model from scratch for different tasks, we can use the 
same (meta-learning) model across tasks. As such, meta-learning can widen the applicabil-
ity of powerful deep learning techniques to domains where less data is available and com-
putational resources are limited.
Deep Meta-Learning techniques are characterized by their meta-objective, which allows 
them to maximize performance across various tasks, instead of a single one, as is the case 
in base-level learning objectives. This meta-objective is reflected in the training procedure 
of meta-learning methods, as they learn on a set of different meta-training tasks. The few-
shot setting lends itself nicely towards this end, as tasks consist of few data points. This 
makes it computationally feasible to train on many different tasks, and it allows us to evalu-
ate whether a neural network can learn new concepts from few examples. Task construction 
for training and evaluation does require some special attention. That is, it has been shown 
beneficial to match training and test conditions (Vinyals et al. 2016), and perhaps train in a 
more difficult setting than the one that will be used for evaluation (Snell et al. 2017).
On a high level, there are three categories of Deep Meta-Learning techniques, namely 
(i)  metric-, (ii)  model-, and (iii)  optimization-based ones, which rely on (i) computing 
input similarity, (ii) task embeddings with states, and (iii) task-specific updates, respec-
tively. Each approach has strengths and weaknesses. Metric-learning techniques are simple 
and effective (Garcia and Bruna 2017), but are not readily applicable outside of the super -
vised learning setting (Hospedales et al. 2020). Model-based techniques, on the other hand,