4504 M. Huisman et al.
1 3
networks (Sung et al. 2018) replace the fixed, pre-defined similarity metrics used in match-
ing and prototypical networks with a neural network, which allows for learning a domain-
specific similarity function. Lastly, attentive recurrent comparators (ARCs) (Shyam et al. 
2017) take a more biologically plausible approach by not comparing entire inputs but by 
taking multiple interleaved glimpses at various parts of the inputs that are being compared.
Key advantages of these metric-based techniques are that (i) the underlying idea of sim-
ilarity-based predictions is conceptually simple, and (ii) they can be fast at test-time when 
tasks are small, as the networks do not need to make task-specific adjustments. However, 
when tasks at meta-test time become more distant from the tasks that were used at meta-
train time, metric-learning techniques are unable to absorb new task information into the 
network weights. Consequently, performance may suffer.
Furthermore, when tasks become larger, pair-wise comparisons may become compu-
tationally expensive. Lastly, most metric-based techniques rely on the presence of labeled 
examples, which make them inapplicable outside of supervised learning settings.
4  Model‑based meta‑learning
A different approach to Deep Meta-Learning is the model-based approach. On a high level, 
model-based techniques rely upon an adaptive, internal state, in contrast to metric-based 
techniques, which generally use a fixed neural network at test-time.
More specifically, model-based techniques maintain a stateful, internal representation 
of a task. When presented with a task, a model-based neural network processes the support 
set in a sequential fashion. At every time step, an input enters and alters the internal state 
of the model. Thus, the internal state can capture relevant task-specific information, which 
can be used to make predictions for new inputs.
Because the predictions are based on internal dynamics that are hidden from the out-
side, model-based techniques are also called black-boxes. Information from previous inputs 
must be remembered, which is why model-based techniques have a memory component, 
either in- or externally.
Recall that the mechanics of metric-based techniques were limited to pair-wise input 
comparisons. This is not the case for model-based techniques, where the human designer 
has the freedom to choose the internal dynamics of the algorithm. As a result, model-based 
techniques are not restricted to meta-learning good feature spaces, as they can also learn 
internal dynamics, used to process and predict input data of tasks.
More formally, given a support set Dtr
Tj corresponding to a task Tj , model-based tech-
niques compute a class probability distribution for a new input x as
where f represents the black-box neural network model, and /u1D73D its parameters.
4.1  Example
Using the same example as in Sect.  3, suppose we are given a task support set 
Dtr
Tj= {([0, −4],1 ),([−2, −4],2 ),([−2, 4],3 ),([6, 0],4 )} , where a tuple denotes a pair 
(xi,yi) . Furthermore, suppose our query set only contains one example Dtest
Tj= {([4, 0.5],4 )} . (11) p/u1D73D(Y/uni007C.varx,Dtr
Tj)=f/u1D73D(x,Dtr
Tj),