4490 M. Huisman et al.
1 3
and k examples per class, implying that /uni007C.varDtr
Tj/uni007C.var=N⋅k . Furthermore, the true labels of 
examples in the test set Dtest
Tj must be present in the train set Dtr
Tj of a given task Tj . Dtr
Tj 
acts as a support set, literally supporting classification decisions on the query set Dtest
Tj . 
Importantly, note that with this terminology, the query set (or test set) of a task is used 
during the meta-training phase. Furthermore, the fact that the labels across stages are 
disjoint ensures that we test the ability of a model to learn new concepts.
The meta-learning objective in the training phase is to minimize the loss function of 
the model predictions on the query sets, conditioned on the support sets. As such, for a 
given task Tj , the model ‘sees’ the support set, and extracts information from the sup-
port set to guide its predictions on the query set. By applying this procedure to different 
episodes/tasks Tj , the model will slowly accumulate meta-knowledge /u1D714 , which can ulti-
mately speed up learning on new tasks.
The easiest way to achieve this is by doing this with regular neural networks, but as 
was pointed out by various authors (see, e.g., Finn et al. 2017) more sophisticated archi-
tectures will vastly outperform such networks. In the remainder of this work, we will 
review such architectures.
At the meta-validation and meta-test stages, or evaluation phases, the learned meta-
information in /u1D714 is fixed. The model is, however, still allowed to make task-specific 
updates to its parameters /u1D73D (which implies that it is learning). After task-specific 
updates, we can evaluate the performance on the test sets. In this way, we test how well 
a technique performs at meta-learning.
N-way, k-shot classification is often performed for small values of k  (since we want 
our models to learn new concepts quickly, i.e., from few examples). In that case, one 
can refer to it as few-shot learning.
Fig. 3  Illustration of N-way, k-shot classification, where N=5 , and k=1 . Meta-validation tasks are not 
displayed. Adapted from Ravi and Larochelle (2017)