4494 M. Huisman et al.
1 3
networks. Then, new tasks can be learned by comparing new inputs to example inputs (of 
which we know the labels) in the meta-learned feature space. The higher the similarity 
between a new input and an example, the more likely it is that the new input will have the 
same label as the example input.Table 3  Overview of the discussed Deep Meta-Learning techniques
The table is partitioned into three sections, i.e., metric-, model-, and optimization-based. All methods in 
one section adhere to the key idea of its corresponding category, which is mentioned in bold font. The col-
umns RL and Bench show whether the techniques are applicable to reinforcement learning settings and the 
used benchmarks for testing the performance of the techniques. Note that all techniques are applicable to 
supervised learning, with the exception of recurrent meta-learners. The benchmark column displays which 
benchmarks from Sect.  2.2.2 were used in the paper proposing the technique. The used coding scheme for 
this column is the following. 1: Omniglot, 2: miniImageNet, 3: tieredImageNet, 4: CIFAR-100, 5: CIFAR-
FS, 6: CIFAR-10, 7: CUB, 8: MNIST, “–”: used other evaluation methods that are non-standard in Deep 
Meta-Learning and thus not covered in Sect.  2.2.2. Used abbreviations: “opt.”: optimization, “diff.”: differ -
entiable, “bench.”: benchmarksName RL Key idea Bench.
Metric-based Input similarity –
Siamese networks ✗ Two-input, shared-weight, class identity network 1, 8
Matching net-
works✗ Learn input embeddings for cosine-similarity weighted predictions 1, 2
Prototypical 
networks✗ Input embeddings for class prototype clustering 1, 2, 7
Relation networks ✗ Learn input embeddings and similarity metric 1, 2, 7
ARC ✗ LSTM-based input fusion through interleaved glimpses 1, 2
GNN ✗ Propagate label information to unlabeled inputs in a graph 1, 2
Model-based Internal and stateful latent task representations –
Recurrent ml. ✓ Deploy Recurrent networks on RL problems –
MANNs ✗ External short-term memory module for fast learning 1
Meta networks ✓ Fast reparameterization of base-learner by distinct meta-learner 1, 2
SNAIL ✓ Attention mechanism coupled with temporal convolutions 1, 2
CNP ✗ Condition predictive model on embedded contextual task data 1, 8
Neural stat. ✗ Similarity between latent task embeddings 1, 8
Opt.-based Optimize for fast task-specific adaptation –
LSTM optimizer ✗ RNN proposing weight updates for base-leaner 6, 8
LSTM ml. ✓ Embed base-learner parameters in cell state of LSTM 2
RL optimizer ✗ View optimization as RL problem 4, 6
MAML ✓ Learn initialization weights /u1D73D for fast adaptation 1, 2
iMAML ✓ Approx. higher-order gradients, independent of optimization path 1, 2
Meta-SGD ✓ Learn both the initialization and updates 1, 2
Reptile ✓ Move initialization towards task-specific updated weights 1, 2
LEO ✗ Optimize in lower-dimensional latent parameter space 2, 3
Online MAML ✗ Accumulate task data for MAML-like training 4, 8
LLAMA ✗ Maintain probability distribution over post-update parameters /u1D73D/uni2032.var
j2
PLATIPUS ✗ Learn a probability distribution over weight initialization /u1D73D –
BMAML ✓ Learn multiple initializations /u1D723 , jointly optimized by SVGD 2
Diff. solvers ✗ Learn input embeddings for simple base-learners 1, 2, 3, 4, 5