4486 M. Huisman et al.
1 3
2.1.1  Regular supervised learning
In supervised learning, we wish to learn a function f/u1D73D∶X→Y that learns to map inputs 
xi∈X to their corresponding outputs yi∈Y . Here, /u1D73D are model parameters (e.g. weights 
in a neural network) that determine the function’s behavior. To learn these parameters, we 
are given a data set of m observations: D= {(xi,yi)}m
i=1 . Thus, given a data set D , learning 
boils down to finding the correct setting for /u1D73D that minimizes an empirical loss function LD , 
which must capture how the model is performing, such that appropriate adjustments to its 
parameters can be made. In short, we wish to find
where SL stands for “supervised learning”. Note that this objective is specific to the data 
set D , meaning that our model f/u1D73D may not generalize to examples outside of D . To meas-
ure generalization, one could evaluate the performance on a separate test data set, which 
contains unseen examples. A popular way to do this is through cross-validation, where one 
repeatedly creates train and test splits Dtr,Dtest⊂D and uses these to train and evaluate a 
model respectively (Hastie et al. 2009).
Finding globally optimal parameters /u1D73DSL is often computationally infeasible. We can, 
however, approximate them, guided by pre-defined meta-knowledge /u1D714 (Hospedales et al. (1)/u1D73DSL∶=arg min
/u1D73DLD(/u1D73D),Table 1  Some notation and meaning, which we use throughout this paper
Expression Meaning
Meta-learning Learning to learn
Tj=(Dtr
Tj,Dtest
Tj) A task consisting of a labeled support and query set
Support set The train set Dtr
Tj associated with a task Tj
Query set The test set Dtest
Tj associated with a task Tj
xi Example input vector i in the support set
yi (One-hot encoded) label of example input xi from the support set
k Number of examples per class in the support set
N Number of classes in the support and query sets of a task
x Input in the query set
y A (one-hot encoded) label for input x
(f∕g∕h )◦ Neural network function with parameters ◦
Inner-level At the level of a single task
Outer-level At meta-level: across tasks
Fast weights A term used in the literature to denote task-specific parameters
Base-learner Learner that works at the inner-level
Meta-learner Learner that operates at the outer-level
/u1D73D The parameters of the base-learner network
LD Loss function with respect to task/dataset D
Input embedding Penultimate layer representation of the input
Task embedding An internal representation of a task in a network/system
SL Supervised Learning
RL Reinforcement Learning