4529 A survey of deep meta-learning  
1 3
The approach is best explained by its pseudocode, as shown in Algorithm 7. In contrast 
to the original MAML, PLATIPUS introduces five more parameter vectors (line 1). All 
of these parameters are used to facilitate the creation of Gaussian distributions over prior 
initializations (or simply priors) /u1D73D . That is, /u1D741/u1D73D represents the vector mean of the distribu-
tions. /u1D7482
q , and vq represent the covariances of train and test distributions respectively. /u1D738x for 
x=q,p are learning rate vectors for performing gradient steps on distributions q (lines 6 
and 7) and P (line 11).
The key difference with the regular MAML is that instead of having a single initializa-
tion point /u1D73D , we now learn distributions over priors: q and P, which are based on query and 
support data sets of task Tj respectively. Since these data sets come from the same task, we 
want the distributions q(/u1D73D/uni007C.varDtest
Tj) , and p(/u1D73D /uni007C.varDtr
Tj) to be close to each other. This is enforced by 
the Kullback–Leibler divergence ( DKL ) loss term on line 12, which measures the distance 
between the two distributions. Importantly, note that q (line 7) and P (line 11) use vector 
means which are computed with one gradient update step using the query and support data 
sets respectively. The idea is that the mean of the Gaussian distributions should be close to 
the updated mean /u1D741/u1D73D , because we want to enable fast learning. As one can see, the training 
process is very similar to that of MAML (Finn et al. 2017) (Sect.  5.5), with some small 
adjustments to allow us to work with the probability distributions over /u1D73D.
At test-time, one can simply sample a new initialization /u1D73D from the prior distribution 
p(/u1D73D /uni007C.varDtr
Tj) (note that q cannot be used at test-time as we do not have access to Dtest
Tj ), and 
apply a gradient update on the provided support set Dtr
Tj . Note that this allows us to sample 
multiple potential initializations /u1D73D for the given task.
The key advantage of PLATIPUS is that it is aware of its uncertainty, which greatly 
increases the applicability of Deep Meta-Learning in critical domains such as medical 
diagnosis (Finn et al. 2018). Based on this uncertainty, it can ask for labels of some inputs 
it is unsure about (active learning). A downside to this approach, however, is the increased 
computational costs, and the fact that it is not applicable to reinforcement learning.