4509 A survey of deep meta-learning  
1 3
In a  similar fashion to memory-augmented neural networks (Santoro et  al. 2016), meta 
networks (Munkhdalai and Yu 2017) also leverage the idea of an external memory module. 
However, meta networks use the memory for a different purpose. The memory stores for each 
observation xi in the support set two components, i.e., its representation ri and the fast weights 
/u1D73D∗
i . These are then used to compute an attention-based representation and fast weights for new 
inputs, respectively. 
The pseudocode for meta networks is displayed in Algorithm 1. First, a sample of the 
support set is created (line 1), which is used to compute task-specific weights /u1D753∗ for the 
representation network u/u1D753 (lines 2-5). Note that u/u1D753 has two tasks, (i) it should compute a 
representation for inputs (xi (line 10 and 15), and (ii) it needs to make predictions for inputs 
(xi , in order to compute a loss (line 3). To achieve both goals, a conventional neural net-
work can be used that makes class predictions. The states of the final hidden layer are then 
used as representations. Typically, the cross-entropy is calculated over the predictions of 
representation network u/u1D753 . When there are multiple examples per class in the support set, 
an alternative is to use a contrastive loss function (Munkhdalai and Yu 2017).
Then, meta networks iterate over every example (xi,yi) in the support set Dtr
Tj . The base-
learner b/u1D73D attempts to make class predictions for these examples, resulting in loss values Li 
(line 7). The gradients of these losses are used to compute fast weights /u1D73D∗ for example i 
(line 8), which are then stored in the i-th row of memory matrix M (line 9). Additionally, 
input representations ri are computed and stored in memory matrix R (lines 10-11).
Now, meta networks are ready to address the query set Dtest
Tj . They iterate over every 
example (x,y) , and compute a representation r of it (line 15). This representation is 
matched against the representations of the support set, which are stored in memory matrix 
R. This matching gives us a similarity vector a , where every entry k denotes the similarity 
between input representation r and the k-th row in memory matrix R, i.e., R(k) (line 16). A 
softmax over this similarity vector is performed to normalize the entries. The resulting