4503 A survey of deep meta-learning  
1 3
parameters, which are computed from the previous hidden state ht−1 . The next hidden state 
ht+1=RNN (Gt,ht−1) is given by the glimpse at time t, i.e., Gt , and the previous hidden 
state ht−1 . The entire sequence consists of g glimpses per image. After this sequence is fed 
into the recurrent neural network (indicated by RNN( ◦)), the final hidden state h2g is used 
as a combined representation of xi relative to x . This process is summarized in Fig.  10. 
Classification decisions can then be made by feeding the combined representations into 
a classifier. Optionally, the combined representations can be processed by bi-directional 
LSTMs before passing them to the classifier.
The attention approach is biologically inspired, and biologically plausible. A downside 
of attentive recurrent comparators is the higher computational cost, while the performance 
is often not better than less biologically plausible techniques, such as graph neural net-
works (Garcia and Bruna 2017).
3.8  Metric‑based techniques, in conclusion
In this section, we have seen various metric-based techniques. The metric-based techniques 
meta-learn an informative feature space that can be used to compute class predictions 
based on input similarity scores. Figure  11 shows the relationships between the various 
metric-based techniques that we have covered.
As we can see, Siamese networks (Koch et  al. 2015) mark the beginning of metric-
based, deep meta-learning techniques in few-shot learning settings. They are the first to 
use the idea of predicting classes by comparing inputs from the support and query sets. 
This idea was generalized in graph neural networks (GNNs) (Hamilton et al. 2017; Garcia 
and Bruna 2017) where the information flow between support and query inputs is paramet-
ric and thus more flexible. Matching networks (Vinyals et al. 2016) are directly inspired 
by Siamese networks as they use the same core idea (comparing inputs for making pre-
dictions), but directly train in the few-shot setting and use cosine similarity as a similar -
ity function. Thus, the auxiliary, binary classification task used by Siamese networks is 
left out, and matching networks directly train on tasks. Prototypical networks (Snell et al. 
2017) increase the robustness of input comparisons by comparing every query set input 
with a class prototype instead of individual support set examples. This reduces the num-
ber of required input comparisons for a single query input to N instead of k⋅N . Relation Fig. 11  The relationships between the covered metric-based meta-learning techniques