4493 A survey of deep meta-learning  
1 3
a good inductive bias (a set of assumptions that guide predictions). We now present a brief 
historical overview of developments in this field of Deep Meta-Learning, based on Hos-
pedales et al. (2020).
Pioneering work was done by Schmidhuber (1987) and Hinton and Plaut (1987). 
Schmidhuber developed a theory of self-referential learning, where the weights of a neural 
network can serve as input to the model itself, which then predicts updates (Schmidhuber 
1987, 1993). In that same year, Hinton and Plaut (1987) proposed to use two weights per 
neural network connection, i.e., slow and fast  weights, which serve as long- and short-term 
memory respectively. Later came the idea of meta-learning learning rules (Bengio et al. 
1991, 1997). Meta-learning techniques that use gradient-descent and backpropagation were 
proposed by Hochreiter et  al. (2001) and Younger et  al. (2001). These two works have 
been pivotal to the current field of Deep Meta-Learning, as the majority of techniques rely 
on backpropagation, as we will see on our journey of contemporary Deep Meta-Learning 
techniques. We will now cover the three categories metric-, model-, and optimization-
based techniques, respectively.
2.4  Overview of the rest of this work
In the remainder of this work, we will look in more detail at individual meta-learning 
methods. As indicated before, the techniques can be grouped into three main categories 
(Vinyals 2017), namely (i) metric-, (ii) model-, and (iii) optimization-based methods. We 
will discuss them in sequence.
To help give an overview of the methods, we draw your attention to the following figure 
and tables. Table  2 summarizes the three categories and provides key ideas, strengths, and 
weaknesses of the approaches. The terms and technical details are explained more fully 
in the remainder of this paper. Table  3 contains an overview of all techniques that are dis-
cussed further on. 
3  Metric‑based meta‑learning
At a high level, the goal of metric-based techniques is to acquire—among others—meta-
knowledge /u1D714 in the form of a good feature space that can be used for various new tasks. 
In the context of neural networks, this feature space coincides with the weights /u1D73D of the Table 2  A high-level overview of the three Deep Meta-Learning categories, i.e., (i) metric-, (ii) model-, and 
(iii) optimization-based techniques, and their main strengths and weaknesses
Recall that Tj is a task, Dtr
Tj the corresponding support set, k/u1D73D(x,xi) a kernel function returning the similarity 
between the two inputs x and xi , yi are true labels for known inputs xi , /u1D703 are base-learner parameters, and g/u1D74B 
is a (learned) optimizer with parameters /u1D74BMetric Model Optimization
Key idea Input similarity Internal task represen-
tationOptimize for fast adaptation
Strength Simple and effective Flexible More robust generalizability
p/u1D73D(Y/uni007C.varx,Dtr
Tj)∑
(xi,yi)∈Dtr
Tjk/u1D73D(x,xi)yi f/u1D73D(x,Dtr
Tj) fg/u1D74B(/u1D73D ,Dtr
Tj,LDtr
Tj)(x)