4505 A survey of deep meta-learning  
1 3
This problem has been visualized in Fig.  5 (in Sect.  3). For the sake of the example, we do 
not use an input embedding function: our model will operate on the raw inputs of Dtr
Tj and 
Dtest
Tj . As an internal state, our model uses an external memory matrix M∈ℝ4×(2+ 1) , with 
four rows (one for each example in our support set), and three columns (the dimensionality 
of input vectors, plus one dimension for the correct label). Our model proceeds to process 
the support set in a sequential fashion, reading the examples from Dtr
Tj one by one, and by 
storing the i-th example in the i-th row of the memory module. After processing the sup-
port set, the memory matrix contains all examples, and as such, serves as internal task 
representation.
Given the new input [4, 0.5], our model could use many different techniques to make a 
prediction based on this representation. For simplicity, assume that it computes the dot 
product between x , and every memory M(i) (the 2-D vector in the i-th row of M, ignoring 
the correct label), and predicts the class of the input which yields the largest dot product. 
This would produce scores −2,−10,−6, and 24 for the examples in Dtr
Tj respectively. Since 
the last example [6, 0] yields the largest dot product, we predict that class, i.e., 4.
Note that this example could be seen as a metric-based technique where the dot product 
is used as a similarity function. However, the reason that this technique is model-based is 
that it stores the entire task inside a memory module. This example was deliberately easy 
for illustrative purposes. More advanced and successful techniques have been proposed, 
which we will now cover.
4.2  Recurrent meta‑learners
Recurrent meta-learners (Duan et  al. 2016; Wang et  al. 2016) are, as the name sug-
gests, meta-learners based on recurrent neural networks. The recurrent network serves as 
dynamic task embedding storage. These recurrent meta-learners were specifically proposed 
for reinforcement learning problems, hence we will explain them in that setting.
The recurrence is implemented by e.g. an LSTM (Wang et al. 2016) or a GRU (Duan 
et al. 2016). The internal dynamics of the chosen Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) allows 
for fast adaptation to new tasks, while the algorithm used to train the recurrent network 
gradually accumulates knowledge about the task structure, where each task is modelled as 
an episode (or set of episodes).
The idea of recurrent meta-learners is quite simple. That is, given a task Tj , we simply 
feed the (potentially processed) environment variables [st+1,at,rt,dt] (see Sect.  2.1.3) into 
Fig. 12  Workflow of recurrent meta-learners in reinforcement learning contexts. As mentioned in 
Sect.  2.1.3, st,rt, and dt denote the state, reward, and termination flag at time step t. ht refers to the hidden 
state at time t. Source: Duan et al. (2016)