4514 M. Huisman et al.
1 3
4.8  Model‑based techniques, in conclusion
In this section, we have discussed various model-based techniques. Despite apparent differ -
ences, they all build on the notion of task internalization. That is, tasks are processed and 
represented in the state of the model-based system. This state can then be used to make pre-
dictions. Figure 20 displays the relationships between the covered model-based techniques.
Memory-augmented neural networks (Santoro et  al. 2016) mark the beginning of deep 
model-based meta-learning techniques. They use the idea of feeding the entire support set in a 
sequential fashion into the model and then making predictions for the query set inputs using 
the internal state of the model. Such a model-based approach, where inputs sequentially enter 
the model was also taken by recurrent meta-learners (RMLs) (Duan et al. 2016; Wang et al. 
2016) in the reinforcement learning setting. Meta networks (Munkhdalai and Yu 2017) also 
use a large black-box solution but generate task-specific weights for every task that is encoun-
tered. SNAIL (Mishra et al. 2018) tries to improve the memory capacity and ability to pin-
point memories, which is limited in recurrent neural networks, by using attention mechanisms 
coupled with special temporal layers. Lastly, the neural statistician and conditional neural pro-
cesses are two techniques that try to learn meta-features of data sets in an end-to-end fash-
ion. The neural statistician uses the distance between meta-features to make class predictions, 
while the conditional neural process conditions classifiers on these features.
Advantages of model-based approaches include the flexibility of the internal dynamics of 
the systems, and their broader applicability compared to most metric-based techniques. How -
ever, model-based techniques are often outperformed by metric-based techniques in super -
vised settings (e.g. graph neural networks (Garcia and Bruna 2017); Sect.  3.6), may not per -
form well when presented with larger data sets (Hospedales et al. 2020), and generalize less 
well to more distant tasks than optimization-based techniques (Finn and Levine 2018). We 
discuss this optimization-based approach next.
5  Optimization‑based meta‑learning
Optimization-based techniques adopt a different perspective on meta-learning than the pre-
vious two approaches. They explicitly optimize for fast learning. Most optimization-based 
techniques do so by approaching meta-learning as a bi-level optimization problem. At the Fig. 20  The relationships between the covered model-based meta-learning techniques. The neural statisti-
cian and conditional neural processes form an island in the model-based approaches