4511 A survey of deep meta-learning  
1 3
mechanism (Vaswani et al. 2017). The temporal convolutions allow for ‘high bandwidth’ 
memory access, and the attention mechanism allows one to pinpoint specific experiences. 
Figure  17 visualizes the architecture and workflow of SNAIL for supervised learning prob-
lems. From this figure, it becomes clear why this technique is model-based. That is, model 
outputs are based upon the internal state, computed from earlier inputs.
SNAIL consists of three building blocks. The first is the DenseBlock, which applies a 
single 1D convolution to the input, and concatenates (in the feature/horizontal direction) the 
result. The second is a TCBlock, which is simply a series of DenseBlocks with an exponen-
tially increasing dilation rate of the temporal convolutions (Mishra et al. 2018). Note that the 
dilation is nothing but the temporal distance between two nodes in a network. For example, 
if we use a dilation of 2, a node at position p  in layer L  will receive the activation from node 
p−2 from layer L−1 . The third block is the AttentionBlock, which learns to focus on the 
important parts of prior experience.
In a similar fashion to memory-augmented neural networks (Santoro et al. 2016) (Sect.  4.3), 
SNAIL also processes task data in sequence, as shown in Fig.  17. However, the input at time t  
is accompanied by the label at time t , instead of t−1 (as was the case for memory-augmented 
neural networks). SNAIL learns internal dynamics from seeing various tasks so that it can 
make good predictions on the query set, conditioned upon the support set.
A key advantage of SNAIL is that it can be applied to both supervised and reinforcement 
learning tasks. In addition, it achieves good performance compared to previously discussed 
techniques. A downside of SNAIL is that finding the correct architecture of TCBlocks and 
DenseBlocks can be time-consuming.
Fig. 17  Architecture and workflow of SNAIL for supervised and reinforcement learning settings. The input 
layer is red. Temporal Convolution blocks are orange; attention blocks are green. Source: Mishra et  al. 
(2018). (Color figure online)