9 
 tasks that cannot be done by previous automation technolog y in certain scenarios ( Kaber, 2018; 
Madni & Madni, 2018 ; Xu. 2021 ); on the other hand, the unique autonomous characteristics of AI 
systems, such as self-evolving machine behavior s and potential non-deterministic /unexpected 
outcome s, may cause biased and unexpected system output  without human  supervision , harming 
humans and society  (Kaber, 2018 ; Rahwan et al., 2019; Xu, 2021) .  
                             
1.3 An emerging form of the human -machine relationship in the AI era  
AI technology has also brought in a paradigmatic change in the human -machine 
relationship. The focus of HCI work has traditionally been on the interaction between humans and 
non-AI computing systems . These systems rely on fixed logic rules and algorithms to respond to the 
input from humans, humans interact with these systems in a form of "stimulus -response"  (Farooq, 
U., & Grudin, J. (2016). These computing  systems  (e.g., automated machines) primarily work as an 
assistive tool , supporting human ’s monitoring and execution of tasks  (Wickens et al., 2015 ).  
As w e are currently entering in the AI-based “autonomous world ,” AI technology has given 
new roles to machines in human -machine systems  as driven by its autonomous characteristics . The 
interaction between human s and AI system s is essentially the interaction between human s and the 
autonomous /AI agent s in the AI system s. As AI technology advances,  intelligent agents can be 
developed to exhibit unique behavior and possess the autonomous characteristics with certain levels 
of human -like intelligent abilities as summarized in Table 1 (Rahwan et al., 2019 ; Xu, 2021 ). With 
AI technology a machine can evolve from an assistive tool that primarily supports human 
operations to a potential collaborative teammate of a team with a human operator, playing the dual 
roles of "assistive tool + collaborative teammate"  (e.g., Brill et al., 2018 ; Lyons et al., 2018 ; O’Neill