31 
 in-the-loop AI systems combines the advantages of human intelligence and AI, and effectively 
realizes human -AI interactions  through user intervention s, such as online assessment for 
crowdsource d human input  (Mnih et al., 2015; Dellermann et al., 2019 a), user participat ion in 
training, adjustment and testing of algorithms  (Acuna et al., 2018; Correia  et al., 2019 ).  
The second type of hybrid intelligence involves  embed ding the human cognitive model into 
an AI system to form a hybrid intelligence based on cognitive computing (Zheng et al., 2017) . This 
type of AI system introduces a variety of biologically inspired  computing intelligence technologies. 
Elements include intuitive reasoning, causal models, memory and knowledge evolution, etc. 
According to the HCAI approach , this type of hybrid intelligence is not in the true sense of human -
machine hybrid intelligence, because such systems are not based on human -machine systems and 
cannot be effective in achieving  the central decision -making role of human operators in the system. 
Of course, the introduction of human cognitive models into machine intelligence, is importan t for 
the development of machine intelligence .  
There will be a lot of opportunities for HCI professionals to play a role in developing 
human -machine hybrid intelligence  systems .  
Human -controlled hybrid intelligence . The HCAI approach advocates human -in-the loop AI 
systems, b ut we emphasize that the systems must be based on human -controlled AI . In other words, 
AI systems are embedded in the “ human loop ” as supporting super tools (Shneiderman, 2021c ), 
ensuring that human -driven decision -making  is still primary . It has been argue d that t here are 
currently two basic schemes  in terms of the control mechanism  (who is in control)  of hybrid 
intelligence : "human -in-loop control" and "human -machine collaborative control" (Wang , 2019). 
The effective handover between humans and AI systems in an emergency state is a current