41 
 human -machine co -driving and take -over/handoff (J eong, 2019 ). For interaction design, we need to 
take innovative approaches beyond traditional HCI design . By applying the HCAI approach, we 
need to develop  an effective human control mechanism with well -designed UIs  to enable human 
operators to monitor and quickly take over control of autonomous systems in emergencies.  
Design for human -contro lled autonomy . SAE J3016 (2018) regulations presume  that when 
autonomous vehicles are equipped with high -level (L4 -L5) automat ed driving functions, driver 
monitoring  and manual intervention are not required. HCI professionals need to step in to ensure 
that humans are always the ultimate decision makers in system  design  (including remote 
operation s) to address safety issues  (Navarro, 2018 ; Shneiderman, 2021c ). To reinforce the 
“human -controlled AI” design goal, w e advocate to implement a “human meaningful control” 
design  to implement the accountability and traceability of autonomous systems  (de Sio & den 
Hoven, 2018 ). When defining the levels of “automation” for autonomous vehicles, SAE J3016 
(2018) seems to be ignoring the differences between automation and AI-based autonom ous 
technology , and SAE J3016 takes a system -centered approach classifying the “automation” level , 
instead of a human -centered approach  (Hancock, 2019 ). HCI professionals need to obtain empirical 
data to help improve the classification of a utonomous levels from the HCAI perspective, which 
may help standardize the way of defining product requirements, measurement for certification of 
autonomous technology, and the need for human operator training.  
A multidisciplinary HCI approach.  As an interdisciplinary  area, HCI professionals are in a 
unique position to address the emerging  issues from a broad perspective of sociotechnical systems, 
including the impacts of autonomous systems on human expectations, operational roles, ethics, 
privacy, and so on. While we have an established process of certifying humans as autonomous