15 
 As listed in Table 2, HCI professionals did not encounter these new HCI challenges in 
human interaction with non -AI systems. Furthermore, based on the HCAI approach (Xu , 2019a) , 
we specif ied the primary HCAI -driven design goals for each of the main issues as shown in the  
Primary HCAI  Design Goals column  (to be further discussed in Section 2.2) . The Detailed 
Analyses & References column indicates the section number in this paper where we specifically 
discuss the findings.  
It should be noted that the literature review  was done in a qualitative nature , it may not be 
complete  and there may be other new challenges  yet to be revealed . However, we argue that these 
findings are sufficient to reveal the trend ing new challenges and opportunities for H CI professionals  
when working on human interaction with AI systems , and the findings are sufficient to compel us to 
make a call to urge HCI professionals to take action  address ing the unique issues in AI systems . 
Also, we assessed these new challenges and opportunities for HCI professionals from a holistic 
perspective , instead of having a deep dive on individual issues . Such a holistic  perspective allows 
us to develop a strategic view for the future HCI work  in the development of AI systems , so that we 
can offer our  strategic recommendations to the HCI community.      
Based on the analyses so far , we can draw the following initial conclusions. As AI 
technology becomes increasingly ubiquitous in people’s work and lives, the machine being daily 
used by humans is no longer just the “conventional” comput ing system , but AI systems that exhibit 
unique characteristics  post new challenges to HCI design . As HCI professionals, we need to drive 
human -centered solutions to timely and effectively address the se new challenges. The HCI 
community must understand these new challenges and reassess the scope and methods of current 
HCI approach  on how we can effectively develop human -centered AI systems. Such changes will