19 
 (1) "Human Factors ": We start from the needs of humans  and implement the human -
centered design approach advocated by the HCI community  (e.g., user research, modeling, iterative 
user interface prototyping and testing ) in the research and development of AI systems . The design 
goals are  to develop usable & explainable  AI and AI systems that guarantee human -driven decision -
making  (see the design goals next to the “ Human Factors ” circle as depicted in Figure 1 ).  
(2) "Technology": We promote a n approach for the development of AI technology by 
integrating human roles into human -machine systems and by taking complementary advantages of 
machine intelligence and human intelligence  (see 3.3 for details). The design goal s are to develop 
human -controlled AI  and augment human abilities, rather than replacing humans  (see the design 
goals next to the “Technology” circle in Figure  1).  
(3) "Ethics": We must guarantee fairness, justice, privacy, and accountability in developing 
AI systems as ethical issues are much more significant in AI systems than conventional non -AI 
systems. The design goal s are to develop ethical & responsible AI and AI systems that guarantee 
human -driven decision -making (see the design goals next to the “Ethics” circle in Figure 1).  
Furthermore, the HCAI approach illustrated in Figure 1 is characterized as follows.  
(1) Placing humans at the center . All the three primary aspects of work defined in the HCAI  
approach place humans at the center. Specifically, the “technology’ work ensures that humans are 
kept at the cent er of AI systems through a deep integration between machine intelligence I and 
human intelligence  to augment human capabilities . The “human  factors ” work ensures that AI 
systems are human -controllable by keeping humans as the ultimate decision makers, usable by 
providing effective interaction design, and explainable by providing understandable output to 
humans. The “ethics” work aims to address the s pecific ethical issues in AI systems by delivering