25 
 human -labeled datasets , the choice /labeling of the dataset and those features represent ed can 
substantially influence the behavior  (Bolukbasi et al., 2016 ; Buolamwini  et al., 2018 ). HCI 
professionals need to figure out an effective approach that can bring in users’ expectations to tune 
the algorithm for prevent ing biased responses.  
Continued improvement of AI systems during behavior evolution . HCI professionals needs  
to study the evolution of the AI -based machine behavior  for continued improvement of AI systems . 
For instance , after being released to the market, algorithm s, learning, and training data will all 
affect the evolution of an AI systems ’ behavior s. An auton omous vehicle  will change its behavior s 
over time by software and hardware up grades ; a product recommendation algorithm make s 
recommendations based on continuous input from u sers, updating their recommendations 
accordingly. The AI community recognizes that it is not easy to define the expected result due to 
user’s subjective expectations (Pásztor, 2018), HCI professionals need to find a collaborative 
method on how to improve the design through re -training based on user feedback  and how to 
collect training data and define the expected re sults that users hope to obtain from AI systems , 
continuously improv ing the design of AI systems .  
Enhancement of software testing approach . The testing methods in traditional software 
engineering are based on predictable software output  and machine behaviors , which was 
specifically created for testing non-AI computing systems . Since the output s of AI system s will 
evolve as the system s learn  over time , HCI professionals need to collaborate with AI and computer 
science professionals to fin d ways to improve the test ing method s from a behavioral science  
perspective . Due to the existence of the unique machine behavior, how do we effectively test and 
measure  the evolving performance of AI systems by taking humans and AI agents as a human -