36 
 centered solutions, such as : interactive dialogues with AI systems  (Abdul et al., 2018) , visualization 
approach (Chatzimparmpas  et al., 2020 ), human -in-the-loop explainable AI (Chittajallu et al, 2019),  
collaborative task -driven (e.g., error detection) , and exploratory interpretation to support the 
adaptation between humans and machines  (Kulesza’s  at al., 2015; Mueller et al., 2019 ). 
Human -centered explainable AI . Future HCI work need to further explore user -participatory 
solutions based on the HCAI approach, such as user exploratory and user -participation approaches 
(Mueller et al., 2019). This is  to ensure that AI is understandable to target users beyond 
explainability, which AI professionals have previously neglected. In addition, there is a lack of 
user-participated experimental validation in many existing studies, along with a lack of rigorous 
behavioral science -based methods (Abdul et al., 2018; Mueller et al., 2019). HCI should give full 
play to its expertise to support validation methods. When adopting user -participated experimental 
evaluation, it is necessary to overcome the unilateral evalu ation methods in some existing studies 
that only evaluate the performance of AI systems, HCI should promote the evaluation of the AI 
systems as a human -machine system by adding an end users perspective (Muelle et al., 2019 ; 
Hoffman, et al., 2018).  
Accelerati on of the transfer of  psychological theories . HCI professionals can leverage our 
own multidisciplinary backgrounds to act as intermedia ries, accelerating the tran sfer of the 
knowledge from other disciplines . For example, many of the existing psychological theories and 
models have not generated  usable results (Abdul et al., 2018; Muelle et al., 2019 ). Also, t here is a 
large body of human factors research work on automation transparency and situation awareness 
(e.g., Sarter & Woods, 1995 ; Endsley , 2017 ), their comprehensive mitigation solutions may offer 
possible solutions to explainable AI.