24 
 learning " approach (Fiebrink et al., 2018; Kaluarachchi  et al., 2021) , Interactive Machine Learning 
aims to avoid concerns over fairness, accountability,  and transparency (Fiebrink et al., 2018). The 
interactive machine learning approach allows users to participate in the algorithm training 
iteratively by selecting, marking, and/or generating training examples to interact with required 
functions of the system, supported by HCI design and evaluation methods.  The interactive machine 
learning approach also pays special attention to the interaction between humans and the machine 
learning  process. From the HCAI perspective, the interactive machine learning approach 
emphasizes on human’s roles in the development with hu man goals and capabilities, so that an AI 
system can deliver better results than humans or algorithms working alone (Amershi et al., 2014).   
The unique m achine behavior creates challenges for developing AI systems, but also 
opportunities for HCI professionals to play a role in future HCI work .  
Application of HCI approach for managing machine behavior . HCI professionals may 
leverage HCI methods (e.g., iterative design and evaluation with end users) to continuously 
improve the design until undesirable results  are minimized . A machine acquire s its behavior  during 
the development with AI technology ; shaping the behavior is affected by many factors , like 
algorithm s, architectur e (e.g., learning parameter, knowledge representation ), training , and data. For 
instance, HCI professionals may translat e user needs into data needs and understand how to 
generate, train, optimize, and test AI -generated behaviors during development . Machine behavior 
can be shaped by exposing it to particular training data. Substantial human effort is necessary to 
annotate or characterize the data in the process of developing autonomous capabilities (e.g., 
labeling that a pedestrian is in the scene) ( Acuna  et al., 2018;  Amershi et al., 2014 ). For instance, 
classification algorithms for image s and text are trained to optimize accuracy on a specific set of