32 
 important topic. The los s of control in autonomous  systems ( e.g., decision tracking after launch of 
autonomous weapon systems, autonomous vehicles) has become a widely concerned issue from the 
perspective of the “ ethical AI” design goal defined in the HCAI approach . The HCAI approach  
requires humans to have the ultimate control. HCI needs to carry out this work from the HCI 
perspectives. Future HCI work needs to seek solutions from an integrated p erspectives of system  
design , human -machine interaction , and ethical AI design .  
Cognitive computing and modeling . As an interdisciplinary, f uture HCI work needs to help 
the AI community explore  cognitive computing based on human cognitive abilities (e.g., intuitive 
reasoning, knowledge  evolution) in support of developing human -machine hybrid intelligent 
systems. Future HCI work should help accelerate the conversion of existing psychological research 
results to support the work of cognitive computing and define cognitive architecture for AI research 
(Salvi et al., 2016). This is essential because the development of existing h ybrid intelligent system s 
based on cognitive computing do es not fully consider the central role and decision -making function 
of human operators in the system s. HCI professionals should collaborate with AI professionals to 
explore the approach of integratin g the cognitive computing method with the human -in-the-loop 
method, either at both system and/or at biological levels (e.g., brain -computer interface 
technology), developing HCAI -based hybrid intelligent systems.  
HCI framework for human -machine hybrid inte lligence . Future HCI work needs to lay the 
foundation for developing effective human -machine hybrid intelligent systems in terms of theory 
and methods . For example, we may apply the joint cognitive systems theory  (Hollnagel & Woods, 
2005 ) and consider  a human -machine intelligent hybrid system as a joint cognitive system with two 
cognitive agents : human and machine. Research work is needed t o explore how to use the two