23 
 computer science professionals without formal training in behavioral science (Epstein et al., 2018; 
Leibo et al., 2018). The leading researchers in the AI community call  for other disciplines to join 
(Rahwan et al., 2019).  
The HCAI design goal is to develop human -controlled AI through manageable machine 
behavior in AI systems  in order to avoid biased and unexpected machine behavior s (see Figure 1) . 
Obviously,  the multi -disciplinary HCI can play a significant role here  (Bromham et al., 2016) . HCI 
professionals can help ensure that we avoid generating extreme or unexpected behaviors and reduce 
biases generated from AI technologies such as machine learning  (Zhang  et al., 2020; Leibo et al., 
2018).  This is also aligned with the "ethical  AI" design goal defined in the HCAI approach  (Figure 
1). Machine  behavior  is one of the unique characteristics that distinguishes  the HCI work from the 
conventional HCI work  for non -AI systems . HCI professionals must fully understand the design 
implications of machine behavior  in developing AI systems  and find effective ways to manage the 
unique behaviors of AI systems in order to deliver HCAI -based systems. Driven by the HCAI  
approach , HCI professionals need to put human s and their needs first  in the development process  
(e.g., data collection, algorithm data training, test)  and to partner with AI professionals to manage  
the development of machine behavior .  
With many of today’s AI systems being derived from machine learning methods, study of 
the mechanism behind a machine’s behavior will require assessment of how machine learning  
methods  and processes impact machine behavior (Ribeiro et al., 2016). Many AI systems are based 
on supervised, reinforced, and interactive learning  approaches that  require work done by humans, 
such as, providing an enormous amount of labeled data for algorithm training. Ini tial work has 
started. As an example of HCAI -aligned design approaches , based on a "human -centered machine