17 
 systems. Shneiderman (2020a) promotes HCAI by providing a two -dimensional design guidelines 
framework and a comprehensive framework for the governance of ethical AI (Shneiderman, 
2020d) . Other r esearchers have also promoted HCAI  approach  from a variety of perspectives, such 
as design process (Cerejo, 2021) , human -centered explainable AI ( Ehsan  et al., 202 0; Bond et al., 
2019 ), trustworthy AI (He et al., 2021) , human -centered machine learning ( Sperrle et al., 2021 ; 
Kaluarachchi  et al., 2021 ).  
However, there are gaps in previous HCAI work . First, m ost of the p revious HCAI work 
was aimed primarily  at either a broad audience or the AI community  but not specifica lly for the 
HCI community, resulting in uncertainty in what action  should be taken by HCI professionals to 
apply H CAI in their work  addressing the new challenges that we did not encounter  in human 
interaction with non -AI systems . Secondly, most of the previous work promoted HCAI at a high 
level , with no specific HCAI -driven design goals  that can be closely tied to the new HCI challenges 
in human interaction with AI systems . Consequently, HCI professionals could not get direct 
guidance to their HCI work. Thirdly , there was no holistic assessment that specifically identifie d the 
unique challenges as we transition to interaction with AI systems from an HCI perspective , with the 
result  that there are no specific opportunities  tied to HCAI -driven design goals  identified to guide 
HCI professionals address ing the new issues in developing HCAI systems . Lastly, the previous 
HCAI work has not included a comprehensive assessment of current HCI approaches (e.g., 
methods, process, skillset) on whether we have gaps to enable HCAI  in future HCI work . 
Thus, to further advance HCAI specifically to the HCI community, we need to specify 
HCAI -driven design goals, tie the se to the unique challenges and opportunities for HCI 
professionals , and then carry out an assessment of current HCI approaches . We believe that s uch a