56 
 the field s of HCI is the embodiment of th e “shared philosophy” model. In the early days of the AI 
era, it is even more necessary for HCI professionals to actively share the HCAI design philosophy 
with the AI community. Although the HCAI approach may not be fully accepted by all in the initial 
stage, but we need to minimize this time -lagging effect. Influence ultimately determines our 
continuing efforts , just as we jointly have been promoting user experience  to society over the last 
40 years  and user experience  has finally become a consensus  for society .  
Third , HCI professionals must update  their skillset and knowledge in AI .  Some HCI  
professionals have already raised their concerns (Yang, 2018). While AI professionals should 
understand HCI approach es, HCI professionals also nee d to have a basic understanding of AI 
technology and apply the knowledge to facilitate the process integration and collaboration . 
Opportunities include  employees' continuing education, online courses, industry events  and 
webinars, workshop, self-learning, or even learning through handling low -risk projects to develop 
new skills , so that HCI professionals can fully understand the design implications posed by the  
unique characteristics  of AI systems  and be able to overcome weakness es in ability to influence AI 
systems  as reported (Yang, 2018) .  
In a long run, we need to train our next generation  of developers and designers to create 
HCAI systems . Over the past 40 years, HCI, human factors, and psychology disciplines have 
provided  an extensive array of professional capabilities. These capabilities have emerged into a 
relatively mature user experience  culture (Xu, 2005).   For this to occur for HCAI , new measures at 
the level of university educ ation are required.  For instance, r elevant departments or programs (e.g., 
HCI, Human Factors, Computer Science , Informatics, Psychology ) need to proactively cultivate 
interdisciplinary talents doing HCAI  work for society. More s pecifically, it is necessary to provide