28 
 Clarification of human and AI’s roles . While HCI traditionally studie d the interaction 
between humans and non -AI computing system s, future HCI work should be focused on 
understanding of how humans and AI systems interact, negotiate,  and even work as teammate s for 
collaboration . Future HCI work needs to assess whether humans and AI agents can be a true 
collaborative teammate  versus an AI agent serving merely as a super tool (Shneiderman, 2020 c; 
Klein, G., Woods, et al., 2004 ), as a peer ( Ötting, 2020) , or as a leader ( Wesche & Sonderegger, 
2019 ). As AI technology advances , an important HCI question is the design -center for the 
interaction (or mutual collaboration ); that is, who are the ultimate decision makers?  We need to 
investigate how we can ensure that when in complex or li fe-changing decision -making, humans 
retain a critical decision -making role instead of AI systems  while creating and maintaining an 
enjoyable user experience ( Inkpen  et al., 2019).  
  Modeling human -AI interaction and collaboration . Conventional interaction models (e.g., 
MHP, GOMS) can no longer meet the needs of complex interactions in the AI era (e.g., Card et al., 
1983) , there is a need for HCI professionals to explore the human cognitive mechanisms for 
modeling the interaction and collaboration  with AI systems (Liu et al., 2018). The goal is to design 
interfaces of AI systems for facilitating effective interaction and potential collaboration. Other 
topics include the models of teaming relationships (e.g., peer, teammate, and mentor/mentee), 
teaming processes (e.g., interactions, communications, and coordination), and applications of 
human -AI collaboration across different work domains.  
Advanc ement of current HCI approach . HCI professionals should  not only rely on current  
HCI approach but do much more . For example, Computer -Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW) 
has long been an active subfield of HCI, and its g oal is to use the computer as a facilitator to