34 
 is this the result, when did you succeed or fail, when can I trust you? The "black box" phenomenon 
has become one of the major concerns in dev eloping AI system s (Muelle  et al., 2019 ; Hoffman  et 
al., 2018 ; Bathaee, 2018 ; Gunning, 2017 ). The "black box" phenomenon may occur in various AI 
systems , including the application of AI in financial stocks, medical diagnosis, security testing, 
legal judgments, and other fields , causing inefficiency in decision -making  and loss of public trust in 
AI. 
As a solution, e xplainable AI intends to provide the user what the machine is thinking and 
can explain to the user why (PwC, 2018) , which is also the HCAI design goal  (see Figure 1) . 
Explainable AI is getting more and more attention. One representative research program is the five -
year research plan for explainable AI launched by DARPA in 2016 (Gunning, 2017). The program 
covers thre e aspects of work : (1) develop a series of new or improved machine learning 
technologies to obtain explainable algorithms; (2) develop explainable UI model with advanced 
HCI technology and design strategies; and (3) evaluate existing psychological theories on 
explanation to assist explainable AI .  
Existing psycholog ical theories on explanation may help the explainable AI work . 
Psychological research has been carried out in the aspects of mechanisms, measurements, and 
modeling. For example, inductive reasoning, causal reasoning, self -explanation, comparative  
explanation , counterfactual reasoning (Hoffman, et al ., 2017 ; Broniatowski, 2021 ). Although many 
hypotheses were v erified in laboratory studies (Mueller, et al., 2019) , much work is still needed to 
build computational models for explainable AI  work . Researchers have realize d the importance of 
non-AI disciplines such as HCI in explainable AI research  (e.g., Bond  et al., 2019; Hoffman  et al., 
2018 ). For instance, t he survey of Miller et al. (2017) indicate s that most explainable AI projects