22 
 The HCI community has recognized that n ew technologies present both challenges and 
opportunities to HCI professionals (e.g., Stephanidis, Salvendy  et al., 2019; Shneiderman  et al., 
2016 ). Specifically, Stephanidis, Salvendy et al.  (2019 ) identified grand challenges and offered 
comprehensive recommendations on the research priorities to address the se grand challenges with 
intelligent interactive systems . As discussed previously, o ur approach is to focus on a holistic 
understanding of  the unique challenges of human interaction with AI systems  as compared to 
human interaction with non -AI systems  from a n HCAI perspective. More specifically, we identify 
the new HCI opportunities for HCI professionals to address the new challenges based on the HCAI 
approa ch and specific HCAI design goals .  
This section is organized as follows : (1) highlight of the new challenges across the seven 
main issues as listed in Tab le 2 for HCI professionals to address ; (2) review of the overall status of 
current research and application in each of the seven main issue s from the HCI perspective ; (3) 
highlight of the new HCI opportunities that HCI professionals can make (or continue to make) 
contributions  to develop AI systems , as driven by the specific HCAI design goals .  
 
3.1 From expected machine behavior to potentially unexpected  behavior   
The machine behavior (system output) of non-AI computing systems  is typically expected 
since design  of such systems are  based on fixed rules or algorithms . Examples include:  washing 
machines, elevators, and conventional office software . However, the behavioral outcome of AI 
systems could be non -deterministic and unexpected. Researchers are raising the alarm about the 
unintended consequences, which can produce negative societa l effects (e.g., Yampolskiy, 2019; 
McGregor  et al., 2021 ). Machine behavior in AI systems also has a special ecological form 
(Rahwan  et al., 2019). Currently, the majority of people studying machine behavior are AI and