20 
 ethical AI and providing “meaningful human control ” for re sponsibility and accountability  (e.g., 
van Diggelen  et al., 2020; Beckers  et al., 2019).     
(2) The interdependency of human factors , technology, and ethics.  The HCAI approach  
advocates synergy across the three aspects of work  as illustrated by the lines connecting all the 
three aspects depicted in Figure 1 . For example, if the impact of AI on humans (e.g., ethics) is not 
considered in design, it is impossible for AI systems to achieve the human -centered goal s and may 
eventually harm humans even though the AI technology deployed is technically made "more like 
humans." On the other hand, ethically designed AI systems  emphasi ze augmenting human 
capabilities rather than replacing humans. AI systems, such as autonomous weapons and vehicles, 
need to provide an effective meaning ful human control mechanism (e.g., human -controllable 
interface through HCI design ) to ensure that the human operators can quickly and effectively take 
over the control of system s in an emergency  (van Diggelen  et al., 2020) . Also, the system should be 
able to  track the accountability of hum an operators through the meaning ful human control 
mechanism  (see more in  Section 3.7).  
(3) Systematic design thinking . From a technical point of view, the HCAI approach  
considers humans and machines as a system and seeks to develop the complementarity of machine 
intelligence and human intelligence within the framework of human -machine systems. From the 
HCI perspective, the HCAI approach emphasizes on the perspective of hu man-machine -
environment system. An effective AI system should be the optimal match between human needs  
(physiology, psychology, etc.), AI technology, and environment (physics, culture, organization, 
society, etc.). From the perspective of ethical design, t he HCAI approach systematically considers 
factors such as ethics, morality, law, and fairness. Therefore, the HCAI approach emphasizes that