43 
 New interaction paradigms . In the realization of multi -modality, natural UI, and pervasive 
computing, hardware technology is no longer an obstacle, but the user's interaction capabilities have 
not been correspondingly supported  (Streitz, 2007) . How to design effective multi -modal 
integration of visual, audio, touch, gestures,  and paral lel interaction paradigms for AI systems is an 
important topic for future HCI work . This work  was mainly carried out in the computer science 
community , the HCI community should support for defining the paradigms , metaphors, and 
experimental verification  to address the unique issues in AI systems  as we did in the personal 
computer era (Fu et al., 2014; Sundar , 2020) .  
Usable user interface . AI technology  change s the way we design user interface s. There is a 
big opportunity for HCI professionals to design usable user interface based on effective interaction 
design with AI systems. Conventional non-AI interfaces tend to be rigid in the order in which they 
accept instructions and the level of detail which t hey require  (Lieberman, 2009 ). AI-based 
technologies , such as gesture recognition, motion recognition, speech recognition,  and 
emotion/intent/context detection, can let systems accept a broader range of human input  through 
multi -modalities  in parallel . Human interaction with AI systems, which is distinct from interaction 
with non -AI systems, requires HCI professionals to develop more effective approaches to support 
HCI design work exploring the design of usable UI that can effectively facilitate human -AI 
interaction, including potential human -AI collaboration . 
Adapti ng AI technology to human capability . Human limited cognitive resources become a 
bottleneck of HCI design in the pervasive computing environment . As early as 2002, Carnegie 
University's Aura project research showed that the most precious resource in pervasive computing 
is not computer technolo gy, but human cognitive resources (Garlan  et al., 2002). In an implicit