64    COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM   |  SEPTEMBER 2023  |  VOL. 66  |  NO. 9research
IMAGE BY ANDRIJ BORYS ASSOCIATES, USING SHUTTERSTOCK
 key insights
 ˽Dynamic certification of autonomous 
systems requires the involvement 
and distillation of knowledge from 
diverse stakeholders, from engineers 
to architects to regulators. It must start 
at the beginning of the life cycle, where 
decisions are most effective and cost of 
design changes are lowest.
 ˽Iterative assessment for dynamic 
certification depends on the use and 
context in which autonomous systems are 
expected to deploy and must account for 
both technical and social requirements.
 ˽Multiple rounds of testing and 
interrogating requirements via 
formal methods provide insights into 
the uncertainty present in varying 
deployment scenarios, where they must 
perform efficiently and safely.AUTONOMOUS SYSTEMS ARE often deployed in complex 
socio-technical environments, such as public roads, 
where they must behave safely and securely. Unlike 
many traditionally engineered systems, autonomous 
systems are expected to behave predictably in varying 
“open-world” environmental contexts that cannot be 
fully specified formally. As a result, assurance about 
autonomous systems requires the development of new 
certification methods —codified checks and balances, 
including regulatory requirements, for deployingsystems—and mathematical tools that 
can dynamically bind the uncertainty 
engendered by these diverse deploy -
ment scenarios. More specifically, au -
tonomous systems increasingly use al -
gorithms trained from data to predict 
and control behavior in contexts previ -
ously not encountered. Using learning 
is a critical step to engineer autonomy 
that can successfully operate in hetero -
geneous contexts , but current certifica -
tion methods must be revised to ad -
dress the dynamic, adaptive nature of 
learning. The heterogeneity that any 
certification framework should address 
for the design of autonomous systems 
is twofold. The first relates to the system 
itself and the heterogeneous compo -
nents that engender its behavior. The 
second is the heterogeneity that certify -
ing must address in relation to the com -
plex socio-technical settings in which 
the system is expected to behave.
We propose the dynamic certifica -
tion  of autonomous systems—the iter -
ative revision of permissible  〈use, con -
text〉  pairs for a system—rather than 
pre-specified tests that a system must 
pass to be certified. Dynamic certifica -
tion offers the ability to learn while cer -
tifying, thereby opening additional op -
portunities to shape the development 
of autonomous technology. This type 
of comprehensive, exploratory testing, 
shaped by insights from deployment, Dynamic 
Certification 
for 
Autonomous 
SystemsDOI:10.1145/3574133
An attempt to provide a common language 
between formal models, simulations, 
real-world (testing) data, and regulatory 
mechanisms.
BY GEORGIOS BAKIRTZIS, STEVEN CARR, DAVID DANKS,  
AND UFUK TOPCU