66    COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM   |  SEPTEMBER 2023  |  VOL. 66  |  NO. 9research
can enable iterative selection of ap -
propriate contexts of use. More specifi -
cally, we propose dynamic certification 
and modeling involving three testing 
stages: early-phase testing, transition -
al testing, and confirmatory testing. 
Movement between testing stages is 
not unidirectional; we can shift in any 
direction depending on our current 
state of knowledge and intended de -
ployments. We describe these stages 
in more detail later, but the key is that 
these stages enable system design -
ers and regulators to learn about and 
ensure autonomous systems operate 
within the bounds of acceptable risk.
Our proposal is similar to how the 
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) 
tests drugs in stages with increasing 
scrutiny before the products are ap -
proved for public consumption. Rather 
than a simple yes/no certification, the 
FDA uses an iterative process of explor -
atory stages in which pharmaceutical 
agents are first approved for limited 
use in restricted contexts under careful 
oversight. They are only gradually ap -
proved for broader use as post-approv -
al monitoring and subsequent stud -
ies demonstrate safety and efficacy. 
Of course, FDA procedures cannot be 
used directly for dynamic certification 
of autonomous (software) systems, but 
they provide an “existence proof” that 
dynamic certification can work.
Technology creation involves at 
least two different yet interdependent 
types of decisions. Design decisions  de-
termine the structure and intended 
operation of the autonomous system, including the evaluation functions 
optimized during development and 
revision/updates. Deployment deci -
sions  determine the contexts and uses 
for the autonomous system, including 
designating certain situations as “do 
not use” (or “use only with increased 
oversight”). In practice, static certifi -
cation and regulatory systems often 
focus only on deployment decisions 
(and take the design decisions and 
technical specifications as fixed). How -
ever, precisely because of the frequent 
uncertainty about what counts as suc -
cess for an autonomous system, certifi -
cation of those systems must also con -
sider design decisions, using technical 
specifications to predict performance 
in contexts that are not encountered.
Dynamic certification includes 
design decisions, particularly in the 
early stages when changes have the 
highest impact and lowest cost, often 
before code or hardware have even 
been built.15,35 Mathematical tools 
from formal methods can thus play 
an essential role in specifying autono -
mous systems at different levels of ab -
straction, even when they have not yet 
been implemented. Formal methods 
allow us to specify acceptable risks, 
identify failures that inform mitiga -
tion strategies, and understand and 
represent the uncertainty associated 
with deploying autonomous systems 
in heterogeneous environments. For -
mal models are also living documents 
that encode design and deployment 
decisions made throughout the life cy -
cle of the autonomous system. For ex -ample, tracking changes in the speci -
fication of requirements throughout 
the life cycle can offer a good picture 
of the design problems and solutions 
at a particular time and how those 
changes reflect design shifts over 
time. Successful dynamic certifica -
tion thus depends on translational 
research by formal methods, autono -
mous systems, and robotics commu -
nities to establish proper procedures 
to ensure that deployed systems are 
unlikely to cause harm.
Dynamic certification relies on an 
iterative assessment of the risks (and 
benefits) introduced by deploying au -
tonomous systems for different uses 
and contexts. Formal methods offer a 
concrete basis for specification, verifi -
cation, and synthesis for autonomous 
systems but do not guide the transla -
tion of our desired values and accept -
able risk into those formal models. We 
require frameworks that explicitly allow 
for ambiguities in specifications and 
uncertainties and partial decisions in 
modeling while remaining scalable to 
practically relevant sizes. More general -
ly, dynamic certification will require an 
appropriate co-evolution of regulatory 
and formal frameworks. Having argued 
for implementing parts of dynamic 
certification via formal methods, it is 
crucial to acknowledge other types of 
analyses that could implement dynamic 
certification, such as assurance cases,3 
structured interrogation of require -
ments,7,28,38 and domain standards.12 In-
deed, these other types of methods and 
their associated tools and metrics could 
play valuable roles in the dynamic certi -
fication of autonomous systems.
Scenario
We motivate and illustrate our pro -
posed framework for dynamic certifi -
cation using a scenario with two inter -
acting systems: an unmanned aerial 
vehicle (UAV) and a ground-based de -
livery robot simultaneously delivering 
packages (see Figure 1). We require that 
the UAV only operate while connected 
to a wireless communication network. 
If it (likely) loses connection, it must 
land in place. A hazardous state results 
if the UAV lands in the same location as 
the ground-based robot. The UAV de -
signer seeks a high-level risk-mitigation 
strategy that accounts for the ground-
based robot’s movement and limits the Figure 1. Different  〈use, context 〉  pairs result in different hazard conditions. 
The arrows and shaded regions are possible trajectories: safe (blue) and hazardous (red). 
Dotted lines indicate connectivity. (a) In suburban areas, the probability of losing connec -
tion is low because the signal has minimal attenuation. (b) In a city, buildings are made with 
concrete and rebar and are laid out densely, increasing the probability of signal attenuation. 
Therefore, the system is more likely to transition to a hazardous state in the city  〈use, con-
text〉  pair. When attempting to deploy in these different scenarios, we must check different 
safety properties. Dynamic certification requires the development of a framework for 
designers that easily adapts between the different scenarios.
(a) Suburban context (b) Urban context