SEPTEMBER 2023  |  VOL. 66  |  NO. 9  |  COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM     71research
stakeholder values and incorporates 
them in modeling and testing autono -
mous systems. We have outlined one 
way of implementing dynamic certi -
fication using formal methods and 
models. In contrast to the current 
practice of using formal methods for 
guarantees once a system is built, we 
can also use formal methods to model 
values and restrictions within deploy -
ment scenarios and open environ -
ments. Formal methods can simulate 
socio-technical parameters, not just 
the technological system. The cen -
tral message of dynamic certification 
is that we must implement precise 
feedback loops between formal mod -
els, simulation environments, and in -
creasingly open-world deployments, 
all to ensure that stakeholder values 
are being protected and advanced. 
Formal models provide a crucial tool 
in these loops as they can justify dy -
namically evolving requirements.
A common concern when imple -
menting verification and certification 
using formal methods is scalability. 
However, scalability is not an issue 
within dynamic certification because 
we expect the formal model to provide 
partial proof of safe deployment. Dy -
namic certification augments formal 
models with testing for this reason. 
Indeed, the feedback between mod -
els, testing, and stakeholder values 
minimizes scalability issues found in 
most static certification contexts. The 
latter must test all behaviors of sys -
tems, while the former can focus on 
the behaviors that lead to losses (vio -
lation of stakeholder values).27 Formal 
methods thus do not need to scale 
indefinitely;d however, that does not 
mean we could instead require regu -
lators and designers to tame some of 
the environmental complexity or limit 
the required autonomy. Alternately, 
one could require only that the formal 
model demonstrates resilience in the 
sense of a return to normalcy after an 
uncontrolled action. This narrower 
requirement can vastly reduce the sce -
narios for formal modeling and assur -
d This does not mean that bottlenecks cannot 
be hit with partial models, but partial mod -
eling gives us the means to say something 
meaningful about the relationship between 
what the system ought (not) to do (that is, its 
requirements) and what the exhibited behav -
ior actually is.the UAV’s  policy would have it fly be -
tween building rooftops only when 
it can safely cross without collision 
and loiter at the rooftop otherwise. 
Of course, such a policy may result in 
extremely long loitering times while 
the UAV waits for the delivery robot to 
move away from the goal region. We 
could thus make the design decision to 
include battery charge as an additional 
parameter in the UAV parametric MDP 
system model. This design decision 
could change the acceptable deploy -
ment contexts, though the details de -
pend on what was learned through ex -
ploratory testing.
Certifying Autonomous Systems 
in Socio-Technical Contexts
Testing in static certification can be 
tractable because the target perfor -
mance is specified ahead of time.19 In 
contrast, testing in dynamic certifica -
tion might appear completely intracta -
ble as it depends on the changing sys -
tem, use, and context. We propose that 
the integration of modeling and test -
ing can make dynamic certification 
feasible. A formal model can provide 
precise, context-sensitive specifica -
tions for the system’s implementation 
and inform the types of tests we con -
duct. This type of dynamic certification 
will ideally result in believable and de -
fensible guarantees of correct opera -
tion.c More importantly, this dynamic 
certification leads to early-phase mod -
els that can be used to interrogate re -
quired or acceptable behavior, even in 
the absence of a specific software or 
hardware implementation. Compared 
to conventional certification regimes, 
dynamic certification revises our as -
sumptions and improves decisions 
or requirements before the system 
is even built, all with the added ben -
efit of identifying the types of contexts 
that led to design changes. The effort 
to understand required assurances 
can begin while we can still effectively 
change the design or the broader so -
cio-technical context.
Dynamic certification systemati -
cally identifies context-dependent 
c We cannot require infallible guarantees, as 
they may be based on incorrect or imperfect 
assumptions. No certification process can be 
perfect, but dynamic certification has the ben -
efit of continued testing to detect incorrect 
(formal) models.Scalability is 
not an issue 
within dynamic 
certification 
because we expect 
the formal model to 
provide partial proof 
of safe deployment.