SEPTEMBER 2023  |  VOL. 66  |  NO. 9  |  COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM     69research
to account for the gap between formal 
models and reality. It is impossible to 
make autonomous systems 100% safe 
100% of the time, but we posit that for -
mal methods can significantly assist in 
designing better, safer systems.
In particular, formal methods can 
be highly valuable for the dynamic cer -
tification of an autonomous system. 
Formal models can specify behavior 
and system dynamics that are difficult 
to implement and test without com -
mitting to a specific design. Formal 
models can therefore be used as an aid 
to inform what testing ought to take 
place to ensure that the system will be -
have as expected. Formal models and 
specifications can also be readily up -
dated given new data to improve analy -
sis precision as the system is deployed.
One formal model for autonomous 
systems that is especially useful for 
dynamic certification is the Markov 
decision process (MDP). The MDP 
models sequential decision making in 
stochastic systems with nondeterminis -
tic choices.30 MDPs have been useful for 
modeling high-level decisions in auton -
omous systems, such as collision-avoid -
ance,36 surveillance using ground-based 
robots,23 and transmission exchange 
for wireless sensor networks.2 Analysis 
with MDPs typically requires that the 
complete model be known a priori,18 
but there is often significant model un -
certainty in early phases since many de -sign and deployment decisions have yet 
to be made. We can instead use a class 
of model known as a parametric  MDP,16 
where parameters model variations in 
transition probabilities. The param -
eters may thus represent design choices 
(for example, requiring a perception 
Module with a certain error rate or set -
ting specific thresholds for underlying 
decision-making algorithms); deploy -
ment decisions and context character -
istics (for example, possible reductions 
in visibility or likelihoods of interrup -
tion of information flow); or modeling 
uncertainties (for example, unknown 
characteristics of motion or reaction 
time under off-nominal conditions). 
Parametric MDPs have the specificity 
and flexibility required for a base system 
model that can be refined and improved 
through exploratory early-phase testing.
We illustrate the use of paramet -
ric MDPs as an early-phase decision-
making tool in our running scenario 
with two autonomous systems: a UAV 
and a ground-based delivery robot, si -
multaneously delivering packages (see 
Figure 2). For dynamic certification, 
we want to iteratively identify uses and 
contexts for which the UAV can safely 
deploy while continually gathering ad -
ditional data to determine when it can 
be deployed in more heterogeneous 
environments. Safe deployment is crit -
ical in all phases (not just confirmatory 
testing) due to the possibility of prob -Current static certification frame -
works involve testing only late in the life 
cycle after a particular system imple -
mentation has been built and is often 
already deployed. They could theoreti -
cally play a role beyond setting perfor -
mance targets, but in practice, they 
rarely do. In contrast, dynamic certifica -
tion uses testing throughout the life cy -
cle, revealing challenges and trade-offs 
while design decisions and changes are 
still possible. The benefits of life cycle-
wide testing require models that can 
capture the “what”, “why”, and “how”, 
along with connections to the eventual 
system design. Formal models play a 
particularly valuable role in dynamic 
certification. In particular, formal mod -
els can be used early to interrogate our 
assumptions about the system’s re -
quirements rather than only being used 
late to provide provable guarantees. For -
mal methods also can give us the tools 
to add stakeholder-specific semantics 
to various models of behaviors, require -
ments, and architectures, thereby pro -
viding a common language to reason 
about the system’s design.
Formal Methods for 
Dynamic Certification
Formal models use the precision of 
mathematical language to reveal mis -
understandings about the system’s 
behavior and requirements.13,24,29,39 
Formal specifications can model com -
plex systems before developing code or 
synthesizing hardware architectures, 
allowing systems engineers to inter -
rogate requirements and find clashes 
and interaction faults early in the sys -
tem’s life cycle. Using formal models, 
we can architect a system proactively: 
no system exists yet, so our design-
decision effectiveness is highest and 
the cost of changes lowest since we do 
not have to bolt modifications onto a 
preexisting design. Additionally, we 
can often synthesize behaviors directly 
from the formal model, which then 
provides our implementation with 
guarantees about important proper -
ties, such as safety.33 Finally, formal 
models can inform testing procedures 
by simulating different contexts and 
becoming more comprehensive (and 
therefore informative) as system data 
is collected during deployment11,22—
with the caveat that there will always be 
a need to interpret those formal results Figure 2. Interrogating models containing different Contexts . 
Using formal methods, we can interrogate models containing different contexts. For 
example, a UAV (shown in red) deployed in a city (left) is more likely to lose connection and 
be forced to land (opaque UAV) compared to a similar UAV operating in a suburban area. 
For the city context, the value for probability   p  1    would be larger than the suburban context 
for the same parameter. This means we must account for and understand how the same 
system can be less or more likely to encounter hazardous conditions when interacting with 
ground-based agents (landing in the vicinity of the delivery robot). We include a possible 
counterexample whereby the UAV drops connection and crash-lands on the delivery robot. 
In a similar, albeit slightly modified context (right), we can choose to explicitly eliminate 
the possibility of ground-based interactions by having the UAV enter the ground layer in a 
prescribed controlled landing zone in the form of the building roofs (shaded red).
(a) Context without landing zones (b) Context with landing zonesDynamic Certi￿cation for Autonomous Systems 9
?1 ?2Dynamic Certi￿cation for Autonomous Systems 9
?1 ?2