SEPTEMBER 2023  |  VOL. 66  |  NO. 9  |  COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM     67research
probability of transitioning to a hazard -
ous state. This strategy requires speci -
fication of acceptable  〈use, context 〉  
pairs—for example, usable trajectories 
or locations for the UAV. This high-lev -
el focus enables key abstractions and 
simplifications. For instance, the de -
signer can abstract away the low-level 
UAV controller and assume that it can 
safely navigate between waypoints. In -
stead of modeling complex behaviors 
about the ground-based robot—which 
may not even be possible if the system 
is outside of the designer’s control—the 
designer can require that the UAV be ro -
bust against random movements of the 
robot. Though this example is simpli -
fied in various ways (for example, only 
including two robots), those simplifica -
tions serve to highlight key conceptual 
points, including the value of formal 
methods.
Dynamic Certification
Dynamic certification is built on two 
fundamental operations: modeling 
and testing. Modeling allows system 
engineers to track design choices that 
otherwise would be difficult to docu -
ment and adjust when issues arise 
because of complex interactions be -
tween sub-components. Models also 
enable the engineer to focus on the 
interfaces between sub-components, 
often abstracting away the individual 
sub-components to focus on the be -
havior of the whole. Importantly, we 
can use models to understand how the 
system might succeed or fail before 
the system is built—that is, for high-
impact, low-cost design decisions. In 
contrast, testing involves the actual 
implementations, focusing on wheth -
er the assumptions of the model and 
resulting design decisions actually 
function as expected in the physical 
world. Conventional static certifica -
tion struggles when operational (or 
regulatory) assumptions fail to hold 
in reality. In contrast, dynamic certifi -
cation posits that modeling and test -
ing should be intertwined throughout 
the system life cycle, so our models 
(and assumptions) can be continually 
refined as we better understand real-
world contexts. Certification of auton -
omous learning systems requires both 
elements: testing, since the world can 
surprise us and the system can change 
through learning, and modeling, to guide our design and testing decisions 
through the massive search spaces.
Assurance requires specifying when, 
where, and why an autonomous sys -
tem is being deployed within a socio-
technical context. But if autonomous 
systems are expected to learn from their 
environment and context of operation, 
then there does not seem to be a stable 
model for testing. Dynamic certification 
turns this concern into a virtue: If our 
base system model contains appropri -
ate parameters, we can iteratively refine 
and augment this base model through 
different testing procedures. This vir -
tue and the resulting testing procedures 
come from the feedback and interac -
tion between stakeholders with differ -
ent concerns and expertise, making it 
clear when testing procedures are suf -
ficient and accurate. Therefore, in the 
long run, we can conduct sufficient 
testing to have an accurate model that 
assures stakeholders that systems will 
operate as expected.
Specification of the base system 
model for dynamic certification re -
quires (perhaps partial) identification 
and description of the following four 
components (inspired by Kimmelman 
and London).20
 ˲Modules  of the system (primar -
ily software, but potentially hardware) 
including the function(s) of each mod -
ule.
 ˲Contexts  in which the system is 
expected to be able to operate success -
fully.
 ˲Mappings  from Context  →  Behav -
ior for “successful” performance in 
various conditions.
 ˲Variations  in the environment for 
which the system should be robust.
Given an initial specification of 
these four elements for an autonomous 
system, dynamic certification can be 
divided into three distinct stages (with 
no requirement for unidirectional pro -
gression through these stages). All four 
components of the base-model specifi -
cation can be revised or adjusted dur -
ing each stage. Although discussions 
of certification often focus on Con -
texts and Mappings, the inclusion of 
design decisions in dynamic certifica -
tion means that other components can 
also be adjusted—for example, adding 
Modules to improve performance in 
given Contexts).
The first stage, early-phase testing , Dynamic 
certification relies 
on an iterative 
assessment of 
the risks (and 
benefits) introduced 
by deploying 
autonomous 
systems for 
different uses and 
contexts.