68    COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM   |  SEPTEMBER 2023  |  VOL. 66  |  NO. 9research
In our running scenario, transitional 
testing would involve testing (not just 
modeling) system performance with 
high-fidelity and hardware-in-the-loop 
simulations4,9,34 or in controlled envi -
ronments—for example, a large indus -
trial park with limited public traffic. 
This stage intends to gather enough 
data to modify the formal system mod -
el to reflect reality further.
In the third and final stage, confir -
matory testing , the system is deployed 
with significant oversight and moni -
toring, but no further controls beyond 
those specified in the certification by 
a set of  〈use, context 〉  pairs. This stage 
aims to determine, in real-world set -
tings, both system performance reli -
ability and the extent of system-user 
value (mis)matches. The latter goal 
is crucial because many autonomous 
system “failures” involve a properly 
functioning system that implements 
different values than the users expect. 
The system behaves correctly, but ac -
cording to a (perhaps implicit) notion 
of success that is different from that 
of the human users;a that is, the sys -
tem implements the wrong Mapping. 
These divergences often appear only 
once the system is in the hands of un -
trained users, so confirmatory testing 
must initially include significant over -
sight to detect, record, and respond to 
real-world performance failures and 
value divergences. This monitoring 
can be gradually reduced as we learn 
the exact behavior of the system in 
relevant real-world contexts—that is, 
even this stage involves some explor -
atory testing.b In the running scenario, 
confirmatory testing would involve su -
pervised deployment in a controlled 
environment, possibly borrowing rules 
and regulations from the operational 
design domain.21 Changes to the sys -
tem design based on actual operation -
al contexts should reflect the formal 
model; they must agree. Once testing 
and modeling agree, the dynamic cer -
tification has ensured that the system 
will behave acceptably and safely.
a Many classic examples of “AI run amok” fall 
into this category. For example, the paperclip 
maximizer6 simply has a different idea of “suc -
cess” than we do.
b Confirmatory testing is thus quite similar to 
conformance testing but does not assume that 
we have a fully specified set of standards and 
behaviors that are provided in advance.occurs in the development lab or oth -
er highly controlled settings. The two 
main goals of this stage are to verify that 
the integrated Modules implement the 
intended Mappings and to develop ap -
propriate base models of the autono -
mous system for offline testing. The 
first goal is relatively standard when 
developing a software system—for ex -
ample, unit-testing. The second goal, 
however, is much less common and 
requires careful consideration of the 
range of Contexts and Variations that 
might be encountered in plausible de -
ployment environments. Importantly, 
all four components of the base system 
model must be (tentatively) specified 
in early-phase testing; this stage is not 
solely technology-focused. Given an 
initial specification, early-phase test -
ing continues until the software sys -
tem is suitably verified and its expected 
performance is sufficiently good in of -
fline testing. In the running scenario, 
early-phase testing could take the form 
of building and testing a gridworld 
that models the high-level decision-
making for the UAV. In this stage, the 
designer would identify anomalous 
behavior, such as locations that create 
deadlocks, thereby enabling design de -
cisions to mitigate situations that lead 
to task degradation.14
In the second stage, transitional 
testing , the system is deployed in real-
world environments, though with sig -
nificant oversight and control. The two 
main goals of this stage are to identify 
Contexts of real-world failure and to 
characterize potential environmental 
Variations. These goals require highly 
active engagement and interventions; 
this stage is not simply “deploy and 
watch” or “compare to prior stan -
dards.” Rather, transitional testing 
should involve, for example, focused 
efforts to place the system into “hard” 
contexts precisely to improve our un -
derstanding of the system. Transition -
al testing involves careful, systematic 
efforts to determine the boundaries 
of appropriate system performance. 
The information produced by this test -
ing can be iteratively used to change 
Modules, constrain Contexts, add 
Mapping complexity, or increase Varia -
tion specificity. Transitional testing is 
exploratory (helping to understand) 
not merely confirmatory (checking 
if the system performs as expected). Dynamic 
certification 
uses testing 
throughout the life 
cycle, revealing 
challenges and 
trade-offs while 
design decisions 
and changes are 
still possible.