70    COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM   |  SEPTEMBER 2023  |  VOL. 66  |  NO. 9research
this mission (Figure 3). These prob -
abilities can then be used to provide 
crucial guidance in the dynamic certi -
fication process.
For instance, when beginning the 
early-phase testing stage, the designer 
has minimal insight into the values 
of   p  1    or   p  2   . One possible outcome is 
that initially, the designer may as -
sume these probabilities correlate 
with signal strength and are, therefore, 
equal—that is,   p  1   =  p  2   . In such a case, 
the formal model is a parametric MDP 
with a single parameter. Under this as -
sumption, we can certify that the agent 
will successfully perform its mission 
no worse than  ∼ 93% of the time (Fig -
ure 3a). However, during transitional 
or confirmatory testing, we may gather 
more information about the system 
and learn that   p  1   ≠  p  2   . In light of this 
new information, we can return to 
early-phase testing to reconsider the 
UAV behavior (in this environment) as 
modeled by a parametric MDP with two 
parameters. In the process of synthe -
sizing these policies, we can now com -
pute the probabilities of success across 
values for both parameters (Figure 3b).
The integrated modeling and test -
ing in dynamic certification can lead 
us to specify a threshold on   p  1    or   p  2    for 
safe deployment. We might identify 
specific, measurable features that de -
fine appropriate deployment contexts. 
For example, we might require that  
  p  1   ∈   [  0, 0 . 15 ]     (Figure 3, highlighted in 
gray). Our current design in suburban 
contexts might satisfy this constraint 
but require additional changes for 
urban contexts. We might adjust the 
design of the UAV (for example, using 
a more reliable communications de -
vice) or instead adjust the context (for 
example, providing additional signal 
towers). In either case, we can justifi -
ably determine the systems, uses, and 
contexts where safe deployment can be 
assured (to a given probability).
Alternately, an urban context such 
as Figure 1b could include buildings 
that provide safe landing zones for the 
UAV (Figure 2b). In this context, we can 
compute a policy that ensures success 
regardless of the values of   p  1    and   p  2   . 
In other words, the contextual deploy -
ment face of safe landing locations 
in the urban context alleviates the 
need to test our model for many pos -
sible values of   p  1    and   p  2   . Specifically,  in demonstrating scalable behavior. 
Simply, an agent that fails to behave 
safely in such simple environments 
is also unlikely to behave safely in the 
real world.26 A parametric MDP can 
model the composition of these three 
modules into a single socio-technical 
system. The UAV can land and take 
off from anywhere in the region. It 
will lose connection and land-in-place 
with probability   p  1    (opaque UAV in 
Figure 2) and remain grounded until 
it reestablishes connection with prob -
ability   p  2   . We formalize the UAV goal 
of safely delivering the package as the 
requirement that the UAV behavior 
maximizes the probability that it deliv -
ers a package to the green region while 
not creating an incident by landing in 
the same physical location as the de -
livery robot. We describe such a mis -
sion using the temporal logic formula  
φ = ¬ Crash  𝖴 Goal  , where  Crash   is true 
when a landed UAV shares the same 
location as the delivery robot. We thus 
abstract away complex low-level inter -
actions involving landing or taking off 
in a crowded region; instead, we focus 
on the human-relevant behavioral un -
derstanding and characterization of 
what might go wrong.
For the range of parameter values, 
we compute policies for the system 
using the Storm probabilistic model-
checking tool.10 When synthesizing the 
optimal policy, that is, the policy that 
satisfies the expression   p  max   [φ]  , we can 
also compute the probability that an 
agent employing this policy will satisfy lematic incidents. For example, if the 
UAV were to hit a delivery robot in early 
testing, then even if there was no dam -
age to either system, this reportable 
event might delay the UAV’s certifica -
tion and eventual deployment. Mitigat -
ing these issues at design time makes 
it less likely that such an event would 
occur and more likely that the system 
would deploy within schedule.
Suppose we have a list of formal re -
quirements (perhaps translated from 
human values) for UAV performance. 
Parametric MDPs provide a useful 
model to check what probability these 
properties hold or, perhaps more im -
portantly, do not hold. In this context, 
the UAV computes a policy that maxi -
mizes the probability of satisfying a 
temporal logic specification. Based 
on a finite number of samples of the 
uncertain parameters, each of which 
induces an MDP, we can estimate the 
best-case probability that the policy 
satisfies the required specification by 
solving a finite-dimensional convex op -
timization problem.
More specifically, we have three 
relevant, high-level Modules (Figure 
2) that determine the movement of 
the UAV, the movement of the robot, 
and the communication status of the 
UAV. When translating a physical en -
vironment such as the predefined sce -
nario (Figure 1) into a formal model, 
we abstract roadway intersections as 
states in a gridworld (Figure 2). While 
gridworlds represent rather simplis -
tic modules, they are quite powerful 
Figure 3. Probability a UAV satisfies its mission.
The probability that the UAV satisfies the specification when employing its optimal policy for 
attempting to deliver a package without incident to the green square in the gridworld model 
(Figure 2). In the highlighted regions, we show the expected parameter range for   p  1    for both 
suburban (gray) and urban (pink). The samples in green (b) are likely to complete the delivery 
without incident while the UAVs operating in the environments shown in yellow and red 
samples are more likely to land-in-place, increasing the probability of an incident occurring.
(a) Assumption that   p  1   =  p  2    (b) Assumption that   p  1   ≠  p  2   0
01
0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.51
0.98
Probability of Satisfaction
Probability of Satisfaction
Probability of Communication Change ( p1, p2)LosingCommunication (
p1)0.96
0.94
0.92Regaining
Communication ( p2)0.75
0.5
0.25
0.25
0.50.250.5