72    COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM   |  SEPTEMBER 2023  |  VOL. 66  |  NO. 9research
15. Frola, F.R. and Miller, C.O. System safety in aircraft 
acquisition. Logistics Management Institute  (1984); 
https://perma.cc/QYV7-C5BY.
16. Hahn, E.M. et al. Synthesis for PCTL in parametric 
Markov decision processes. In Proceedings of the 
3rd NASA Intern. Symp. on Formal Methods, Lecture 
Notes in Computer Science . Springer (2011).
17. Hosseini, S. et al. A review of definitions and measures 
of system resilience. Reliability Engineering System 
Safety  (2016).
18. Junges, S. et al. Parameter Synthesis for Markov 
Models  (2019); arXiv:1903.07993 [cs.LO].
19. Kaner, C. What is a good test case? Conf. on Software 
Testing Analysis Rev. East  (2003).
20. Kimmelman, J. and London, A.J. The structure of 
clinical translation: Efficiency, information, and ethics. 
Hastings Center Report  (2015).
21. Koopman, P. and Fratrik, F. How many operational 
design domains, objects, and events? In Proceedings 
on the 33rd Conf. on Artificial Intelligence, Workshop 
on Artificial Intelligence Safety  (2019).
22. Kress-Gazit, H. et al. Formalizing and guaranteeing 
human-robot interaction. Communications of the ACM . 
(2021).
23. Lahijanian, M. et al. Temporal logic motion planning 
and control with probabilistic satisfaction guarantees. 
IEEE Transactions on Robotics  (2012).
24. Lamport, L. Specifying Systems: The TLA+ Language 
and Tools for Hardware and Software Engineers . 
Addison-Wesley (2002).
25. Lecomte, T. The bourgeois gentleman engineering and 
formal methods. In Intern. Symp. on Formal Methods . 
Springer (2019).
26. Leike, J. et al. AI Safety Gridworlds  (2017); arXiv 
preprint arXiv:1711.09883.
27. Leveson, N.G. Engineering a Safer World: Systems 
Thinking Applied to Safety . MIT Press (2011).
28. Leveson, N.G. et al. Requirements specification for 
process-control systems. IEEE Transactions on 
Software Engineering  (1994).
29. Luckcuck, M. et al. Formal specification and 
verification of autonomous robotic systems: A survey. 
ACM Comput. Surv . (2019).
30. Puterman, M.L. Markov Decision Processes: Discrete 
Stochastic Dynamic Programming . John Wiley Sons 
(2014).
31. Sekhon, J. and Fleming, C. Towards improved testing 
for deep learning. In Proceedings of the 41st Intern. 
Conf. on Software Engineering: New Ideas and 
Emerging Results . IEEE/ACM (2019).
32. Sekhon, J. and Fleming, C. SCAN: A spatial context 
attentive network for joint multi-agent intent 
prediction. In Proceedings of the 35th AAAI Conf. on 
Artificial Intelligence . AAAI Press (2021).
33. Seshia, S.A. et al. Formal methods for semi-
autonomous driving. In Proceedings of the 52nd Annual 
Design Automation Conf . ACM (2015).
34. Shah, S. et al. AirSim: High-fidelity visual and physical 
simulation for autonomous vehicles. In Proceedings 
of the 11th Intern. Conf. on Field and Service Robotics . 
Springer (2017).
35. Strafaci, A. What does BIM mean for civil engineers. 
CE News Transportation  (2008).
36. Temizer, S. et al. Collision avoidance for unmanned 
aircraft using markov decision processes. In 
Proceedings of the AIAA Guidance, Navigation, and 
Control Conf.  (2010).
37. Voas, J. and Schaffer, K. Whatever happened to formal 
methods for security? Computer  (2016).
38. Webster, M. et al. A corroborative approach to 
verification and validation of human-robot teams. 
Intern. J. Robotics Res  (2020).
39. Wing, J.M. A specifier’s introduction to formal 
methods. Computer  (1990).
Georgios Bakirtzis  (bakirtzis@utexas.edu) is Peter 
O’Donnell Jr. postdoctoral fellow at The University of 
Texas at Austin, USA.
Steven Carr  is a postdoctoral fellow at The University of 
Texas at Austin, USA.
David Danks  is a professor of Data Science and 
Philosophy at the University of California, San Diego, USA.
Ufuk Topcu  is associate professor of Aerospace 
Engineering and Engineering Mechanics at The University 
of Texas at Austin, USA.
Copyright is held by the owner/authors.  
Publication rights licensed to ACM.At the same time, AI presents ad -
ditional challenges for the dynamic 
certification of autonomous systems. 
First, the distributed nature of much 
AI and robotic development can lead 
to significant communication barriers 
between different stakeholders dur -
ing the requirements elicitation stage, 
and research is needed to develop, test, 
and validate structured approaches for 
requirement and value elicitation. Sec -
ond, modular and scalable methods and 
tools are needed to characterize precise -
ly—whether through formal methods or 
otherwise—the connections between re -
quirements and system (mis)behavior, 
particularly given the inevitable uncer -
tainties with AI-enabled systems. Third, 
higher-fidelity causal models could im -
prove counterfactual reasoning in the 
design and certification of autonomous 
systems, as the certification processes 
could then incorporate additional feed -
back loops that identify counterexam -
ples in data collection, provide diagnos -
tic capabilities, and clarify assumptions 
used to evaluate performance of the 
autonomous system in uncertain, open-
world environments. 
References
1. ARGO AI. Argoverse: Public Datasets Supported by 
Detailed Maps to Test, Experiment, and Teach Self-
Driving Vehicles How to Understand the World around 
Them . (2022); https://tinyurl.com/2n52u8fn.
2. Alsheikh, M.A. et al. Markov decision processes with 
applications in wireless sensor networks: A survey. 
IEEE Communication Surveys and Tutorials . (2015).
3. Asaadi, E. et al. Dynamic assurance cases: A pathway 
to trusted autonomy. Computer  (2020).
4. Bacic, M. On Hardware-in-the-loop simulation. In 
Proceedings of the 44th IEEE Conf. on Decision and 
Control IEEE , (2005).
5. Bakirtzis, G. et al. Compositional thinking in 
cyberphysical systems theory. Computer  (2021).
6. Bostrom, N. Ethical issues in advanced artificial 
intelligence. Rev. of Contemporary Philosophy  (2006).
7. Bourbouh, H. et al. Integrating formal verification 
and assurance: An inspection rover case study. In 
Proceedings of the 13th Intern. Symp. on NASA Formal 
Methods, Lecture Notes in Computer Science . Springer 
(2021).
8. Bouvier, J. et al. Quantitative resilience of linear 
driftless systems. In Proceedings of the Conf. on 
Control and its Applications , SIAM (2021).
9. Curiel-Ramirez, L.A. et al. Hardware in the loop 
framework proposal for a semi-autonomous car 
architecture in a closed route environment. Intern. J. 
on Interactive Design and Manufacturing  (2019).
10. Dehnert, C. et al. A storm is coming: A modern 
probabilistic model checker. In Intern. Conf. on 
Computer Aided Verification . Springer (2017), 592-600.
11. Fan, C. Formal methods for safe autonomy: Data-
driven verification, synthesis, and applications. Ph.D. 
Dissertation . University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign (2019).
12. Farrell, M. et al. Evolution of the IEEE P7009 
standard: Towards fail-safe design of autonomous 
systems. In Proceedings of the IEEE Intern. Symp. on 
Software Reliability Engineering  (2021).
13. Fisher, M. et al. Verifying autonomous systems. 
Communications of the ACM  (2013).
14. Fleming, C.H. et al. Cyberphysical security through 
resiliency: A systems-centric approach. Computer  
(2021).ance,17 as others can specify what is 
required for “normal behavior.”
Dynamic certification differs from 
conventional certification not because 
it proposes stages and feedback loops—
already present in static certification—
but based on the types of testing (ex -
ploratory, not just confirmatory) and 
specification (partial, rather than com -
plete) in every stage. The more precise 
data we can capture with models and 
tools, the better-informed stakeholders 
will be to ensure the operational needs 
of the system. Toward this goal, research 
must be conducted at the intersection 
of robotics, control, learning, safety, 
security, resilience, testing, and formal 
methods. For example, roboticists must 
include realistic dynamical models for 
surrounding information that can be 
given by learning;32 learning must be 
interpretable based on test vectors;31 
control must account for clashing safety 
requirements based on dynamics;28 and 
safety,25 security,37 and resilience8 must 
be given formal interpretations based 
on realism but allow partial modeling, 
precisely to account for the uncertainty 
arising from coupled learning systems. 
Two recent improvements that will as -
sist with developing dynamic certifi -
cation are compositional verification, 
which relates different model types,5 
and more operational data—for exam -
ple, high-definition maps for streets in 
major cities.1
Dynamic certification is an ap -
proach for autonomous systems that 
attempts to provide a common lan -
guage between formal models, simu -
lations, real-world (testing) data, and 
regulatory mechanisms. Dynamic cer -
tification requires advances in formal -
ism compatibility and co-design, the 
development of high-fidelity simula -
tion tools that can input information 
from formal models, expansive con -
text-aware testing vectors, and legal 
codification of acceptable stages of 
deployment. In light of these multi -
disciplinary aspects, it is unsurprising 
that dynamic certification has been a 
relatively under-explored approach. 
However, dynamic certification prom -
ises better-designed, safer, and more 
secure autonomous systems, providing 
assurance of correct behavior and in -
creased deployment of those systems. 
The effort to advance dynamic certifi -
cation can provide significant benefits.