3. Automated data augmentation without a
proxy task
Figure 2. Example images augmented by RandAugment. In
these examples N=2 and three magnitudes are shown corre-
sponding to the optimal distortion magnitudes for ResNet-50,
EfﬁcientNet-B5 and EfﬁcientNet-B7, respectively. As the dis-
tortion magnitude increases, the strength of the augmentation in-
creases.
The primary goal of RandAugment is to remove the need
for a separate search phase on a proxy task. The reason we
wish to remove the search phase is because a separate search
phase signiﬁcantly complicates training and is computation-
ally expensive. More importantly, the proxy task may pro-
vide sub-optimal results, as seen in the previous section. In
order to remove a separate search phase, we aspire to fold
the parameters for the data augmentation strategy into the
hyper-parameters for training a model. Given that previ-
ous learned augmentation methods contained 30+ parame-
ters [4, 19, 15], we focus on vastly reducing the parameter
space for data augmentation.
Previous work indicates that the main beneﬁt of learned
augmentation policies arise from increasing the diversity of
examples [4, 15, 19]. Indeed, previous work enumerated a
policy in terms of choosing which transformations to apply
out ofK=14 available transformations, and probabilities for
applying each transformation:
•identity •autoContrast •equalize
•rotate •solarize •color
•posterize •contrast •brightness
•sharpness •shear-x •shear-y
•translate-x •translate-y
In order to reduce the parameter space but still maintain im-transforms = [
’Identity’ ,’AutoContrast’ ,’Equalize’ ,’Rotate’ ,
’Solarize’ ,’Color’,
’Posterize’ ,’Contrast’ ,’Brightness’ ,’Sharpness’ ,
’ShearX’ ,’ShearY’ ,
’TranslateX’ ,’TranslateY’ ]
defrandaugment(N, M):
"""Generate a set of distortions.
Args:
N: Number of augmentation transformations to apply
sequentially.
M: Magnitude for all the transformations.
"""
sampled_ops = np.random.choice(transforms, N)
return[(op, M) foropinsampled_ops]
Figure 3. Python code for RandAugment based on numpy.
age diversity, we replace the learned policies and probabili-
ties for applying each transformation with a parameter-free
procedure of always selecting a transformation with uni-
form probability1
K. GivenNtransformations for a training
image, RandAugment may thus express KNpotential poli-
cies.
The ﬁnal set of parameters to consider is the magnitude
of the each augmentation distortion. Following [4], we em-
ploy the same linear scale for indicating the strength of each
transformation. Brieﬂy, each transformation resides on an
integer scale from 0 to 10 where a value of 10 indicates
the maximum scale for a given transformation. A data aug-
mentation policy consists of identifying an integer for each
augmentation [4, 19, 15]. In order to reduce the parame-
ter space further, we observe that the learned magnitude for
each transformation follows a similar schedule during train-
ing (e.g. Figure 4 in [15]) and postulate that a single global
distortion Mmay sufﬁce for parameterizing all transforma-
tions. We experimented with four methods for the schedule
ofMduring training: constant magnitude, random magni-
tude, a linearly increasing magnitude, and a random magni-
tude with increasing upper bound. The details of this exper-
iment can be found in Appendix A.1.1.
The resulting algorithm contains two parameters Nand
Mand may be expressed simply in two lines of Python
code (Figure 3). Both parameters are human-interpretable
such that larger values of NandMincrease regularization
strength. Standard methods may be employed to efﬁciently
perform hyperparameter optimization [38], however given
the extremely small search space we ﬁnd that naive grid
search is quite effective (Section 2). We justify all of the
choices of this proposed algorithm in the subsequent sec-
tions by comparing the efﬁcacy of our simple method to
previous learned data augmentation methods.