Randaugment: Practical automated data augmentation
with a reduced search space
Ekin D. Cubuk∗, Barret Zoph∗, Jonathon Shlens, Quoc V . Le
Google Research, Brain Team
Abstract
Recent work on automated augmentation strategies has
led to state-of-the-art results in image classiﬁcation and ob-
ject detection. An obstacle to a large-scale adoption of
these methods is that they require a separate and expen-
sive search phase. A common way to overcome the ex-
pense of the search phase was to use a smaller proxy task.
However, it was not clear if the optimized hyperparame-
ters found on the proxy task are also optimal for the actual
task. In this work, we rethink the process of designing auto-
mated augmentation strategies. We ﬁnd that while previous
work required a search for both magnitude and probabil-
ity of each operation independently, it is sufﬁcient to only
search for a single distortion magnitude that jointly controls
all operations. We hence propose a simpliﬁed search space
that vastly reduces the computational expense of automated
augmentation, and permits the removal of a separate proxy
task.
Despite the simpliﬁcations, our method achieves equal
or better performance over previous automated augmenta-
tion strategies on on CIFAR-10/100, SVHN, ImageNet and
COCO datasets. EfﬁcientNet-B7, we achieve 85.0% accu-
racy, a 1.0% increase over baseline augmentation, a 0.6%
improvement over AutoAugment on the ImageNet dataset.
With EfﬁcientNet-B8, we achieve 85.4% accuracy on Ima-
geNet, which matches a previous result that used 3.5B extra
images. On object detection, the same method as classiﬁca-
tion leads to 1.0-1.3% improvement over baseline augmen-
tation. Code will be made available online.
1. Introduction
Although data augmentation is a widely used method to
inject additional knowledge to train vision models [36, 17,
6, 48], the fact that it is manually designed makes it difﬁ-
cult to scale to new applications. Learning data augmen-
tation strategies from data has recently emerged as a new
paradigm to automate the design of augmentation and has
∗Equal contribution.CIFAR-10 SVHN ImageNet
search PyramidNet Wide-ResNet EfﬁcientNet-B7
space cost acc. cost acc. cost acc.
Baseline 0 0 97.3 0 98.5 0 84.0
AA 10325K 98.5 1K 98.9 15K 84.4
Fast AA 10323.5 98.3 1.5 98.8 --
PBA 10615.0 98.5 1.0 98.9 --
RA (ours) 1020 98.5 0 99.0 0 85.0
Table 1. RandAugment matches or exceeds predictive perfor-
mance of other augmentation methods with a signiﬁcantly
reduced search space. We report the computational cost, the
search space size, and the test accuracy achieved for AutoAugment
(AA) [4], Fast AutoAugment [19], Population Based Augmenta-
tion (PBA) [15] and the proposed RandAugment (RA) on CIFAR-
10 [16], SVHN [28], and ImageNet [5] classiﬁcation tasks. Com-
putational cost is reported as the number of GPU hours expended
for identifying the augmentation policy in a separate search phase
on a proxy task. Search space size is reported as the order of mag-
nitude of the number of possible augmentation policies. Dash in-
dicates that results are not available.
the potential to address some weaknesses of traditional data
augmentation methods [4, 51, 15, 19]. Training a machine
learning model with a learned data augmentation policy
may signiﬁcantly improve image classiﬁcation [4, 19, 15],
object detection [51], model robustness [25, 46, 34], and
semi-supervised learning image classiﬁcation [44]. Unlike
architecture search [53], all of these improvements in pre-
dictive performance incur no additional computational cost
at inference time.
An obstacle to a large-scale adoption of these methods is
that they require a separate and expensive search phase. A
common way to overcome the expense of the search phase
was to use a smaller proxy task. Although the proxy task
helps speeding up the search process, it also adds extra com-
plexity to the methods and causes further issues. For exam-
ple, it was not clear if the optimal hyperparameters found
on the proxy task are also optimal for the actual task. In
fact, we will provide experimental evidence in this paper to
challenge this core assumption. In particular, we demon-
strate that this strategy is sub-optimal as the strength of the
augmentation depends strongly on model and dataset size.
These results suggest that an improved data augmentation
may be possible if one could remove the separate search
1