dation accuracy [7, 49], robustness [40, 46, 9], or both [25].
Mixup [48] is a particularly effective augmentation method
on CIFAR-10 and ImageNet, where the neural network is
trained on convex combinations of images and their corre-
sponding labels. Object-centric cropping is commonly used
for object detection tasks [24], whereas [8] adds new objects
on training images by cut-and-paste.
Moving away from individual operations to augment
data, other work has focused on ﬁnding optimal strategies
for combining different operations. For example, Smart
Augmentation learns a network that merges two or more
samples from the same class to generate new data [18]. Tran
et al. generate augmented data via a Bayesian approach,
based on the distribution learned from the training set [42].
DeVries et al. use transformations (e.g. noise, interpo-
lations and extrapolations) in the learned feature space to
augment data [6]. Furthermore, generative adversarial net-
works (GAN) have been used to choose optimal sequences
of data augmentation operations[32]. GANs have also been
used to generate training data directly [31, 27, 50, 1, 37],
however this approach does not seem to be as beneﬁcial as
learning sequences of data augmentation operations that are
pre-deﬁned [33].
Another approach to learning data augmentation strate-
gies from data is AutoAugment [4], which originally used
reinforcement learning to choose a sequence of operations
as well as their probability of application and magnitude.
Application of AutoAugment policies involves stochasticity
at multiple levels: 1) for every image in every minibatch,
a sub-policy is chosen with uniform probability. 2) oper-
ations in each sub-policy has an associated probability of
application. 3) Some operations have stochasticity over di-
rection. For example, an image can be rotated clockwise or
counter-clockwise. The layers of stochasticity increase the
amount of diversity that the network is trained on, which in
turn was found to signiﬁcantly improve generalization on
many datasets. More recently, several papers used the Au-
toAugment search space and formalism with improved op-
timization algorithms to ﬁnd AutoAugment policies more
efﬁciently [15, 19]. Although the time it takes to search
for policies has been reduced signiﬁcantly, having to imple-
ment these methods in a separate search phase reduces the
applicability of AutoAugment. For this reason, this work
aims to eliminate the search phase on a separate proxy task
completely.
Some of the developments in RandAugment were in-
spired by the recent improvements to searching over data
augmentation policies. For example, PBA [15] found that
the optimal magnitude of augmentations increased during
the course of training, which inspired us to not search over
optimal magnitudes for each transformation but have a ﬁxed
magnitude schedule, which we discuss in detail in Sec-
tion 3. Furthermore, authors of Fast AutoAugment [19]found that a data augmentation policy that is trained for
density matching leads to improved generalization accu-
racy, which inspired our ﬁrst order differentiable term for
improving augmentation (see Section 4.5).
6. Discussion
Data augmentation is a necessary method for achieving
state-of-the-art performance [36, 17, 6, 48, 11, 30]. Learned
data augmentation strategies have helped automate the de-
sign of such strategies and likewise achieved state-of-the-
art results [4, 19, 15, 51]. In this work, we demonstrated
that previous methods of learned augmentation suffers from
systematic drawbacks. Namely, not tailoring the number of
distortions and the distortion magnitude to the dataset size
nor the model size leads to sub-optimal performance. To
remedy this situation, we propose a simple parameterization
for targeting augmentation to particular model and dataset
sizes. We demonstrate that RandAugment is competitive
with or outperforms previous approaches [4, 19, 15, 51]
on CIFAR-10/100, SVHN, ImageNet and COCO without
a separate search for data augmentation policies.
In previous work, scaling learned data augmentation to
larger dataset and models have been a notable obstacle. For
example, AutoAugment and Fast AutoAugment could only
be optimized for small models on reduced subsets of data
[4, 19]; PBA was not reported for large-scale problems [15].
The proposed method scales quite well to datasets such as
ImageNet and COCO while incurring minimal computa-
tional cost (e.g. 2 hyper-parameters), but notable predic-
tive performance gains. An open question remains how this
method may improve model robustness [25, 46, 34] or semi-
supervised learning [44]. Future work will study how this
method applies to other machine learning domains, where
data augmentation is known to improve predictive perfor-
mance, such as image segmentation [2], 3-D perception
[29], speech recognition [14] or audio recognition [13]. In
particular, we wish to better understand if or when datasets
or tasks may require a separate search phase to achieve op-
timal performance. Finally, an open question remains how
one may tailor the set of transformations to a given tasks
in order to further improve the predictive performance of a
given model.
7. Acknowledgements
We thank Samy Bengio, Daniel Ho, Ildoo Kim, Jaehoon
Lee, Zhaoqi Leng, Hanxiao Liu, Raphael Gontijo Lopes,
Ruoming Pang, Ben Poole, Mingxing Tan, and the rest of
the Brain Team for their help.