phase on a proxy task.
In this work, we aim to make AutoAugment and related
methods [4, 15, 19] better, and more practical. While previ-
ous work focused on the search methodology [19, 15], our
analysis shows that the search space plays a more signiﬁcant
role. In previous work, it was required to search for both
the probability and the magnitude of each operation in the
search space. Our experiments show that it is sufﬁcient to
optimize all of the operations jointly with a single distortion
magnitude while setting the probability of each operation to
uniform. The simpliﬁed search space vastly reduces the cost
of automated augmentation. With the reduced search space,
we also simplify the whole search process: we no longer
need a separate expensive search phase and proxy tasks.
The reduction in parameter space is in fact so dramatic
that simple grid search is sufﬁcient to ﬁnd a data augmenta-
tion policy that outperforms all learned augmentation meth-
ods that employ a separate search phase. We name our
method RandAugment because it uniformly samples ops in
the search space. Table 1 shows a summary of our main
results: despite the fact that RandAugment is much faster
thanks to having a much smaller search space. RandAug-
ment also achieves higher accuracy on a wide range of
benchmarks, thanks to its ability to adjust its distortion mag-
nitude on the model and dataset size. Our contributions can
be summarized as follows:
•We demonstrate that the optimal strength of a data
augmentation distortions depends on the model size
and training set size. This observation indicates that
a separate optimization of an augmentation policy on
a smaller proxy task may be sub-optimal for learning
and transferring augmentation policies.
•We analyze AutoAugment methods and identify that
the search space plays an important role in the re-
sults. We hence introduce a vastly simpliﬁed search
space for data augmentation containing 2 interpretable
hyper-parameters. One may employ a simple grid
search to tailor the augmentation policy to a model and
dataset, removing the need for a separate search pro-
cess. Our change is however orthogonal to the better
search methods and can be used in combination with
them.
•Despite the simpliﬁcations, our method surprisingly
outperforms AutoAugment and related methods. We
achieve state-of-the-art results on a wide range of
datasets: CIFAR, SVHN, and ImageNet. With
EfﬁcientNet-B7, we achieve an accuracy of 85.0%,
a 0.6% increment over AutoAugment and 1.0% over
baseline augmentation [39]. With an even larger net-
work, EfﬁcientNet-B8, we achieve 85.4% accuracy on
ImageNet with no extra data, which matches a previ-ous result that used an additional 3.5B Instagram im-
ages [26] (with a model that has 9.4 times more param-
eters than ours).
2. Systematic failures of a separate proxy task
A central premise of learned data augmentation is to con-
struct a small, proxy task that may be reﬂective of a larger
task [52, 53, 4]. Although this assumption is sufﬁcient for
identifying learned augmentation policies to improve per-
formance [4, 51, 30, 19, 15], it is unclear if this assumption
is overly stringent and may lead to sub-optimal data aug-
mentation policies.
In this section, we challenge the hypothesis that formu-
lating the problem in terms of a small proxy task is appropri-
ate for learned data augmentation. In particular, we explore
this question along two separate dimensions that are com-
monly restricted to achieve a small proxy task: model size
and dataset size. To explore this hypothesis, we systemat-
ically measure the effects of data augmentation policies on
CIFAR-10. First, we train a family of Wide-ResNet archi-
tectures [47], where the model size may be systematically
altered through the widening parameter governing the num-
ber of convolutional ﬁlters. For each of these networks, we
train the model on CIFAR-10 and measure the ﬁnal accu-
racy compared to a baseline model trained with default data
augmentations (i.e. horizontal ﬂips and pad-and-crop) [47].
The Wide-ResNet models are trained with the additional
K=14 data augmentations (see Section 3) over a range of
global distortion magnitudes Mparameterized on a uniform
linear scale ranging from [0, 30]1.
Figure 1a demonstrates the relative gain in accuracy of
a model trained across increasing distortion magnitudes for
three Wide-ResNet models. The squares indicate the dis-
tortion magnitude with which achieves the highest accu-
racy. Note that in spite of the measurement noise, Figure
1a demonstrates systematic trends across distortion magni-
tudes. In particular, plotting all Wide-ResNet architectures
versus the optimal distortion magnitude highlights a clear
monotonic trend across increasing network sizes (Figure
1b). Namely, larger networks demand larger data distor-
tions for regularization. Figure 2 highlights the visual dif-
ference in the optimal distortion magnitude for differently
sized models. Conversely, a policy learned on a proxy task
(such as AutoAugment) provides a ﬁxed distortion mag-
nitude (Figure 1b, dashed line) for all architectures that is
clearly sub-optimal.
A second dimension for constructing a small proxy task
is to train the proxy on a small subset of the training
data. Figure 1c demonstrates the relative gain in accu-
1Note that the range of magnitudes exceeds the speciﬁed range of mag-
nitudes in the Methods because we wish to explore a larger range of mag-
nitudes for this preliminary experiment. We retain the same scale as [4] for
a value of 10 to maintain comparable results.