Figure 1. Optimal magnitude of augmentation depends on the size of the model and the training set. All results report CIFAR-10
validation accuracy for Wide-ResNet model architectures [47] averaged over 20 random initializations, where N=1. (a) Accuracy of
Wide-ResNet-28-2, Wide-ResNet-28-7, and Wide-ResNet-28-10 across varying distortion magnitudes. Models are trained for 200 epochs
on 45K training set examples. Squares indicate the distortion magnitude that achieves the maximal accuracy. (b) Optimal distortion
magnitude across 7 Wide-ResNet-28 architectures with varying widening parameters ( k). (c) Accuracy of Wide-ResNet-28-10 for three
training set sizes (1K, 4K, and 10K) across varying distortion magnitudes. Squares indicate the distortion magnitude that achieves the
maximal accuracy. (d) Optimal distortion magnitude across 8 training set sizes. Dashed curves show the scaled expectation value of the
distortion magnitude in the AutoAugment policy. [4]
racy of Wide-ResNet-28-10 trained across increasing dis-
tortion magnitudes for varying amounts of CIFAR-10 train-
ing data. The squares indicate the distortion magnitude with
that achieves the highest accuracy. Note that in spite of
the measurement noise, Figure 1c demonstrates systematic
trends across distortion magnitudes. We ﬁrst observe that
models trained on smaller training sets may gain more im-
provement from data augmentation (e.g. 3.0% versus 1.5%
in Figure 1c). Furthermore, we see that the optimal distor-
tion magnitude is larger for models that are trained on larger
datasets. At ﬁrst glance, this may disagree with the expec-
tation that smaller datasets require stronger regularization.
Figure 1d demonstrates that the optimal distortion mag-
nitude increases monotonically with training set size. One
hypothesis for this counter-intuitive behavior is that aggres-
sive data augmentation leads to a low signal-to-noise ratio
in small datasets. Regardless, this trend highlights the need
for increasing the strength of data augmentation on larger
datasets and the shortcomings of optimizing learned aug-
mentation policies on a proxy task comprised of a subset of
the training data. Namely, the learned augmentation may
learn an augmentation strength more tailored to the proxy
task instead of the larger task of interest.The dependence of augmentation strength on the dataset
and model size indicate that a small proxy task may provide
a sub-optimal indicator of performance on a larger task.
This empirical result suggests that a distinct strategy may be
necessary for ﬁnding an optimal data augmentation policy.
In particular, we propose in this work to focus on a uniﬁed
optimization of the model weights and data augmentation
policy. Figure 1 suggest that merely searching for a shared
distortion magnitude Macross all transformations may pro-
vide sufﬁcient gains that exceed learned optimization meth-
ods using proxy tasks. Additionally, we see that optimizing
individual magnitudes further leads to minor improvement
in performance (see Section A.1.2 in Appendix).
Furthermore, Figure 1a and 1c indicate that merely sam-
pling a few distortion magnitudes is sufﬁcient to achieve
good results. Coupled with a second free parameter N,
we consider these results to prescribe an algorithm for
learning an augmentation policy. In the subsequent sec-
tions, we identify two free parameters NandMspecify-
ing RandAugment through a minimal grid search and com-
pare these results against computationally-heavy learned
data augmentations based on proxy tasks.