Agnostic Federated Learning
U=∑p
k=1mk
mDk:But why should Ube the target distribu-
tion of the learning model? Is Uthe distribution that we
expect to observe at test time? What guarantees can be
derived for the deployed system?
We argue that, in many common instances, the uniform dis-
tribution is not the natural objective distribution and that
seeking to minimize the expected loss with respect to the
speciﬁc distribution Uisrisky . This is because the target dis-
tribution may be in general quite different from U. In many
cases, that can result in a suboptimal or even a detrimental
performance. For example, imagine a plausible scenario of
federated learning where the learner has access to a large
population of expensive mobile phones, which are most
commonly adopted by software engineers or other technical
users (say 70%) than other users ( 30%), and a small popula-
tion of other mobile phones less used by non-technical users
(5%) and signiﬁcantly more often by other users ( 95%). The
centralized model would then be essentially based on the
uniform distribution based on the expensive clients. But,
clearly, such a model would not be adapted to the wide gen-
eral target domain formed by the majority of phones with
a5%−95% population of general versus technical users.
Many other realistic examples of this type can help illustrate
the learning problem resulting from a mismatch between
the target distribution and U. In fact, it is not clear why
minimizing the expected loss with respect to Ucould be
beneﬁcial for the clients, whose distributions are Dks.
Thus, we put forward a new framework of agnostic feder-
ated learning (AFL), where the centralized model is op-
timized for any possible target distribution formed by a
mixture of the client distributions. Instead of optimizing the
centralized model for a speciﬁc distribution, with the high
risk of a mismatch with the target, we deﬁne an agnostic
and more risk-averse objective. We show that, for some
target mixture distributions, the cross-entropy loss of the
hypothesis obtained by minimization with respect to the uni-
form distribution Ucan be worse than that of the hypothesis
obtained in AFL by a constant additive term, even if the
learner has access to inﬁnite samples (Section 2.2).
We further show that our AFL framework naturally yields a
notion of fairness, which we refer to as good-intent fairness
(Section 2.3). Indeed, the predictor solution of the optimiza-
tion problem for our AFL framework treats all protected
categories similarly. Beyond federated learning, our frame-
work and solution also cover related problems in cloud-
based learning services, where customers may not have any
training data at their disposal or may not be willing to share
that data with the cloud due to privacy concerns. In that case
too, the server needs to train a model without access to the
training data. Our framework and algorithm can also be of
interest to other learning scenarios such as domain adapta-
tion, drifting, and other contexts where the training and testdistributions do not coincide. In Appendix A, we give an
extensive discussion of related work, including connections
with the broad literature of domain adaptation.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2,
we give a formal description of AFL. Next, we give a de-
tailed theoretical analysis of learning within the AFL frame-
work (Section 3), as well as a learning algorithm based on
that theory (Section 4). We also present an efﬁcient convex
optimization algorithm for solving the optimization prob-
lem deﬁning our algorithm (Section 4.2). In Section 5, we
present a series of experiments comparing our solution with
existing federated learning solutions. In Appendix B, we
discuss several extensions of the AFL framework.
2. Learning scenario
In this section, we introduce the learning scenario of agnos-
tic federated learning we consider. We then argue that the
uniform solution commonly adopted in standard federated
learning may not be an adequate solution, thereby further
justifying our agnostic model. Next, we show the beneﬁt of
our model in fairness learning.
We start with some general notation and deﬁnitions used
throughout the paper. Let Xdenote the input space and Y
the output space. We will primarily discuss a multi-class
classiﬁcation problem where Yis a ﬁnite set of classes, but
much of our results can be extended straightforwardly to
regression and other problems. The hypotheses we consider
are of the form h∶X→Y, where Ystands for the simplex
overY. Thus,h(x)is a probability distribution over the
classes or categories that can be assigned to x∈X. We
will denote by Ha family of such hypotheses h. We also
denote by`a loss function deﬁned over Y×Yand taking
non-negative values. The loss of h∈Hfor a labeled sample
(x;y)∈X×Yis given by `(h(x);y). One key example
in applications is the cross-entropy loss, which is deﬁned
as follows:`(h(x);y)=−log(Py′∼h(x)[y′=y]). We will
denote by LD(h)the expected loss of a hypothesis hwith
respect to a distribution DoverX×Y:
LD(h)=E
(x;y)∼D[`(h(x);y)];
and byhDits minimizer: hD=argminh∈HLD(h).
2.1. Agnostic federated learning
We consider a learning scenario where the learner
receivespsamplesS1;:::;Sp, with each Sk=
((xk;1;yk;1);:::;(xk;mk;yk;mk))∈(X×Y)mkof sizemk
drawn i.i.d. from a possibly different domain or distribution
Dk. We will denote by ̂Dkthe empirical distribution associ-
ated to sample Skof sizemdrawn from Dm. The learner’s
objective is to determine a hypothesis h∈Hthat performs
well on some target distribution. Let m=∑p
k=1mk.