Agnostic Federated Learning
Mehryar Mohri1 2Gary Sivek1Ananda Theertha Suresh1
Abstract
A key learning scenario in large-scale applications
is that of federated learning , where a centralized
model is trained based on data originating from a
large number of clients. We argue that, with the
existing training and inference, federated models
can be biased towards different clients. Instead,
we propose a new framework of agnostic feder-
ated learning , where the centralized model is opti-
mized for any target distribution formed by a mix-
ture of the client distributions. We further show
that this framework naturally yields a notion of
fairness. We present data-dependent Rademacher
complexity guarantees for learning with this ob-
jective, which guide the deﬁnition of an algorithm
for agnostic federated learning. We also give a fast
stochastic optimization algorithm for solving the
corresponding optimization problem, for which
we prove convergence bounds, assuming a convex
loss function and a convex hypothesis set. We fur-
ther empirically demonstrate the beneﬁts of our
approach in several datasets. Beyond federated
learning, our framework and algorithm can be of
interest to other learning scenarios such as cloud
computing, domain adaptation, drifting, and other
contexts where the training and test distributions
do not coincide.
1. Motivation
A key learning scenario in large-scale applications is that
offederated learning . In that scenario, a centralized model
is trained based on data originating from a large number of
clients, which may be mobile phones, other mobile devices,
or sensors (Kone ˇcn`y, McMahan, Yu, Richt ´arik, Suresh, and
Bacon, 2016b; Kone ˇcn`y, McMahan, Ramage, and Richt ´arik,
2016a). The training data typically remains distributed over
1Google Research, New York;2Courant Institute of Mathe-
matical Sciences, New York, NY. Correspondence to: Ananda
Theertha Suresh <theertha@google.com >.
Proceedings of the 36thInternational Conference on Machine
Learning , Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).the clients, each with possibly unreliable or relatively slow
network connections.
Federated learning raises several types of issues and has
been the topic of multiple research efforts. These include
systems, networking and communication bottleneck prob-
lems due to frequent exchanges between the central server
and the clients (McMahan et al., 2017). Other research ef-
forts include the design of more efﬁcient communication
strategies (Kone ˇcn`y, McMahan, Yu, Richt ´arik, Suresh, and
Bacon, 2016b; Kone ˇcn`y, McMahan, Ramage, and Richt ´arik,
2016a; Suresh, Yu, Kumar, and McMahan, 2017), devising
efﬁcient distributed optimization methods beneﬁting from
differential privacy guarantees (Agarwal, Suresh, Yu, Ku-
mar, and McMahan, 2018), as well as recent lower bound
guarantees for parallel stochastic optimization with a de-
pendency graph (Woodworth, Wang, Smith, McMahan, and
Srebro, 2018).
Another important problem in federated learning, which
appears more generally in distributed machine learning and
other learning setups, is that of fairness . In many instances
in practice, the resulting learning models may be biased or
unfair: they may discriminate against some protected groups
(Bickel, Hammel, and O’Connell, 1975; Hardt, Price, Sre-
bro, et al., 2016). As a simple example, a regression al-
gorithm predicting a person’s salary could be using that
person’s gender. This is a central problem in modern ma-
chine learning that does not seem to have been speciﬁcally
studied in the context of federated learning.
While many problems related to federated learning have
been extensively studied, the key objective of learning in
that context seems not to have been carefully examined.
We are also not aware of statistical guarantees derived for
learning in this scenario. A crucial reason for such ques-
tions to emerge in this context is that the target distribution
for which the centralized model is learned is unspeciﬁed.
Which expected loss is federated learning seeking to mini-
mize? Most centralized models for standard federated learn-
ing are trained on the aggregate training sample obtained
from the subsamples drawn from the clients. Thus, if we
denote by Dkthe distribution associated to client k,mkthe
size of the sample available from that client and mthe total
sample size, intrinsically, the centralized model is trained to
minimize the loss with respect to the uniform distribution