SUNRISE: A Simple Uniﬁed Framework
for Ensemble Learning in Deep Reinforcement Learning
Kimin Lee1Michael Laskin1Aravind Srinivas1Pieter Abbeel1
Abstract
Off-policy deep reinforcement learning (RL) has
been successful in a range of challenging domains.
However, standard off-policy RL algorithms can
suffer from several issues, such as instability in Q-
learning and balancing exploration and exploita-
tion. To mitigate these issues, we present SUN-
RISE, a simple uniﬁed ensemble method, which
is compatible with various off-policy RL algo-
rithms. SUNRISE integrates two key ingredi-
ents: (a) ensemble-based weighted Bellman back-
ups, which re-weight target Q-values based on
uncertainty estimates from a Q-ensemble, and
(b) an inference method that selects actions us-
ing the highest upper-conﬁdence bounds for ef-
ﬁcient exploration. By enforcing the diversity
between agents using Bootstrap with random ini-
tialization, we show that these different ideas
are largely orthogonal and can be fruitfully in-
tegrated, together further improving the perfor-
mance of existing off-policy RL algorithms, such
as Soft Actor-Critic and Rainbow DQN, for both
continuous and discrete control tasks on both
low-dimensional and high-dimensional environ-
ments. Our training code is available at https:
//github.com/pokaxpoka/sunrise .
1. Introduction
Model-free reinforcement learning (RL), with high-capacity
function approximators, such as deep neural networks
(DNNs), has been used to solve a variety of sequential
decision-making problems, including board games ( Silver
et al.,2017;2018), video games ( Mnih et al. ,2015;Vinyals
et al.,2019 ), and robotic manipulation ( Kalashnikov et al. ,
2018 ). It has been well established that the above suc-
cesses are highly sample inefﬁcient (Kaiser et al. ,2020 ).
Recently, a lot of progress has been made in more sample-
1University of California, Berkeley. Correspondence to: Kimin
Lee<kiminlee@berkeley.edu >.
Proceedings of the 38thInternational Conference on Machine
Learning , PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).efﬁcient model-free RL algorithms through improvements
in off-policy learning both in discrete and continuous do-
mains ( Fujimoto et al. ,2018 ;Haarnoja et al. ,2018 ;Hessel
et al.,2018;Amos et al. ,2020). However, there are still sub-
stantial challenges when training off-policy RL algorithms.
First, Q-learning often converges to sub-optimal solutions
due to error propagation in the Bellman backup, i.e., the
errors induced in the target value can lead to an increase in
overall error in the Q-function ( Kumar et al. ,2019 ;2020 ).
Second, it is hard to balance exploration and exploitation,
which is necessary for efﬁcient RL ( Chen et al. ,2017 ;Os-
band et al. ,2016a ) (see Section 2for further details).
One way to address the above issues with off-policy RL algo-
rithms is to use ensemble methods, which combine multiple
models of the value function and (or) policy ( Chen et al. ,
2017 ;Lan et al. ,2020 ;Osband et al. ,2016a ;Wiering &
Van Hasselt ,2008 ). For example, double Q-learning ( Has-
selt,2010 ;Van Hasselt et al. ,2016 ) addressed the value
overestimation by maintaining two independent estimators
of the action values and later extended to continuous con-
trol tasks in TD3 ( Fujimoto et al. ,2018 ). Bootstrapped
DQN ( Osband et al. ,2016a ) leveraged an ensemble of Q-
functions for more effective exploration, and Chen et al.
(2017 ) further improved it by adapting upper-conﬁdence
bounds algorithms ( Audibert et al. ,2009 ;Auer et al. ,2002 )
based on uncertainty estimates from ensembles. However,
most prior works have studied the various axes of improve-
ments from ensemble methods in isolation and have ignored
the error propagation aspect.
In this paper, we present SUNRISE, a simple uniﬁed ensem-
ble method that is compatible with most modern off-policy
RL algorithms, such as Q-learning and actor-critic algo-
rithms. Our main idea is to reweight sample transitions
based on uncertainty estimates from a Q-ensemble. Be-
cause prediction errors can be characterized by uncertainty
estimates from ensembles (i.e., variance of predictions) as
shown in Figure 1(b), we ﬁnd that the proposed method
signiﬁcantly improves the signal-to-noise in the Q-updates
and stabilizes the learning process. Additionally, for ef-
ﬁcient exploration, We deﬁne an upper-conﬁdence bound
(UCB) based on the mean and variance of Q-functions simi-
lar to Chen et al. (2017), and introduce an inference method,