E
that consist of attention based systems. In [15], a combination
of two attention mechanisms, channel and temporal, was pro-
posed. The temporal attention consists of 1×1convolution for
feature aggregation followed by a small CNN to produce tem-
poral attention weights. On the other hand, channel attention
consists of a bank of fully connected layers to produce the chan-
nel attention map. Using two separate attention models makes
the system very complex and increases the number of parame-
ters by a lot. We perform spatial and channel attention with just
one depthwise convolutional layer.
A multi-stream network with temporal attention for the ESC
task was proposed in [16]. The model consists of three streams
with each stream receiving one of the three stacked inputs:
raw waveform, STFT (Short-time Fourier Transform) and delta
STFT. A temporal attention model received the inputs directly
and propagated it’s output to the main models intermediate lay-
ers. Here, again, the model is too complex and also, the atten-
tion block doesn’t receive any intermediate feedback from the
main model.
The research works mentioned above and many others provide
us with many insights by achieving high performance on difﬁ-
cult datasets. But, they also suffer from issues regarding feature
extraction, computational complexity and CNN model architec-
ture. In this paper, we try to address these issues and in doing
so, achieve state-of-the-art performance.
3. Proposed Environment Sound
Classiﬁcation Model
We propose a novel ESC model that consists of multiple feature
channels extracted from the audio signal and a new DCNN ar-
chitecture consisting of separable convolutions, that works on
time and frequency domain separately and a depthwise convo-
lution based attention mechanism.
The feature extraction stage consists of four channels
of features, which are: Mel-Frequency Cepstral Coefﬁ-
cients (MFCC), Gammatone Frequency Cepstral Coefﬁcients
(GFCC), Constant Q-transform (CQT) and Chromagram.
For the classiﬁcation stage, we propose a CNN architecture that
works better for audio data, as shown in Fig. 3. We use spa-
tially separable convolutions to process time and frequency do-
main features separately and aggregate them at the end. Also,
the downsampling value is different for time and frequency do-
mains in the maxpooling layers. Along side the main DCNN
model, we add spatial and channel attention using the depth-
wise convolution. In the subsequent sub-sections, we explain
the feature extraction and classiﬁcation stages of our model.
3.1. Multiple Feature Channels
In this paper, we employ four major audio feature extrac-
tion techniques to create a four channel input for the Deep
CNN, namely, Mel-Frequency Cepstral Coefﬁcients (MFCC)
[1], Gammatone Frequency Cepstral Coefﬁcients (GFCC) [2],
Constant Q-Transform [3] and Chromagram [4]. Incorporat-
ing different signal processing techniques that extract different
types of information provides the CNN with more distinguish-
able characteristics and complementary feature representations
to accurately classify audio signals.
The MFCC, GFCC, CQT and Chroma features are stacked to-
gether to create a four channel input for the Deep CNN. Each
feature plays it’s part in the classiﬁcation task. MFCC acts as
the backbone by providing rich features, GFCC adds transient
sound features, CQT contributes with better low-to-mid fre-
(a)Audio Signal
(b)Mel Frequency Cepstral
Coefﬁcients
(c)Gammatone Frequency
Cepstral Coefﬁcients
(d)Constant Q-Transform
 (e)Chromagram
Figure 1: Multiple Feature Channels
(a)
 (b)
Figure 2: PCA of Features
quency range features and ﬁnally Chromagram provides pitch
category analysis and signal structure information. Fig. 1 shows
a graphical representation of the features extracted from an au-
dio signal (Fig. 1(a)). All features are normalized between 0
and 1 using min-max normalization. From the ﬁgure, we can
see the contrast in the values of each feature.
Fig. 2(a) shows the Principal Component Analysis (PCA) of
the features. We take the ﬁrst two principal components of the
four features we use in our model to create a 2D visualization
of the feature space. From the ﬁgure we can see that most of
features are heavily concentrated in the middle region. But, as
shown in Fig. 2(b), we encircle a few regions that different
features provide some amount of different information. Indeed
some of these regions might contain irrelevant or outlier infor-
mation that is not of value to classiﬁcation. But, as seen in the
ﬁgure these feature extraction techniques do provide unique and
complementary information. Chromagram features provide lit-
tle distinctive information and shown in the results section, it
provides little increase to the performance of the model.
3.2. Deep CNN Architecture: Main Block
Fig. 3 shows our proposed Deep CNN architecture for environ-
mental sound classiﬁcation. The main block consists of ﬁve
repetitions of Conv2D-Conv2D-Conv2D-MaxPool-BatchNorm