E
Environment Sound Classiﬁcation using Multiple Feature Channels and
Attention based Deep Convolutional Neural Network
Jivitesh Sharma1, Ole-Christoffer Granmo1, Morten Goodwin1
1Centre for Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research
Department of Information and Communication Technology
University of Agder, Norway
jivitesh.sharma@uia.no, ole.granmo@uia.no, morten.goodwin@uia.no
Abstract
In this paper, we propose a model for the Environment Sound
Classiﬁcation Task (ESC) that consists of multiple feature chan-
nels given as input to a Deep Convolutional Neural Network
(CNN) with Attention mechanism. The novelty of the paper lies
in using multiple feature channels consisting of Mel-Frequency
Cepstral Coefﬁcients (MFCC), Gammatone Frequency Cep-
stral Coefﬁcients (GFCC), the Constant Q-transform (CQT)
and Chromagram. And, we employ a deeper CNN (DCNN)
compared to previous models, consisting of spatially separable
convolutions working on time and feature domain separately.
Alongside, we use attention modules that perform channel and
spatial attention together. We use the mix-up data augmentation
technique to further boost performance. Our model is able to
achieve state-of-the-art performance on three benchmark envi-
ronment sound classiﬁcation datasets, i.e. the UrbanSound8K
(97.52%), ESC-10 (94.75%) and ESC-50 (87.45%).
Index Terms : Convolutional Neural Networks, Attention, Mul-
tiple Feature Channels, Environment Sound Classiﬁcation
1. Introduction
One of the most important application is the Environment
Sound Classiﬁcation (ESC) that deals with distinguishing be-
tween sounds from the real environment. It is a complex task
that involves classifying a sound event into an appropriate class
such as siren, dog barking, airplane, people talking etc.
The most successful ESC models consist of one or more stan-
dard audio feature extraction techniques and deep neural net-
works. In this paper, we explore the idea of employing multiple
feature extraction techniques like the Mel-frequency Cepstral
Coefﬁcients (MFCC) [1], Gammatone Frequency Cepstral Co-
efﬁcients (GFCC) [2], Constant Q-Transform (CQT) [3], Chro-
magram [4] and stack them to create a multiple channel input to
our classiﬁer.
After feature extraction, the next stage is classiﬁcation. Many
machine learning algorithms have been used to classify sound,
music or audio events. However, in the ESC task, Deep CNNs
have been able to outperform other techniques, as evident from
the previous ESC models. In this paper, we also employ a Deep
CNN for classiﬁcation. However, we split between time and
frequency domain feature processing by using separable convo-
lutions [5] with different kernel sizes. Also, we use max pooling
across only one of the domains at a time, until after the last set
of convolutional layers to combine time and frequency domain
features. This enables processing time and frequency domain
features separately and then combining them at a later stage.
Along with the model, we also design a novel attention mod-
ule that enables both spatial and channel attention. In order to
achieve both spatial and channel attention with the same mod-ule, we need an attention weight matrix with dimensions equal
to the DCNN block output. So that, each output feature map in
each channel has it’s own attention weights. We use the depth-
wise separable convolution [6] to achieve attention with mini-
mal increase in number of parameters.
Using these techniques allows our model to achieve state-of-
the-art performance on three benchmark datasets for environ-
ment sound classiﬁcation task, namely, ESC-10, ESC-50 [7]
and UrbanSound8K [8].
2. Related Work
There have been several innovative and high performance ap-
proaches proposed for the task of environmental sound classi-
ﬁcation (ESC). In [9], a deep CNN was shown to give com-
petitive results for the ESC tasks by thorough and exhaustive
experimentation on the three benchmark datasets.
In [10], phase encoded ﬁlterbank energies (PEFBEs) was pro-
posed as a novel feature extraction technique. Finally, a
score-level fusion of FBEs and PEFBEs with a CNN classiﬁer
achieved best performance.
In the second version of the EnvNet, called EnvNetv2 [11],
the authors employed a mechanism called Between Class (BC)
learning. In BC learning, two audio signals from different
classes are mixed with each other with a random ratio. The
CNN model is then fed the mixed sound as input and trained to
output this mixing ratio.
An unsupervised approach of learning a ﬁlterbank from raw
audio signals was proposed in [12]. Convolutional Restricted
Boltzmann Machine (ConvRBM), which is an unsupervised
generative model, was trained to raw audio waveforms. A
CNN is used as a classiﬁer along with ConvRBM ﬁlterbank and
score-level fusion with Mel ﬁlterbank energies. Their model
achieves 86.5% on the ESC-50 dataset.
A novel data augmentation technique, called mixup, was pro-
posed in [13]. It consists of mixing two audio signals and their
labels, in a linear interpolation manner, where the mixing is con-
trolled by a factor λ. In this way, their model achieves 83.7%
accuracy on the UrbanSound8K dataset. We employ the mix-
up data augmentation in our work to boost our model’s perfor-
mance.
A complex two stream structure deep CNN model was proposed
in [14]. It consists of two CNN streams. One is the LMC-
Net which works on the log-mel spectrogram, chroma, spectral
contrast and tonnetz features of audio signals and the other is
the MCNet which takes MFCC, chroma, spectral contrast and
tonnetz features as inputs. The decisions of the two CNNs are
fused to get the ﬁnal TSDCNN-DS model. It achieves 97.2%
accuracy on the UrbanSound8K dataset.
There have also been a few contributions towards the ESC task