E
with different number of kernels and kernel sizes. Almost all
convolutional layers are made up of spatially separable convo-
lutions.
In the case of the ESC task, the input are the features extracted
from the audio signals. Each feature set is of the shape (t,f,c ),
wheretis the compressed time domain (compressed due to win-
dow size and hop length) and cis the number of channels. Each
window of time yields fnumber of features ( f= 128 in our
model). So, we treat the time domain and the feature domain
separately. The kernels with the form 1×mwork on the fea-
ture domain and the ones with n×1work on the time domain.
Using the 1×mtype of convolution operation enables the net-
work to process each set of features from a time window sep-
arately. And, the n×1type of convolution allows the aggre-
gation of a feature along the time domain. Now, ccorresponds
to the number of feature extraction methods we adopt (in our
model,c= 4). So, each kernel works on each channel, which
means that all different types of features extracted from the sig-
nal feature extraction techniques is aggregated by every kernel.
Each kernel can extract different information from an aggre-
gated combination of different feature sets.
Another major advantage of using this type of convolution is the
reduction in number of parameters. This is the primary advan-
tage of separable convolutions when they were used in [5] and
have probably been used earlier as well.
In case of standard square kernels like n×n, which are used for
computer vision tasks, the dimensions of the kernel are in accor-
dance to the image’s spatial structure. The 2D structure of an
image represents pixels, i.e. both dimensions of an image rep-
resent the same homogeneous information. Whereas, in case of
audio features, one dimension gives a compact representation
of frequency features of a time window and the other dimen-
sion represents the ﬂow of time (or sliding time window). So,
in order to process information accordingly and respect the in-
formation from different dimensions of the input, we use 1×m
andn×1separable convolutions.
3.3. Deep CNN Architecture: Attention Block
In this paper, we achieve spatial and channel wise attention
using a single attention module and dramatically reduce the
number of parameters required for attention by using depthwise
convolutions. The attention block, shown in Fig. 3, runs in
parallel with a main block. The pooling size and kernel size
in the attention block is the same as the pooling and kernel
size in the corresponding parallel main block. Using depthwise
convolution reduces the number of parameters and thus reduces
the overhead of adding attention blocks to the model.
Before the element-wise multiplication of the attention matrix
with the main block output, we add a batch normalization layer
to normalize the attention weights. Normalization is important
for smoothing. The batch-norm layer is followed by a ReLU
activation, that makes the attention weight matrix sparse
which makes the element-wise multiplication computationally
efﬁcient.
ai=φ(BatchNorm (f(MaxPool (li−1)))) (1)
li=ai⊙ˆli (2)
Equations 3 and 4 make up the attention module, where fis
the depthwise separable convolution comprising of depthwise
and point-wise convolution and φis the ReLU activation func-
tion. This single attention module performs both spatial and
channel attention. Channel-wise attention requires an attention
Conv 2D
(1 x 3/ 5 x 1/ 5 x 3, 
s = 1, c)
Conv 2D
(1 x 3/ 5 x 1/ 5 x 3, 
s = 1, c)
Conv 2D
(1 x 1, s = 1, c)
BatchNorm
Leaky-ReLU
MaxPool 2D
(1 x 2/ 4 x 1/ 4 x 2)Depthwise Conv 2D
(1 x 3/ 3 x 1/ 3 x 3, 
s = 1)
cMaxPool 2D
(1 x 2/ 4 x 1/ 4 x 2)
BatchNorm
ReLUAttention Block Main Block
lili-1
Pointwise Conv 2D
(1 x 1, s = 1, c)Figure 3: Attention based DCNN model
weight for each output channel of the main block and spatial
attention requires an attention weight for each spatial location
in the output feature map. Our attention module produces c
weights, which enables channel attention, and each weight in c
is a matrix of n×m, which enables spatial attention. And, us-
ing a single depthwise separable convolution layer we are able
to achieve this with considerably less number of parameters and
operations.
An advantage of using attention as a separate module that runs
in parallel with every main block and connected before and af-
ter each main block, with less number of parameters and layers,
is that it allows smooth propagation of the gradient like skip or
residual connections [17, 18].
4. Experimental Setup
We report state-of-the-art results on ESC benchmark datasets,
i.e. UrbanSound8K, ESC-10 and ESC-50, using the proposed
model. The ESC-10 and ESC-50 contain 2000 audio ﬁles of
5 seconds length each, while UrbanSound8K consists of 8732
audio ﬁles of 4 seconds each. ESC-10 and UrbanSound8K con-
tain audio from 10 classes while ESC-50 has 50 classes. We
use k-fold cross-validation on the speciﬁed folds and report the
average accuracy across the folds. For ESC-10 and ESC-50,
k= 5and for UrbanSound8K, k= 10 .
We use Tensorﬂow and Keras to implement our CNN classiﬁer
and Librosa [19] and the Matlab Signal Processing Toolbox [20]
for audio processing and feature extraction. In terms of hard-
ware, we use the NVIDIA DGX-2 consisting of 16NVIDIA
TeslaV100GPUs with 32Gigabytes of VRAM each and a sys-
tem memory of 1.5Terabytes.
For every feature extraction technique, we extract 128 features
for each window of length 1024 (3.2 ms) with a hop length of
512 (1.6 ms) at 32kHz. We normalize all feature vectors us-