In summary, we observe independence between the improvements on optimization speed and ﬁnal
performance. Moreover, this is in line with the loss landscape observations in Section 3.3. Earlier
checkpoints in pre-training are out of basin of the converged model and at some point during training
we enter the basin (which is the same for pre-train and ﬁne-tune models as we saw in Section 3.3).
This also explains the plateau of performance after some checkpoints. Therefore, we can start from
earlier checkpoints in pre-training.
4 Related work
Recent work has looked into whether transfer learning is always successful [He et al., 2018, Kornblith
et al., 2018, Ngiam et al., 2018, Huh et al., 2016, Geirhos et al., 2019]. For example, Kornblith et al.
[2018] illustrates that pretrained features may be less general than previously thought and He et al.
[2018] show that transfer (even between similar tasks) does not necessarily result in performance
improvements. Kolesnikov et al. [2019] propose a heuristic for setting the hyperparameters for
transfer. Yosinski et al. [2014] show that in visual domain features from lower layers are more general
and as we move more towards higher layers the features become more speciﬁc. Raghu et al. [2020]
evaluated the role of feature reusing in meta-learning. Directly related to our work is [Raghu et al.,
2019], where they investigate transfer learning from pre-trained IMAGE NETmodel to medical domain
and note the role of model size on transfer performance, as well as the role of feature independent
aspects such as weight scaling. In this paper, we go beyond their angles and propose an extensively
complementary analysis. We dissect the role of different modules from various angles. Moreover, we
provide insights into what is being transferred. We also extend the understanding of role of feature
reuse and other parameters at play for successful transfer.
Transfer learning is also a key components in recent breakthroughs in natural language processing,
as pre-trained representations from task-agnostic transformer language models turned out to work
extremely well on various downstream tasks [Devlin et al., 2018, Raffel et al., 2019, Yang et al., 2019,
Liu et al., 2019, Brown et al., 2020], therefore extensively analyzed [Hendrycks et al., 2020, Tamkin
et al., 2020]. Transfer learning in text domains is charasteristically different from transfer learning
in visual domains due to the nature of the data, utility of untrained representations, pre-training
techniques and the amount of distribution shifts between pre-training and downstream tasks. In this
paper, we focus on studying transfer learning in visual domain.
The ﬂatness of the basin of the loss landscape near the ﬁnal solution is studied as an indicator of the
generalization performance of neural network models [Keskar et al., 2016, Jiang et al., 2019]. It is
found that a nonlinear connecting path could be found between any pair of basins corresponding to
different solutions [Garipov et al., 2018, Draxler et al., 2018, Fort and Jastrzebski, 2019]. In this
paper, we study linear path connectivity between solutions to investigate the connectivity in the
parameter space.
5 Conclusion and future work
In this paper we shed some light on what is being transferred in transfer learning and which parts
of the network are at play. We investigated the role of feature reuse through shufﬂing the blocks of
input and showed that when trained from pre-trained weights initialization, the network stays in the
same basin of the solution, features are similar and models are close in the `2distance in parameter
space. We also conﬁrmed that lower layers are in charge of more general features. Our ﬁndings on
basin in the loss landscape can be used to improve ensemble methods. Our observation of low-level
data statistics improving training speed could lead to better network initialization methods. Using
these ﬁndings to improve transfer learning is of interest for future work. More speciﬁcally, we plan
to look into initialization with minimum information from pre-trained model while staying in the
same basin and whether this improves performance. For example, one can use top singular values
and directions for each module for initialization and investigate if this sufﬁces for good transfer, or
ensure initialization at the same basin but adding randomization to enhance diversity and improve
generalization. Investigating the implications of these ﬁndings for parallel training and optimization is
also of interest. taking model average of models in the same basin does not disturb the performance.
9