Figure 3. Performance comparison of supervised learning and in-context learning under different corrupted rates. We plot the mean accuracy (± standard
deviation) across six different datasets for three different model sizes.
Figure 4. Results with varying imbalance ratios for in-context learning
across three different models
though ICL is less sensitive to label imbalance, the model perfor-
mance is not superior to that of SL, especially with GPT2-Largeand GPT2-XL. With GPT -J, the advantage of ICL becomes obvi-ous, which indicates that, with large language models, ICL is clearlypreferable when dealing with class-imbalanced datasets.
Discussion In SL, imbalanced data imposes “label bias” during
learning where the decision boundaries can be strongly inﬂuenced bythe frequent classes. SL is incented to learn features from the frequentclasses and may ignore other features. In contrast, ICL achieves non-trivial performance for classiﬁcation tasks with imbalanced demon-strations as it may mitigate the effects of bias by leveraging the con-text speciﬁc information. This strongly suggests that the learning be-haviour of ICL is not affected by the number of instances per classin the demonstrations, and ICL is capable of preserving pre-trainingknowledge as well as learning richer features. The reason for thismay be that ICL can learn not only the label-relevant features butalso other interesting features that capture the intrinsic properties ofthe input distributions and the structures of the input-label correspon-dence, which may generalize better to rare classes. This hypothesisneeds further study.5 Analysing ICL ’s Sensitivity Using Attention
Score
Our ﬁndings seem intuitive but are not trivial. The language modelsare not pre-trained on perturbed samples, but still ICL is less sensitiveto label perturbations compared to SL. Understanding these observa-tions are crucial for practitioners to apply ICL. The attention mecha-nism [2] has been used as an important component across LLMs. Anattention layer produces a distribution over input representations tobe attended to, and the distribution can reﬂect the signiﬁcance of theinputs. Inspired by Wiegreffe and Pinter [38] that shows the utility ofattention scores in interpretation, we further examine why ICL is lesssensitive to label perturbations using attention scores. Speciﬁcally,we compute the attention scores of the output label word in each ex-ample for demonstration Cand sum up the scores for the same class
together. We report the summed attention score ratio across differentclass labels (i.e. correct labels and perturbed labels) in the MR datasetand refer this as Attention ratio score that explains the robustness of
ICL under the imbalance and noisy label settings.
LMRatios (corrected : corrupted)
5:0 4:1 3:2 2:3 1:4 0:5 STD
GPT2-Large 0.424 0.428 0.434 0.443 0.459 0.453 0.014
GPT2-XL 0.521 0.561 0.525 0.591 0.592 0.564 0.031
GPT -J 0.370 0.393 0.428 0.297 0.323 0.316 0.051
Table 7. Attention ratio scores for different correct label ratios for three
models. Scores between models are not comparable, as attention scores vary.
STD is the standard deviation across different corrupted ratios per model.
Noisy Labels To construct the experiment with noisy labels, we
use 5 demonstration examples (k =5 ) and evaluate with vari-
ous corrupted rates. Results are shown in Table 7. With relatively
small language models, such as GPT2-Large and GPT2-XL, thereare small ﬂuctuations of attention scores if more corrupted labels areadded to the demonstration; however, with larger models like GPT -J, a large variation of attention appears as the number of corruptedlabels increases. The aforementioned observation further indicatesthat smaller models cannot differentiate gold labels and corruptedones and pay approximately the same attention to all labels; how-ever, large language models demonstrate an ability to disambiguatebetween gold and corrupted labels, which supports our suspicion.X. Wang et al. / Investigating the Learning Behaviour of In-Context Learning: A Comparison with Supervised Learning 2548