training examples, including under-sampling, over-sampling , and a
mix. Synthetic Minority Oversampling Technique (SMOTE) [4] isan over-sampling method where synthetic samples are generated forthe minority class using the feature space to generate new instanceswith linear interpolation between positive instances. NearMiss [42]is an under-sampling technique that balances the class distributionby randomly eliminating majority class instances. However, over-sampling can potentially lead to over-ﬁtting, while under-samplingmay cause information loss. The algorithm-level approaches pursuebalancing the class distribution and lifting the importance of minorityclass samples without altering the training data distribution, includ-ing cost-sensitive learning and threshold-adjustment methods. Cost-sensitive learning modiﬁes cost functions [21, 37] and thresholdingmethods change the decision threshold at test time after training theclassiﬁer on the original imbalanced data [22].
7 Conclusion and Future Work
Our work is the ﬁrst to study ICL among label perturbations. Weempirically show that the learning behaviour of ICL is more inﬂu-enced by the quality of the ground truth input-label pairings, and it isless effected by the number of pairings for each class in the demon-strations. In comparison with supervised learning (SL), we discoverthat ICL is less sensitive to perturbed labels than SL, which is stilla standard method, and is still useful if the language model is rela-tively small. However, with large language models, the utility of ICLemerges. These ﬁndings highlight the importance of considering dif-ferent learning strategies (ICL or SL) and model sizes when work-ing with large language models and different classiﬁcation tasks.Our work encourages practitioners to use ICL instead of SL or, atleast, to consider evaluating the impact of perturbed pre-training ondownstream tasks if large language models are available (here, weexpected better performance from ICL and at least the model sizeshould be larger than GPT -J). Our experiments are limited to textclassiﬁcation tasks, and we have not examined the performance ofICL for other tasks such as text generation nor in other domainssuch as computer vision. Extending our current work to such tasksis non-trivial, and is left for future work. To understand the learn-ing behaviours of in-context learning and supervised learning, wetrain and ﬁne-tune a model multiple times with different seeds ona ﬁxed number of demonstration examples, which can be computa-tionally intensive if the sizes of the datasets and models are large (forinstance, we ﬁne-tune the GPT -J model on the MR dataset using 4NVIDIA A100 80G GPUs with parallel computing). This can be anon-trivial problem for practitioners with limited computational re-sources. Our experiments only have been conducted on the modelsthat range from 774 million to 6.7 billion parameters due to theseconsiderations. As yet, there does not seem to be any evidence thatlarger LLMs will reverse the tendencies we observed. We hope ourﬁndings of the behaviours of ICL under label perturbations can be auseful reference for potential users who have limited computationalresources. We would also be interested to explore ways to optimizethe learning behaviour of LLMs in different scenarios. We hope ourwork can inspire analysis of ICL in broader environments in the wildand provide insights for the design of future uses of ICL.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank all reviewers for their comments, whichhelped improve this paper considerably. This research is partiallyfunded by The Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Coun-cil of Canada (NSERC) through a Discovery Grant to R. E. Mercer.F. Rudzicz is supported by a CIFAR Chair in AI.
References
[1] Ekin Akyürek, Dale Schuurmans, Jacob Andreas, Tengyu Ma, and
Denny Zhou, ‘What learning algorithm is in-context learning? Investi-
gations with linear models’, in The Eleventh International Conference
on Learning Representations (ICLR), (2023).
[2] Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Y oshua Bengio, ‘Neural ma-
chine translation by jointly learning to align and translate’, in 3rd Inter-
national Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), (2015).
[3] Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, et al., ‘Language models are few-shot
learners’, in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol-
ume 33, pp. 1877–1901, (2020).
[4] Nitesh V . Chawla, Kevin W . Bowyer, Lawrence O. Hall, and W . Philip
Kegelmeyer, ‘SMOTE: Synthetic minority over-sampling technique’,Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research, 16(1), 321–357, (2002).
[5] Pengfei Chen, Ben Ben Liao, Guangyong Chen, and Shengyu Zhang,
‘Understanding and utilizing deep neural networks trained with noisylabels’, in Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Ma-
chine Learning, pp. 1062–1070, (2019).
[6] Y anda Chen, Ruiqi Zhong, Sheng Zha, George Karypis, and He He,
‘Meta-learning via language model in-context tuning’, in Proceedings
of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-guistics (V olume 1: Long Papers), pp. 719–730, (2022).
[7] Ido Dagan, Oren Glickman, and Bernardo Magnini, ‘The P ASCAL
Recognising Textual Entailment Challenge’, in Proceedings of the First
International Conference on Machine Learning Challenges: Evaluat-ing Predictive Uncertainty Visual Object Classiﬁcation, and Recogniz-ing Textual Entailment, pp. 177–190, (2005).
[8] Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, Mandy Simons, and Judith Tonhauser,
‘The CommitmentBank: Investigating projection in naturally occur-ring discourse’, Proceedings of Sinn und Bedeutung, 23(2), 107–124,
(2019).
[9] Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova,
‘BERT: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for languageunderstanding’, in Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:Human Language Technologies, V olume 1 (Long and Short Papers),pp. 4171–4186, (2019).
[10] Jesse Dodge, Gabriel Ilharco, Roy Schwartz, Ali Farhadi, Hannaneh
Hajishirzi, and Noah Smith, ‘Fine-tuning pretrained language models:Weight initializations, data orders, and early stopping’, arXiv preprint:
arXiv:2002.06305, (2020).
[11] Shivam Garg, Dimitris Tsipras, Percy Liang, and Gregory V aliant,
‘What can transformers learn in-context? a case study of simple func-tion classes’, in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,
volume 35, pp. 30583–30598, (2022).
[12] Dan Hendrycks, Mantas Mazeika, Duncan Wilson, and Kevin Gimpel,
‘Using trusted data to train deep networks on labels corrupted by se-vere noise’, in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
volume 31, pp. 10456–10465, (2018).
[13] Eduard Hovy, Laurie Gerber, Ulf Hermjakob, Chin-Y ew Lin, and
Deepak Ravichandran, ‘Toward semantics-based answer pinpointing’,inProceedings of the First International Conference on Human Lan-
guage Technology Research, pp. 1–7, (2001).
[14] Maksims Ivanovs, Roberts Kadikis, and Kaspars Ozols, ‘Perturbation-
based methods for explaining deep neural networks: A survey’, Pattern
Recognition Letters, 150, 228–234, (2021).
[15] Lu Jiang, Zhengyuan Zhou, Thomas Leung, Li-Jia Li, and Li Fei-Fei,
‘MentorNet: Learning data-driven curriculum for very deep neural net-works on corrupted labels’, in Proceedings of the 35th International
Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2304–2313, (2018).
[16] Ishan Jindal, Matthew Nokleby, and Xuewen Chen, ‘Learning deep net-
works from noisy labels with dropout regularization’, in 2016 IEEE
16th Int. Conference on Data Mining (ICDM), pp. 967–972, (2016).
[17] Cheolhyoung Lee, Kyunghyun Cho, and Wanmo Kang, ‘Mixout: Effec-
tive regularization to ﬁnetune large-scale pretrained language models’,inProceedings of International Conference on Learning Representa-
tions (ICLR), (2020).
[18] Kimin Lee, Sukmin Y un, Kibok Lee, Honglak Lee, Bo Li, and JinwooX. Wang et al. / Investigating the Learning Behaviour of In-Context Learning: A Comparison with Supervised Learning 2550