Figure 5. Performance comparison of supervised learning and in-context learning under different imbalance ratios. We plot the mean accuracy (± standard
deviation) across six different datasets for three different model sizes.
Label Imbalance To construct the experiment with class-
imbalanced data, we evaluate the attention score ratio of the two
classes by ﬁxing the number of examples of one class and addingexamples for another. We report their attention score ratio in Table8.The attention scores change slightly with different imbalance ra-
tios, which indicates that each class receives approximately the sameattention from ICL even with imbalanced label distributions.
LMImbalance Ratio
100% 50% 33% 25% 20% 10% STD
GPT2-Large 0.946 0.956 0.936 0.967 0.913 0.887 0.030
GPT2-XL 0.929 0.995 0.983 0.995 0.913 0.975 0.035
GPT -J 0.909 0.825 0.847 0.857 0.908 0.913 0.038
Table 8. Attention ratio scores for different imbalance ratios for three mod-
els. Scores between models are not comparable, as attention scores vary. STD
is the standard deviation across different imbalance ratios per model.
6 Related Work
6.1 Learning with Large Pre-trained Language
Models
Large pre-trained language models have become a cornerstone of
natural language processing, and have shown strong generalizationabilities on a wide range of tasks [3, 9, 32, 33]. Currently, thereare two key frameworks [23] to use LLMs, namely supervised ﬁne-tuning and in-context learning.
Supervised learning performs gradient-based ﬁne-tuning to adapt
a task-agnostic pre-trained model for a speciﬁc task. Existing work[10, 17, 31] shows that supervised ﬁne-tuning signiﬁcantly boosts theperformance on various NLP tasks, especially on small datasets.
In-context learning learns a new task without updating the model’s
parameters. ICL adds a prompt (usually a task description) and an-notated examples as demonstrations (also known as “shots”) to en-able few-shot learning without ﬁne-tuning [3]. Some recent work hasbeen devoted to investigating ICL. For instance, Min et al. [27] tried
to explain and understand the mechanism of ICL and found correctinput-label mapping matters very little, while later work [41] fur-ther argued the impact of correct mappings under different conﬁgu-rations. Zhao et al. [45] showed that models are biased by the order
of the demonstration examples. Liu et al. [24] and Mishra et al. [28]
focused on the sensitivity of ICL: the former empirically studied thesensitivity of GPT -3’s few-shot capabilities with respect to the selec-tion of in-context examples and the latter re-framed the instructionalprompts to improve the in-context performance for language mod-els. Chen et al. [6] and Min et al. [26] used meta-training with an
explicit in-context learning objective. Xie et al. [40] and Akyürek et
al. [1] studied what enables ICL: the former explained ICL as im-
plicit Bayesian inference and the latter used linear regression as aprototypical problem to study the learning algorithm of ICL. Y oo et
al.[41] shared the same conclusion that ground-truth labels matter to
ICL, as we claim, but by conducting experiments only on GPT -J. Ourexperiments cover three models with various sizes and we draw themore in-depth conclusion that LLMs are more sensitive to corruptedlabels than smaller models. Parallel to our research, Zhang et al. [44]
claimed that a well-balanced demonstration set does not consistentlylead to better performance in ICL by studying the class imbalanceunder the demonstration example selection. While we reach a simi-lar conclusion, we saw the result that label imbalance matters little toICL when comparing ICL and SL.
6.2 Training with Perturbed Labels
Noisy Labels Learning with noisy labels can be divided into at-
tempts that handle noisy labels in data pre-processing and attemptsto learn robustly from the noisy labels directly. Some approaches pre-process auxiliary data by selecting clean instances according to rules.For instance, Li et al. [20] learned a teacher network with a small
clean dataset to do importance re-weighting of the noisy labels inthe loss function. Similarly, MentorNet [15] learned a data-drivencurriculum to select clean instances that could guide the training ofa student network. Further, Chen et al. [5] applied cross-validation
to randomly split the noisy dataset and remove large-loss samples.Other approaches alleviate noise by making the learning processmore robust to label noise, mainly among three categories: robustarchitectures [16, 18, 39] add a noise adaptation layer to learn la-bel transitions or develop a dedicated architecture to support diversetypes of label noise; robust regularization [25, 30] that enforces adeep neural network to overﬁt less to false-labeled examples explic-itly or implicitly; and robust loss functions [12, 36] which adjust theloss according to the conﬁdence of the labels.
Label Imbalance Imbalanced text classiﬁcation focuses mainly
on two types of methods: sampling-based and algorithm-level.Sampling-based methods balance class distributions by manipulatingX. Wang et al. / Investigating the Learning Behaviour of In-Context Learning: A Comparison with Supervised Learning 2549