Figure 2. Results with varying ratio of correct labels for in-context learning
over three different models.
experiment with three language models, GPT2-Large [32], GPT2-
XL [32], and GPT -J [35], ranging from 774 million to 6.7 billion
parameters, all being decoder-only models. Evaluating on a compa-rable set of models with different sizes allows us to further investi-gate whether the observations depend on the model size. We reportMacro-F1 scores for all tasks and compute the average score overseeds for each dataset. The code for reproducing our experiments isavailable at https://github.com/xdwang0726/ICL_LL.
4 Empirical Findings
We intensively experiment to answer the following:
1. Does the ratio of correct labels matter to the performance of in-
context learning?
2. Is in-context learning less sensitive to noisy labels compared to
supervised learning?
3. Does the imbalance ratio affect in-context learning performance?4. Is in-context learning more sensitive to label imbalance compared
to supervised learning?
Tables 3 and 4 report the main results for in-context learning andsupervised learning performance across three different models undernoisy label and label imbalance settings, respectively
1.
4.1 How do ICL and SL Learn with Noisy Labels?
Ground-truth Labels matter a lot to ICL Min et al. [27] claimed
that replacing ground-truth labels with incorrect labels marginallyaffects the overall performance on speciﬁc datasets. In contrast, ourwork conducts extensive experiments on the impact of gold labels,and it is noticeable that the ability of ICL emerges differently depend-ing on corruption rates, as shown in Figure 2. Model performanceis sensitive to the ratio of correct labels in the demonstrations. Infact, using all corrupted labels always signiﬁcantly under-performsdemonstration with all gold labels across all three models. Mean-while, as the model size increases, the performance gap between var-ious corruption rates also increases, which indicates that the large
1Detailed performance for each dataset can be found in Technical Ap-
pendix A at https://github.com/xdwang0726/ICL_LL/blob/main/ECAI_
Supplementary_Document.pdf.language models are more sensitive to the corrupted labels. For in-
stance, the performance gap between all gold and all corrupted labelsfor GPT2-Large is 8.5%, and for GPT -J is 17.9%.
Correct labels matter a lot to the model performance but, in rare
cases, model performance is not guaranteed with lower corruptionrates. An inﬂection point might exist where a certain number of cor-rupted labels helps improve model performance. For instance, 75%
correct labels performs slightly better than using all gold labels forGPT2-XL.
Compared with SL Overall, as the corrupted rate increases, the
performance of supervised learning declines dramatically, and theperformance of ICL drops slowly for GPT2-Large and GPT2-XL butdecreases as rapidly as SL for GPT -J, as shown in Figure 3. Look-ing at the sensitivity measures in Table 5, we see that ICL is lesssensitive than SL across all three models. In addition, ICL graduallyoutperforms SL as the model size increases. SL performance dropsup to 19% after injecting incorrect labels, while ICL performancedrops 11%. It is also noticeable that, as more incorrect labels are in-troduced, the performance of ICL declines gradually at ﬁrst and thenbecomes constant, while SL steadily declines. ICL gradually attainsperformance comparable to that of SL as the model size increases.
We are also interested in how various learning paradigms perform
with different classiﬁcation types. We divide the six classiﬁcationtasks into two types, binary classiﬁcation and multi-class classiﬁca-tion. As shown in Table 3
2,there is no large gap between the perfor-
mance of SL and ICL in binary classiﬁcation. Speciﬁcally, in binaryclassiﬁcation with GPT2-large and GPT -J, ICL is slightly better withlower corruption rates and SL improves with small advantages whendealing with large corruption rates. SL outperforms ICL slightlyacross most corruption rates when using GPT2-XL. With multi-classclassiﬁcation, as the number of corrupted label increases, the perfor-mance of ICL gradually outperforms SL across all three models. Thecause of different tendencies in performance between ICL and SL onbinary and multi-class classiﬁcation may be that binary classiﬁcationtasks are generally simpler than multi-class tasks. With binary tasks,SL may be able to learn accurate decision boundaries more easily,while ICL may not provide additional beneﬁt beyond the labeled ex-amples. When faced with more complex multi-class tasks, ICL maybetter leverage the context of the inputs to better understand the re-lationships between the labels and provide more accurate predictionsas the size of the model increases.
Discussion The learning behaviour of SL is strongly affected by
the ground truth input-label correspondence as the model size in-creases. It suggests that SL requires correct pairings to performdownstream tasks. We hypothesize that, for ICL, the wrong pair-ings sabotage the pre-trained knowledge to some extent, but the largelanguage models are more able to absorb knowledge directly fromthe pairings in the demonstrations. Similarly, input-label correspon-dence has a consistent effect on the learning behaviour of SL acrossall model sizes, but SL is more sensitive to corrupted labels com-pared to ICL. The reason for this may be that with SL, the model isﬁne-tuned by updating parameters using the wrong input-label pairswhich enlarge the noisy “signal” in the labels. SL may be more proneto over-ﬁtting than ICL, especially with high corruption rates. Whenthe labels are noisy, the model may learn to ﬁt the noise data dur-ing training rather than the underlying patterns, which may lead to
2The detailed visualization can be found in Figure 1 in the Technical
Appendix B at https://github.com/xdwang0726/ICL_LL/blob/main/ECAI_
Supplementary_Document.pdf.X. Wang et al. / Investigating the Learning Behaviour of In-Context Learning: A Comparison with Supervised Learning 2546