CompILE: Compositional Imitation Learning and Execution
Thomas Kipf1yYujia Li2Hanjun Dai3yVinicius Zambaldi2Alvaro Sanchez-Gonzalez2
Edward Grefenstette4 #Pushmeet Kohli2Peter Battaglia2
Abstract
We introduce Compositional Imitation Learn-
ing and Execution (CompILE): a framework for
learning reusable, variable-length segments of
hierarchically-structured behavior from demon-
stration data. CompILE uses a novel unsuper-
vised, fully-differentiable sequence segmentation
module to learn latent encodings of sequential
data that can be re-composed and executed to per-
form new tasks. Once trained, our model gener-
alizes to sequences of longer length and from en-
vironment instances not seen during training. We
evaluate CompILE in a challenging 2D multi-task
environment and a continuous control task, and
show that it can ﬁnd correct task boundaries and
event encodings in an unsupervised manner. La-
tent codes and associated behavior policies discov-
ered by CompILE can be used by a hierarchical
agent, where the high-level policy selects actions
in the latent code space, and the low-level, task-
speciﬁc policies are simply the learned decoders.
We found that our CompILE-based agent could
learn given only sparse rewards, where agents
without task-speciﬁc policies struggle.
1. Introduction
Discovering compositional structure in sequential data, with-
out supervision, is an important ability in human and ma-
chine learning. For example, when a cook prepares a meal,
they re-use similar behavioral sub-sequences (e.g., slicing,
dicing, chopping) and compose the components hierarchi-
cally (e.g., stirring together eggs and milk, pouring the mix-
yWork done during an internship at DeepMind.#Work done
while employed at DeepMind.1Informatics Institute, University
of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands2DeepMind, London,
UK3School of Computational Science and Engineering, Geor-
gia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia, USA4Facebook
AI Research, London, UK. Correspondence to: Thomas Kipf
<t.n.kipf@uva.nl >.
Proceedings of the 36thInternational Conference on Machine
Learning , Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).
Task 1 Task 2 Task 3 
Differentiable 
segmentation Latent code 
(per segment) Figure 1: Joint unsupervised learning of task segmenta-
tion and encoding in CompILE. CompILE auto-encodes
sequential demonstration data by 1) softly breaking an input
sequence into segments of variable length, and 2) mapping
each such segment into a latent code, which can be executed
to reconstruct the input sequence. At test time, the latent
code can be re-composed to produce novel behavior.
ture into a hot pan and stirring it to form scrambled eggs).
Humans are adept at inferring event structure by hierar-
chically segmenting continuous sensory experience (Zacks
et al., 2001; Baldassano et al., 2017; Radvansky & Zacks,
2017), which may support building efﬁcient event represen-
tations in episodic memory (Ezzyat & Davachi, 2011) and
constructing abstract plans (Richmond & Zacks, 2017).
An important beneﬁt of compositional sub-sequence repre-
sentations is combinatorial generalization to never-before-
seen conjunctions (Davidson, 1984; Denil et al., 2017). Be-
havioral sub-components can also be used as high-level
actions in hierarchical decision-making, offering improved
credit assignment and efﬁcient planning. To reap these ben-
eﬁts in machines, however, the event structure and compos-
able representations must be discovered in an unsupervised
manner, as sub-sequence labels are rarely available.
In this work, we focus on the problem of jointly learning to
segment, explain, and imitate agent behavior (from demon-
strations) via an unsupervised auto-encoding objective. The
encoder learns to jointly infer event boundaries and high-
level abstractions (latent encodings) of activity within each
event segment, while the task of the decoder is to reconstruct
or imitate the original behavior by executing the inferred
sequence of latent codes.