CompILE: Compositional Imitation Learning and Execution
Figure 5: Learning curves for agents trained in the multi-task grid world environment for a single representative seed. We
found that the qualitative behavior was consistent across seeds. Original learning curve (reward at every episode) plotted as
shaded line; overlaid with solid line using exponential smoothing for easier visibility. BC denotes a V AE-based behavioral
cloning baseline that was exposed to the same number of task demonstrations as our CompILE model. The low-level
baseline is an agent without internal hierarchy. The CompILE-based hierarchical agent beneﬁts from signiﬁcantly improved
exploration and is the only agent that succeeds at all sparse reward tasks. Best viewed in color.
reached maximum number of 50 steps) was met ( sparse
reward setting). The sparse reward setting poses a very
challenging exploration problem: the agent only receives a
learning signal if it has completed all tasks from the task list
in the correct order, without mistakes (i.e., without picking
up a wrong object which could render the episode unsolv-
able). We compare against a low-level baseline agent that
only has access to low-level actions and a V AE-based, pre-
trained BC baseline that receives the same pre-training as
our CompILE agent, but does not learn a task segmenta-
tion (it also has access to low-level actions). All agents
use the same CNN-based architecture (see supplementary
material for details) and are trained using the distributed
policy-gradient algorithm IMPALA (Espeholt et al., 2018).
Results are summarized in Figure 5.
The hierarchical agent with sub-task policies from the Com-
pILE model achieves consistent results across all settings
and generalizes well to the 5 task setup, even though it has
only seen demonstrations of 3 tasks during pre-training. It
is the only agent that learns to solve the pick up task setting
with sparse reward. The visit task is signiﬁcantly easier to
solve as the episode does not end if a wrong object is visited.
Nonetheless, the low-level baseline (without pre-training)
fails to learn under the sparse reward setting for all but the
3x visit task. Only if reward for every individual sub-task is
provided, the low-level baseline learns to solve the task in
the fewest number of episodes.
4.4. Limitations and future work
As our training procedure is completely unsupervised, the
model is free to choose any type of semantics for its la-tent code. For example, in the grid world environment we
found that the model learns a location-speciﬁc latent code
(with only a small degree of object speciﬁcity), whereas
the ground truth task list is speciﬁc to object type. See
supplementary material for an example. It remains to be
seen to what degree the latent code can be grounded in a
particular manner with only weak supervision, e.g. in a semi-
supervised setting or using pairs of demonstrations with the
same underlying task list. Furthermore, we have currently
only explored fully-observable, Markovian settings. An
extension to partially-observable environments will likely
introduce further challenges, as the generative model will
require some form of recurrency or memory, and the model
might learn to ignore the latent code altogether.
5. Conclusions
Here we introduced CompILE, a model for discovering and
imitating sub-components of behavior in sequential demon-
stration data. Our results showed that CompILE can success-
fully discover sub-tasks and their boundaries in an imitation
learning setting, and the latent sub-task encodings can then
be used as sub-policies in a hierarchical RL agent to solve
challenging sparse reward tasks. While here we explored im-
itation learning, where inputs to the model are state-action
sequences, in principle our method can be applied to any se-
quential data, and an interesting future direction is to apply
our differentiable segmentation and auto-encoding mecha-
nism to other data domains. Future work will investigate
extensions for partially-observable environments, its appli-
cability as an episodic memory module, and a hierarchical
extension for abstract, high-level planning.