For the system in Equation 30 to be stable, every eigenvalue of ˆW=Ws+Wrmust lie within the complex-valued unit
circle [1, 65]. Since there is considerable flexibility in the choice of the elements of AandBto satisfy this requirement,
setting △T= 1 for simplicity is acceptable. As another simplification, let Abe a diagonal matrix with large negative entries
(i.e., aii≪0) on its main diagonal (thereby practically guaranteeing the stability of Equation 14). Then, from Equation 25,
Ws≈−A−1will be a diagonal matrix with small positive entries,1
|aii|, on its main diagonal, which means that the explicit
effect of the state signal’s value from memory, ⃗ s[n−1], on the system’s trajectory will be negligible (the implicit effect through
⃗ r[n−1]will still be present as long as ∥Wr∥>0). Thus, ignoring the first term in Equation 30, reduces it to the standard
RNN definition:
⃗ s[n] =Wr⃗ r[n−1] +Wx⃗ x[n] +⃗θs (32)
⃗ r[n] =G(⃗ s[n]) (33)
From Equation 32, now only the matrix ˆW≈Wr≈−A−1Bis responsible for the stability of the RNN. Consider the best
case scenario, where Bis a diagonal matrix ( B= ΛB). With this simplification, the essential matrix for analyzing the stability
of Equation 32 becomes ˜W=−A−1ΛB, where ΛBis the diagonal matrix (i.e., consisting of only the eigenvalues of B, with
the individual eigenvalues, λi, on the main diagonal of ΛB). Since both AandΛBare diagonal, ˜Wis a diagonal matrix with
the entries µi=λi
|aii|on its main diagonal. These quantities become the eigenvalues of the overall RNN system in Equation 32
in the “small signal regime” ( ∥⃗ s[n]∥ ≪1), each adding the mode of (µi)n, multiplied by its corresponding initial condition,
to the trajectory of ⃗ s[n]. A necessary and sufficient condition for stability is that 0< µi<1, meaning that every eigenvalue,
λi, ofBmust satisfy the condition 0< λi<|aii|. If any µiandλifail to satisfy this condition, the system will be unstable,
causing the elements of ⃗ r[n]to either oscillate or saturate (i.e., enter the flat regions of the warping nonlinearity) at some value
of the index, n.
An alternative to choosing the specific convenient form of Ain Equation 25 would be to (somewhat arbitrarily) treat Ws,Wr,
Wx, and ⃗θsin Equation 30 as mutually independent parameters and then set Ws= 0 to obtain the standard RNN definition
(as in Equation 32). In this case, the above stability analysis still applies. In particular, the eigenvalues, µi, ofWrare subject
to the same requirement, 0< µi<1, as a necessary and sufficient condition for stability.
Stability considerations will be later revisited in order to justify the need to evolve the RNN to a more complex system, namely,
the LSTM network.
We have shown that the RNN, as expressed by Equation 30 (in the canonical form) or by Equation 32 (in the standard form),
essentially implements the backward Euler numerical integration method for the ordinary DDE in Equation 14. This “forward”
direction of starting in the continuous-time domain (differential equation) and ending in the discrete-index domain (difference
equation) implies that the original phenomenon being modeled is assumed to be fundamentally analog in nature, and that it is
modeled in the discrete domain as an approximation for the purpose of realization. For example, the source signal could be
the audio portion of a lecture, recorded on an analog tape (or on digital media as a finely quantized waveform and saved in an
audio file). The original recording thus contains the spoken words as well as the intonation, various emphases, and other vocal
modulations that communicate the content in the speaker’s individual way as expressed through voice. The samples generated
by a hypothetical discretization of this phenomenon, governed in this model by Equation 14, could be captured as the textual
transcript of the speech, saved in a document containing only the words uttered by the speaker, but ignoring all the intonation,
emotion, and other analogous nuances. In this scenario, it is the sequence of words in the transcript of the lecture that the
RNN will be employed to reproduce, not the actual audio recording of the speech. The key subtle point in this scenario is
that applying the RNN as a model implies that the underlying phenomenon is governed by Equation 14, whereby the role
of the RNN is that of implementing the computational method for solving this DDE using the backward Euler discretization
rule, under the restriction that the sampling time step, △T, is equal to the delay, τ0. In contrast, the “reverse” direction would
be a more appropriate model in situations where the discrete signal is the natural starting domain, because the phenomenon
originates as a sequence of samples. For example, a written essay originates as a sequence of words and punctuation, saved
in a document. One can conjure up an analog rendition of this essay as being read by a narrator, giving life to the words
and passages with intonation, pauses, and other expressions not present in the original text of the essay. While the starting
point depends on how the original source of data is generated, both the continuous (“forward”) and the discrete (“reverse”)
representations can serve as tools for gaining insight into the advantages and the limitations of the models under consideration.
8