EDU/WKP(2020)6   13 
TRUSTWORTHY ARTIFICI AL INTELLIGENCE (AI)  IN EDUCATION: PROMI SES AND CHALLENGES  
Unclassified  Box 4.1. G20 AI Principles  
In June 2019, G20 Leaders welcomed Principles for responsible stewardship of 
trustworthy AI (the G20 AI Principles). These included the Principles of:  
Inclusive growth, sustainable development and well -being  
Stakeholders should proactively engage in responsible stewardship of trustworthy AI in 
pursuit of beneficial outcomes for people and the planet, such as augmenting human 
capabilities and enhancing creativity, advancing inclusion of underrepresented 
populations, reducing economic, social,  gender and other inequalities, and protecting 
natural environments, thus invigorating inclusive growth, sustainable development and 
well-being.  
Human -centred values and fairness  
a. AI actors should respect the rule of law, human rights and democratic values,  throughout 
the AI system lifecycle. These include freedom, dignity and autonomy, privacy and data 
protection, non -discrimination and equality, diversity, fairness, social justice, and 
internationally recogn ised labo ur rights.  
b. To this end, AI actors should  implement mechanisms and safeguards, such as capacity 
for human determination, that are appropriate to the context and consistent with the state 
of art.  
Transparency and explainability  
AI Actors should commit to transparency and responsible disclosure reg arding AI 
systems. To this end, they should provide meaningful information, appropriate to the 
context, and consistent with the state of art:  
i. to foster a general understanding of AI systems;  
ii. to make stakeholders aware of their interactions with AI systems,  including in the workplace;  
iii. to enable those affected by an AI system to understand the outcome;  and  
iv. to enable those adversely affected by an AI system to challenge its outcome based on 
plain and easy -to-understand information on the factors, and the logi c that served as the 
basis for the prediction, recommendation or decision.  
Robustness, security and safety  
a. AI systems should be robust, secure and safe throughout their entire lifecycle so that, in 
conditions of normal use, foreseeable use or misuse, or ot her adverse conditions, they 
function appropriately and do not pose unreasonable safety risk.  
b. To this end, AI actors should ensure traceability, including in relation to datasets, 
processes and decisions made during the AI system lifecycle, to enable analy sis of the 
AI system’s outcomes and responses to inquiry, appropriate to the context and consistent 
with the state of art.  
c. AI actors should, based on their roles, the context, and their ability to act, apply a 
systematic risk management approach to each ph ase of the AI system lifecycle on a 
continuous basis to address risks related to AI systems, including privacy, digital 
security, safety and bias.