10  EDU/WKP(2020)6  
TRUSTWORTHY ARTIFICI AL INTELLIGENCE (AI)  IN EDUCATION: PROMI SES AND CHALLENGES  
Unclassified  the right interventions to prevent dropout. AI systems hold promise to improve early 
warning systems, which are increasingly based on longitudinal datasets that are emerging 
in education. Even thoug h identifying risks does not imply solving them, AI solutions help 
school principals to use existing data in new ways and design interventions to predict and 
prevent dropout more efficiently.  
AI solutions are for example widespread in the United States, wi th a host of vendors 
providing districts and states with solutions helping school principals and district leaders 
to prevent dropout in real time. One of the virtues of these solutions is to provide feedback 
early enough to prevent dropout. Early warning s ystems typically take the form of 
dashboards that help visualise different types of students at risk of dropping out and 
(hopefully) providing them with appropriate interventions.  
In less affluent countries, such as India, dropping out is also a problem an d experimentation 
with early warning systems and interventions have also been developed and evaluated. 
Some of them are based on technology although the underlying data can be quite different 
from those used in the United States.1  
Early warning systems ar e not yet a very mature technology, in spite of the promises they 
hold. Research on the relevant indicators to predict dropout is ongoing, as is research about 
possible interventions. While they hold tremendous promise, they embody the current 
limits of AI  and the imperative to ensure it provides trustworthy and useful advice. Here 
the drawbacks come less from hurtful behaviours rather than from the missed opportunities 
presented by AI systems that do not identify accurately students who could have been 
helped. 
2.2.2.  Assessing new skills sets thanks to AI  
Standardised assessments are a key feature of many education systems that can generate a 
lot of anxiety and drive teaching and learning practices within education systems. 
Increasingly, employers and policy maker s feel that assessment should go beyond 
knowledge content and reasoning to include complex skills such as complex problem 
solving, collaboration, and social and emotional skills – which underpin the transformation 
of the world of work and of economies and societies that is recognised by the G20 AI 
Principles.  
AI is opening new avenues in this direction. Embedded assessment, for example, creates 
the possibility for moment -to-moment assessments. In digital learning environments, AI 
systems can determine if st udents have mastered a specific subject. Because they store 
information about the student, they are also able to give formative and elaborated feedback.  
AI solutions also try to assess how people think, respond to a learning situation and adapt 
to the stu dents’ needs and skills. Part of it can be done through speech recognition and 
language analysis, as well as through behavioural patterns while engaging with the task.  
Game -based assessment and simulations also offer new ways to assess complex skills. 
They  can for example incorporate assessment items into a game environment, allowing 
students to show their learning achievement in a playful and engaging environment. 
Game -based assessment can be of great value in formative assessment, adapting to the 
competen ces of an individual student, but is also applied in summative assessment. 
Game -based assessment typically use augmented and virtual reality as well as the adaptive 
power of AI. Simulations have been effectively used in science, technology, engineering 
and mathematics (STEM) education and in assessments in those fields, for example in 
                                                             
1 See for example the Quest Alliance school dropout prevention pilot program, www.questalliance.net