EDU/WKP(2020)6   15 
TRUSTWORTHY ARTIFICI AL INTELLIGENCE (AI)  IN EDUCATION: PROMI SES AND CHALLENGES  
Unclassified  Countries may deal with questions of trust in different ways. Promoting social interaction 
and mutual trust is one of the pillars in China’s AI strategy.2 According to the EU guidelines 
for trustworthy AI,3 AI should be transparent , that is traceable (documentation and 
identification of decision -making) and  explainable (of both technical processes and related 
human decisions). Humans should have a right to be informed that they are interacting with 
an AI system, and capabilities and  limitations should be communicated to AI practitioners 
or end -users. The United States ’ strategy on AI also confirms that further research on AI 
should lead to more secure, robust, and safe AI systems that are reliable and trustworthy.4 
All these strategi es have aspects that closely mirror the G20 AI Principles.  
4.2. Dealing with privacy and security  
Societies and individuals can benefit  from AI innovations . They  can have a positive impact 
on education and learning outcomes, and prepare students for a digital f uture. But two other 
important policy issues relate to data protection and security, given that many students are 
minors, and to possible biases embedded in AI algorithms or in the data that feed them.  
Massive data collection typically  lead to concerns abo ut privacy and data security. While 
the use of personal data enhances the effectiveness of AI systems  in education , the 
collection and storage of data create new risks for privacy  of students. Beyond the “Big 
Brother” fears that are common to all sectors o f society, additional concerns related to 
privacy and AI in education usually are at least twofold. Families are concerned that 
education institutions or even employers may use “old” data to make decisions, which 
raises the question of how long and which d ata could be stored and retrieved to make some 
decisions. A second question relates to the possible use of the data for commercial purposes 
in a sphere where commercial interests are often excluded.  
In many ways, those concerns relate to the “human -centred ” nature of trustworthy AI, and 
the extent to which in a world where AI becomes more prominent, some habits and rights 
of humans can be preserved – for example the ability not to be constantly observed, not to 
risk to have one’s private information publicl y exposed, the ability not to be judged based 
on past or irrelevant (but now available) information, etc.  
Countries have specific ways of dealing with privacy and security issues , which typically 
apply to education . In the European Union, the General Data Protection Regulation 
(GDPR) sets a relatively strict framework for the use of personal data. The use of data – 
including sharing and storage – is allowed only according to specific criteria. Transparency, 
data and storage limitation, and accountability ar e amongst the most important principles 
of the GDPR. In the United States, the US Family Educational and Privacy Rights Act sets 
out a specific framework for the use of personal data in the case of education. The Chinese 
Governance Principles for Responsib le AI state that AI development should respect and 
protect personal privacy and fully protect the individual’s right to know and right to choose. 
                                                             
2 ‘Full translation: China’s ‘New Generation Artificial Intelligence Development Plan’ (2017)’, 
https://www.newamerica.org/cybersecurity -initiative/digichina/b log/full -translation -chinas -new-generation -artificial -
intelligence -development -plan-2017/  (visited 2020, Jan. 17).  
3 ‘Ethics Guidelines for Trustworthy AI’, https://ec.europa.eu/futurium/en/ai -alliance -consultation/guidelines#Top  (visited 2020, 
Jan. 17).  
4 ‘Artifical Intelligence for the American People’, https://www.whitehouse.gov/ai/ai -american -values/  (visited 2020, Jan. 17).