16  EDU/WKP(2020)6  
TRUSTWORTHY ARTIFICI AL INTELLIGENCE (AI)  IN EDUCATION: PROMI SES AND CHALLENGES  
Unclassified  AI systems should also continuously improve transparency, explainability, reliability, and 
controllability, an d close attention should be paid to the safety and security of AI systems.5 
5. Conclusions  
AI holds a promise to improve educational processes and outcomes in the classroom and 
at the system level and help achieve SDG 4. Currently, the deployment of AI in education 
remains limited at the system level. It is still mainly embodied in applications and solutions 
for individuals rather than for schools or governments. However, the EdTech industry 
keeps growing, and massive investments are being made in G20 count ries. There is no 
doubt that AI will become pervasive in education and that education policy makers and 
governments will face the challenges of operationalising the G20 AI Principles in the 
education sector.  
In addition to implementing the Principles for r esponsible stewardship of trustworthy AI in 
education, several policy considerations outlined in the G20 AI Principles appear of 
particular relevance; notably, the role of long -term public investment, and encouragement 
of private investment in R&D, to spur  innovation in trustworthy AI, and creation of a policy 
environment that supports an agile transition from R&D to deployment. There is still 
limited evidence about the effectiveness of many AI solutions in education, a sector where 
both public and private investment in research and development is typically low. We do 
not know whether many of the current promising AI applications are technically 
trustworthy, nor whether they may possibly lead to non -trustworthy behaviours by some 
actors in the education sect or. This is particularly important in a public sector where the 
costs of buying technology should be matched by tangible benefits. In addition, education 
systems rarely have establishments that allow for experimentation and the smooth 
transition from the r esearch and development to the implementation phase. But new forms 
of innovative school networks could be developed as the traditional ways of assessing the 
effectiveness of educational interventions (e.g. randomised control trials) may be too slow 
in a ra pidly evolving technological context.  
Another important policy consideration is how governments can work with stakeholders to 
shape AI in education to help prepare for the transformation of the world of work and 
society. As shown above, in a different doma in, it is possible to better prepare students and 
learners for the transformation of work and society, notably by developing their complex 
thinking skills such as creativity or critical thinking. Some initiatives have shown that it is 
possible to work with  stakeholders to achieve those goals, but also that change will not 
happen by itself.  
Finally, a particularly challenging aspect of the G20 AI Principles lies in considering the 
“open sharing” of data with companies, which is particularly difficult in the education 
sector – although it happens increasingly in a controlled way in many countries. New 
solutions will have to be invented, perhaps inspired from developments in other public 
sectors.  
  
                                                             
5 ‘Full translation: China’s ‘New Generation Artificial Intelligence Development Plan’ (2017)’, 
https://www .newamerica.org/cybersecurity -initiative/digichina/blog/full -translation -chinas -new-generation -artificial -
intelligence -development -plan-2017/  (visited 2020, Jan. 17).