EDU/WKP(2020)6   11 
TRUSTWORTHY ARTIFICI AL INTELLIGENCE (AI)  IN EDUCATION: PROMI SES AND CHALLENGES  
Unclassified  medical assessments (surgical procedures). In medical education, those assessments have 
become common in universities.  
While promising to assess certain skills, AI -based asses sments face some resistance and 
raise new technical difficulties when used in a high stake context. The idea that tests could 
be different but still reliable and fair to assess people’s skills challenges many students’, 
parents’ and policy makers’ views ab out equity, showing that AI advances bring as many 
social and behavioural challenges to society as technical ones.  
3. Skills for the digital era  
The rapid adoption and diffusion of AI in the economy raises new challenges for 
governments and education stakehol ders: what knowledge and skills should formal 
education systems develop given the ongoing developments? Recent research estimates 
that 14% of existing jobs could disappear as a result of automation in the next fifteen to 
twenty years, and another 32% are l ikely to change radically. (OECD, 2019 [1]) This implies 
that the relative demand for skills will change, and so should the supply as well.  
At this point, AI seems to best humans when it comes to repetitive and predicti ve tasks, 
tasks that hinge on computational power, classifying huge amounts of data and inputs, and 
making decisions based on concrete rules. (Holmes, 2019 [5]) People need skills for cases 
where they trump the performance of ma chines, for example for making products and 
results usable for humans and communicating about them, and making decisions about 
abstract values. (Holmes, 2019 [5]) The OECD Skills Outlook  shows that having higher 
cognitive skills – literacy, numeracy or problem -solving skills in technology -rich 
environments, or a mix of these – significantly augments the probability that people will 
move from using the internet for information and communic ation to a diversified and 
complex use, taking other determinants into account (OECD, 2019 [6]) ( (Elliott, 2017 [7]). 
In the digital era, complex skills that are less easy to automa te become increasingly 
important. Creativity and critical thinking are becoming increasingly important in the 
labour market, and contribute to a better personal and civic life. (Vincent -Lancrin et  al., 
2019 [8]) The spe ed, volume and reach of information flows on the Internet emphasise the 
importance of cognitive skills. Critical thinking is of particular importance to meet some 
of those new demands, as students must be able to read complex texts in order to distinguish 
between credible and untrustworthy sources, and between fact and fiction. Creativity is also 
key to the development of new solutions that cannot be invented by computers yet, 
including solutions that are enhanced by AI and the use of robots. Besides the ec onomic 
argument that complex innovation skills are less easy to automate, they also contribute to 
human well -being and to the good functioning of democratic societies. This is also true for 
socio -emotional skills such as persistence, communication or colla boration.  
The G20 AI Principles acknowledge the evolving nature of the skills required to cope with 
the transformation of economies and societies, and recommend that governments work with 
stakeholders to not only empower people to use AI but also equip the m with the skills that 
will help workers to have a fair transition as AI is deployed. While it has to continue over 
the life cycle, this endeavour starts in education, in school, vocational education and tertiary 
education.  
Virtually all school curricula i n OECD countries officially promote the development of 
creativity, critical thinking and other innovation skills in school and in higher education. 
This is also becoming increasingly common in G20 countries, including China and India. 
Yet, teachers often f ind it unclear what they mean and entail in their daily teaching practice. 
The OECD worked with school networks in 11 countries to define and operationalise