8  EDU/WKP(2020)6  
TRUSTWORTHY ARTIFICI AL INTELLIGENCE (AI)  IN EDUCATION: PROMI SES AND CHALLENGES  
Unclassified  through an intensive use of data. Implementation began in 2012 in eight schools in Chicago, 
New York City and Washington DC focusing on lower -secondary school mathematics. 
Aiming at providing instruction that is continually resp onsive to learners’ abilities, the 
programme assesses students’ skill levels on a daily basis and uses algorithms to target 
content delivery and assign students to varying instructional modes. These include 
teacher -led instruction, student collaborative wo rk and educational software such as virtual 
adaptive tutoring. The Teach to One model relies on data from continuous formative 
assessment to identify individual learning gaps in maps describing progression in skills, for 
instance the understanding of mathe matical relationships between ratios and rational 
numbers. Every day, students access computer dashboards displaying their progress and 
presenting them with tasks to work on their skills gaps as well as links to a variety of 
educational materials. Since sk ill maps are non -linear, students are allowed to move at their 
own pace and design their own “playlists” of tasks and skills. The large amount of data 
generated in this process is fed back to an underlying information system. The iteration of 
the model inf orms a daily reconfiguration of personalised learning paths and the design of 
broader, two -week instruction cycles. The process also provides teachers with real -time 
information about class and student performance through dynamic dashboards, allowing 
them to target their support to students’ learning in a timely manner.  
Other applications of AI are based on the same principle, be it in school or out of school. 
One of China’s largest companies in out -of-school tutoring education is TAL Education 
Group (Beiji ng Century Good Future Education Technology Co., Ltd.) – a company also 
offering in -school services. Its AI lab has developed several types of solutions to help 
Chinese students prepare for their university entrance exams. The “Adaptive Test and 
Learning P lan” data mines its large set of assessment questions and provides students with 
real-time personal questions allowing to better understand their current knowledge level, 
and deciding which offline class suits them best. The system also uses those results to 
design customised study plans and push relevant materials to parents.  
In India, a recent success in education technology is BYJU -The Learning App . In 2015, it 
released a math and science tutor for students in grades 6 to 12, then followed with one for 
grades 4 and 5 that also combines instruction with diagnosis and personalisation. In 
addition to providing video lessons, the application gauges whether the student has 
understood the concepts, and then takes the student either to the next level or back to basics. 
This is a typical example of personalised adaptive models for learning. BYJU has become 
the largest “unicorn” in EdTech in recent years, and reached a USD  4 billion valuation in 
2018 (with 1.3 million paying users).  
2.1.2.  Supporting students with special  needs with AI  
Providing all students with a more inclusive access to education has been a persisting 
challenge for most countries, even more so in less affluent countries. Inclusive education 
is one of the global objectives promoted in SDG Goal 4, with th e explicit objective to ensure 
equal access to all levels of education for everyone, including persons with disabilities. AI 
systems have already shown their effectiveness to help students with disabilities, e.g. visual 
or hearing impairments or impairment s in social skills (language and communication), to 
benefit from education. For example, wearables using AI can help visually impaired 
students to read books and recognise faces, and thus to learn and socialise within their 
communities. Specialised systems  have been designed to assist students with all kind of 
disabilities. Powered by AI, technologies such as augmented and virtual reality (AR/VR) 
and robotics support the learning and engagement of students with health impairments and 
mental health issues. W hile some technologies help to bypass some of the obstacles, like 
text-to-speech or speech -to-text applications, others are based on research and show