EDU/WKP(2020)6   7 
TRUSTWORTHY ARTIFICI AL INTELLIGENCE (AI)  IN EDUCATION: PROMI SES AND CHALLENGES  
Unclassified  Box 2.1. Artificial intelligence  
In 2019 the AI Group of Experts at t he OECD defined the AI system as a machine -based 
system that can, for a given set of human -defined objectives, make predictions, 
recommendations or decisions influencing real or virtual environments. AI systems are 
designed to operate with varying levels o f autonomy. AI system lifecycle phases consist 
of: 1) planning and design, data collection and processing, and model building and 
interpretation; 2) verification and validation; 3) deployment; and 4) operation and 
monitoring (OECD, 2019 [3]). 
One of the most promising AI techniques is machine learning (ML), which is described 
as a set of techniques to allow machines to learn in an automated manner through 
patterns and inferences rather than through explicit instructions from a human. Behind 
ML is a technique referred to as ‘neural networks’, which is accompanied by growing 
computational power and the availability of massive datasets, also known as big data. 
(OECD, 2019 [3]) In educatio n for example, language learning applications rely on ML.  
In education, artificial intelligence is embedded in many technological innovations that 
provide learning analytics, recommendations and diagnosis tools in various ways and for 
various purposes. In many cases, AI applications are still nascent and used in experimental 
and local contexts rather than at scale at the system level. There are, however, many 
examples of promising uses that foreshadow how AI might transform education in the next 
decades, both in the classroom and at the system levels, and address different stakeholders: 
students, teachers, administrators, parents, as well as policy makers. AI may particularly 
help achieve some of the global educational targets identified by the international 
community in SDG 4: “Ensure inclusive and equitable quali ty education and promote 
life-long learning opportunities for all ”. In line especially with the first G20 AI Principle, 
this section illustrates how, in the education sector, AI could be used  “in pursuit of 
beneficial outcomes for people and the planet, su ch as augmenting human capabilities and 
enhancing creativity, advancing inclusion of underrepresented populations, reducing 
economic, social, gender and other inequalities, and protecting natural environments, thus 
invigorating inclusive growth, sustainabl e development and well -being. ” 
2.1. AI applications for instruction  
2.1.1.  Personalising learning with AI  
In terms of instruction, AI’s biggest promise lies in the personalisation of learning and 
learning materials. Personalised learning is an educational approach a imed at customising 
learning based on students’ individual needs and strengths. AI applications can identify 
pedagogical materials and approaches adapted to the level of individual students, and make 
predictions, recommendations and decisions about the nex t steps of the learning process 
based on data from individual students. AI systems assist learners to master the subject at 
their own pace and provide teachers with suggestions on how to help them. This is as 
important to support learning in G20 countries as in the global context. Interventions such 
as “Teach at the right level” are addressing this issue without technology, but the possibility 
to personalise learning content thanks to AI opens new initiatives to tackle this problem 
and improve learning outc omes in literacy and numeracy.  
While those AI solutions are still relatively rare, they have been used for years by some 
educational establishments. In the United States, New Classrooms has for example 
developed the Teach to One math programme to personali se learning and instruction