EDU/WKP(2020)6   9 
TRUSTWORTHY ARTIFICI AL INTELLIGENCE (AI)  IN EDUCATION: PROMI SES AND CHALLENGES  
Unclassified  promising results. For example, students with autism can explore and improve social skills 
through intera cting and collaborating with virtual characters and digital objects in a 
classroom.  
Since 2016, students at Beijing Union University have been provided with an intelligent 
speech recognition system that simultaneously converts teacher’s spoken language int o text 
subtitles on a large screen. In the classroom, students with disabilities can follow the 
teaching through a multi -channel and multi -dimensional information input combining sign 
language, voice port, spoken language subtitle and text handout.  
In many  countries, diagnosis tools to detect special needs such as dyslexia, dyscalculia, 
spelling difficulties or Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) are now based on 
technological devices using AI techniques (Drigas and Ioannidou, 2013 [4]). 
Those applications are just a few examples of how AI could help make education more 
inclusive and accessible in a multiplicity of contexts, regardless of peoples’ disabilities or 
vulnerabilities.  
2.1.3.  Some other ap plications  
Other applications of AI using its ability to detect patterns to provide students, teachers or 
parents with individualised suggestions have been developed for:  
 Online and blended learning: chatbots powered by AI agents provide students and 
teach ers with analytics on their learning.  
 Classroom dynamics: different types of sensors and cameras analyse the classroom 
dynamics and student engagement to provide teachers with real time or post hoc 
feedback and suggestions.  
 Foreign language learning: AI features such as speech recognition and analysis, 
pronunciation correction, help supplement teachers in the teaching of foreign 
languages.  
All those application hold promises to improve the quality of education globally and 
improve the support and feedback  offered to teachers, students and lifelong learners. They 
can be used in a multiplicity of contexts and by a variety of learners.  
2.2. AI applications for system and school management  
The algorithmic power of AI is also used to create predictive and diagnosis  models to 
support decisions and generate feedback at the establishment (school, university, etc.) or 
education system level (district, region, country, etc.). AI is for example leading the way 
to increase completion of quality primary and secondary educat ion, or transform tools such 
as standardised assessments, allowing to broaden the scope of the skills that can be assessed 
and increase the relevance of assessments to the skills that will become more important in 
a world shaped by digital technologies.  
2.2.1.  Reducing dropout with the help of AI  
School dropout is a major educational policy issue across the globe – although countries 
with different levels of affluence may focus on different ages of dropout. In low income 
countries, 60% of upper secondary school ag e children were out of school in 2015. In 2018, 
completion rates for primary, lower secondary and upper secondary education were 68, 44 
and 21%, respectively, far from the objective of universal completion by 2030. Educators 
and policy makers are concerned  with finding the right indicators to predict dropout and