EDU/WKP(2020)6   5 
TRUSTWORTHY ARTIFICI AL INTELLIGENCE (AI)  IN EDUCATION: PROMI SES AND CHALLENGES  
Unclassified  Foreword  
In 2019 in Osaka, Japan, G20 Leaders welcomed the G20 Artificial Intelligence (AI) 
Principles, committing to a human -centred approach to AI in order to foster public trust 
and confidence in AI technologies and fully realise their potential. As elaborated i n the 
2019 G20 Ministerial Statement on Trade and Digital Economy, the G20 AI Principles for 
responsible stewardship of trustworthy AI put a spotlight on inclusive growth, sustainable 
development and well -being; human -centred values and fairness; transpare ncy and 
explainability; robustness, security and safety; and accountability. The Principles stem 
from the recognition that while AI technologies have the potential to help advance the 
sustainable development goals (SDGs) and realise a sustainable and inclu sive society, they 
also may present societal challenges, including labour market transitions, privacy, security, 
ethical issues, new digital divides and the need for AI capacity building.  
Following the commitment of G20 Leaders, and to strengthen the G20’ s path setting role 
in promoting the responsible development and use of AI, the 2020 Saudi Arabian G20 
Presidency has proposed to establish a G20 AI Dialogue. This Dialogue, to take place under 
the G20 Digital Economy Task Force (DETF), has the broad aims to keep global policy 
making on AI up to speed with technological developments, to support sharing of 
experiences and policy practices amongst G20 members, and to inform the G20’s ongoing 
implementation of the G20 AI Principles. It complements the Saudi Pr esidency’s parallel 
efforts in 2020 to develop a G20 Action Plan on implementation of the G20 AI Principles.  
In 2020, the G20 AI Dialogue focused on trustworthy AI in education, healthcare and 
public services (e -government). Against the backdrop of the G20  AI Principles, it aims to 
discuss how AI applications at the sector level uphold responsible stewardship of 
trustworthy AI and the challenges that arise as these sectors make increasing use of this 
technology.  
This working paper was developed as a backgr ound paper to support the first G20 AI 
Dialogue discussion in 2020, on “Trustworthy AI in Education”. It aims to provide with a 
selected array of AI use cases in education and a glimpse into the opportunities and 
challenges raised by this technology, with a view to stimulating debate and providing 
sector -level insights into how the G20 AI Principles can be successfully implemented.  
Sarah Box, Senior Counsellor at the OECD Directorate for Science, Technology and 
Innovation, is gratefully acknowledged for her  comments and suggestions on the paper.