14  EDU/WKP(2020)6  
TRUSTWORTHY ARTIFICI AL INTELLIGENCE (AI)  IN EDUCATION: PROMI SES AND CHALLENGES  
Unclassified  Accountability  
AI actors should be accountable for the proper functioning of AI systems and for the 
respect o f the above principles, based on their roles, the context, and consistent with the 
state of art.  
The G20 also took note of five Recommendations for national policies and international 
co-operation for trustworthy AI, including investing in AI research and development, 
fostering a digital ecosystem for AI, shaping an enabling environment for AI, building 
human capacity and preparing for labour market transformation, and international co -
operation for trustworthy AI.  
Source:  (G20, n.d. [9]), www.meti.go.jp/press/2019/06/20190610010/20190610010 -1.pdf , (accessed 25 
February 2020).  
4.1. Trust in AI  
As highlighted by the G20 AI Principles, r eaching the full potential of AI in education will 
require  that policy makers , educators and other stakeholders trust AI systems and their 
social use. This is particularly true in education as AI applications could be used to make 
decisions having a high s take for students: it could be used to support admission decisions, 
or to identify the type of support, including financial support, required by different types 
of learners, for instance.  
Trust in AI has multiple dimensions. In education, AI might be consi dered trustworthy 
when it does properly what it is supposed to do, but also when one can trust that human 
beings will use it in a fair and appropriate way. For example, early warning systems 
powered by AI will typically profile students and identify who is  at risk of dropping out. If 
their effectiveness in identifying the right students is too limited, even if they do no more 
harm than the lack of a system, they are not fully trustworthy and need improvement 
through further research and development. Another  possibility is that they are accurate but 
misused. Identifying who is at risk of dropping out matters only if a good (human) 
intervention to support the students and address that risk is implemented. Some 
interventions might aim to improve completion and contribute to social justice, fairness 
and non -discrimination, in line with the G20 Principles. However, other interventions 
might seek to exclude “at risk” students from school, for example because in some 
accountability regimes they may lead to sanctions  against the school, or a loss of reputation. 
It is thus not just AI that needs to be trustworthy, but also the interaction between humans 
and AI.  
In other cases, which are still rare in most education systems, AI could lead to automatic 
decisions, or sugg estions that will likely become decisions. For example, this could be the 
case for admissions to schools or universities based on certain algorithms. In some cases, 
this may increase fairness (for example, if the system was previously biased), but it may 
also have unintended consequences. As the new system will likely change the beneficiaries 
of the most in -demand schools, trust can only come with transparency and explainability 
of the criteria and algorithms. Expanding “openness” to algorithms is one solut ion for 
transparency, but for some AI techniques (such as deep learning), explainability remains 
difficult. Some countries (such as France) have renounced the use of some types of 
algorithms in public decision -making because of the difficulty in explaining  them to a lay 
audience.