6  EDU/WKP(2020)6  
TRUSTWORTHY ARTIFICI AL INTELLIGENCE (AI)  IN EDUCATION: PROMI SES AND CHALLENGES  
Unclassified  1. Introduction  
In the transition to a digital era, education in G20 countries faces two challenges: reaping 
the benefits of AI and related technological advances to improve educational processes in 
the classroom and at the system level; preparing students for new skillsets for increasingly 
automated economies and societies, including, for some of them, the skills to contribute to 
the further development of digitalisation.  
Digital technologies such as artificial intel ligence (AI), the Internet of Things (IoT) and 
other advances in information and computer technology (ICT) provide opportunities to 
improve the education process. The education technology industry, often simply referred 
to as ‘EdTech’, is growing, with mas sive investments in countries such as China, the United 
States and India. It develops a wide range of digital solutions for education institutions and 
stakeholders, from online platforms to robots and smart devices. The use of digital 
technologies increase s both the production and value of data, creating new opportunities to 
improve education and education policies, but also new challenges.  
Education systems have started to change their curriculum and skills requirements and put 
a stronger emphasis on skill s for innovation and citizenship in a digital era. The skills 
required to enter and progress in the labour market are undergoing profound changes, with 
more demand and emphasis on complex skills (OECD, 2019 [1]). 
To support the G20 AI Dialogue on “Trustworthy AI in education”, this paper briefly 
presents promising uses of AI in classrooms and in the education system, and some possible 
ways to strengthen the acquisition of more complex skills such as creativity, cri tical 
thinking, communication or collaboration. It then looks at the opportunities and challenges 
that AI may create for educators and policy makers, aiming to stimulate debate on how 
countries can harness AI in their education sectors in a trustworthy w ay and provide 
sector -level insights into the implementation of the G20 AI Principles.  
2. Artificial intelligence in education  
Digitalisation has been one of the main drivers of innovation in education practices in the 
classroom in the past decade (Vincent -Lancrin et  al., 2019 [2]). While most innovation in the 
past decade related to an increased use of computers and the internet in the classroom, the 
next wave will be based on AI, or on combinations of AI and other technol ogies. A short 
description of AI is given in Box 2.1.