Towards Accurate Model Selection in Deep Unsupervised Domain Adaptation
Kaichao You1 2Ximei Wang1 2Mingsheng Long1 2Michael I. Jordan3
Abstract
Deep unsupervised domain adaptation (Deep
UDA) methods successfully leverage rich labeled
data in a source domain to boost the performance
on related but unlabeled data in a target domain.
However, algorithm comparison is cumbersome
in Deep UDA due to the absence of accurate and
standardized model selection method, posing an
obstacle to further advances in the ﬁeld. Existing
model selection methods for Deep UDA are either
highly biased, restricted, unstable, or even contro-
versial (requiring labeled target data). To this end,
we propose Deep Embedded Validation (DEV ),
which embeds adapted feature representation into
the validation procedure to obtain unbiased esti-
mation of the target risk with bounded variance.
The variance is further reduced by the technique
of control variate. The efﬁcacy of the method has
been justiﬁed both theoretically and empirically.
1. Introduction
Deep learning enables machine recognition (He et al., 2016;
Long et al., 2015a) at the cost of large scale labeled data. It is
common to trade off the limited labeling budget against the
demand for more labeled data by data-hungry deep models.
Domain adaptation (Pan & Yang, 2010) serves as a promis-
ing solution to such a dilemma: it transfers the knowledge
from existing labeled data ( source domain ) to the unlabeled
data ( target domain ) to reduce the labeling work.
The formulations of domain adaptation mainly fall into two
categories, covariate shift andlabel shift , relating to causal
and anti-causal inference (Schlkopf et al., 2012). Although
some works focus on the label shift (Lipton et al., 2018;
Azizzadenesheli et al., 2019), covariate shift appears more
1School of Software2BNRist, Research Center for Big Data,
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China3University of California,
Berkeley, USA.
Kaichao You <youkaichao@gmail.com >. Correspondence to:
Mingsheng Long <mingsheng@tsinghua.edu.cn >.
Proceedings of the 36thInternational Conference on Machine
Learning , Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).natural in recognition tasks where deep models have shown
their superiority (Long et al., 2015b; Ganin et al., 2016).
While shallow learning methods have been extensively stud-
ied to tackle domain adaptation problems (Gong et al., 2012;
Fernando et al., 2013), deep models (Long et al., 2015b;
Ganin et al., 2016; Saito et al., 2018a) are attracting more
and more attention because of their impressive performance.
Distribution matching methods (Long et al., 2017; Shen
et al., 2018) align domains with well-deﬁned statistical dis-
tribution divergence between deep features, while adversar-
ial learning methods (Ganin et al., 2016; Tzeng et al., 2017)
learn domain-invariant deep representations with adversar-
ial training (Goodfellow et al., 2014). Other approaches to
deep domain adaptation include generative models (Sankara-
narayanan et al., 2018), similarity learning (Pinheiro, 2018),
to name a few.
The typical pipeline of machine learning is as follows: sev-
eral hyperparameter conﬁgurations are tried to get candidate
models, then model selection methods are employed to se-
lect the best conﬁguration, and the ﬁnal result in the test set
is reported. Such a diagram struggles in domain adaptation:
the performance in the test set ( Target Risk ) is what we care
about, but labels for the test set are inaccessible both in the
model training and selection stage. Labels in the training
set are abundant, but the performance in the training set
(Source Risk ) is inconsistent to the target risk because of the
domain shift, posing an obstacle to model selection in do-
main adaptation. Contemporarily there are several plausible
hyperparameter selection methods:
(1) Fixed Hyperparameters. Tzeng et al. (2017); Saito
et al. (2018a); Pinheiro (2018) stated that hyperparameters
are ﬁxed across various experiments on the same dataset.
However, it remains unclear how these ﬁxed hyperparame-
ters were selected. A reasonable hypothesis would be that
hyperparameters are selected in one task with target labeled
data and applied across other tasks, which requires more
than one task at hand. Such a requirement may be satis-
ﬁed in the research area where there are several tasks in
each dataset. Nonetheless, in practical domain adaptation
scenarios, we are often interested in one task, and Fixed
Hyperparameters strategy will not work.
(2) Source Risk. Ganin et al. (2016) selected hyperparam-
eters by taking the source risk into account. Although the