Towards Accurate Model Selection in Deep Unsupervised Domain Adaptation
Table 1. Comparisons among different model selection methods for Deep UDA.
MethodWorking Assumptions Technical Advantages
covariate shift w/o target labels unbiased controlled variance
Source Risk 7 3 7 7
Target Risk 3 7 3 3
IWCV (Sugiyama et al., 2007) 3 3 3 7
TrCV (Zhong et al., 2010) 3 7 3 7
DEV (Proposed) 3 3 3 3
source domain is related to the target domain and source
risk may reﬂect the target risk to some extent, such a method
comes without theoretical guarantees and is not convincing.
Speciﬁcally, source risk is a highly biased estimator of the
underlying target risk in the presence of a large domain gap.
(3) Target Risk. Hoffman et al. (2018) leaved a proportion
of target data to be held out for model selection and the rest
target data for transductive training. While it is an unbiased
estimator of ground truth target risk, it is controversial to em-
ploy labeled target data in unsupervised domain adaptation.
If some labeled target data are available, then instead of
using them for model selection, why not exploring them for
semi-supervised domain adaptation that often yields better
empirical results?
(4) Importance-Weighted Cross-Validation (IWCV)
(Sugiyama et al., 2007) .Initially designed as a validation
method for the covariate shift problem, IWCV was adopted
by (Long et al., 2018) to tune hyperparameters. While it has
a theoretical guarantee that it is unbiased, IWCV requires
known density ratio to approximate the target distribution. If
no density ratio is given, it ﬁts a multi-dimensional normal
distribution to estimate the density ratio. Furthermore, the
variance of IWCV is unbounded, explaining its instability.
A detailed comparison of these model selection methods
is presented in Table 1. Different domain adaptation algo-
rithms employ different model selection methods. It is thus
challenging to compare state of the art Deep UDA models
if they are selected by different validation methods. For
example, it is unfair to compare the performance selected
by Target Risk with that selected by Source Risk. For a fair
comparison, researchers may struggle to re-implement exist-
ing methods under the same validation scheme. Further, the
same work may exhibit very different results due to incon-
sistent model selection methods in a variety of publications.
Dilemma in VisDA Challenge. Synthetic-to-Real Visual
Domain Adaptation (VisDA) (Peng et al., 2018) is a large
scale domain adaptation challenge. It aims to facilitate the
development of unsupervised domain adaptation and pro-
vides the largest cross-domain object classiﬁcation dataset
to date. When it comes to model selection, however, the
organizers get trapped into the dilemma: the labels of testset cannot be published and can only live in the test server;
the labels of training set are given, but presented with the
considerable domain gap, their effect for model selection is
limited. As a compromise, the organizers released a fully
labeled validation set which is different from both the source
domain and target domain, only used for model selection.
To combat the above dilemma in Deep UDA, we propose
Deep Embedded Validation (DEV ), a new model selection
method tailored to Deep UDA. It embeds adapted feature
representation in the validation procedure to yield unbiased
estimation of the target risk with bounded variance. Control
variate method is exploited to further reduce the variance of
the estimation. Theoretical analysis shows the advantage of
DEV. Furthermore, several empirical experiments show the
performance of models selected by DEV approaches that of
Target Risk, even though no target labeled data are required.
2. Related Work
In this section, we review the model selection methods in
both supervised learning and domain adaptation.
2.1. Model Selection in Single Domain
Machine learning algorithms aim to learn knowledge from
data. While learning is carried out using the training set , our
interest mainly focuses on the performance of the algorithm
on unseen data, which gives rise to the usage of the test set .
Test data is held out in the training stage. It is tested only
once. Hyperparameters of machine learning algorithms are
selected on another part of data dubbed as the validation
set.
Hold-out . If abundant data is given, we can just split the
data into three parts. The training set is only for learning, the
validation set is only for hyperparameter tuning, and the test
setis for the ﬁnal evaluation. We call such a method hold-
out because the validation set is not involved in training.
In hold-out validation, each candidate model will only be
evaluated once.
k-fold Cross-Validation . In the case of limited data, how-
ever, one would strive to involve as much data in training as