Table 26: Example input and output pairs for CSQA with chain-of-thought (commonsense reasoning).
Q:What are candles good for eliminating? Answer Choices: (A) shelf (B) board (C) church (D) table
(E) dark
A:Let’s think step by step. Candles are commonly used to provide light, so (E) dark is a good answer
choice. Therefore, among A through E, the answer is (E) dark.
Q:How does going jogging generally affect one’s self esteem? Answer Choices: (A) feel better (B)
feel pride (C) sweating (D) ocean (E) arthritis
A:Let’s think step by step. A: (A) feel better, (B) feel pride. Therefore, among A through E, the
answer is A: (A) feel better, (B) feel pride.
Q:James know that committing murder was wrong, but he thought that he could get away with it. He
was really troubled and fearful because of what? Answer Choices: (A) happiness (B) problems (C)
prosecution (D) distress (E) misery
A:Let’s think step by step. James committed murder and was aware that it was wrong. He thought he
could get away with it, but was troubled and fearful. Based on this information, the answer would be
(C) prosecution. Therefore, among A through E, the answer is (C) prosecution.
Q:How can someone die from eating hamburger? Answer Choices: (A) gas (B) getting full (C) mad
cow disease (D) death (E) feel full
A:Let’s think step by step. (C) mad cow disease. Therefore, among A through E, the answer is (C)
mad cow disease. Mad cow disease, also known as bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE), is a
rare but serious condition that can be transmitted to humans who eat contaminated beef. In severe
cases, it can cause a variant of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, which can be fatal.
Q:If there is a pond with trees around it, where it it likely located? Answer Choices: (A) ground (B)
bathroom (C) forest (D) countryside (E) rural area
A:Let’s think step by step. (D) countryside or (E) rural area. Therefore, among A through E, the
answer is (D) countryside or (E) rural area.
Q:What would you do if you have curiosity but are blind and paralyzed? Answer Choices: (A) hear
news (B) analyse (C) go somewhere (D) examine thing (E) see favorite show
A:Let’s think step by step. Option A: Hear news - this is a good choice as it would allow you to stay
informed and engaged with current events. Option B: Analyze - This could also be a good choice as
it would allow you to engage your mind and think critically. Option C: Go somewhere - This may
not be a feasible option as you are paralyzed. Option D: Examine things - This may not be a feasible
option as you are blind. Option E: See favorite show - This may not be a feasible option as you are
blind. Considering the limitations you have, options A and B may be the most feasible for you to
satisfy your curiosity. Therefore, among A through E, the answer is A and B: Hear news and Analyze.
Q:You should watch out for snakes if floating down what African body of water? Answer Choices:
(A) wet grass (B) western texas (C) high grass (D) amazon river (E) tree
A:Let’s think step by step. The answer is (D) the Nile River. Therefore, among A through E, the
answer is (E) tree, as this is the only one that is not a body of water.1365