Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 1339–1384
December 6-10, 2023 ©2023 Association for Computational Linguistics
Is ChatGPT a General-Purpose Natural Language Processing Task Solver?
Chengwei Qin†∗, Aston Zhang, Zhuosheng Zhang♣, Jiaao Chen♠,
Michihiro Yasunaga♦, Diyi Yang♦
†Nanyang Technological University,♣Shanghai Jiao Tong University
♠Georgia Institute of Technology,♦Stanford University
Abstract
Spurred by advancements in scale, large lan-
guage models (LLMs) have demonstrated the
ability to perform a variety of natural language
processing (NLP) tasks zero-shot—i.e., with-
out adaptation on downstream data. Recently,
the debut of ChatGPT1has drawn a great deal
of attention from the natural language process-
ing (NLP) community due to the fact that it
can generate high-quality responses to human
input and self-correct previous mistakes based
on subsequent conversations. However, it is not
yet known whether ChatGPT can serve as a gen-
eralist model that can perform many NLP tasks
zero-shot. In this work, we empirically analyze
the zero-shot learning ability of ChatGPT by
evaluating it on 20 popular NLP datasets cov-
ering 7 representative task categories. With ex-
tensive empirical studies, we demonstrate both
the effectiveness and limitations of the current
version of ChatGPT. We find that ChatGPT per-
forms well on many tasks favoring reasoning
capabilities ( e.g., arithmetic reasoning) while
it still faces challenges when solving specific
tasks such as sequence tagging. We addition-
ally provide in-depth analysis through qualita-
tive case studies.
1 Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) have been shown
to be able to solve a variety of natural language
processing (NLP) tasks zero shot—i.e., without re-
lying on any training data for a given downstream
task—by conditioning the model on appropriate
prompts (Brown et al., 2020; Chowdhery et al.,
2022a). The ability to perform new tasks based
on instructions can be seen as an important step
towards artificial general intelligence (Goertzel,
2014). Despite achieving reasonable performance
∗Correspondence to Chengwei Qin <cheng-
wei003@e.ntu.edu.sg> and Aston Zhang
<az@astonzhang.com>
1https://chat.openai.com/in some cases, current LLMs are still prone to var-
ious mistakes in zero-shot learning. In addition,
the format of the prompt can have a substantial
impact—for example, simply adding “ Let’s think
step by step ” (Kojima et al., 2022) has been shown
to significantly improve the performance of In-
structGPT (Ouyang et al., 2022) on reasoning tasks.
These limitations illustrate that current LLMs are
not truly general-purpose language systems.
Recently, the ChatGPT LLM released by Ope-
nAI has attracted a great deal of attention from the
NLP community. ChatGPT was created by train-
ing a GPT-3.5 series model through reinforcement
learning from human feedback (RLHF) (Christiano
et al., 2017) (similarly to InstructGPT). RLHF
mainly includes three steps: training a language
model with supervised learning, collecting compar-
ison data based on human preferences and training
a reward model, and optimizing the language model
against the reward model using reinforcement learn-
ing (Ouyang et al., 2022). Through RLHF training,
ChatGPT has been observed to have impressive ca-
pabilities in various aspects, including generating
high-quality responses to human input, rejecting
inappropriate questions, and self-correcting previ-
ous errors based on subsequent conversations (Guo
et al., 2023).
While ChatGPT shows strong dialogic capabili-
ties, it still remains unclear to the NLP community
whether ChatGPT attains better zero-shot general-
ization compared with existing LLMs. To fill in
this research gap, we systematically study the zero-
shot learning capability of ChatGPT by evaluating
it on a large collection of NLP datasets covering
7 representative task categories, including reason-
ing2, natural language inference, question answer-
ing (reading comprehension), dialogue, summa-
rization, named entity recognition, and sentiment
2Reasoning abilities can be assessed by means of linguistic
tasks (Liang et al., 2022), such as with prompt templates and
chains of thought in the text format.1339