Table 42: Example input and output pairs for MuTual (dialogue).
Q:f : why all the candles ? is the electricity out or something ? m : no , i just thought it would make
the place smell nice . f : it does smell nice , but it ’s still awfully dark . Which choice is correct ?
Answer Choices: (A) m : yes . the candles smell terrible . (B) m : yes . the candles are not bright
enough and they smells bad . (C) m : yes . the room is still dark even the candles were lit . (D) m :
yes . the candles are better than electricity because they are very bright .
A:Among A through D, the answer is C: m : yes . the room is still dark even the candles were lit .
Q:m : is it ok if i pay for this book by visa ? i have n’t got much cash on me . f : we ca n’t really take
cards for amounts under 5 pounds . that one ’s only 3.99 pounds , is n’t it ? Which choice is correct ?
Answer Choices: (A) m : yes . why do you have to use a credit card ? (B) m : yes . you need to pay
by cash . (C) m : yes . you pay 3.99 pounds by check ? (D) m : yes . you need to pay for this t-shirt
by cash .
A:Among A through D, the answer is (B) m : yes . you need to pay by cash .
Q:m : what color should we paint the walls of the babies room , red ? f : i do n’t like the color red .
what about blue or yellow ? m : i do n’t like yellow very much . i ’m sorry , but the first one you
mentioned sounds fine . Which choice is correct ? Answer Choices: (A) f : okay , then we will pick
blue . (B) f : as your wish , we will choose your favorite color yellow . (C) f : same as you , i prefer
red . (D) f : blue for the ceiling ? do n’t be ridiculous .
A:Among A through D, the answer is A: f : okay, then we will pick blue.
Q:f : dad , can i go out tonight ? m : no , i ’m sorry . you ca n’t . f : can i ask nancy for dinner ? m
: ok , but you ca n’t let your brother alone . Which choice is correct ? Answer Choices: (A) f : ok.
then i will ask nancy for dinner tonight . (B) f : i will stay at home alone because i do n’t want ask
nancy for dinner . (C) f : ok. so i can ask nancy for dinner tonight if i do n’t have to have my brother
companied . (D) f : i have to stay home with me brother because i will not ask nancy to have dinner .
A:Among A through D, the answer is (C) f : ok. so i can ask nancy for dinner tonight if i do n’t have
to have my brother companied .
Q:f : i ’m very disappointed at the new house . i expected it to be much better . m : you ca n’t say
that , rose . i think it ’s much better than mine . Which choice is correct ? Answer Choices: (A) f :
why do you think my house is astonishing but still not better than yours ? (B) f : why do you think
my house is much better than yours ? you are so satisfying with my house . (C) f : why do you think
my house is disappointing ? (D) f : why do you think your house is much better than mine ? you are
so satisfying with your house .
A:Among A through D, the answer is C) f : why do you think my house is disappointing?
Q:f : you mistook the salt for sugar ? i told you the salt was in the black container and the sugar was
in the white one . m : yes , that was so silly of me . i forgot that you told me and i could n’t tell the
difference at the time . this coffee is terrible now . Which choice is correct ? Answer Choices: (A) f :
i ’m sorry . i gave you the wrong information . (B) f : you put the sugar in the black container . my
god . (C) f : you added salt to your coffee . oh , no . (D) f : you added salt to you coffee . no ! you
added salt to mine ?
A:Among A through D, the answer is (D) f: you added salt to you coffee. no! you added salt to
mine?1381