Table 43: Example input and output pairs for SAMSum (summarization).
Eric: MACHINE! Rob: That’s so gr8! Eric: I know! And shows how Americans see Russian ;) Rob:
And it’s really funny! Eric: I know! I especially like the train part! Rob: Hahaha! No one talks to the
machine like that! Eric: Is this his only stand-up? Rob: Idk. I’ll check. Eric: Sure. Rob: Turns out
no! There are some of his stand-ups on youtube. Eric: Gr8! I’ll watch them now! Rob: Me too! Eric:
MACHINE! Rob: MACHINE! Eric: TTYL? Rob: Sure :)
TL;DR: Eric and Rob are discussing a stand-up comedy routine involving a machine, and they find
it funny. They plan to watch more of the comedian’s stand-up on YouTube and say "TTYL" before
ending the conversation.
Beatrice: I am in town, shopping. They have nice scarfs in the shop next to the church. Do you want
one? Leo: No, thanks Beatrice: But you don’t have a scarf. Leo: Because I don’t need it. Beatrice:
Last winter you had a cold all the time. A scarf could help. Leo: I don’t like them. Beatrice: Actually,
I don’t care. You will get a scarf. Leo: How understanding of you! Beatrice: You were complaining
the whole winter that you’re going to die. I’ve had enough. Leo: Eh.
TL;DR: Leo is shopping in town with Beatrice and a friend. The friend suggests buying a scarf, but
Leo does not want one because he does not like them. Beatrice insists on buying him one despite his
reluctance, citing that he was constantly cold last winter and complained about it.
Jeff: Should we go to the village party? Lia: I’m too tired after hiking Mico: I’d like to go, there may
be some hot boys! Lia: I doubt Jim: like a real village boy? Jim: who doesn’t even speak English?
Mico: yes, the dummer, the better Jim: haha, stupid fucks good, they say Mico: I confirm! Lia: not
my cup of tea Mico: I’ll go there, who wants to join? Jeff: I’ll go as well Mico: wanna drive? Jeff: so
you could drink? Mico: would be nice, hahah Jeff: not excited, but ok Mico: thanks!
TL;DR: Mico and Jeff want to go to a village party, Lia is tired from hiking and not interested, Jim
makes a derogatory comment about the village people and Mico agrees. Mico wants to drink at the
party and asks Jeff to drive.
Lisa: Hello Peter. What have you been doing off late? Peter: Bit busy with work. Lisa: Too much of
work, huh? Peter: Not really, I’ve been working out Lisa: Ohh, trying to get in shape? Peter: Nah, I
don’t have much of weight to lose, just want to improve my health. Lisa: That’s a good thought. I
was also thinking of working out a bit. What do you do? Do you go to a Gym? Peter: Yes, I hold a
membership with the one near our office. Lisa: Which exercises do you do regularly? Peter: I do
weights and run on the treadmill. Lisa: Besides exercises, I think I need to eat better to help me keep
in shape. Peter: Another major requirement for good health is sleep. On an average one requires at
least 7-8 hours of sleep. Lisa: There are a lot of things we can do to stay healthy. Peter: Yes. One
needs to maintain a regime to stay healthy for a long term.
TL;DR: Peter and Lisa are discussing their recent activities, with Peter mentioning that he has been
busy with work but also working out to improve his health. He holds a membership at a gym near their
office and regularly does weights and runs on the treadmill. Lisa also expresses interest in working
out and eating better to stay in shape. Peter also mentions that getting enough sleep is important for
overall health and that maintaining a regime is key to long-term health.1382