Table 29: Example input and output pairs for COPA (commonsense reasoning).
premise: The pair of students came under scrutiny by the teacher.
What is the cause?
choice1: The students both received excellent grades.
choice2: Their responses on the assignment were identical.
answer: Choice 2: Their responses on the assignment were identical.
premise: The boy threw a temper tantrum.
What is the cause?
choice1: His brother took his toys from him.
choice2: He shared his toys with his brother.
answer: choice1: His brother took his toys from him.
premise: The woman read the newspaper.
What is the effect?
choice1: She discovered the outcome of the election.
choice2: She casted a vote in the election.
answer: choice1: She discovered the outcome of the election.
premise: The woman was in a bad mood.
What is the effect?
choice1: She engaged in small talk with her friend.
choice2: She told her friend to leave her alone.
answer: choice2: She told her friend to leave her alone.
premise: The woman banished the children from her property.
What is the cause?
choice1: The children hit a ball into her yard.
choice2: The children trampled through her garden.
answer: It is not specified in the premise what the cause of the woman banishing the children from
her property is. The choices "The children hit a ball into her yard" and "The children trampled through
her garden" are possible causes, but without more information it is not possible to determine which, if
either, is correct.
premise: The woman retired.
What is the effect?
choice1: She received her pension.
choice2: She paid off her mortgage.
answer: The effect of the woman retiring is not specified in the premise, so it is not possible to
determine if either choice is correct. More information is needed to determine the specific effects of
her retirement.
premise: The computer was expensive to fix.
What is the effect?
choice1: I got it repaired.
choice2: I bought a new one.
answer: The effect of the computer being expensive to fix is either choice1: getting it repaired or
choice2: buying a new one.1368