Table 38: Example input and output pairs for Tracking Shuffled Objects with chain-of-thought (logical reasoning).
Q:Alice, Bob, and Claire are friends and avid readers who occasionally trade books. At the start of
the semester, they each buy one new book: Alice gets Moby Dick, Bob gets The Great Gatsby, and
Claire gets Lolita. As the semester proceeds, they start trading around the new books. First, Claire
and Bob swap books. Then, Alice and Claire swap books. Finally, Alice and Bob swap books. At the
end of the semester, Bob has
Which choice is true ? Answer Choices: (A) Moby Dick. (B) The Great Gatsby. (C) Lolita.
A:Let’s think step by step. At the start of the semester, Bob has (B) The Great Gatsby. After the
first trade, Claire and Bob swap books, so Bob now has (C) Lolita. After the second trade, Alice
and Claire swap books, so Bob now has (A) Moby Dick. After the final trade, Alice and Bob swap
books, so Bob now has (B) The Great Gatsby. Therefore, the correct answer is (B) The Great Gatsby.
Therefore, among A through C, the answer is (B) The Great Gatsby.
Q:Alice, Bob, and Claire are playing a game. At the start of the game, they are each holding a ball:
Alice has a green ball, Bob has a purple ball, and Claire has a blue ball. As the game progresses, pairs
of players trade balls. First, Bob and Alice swap balls. Then, Claire and Bob swap balls. Finally, Bob
and Alice swap balls. At the end of the game, Bob has the
Which choice is true ? Answer Choices: (A) green ball. (B) purple ball. (C) blue ball.
A:Let’s think step by step. At the start of the game, Bob has a purple ball. In the first trade, Bob and
Alice swap balls, so Bob now has a green ball. In the second trade, Claire and Bob swap balls, so Bob
now has a blue ball. In the final trade, Bob and Alice swap balls again, so Bob ends the game with
the green ball. Therefore, the correct answer is (A) green ball. Therefore, among A through C, the
answer is (A) green ball.
Q:Alice, Bob, and Claire are holding a white elephant gift exchange. At the start of the event, they
are each holding a present of a different color: Alice has a yellow present, Bob has a white present,
and Claire has a purple present. As the event progresses, pairs of people swap gifts. First, Alice and
Bob swap their gifts. Then, Bob and Claire swap their gifts. Finally, Bob and Alice swap their gifts.
At the end of the event, Bob has the
Which choice is true ? Answer Choices: (A) yellow present. (B) white present. (C) purple present.
A:Let’s think step by step. A: (A) yellow present. Therefore, among A through C, the answer is A)
yellow present.
Q:Alice, Bob, and Claire are friends and avid readers who occasionally trade books. At the start of
the semester, they each buy one new book: Alice gets Hound of the Baskervilles, Bob gets Catch-22,
and Claire gets The Pearl. As the semester proceeds, they start trading around the new books. First,
Claire and Bob swap books. Then, Bob and Alice swap books. Finally, Claire and Alice swap books.
At the end of the semester, Claire has
Which choice is true ? Answer Choices: (A) Hound of the Baskervilles. (B) Catch-22. (C) The Pearl.
A:Let’s think step by step. At the start of the semester, Claire has The Pearl. Then, Claire and Bob
swap books, so Claire now has Catch-22. Next, Bob and Alice swap books, so Bob now has Hound of
the Baskervilles and Claire still has Catch-22. Finally, Claire and Alice swap books, so Claire now
has Hound of the Baskervilles and Alice has Catch-22. Therefore, the correct answer is (A) Hound of
the Baskervilles. Therefore, among A through C, the answer is (A) Hound of the Baskervilles.1377