Table 37: Example input and output pairs for Tracking Shuffled Objects (logical reasoning).
Q:Alice, Bob, and Claire are friends and avid readers who occasionally trade books. At the start of
the semester, they each buy one new book: Alice gets Moby Dick, Bob gets The Great Gatsby, and
Claire gets Lolita. As the semester proceeds, they start trading around the new books. First, Claire
and Bob swap books. Then, Alice and Claire swap books. Finally, Alice and Bob swap books. At the
end of the semester, Bob has
Which choice is true ? Answer Choices: (A) Moby Dick. (B) The Great Gatsby. (C) Lolita.
A:Among A through C, the answer is (B) The Great Gatsby.
Q:Alice, Bob, and Claire are playing a game. At the start of the game, they are each holding a ball:
Alice has a green ball, Bob has a purple ball, and Claire has a blue ball. As the game progresses, pairs
of players trade balls. First, Bob and Alice swap balls. Then, Claire and Bob swap balls. Finally, Bob
and Alice swap balls. At the end of the game, Bob has the
Which choice is true ? Answer Choices: (A) green ball. (B) purple ball. (C) blue ball.
A:Among A through C, the answer is B) purple ball.
Q:Alice, Bob, and Claire are holding a white elephant gift exchange. At the start of the event, they
are each holding a present of a different color: Alice has a yellow present, Bob has a white present,
and Claire has a purple present. As the event progresses, pairs of people swap gifts. First, Alice and
Bob swap their gifts. Then, Bob and Claire swap their gifts. Finally, Bob and Alice swap their gifts.
At the end of the event, Bob has the
Which choice is true ? Answer Choices: (A) yellow present. (B) white present. (C) purple present.
A:Among A through C, the answer is (B) white present.
Q:Alice, Bob, and Claire are friends and avid readers who occasionally trade books. At the start
of the semester, they each buy one new book: Alice gets Catch-22, Bob gets Lolita, and Claire gets
Hound of the Baskervilles. As the semester proceeds, they start trading around the new books. First,
Bob and Alice swap books. Then, Bob and Claire swap books. Finally, Alice and Claire swap books.
At the end of the semester, Claire has
Which choice is true ? Answer Choices: (A) Catch-22. (B) Lolita. (C) Hound of the Baskervilles.
A:Among A through C, the answer is (C) Hound of the Baskervilles.
Q:Alice, Bob, and Claire are playing a game. At the start of the game, they are each holding a ball:
Alice has a purple ball, Bob has a yellow ball, and Claire has a orange ball. As the game progresses,
pairs of players trade balls. First, Claire and Bob swap balls. Then, Bob and Alice swap balls. Finally,
Claire and Bob swap balls. At the end of the game, Alice has the
Which choice is true ? Answer Choices: (A) purple ball. (B) yellow ball. (C) orange ball.
A:Among A through C, the answer is B) yellow ball.
Q:Alice, Bob, and Claire are friends and avid readers who occasionally trade books. At the start of
the semester, they each buy one new book: Alice gets Hound of the Baskervilles, Bob gets Catch-22,
and Claire gets The Pearl. As the semester proceeds, they start trading around the new books. First,
Claire and Bob swap books. Then, Bob and Alice swap books. Finally, Claire and Alice swap books.
At the end of the semester, Claire has
Which choice is true ? Answer Choices: (A) Hound of the Baskervilles. (B) Catch-22. (C) The Pearl.
A:Among A through C, the answer is (A) Hound of the Baskervilles.1376