18
the automation of vehicles and/or infrastructure, as detailed in
[34]: individual, collective, and shared.
First, individual transportation applies an isolated decision-
maker, with or without communication skills. It is analogous
to a Lagrangian description in ﬂuid mechanics (or trafﬁc
network science), separately considering each particle’s dy-
namics. Each vehicle takes its decision independently of the
others, but considers interaction [159] and courtesy [184].
Second, we identify the Eulerian description in ﬂuid me-
chanics with collective decisions. One globally considers par-
ticles’ interactions and behaviors within a given volume; a
platoon comprises numerous entities – individual vehicles –
but adopts a uniﬁed behavior: a swarm intelligence. Collective
systems require a strong knowledge of other vehicles’ states
when acting as auto-organized systems, and/or strong commu-
nication with other vehicles and/or infrastructure if acting as
self-organizing [185]. Many studies have modeled cooperative
platoon maneuvers using multi-agent event-based approach
[186], swarm intelligence [187], risk estimators [188], or fuzzy
logic [189]. Similarly, an intelligent infrastructure approach
includes a conductor of a group of vehicles, which acts as
either a manager or a controller. In case of managing, the
vehicles entering the area supervised by the intelligent infras-
tructure send their intention. The infrastructure then provides
a coordination scheduler to fulﬁll the desired actions of every
vehicle. In the second case, the intelligent infrastructure takes
full control of the monitoring. In the literature, one can
mainly ﬁnd intelligent highway managers with knowledge-
based inference engines [190], [191] and agents [183].
The last cooperative approach concerns the drivers’ shared
decision. Today, the ﬁrst four SAE automation levels in [10]
depict a shared cooperation between drivers and autonomous
vehicles, from driver assistance to partial, conditional, and
high automation. As long as the driver stays in the vehicle,
he/she approves the decisions and can take the control back at
any moment. To maintain decision continuity, human driver
experiences represent a useful base of knowledge for the
system. A fuzziﬁcation approach to mix this driver cognition
experience with the system’s decision is proposed in [192]. In
[150], the authors present to the driver a maneuver grid based
on a crash estimation with the Equivalent Energetic Speed
(EES), whereas [193] introduces game theory for cooperative
guidance. Although studies exist on integrating autonomous
vehicles and human drivers, the question of adapting the
autonomous vehicle behavior to the driver type is of interest
for the popularization of such vehicles [194].
D. Validation and Evaluation
In addition to the indicators depicted in Table II, the
evaluation of the algorithms must include a veriﬁcation of
behaviors, judgments, and responsibilities. Here, we discuss
the validation of transition stability with different planners,
the evaluation of motion planning methods on predeﬁned use
cases, the ethics dilemmas, and the topic of rules relaxation.
1) Transition Stability
The various cases encountered often require the use of
different combined motion planning algorithms. In this case,we need to know whether the resulting architecture is stable,
reliable, and robust, or whether it is necessary to add a high-
level supervisor to validate the coherence of decisions, actions,
and observations. In [195], the authors propose a behavior
paradigm analogous to the FSM decision to implement an
architecture able to switch from manual to autonomous driving
and between maneuver modes.
2) Evaluation
As stated in section IV, the validation of motion plan-
ning algorithms mostly relies on extensive simulation and
experimental testing results, where a human driver evaluates
the action according to a personal reference index, such as
safety, smoothness, or operation time [54]. There is a lack
of formal analysis and evaluation methods to hierarchically
classify algorithms’ performances. This will change thanks to
the open source scenario library developed by [196] to propose
a benchmark for motion planning algorithms, or with Key
Performance Indicators (KPIs) proposed by [197].
3) Ethics
As soon as robotic systems interact with human beings,
questions of ethics in autonomous decision-makers arise. Ref-
erence [198] proposes an ethical vehicle deployment strategy
in a hybrid rational and AI approach, especially for critical
safety situations. The authors in [199] show how to incorporate
ethics into decisions based on ethical frameworks, such as
deontology – as rules constraining the actions and navigation
of the system, consequentialism – as cost-based construction
for the objective function, or as morality to determine the
different costs of the system’s behaviors.
4) Algorithm Relaxation
The strict respect and relaxation of driving rules are key
points to ensure safety in any case for an autonomous vehicle.
Indeed, even hard constraints might become dangerous in
critical cases [13]. Reference [200] introduces an ontology
for trafﬁc rules in unusual situations with knowledge-based
inference engines to avoid blockage situations, and to preserve
safety with lane crossing or excess speed.
VI. C ONCLUSION
To conclude, our literature review revealed a huge amount
of algorithms for motion planning in robotics. The objective
of this paper was to identify the main methods of motion
planning for autonomous vehicles in the highway case. We do
not claim to have exhaustively gathered all algorithms used
for this application, but we hope to have shown the diversity
and potential of highway planning. Through this state-of-the-
art work, we also aspired to present readers with a different
proposal of decomposition methods than what they may have
found in previous reviews. In particular, we believe that the
radar chart illustration of differentiating attributes will allow
future users to identify and orient their work towards a solution
that will correctly answer their problem. Finally, the last
objective of this survey was to encourage readers’ reﬂections
on the practical implementation of these algorithms and, more
generally, their perspectives of highway motion planning and
autonomous driving.