4
Autonomous vehicles are also studied in platooning. This
conﬁguration decreases the distances between the vehicles and
thus increases the capacity of roads. The motion planning
strategy in platoons must be more robust than for individual
vehicles in the sense of smoother acceleration and turns to
guarantee the platoon’s stability. Platooning is not as interest-
ing from the perspective of motion planning as from that of
control. We therefore do not consider any speciﬁc studies on
platooning in this review. Please refer to [35] for more details.
The main differences between highway, except for platoon-
ing, and city driving consist in a further look-ahead time,
with a stronger focus towards the ahead direction of the
road, whereas city driving involves a closer range but in all
directions. The highway vehicle dynamics is also simpler with
lower turn-angle, no reverse, and less braking/acceleration, but
higher and more constant speed. Thus, even if there are less
hazards, the risk due to high speed is stronger. Moreover,
the higher distances imply poorer sensors capacities. Finally,
less trafﬁc insures more stable scenario. The algorithms which
consider all these speciﬁcities in real-time will be favored for
a practical application on highways.
D. Constraints on Highway Driving
Despite indicators such as high reliability, safety, and low
computation time needed for algorithmic speciﬁcations, we
also consider more speciﬁc highway planning constraints. On
the one hand, the environment’s safety constraints respect the
driving rules and avoid collision. These are called hard con-
straints as they are absolutely essential for autonomous driving
acceptance. On the other hand, the driver makes it necessary
to respect ride optimization constraints for the minimization of
time, distance, or energy consumption, and maximization of
comfort. These are called soft constraints and can be relaxed.
Other feasibility constraints rely on kinematic restrictions of
the vehicle, which are the nonholonomic dynamics, i.e. the
vehicle evolves in a three dimension space with only two
degrees of freedom, a smooth path, i.e. the trajectory should be
differentiable and its curvature continuous, and the dynamics
limitations of a vehicle. The choice of the vehicle’s model
to handle these constraints induces algorithmic complexity,
the more degrees of freedom are used, the more complex is
the model solver. For most highway planning developments,
there is no or very few (particle kinematics with longitu-
dinal and lateral position and velocity states) consideration
of the vehicle model, except for the explicit resolution of
the potential ﬁeld methods (see III-B3) and the numerical
optimization (see III-B5). This question of degrees of freedom
is a fundamental design parameter in motion planning and
control architecture, and should be addressed to guarantee a
safe and drivable motion [36] as well as consistency [37]. The
last dynamic constraint is the evolution of the ego vehicle in
time. To summarize, the authors in [27] identify the quality
requirements for the generated motion: “feasible, safe, optimal,
usable, adaptive, efﬁcient, progressive, and interactive.”
E. What Is at Stake in this Paper
Our interest in this classiﬁcation is to highlight the many
types of algorithms used in motion strategy for highwayautonomous driving without limiting ourselves to their math-
ematical complexity, but with a speciﬁc focus on their real-
time effectiveness. We do not pretend to rank the methods;
we prefer to classify them from a practical perspective, i.e.
we analyze how the algorithms work well, their advantages
and drawbacks, considering simulations or experiments. The
methods’ optimality is of secondary interest then, compared to
the feasibility of the motion. In the particular case of highway
driving, we must guarantee at least one motion to ensure
continuity. Following the ego lane and adapting its longitudinal
states to the front vehicle is, by nature, always feasible.
III. S TATE OF THE ART
The choice of the motion planning methods depends on the
formulation of the motion planning problem.
Firstly, the problem formulation strongly varies with
the inherited data (discrete/continuous, algebraic/analytic or
static/dynamic) for the scene representation. Thus, the sensory
technologies are of great importance to implement a motion
planning algorithm. Even if the uncertainties are more and
more considered in the motion planning scope (see V .A), too
few papers addressing motion planning tackle the issue of the
sensor’s architecture and technology. We invite the readers to
refer to [38] for a corresponding review.
Secondly, motion planning combines ﬁve unavoidable as-
pects, as seen in the previous section: (i) state estimation, (ii)
time evolution, (iii) actions planning, (iv) criteria optimization,
and (v) compliance with constraints. How these are handled
changes the outlook of the problem.
Furthermore, two approaches for reviewing motion planning
algorithms coexist: distinguishing and not distinguishing the
driving modes. For the ﬁrst, the driving modes and use cases
are separated. For example, in [39], the authors focus on the
speciﬁc actions of lane changing and merging maneuvers on
highways. In this review, we consider a situation only as a
speciﬁc set of criteria and constraints, not as a differentiating
element for the algorithms. In this way, all methods could
be applied to the different situations, with limitations to their
proper functioning. Yet, we noticed that the main functions of
motion strategy described in II-B involve discriminating speci-
ﬁcities among motion planning methods, e.g. the deformation
function requires a reactive online real-time method.
In this section, we ﬁrst explain our algorithm classiﬁcation,
and then review the most popular approaches from their
founding principles to their advancement for an application to
highway planning since the DARPA Urban Challenge 2007.
We do not pretend to make an exhaustive taxonomy as an
inﬁnite number of ways of treating motion planning exist.
A. Taxonomy Description
According to what we consider in section II, we propose
in this review to classify the algorithms in the families
summarized in Fig. 3. The term family refers to a set of
algorithms that rely on the same basic principle. They usually
return the same type of output, qualify with the same attributes,
and relate to the same mathematical domain. We propose a
classiﬁcation based on the following characteristics: