15
However, they present the advantages of providing an abstract
and universal representation and easy replanning. For example,
McKnight and Adams list 45 major driving tasks in [160],
[161], [162], [163], decomposed into 1700 elementary tasks;
see Fig. 12. References [139], [164] deﬁne the sequence of
operations to perform an overtaking maneuver; each action is
then validated under a set of numerical criteria to prompt the
next action. The authors in [83] propose a functional archi-
tecture of the driving strategy as a discrete set of behavioral
strategies for a speciﬁc trafﬁc situation.
Third, some learning approaches are inspired by interaction
models introduced in game theory . The idea for highway
planning is to consider the moving vehicles as players that
observe each other’s actions and consequently react with an
appropriate strategy. The main advantage of this method is that
it quickly obtains a trained driver model, starting with a merely
basic one. The main drawback is that it assumes that all the
players respect the rules, and it can therefore lead to unsafe
reactions in real-life applications. Moreover, one should make
sure to learn using various behaviors of the players to enrich
the knowledge. In [133], the models develop more complex
strategies as they are trained against the other behaviors. The
authors use POMDP to model the players’ knowledge and
Jaakola reinforcement learning in the training phase.
AI human-like methods are well suited to decision making
in highway scenarios, where drivers’ behaviors are more
predictable due to the basic rules of this environment. They
are also easy to understand and to share with the driver.
Moreover, the application of such algorithms is usually not
as complicated as modeling a driver, but still interesting
enough to involve in complex scenarios. With their simple
architecture and heterogeneous implementation, one notices
that no major framework is highlighted in the literature of
autonomous driving for AI human-like methods.
IV. C OMPARISON TABLE FOR HIGHWAY APPLICATIONS
The highway applicability of the previously described meth-
ods is summarized in Table II. We propose to quantify the
constraints’ assessment with a ‘– / / +’ scale. We assess
‘– –’ as being highly inappropriate, ‘–’ inappropriate, ‘ ’
intermediary, ‘+’ appropriate, and ‘++’ highly appropriate. The
references illustrate the use cases of the families to suggest
their situation adaptiveness (collision avoidance, car following,
lane change, merging, overtaking) and their implementation
in simulation or experimentation, speciﬁed with the square
brackets’ superscript and subscript respectively. To quote but
a few, simulators such as CARLA, PreScan, SCANeR studio,
TORCS are developed for autonomous driving.
Unlike the classiﬁcation in [25], we do not focus on the
usual points of comparison, such as completeness, optimality,
or time complexity, but on how the algorithms offer an
effective and efﬁciently implementable response to practical
applications. Therefore, one can interpret Table II as a guide
to choose the most appropriate family given the attributes of
the algorithm, and its intrinsic and extrinsic limits. Further-
more, one will notice that references often apply to differentfamilies. In that sense, Table II also helps to understand the
complementary methods for a systemic motion planner design.
Among the characteristics highlighted in this review, the
taxonomy criteria can be found in III-A: (i) the type of use of
set- and solve-algorithm, (ii) the predictive or reactive horizon ,
and (iii) the mathematical domain ; and the motion planning
functions in II-B (Fig. 2).
As intrinsic limits, we distinguish the performance, ease
of use, and data analysis. The performance ﬁrst gathers the
real-time implementation. In the case of highway motion
(>17m=s), with an error of a meter, the motion planning al-
gorithm should return a solution within the order of magnitude
of10msto be real-time. As the intrinsic cost of each algorithm
strongly relies on the hardware platform, we inform about
qualitative, but not quantitative computation. The other perfor-
mance requirements are derived from the analysis proposed in
[97]: robustness of the algorithm to ﬁnd a solution despite
the variation of the environment (merging, jam approach);
stability to keep the solution despite environmental changes;
adaptability to perform a solution in various conditions, e.g.
introducing new scenarios or criteria; and the feasibility of
converging to a solution in a ﬁnite time. The ease of use is
deﬁned by the ability to replan in real-time without changing
the structure of the algorithm. The last intrinsic limit relates to
the data analysis: the input type for the scene representation
(discrete, sampled, continuous) and the output type of the
algorithm (space, path, trajectory, maneuver, task), along with
the ability to deal with uncertain data.
The extrinsic limits show the algorithm’s dependency on
high-level sensors of the ego vehicle and/or the infrastructure.
This aspect is important to reﬂect the real applicability in a
near or further future. If the algorithm works well only with
precise information over a large time horizon, which does
not correspond to the current high-level sensors’ properties,
it will be highly inappropriate for sensors constraints . We
invite the readers to consider [38] as a reference for sensors’
properties. As stated before, the speciﬁcities of the driving
environment and vehicle kinematics must be considered. We
therefore consider whether the algorithm performs well in
complex environments (dense trafﬁc, various topologies) and
takes the constraints of the environment and the ego vehicle
kinematics into account.
V. F UTURE RESEARCH DIRECTIONS
This part spotlights some critical and forthcoming issues of
research for highway driving motion planning.
A. Data Management
Like a driver, the decision relies on a proper represen-
tation/perception/modeling of the environment and a good
control of the vehicle’s behavior, as discussed in [165]. Refer-
ence [166] details several perception challenges impacting the
motion planners, and [167] discusses conditions to improve
control algorithms for driving. In this review, we pay attention
to two questions: how much data is enough in terms of
uncertainties and trustworthiness? and how do we make a
decision with latency and unsynchronized data?