1
A Review of Motion Planning
for Highway Autonomous Driving
Laur `ene Claussmann, Marc Revilloud, Dominique Gruyer, and S ´ebastien Glaser
Abstract —Self-driving vehicles will soon be a reality, as main
automotive companies have announced that they will sell their
driving automation modes in the 2020s. This technology raises
relevant controversies, especially with recent deadly accidents.
Nevertheless, autonomous vehicles are still popular and attractive
thanks to the improvement they represent to people’s way of life
(safer and quicker transit, more accessible, comfortable, conve-
nient, efﬁcient, and environment friendly). This paper presents a
review of motion planning techniques over the last decade with
focus on highway planning. In the context of this article, motion
planning denotes path generation and decision making. Highway
situations limit the problem to high speed and small curvature
roads, with speciﬁc driver rules, under a constrained environment
framework. Lane change, obstacle avoidance, car following, and
merging are the situations addressed in this work. After a
brief introduction to the context of autonomous ground vehicles,
the detailed conditions for motion planning are described. The
main algorithms in motion planning, their features, and their
applications to highway driving are reviewed, along with current
and future challenges and open issues.
Index Terms —Advanced Driver Assistance Systems, Au-
tonomous driving, Decision making, Intelligent vehicles, Motion
planning, Path planning
I. I NTRODUCTION
SINCE the last decade, the development of autonomous
vehicles has spread worldwide among universities and the
automotive sector as one of the most promising advancements
in automotive engineering and research.
One of the ﬁrst contributions to driverless cars dates back
to the 1920s at the Houdina Radio Control Company, which
successfully proceeded with the demonstration of a car con-
trolled by radio signals sent by a trailing vehicle [1]. In the late
80s and 90s, research institutes and automotive manufacturers
partnership numerous autonomous driving projects ﬁnanced
in, such as the European EUREKA Prometheus program
[2] with the twin cars VaMP and VITA II [3], “No Hands
Across America” from Carnegie Mellon University’s Navlab
[4], ARGO from the University of Parma’s VisLab [5], and
the automated highway platooning Consortium (NAHSC) [6],
among others.
L. Claussmann is afﬁliated with the department of Autonomous Driving at
Institut VEDECOM and with IFSTTAR-LIVIC laboratory, 78000 Versailles,
France (e-mail: laurene.claussmann@vedecom.fr).
M. Revilloud is with the department of Autonomous Driving at Institut
VEDECOM, 78000 Versailles, France (e-mail: marc.revilloud@vedecom.fr).
D. Gruyer is with IFSTTAR-LIVIC laboratory, 78000 Versailles, France
(e-mail: dominique.gruyer@ifsttar.fr). https://orcid.org/0000-0003-4453-5093
S. Glaser was with IFSTTAR-LIVIC laboratory. He is now with CARRS-Q
at Queensland University of Technology, Brisbane city, QLD 4000, Australia
(e-mail: sebastien.glaser@qut.edu.au). https://orcid.org/0000-0003-0658-7765
Manuscript received [Month] dd, yyyy; revised [Month] dd, yyyy.Nowadays, many technological evolutions in partial au-
tonomous vehicles are already used in Advanced Driving
Assistance Systems (ADAS), and automakers now try to per-
sonalize ADAS to the driver’s style [7]. Concerning highway
planning, the main assistance technologies concern both the
longitudinal and lateral comfort and security with the Cruise
Control (CC), the Intelligent Speed Adaptation (ISA), the
Lane Keeping Assist (LKA), or the Lane Departure Warning
(LDW). While interacting with obstacles, collision avoidance
systems either warn the driver about an imminent collision,
e.g. the Lane Change Assist (LCA), or autonomously take
action, helping the driver stay safe, such as the Adaptive Cruise
Control (ACC) or the Automatic Emergency Braking (AEB).
After Nevada, USA, authorized driverless vehicles on public
roads in June 2011, other American states and countries
adopted laws to test autonomous vehicles in trafﬁc. In re-
sponse, the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe
(UNECE) made the use of ADAS in the Vienna Convention on
Road Trafﬁc [8] more ﬂexible. It allowed automated driving
systems, “provided that these technologies are in conformity
with the United Nations vehicle regulations or can be over-
ridden or switched off by the driver” [9]. With such an
evolution in the automotive ﬁeld, the Society of Automotive
Engineers (SAE) published a standard classiﬁcation for au-
tonomous vehicles with a 6-level system, from 0 (no control
but active safety systems) to 5 (no human intervention for
driving) [10]. Levels 4 and 5 have not been technically fulﬁlled
by automakers yet; however, since the Defense Advanced
Research Projects Agency (DARPA) organized autonomous
vehicle competitions in 2004, 2005, and 2007, and thanks to
new technologies, autonomous functions are evolving quickly
and treat more complex scenarios in real environments. The
11 ﬁnalist teams of the DARPA Urban Challenge 2007 [11]
succeeded in navigating through a city environment. The
University of Parma’s VisLab ran the VisLab Intercontinental
Autonomous Challenge (VIAC) in 2010, a 15 900 km trip
in 100 days from Parma, Italy to Shanghai, China [12]; and
ran the PROUD project [13] in 2013, a mixed trafﬁc driving
route open to public trafﬁc through Parma, Italy. In 2011, the
European projects HA VEit [14], ABV [15], and CityMobil
[16] successfully demonstrated highway and city driving. In
2012, highway driving in platooning was achieved by the
SARTRE Project [17]. In 2013, another demonstration by
Daimler and Karlsruhe Institute of Technology completed the
Bertha Benz Memorial Route [18] with both city and highway
driving. In 2016, the international Grand Cooperative Driv-
ing Challenge (GCDC) [19] presented merging, intersection,
and emergency trafﬁc scenarios. In addition to the research