14
autonomous driving is the absence of a causal explanation to
a solution, while their main advantage is their ability to learn
by training on multidimensional data. Another disadvantage
is thus the large amount of data required, which makes
them computationally expensive. Reference [122] proposes a
combination of Hidden Markov Models (HMM) and Gaussian
Mixture Regression to mimic the driver’s acceleration and
braking model, whereas [141] learns the driving speed proﬁles
with a Levenberg-Marquardt algorithm on a 3-layer ANN
with 20 hidden nodes trained on 600 driving trips. The
authors in [142] imitate driver trajectories for lane changing
with Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN), and [143]
compares the learning stage with human driver control inputs.
Reinforcement learning is used in [133] to determine the
policies for each agent in the scene representation, or for
multi-goal overtaking maneuvers in [144] and automated lane
change maneuvers in [145]. Some new promising research
is in progress using the deep learning methods [146], or by
integrating the perception and planning blocks in end-to-end
learning [147]. Neural networks are also extended in case
of uncertainty with Bayesian probabilities in belief networks
[148]. However, one of the challenges of these methods is
ensuring that they learn in the correct way with the diversity
of environments and behaviors of driving.
AI approximate reasoning algorithms seem to be highly
promising for the near future. They rely on logic and statistical
bases, which are extended to cognitive properties. They also
provide adaptive reasoning to evolve appropriately to their
environment. At the moment, the main impediment to these
algorithms is the lack of feedback in real driving scenarios.
As the real-time implementation of approximate reasoning
algorithms is complex, the use of speciﬁc frameworks is
favored, e.g. Matlab Fuzzy Logic Toolbox for fuzzy logic
approach or TensorFlow for machine learning.
d) AI Human-Like Methods
AI human-like methods propose high-level models that
mirror human processes for solve-algorithms. We do not pre-
tend in this review to provide a complete description of driver
models; for this, the readers are invited to refer to [149]. The
AI human-like methods discussed in this article are decision
making functions, based on human cognitive aspects. They
are intelligent, potentially learning, and cognitive procedures.
Their knowledge of the environment rules and ability to handle
various and complex situations make them useful for predictive
and reactive planning. Their main advantage is an abstract
and universal representation of the decision making process.
However, they are difﬁcult to model and to use accurately.
In [28], the author highlights different driver models based
on taxonomic or functional, and behavioral or psychological
distinctions. With respect to his decomposition, we categorize
AI human-like methods into three main approaches based on
risk, task, and game theories.
Risk estimators are employed to interpret rational decisions
from the scene analysis with a cognitive bias. The main
advantage is to be intuitive. This implies a balance between
a subjective level of acceptable risk and the objective safety,which is a negative aspect for a global risk assessment. The
authors in [31] identify two notions to evaluate the risk of a
situation: risk of collision and risky unexpected behavior. In
the scope of this review, we only details algorithms for the
risk of collision. The most basic risk estimator uses a binary
collision prediction. Considering a risk criterion, a threshold
is applied to the obtained value to classify it as risky or
safe. Indicators such as Time-To-Collision (TTC) [51], [55],
[150] or Time-To-React (TTR) [151], [152], e.g. steering or
braking, give measurable estimators to the driver too. This
method is also exploited in [153] to return Inevitable Collision
States (ICS) for grid occupation representation (see III-B1).
The Time-To-Intercept (TTI) indicator is extended in [154]
to return a position-velocity shadow target to prevent obstacle
collision. Binary risk estimators provide a coarse evaluation
of the scene, but uncertainty of the obstacles’ future motion
is a parameter not to neglect. Probabilistic risk estimators are
better suited to providing a more realistic scene representation.
To adapt the risk perception to the driver, compensa-
tion risk estimators introduce driver states such as stress,
drowsiness, or illness. In [155], the authors use a risk-speed
compensation model, i.e. the product of perceived risk and
the driver’s speed is constant. Reference [156] exploits a risk
homeostasis theory to deal with uncertainties over subjective
risk assessment. Furthermore, the authors in [157] introduce a
Time of Zone Clearance (TZC), combined with the perceived
risk on speed, distance, safety, and comfort, and based on the
proposition that risk appears if trajectories overlap.
Even if compensation risk estimators seem to be more
faithful to the human decision, the above risk approaches are
usually based on one factor of risk, whereas risk warning
should take into account all factors of the scene representation.
Reference [158] proposes a two-level risk estimator affected
by weather, trafﬁc, or road conditions, and then reﬁned with
real-time information about the ego vehicle surroundings.
Promising risk assessments have been developed combining
usual risk estimators and belief theory, as proposed in [159]
to relax thresholds applied to fuzzy sets.
The second approach comprises taxonomic models , which
are also popular symbolic models for human decisions. They
identify the sequential driving tasks relations, with behavioral
and ability requirements. Those methods call for a logical
organization, and represent operational research task schedul-
ing. They must then be interpreted either as space-time-action
constraints or with a local planner, e.g. the curve planner
discussed in III-B4. One of the disadvantages is their difﬁcult
explicit description, as they are either focused on a driving
task, such as lane changing or merging, or hardly exhaustive.
Task 32: Passing
32-1   Decides wether to pass (two- or three-lane roads)
32-11   Looks along roadside for no passing control signs
32-111   Does no pass if « no passing » zone is indicated or has been 
indicated previously
32-112   May pass if sign indicates end of « no passing » zone
32-12   Observes lane markings
32-121   Does not pass if left side of lane is marked by the following:
32-1211   One or two solid lines
32-1212   Solid line to the right of broken line
Fig. 12. Illustration of the ﬁrst elementary tasks for ”passing” in [161].