6
real-time performance. We distinguish three main subfamilies
for space decomposition, illustrated in Fig. 4: sampling points,
connected cells, and lattice. The basic idea is:
1) to sample or discretize the evolution space;
2) to exclude the points, cells, or lattices in collision with
obstacles or not feasible; and
3) to either send those space decompositions as free-space
constraints, or to solve the resulting space conﬁguration
with a pathﬁnding algorithm (see III-B2) or a curves
planner (see III-B4) to directly send waypoints, con-
nected cells sets, or lattice sets to the control block.
a) Sampling-Based Decomposition (Fig. 4(a))
Two main routines are used in the literature to return a
set of sampling points. The ﬁrst one chooses the points in
the evolution space of the ego vehicle with respect to the
kinematic constraints, but with higher calculation time due to
the optimization choice of the samples under these constraints.
The second one picks random points in the evolution space,
so that the algorithm is computed faster but the method
is incomplete, not replicable and sensitive to the random
points’ distribution. Moreover, the links between two points
are not necessarily kinematically feasible. Both routines are
suboptimal and do not guarantee that a solution will be found
if one exists, or that a solution will be returned in a ﬁnite
computational time. However, sampling conﬁgurations are
ﬂexible to dynamic replanning and do not require any explicit
modeling of the collision space. They can thus be used for a
reactive trajectory deformation.
The most popular random method is the Probabilistic
RoadMap (PRM) [41]. It uses random samplings picked in
the evolution space during the construction phase. These sam-
plings are connected to their neighbors to create an obstacle-
free roadmap, which is then solved during a second query
phase by a pathﬁnding algorithm, e.g. Dijkstra (see III-B2)
in [42]. In [33], the authors ﬁrst sample the conﬁguration
space based on a reference path, e.g. the ego lane centerline,
then select the best set of sampling points according to an
objective function, and ﬁnally assign a speed proﬁle to the
path to respect safety and comfort criteria.
Goal State
(a) Sampling points
(c) LatticeGoal 
State(b) Connected cellsStart State
Goal State
a regular structure 
with 5 mo on 
primi ves
Obstacle
Start State
Obstacle
Start StateObstacle
Obstacle
ObstacleObstacle
SelectedPathSelectedPath
Selected
Path
Fig. 4. Space conﬁguration illustrations. The points / cells / maneuvers are
candidate solutions in blue, dismissed in red, and the solution in green.A better strategy is to consider both space and time di-
mensions in the decomposition. Dealing with spatiotemporal
sampling points makes it possible to obtain a predictive algo-
rithm, as was done in [43], where points are constrained in a 5-
dimensional evolution space with vehicle position, orientation,
velocity, and arrival time. Considering the drawback of tiny
space and space close to obstacles, adaptive samplings can
be adapted to autonomous vehicles, as presented in [44] for
robots from 2to8degrees of freedom.
These methods are usually preferred for mobile robotics or
autonomous vehicles in unstructured environments. Their use
for highly structured highway planning is thus diminished.
b) Connected Cells Decomposition (Fig. 4(b))
The methods ﬁrst decompose the space into cells using
geometry, and then construct an occupancy grid and/or a cells
connectivity graph, see Fig. 5 for application examples. In
the occupancy grid approach, a grid is generated around the
ego vehicle. The information on the obstacles’ detection is
overlaid on the grid. In case uncertainties are considered,
stochastic weights are added to the cells to obtain a costmap
representation. The main drawbacks of an occupancy grid are
the large memory requirements and high computation time,
the false indicative occupation with moving obstacles, and a
space- and time-varying resolution. In the connectivity graph
approach, the nodes represent the cells, and the edges model
the adjacency relationship between cells. The graph can be
interpreted as a path along the edges of the cells or a path to
ﬁnd inside the connected cells.
Two strategies are distinguished: those that are based on
the obstacles, and those that are not. The representation of
obstacles plays a key role for cells decomposition algorithms.
Obstacles are usually represented as convex polygons [45],
rectangular [46], triangular [47], circular [48], [49], [50],
ellipsoidal shapes [32], [51], based on the obstacle dimensions
and speed; or the entire road lane [52]. For non-obstacle-
based representation, the cells’ organization can be determined
ofﬂine, and then ﬁlled online. The grid is rapidly obtained,
but does not take advantage of the environment properties.
On the other hand, the obstacle-based representation builds
an online grid, which is more computational as replanning
is necessary to consider the dynamic of the environment.
Whatever the decomposition, probabilistic occupancy can be
applied to deﬁne a more realistic decomposition proportional
to the probability of occupancy, as proposed in [53].
The most intuitive non-obstacle-based method is the exact
decomposition in Fig. 5(e), which separates the space with
vertical and/or horizontal segments. An egocentric exact de-
composition adapted to the vehicle’s size and the obstacle’s
relative speed is used to exploit an occupancy grid for a
Markov Decision Process in [50] and a lane change ﬂow
chart in [54] (see III-B6). Reference [52] ﬁlls the occupancy
grid with a belief state from the semantic lane information.
In [55], 8overlapping static and dynamic cells are mapped
based on the lane conﬁguration and performance of integrated
sensors. Considering the nonholonomic behavior of the ve-
hicle, the curvilinear or polar grids [53] provide a more