17
1) Data Uncertainty and Trustworthiness
As we discussed in II-B, motion planning algorithms
need a scene representation with data characterized by their
uncertainties and trustworthiness. The quality of these data
is crucial for motion planning to ensure safety decisions. For
example, the authors in [168] propose a method to evaluate the
appropriate number of naturalistic driving data to model a car
following behavior. Some research has been conducted on data
uncertainties and trustworthiness on applied methods, such
as Kalman estimators [52], [169], Markov processes [131],
[170], Monte Carlo simulation [170], evidential theory [52],
or interval arithmetic [171]. Furthermore, the planning stage
must also ensure motion continuity to guarantee the safety of
the vehicle even if data are missing.
2) Data Synchronization
The scene’s data are obtained with heterogeneous frequen-
cies and latencies. The problem is therefore choosing a logic
of data synchronization processing, as is done in [172]. A ﬁrst
solution is to run the algorithm with the same time step for the
motion planner and the controller, and to extrapolate the last
obtained data. The second possibility is to have a planner that
will refresh at each new data arrival. A mixed logic would then
be to operate on a ﬁxed frequency and to refresh the data as
soon as new data arrive, to improve the propagation equations
by extrapolation of the data set.
B. Adaptive Mobility
Adaptive mobility tackles the question of the introduc-
tion of autonomous vehicles to our human environment. In
fact, all the infrastructure and driving rules for transportation
means are built from human models. According to current
and future reﬂections on autonomous developments, it is not
yet conceivable to consider, in a near future, autonomous
transportation means independent of the current ones. Thus,
it can be wise to ask whether it is reasonable to expect
to model and to reproduce human behavior/reasoning on a
robotic system whose environmental knowledge is not adapted
in terms of perception and reasoning means. Five aspects of
driving are especially subject to this question: safety, eco-
driving, perception compensation, route context, and service-
oriented vehicles.
1) Safety
The safety considerations impose the need for intelligent
enough algorithms to distinguish a permanent or temporary
danger, such as the front vehicle suddenly stopping, or another
one cutting in.
From a motion planning perspective, the ego vehicle is safe
if it is not in conﬂict with its environment. However, this safety
space highly depends on the safety capacity of robot driving,
which can be different from a human one. As stated in [173],
longitudinal distance and speed controls are generally faster
in autonomous driving, and so longitudinal safety space could
be smaller. In contrast, lateral distance control is generally
more stable with human drivers; thus, lateral safety space
must be larger with robot drivers. Furthermore, this safety
space has to be sufﬁcient against the unexpected challenges ofthe environment (e.g. unexpected brakes from leading vehicle,
unforeseen road’s dead end). The formal methods are thus used
to mathematically prove safety properties [174], [175].
Moreover, at the moment, automakers are developing au-
tonomous vehicles with human takeover and human-robot
mixed driving. This implies a possibly shared decision making
between autonomous vehicles and drivers. The ﬁrst problem
is retaining a stable and predictive decision in case the driver
takes the control back [176]. The second one is that the
decisions of the human driver and the machine may contradict
each other [177]. The third safety consideration is of human
drivers’ behaviors towards robot drivers in the sense of respect,
acceptability, and predictability [178] or comfort [179].
2) Eco-driving Planning
Eco-driving is expressed as a multicriteria optimization
problem (see III-B5), with a cost function based on energy
efﬁciency and environmental care. Two main aspects are
considered. The ﬁrst deals with the dynamic model of the ego
vehicle to propose a smooth maneuver, such as low acceler-
ation and constant speed to decrease fuel consumption [180].
The second one is a matter of prediction and anticipation to
not act suddenly, as suggested by the driver policy in [181].
3) Perception Compensation
One of the problems regarding perception is the constraint
of a ﬁxed point of view of the driving scene. However, when
a human driver has to make a decision, he/she optimizes
his/her perception by moving the ego vehicle to capture
more information on a larger perceived environment. This
perception compensation places the ego vehicle in a position
to optimize the capacity of the sensors with a geometrically
wide perception, as suggested in [182] for city driving.
4) Route Context
The route planner is well studied with a trip scheduler.
However, there are very few examples in the literature of
integrating these data for decision and generation functions
(see Fig. 2). In fact, route planning constrains the evolution
space, especially on highways; e.g. a right-hand highway exit
involves the ego vehicle to navigate to the rightmost lane.
These requirements imply respecting constraints in actions,
distances, and time to follow the instructions of the navigator.
5) Service Orientation
The last prospect discussed for adaptive mobility concerns
the future use of transportation. Reference [183] highlights the
roles of driverless vehicles in the service for which they are
designed, e.g. private car, taxi, shuttle bus, logistics, health or
safety vehicles. Their behaviors then become heterogeneous
according to their modality of services. Until now, the classic
representation was the space-time domain decision making, i.e.
where andwhen the vehicle had to navigate. A third dimension
is now added: how the vehicle has to navigate. The behavior
towards other vehicles then shows a logistic-driven attitude to
prioritize the evolution space.
C. Cooperative Planning
Driving is a social task, where cooperation is inherent to
the decision making. We identify three perspectives regarding