13
b) AI Heuristic Algorithms
Heuristic algorithms are experience-based and conducive to
natural environment process exploration. They aim to ﬁnd an
approximate solution, and are therefore used as faster and more
efﬁcient algorithms when the traditional exhaustive methods
fail. In motion planning, they usually return a set of actions,
but are also able to return paths or trajectories and to act as
set- and solve- algorithm in predictive or reactive planning.
Their main advantage is their low computational time and
complexity, and their ability to handle complex problems. On
the other hand, they provide, by deﬁnition, a local solution,
which does not guarantee global optimality and accuracy.
The most convenient interpretation of heuristic methods
involves an agent representation. An intelligent agent is an
autonomous entity modeled with a rational and social behavior,
which adapts to the observations of the environment. Its be-
havior can be based on condition-action rules (only depending
on the current perception), a world model (how it affects the
environment), goals to achieve, or utility to goals, e.g on a
game theoretic formalism in [133]. The faculties of heuristic
agents allow the inclusion of multipolicy decision making,
such as in [132], including distance to goal, lane choice bias,
max yaw rate, and policy cost. They are especially well suited
to uncertain environments. The main drawback is the difﬁculty
of ensuring convergence towards the solution.
Learning methods are also introduced to the decision in
heuristic approaches. Support Vector Machines (SVM) are
statistical learning classiﬁers for agent intentions which de-
pend on information search algorithms. In analogy with an
FSM, they are based on states’ classes and in-between margins.
The separation of the classes has to be trained beforehand,
and full labeling of input data is needed to return a convenient
classiﬁcation. In [117], the authors develop an SVM to provide
the control points to a B ´ezier curve-ﬁtting method. Authors in
[134] deﬁne an SVM for personalized lane change decision
based on the relative velocities and positions.
Evolutionary methods are a more widely used class of
learning algorithms. They are deﬁned as meta-heuristic func-
tions, inspired by biomimetics with a natural rational evolution
process, such as reproduction, mutation, recombination, and
selection. The ﬁrst step is to determine a set of a priori
solutions associated with a ﬁtness function to evaluate their
quality. A set of evolution processes is then applied to ﬁnd
a better solution to the optimization problem. In [135], the
authors develop the reasoning system SAPIENT, based on
a population-based incremental learning, to deﬁne the most
appropriate parameters for a given task to solve tactical driving
problems. More recently, [136] applies two genetic algorithms
to reﬁne a fuzzy control module, and [137] details a genetic
algorithm with a 4-chromosome structure based on speed,
angle, break and time to avoidance. The risk of such algorithms
is linked to the mutation mechanism, whose random process
can lead to local minima. They are of particular interest for
agent swarm methods; see V-C for references.
AI heuristic algorithms are a good alternative to address
the disadvantages of classical methods. Their attributes are
acceptable for highway driving, where an optimal solution isnot necessary and approximate solutions could be sufﬁcient.
There is no AI-heuristic framework built for the autonomous
vehicle applications, however, major frameworks are available
to solve this family, e.g. JADE for agents, DEAP, Jenetics
or the Matlab Global Optimization Toolbox for evolutionary
algorithms.
c) AI Approximate Reasoning
AI approximate reasoning mimics human reasoning. We
distinguish the logic approach, as described earlier with expert
systems, with the difference that the knowledge base is non-
Boolean; and the learning approach to classify new knowledge
to adapt to future situations. The ﬁrst presents the advantage
of exhibiting intelligent behavior with intuitive demonstration
and explanation, whereas the second is related to a system
able to understand, think, and learn.
Compared to Boolean logic, fuzzy logic relies on many-
valued variables. It consists of fuzzy expert systems based on
Boolean compromises, which mathematically model vague-
ness and are close to cognitive reasoning with an inductive
logic programming on different attribute-level solutions. They
return a decision, usually expressed as a maneuver or task, and
are thus part of predictive or reactive solve-algorithms. Their
major advantages are the ﬂexibility and permissiveness of the
designed rules and by extension to uncertain data. On the other
hand, their main drawbacks are their lack of traceability and
the absence of a systematic design methodology. The authors
in [138] propose a fuzzy inference decision system to check
whether the ego vehicle has enough time to change lanes based
on a close, medium, or far evaluation of the gaps between the
surrounding obstacles; see Fig. 11. References [139] and [140]
use fuzzy rules on lateral and angular error, respectively, to
propose automatic overtaking maneuvers and lateral following
of a reference map.
Artiﬁcial Neural Networks (ANN) are a popular form of
approximate learning solutions. ANNs imitate the low-level
structure of biological neural networks, i.e. connected neurons
in overlaid layers. The learning process is based on error
retropropagation to adjust the neural connections’ weights with
different learning strategies, e.g. supervised, unsupervised,
reinforcement learning. They are used for both generation and
decision making functions, as a set- and solve-algorithm in
predictive and reactive approaches. Their main drawback for
Fig. 11. Illustration of the fuzzy logic decision in [138].