8
with a connectivity graph [45] or with a space constraint-
based optimization method [72]. Reference [73] builds the
corridors with the homotopic method to enumerate the possible
maneuver variants from a path velocity decomposition and
[74] proposes a four collision-free cells partitioning to design
a spatiotemporal transition graph. A major drawback of driving
corridor algorithms is still their calculation time.
Most static cells decompositions are of little interest in the
context of highway planning. Methods that are only based on
obstacle decomposition exclude the road geometry, which is
at the core of highway driving. In contrast, algorithms that
beneﬁt from both road constraints and dynamic obstacles are
of major use for highway planning.
c) Lattice Representation (Fig. 4(c))
In motion planning, a lattice is a regular spatial structure,
which is a generalization of a grid [22]. It is possible to deﬁne
motion primitives, that connect one state of the lattice exactly
to another. All the feasible state evolutions resulting from the
lattice are represented as a reachability graph of maneuvers.
The main application of lattice methods is predictive planning.
The advantage of a lattice representation is the consideration
of the kinematic constraints implicitly handled by the motion
on the lattice [75], as well as a spatiotemporal consideration.
Moreover, the lattice can be calculated ofﬂine for a quick
replanning [76]. Unfortunately, their application to reactive
planning is mostly limited due to the ﬁxed structure.
The classic lattice representation is based on the maximum
turn strategy [13], [76], where only the turning radius of the
ego vehicle is discretized to propose different curved paths.
As an improvement, the velocity (speed and acceleration) is
considered with a curvature velocity method as presented
in [77], and extended to autonomous vehicles in [72], [78].
The main drawbacks of these methods are the rigidity of the
predeﬁned motion set and the high density of the motion graph
required to reach the goal position. Nevertheless, it is possible
to deﬁne an environment-adapted lattice , in contrast to the
previously discussed lattices based on predeﬁned motion. The
authors in [29], [79], [80], [81] operate regular sampling points
over the spatiotemporal evolution space based on highway
lane marks and centerlines. The use of curves to connect the
sampling points provides a curved lattice graph set-algorithm.
Other approaches adapt the lattice to the driver’s behavior for
a priori maneuver, as done in [82] for lane changing.
Lattice representations compile both road boundaries and
kinematic constraints, and can be quickly replanned, which is
useful for highway planning. Nonetheless, the structure’s itera-
tion memory requirement and long-term advantage represent a
burden for fast computing path planning on a highway. As will
be presented in III-B4, curve iterations as tentacles are favored
over lattice representation for highway motion planning.
2) Pathﬁnding Algorithms
The pathﬁnding algorithm family is a subpart of graph the-
ory in operational research used to solve combinatorial prob-
lems under a graph representation. The graph can be weighted
or oriented with sampling points, cells, or maneuvers nodes.
Start State Start State
Start State Start State
Start State Start State
Cs-i/Cg-i
XnearXnewXnew
XnearXrandom Xrandomeps>Cs-i
Cs-i/Cg-iCs-i
(a) Dijkstra
(c) RRT(b) A*Goal State Goal State
Goal State
Goal State Goal StateSelectedPath
SelectedPathExplored States
Explored States
Goal State
Obstacle Obstacle
Obstacle
Obstacle ObstacleObstacle
Fig. 6. Illustrations of the processes of (a) Dijkstra, (b) A*, and (c) RRT.
The basic principle is to ﬁnd a path in a graph to optimize a
cost function. Traveled distance, fuel consumption, and com-
fort are the main cost functions for highway planning problems
[42], [72], [83]. The graph resolution is based on logic and
heuristic methods, which are mainly solve-algorithms and refer
to the decision function even if they do not apply any decision
but a selection. The subfamily of Rapidly-exploring Random
Trees (RRT – see below for details) comprises both set- and
solve-algorithms, with motion generation and selection. The
main use of pathﬁnding algorithms is for route planning, but
they adapt well for local planning and applications to highways
as predictive algorithms. As beneﬁts, these algorithms are
universal and widely used, and solve either known or unknown
environments. The main drawbacks are their dependency on
the graph size and complexity, which affects the choice of the
solver, and their need for detailed information on the space
conﬁguration, which makes them slow in vast areas. We will
restrict our review to the most frequently observed algorithms
for highway autonomous driving.
For known environments, the graph is previously generated
by a space conﬁguration algorithm to model the connectivity
of the evolution space (see III-B1). In the Dijkstra algorithm
from [84], the author details a method to “Find the path
of minimum total length between two given nodes Pand
Q”, which becomes a very popular graph solver for motion
planning application to autonomous vehicles [42], [72], [83];
see Fig. 6(a). As the algorithm uniformly explores all the
directions, it ﬁnds the optimal path with respect to the cost
function, but its computational time is high.
This drawback was ﬁrst reduced with the A*algorithm
introduced in [85], and recently tested on autonomous vehi-
cles’ replanning in [86]; see Fig. 6(b). It consists of applying
Dijkstra’s algorithm with a heuristic search procedure on the
goal-node to expand the fewest possible nodes while searching
for the optimal path. The heuristic should always be optimistic,
i.e. the real cost should be higher than the heuristic cost, as
otherwise the minimal path will be distorted. As an example
of a heuristic evaluation function, [76] chooses the distance to
both ego lanes’ borders and the traveled distance for Dijkstra’s
cost function, whereas [87] adds to the travel time function the
distance to the goal and hazardous motions penalizations as
heuristics. It is also possible to weight the heuristic function
to reduce the calculation time, as described in the Anytime
Weighted A* (AWA*), which guarantees the ﬁnding of a