10
N discrete nodes on which potential forces are applied [48];
see Fig. 7(c). Reference [103] applies elastic band to car
following as a deformation of the leader vehicle path and [104]
develops a time-related elastic band framework with temporal
waypoints for lane changing.
Attractive and repulsive forces are widely implemented
for reactive planning in all kinds of robotics. Except the
high time calculation, they prove their efﬁciency for highway
planning, thanks to a straightforward integration of the scene
representation, provided that the potential functions are well
chosen within the environment.
4) Parametric and Semi-parametric Curves
Parametric and semi-parametric curves are major geometric
methods in path planning algorithms on highway for at least
two reasons: (i) the highway roads are built as a succession of
simple and predeﬁned curves (line, circle, and clothoid [105]);
and (ii) a predeﬁned set of curves is easy to implement as
candidate solution sets to test. Moreover, as some of the curve-
based algorithms directly take into account the kinematic
constraints of the vehicle, they are widely used to complement
other methods. Geometric considerations are usually separated
from the dynamic constraints. For instance, the authors in [42],
[106] ﬁrst solve a static problem considering the geometry
of the road, and then solve the dynamic dual problem by
searching for a speed proﬁle built to adapt to the curvature
proﬁle of the road and to respect the constraints of the dynamic
obstacles. In contrast, [107] ﬁrst ﬁxes the speed proﬁle and
then deforms the curve path. Those decoupled approaches
could lead to a long time reaction for the vehicle in case of
a blocking situation or replanning. Otherwise, curve planners
are well suited to a predictive approach too, as they deﬁne a
motion from a start to a goal point or cell or maneuvers. This
property is also suitable for replanning stages.
We distinguish between two exploitations of curve al-
gorithms. First, the point-free curves subfamily is used to
build kinematically feasible trajectories as a set of candidate
solutions (maneuvers). Second, the point-based subfamily uses
curves to ﬁt a set of chosen waypoints (sampling points or
cells). The ﬁrst routine is a set-algorithm and needs a decision-
maker to return the most convenient maneuver, whereas the
second one requires a space decomposition before ﬁtting a
path or a trajectory, and is thus a solve-algorithm. Both are
considered for the generation function.
The point-free curves subfamily refers to the principle of
lattice, called tentacles algorithm, as introduced in [108]; see
Fig. 8(a). Instead of a space decomposition, the tentacles
are based on primitives parametric curves, such as lines and
circles, clothoids, and sigmoids. Each tentacle is obtained with
Fig. 8. Illustrations of the point-free and point-based curves methods.different lateral, i.e. steering wheel angle, and/or longitudinal,
i.e. speed, parameters. Moreover, as the search space for solu-
tions is reduced, the computational time is limited compared
to the space decomposition methods. The tentacles can also
be calculated ofﬂine, as a trajectory data base [109].
Reference [110] shows that line and circle paths are the
solution for curves of minimal length with constraints on
curvature and start/end positions. In [107], the authors work
with a lane-based zone model built on the linear minimum
and maximum trajectories. Those curve conﬁgurations are
tested on tracks in [42], [109]. Despite the simplicity and
good behavior with high curvature, the second order of line
and circle curves is not continuous and hence not realistic
for the curvature continuity of the vehicle model. Regarding
the road design, lines and circles are linked with clothoid
functions to obtain a continuous curvature function. Indeed,
the clothoid has its curvature proportional to the curvilinear
abscissa [50]. This condition is important for the limitation of
the lateral acceleration and thus the vehicle’s comfort [106].
For example, [111] selects clothoid tentacles for overtaking
trajectories based on clearance, change of curvature, and
trajectory orientation criteria. The authors in [112] propose
a fast method to generate a piecewise clothoid curve in
agreement with a reference line (e.g. ego lane centerline
for highway planning), and kinematic constraints. Conversely,
[113] focuses on clothoid path sparsiﬁcation to perform bet-
ter optimization. However, the clothoid presents an iterative
construction process, which increases its calculation time.
The use of straight lines, curves, and arcs based on clothoids
paths are also favored to generate reference trajectories in
a road-aligned coordinate system [114]. Nevertheless, the
highway curvature is usually small enough for acceptable
approximation of a straight road. Under this assumption, only
two path’s geometries exist for the vehicle: going straight with
a straight line or changing lane. For the second case, the sig-
moid or S-function appears to be an easy solution [115]. The
authors in [32] use sigmoids to generate different candidate
trajectories with acceleration proﬁles based on experiments
from different driver behaviors.
The point-based curves subfamily is well suited to geo-
metrically constrained environments and to ensure that the
dynamic constraints of the ego vehicle are respected. The
principle is to determine control points in the environment,
and to ﬁt them with a curve. They can also be used for a
smoothing step in other motion planning algorithms. In [29],
the authors use a cubic spiral for path generation, as do [80],
and a cubic function of time for velocity generation, whereas
in [54] quartic and quintic polynomials are respectively used
to generate longitudinal and lateral motions. In [81], the
authors compare cubic polynomial functions and smoother
quartic curvature polynomials to generate the path with cubic
polynomial speed proﬁles, based on a sampling point lattice.
The use of semi-parametric spline curves is an improve-
ment on polynomial interpolations, which are difﬁcult to ﬁnd
and increase in complexity. This entails deﬁning curves as
a set of piecewise polynomials. In this way, the obtained
polynomial equations are of a lower degree but there are