11
a large number of polynomials to deal with. For example,
[79] generates quintic spline trajectories adapted to the road
shape. The authors in [76] develop adaptive polar splines
with non-zero curvature at the beginning and end segments to
suit highway maneuvers. Among spline curves, we distinguish
B´ezier curves ; see Fig. 8(b). They use control points instead
of interpolation points as inﬂection points. The inconvenient
is thus not to pass trough the deﬁned control points, except
for the start and end points. The advantages are their simple
implementation and thus a low computation cost compared to
the previously discussed methods. Reference [49] smooths the
primitive path from three waypoints with a quadratic B ´ezier
curve to guarantee kinematic feasibility and avoid static obsta-
cles. In [116], the authors also use piecewise quadratic B ´ezier
curves based on safe lane change distances for autonomous
vehicles and ride comfort. It is also possible to provide the
control points of the B ´ezier curve from an SVM (see III-B6),
as in [117], which calculates three 4th-degree B ´ezier curves.
As previously mentioned, the curve algorithms are largely
used to interface with all others motion planning algorithms.
The choice of the curve type mostly depends on the type of
problem and the knowledge of the environment.
5) Numerical Optimization
The optimization problem for motion planning is deﬁned
as a solve-algorithm based on logic and heuristic approaches.
They are part of decision and generation functions. The
optimization is usually expressed as the minimization of
a cost function in a sequence of states variables under a
set of constraints, and is part of competitive combinatorial
operational research to avoid a combinatorial explosion. In
motion planning applications, we distinguish two domains of
interest, as described in [85]. The ﬁrst one focuses on ﬁnding
efﬁcient algorithms to solve complex problems and to improve
search time with a heuristic approach (see III-B2 for some
heuristics details). The second one is the mathematical study of
the problem to deduce particular properties to ﬁnd a predictive
solution in a restrictive space. As the ﬁrst domain is commonly
used to decrease the computation time of algorithms, only the
second domain is further discussed in the following.
The considered approaches model the ego vehicle and
environment constraints in a well-deﬁned mathematic form.
The main advantages are that they easily handle the constraints
of the problem, they deal with multicriteria optimization,
and they consider the state dimensionality and kinematics of
the vehicle model [118]. The basic resolution is the Linear
Programming (LP). In LP formulation, the algorithm solves
a linear cost function under linear equalities or inequalities.
The Simplex algorithm is one of the most popular ones;
see [81]. In [119], a spatially based trajectory planning with
Sequential LP (SLP) is proposed. For nonlinear problems
(NLP), nonlinear optimization is used either in the special
case of nonlinear regression problems, such as the Levenberg-
Marquardt algorithm on path optimization in [29], [104], or
in nonlinear integration, as explained in [33] with a Boundary
Value Problem (BVP) solver. For multi-objective problems, the
use of Quadratic Programming optimization (QP) involvesan iterative search of a convex approximation solution to
the original problem, as in [18] with sequential quadratic
programming (SQP) optimization on distance offset, velocity
quadratic error, acceleration, jerk, and yaw rate functions.
In [120], [121], the authors formalize the problem of lane
changing and overtaking with a Mixed Integer Quadratic
Programming (MIQP).
For speciﬁc predictive applications, resolution under Model
Predictive Control (MPC) is highly popular [46], [47], [51],
[113], [118], [122], [123]. MPC algorithms solve the problem
at each sampling time to ﬁnd a predictive motion solution over
a longer horizon time, but only apply the ﬁrst sequence of ac-
tions. In that respect, MPC models a receding horizon control
and shifts the solution set to remain accurate to upcoming
information. The main advantage of MPC algorithms is their
replanning ability, but they are still too poor for non-convex
and high complexity problems.
Dynamic Programming (DP) draws its efﬁcacy for com-
plex computational problems by breaking them into simpler
subproblems, even with interdependency. The resolution of
each subproblem is combined to ﬁnd the global problem
solution. This implies that the description of the problems
has good characteristics. In [49], the author searches for the
shortest path in a cells decomposition using a pre-calculated
DP solution. The authors in [124] use DP to calculate the
optimal cost-to-go value of a set of maneuvers for different
speed proﬁles.
Numerical optimization is widely used in motion planning,
either to decrease the solving time of a graph’s exploration, or
to exploit the mathematical properties of the problem. These
algorithms can be solved by generic numerical resolution tools.
The main encounter frameworks in the literature are CVX and
CVXGEN softwares, Gurobi and YALMIP solvers, Matlab
Optimization Toolbox, NPSOL package, and ACADO Toolkit.
6) Artiﬁcial Intelligence
The main contribution of Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) for
autonomous driving is its ability to reproduce and simulate
drivers’ reasoning and learning. These techniques rely on
thinking and acting consistently with the environment, a
memory structure, and drawing inferences. In this sense, AI
algorithms are particularly interesting for the decision making
function, as discussed in [34]. They are also well suited to mo-
bile robotics, as they are ﬂexible, adaptive, and reactive to their
environment. Moreover, AI techniques are well organized to
deal with huge, incomplete, or inaccurate data. The advantages
of AI-based algorithms are their capacity to answer generic
questions and to absorb new modiﬁcations without affecting
the structure of the algorithm. They are mostly employed as
solve-algorithms for predictive planning, but also as symbolic
set-algorithms, and less frequently for reactive deformation. AI
gathers a wide diversity of methods from logic to cognitive
representation. We propose to organize this section in two
main axes – cognitive/rational and rules/learning distinctions
– based on [125]’s distinction between thinking and acting
humanly or rationally. We thus distinguish the four subfamilies
depicted in Fig. 9: logic approaches, heuristic algorithms,
approximate reasoning, and human-like methods.