23
[191] M. H ¨ulsen, J. M. Z ¨ollner, and C. Weiss, “Trafﬁc intersection situation
description ontology for advanced driver assistance,” in IEEE Intelli-
gent Vehicles Symposium (IV) , 2011.
[192] P. Morignot, J. P. Rastelli, and F. Nashashibi, “Arbitration for balancing
control between the driver and adas systems in an automated vehicle:
Survey and approach,” in IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium (IV) ,
2014.
[193] E. Altendorf and F. Flemisch, “Prediction of driving behavior in
cooperative guidance and control: a ﬁrst game-theoretic approach,”
CogSys, Madgeburg , 2014.
[194] A. Rosenfeld, Z. Bareket, C. V . Goldman, S. Kraus, D. J. LeBlanc, and
O. Tsimhoni, “Towards adapting cars to their drivers,” AI Magazine ,
vol. 33, no. 4, p. 46, 2012.
[195] A. Broggi, S. Debattisti, M. Panciroli, and P. P. Porta, “Moving from
analog to digital driving,” in IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium (IV) ,
2013.
[196] M. Althoff, M. Koschi, and S. Manzinger, “Commonroad: Composable
benchmarks for motion planning on roads,” in IEEE Intelligent Vehicles
Symposium (IV) , 2017.
[197] J. Quilbeuf, M. Barbier, L. Rummelhard, C. Laugier, A. Legay, B. Bau-
douin, T. Genevois, J. Iba ˜nez-Guzm ´an, and O. Simonin, “Statistical
model checking applied on perception and decision-making systems
for autonomous driving,” in IEEE Int. Conf. on Intelligent Robots and
Systems (IROS) Workshops , 2018.
[198] N. J. Goodall, “Ethical decision making during automated vehicle
crashes,” Transportation Research Record , vol. 2424, no. 1, pp. 58–
65, 2014.
[199] S. M. Thornton, S. Pan, S. M. Erlien, and J. C. Gerdes, “Incorporating
ethical considerations into automated vehicle control,” IEEE Trans. on
Intelligent Transportation Systems , vol. 18, no. 6, pp. 1429–1439, 2017.
[200] P. Morignot and F. Nashashibi, “An ontology-based approach to relax
trafﬁc regulation for autonomous vehicle assistance,” IASTED Int. Conf.
on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Applications , 2013.
Laur `ene Claussmann received the Dipl.-Ing. de-
gree from Ecole Nationale Sup ´erieure de l’Energie,
l’Eau et l’Environnement (Grenoble INP - ENSE3),
Grenoble, France, in Automatic Control, Systems
and Information Technology, in 2015. She is cur-
rently working towards the PhD degree in Auto-
matic Control at Universit ´e Paris-Saclay with In-
stitut VEDECOM and IFSTTAR-LIVIC laboratory,
France. Her research is focused on motion planning
for the application of autonomous vehicles.
Marc Revilloud is a researcher on autonomous
vehicles at Institut VEDECOM, France. He received
the Dipl.-Ing. degree from Universit ´e de Technolo-
gie Belfort-Montb ´eliard (UTBM), France, in Image,
Interaction and Virtual Reality, in 2010 and the
Ph.D. degree in Signal and Image Processing from
Universit ´e Paris-Saclay, France. His current research
interests revolve around autonomous vehicles, lane
detection and visual SLAM.
Dominique Gruyer was born in France, in 1969.
He received the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees respectively
in 1995 and 1999 from University of Technology
of Compi `egne. Since 2001, he is a researcher at
INRETS, into the perception team of LIVIC depart-
ment (Laboratory on interactions between vehicles,
infrastructure and drivers) and he works on the
study and the development of multisensors/sources
association, combination and fusion. His works enter
into the conception of on-board driving assistance
systems and more precisely on the carry out of
multiobstacle detection and tracking, extended perception, accurate ego local-
ization. He is involved for multisensor fusion tasks and sensors modeling and
simulation in several European and French projects dealing with intelligent ve-
hicles (HA VEit, Isi-PADAS, CVIS, CARSENSE, eMOTIVE, LOVe, ARCOS,
MICADO, ABV , eFuture, CooPerCom, SINETIC, ...). He is responsible and
the main inventor of the SiVIC platform (Simulation for Vehicle, Infrastructure
and sensors). Since 2010, he is the team leader of the LIVICs Perception team.
For 5 years, he is a network researcher in AUTO21 (Canada). He was the co-
founder and technical Director of the CIVITEC Company until 2015. Since
April 2015, CIVITEC is a subsidiary of the ESI group company. He is now
the head of LIVIC laboratory (since January 2015), a Research Director (since
2014) in IFSTTAR, and Perception system and data fusion Scientiﬁc Director
(since April 2015) for ESI group (CIVITEC).
S´ebastien Glaser is Professor in Intelligent Trans-
portation System at the Center for Accident Re-
search and Road Safety (CARRS-Q, Queens-
land University of Technology, Australia), where
he focuses on a safe and sustainable develop-
ment/deployment of Automated Driving System in
interaction with others road users. He has obtained
his PhD in Automatic and Control in 2004, his Ha-
bilitation in 2011, and worked as a researcher in the
development of Connected and Automated Vehicles
(CA V). He was involved in several European Union
initiatives and in the French National Research Agency (ANR) initiative on
A V development, test and evaluation. He also led the technological roadmap
task force in France for the A V . Since 2009, he has worked across academic
and industrial sectors and held senior researcher positions. He led the French
ABV project, gathering 8 academic and industrial partners, to develop a
CA V solution at low speed. He has been the deputy director and director
of LIVIC from 2012-2015 and project leader of VEDECOM between 2015-
2017, developing the Autonomous Vehicle prototypes.