7
realistic decomposition around the ego vehicle. However, as
non-obstacle-based occupancy grids cannot evolve according
to the obstacles’ dynamics, they quickly become obsolete due
to the computational cost of a reﬁned decomposition. Another
drawback is the lack of accuracy on obstacles’ positions.
To consider environment uncertainties, the Vector Field
Histograms (VFH) from [56] statistically models the evo-
lution space with a velocity histogram occupancy grid as a
polar histogram; see Fig. 5(d). Reference [57] proposes a
constrained VFH to treat kinematic and dynamic constraints
to extend to highway applications. VFH methods are mostly
used for deformation function as a reactive planner, as they
are robust to sensors’ uncertainties [58].
To reduce the search space, decrease the computation time
and deal with dynamic obstacles that are either hard to model
or not modeled, the Dynamic Window (DW) approach in
Fig. 5(f), introduced in [59], reduces the search space into a
reachable velocity space within a short time interval. It is also
used as a reactive planner for trajectory deformation. In [60],
DW is directly applied on an image from the camera. Refer-
ence [61] combines a DW approach for avoiding unmodeled
obstacles with a Velocity Vector Fields (VVF) (see III-B3).
The authors in [62] demonstrate safety recommendations for
both static and moving obstacles using DW.
The routines of the second type use the obstacles to set
the cells decomposition. The Voronoi decomposition [63]
builds cells between particular points, which represent each
obstacle, mainly using the Euclidean bisection (L2 Euclidean
distance norm) or absolute value (L1 Manhattan distance
norm); see Fig. 5(b). The method is extended to polygonal
obstacles with the generalized V oronoi diagram [64]. The
decomposition generate a non-regular grid and is classically
interpreted as the way that is equidistant from each obstacle
(way along the edges), i.e. a skeleton. Reference [42] uses
V oronoi diagrams to reduce the obstacle-free point’s space,
whereas the authors in [58] propose a real-time algorithmbased on one V oronoi cell built on the next collision point in
the ego vehicle trajectory. To increase the distance between an
obstacle and the ego vehicle, weighted [65] and uncertain [66]
V oronoi diagrams have been developed in mobile robotics, but
they are not that common for autonomous vehicles. The major
drawbacks of V oronoi decompositions are the heterogeneous
cells sizes, the kinematic feasibility of linking adjacent cells,
and the dynamic evolution, which involves time-consuming
replanning. Moreover, the equidistance does not necessarily
guarantee safety. In response to these issues, the approximate
methods split up into thinner cells when the obstacles are
closer to obtain a more accurate occupation grid. A classic
approximate approach is the quad tree decomposition, as in
[67]. Building a dynamic cells decomposition remains the
major drawback of the V oronoi and approximate approaches.
A major improvement is then to add a time dimension to
the spatial decomposition. The visibility decomposition in
Fig. 5(a) picks points of interest in the scene representation,
and links them with segments if these do not intersect obstacles
[68]. They are extended to a path velocity representation in
[69]. The points of interest can be based on the obstacles’
vertices [70] or along the road border [49]. This implies that
the path along the edges can be in contact with obstacles,
which is then adapted to the highway planning problem
by space shifting the trajectories, as in [70]. In addition,
thedriving corridor representation in Fig. 5(c) uses road
boundaries and the spatiotemporal positions of obstacles to
produce a set of free spatiotemporal evolutions as corridors
[18]. From a static decomposition based on visibility decom-
position as graph connectivity, [49] builds a dynamic corridor
from Velocity Obstacles (VO) analysis. This spatiotemporal
algorithm returns the set of all the velocities of the ego vehicle
that lead to a collision [71]. A velocity outside the spatiotem-
poral representation guarantees that there will be no collision
under the hypothesis that the obstacle velocity prediction is
correct. The passage and region channels are then solved
Fig. 5. Illustrations of connected cells decompositions