24 
 “tournaments”, with the winner of the tournament selected for reproduction.  Selection can also 
directly carry over the best solution(s) in a population to the next. This mechanism is called “elitism” 
and is to guarantee that solution quality will not degrade during optimization. Overall, selection 
promotes intensification during search. 
When two parent solutions are selected, the crossover operator is applied to reproduce two offspring 
solutions. Figure 12a shows two parent solutions (chromosomes) i and j of a 5-decision variable 
problem (5 genes) where a “single-point crossover” is applied. In this crossover, a single point on the 
chromosomes is selected randomly, and all genes (decision variable values) beyond that point are 
swapped between the two parents to reproduce the two offspring. Figure 12c illustrates how a single-
point crossover operator functions with 2 decision variables on the fitness landscape of Figure 10. 
Crossover operators may work for both intensification and diversification during the search, 
depending on the type of the crossover operator and the locations of parents with respect to each 
other.  
A mutation operator may be applied to mutate a small number of offspring that resulted from the 
crossover. Figure 12b shows an example mutation where one of the decision variables (genes) is 
randomly selected and replaced by a uniformly distributed random number in its feasible range. Figure 
12d illustrates how this mutation works in the 2-decision variable space where x 1 is mutated. Mutation 
works to preserve and introduce diversity during the search. It enables the EA to escape local optima.  
The heuristic operators above can be easily applied to both continuous and discrete problems. In case 
of continuous problems, such as model calibration, the procedure explained above directly applies to 
model parameters that can be varied within their feasible ranges. In case of discrete problems, such 
as water distribution system design where the optimal size of pipes is of interest, the feasible range 
of each decision variable is reduced to a set of possible values (e.g. commercially available pipe sizes) 
that can be directly incorporated into the procedure. For example, for mutation of Figure 12b, the 
pipe size can be directly replaced by another pipe size chosen randomly from the available set of pipe 
sizes.  Further details on GAs can be found in Holland (1975), Goldberg (1989), Michalewicz (1992) 
Coley (1999), Nicklow et al. (2009) and Maier et al. (2014).