16 
 calibration and which subset for model validation (e.g. see Zheng et al., 2018), all of which can have a 
significant impact on the properties of the fitness landscape. 
 
 
 
Figure 6. Illustrations of smooth (a) and rugged (b) fitness landscapes for minimization problems, 
where f represents an objective function and x represents a decision variable. 
 
3. The behaviour of the search method.   How well a search space of a particular size and ruggedness 
can be explored, both in terms of the ability to find globally optimal or near-globally optimal solutions 
and the computational efficiency with which this is achieved, is a function of the way a particular 
optimization algorithm navigates the fitness landscape(s).  All optimization algorithms generally 
search the fitness landscape(s) in a stepwise fashion, starting from a random point and making 
incremental improvements over a number of iterations, as formalized in Equation 4 below, with the 
only difference between optimization algorithms being the mechanism that is used decide how to 
make adjustments to the decision variables from one iteration to the next (i.e. ∆x Xt-1). If we write 
xt = xt-1 + ∆xt-1             (4) 
where t denotes the iteration number, then xt-1 is the vector of decision variables (solutions) in the 
previous iteration, xt is the updated vector of decision variables, and ∆ xt-1 denotes the change in the 
vector of decision variables from one iteration to the next.   
The adjustment mechanisms used by different optimization algorithms are generally characterised by 
two competing processes: diversification (exploration) and intensification (exploitation).  The goal of 
diversification is to explore the search space as widely as possible.  This is an advantage if the search 
space is rugged and characterised by a large number of local optima, as illustrated in Figure 6b, so that 
the region containing the global optimum can be found.  This is particularly important for large search 
spaces.  However, an algorithm that explores more than is needed is less computationally efficient 
and, while it might be able to find the region of the search space that contains the global optimum, it 
might not be able to converge on this solution.   xf
xf(a)                                                                 (b)