29 
 NSGA-ll developed by Deb et al., 2000), the solutions in a population are grouped into multiple fronts. 
The non-dominated solutions form the first front and receive rank 1, and the remaining solutions that 
are non-dominated by all solutions, excluding the solutions on the first front, form the second front 
and receive rank 2. This will continue to the third and higher fronts. In this strategy, candidate 
solutions lying on the same front are deemed equally fit. In the dominance rank strategy, the fitness 
of any given solution is the number of other solutions that dominate that solution (e.g., used in MOGA 
developed by Fonseca and Fleming, 1993); while in the dominance count strategy, fitness of a given 
solution is defined as the number of other solutions this solution dominates (e.g., used in SPEA2 
developed by Ziztler et al., 2002). Readers may refer Zitzler et al. (2004) for more details on the 
different fitness assignment strategies for multi-objective optimization. 
In multi-objective EAs, diversification is not limited to the decision-variable space. It is also important 
to introduce diversity in the objective space (see Figure 16) to diversify the optimal solutions and 
spread them uniformly on the Pareto front. This is because the purpose of the optimization process is 
not to identify a single, optimal solution, but to identify a set of optimal solutions that are distributed 
with a uniform “density” over the Pareto front.  For this purpose, “crowding distance”, which is a 
measure to estimate the density of solutions surrounding any given point in the objective space, is 
often used to encourage solutions to “spread out”.  Accurately stated, in a bi-objective space, the 
crowding distance of a solution is defined as one half of the circumference of the rectangle formed by 
the two neighbouring solutions of the same front on either side of that solution (Figure 16). In 
addition, the three ranking strategies in Figure 15 may result in multiple solutions receiving the same 
rank, while EAs may need to differentiate such solutions in the process of selection. For example, in 
the dominance depth strategy, all solutions lying on the same front would be seen equally. In this case, 
density, as quantified, for example, by crowding distance, can be used for a second-level fitness 
assignment of these solutions, indicating that solutions lying on the same front, but with larger 
crowding distance, would receive a higher fitness value (i.e., a higher chance to be selected). 
 
 
Figure 15.  Strategies for dominance-based ranking (fitness assignment) of candidate solutions in the 
objective space: (a) dominance depth, (b) dominance rank, and (c) dominance count. The number by 
each candidate solution is the associated rank to that solution; in (a) and (b), a smaller number 
indicates a better solution, while in (c) a larger number indicates a better solution 
 f1 f1 f1f2 f2 f2
1112
23
3
3013
5
0013
2432
20
0
0
front 1front 2front 3(a)                                                 (b)                                            (c)