15 
 the decision variables (e.g. what is the smallest and what is the largest diameter to be considered), 
and the level of discretization (resolution) in cases where discrete variables are considered (e.g. how 
many commercially available diameters are considered within the selected range of diameters).  The 
larger the number of decision variables, the larger the ranges of the decision variables and the finer 
the resolution, the larger the search space and the more difficult it is likely to be to identify the optimal 
solution(s). 
However, it is not only the size of the total search space that matters, but also the size of the feasible 
portion of this space (i.e. the size of the space for which all constraints are met).  For some problems, 
many of the decision variable combinations result in solutions that violate constraints related to target 
system performance (i.e. infeasible solutions).  For example, for the wastewater treatment problem 
(Figure 1), various combinations of treatment levels at the WWTPs might result in better objective 
function values (i.e. lower treatment costs), but might result in water quality levels in the receiving 
waters that do not satisfy minimum water quality constraints.  If the size of the feasible portion of the 
decision variable space is small, it might be difficult to find a combination of decision variables that 
results in feasible solutions.  Consequently, the ability to find optimal solutions can not only be made 
more difficult if the size of the search space is very large, but also if the feasible region of the total 
search space is very small. 
2. The properties of the fitness landscape.  If the fitness landscape is very smooth, like the “big bowl” 
in Figure 6a, the search is relatively easy, as there is a single optimum (for a minimization problem).  
However, if the fitness landscape is very rugged, as shown in Figure 6b, finding the lowest point in the 
landscape is very difficult.  This is because there are many troughs, making it difficult to navigate the 
landscape and to know if a trough that has been found is the lowest trough (i.e. the global optimum), 
or just a local optimum.  For real-world problems, fitness landscapes tend to be complex (e.g. Gibbs 
et al., 2011, 2015; Kingston et al., 2005), characterized by a range of features from small-scale 
features, such as roughness or noise, to large-scale features, such as multimodality (Razavi and Gupta, 
2015). Consequently, the fitness landscapes for many environmental problems are likely to be rugged 
and characterized by many local optima, a large degree of non-linearity and possibly discontinuities, 
especially if objective function values are calculated with the aid of complex simulation or integrated 
assessment models (Hamilton et al., 2015). 
Although increasing the difficulty of the optimization problem, the presence of multiple local optima 
with similar objective function values in the fitness landscape can be either advantageous or 
disadvantageous from a practical perspective.  A potential advantage is the provision of choice 
(diversity) to decision-makers in relation to which option to implement based on factors not formally 
considered during the optimization.  For example, if there are a number of equally “good” 
management options, these can be fed into a participatory decision-making process to determine 
which should be implemented.  However, the existence of multiple local optima with similar objective 
function values in the fitness landscape creates problems with model identifiability during model 
calibration (Shin et al., 2015), as it is difficult to determine which set of model parameters is the 
“correct” one. Another potential complicating factor related to model calibration is that the global 
optimum in the fitness landscape might not necessarily correspond to the model parameterization 
that results in the model that best represents the underlying physical processes.  This is because for 
model calibration problems, the fitness landscape is a function of which error measure is used, how 
much data are available for calibration and which subset of the available data are used for model