12 
 It should be noted that the translation of environmental and water resources management problems 
into the somewhat rigid formulation outlined above can be challenging, especially for real-world 
problems, which are often complex, high-dimensional, ill-defined and not well structured.  
Consequently, where possible, stakeholders should be directly involved in the formulation of 
optimization problems, informing the objectives, decisions and constraints as part of an interactive 
process (Di Matteo et al., 2017a; Smith et al., 2017; Wu et al., 2016). 
3.2 Problem representation 
Optimization problems can be represented geometrically by considering a “fitness landscape”. A 
fitness landscape, or synonymously called a “response surface”, depicts the shape of the fitness 
(objective) function for a particular objective with respect to the decision variables (e.g. model error 
as a function of different values of model parameters for model calibration problems). For an 
optimization problem with only one decision variable, the resulting fitness landscape is a (typically 
nonlinear) line, and for a problem with two decision variables, the fitness landscape is a plane (see 
Figure 3). For higher-dimensional problems with three or more decision variables, the fitness 
landscape becomes a hyperplane that cannot be visualised easily. 
 
Figure 3. A typical fitness landscape (response surface) and its contour plot for a model calibration 
problem, where the objective function f is a goodness-of-fit metric to be maximized and the decision 
variables x 1 and x 2 are model parameters. This optimization problem has two regions of attraction 
(one local maximum in addition to the global maximum). 
 
When there is a single objective to be maximized, there is a single fitness landscape and the purpose 
of optimization is to identify the highest peak (or the lowest trough for minimization problems) in the 
fitness landscape for the problem under consideration. In other words, the purpose of optimization is 
to identify the feasible combination of decision variable values that results in the largest value of the 
objective function (fitness).  Consequently, the optimization process is akin to identifying the “highest 
hill” in the fitness landscape, which is referred to as the “global optimum”, as it is the best performing