31 
 the order of minutes or even hours and (ii) search spaces can be extremely large and rugged, requiring 
larger population sizes and/or numbers of generations in order to find good solutions. These 
computational challenges are exacerbated when considering uncertainties, as performance metrics 
such as risk, resilience, reliability or robustness (Hashimoto et al., 1982; McPhail et al., 2018) generally 
require simulation models to be run hundreds or even thousands of times during each iteration of the 
optimization process (Beh et al., 2017). 
These computational challenges can be addressed using a number of strategies. A commonly used 
approach is replace computationally expensive simulation models with more efficient surrogate-, 
meta- or emulation- models (Razavi et al., 2012), which can increase the computational efficiency of 
EAs by one to two orders of magnitude (Beh et al., 2017; Broad et al., 2015b; Timani and Peralta, 
2017). As EAs are easily parallelizable (see Section 4), the use of parallel computing can also be an 
effective means of reducing overall runtime (Newland et al., 2018; Tang et al., 2007). Depending on 
the type of the problem and the EA algorithm used, “pre-emption” strategies can be used to 
opportunistically evade running computationally expensive models during optimization (Asadzadeh 
et al., 2014; Razavi et al., 2010).  Alternatively, the size and complexity of the optimization problem 
can be decreased by reducing the size of the search space (Fu et al., 2012) or re-formulating the 
optimization problem (Garner and Keller, 2018; Quinn et al., 2017). 
Challenges with adjustment of searching behaviour:   As mentioned in Section 4, one of the 
advantages of EAs is that their searching behaviour (i.e. their degree of diversification (exploration) 
and intensification (exploitation)) can be adjusted to match the properties of the fitness landscape for 
the problem under consideration.  However, in practice, this can be a challenge, as the properties of 
the fitness landscape are unknown.  As a result, the parameters that control the searching behaviour 
of EAs are commonly determined with the aid of extensive sensitivity analysis, although guidelines for 
the selection of appropriate parameters have been developed for some problem types (e.g. Gibbs et 
al., 2015; Zecchin et al., 2005).  Alternatively, algorithm searching behaviour can be adjusted 
dynamically throughout the search by automatically adjusting (i) parameter values to achieve pre-
determined searching behaviours (Hadka and Reed, 2013; Vrugt et al., 2009; Wang et al., 2017; Zheng 
et al., 2017) or (ii) the utilisation rate of different operators in response to algorithm performance 
(Hadka and Reed, 2013; Vrugt et al., 2009; Wang et al., 2017; Zheng et al., 2017). 
8. How do we Implement EAs?  
A typical implementation strategy for the workflow described by Figure 8 is to view the search 
algorithm and simulation model as “black box” components that are coupled via an I/O (input/output) 
interface. This I/O interface manages run-time execution and data transfers of both the algorithm and 
the simulation model. As discussed in Section 4 (e.g. see Figure 8), data transfer consists of preparing 
model input and processing model output and can be accomplished by reading and writing files or by 
in-memory or inter-process communication.  
As summarized by Matott et al. (2009), a number of software packages have been built using the black 
box approach described above, and such packages typically support multiple algorithms and may be 
written in compiled (i.e., C/C++ or FORTRAN) or interpreted (i.e., R, Python, or MATLAB) languages. 
Figure 17 illustrates a black-box approach to implementing EAs. As indicated in Figure 16, the primary 
operators of the optimizer (e.g. elitism, selection, crossover and mutation) are invariant with respect