35 
 spaces to be explored in a computationally efficient manner.  This is achieved using the same process 
employed during informal optimization in that a trial solution is proposed, which is then evaluated 
using a simulation model leading to the selection of a new (hopefully improved) solution and so on.  
The primary difference is that the decision of which solution to try in the next iteration is not informed 
by the domain knowledge of the user, but by operators inspired by examples from nature, such as 
survival of the fittest and the way colonies of ants search for food.  This generally enables the 
identification of solutions that achieve better environmental performance for the same cost or 
solutions that achieve a particular environmental outcome for reduced financial outlay, rather than 
solutions that result in inferior environmental outcomes for higher costs.  In this way, formal 
optimization processes can be incorporated into integrated environmental decision-making 
processes, rather than prescribing a single optimal solution using a black-box process. 
However, it is important to note that despite all of the advantages of EAs, they are not necessarily 
always the best optimization method to use.  For example, if in some specific case where the analysed 
real-life problem could be linearized without losing its key features, and/or a planner needs an answer 
very quickly (e.g. hydropower scheduling), other optimization methods (such as Linear Programming) 
may be better suited.  This highlights the importance of using any optimization method appropriately.  
EAs are particularly well suited to solving large, complex, discrete and non-linear real-life problems 
and are particularly useful for providing decision support in suitably formulated and solved 
optimization problems accompanied with relevant expert analyses, ideally in some iterative 
exploratory-type setup. When used in this way, EAs can be very helpful and can reduce the 
computational burden of the analysed problem, thereby enabling simulation modellers to explore 
many more options and trade-offs than would otherwise be possible. Thus they allow modellers to 
focus in general on more important aspects of the analysed problem. 
 
Acknowledgements 
We would like to acknowledge the following graduate students who have helped to proofread this 
manuscript, including Mikaela DeRousseau at the University of Colorado Boulder and Kasra Keshavarz 
and Mustakim Ali at the University of Saskatchewan.  The authors would also like to thank David 
Vowels from the University of Adelaide and Tony Jakeman from the Australian National University for 
reading the draft manuscript and their useful comments for improving it, as well as Gayani Fernando 
from the University of Adelaide for assisting with compiling and formatting the references.  Finally, 
the authors would like to thank the reviewers of this paper, Andrea Rizzoli, Jan Kwakkel and one 
anonymous reviewer, whose feedback have helped with improving the quality of this paper 
significantly. 
 
References 
Afshar, A., Massoumi, F., Afshar, A., Mariño, M.A., 2015. State of the art review of ant colony 
optimization applications in water resource management. Water Resources Management 
29(11), 3891-3904.