27 
 of these two mechanisms based on user-selected weightings.  Once paths have been selected for each 
decision variable, a trial solution to the problem under consideration has been obtained.  In general, 
a number of solutions is obtained in each iteration, which is akin to the size of the ant colony in natural 
systems and is equivalent to the population size in GAs. 
The way pheromone levels on each of the paths are updated from one iteration to the next is generally 
a function of the quality of the solutions obtained, where paths that contribute to solutions with better 
objective function values receive a greater amount of pheromone than paths that contribute to poorer 
quality solutions.  The specific way in which this is achieved varies between algorithms, where some 
algorithms use information from all ants in the colony, while others only use information from ants 
that select high-performing solutions (Bullnheimer et al., 1999; Dorigo et al., 1996; Stützle and Hoos, 
2000).  Further details on ACO algorithms and their applications can be found in Dorigo et al. (1996), 
Stützle and Hoos (2000), Dorigo et al. (2006), García-Martínez et al. (2007), Zecchin et al. (2007) and  
Afshar et al. (2015).    
 
5.3 Constraint handling 
The design of EAs and other metaheuristics is typically such that they can search for optimal solutions 
in a hypercube decision space, where there are only bound constraints (see Equation 3). In some cases, 
the design of an algorithm functions naturally to respect bound constraints (e.g. binary decision 
variable problem solved with a GA). However, in many algorithms, some special constraint handling 
procedures, often invisible to users, are required to respect bound constraints.  If during the search a 
generated solution goes beyond a bound, it may be rejected (and a new solution would be generated), 
absorbed to the bound, or reflected back into the hypercube. Figure 14 shows an example with these 
three simple “constraint handling” mechanisms for bound constraints.  
 
Figure 14.  Bound constraint handling in metaheuristic optimization. Three strategies are shown: 1- 
the new solution violating the constraint is rejected in order to generate another new solution, 2- 
the new solution is modified and absorbed to the bound, and 3- the new solution is modified and 
reflected by the bound. 
 
The ability to handle other types of constraints (see Equation 2) may not be as straightforward. In 
general, the “rejecting” approach is the simplest but most inefficient way of handling any type of 
constraint. With this approach, any candidate solution that violates a constraint will be rejected and x1x2
x1uxt-1xtxtrejected
solutionabsorbed
solutionreflected
solution
boundabs ref∆xt-1
xt