20 
 The way EAs are used is intuitive:  The application of EAs is intuitive, as the optimization process that 
is used mirrors the informal optimization process adopted when using simulation models to assist with 
the identification of solutions to environmental problems (Figure 2).  The major difference between 
the informal optimization process in Figure 2 and the formal EA-based optimization process is in how 
solutions are altered (i.e., how ∆ xt-1 is obtained).  As part of informal optimization processes, values of 
∆xt-1 are obtained using personal domain knowledge, experience and intuition, but in the EA-based 
process, these changes in decision variable values from one iteration to the next are obtained 
automatically with the aid of evolutionary operators (Figure 9).  The operators are generally based on 
optimization strategies found in nature, such as survival of the fittest, although this is not always the 
case (see Sections 5 and 6 for details).   
 
 
Figure 9. Process of identifying optimal solutions when evolutionary algorithms are used. 
 
EAs are applicable to discrete and continuous decision variables:  Another advantage of EAs is that 
they can generally work with both discrete and continuous decision variables, as opposed to most 
traditional optimization methods, which require continuous decision variables (exceptions include 
integer programming (Samani and Mottaghi, 2006) and combinatorial optimization methods (Da 
Conceição Cunha and Sousa, 1999)). This is of benefit for a large number of real-world applications 
where decision variables are either categorical (e.g. distinct crop choices, distinct infrastructure 
options) or where continuous variables are constrained by practical considerations (e.g. pipes are only 
manufactured in discrete diameters, wasteload reduction levels are aligned with particular treatment 
processes).  However, while EAs can cater to both discrete and continuous variables, the mechanisms 
that aim to improve solution quality from one iteration to the next are different for discrete and 
continuous variables, requiring these mechanisms to be implemented in a single algorithm, as is done 
for example in the Exploratory Modeling Workbench (Kwakkel, 2017), the Water System Multi 
Objective Genetic Algorithm (WSMGA) (https://github.com/jeffrey-newman/WSMGA-with-Wrapper-
and-Analytics; Wu et al., 2010b) and the mixed integer implementation of the Pareto Archived 
Dynamically Dimensioned Search algorithm applied in Tolson et al. (2012).    
EAs can handle constraints in a straightforward manner:  Constraint handling in EAs is easy and 
straightforward. The most common approach to handling constraints is to use penalty functions. The 
idea is to transform a constrained optimization problem into an unconstrained problem by adding a 
penalty value to the objective function based on the amount of constraint violation of a candidate 
solution (see Section 5.3). As reviewed by (Coello, 2002), there are other constraint handling 
techniques that work well, such as restricted tournament selection for multi-objective optimization,