21 
 in which the feasibility of solutions is integrated into the selection procedure (see Section 5.3 for 
details, especially Figure 13). 
EAs have the ability to deal with multiple objectives simultaneously:  Many traditional approaches to 
solving multi-objective optimization problems merge the different fitness landscapes into one, 
typically through their weighted summation based on their perceived importance, thereby turning a 
multi-objective optimization problem into a single objective problem. Such approaches, however, limit 
any insights that can be gained into the problem and its solutions, as trade-offs between objectives 
are not able to be explored. EAs, however, are able to overcome this limitation, as they typically have 
multi-objective analogues.  Such analogues navigate multiple fitness landscapes simultaneously during 
the optimization process and are able to approximate Pareto fronts in a single algorithm run, as 
explained in Section 3.2.   
EAs are easily parallelizable:  EAs are naturally suited to being implemented in parallel computing 
environments. At each generation, individual solutions in the population can be evaluated in parallel 
on multiple processors to accelerate the search. This can result in a significant saving in 
(computational) time, compared with most traditional optimization methods, where candidate 
solutions would have to be evaluated serially during the search. 
EAs are not prescriptive:   As EAs work with populations of solutions, they produce a number of near-
optimal solutions, which might be similar in objective function space, but quite different in decision 
variable space (either for single- or multi-objective problems).  This enables consideration of factors 
other than those captured in the mathematical formulation of the optimization problem when 
selecting the final “optimal” solution.  As a result, decision-makers have greater control in terms of 
using their judgement and intuition to select the final solution based on a number of good solutions 
“suggested” by the optimization algorithm (Di Matteo et al., 2017b).  In this way, EAs are used to assist 
with “sifting through” the very large solution spaces that are a feature of environmental problems 
(see Table 1) in order to identify a set of near-optimal candidate solutions that can then be scrutinized 
by decision-makers to identify those that make most sense, either informally or with the aid of multi-
criteria decision analysis methods (e.g. Hyde and Maier, 2006). 
EAs result in increased trust in optimization results: The fact that the evaluation of objectives and 
constraints when EAs are used is based on the outputs of (existing) environmental simulation models, 
and that the iterative process of identifying improved solutions mimics that used by experienced 
environmental modellers, reduces the black-box nature of the optimization process and increases 
trust in the optimal solutions identified.  This is in contrast to the use of more traditional optimization 
methods, such as linear programming, where simplified versions of existing models are likely to be 
used, the application of which is unlikely to evoke the same level of trust.  The fact that solutions are 
not “prescriptive”, as outlined above, is also likely to increase trust in the overall optimization process.  
However, the degree to which the solutions developed with the aid of simulation-optimization 
approaches are trusted is likely to be a function of the degree to which decision-makers are familiar 
with and trust the simulation model, especially of the optimal solutions do not correspond with 
expectations (Di Matteo et al., 2018).