30 
 Unlike the above strategies for MOEAs, some other algorithms take a more simplified approach and 
only search from dominance rank 1 (nondominated solutions).  That is, the population or set of current 
solutions maintained during the search only contains those that are currently non-dominated.  Two 
examples would be PAES and PADDS (Asadzadeh and Tolson, 2013; Asadzadeh and Tolson, 2009; 
Knowles and Corne, 2000).  In both of these algorithms, a measure such as crowding distance is utilized 
to influence algorithm trajectory when preference between two or more non-dominated solutions is 
required. 
It should be noted that the number of Pareto-optimal solutions increases with an increase in the 
number of objective functions. This is because all of the Pareto-optimal solutions of a k-objective 
optimization problem would remain Pareto optimal in the same problem with additional objective 
functions, while any additional objective function would introduce a new dimension in the objective 
space and extend the Pareto front.  So as more objectives are added to a problem, the proportion of 
feasible solutions being Pareto-optimal also increases.  This increase limits the ability of MOEAs (and 
any multi-objective algorithm) to accurately approximate high dimensional Pareto fronts and as such, 
the application of MOEAs is often limited to two or three objectives.  Further details on MOEAs and 
their applications can be found in Coello et al. (2007),  Deb (2001), Nicklow et al. (2009) and  Reed et 
al. (2013). 
 
Figure 16.  Ranking of solutions lying on the same front by crowding distance. The crowding distances 
of solutions A and B are df 1A+df2A and df 1B+df2B, respectively. As crowing distance of A is larger than 
that of B, A will receive a better rank for selection. 
7. What are the Challenges associated with using EAs?  
While EAs have a number of advantages over more conventional optimization methods, as discussed 
in Section 4, they also present a number of additional challenges, especially related to computational 
efficiency and the adjustment of their searching behaviour. 
Challenges with computational efficiency:  As EAs work with populations of solutions and generally 
evolve better solutions over tens or hundreds of iterations, the number of times objective function 
and constraint values have to be calculated is the product of the population size and the number of 
iterations.  This can make their use computationally demanding, especially if objective function and/or 
constraint values are obtained with the aid of environmental models.  The application of EAs to 
complex, real-world problems are of particular concern in this regard, as (i) model run-times can be in f1f2
B
df1df2df1df2AA
A
B
B