22 
 5. How do Single Objective EAs and other Metaheuristics work? 
As mentioned previously, EAs are similar to many conventional optimization algorithms in that they 
update decision variable values in an iterative fashion (Equation 4) in order to identify solutions that 
optimize the objective function.  However, as shown in the high-level pseudo-code for single-objective 
EAs below, they work with populations of solutions, rather than a single solution, as discussed in 
Section 4, and update decision variable values using heuristic operators.  These operators can vary 
significantly between different types of EAs, but are usually inspired by examples from nature. In 
general, there are two major philosophies for determining ∆ xt-1, “evolutionary computation” and 
“swarm intelligence”. The former, such as Genetic Algorithms (GAs) (Goldberg, 1989), was inspired by 
biological evolution, such as selection, recombination (crossover), and mutation, while the latter, such 
as Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) (Kennedy and Eberhart, 1995) and Ant Colony Optimization 
(ACO) (Dorigo et al., 1996), was inspired by the collective social behaviour of natural organisms such 
as birds, ants, and fish. 
A range of “operators” has been developed over the past decades to mimic the functioning of these 
natural systems for optimization purposes. An EA utilizes a collection of such operators that work 
together to determine ∆ xt-1 intelligently based on feedback from the performance of the solutions 
generated in the previous iteration (Figure 9), while keeping “some” balance between diversification 
and intensification. The relative degree of exploration and exploitation of the search is adjusted by 
changing the values of a number of parameters that control the function of theses operators, which 
can be done in a variety of ways (see e.g. Zheng et al., 2017). 
 
A high-level pseudo-code for single-objective EAs
 
 
In general, as shown in Figure 10 for an example with a 2-dimensional fitness landscape, EAs begin 
with a randomly distributed initial population (Figure 10a) and an exploration-oriented search in the 
first iterations to locate the main regions of attraction (Figure 10b). As the search continues, it 
becomes more exploitation-oriented in the regions of attraction, and identifies the best solution in 
the final iteration (Figure 10c). Examples of how this is achieved using evolutionary computation- and 
swarm intelligence-based algorithms are given in Sections 5.1 and 5.2, respectively. 
  Generate an initial population of solutions, x0, and evaluate their  fitness 
 REPEAT 
o Generate a new population, xt, by updating xt-1 using heuristic operators  
(e.g. evolution operators including selection, recombination, and mutation that focus on the best 
solutions in the set so far) 
o Evaluate the fitness of solutions in the new population by using the simulation model to evaluate 
the fitness function 
 UNTIL stopping criteria are met 
 Return the best solution in the current population and respective fitness function