26 
 an appropriate resolution.  In the example in Figure 13, there are two decision variables, X 1 and X 2, 
each of which can take on nine discrete values (i.e. X 1,1, X1,2, … X1,9; X2,1, X2,2, … X2,9).  At the beginning 
of the optimization process, the same pheromone concentrations are assigned to all decision variable 
options, as indicated by the same thickness of blue shading for each of the nine paths for both decision 
variables in Figure 13a.  As the optimization process progresses, decision variable options (i.e. paths) 
that result in better solutions (i.e. better objective function values) receive more pheromone, 
increasing their chances of being selected in subsequent iterations, creating the positive 
reinforcement loop observed in nature.  Consequently, at the end of the optimization process, the 
paths that result in the globally optimal solution have significantly larger pheromone concentrations 
than the other paths, as shown in Figure 13b (i.e. the paths corresponding to decision variable options 
(X1,7 and X 2,6). 
 
 
Figure 13.  Illustration of the evolution of pheromone concentrations over a large number of 
iterations, where the thickness of the blue shading of the paths corresponding to discrete decision 
variable choices corresponds to pheromone concentration.  As can be seen, the discrete values of 
X1nd X2 that correspond to the globally optimal solution (i.e. X 1,7 and X 2,6) have higher pheromone 
concentrations during the final iteration, thereby increasing the probability that these decision 
variable values will be selected. 
 
At each iteration of the optimization process, decision variable options (i.e. paths) are selected as a 
function of the relative pheromone concentrations on different paths.  A common way of achieving 
this is by using a biased roulette wheel, although the way the probabilities of selecting a particular 
path are calculated generally varies between algorithms (Dorigo and Gambardella, 1997; Dorigo et al., 
1996).  For example, in many algorithms, these probabilities are often also a function of a preference 
for locally optimal solutions (i.e. decision variable values that are known to increase objective function 
values (for a maximization problem)), in addition to pheromone levels, with the relative contribution