32 
 to the simulation model and linkage between the optimizer and simulation model is only required for 
evaluation of the fitness of the population of each generation.  
 
Figure 17 . Illustration of the 'black-box' approach to linking an evolutionary algorithm with a water 
resources model. x and f(x) are as described in equations 1-3 (see Section 3.1) and y( x) represents a 
set of model outputs (response variables) that are computed as a function of the decision variables 
(i.e. x) represents a vector of objective functions and/or constraints that are to be optimized and 
which are computed using the model outputs. 
 
In addition to standalone EA packages, there has been a variety of APIs (application programming 
interfaces) and libraries developed to support EA implementations (e.g. Hadka, 2016; Wilhelmstötter, 
2018). These APIs and libraries generally prescribe a specific I/O interface that will ensure 
interchangeability and interoperability across algorithms implemented using a given API or library. In 
this way, libraries and APIs foster a community of practice with respect to EA implementation and 
their adoption is highly encouraged for advanced users. 
The difficulty of comparing alternative algorithm implementations and of assessing incremental 
changes to a given algorithm is now being increasingly recognized (e.g.  Hansen et al., 2016; Sörensen, 
2013; Weyland, 2012, 2015). This has led some algorithm developers to formalize “standard” 
algorithm implementations that can be used to establish the expected baseline reference behaviour 
and performance of a given algorithm (Bratton and Kennedy, 2007; Swan et al., 2015). 
The choice of programming language for implementing an EA algorithm is typically made pragmatically 
based on the historical preferences and experience of the code developer. In general, compiled 
languages are capable of delivering significantly better computational performance, relative to 
interpreted languages. However, these effects are not likely to be significant within a given algorithm 
implementation since runs of the simulation model usually dominate the overall compute 
requirements of a given simulation-based optimization exercise.