4 
 implementation of policy option) to produce desired environmental outcomes, but without formal 
strategies for achieving this.  Consequently, before details of EAs are given, a case is made for why 
formal optimization methods can be useful where environmental models are used to support 
decisions.  In addition, details are given of how to structure environmental decision problems to 
enable such optimization methods to be used.  Then, information is provided on how EAs work, how 
EAs can be implemented and what some of the challenges are when applying EAs to real-world 
problems.  For ease of understanding, key concepts related to the way decision problems are 
structured are introduced in the context of five classes of environmental problems, which are 
illustrated via five specific examples:  
 The mitigation of global climate change impacts:   This problem type is illustrated via the example 
of designing water distribution systems so as to minimise their impact on greenhouse gas 
emissions.  As climate change is caused by anthropogenic systems, mitigation options typically 
require modifications to be made to engineered systems.  In the specific example presented here, 
this corresponds to the selection of the components of the systems of pipes, tanks, pumps and 
valves that deliver water from sources (e.g. rivers, lakes, groundwater) to domestic, industrial and 
agricultural consumers.  Such water distribution systems contribute to greenhouse gas emissions 
through both the embodied energy of their system components (e.g. pipes, tanks) and the energy 
required for operating pumps to maintain the required system pressures.  By optimizing the design 
of these systems, the best possible trade-offs between cost and climate change impacts (via 
greenhouse gas emissions) can be identified, while ensuring such systems perform reliably. 
 Regional resource consumption in urban systems: This problem type is illustrated via the example 
of the long-term planning of water resources systems, where optimization can be used to ensure 
that the best possible balance between the benefits (i.e. water supply security) and impacts (e.g. 
social and environmental impacts of water extraction) of natural resource consumption can be 
identified. 
 Natural resource management:   This problem type is illustrated via the example of the operation 
of reservoir systems, where optimization can be used to determine how to operate an 
infrastructure system so as to achieve the best possible trade-offs between various economic, 
social and environmental outcomes in catchments (watersheds). 
 Pollution management in an environmental system:  This problem type is illustrated via the 
example of the determination of wastewater treatment levels, where optimization can be used to 
determine the lowest-cost treatment strategies that maintain environmental health in a river 
system. 
 Environmental model development:  This problem type is illustrated via the example of model 
calibration, where optimization can be used to identify the model parameters that provide the 
best match between model outputs and the corresponding measured data. 
It should be noted that the above example applications are illustrative only and were selected to 
ensure that the principles presented are accessible to as wide an audience as possible, which is one 
of the objectives of Introductory Overviews.  This is why examples belonging to five different classes 
of problems are presented, so that the underlying principles are likely to resonate with as many 
readers as possible.  However, the basic principles on optimization and evolutionary algorithms 
presented in this paper are applicable to all problems where environmental models are calibrated or