9 
 network might be decreased, increasing pressure losses, but decreasing cost and greenhouse gas 
emissions. 
 For the long-term water resources planning problem, if the previously selected solution resulted 
in a demand shortfall, the capacities of one or more of the sources might be increased, resulting 
in increased cost and water resources impact.  In contrast, if the previously selected solution 
resulted in a large supply excess, the capacities of one or more of the sources might be decreased, 
reducing cost and water resources impact. 
 For the reservoir operation problem, if the previously selected solution resulted in unacceptably 
high levels of spillage (water flowing over the spillway and not generating power), less water might 
be held back in the reservoir prior to the spillage event, increasing the storage capacity at the cost 
of reducing the amount of water available for irrigation and environmental flows.  Conversely, if 
the previously selected solution resulted in very low levels of flood risk, more water might be 
stored in the reservoir for hydropower, environmental and irrigation usage. 
 For the wastewater treatment problem, if the previously selected solution resulted in a violation 
of the water quality standard in the river, some of the upstream treatment levels might be 
increased, improving water quality, but increasing cost. Conversely, if the previously selected 
solution resulted in water quality that is above the required level, some of the treatment levels 
might be decreased, reducing water quality, but decreasing cost. 
 For the model calibration problem, in the case of a rainfall-runoff model, if the previously selected 
solution resulted in an underestimation of peak flows, the value of the runoff curve number 
parameter might be increased to intensify the runoff response to rainfall, and vice versa. 
Conversely, if that solution resulted in a longer time-to-peak than reality, the value of the 
roughness coefficient might be decreased to allow faster movement of water through channels.  
The steps of selecting a trial solution, evaluating its performance with the aid of one or more 
environmental models and selecting a new (hopefully improved) solution based on experience and 
domain knowledge, as well as the performance of the previously selected solution(s), are repeated 
until no further improvement in objective function values can be achieved or the analyst is satisfied 
with the selected solution.  
While the informal optimization approach described above works reasonably well when the problem 
under consideration and simulation model used are well understood by the analyst, and the number 
of decision variables and their feasible ranges (i.e., number of alternative solutions) are relatively 
small, it is unlikely to yield the best possible outcome for the majority of environmental problems.  
This is because the size of the solution space of typical environmental problems is extremely large, as 
illustrated in Table 1 for particular instances of the five example problems considered previously.  
While a vast majority of these solutions might not be considered reasonable from a practical 
perspective, and would thus be excluded from consideration as part of the informal optimization 
process outlined above, the resulting search spaces would still be extremely large, as shown in the last 
column of Table 1, which shows the size of the solution spaces after 99.99% of possible solutions have 
been discarded. As a result, it is extremely unlikely that optimal, or even near-optimal, solutions can 
be identified by using the informal optimization process outlined above, as only a very small fraction 
of the search space is explored.  This problem is exacerbated by the fact that many environmental