17 
 The goal of intensification is to exploit any information about the fitness landscape in order to 
converge to good solutions as quickly as possible.  This works well for relatively smooth fitness 
landscapes, such as the one illustrated in Figure 6a, as globally optimal solutions can be identified in a 
computationally efficient manner.  However, for rugged fitness landscapes (Figure 6b), exploitative 
searching behaviour generally results in convergence to local optima that are in the vicinity of the 
starting position of the search, as there is insufficient exploration of other regions of the search space. 
Consequently, for rugged fitness landscapes, the performance of algorithms that exhibit exploitative 
behaviour can be highly variable, depending on the starting position in the search space.   
4. Why should we use Evolutionary Algorithms? 
There are a number of reasons why EAs are a good choice for finding optimal solutions to 
environmental problems, as discussed below.   
EAs are able to find (near-) globally optimal solutions: A major advantage of EAs is that they are 
population-based.  This is analogous to having an entire search party exploring the fitness landscape(s) 
on the lookout for the globally optimal solution(s), rather than a single person. As a result, large and 
rugged search spaces can be explored more effectively and efficiently because the use of a search 
party, rather than a single person, enables a greater area of the search space to be covered.  In 
addition, the members of the search party often exchange and share information with each other 
using a range of mechanisms (see Sections 5 and 6), enabling promising regions of the search space to 
be identified more effectively and subsequently enabling the search to be concentrated in these 
regions. 
The searching behaviour of EAs can be customised to the problem under consideration:  EAs have 
the ability to be tuned to determine ∆ xt-1 values (Equation 4) that represent an appropriate balance 
between exploration (diversification) and exploitation (intensification), depending on the properties 
of the fitness landscape (i.e. the problem under consideration). This enables EAs to escape local 
optima in the fitness landscape, while still being able to converge relatively quickly (to global, or near-
global, optima).  In contrast, most conventional optimization algorithms do not have this ability. 
For example, gradient methods, which are a classical optimization strategy, calculate ∆ xt-1 as a function 
of the local gradient of the current solution ( xt-1) in the fitness landscape and a step size (Figure 7a). 
Consequently, gradient-based methods exhibit a high degree of exploitation (intensification) and 
therefore only search locally in certain regions of the fitness landscape, but they do not have the ability 
to escape local optima. In contrast, as part of traditionally used random search strategies, ∆ xt-1 is 
chosen randomly by sampling the feasible space, as shown in Figure 7b. Consequently, this strategy 
exhibits a high degree of exploration (diversification), enabling larger areas of the fitness landscape to 
be searched, but does not have the ability to converge to good solutions.