11 
 3. How do we Formulate and Solve Optimization Problems? 
3.1 Problem formulation 
The formulation of formal optimization problems is very similar to that of problems that are solved 
using the informal optimization process outlined in Section 2, requiring the specification of the 
following three components: 
 Objective functions, which represent the values that should be maximized (e.g. system 
performance) or minimized (e.g. environmental impact) (see Figure 1). 
 Decision variables, which are the values that can be manipulated in order to maximize or minimize 
the objective functions (see Figure 1). These can take on discrete (e.g.  integer) or continuous (real) 
values, depending on the problem under consideration. 
 Constraints, which can generally be placed on the values that decision variables can take, or used 
to avoid undesirable/infeasible system responses (see Figure 1).  
A solution is defined as a set of selected values of the decision variables, and a feasible solution is one 
that satisfies all problem constraints. The quality of different solutions is evaluated using the objective 
function.  As mentioned previously, the (environmental) outcomes of interest are represented by the 
objectives and constraints, which generally correspond to the outputs of environmental models, and 
the potential interventions/choices are represented by the decision variables, which generally 
correspond to the inputs of environmental models.  Generally, decision variables correspond to 
anthropogenic changes to natural systems, either directly (e.g. revegetation) or via an engineered 
system (e.g. pollution control). 
Formally, optimization problems are represented (Cohon and Marks, 1975) as a maximization problem 
of an objective function, subject to inequality (and sometimes equality) constraints, as follows: 
maximize f( x)          (1) 
subject to 
gi(x) ≤ 0,  i = 1, 2, …, m       (2) 
 xjl ≤ xj ≤ xju  j = 1, 2, …, n       (3) 
where x is the vector of decision variables, x j indicates the jth value in this vector, and x jl and x ju are 
lower and upper bounds on the decision variables, respectively; f is the objective function and g i is the 
ith constraint function of vector x. These functions can be highly non-linear and complex, and their 
collective evaluation for any given x requires the running of environmental simulation models.  
For minimization problems, the maximization formulation above can be easily transformed into a 
minimization formulation by multiplying the objective function by minus one (i.e., maximize -f( x) is 
equivalent to minimize f( x)). Also, the “single-objective” optimization formulation above can be 
extended to a “multi-objective” optimization formulation by introducing more objective functions to 
be maximized simultaneously in Eq. (1) above; that is, to maximize (f 1(x), …, f k(x)), where k is the 
number of objective functions.