7 
 and to minimize environmental, social and economic costs by selecting appropriate reservoir 
release magnitudes and durations over time, which are the decision variables (i.e. interventions).  
The constraints  are the available water resources and limits on reservoir outflows. A solution 
consists of the selected reservoir release schedule. 
 The determination of wastewater treatment levels for pollution control in environmental 
systems: For this problem, the outcomes of interest correspond to both constraints  (i.e. the 
maintenance of acceptable water quality levels in the river system under consideration) and 
objectives  (i.e. minimizing the cost of the interventions required to achieve the desired water 
quality outcomes).  The decision variables  (i.e. interventions) are the required wastewater 
treatment levels and a solution consists of the selected treatment levels at each wastewater 
treatment plant. 
 The calibration of simulation models:  For this problem, the objectives  (i.e. outcomes of interest) 
are to minimize an error measure between simulated flux/state variables and corresponding 
measured flux/state variables by selecting appropriate values of the parameters of a simulation 
model, which are the decision variables.  The constraints  are the allowable ranges of the 
parameters. A solution consists of a selected value for each of the model parameters to be 
obtained by calibration. 
Once an environmental problem has been formulated in terms of objectives  (i.e. the values to be 
maximized or minimized), decision variables  (i.e. the values that can be changed to maximize or 
minimize the objective(s)) and constraints  (i.e. the allowable values of decision variables and/or 
objectives/constraints), the best solutions are generally identified using an informal “optimization” 
process, where the “best” solutions are identified via trial-and-error (Simon, 1996), as illustrated in 
Figure 2.  The first step of this process involves the selection of a plausible solution to the problem 
under consideration from the available alternatives. This selection is generally based on domain 
knowledge, experience and intuition.  For example: 
 
 
Figure 2. Steps in a traditional informal “optimization” process for finding optimal solutions to 
environmental problems with the aid of environmental simulation models via trial-and-error. 
 
 For the water distribution system design problem, this would involve the selection of the 
diameters of all of the pipes in the network, the sizes and locations of all of the tanks and the 
types, locations and sizes of the valves and pumps.