18 
  
Figure 7. Examples of (a) search using a gradient-based approach, and (b) random (exhaustive) 
search that “blindly” samples the search space. Here, the response surface of Figure 1 is shown as 
contour plots. 
 
The fact that these more traditional optimization algorithms exhibit fixed searching behaviours that 
cannot be tailored to match the characteristics of the fitness landscape limits their range of 
applicability, as they are generally only suited to certain types of problems.  For example, gradient-
based methods are generally only suited to problems with relatively smooth fitness landscapes with a 
single basin of attraction (see Figure 6a), whereas random search methods are generally only suited 
to problems with very rough and unstructured search spaces (see Figure 6b).  However, as mentioned 
previously, the searching behaviour of EAs can be adjusted to achieve the most appropriate balance 
between diversification and intensification for the problem under consideration.  
EAs are easily linked with (existing) simulation models:  One of the greatest advantages of using EAs 
is that they can be easily linked with existing simulation and integrated assessment models (see 
Section 8).  This can be achieved in a straightforward manner, only requiring a two-way coupling 
between the optimization algorithm and an (existing) simulation model (Figure 8).  In the coupling, (i) 
the optimization algorithm determines decision variable values that are passed to the simulation 
model, (ii) the simulation model evaluates the corresponding objective function and constraint values 
and (iii) the objective function and constraint values are passed back to the optimization algorithm. 
Consequently, if the performance of a system can be simulated using an existing model, it can also be 
optimized using EAs. This facilitates the comparison of solutions created via informal optimization 
(using the simulation model as an engine) with the solutions coming from the EA optimization process, 
which can aid in users’ trust of the optimization results (Smith et al., 2015).