25 
  
Figure 12.  Example crossover and mutation operators and their performance on a fitness landscape. 
(a) Single-point crossover that reproduces two offspring from two parents in a 5D decision variable 
space. (b) Uniform mutation that replaces the value of a decision variable by a uniformly distributed 
random number between the variable lower and upper bounds (R 2 = random number in [x 2l, x2u]). 
Example outcome of (c) single-point crossover and (d) uniform mutation in a 2D decision variable 
space. 
 
5.2 Ant colony optimization algorithms 
In contrast to GAs, in ACO algorithms (ACOAs), the evolutionary operators are not applied to solutions 
directly.  Instead, the solution space is modified to encourage the selection of decision variable values 
that have resulted in good solutions in previous iterations.  As a result, completely new solutions are 
generated in each iteration, rather than modifying solutions from previous iterations. 
This searching behaviour is inspired by the way colonies of ants look for food in nature.  As part of this 
process, ants deposit pheromone, leaving trails, and other ants are more likely to follow trails with 
higher concentrations of pheromone.  As shorter paths between a colony’s nest and a food source can 
be traversed more quickly, shorter paths receive more pheromone per unit time, encouraging more 
ants to follow this path, further increasing its pheromone concentration.  In this way, a positive 
feedback loop is created, reinforcing shorter paths (i.e. better solutions) from one iteration to the 
next.  At the same time, the attractiveness of longer paths diminishes over time due to pheromone 
evaporation. 
When using ACO to identify optimal solutions to environmental problems, the values particular 
decision variables can take correspond to the different paths ants can traverse (e.g. Golding et al., 
2017; Nguyen et al., 2016; Szemis et al., 2012).  As these paths are discrete, the decision variable 
options also have to be discrete, which requires continuous decision variables to be discretized using