19 
  
 
Figure 8. Illustration of coupling between the evolutionary optimization module and the simulation 
model, where the optimization module can be “bolted onto” any simulation model.  The 
optimization module identifies which solutions to try and passes these to the simulation model, 
which evaluates the utility of these solutions (i.e., objective function and constraints).  This 
information is passed back to the optimization module, where it is used to determine which 
solutions to try next. 
 
An implication of this is that EAs have a wider range of applicability compared with many more 
traditional optimization approaches, such as linear programming (Md. Azamathulla et al., 2008) and 
gradient-based methods (Kessler and Shamir, 1989).  For example: 
 Linear programming works when the objective function and constraints are linear, while 
many environmental processes are highly non-linear. Therefore, when linear 
programming is used, the outputs from simulation models can generally not be used 
directly, and instead, a simplified (linear approximation) version of the problem has to be 
solved.  In this way, although linear programming is very computationally efficient and 
guaranteed to find the globally optimal solution, the solution that is found is generally not 
to the actual problem (unless the problem is linear), but a simplified version of the 
problem. 
 
 When gradient methods are used, information about the gradient of the fitness function 
is used to decide in which direction the search should proceed (i.e., how ∆ xt-1 is 
determined), as mentioned previously.  However, the gradient (derivative) information of 
environmental models is not typically available, requiring the derivative of the objective 
function to be approximated numerically.  This increases the computational demand, as 
many more objective function values (i.e., model runs) need to be evaluated.  In addition, 
in fitness landscapes with significant roughness/noise (small-scale features that might be 
due to simulation model errors), the resulting derivative information might be deceptive 
and misguide the search. Related to this, the objective function might be non-
differentiable (e.g. due to discontinuity) in some areas of the feasible space. The 
derivative-free nature of EAs, however, makes them insensitivet to possible discontinuity 
and ruggedness in fitness landscapes.