8 
  For the long-term water resources planning problem, this would involve the selection of the 
capacities of the various potential supply sources, as well as the various demand management 
strategies. 
 For the reservoir operation problem, this would involve the selection of when to release water, 
how much to release and how long for. 
 For the wastewater treatment problem, this would involve the selection of the treatment level at 
each wastewater treatment plant. 
 For the model calibration problem, this would involve the selection of values for each model 
parameter to be obtained by calibration. 
The performance of the selected solution in terms of objective function values and constraint violation 
(i.e. the outcomes of interest) is then evaluated, typically with the aid of one or more environmental 
simulation models.  For example: 
 For the water distribution system design problem, a hydraulic simulation model (e.g. Rossman, 
2000) would typically be used to check whether minimum pressure constraints are violated for 
the selected pipe diameters, in addition to the calculation of the values of the cost and greenhouse 
gas emission objectives. 
 For the long-term water resources planning problem, a river basin planning model would generally 
be used to simulate the interactions between various sources and demands throughout the year 
in order to enable the impact on water resources, supply cost, energy and greenhouse gas 
emissions, as well as reliability of supply, to be calculated for different combinations of water 
sources and extraction amounts/capacities and demand management strategies. 
 For the reservoir operation problem, an integrated model would be required, linking reservoir 
releases to the hydropower, environmental health, crop production and flood protection 
objectives. 
 For the wastewater treatment problem, a water quality model (e.g. Ambrose et al., 2017) would 
generally be used to check whether the water quality constraints in the river are violated for the 
selected treatment levels, in addition to the calculation of the corresponding treatment costs. 
 For the model calibration problem, the simulation model to be calibrated (e.g. Arnold et al., 1998) 
would be run with the selected parameter values, and the error metric (see Bennett et al., 2013) 
for a comprehensive range of metrics) would be calculated between the simulated model outputs 
for a set of inputs and the corresponding measured outputs. 
The next step in the informal “optimization” process involves selection of an alternative, hopefully 
improved, solution. This selection takes into account the performance of the solution that was 
selected initially, as well as experience, domain knowledge, and intuition. For example: 
 For the water distribution system design problem, if the previously selected solution resulted in a 
violation of the pressure constraint in a particular part of the system, some of the pipe diameters 
in this region of the network might be increased, reducing pressure losses, but increasing cost and 
greenhouse gas emissions.  Conversely, if the previously selected solution resulted in a large 
pressure excess in a particular part of the system, some of the pipe diameters in this region of the