3 
 1. Introduction and Learning Objectives 
Many environmental decision-making problems can be cast as trying to find a preferred option among 
different alternatives.  The use of environmental models can play a central role in this task (Merritt et 
al., 2017), as they can be used to assess the utility of different decision alternatives (e.g. infrastructure 
interventions, management strategies, policy options).  However, identifying the most suitable option 
can be difficult, as environmental problems are generally complex and the number of available 
alternatives is often large.  Consequently, significant benefits can be achieved by linking simulation 
models with a modern family of optimization techniques referred to as “metaheuristics” in order to 
identify the options that make best use of scarce resources, achieve the best environmental outcomes 
for a given budget or provide the best trade-offs between competing objectives for further scrutiny.  
This enables decision-making processes to focus on options that provide the “best bang for buck”, 
rather than options that are potentially less reliable, more expensive and achieve worse 
environmental outcomes. 
The term “metaheuristic” (coined by Glover, 1986) is composed of two Greek words, the prefix “meta” 
meaning “beyond” and “heuristic” meaning “to discover”.  From an optimization perspective, 
metaheuristics are high level procedures designed to intelligently utilize heuristics to efficiently find a 
near-optimal solution to complex optimization problems (for definitions, see Blum and Roli, 2003). 
From an environmental management perspectives, they provide a means to make use of (existing) 
environmental models to identify a set of solutions (decision alternatives) that provide (near) optimal 
trade-offs between desired outcomes.   Many metaheuristics are “nature-inspired” (also alternatively 
called “metaphor-based”), as they involve heuristics that imitate processes in natural systems (Blum 
et al., 2011; Boussaïd et al., 2013; Dréo et al., 2006; Zavala et al., 2014). Metaheuristics can be divided 
into two classes, including those that work with populations of solutions and those that do not.  
Evolutionary algorithms (EAs), which are population based, are a major, and arguably the most 
popular, class of metaheuristics. Consequently, as was done in Maier et al. (2014), the focus of this 
paper is on EAs, although many of the concepts discussed also broadly apply to other metaheuristics. 
EAs have proven to be highly effective in solving a wide range of environmental problems (Maier et 
al., 2014), as they can be used in realistic decision-contexts. This is because they (i) can be used as one 
element in broader, participatory environmental decision-making processes (Di Matteo et al., 2017a; 
Kaim et al., 2018; Piscopo et al., 2015; Wu et al., 2016), (ii) can be linked with existing simulation 
models to assist with the exploration of large solution spaces (Maier et al., 2015), (iii) can cater to 
multiple competing objectives (Newland et al., 2018; Verstegen et al., 2017), (iv) can take into account 
uncertainties (Beh et al., 2017; Eker and Kwakkel, 2018) and (v) generally provide a number of “good” 
solutions that can be explored further, rather than being prescriptive (Di Matteo et al., 2017a; Kaim 
et al., 2018).  Their main disadvantages are (i) that they are potentially computationally expensive, 
although this primarily depends on the computational efficiency of the simulation model with which 
they are linked, (ii) that they are not guaranteed to identify the globally optimal solution (from a 
mathematical perspective) and (iii) that they generally need to be tuned to the problem under 
consideration (Maier et al., 2014; Mala-Jetmarova et al., 2017). 
The purpose of this Introductory Overview is to introduce EAs to the environmental modelling 
community, where environmental models are commonly used to assist with identifying the course of 
action that should be undertaken (e.g. pollution control, operation of infrastructure system,