28 
 removed from the search and the degree of constraint violation is not considered. An efficient, and 
perhaps the most popular, way of handling any type of constraint is the “penalizing” approach. In this 
general-purpose approach, which is also referred to as the “penalty function” approach, a penalty 
function is defined to quantify the degree of infeasibility (constraint violation) of an infeasible solution 
and penalize it proportionally. In this way, the constraint is removed from the optimization 
formulation, and instead, a corresponding penalty function is integrated into to the objective function. 
This integration is typically by weighted averaging with a carefully chosen weight for the penalty 
function. In practice, the user may need to identify the appropriate penalty function and 
corresponding weights via trial and error. 
6. How do Multi-Objective EAs work? 
The searching mechanisms of multi-objective EAs (MOEAs) are based on the same basic principles that 
underpin single objective EAs.  However, as shown in the high-level pseudo-code below, a major 
difference between the two is in the way they evaluate the fitness of a solution. Unlike single-objective 
optimization, where fitness evaluation is straightforward and is performed simply by evaluating a 
single objective function, multi-objective optimization requires a more elaborate “fitness assignment” 
scheme that brings together and unifies the different objective functions. Fitness assignment is a 
major component of multi-objective EAs and other metaheuristics and basically refers to the process 
of translating a vector of objective function values into a scalar-valued fitness that can be used for 
ranking and selecting solutions of higher quality during the course of the search.  
 
A high-level pseudo-code for multi-objective EAs
 
 
There are different strategies for fitness assignment, but these are generally based on the dominance 
concept illustrated in Section 3. The idea is to rank candidate solutions based on their dominance 
strength in objective space and to use the rank numbers of the solutions as their respective fitness 
values. Figure 15 shows three strategies for ranking the solutions in a population, namely “dominance 
depth”, “dominance rank” and “dominance count”. In the dominance depth strategy (e.g., used in  Generate an initial population of solutions, x0, and assign their fitness using code a 
 REPEAT 
o Generate a new population, xt, by updating xt-1 using heuristic operators  
(e.g. evolution operators including selection, recombination, and mutation) 
o Assign the fitness of solutions in the new population using code A below 
 UNTIL stopping criteria are met 
 Return the non-dominated solutions in the current population and respective fitness functions 
 
 
 A: Sub-pseudo-code for fitness assignment in multi -objective EAs  
o Evaluate the multiple fitness functions for each solution 
o Rank the solutions based on their dominance and density