13 
 among all possible solutions. It should be noted that there may exist one or multiple other hills in the 
fitness landscape with lower peaks, which are referred to as “local optima”, as their respective 
solutions are optimal only within their neighbourhood in the decision variable space.  
When there is more than one objective, each objective has its own fitness landscape, as variations in 
objective values with changes in decision variable values are likely to be different for different 
objectives.  For many problems, objectives compete with each other, so that solutions that improve 
values of one objective might degrade values in another.  For example, a reservoir release schedule 
that increases ecological health in the river is unlikely to also increase agricultural production.   
Consequently, when considering competing objectives, it is less clear which solutions are better than 
others, as the solution that results in the highest peak in the fitness landscape for one objective might 
result in the lowest peak in the fitness landscape for the other objective and vice versa.  In such cases, 
the optimality of a solution is determined using the concept of dominance. 
If a solution ( xi) performs better than another ( xj) in at least one objective and does not perform worse 
in any of the other objectives (e.g. f 1(xi) < f1(xj) and f l(xi) <= fl(xj) for l = 2…k) , then the first solution ( xi) 
is said to dominate the other solution ( xj), as it is clearly better with respect to all objectives.  However, 
given a pair of solutions ( xp, xq) where each solution performs better than the other in at least one 
objective (e.g. f 1(xp) < f1(xq) and f 2(xp) > f2(xq)), it is not possible to determine which solution is best 
without some value judgement about the relative importance of different objectives.  Consequently, 
for problems with more than one competing objective, it is not possible to determine a single best 
solution, as there are a number of solutions (e.g. xp and xq above) that are not dominated by any 
others.  This set of non-dominated solutions forms the Pareto front (Pareto, 1896), which is unique 
and provides the optimal trade-off between objectives.  
The above concepts are illustrated in Figures 4 and 5 for a hypothetical problem with two decision 
variables (2-dimensional decision space) and two objective functions (2-dimensional objective space), 
both of which are to be minimized.  Figure 4 illustrates the mapping from the solution to the objective 
space, which is generally done with the aid of one or more simulation models.  As can be seen, the 
solutions that are non-dominated in the objective space lie on the Pareto front, whereas dominated 
solutions do not.  The relationship between the different fitness landscapes for the two objectives and 
the Pareto front is illustrated in Figure 5. 
3.3 Problem solution 
As mentioned previously, the solution of single objective optimization problems corresponds to the 
process of searching the fitness landscape for the highest peak or lowest trough, depending on 
whether the objective is to maximize or minimize the objective function.  For problems with more 
than one objective, the optimization process corresponds to searching the fitness landscapes for each 
of the objectives so as to identify non-dominated solutions.  As the globally optimal objective function 
value(s), and the corresponding decision variable values (i.e. the solution), are unknown for real-life 
optimization problems (i.e. the whole purpose of the optimization process is to identify these), it is 
not possible to assess how well an optimization algorithm has performed.  The exception to this is 
model calibration, where the “best” value that can possibly be achieved (i.e. a calibration error of 
zero) is known.  Consequently, split sample testing (i.e. using a subset of the available data for 
calibration and a subset for validation) can be used for these types of optimization problems to obtain 
a measure of the “robustness” of the calibration process. This, however, is generally affected by a