33 
 As mentioned previously, EAs that iteratively operate on a population of candidate solutions sets are 
readily parallelized using distributed computing, whereby population members are evaluated 
simultaneously by a team of processors.  These processors may reside on the same motherboard (e.g. 
in a typical desktop system), within the same rack or cluster of a data centre, within multiple data 
centres that are geographically separated, or, most generally, across multiple interconnected 
computing devices (e.g. desktops, laptops, tablets, and smartphones). In addition to choosing an 
appropriate communications interface (e.g. the message passing interface (MPI)(Gibson and Meter, 
2000; Gropp et al., 2014), the sockets protocol, network attached storage (NAS), etc.) for relaying 
information between these processors, implementers must decide whether the processors should 
operate synchronously or asynchronously. Figure 18 illustrates the difference between the 
synchronous (left hand side of Figure 18) and asynchronous (right hand side of Figure 18) schemes in 
the context of evaluating the new generation of an EA using parallel computing.   
As illustrated in Figure 18, in the synchronous mode of operation, each processor is assigned a set of 
a priori compute tasks and these are typically keyed to the processor’s unique id. For example, 
processor 0 might always be responsible for evaluating the first 10 population members, with 
processor 1 assigned the next 10 members, and so on. While this approach minimizes inter-processor 
communication overhead, it can result in significant bottlenecking if simulation run times are markedly 
heterogeneous across the population members. For example, such heterogeneity can occur if model 
pre-emption is employed (Razavi et al., 2010). Consequently, some processors may take longer than 
others to complete a given round of evaluations, thereby forcing those that finish early to wait.  
As shown in the right hand side of Figure 18, in the asynchronous mode of operation, one or more 
processors are designated as “managers” or “coordinators”. These managers communicate 
asynchronously and on-demand with the remaining “worker” processors to assign compute tasks. This 
asynchronous approach entails more inter-processor communication overhead but has the benefit of 
minimizing the idle time of “worker” processors. 
As the use of EAs enters into the state of practice, there has been increased interest in incorporating 
them into decision support systems and related integrated modelling frameworks (e.g.  Babendreier 
and Castleton, 2005; Laniak et al., 2013). Such “meta-systems” involve complex modelling workflows 
that can include parameter estimation, uncertainty and sensitivity analysis, and design optimization. 
Ideally, these systems should be structured to accommodate varied programming languages, libraries 
and APIs. Furthermore, the execution management used within a given meta-system should be 
implemented in a manner that can exploit the inherent parallelism of EAs.  
Looking to the future, various EA research directions and emerging technologies are already 
influencing their implementation in computer software.  For example, the ubiquity of cloud computing 
has fostered the emergence of optimization as a service (OaaS) as a practical on-demand tool for 
decision makers to apply EAs to solve previously intractable problems (Broad et al., 2015a; Kurschl et 
al., 2014). Rapid and agile OaaS implementation is facilitated by portable and interpreted web-ready 
languages that support reflection and introspection (e.g. python, php, and javascript). Furthermore, 
researchers are in the early stages of exploring how EAs can best exploit exascale parallel computing 
technologies like accelerators and graphics processing units (GPUs) (Alonso, 2015; Cárdenas-Montes 
et al., 2016; Hadka and Reed, 2015). Finally, the development of hybridized EA algorithms is an