The paper reviewed artificial intelligence and digital twin research. 83 papers are covered and 
discussed. It is a very good topic with high engineering potential. However, the current 
manuscript has issues in focus. Instead of discouraging the authors, I hope the comments 
underneath are helpful for the users to improve the manuscript.
In recent years, there are many review papers about DT already. This manuscript tries to 
focus on AI in DT, which is a very good topic. However, many of the references are general 
DT research with low connections to AI, which affects the value of the manuscript. Please 
find more details underneath.  
 
Page 4 to 14: The contents described DT research in the area of aerospace, 
automated driving, intelligent manufacturing, and smart cities. Many of the 
references use traditional automation and simulation methods and do not show an 
explicit connection to AI.  
 ○
The manuscript needs to draw a very clear line between an intelligent system and 
artificial intelligence. In the discussed literature, many of the systems and methods 
are intelligent, but not artificial intelligence. These types of research should be 
excluded from the review.  
 ○
Page 14 to 15: Similarly, this section discusses the general challenges of DT, instead 
of AI’s challenges in DT.  
 ○○
Even though it does not affect my evaluation of the manuscript, there are some minor 
issues that can also be improved.  
 
Figure 2: The figure is unnecessarily big, and some of the arrows are not pointed to 
the year circle. Please improve the visual design.  
 ○
Figure 3: Similarly, the figure is too big and the visual design can be improved.  
 ○
Page 8: What does FP-growth refer to? Please provide the relevant statement.○○
 
Is the topic of the review discussed comprehensively in the context of the current 
literature?
Partly
Are all factual statements correct and adequately supported by citations?
Partly
Is the review written in accessible language?
Yes
Are the conclusions drawn appropriate in the context of the current research literature?
Partly
Competing Interests:  No competing interests were disclosed.Digital Twin  
 Page 23 of 25Digital Twin 2022, 1:12 Last updated: 13 NOV 2024