the current application of traditional smart city construction,  
there are still data fragmentation in various fields.  
Generally, there are at least three base maps in general cities,  
namely, the urban information model platform promoted 
by the housing and urban-rural construction system, the  
spatiotemporal big data platform led by natural resources  
and land planning, and the city base map for urban security 
and comprehensive governance based on the line of public  
security politics and law. Each base map forms its own system,  
and generally only supports the applications in the system.  
It cannot be used by other departments on demand and at any  
time. The number has already been accumulated in quite some  
time, and it is tough to give up and integrate. This makes it  
difficult and challenging to implement the urban traffic  
simulation process.
In fact, in terms of the construction of digital twin tools and  
platforms, most of the current tools and platforms focus on  
certain specific aspects and lack systematic considerations.  
However, to create a visualization of the entire process  
of urban planning, construction and management, collect  
urban “pulse” data, reflect the in-time operating situations  
of the city, and provide root solutions for information 
resource sharing, integration, effective utilization, and cross-  
departmental business collaboration. Digital twin technology  
has great potential.
Future prospects of artificial intelligence in digital 
twins
Future prospects of digital twins in the field of 
automotive autonomous driving
In the future promotion of the digital twin automobile  
autonomous driving virtual environment test system, the use  
of open analog interfaces to control code-based traffic scenarios  
is a major trend in the future. Future research topics will be  
carried out around the promotion of the test platform. After  
all, the current utilization rate of the autonomous driving test  
environment is not so high. In the future, a large amount of  
comprehensive market research is needed to accurately grasp  
market needs, formulate a reasonable market promotion plan, 
including scientific research results transformation methods,  
product promotion and application methods, product pricing,  
etc., formulate a reasonable product development plan, and  
establish software and hardware integration digital twin  
autonomous driving test platform.
The promotion can be achieved through the establishment 
of a digital twin autopilot test system through joint auto  
manufacturing companies, auto suppliers, scientific research  
institutions, etc., to jointly overcome its technical difficulties,  
gradually form a consensus on the autopilot test system, and  
promote the development of the autopilot test industry. On the  
other hand, it launched a digital twin autonomous driving test  
platform for auto companies, auto suppliers, and scientific  
research institutions. It adopts a joint unit membership  
system for low-cost use and joint development; for non-joint  
units, two methods are used: fee-per-time for testing  
services, annual fee for platform establishment, or perpetual  authorization fee. Establish a complete pre-sales consulting-  
platform establishment-testing service-after-sales maintenance 
team and system, and carry out the adaptability adjustment  
of the test platform and the collection and resolution of after-  
sales problems.
Of course, tracking and recording the process is also very  
important. Continuously track and record the external use of 
the digital twin autonomous driving test platform, establish a  
database of use information, and compare various aspects  
on the bases of use data. The modularization and  
platformization effect evaluation of the digital twin automatic  
driving test system is carried out, so as to realize the  
targeted improvement of the digital twin automatic driving  
test system, and realize the closed-loop development mode of  
“platform establishment-tracking return visit-iterative upgrade”.
Future research topics of digital twins in the aerospace 
field
In the aerospace field, the use of digital twins has already  
shown impressive benefits. With the help of the construction  
of physical entity model and the application of related data,  
it can not only reduce the number and duration of aircraft  
certification tests, eliminate accidental cracks and failures, but 
also reduce the number of maintenance inspections for the  
overall structure of the aircraft and frequency to achieve  
unprecedented economic safety and reliability. However, the  
digital twin technology currently lacks a systematic and  
universal reference model for guidance, and in the future,  
there is still a long way to go in related research on the  
optimization of digital twin models. In addition, digital twins  
will gradually develop in the direction of simulation and  
integration. These two are also the subject of future research.  
Virtualization- the integrity of object digital twins is critical  
to the success of their application in the industrial area.  
Each physical model has a particular model, commonly used  
models such as fluid mechanics, structural mechanics,  
thermodynamic, applied mechanics, fatigue damage, material  
state evolution model, etc., in the future, associating different  
models together and reflecting them in the twin model in  
real time is the key to the implementation of digital twin  
technology. Integration-the realization of the two-way  
interaction of models and key data at all stages of the product  
and twin life cycle determines whether the digital twin  
technology can be successfully applied. The realization of  
this breakthrough requires other technical support, and the  
vision of the digital twin needs to be integrated with other  
advanced technologies to be realized.
Future prospects of digital twins in the direction of 
smart manufacturing
In the coming years, digital twins development trend will  
keep increasing. More and more manufacturers are beginning  
to utilize digital twin technology to improve procedures,  
generate real-time database judgments, and begin to look for  
opportunities to revise innovative services, products, and  
business methods. The manufacturing industry will slowly  
become a pioneer in the application of digital twin technology.  
Page 16 of 25Digital Twin 2022, 1:12 Last updated: 13 NOV 2024