Figure 5.  Flight life prediction based on digital twin.
(High Threshold Logic) equipment52 is often used for safety  
and proactive performance testing. But in this kind of test,  
only the controller is real, and other factors like the driver,  
gearbox, power, road environment, and other controller-  
related content are simulated in a virtual environment. Due  
to the limited computer level at present, the simulation  
environment cannot be set too complicated, so the performance  
of the tested car object is not so accurate, and the test  
accuracy has a certain deviation. Of course, testing in a real  
environment is undoubtedly the best choice, but due to various  
limitations of physical conditions, it is impossible to maintain  
a uniform test scenario every time. Therefore, a test  
evaluation system combining automatic driving simulation  
testing based on digital twin technology and actual road  
environment should be implemented53. The digital twin test  
architecture diagram is shown in Figure 6.
Zhang et al. (2020)54 proposed a vehicle damage detection &  
segmentation algorithm based on transfer learning and  
improved mask regional convolutional neural network 
(mask RCNN). The vehicle damage image was collected for  
preprocessing, and the data set label was made by Labelme  
and divided into the training set and test set. The residual  
network (ResNet) was optimized, and the feature pyramid  
network (FPN) was used for feature extraction. The results  
showed that the improved Mask RCNN had better Average  
Precision (AP) value, detection accuracy, and masking  
accuracy. Thee efficiency of solving traffic accident  
compensation was improved. Li et al. (2021)55 targeted the  
post-disaster distribution system restoration (PDSR) problem  
of post-disaster transportation infrastructure. A PDSR  
collaborative optimization model was established with  logistics support and geographical characteristics. Meantime, an 
improved mixed bacteria colony chemotaxis (BCC) algorithm  
was introduced to solve the model. At the same time, the  
BCC algorithm was used to determine the maintenance plan  
and material distribution of the distribution system. Finally,  
based on distribution networks of different scales in road  
network traffic, the effectiveness of this method was  
verified by using different damage levels and geographical  
characteristics. The study of Yun, et al. (2021)56 pointed  
out that computer simulation based on digital twins is an  
indispensable step in the design of autonomous vehicles.  
However, it takes a lot of effort to design a simulation  
environment that is exactly the same as the real road  
conditions, and the cost-effectiveness is very low, because  
many things must be implemented. In the study, a method 
was proposed to use the online game “GTA5” (Grand Theft  
Auto V) as the basis for the simulation of autonomous  
vehicles. The GTA5 online game may be utilized as an  
appropriate simulation tool since it has a range of ideal items,  
pedestrians, and highways. Through capturing the GTA5  
game screen using OpenCV57 and analyzing it with Python’s  
YOLO (You Only Live Once)58 and TensorFlow59, a highly  
accurate object recognition system can be established by  
designing algorithms to avoid object collisions and different  
lane recognition.
Applying digital twins to the field of autonomous driving,  
city or city-level digital twin data can be used as high-  
precision maps, that is, basic environmental data for car  
operation. It is the opinion of the authors that automobile  
manufacturers, autopilot equipment manufacturers and  
comprehensive solution providers all need the popularization  
Page 8 of 25Digital Twin 2022, 1:12 Last updated: 13 NOV 2024