more than 20 billion sensors and terminals connected, and the  
digital twin would connect billions of physical devices, trying  
to simulate as much as possible of the actual situation of the  
physical world in the virtual world3,16,17. This prediction has  
been verified, and it is the opinion of the authors that more  
sensors and terminal equipment will be used in this technology  
in 2021. Because the advantages of digital twins are becoming  
more and more prominent, the research fields of digital 
twins are diverse, mainly in the field of computer integrated  
manufacturing, and the development process has gone through many stages
18, as shown in Figure 1 below.
Data acquisition, data modeling, and data application are three  
main 
aspects of the digital twins. Data collection refers to the  
full use of satellite remote sensing, tilted aerial photogrammetry,  
lidar measurement, cameras and other technologies to obtain  
three-dimensional data from a complete physical space scene19. The function of the sensor is to obtain different kinds of real  
data in the real world20. The technical difficulty and key of 
data collection is the high precision and efficiency of data  
collection, which determines the quality, efficiency and cost of data collection. After obtaining a large amount of original  
physical world data, data modeling was carried out, and  
automatic modeling tools were used for further processing to  
generate a three-dimensional model of the actual recovery  
of the physical world. In addition to high-precision virtual  
reconstruction of the environment, digital twin data is more  
effective in supporting various operating processes. Data  
modeling can be divided into two parts: visual 3D modeling
21  
and semantic modeling22. Visual 3D modeling is a  
3D reproduction of the physical world. The semantic modeling  
of digital twins includes “structuring” the collected data and  
identifying objects such as vehicles, roads, people, and  
internal objects. The mapping concept is shown in Figure 2.
Figure 1. The development history of digital twins.
Page 4 of 25Digital Twin 2022, 1:12 Last updated: 13 NOV 2024