If early practitioners show first-mover advantages in various  
industries, other manufacturing companies will follow their 
pace. In the long run, to realize the full potential of digital twin  
technology, it may be necessary to integrate systems and  
data across all parts of ecosystem. Establish a complete digital  
imitation of the client life cycle or supply chain, and provide  
an insightful macro-operation view, including first-tier suppliers  
and their own suppliers, but still need to integrate exterior  
substances into the interior digital ecosystem. Now, most  
manufacturers are still dissatisfied with outside connection  
that extends beyond point-to-point connectivity. To overcome  
this hesitancy may be a long-term battle, but in the end  
all the effort is worth it. In the future, companies hope to use  
block chains to break information silos, verify information  
and enter digital twins. This will release a large amount of  
previously inaccessible data, make the simulation more  
detailed and dynamic, and create immeasurable potential value.
Future research topics of digital twins in intelligent 
urban transportation
With the continuous iteration of information technology, the  
gradual improvement of 5G standards and the establishment  
of commercial networks, the network performance of 
large bandwidth, high speed, and low latency will further  
empower the upgrade of the digital twin intelligent  
transportation system. On the one hand, the 5G ultra-high-
speed network performance makes it possible for vehicles to  
communicate safely and reliably in high-speed movement,  
ensuring the realization of functions such as vehicle-road  
collaborative automatic driving, vehicle formation automatic  
driving, and remote automatic driving. On the other hand,  
the accelerated development of 5G has coordinated the IOT  
and AI to enable the transportation system to have the ability  
to “connect all things”, allowing digital twins to “migrate” 
the four elements of “human-vehicle-road-environment”  
transportation from the physical world. In the digital world,  
traffic data has been greatly enriched, allowing the “digital,  
networked, and intelligent” of smart transportation to be truly  
implemented. Although digital twins are the frontier trend of  
smart transportation, there is still a certain gap between the real  
global management, synchronous visualization, and virtual-real 
interaction digital twin transportation system. However, driven  
by 5G technological changes and demand upgrades, digital  
twins generate novel thoughts, new approaches, and new  
concepts for smart transportation, which will continue to  
develop in the future and eventually form a complete technical 
operation system.
With the advancement of 5G, 6G and other cutting-edge  
communication technologies, coupled with end-side-cloud  
collaborative computing, the real-time performance of digital  
twins can be improved, and it is even possible to model  
unknown areas in real time without relying on high-precision  
maps. Secondly, by improving behavior simulation and  
prediction algorithms, the deduction of behavior prediction  
can be made more accurate, and with stronger computing  
power, even more parallel worlds can be deduced at once.  
Furthermore, with the development of V2X (vehicle to  everything) technology, there will be more types of traffic  
participants and more complex scenarios. How to make  
simulation better is also a direction that is worth studying.  
Finally, in terms of real-time decision-making and remote  
control of individuals, the requirements for the entire twin  
system will be higher. For example, whether data can be  
transported to the cloud and backend instantaneously and  
safely, and through situational awareness, the control  
commands can be transmitted back to the physical world.  
This process must be done fast enough, and the data  
transmission process needs to be safe and stable.  
Incorporating related technologies such as blockchain is an  
explorable solution to make this information closed-loop  
process safe and stable.
The digital twin city is also a product of the continuous  
development of urban informatization construction and a  
high-level stage of urban informatization development.  
The digital twin city corresponding to the physical city makes  
full use of the city-wide big data formed in the early stage  
to provide platforms, tools and means for city comprehensive  
decision-making, intelligent management, and global  
optimization.
Discussion of the use of digital twins in related 
fields
According to research conducted by researchers, it can be  
found that the application of digital twins in different fields  
has become mature, and there are good application prospects  
in the future. This has also been confirmed in some current  
studies. Wan, et al . (2021)81 reviewed the performance of  
semi-supervised support vector machines (SVM) in brain  
picture fusion digital twins in terms of feature detection,  
diagnosis, and prediction. Aiming at the large amount of  
unlabeled data in brain images, using both unlabeled and  
labeled data, a semi-supervised SVM is proposed. At the same  
time, the research also describes how AlexNet model is  
enhanced, and the digital twin model is used to map the brain  
image in the actual space to the virtual space. It is not difficult  
to find that although brain tumor images have complex edge  
structures, artifacts, offset fields and additional flaws  
affecting image segmentation, the application of digital twins  
in the medical field realizes the key steps for precise  
treatment of brain tumors, which truly meets clinical needs.  
It is extremely important in the follow-up clinical diagnosis  
and treatment of brain tumors.
Lv, et al . (2021)82 discussed the consequences of application  
and limits of UA V (Unmanned Aerial Vehicle) in 5G/B5G  
(Beyond 5G) mobile and wireless communications. According  
to 5G communication, DL algorithms are proposed to  
develop a UA V digital twin messaging pathways model  
on the basis of DL. Coordinated multi-point transmission  
technology uses unmanned aerial vehicles for research on  
interference suppression. The essential algorithm in physical  
layer safety is employed to assure information transmission  
security. Finally, one can simulate and analyze the  
constructed model. The algorithm has outstanding advantages 
Page 17 of 25Digital Twin 2022, 1:12 Last updated: 13 NOV 2024