The concept of digital R&D strategy seems to be a cliché.  
With the efforts of industrial software manufacturers in the  
past 10 years, various industries in China, including the  
aerospace industry, are already “quite” familiar with the  
concept of digital twins, but we are familiar with digital R&D  
applications. What is the depth, breadth, and value of the  
harvest, we still have considerable room for improvement.  
The life cycle of an aircraft can reaches several decades, so  
recording and analyzing the data of the entire life cycle 
is not only valuable, but necessary. The document-based  
departmental collaboration model must shift to a model-based,  
digital twin-digital collaboration model. This also brings great  
challenges to related industries.
Regarding the use of digital twins, the best generalization is to  
build and maintain a large number of surreal models and  
data. They are best able to predict the product behavior  
throughout the life cycle through real-time simulation. These  
models are constructed in several proportions and examples  
according to different application situations, integrating  
multiple aspects, including the best and physical descriptions, 
and mirroring the real product life. When the digital twin is  
deployed to the full range, it will track all parameter  
information that affects the operation of the product. It includes 
the initial design and further improvements, manufacturing-  
related deviations, modifications, uncertainties, updates, as well  
as all the historical data and aviation data that can be obtained  
from the sensor data of the airborne combine traffic wellness  
supervisory system, manage former records, and realize data  
mining.
Therefore, only by utilizing the complete digital twins  
technology to establish a large number of surreal models and  
data, including digital product models, digital manufacturing  
models, and digital performance models, real-time, two-way,  
transparent, and systematic consideration of design,  
manufacturing, and performance. It is possible to control and  
reduce the development cycle, otherwise as the difficulty 
of research and development increases, the risk of delayed  
delivery will become greater and greater. In addition, only  
full digitalization can break through the bottleneck of  
performance design.
Challenges of AI in digital twins technology in 
intelligent manufacturing
As many intelligent production and construction technology  
becomes more and more mature, intelligent manufacturing  
technology is becoming more and more popular, and the  
realization of efficient and intelligent real-time monitoring  
of the production process of workshop equipment is still the  
focus of research. At present, industrial production has  
developed to a stage of high automation and informationization,  
but there are still many problems that need to be improved  
and optimized. For example, many factories have different  
levels of construction of information systems, the channels  
between the systems are not fully opened up, there are a 
large number of information islands, and there are issues like  
incomplete data management and inconsistent data standards.  Specifically, the products produced by the factory are  
diversified, highly personalized, and poor in versatility. This 
directly leads to frequent product design and process changes,  
and brings great challenges to production, procurement,  
warehouses, and quality.
Besides, the factory also has problems to be solved for the  
small batch production of multiple varieties of products: for  
example, some discrete production models of multiple  
varieties and small batches limit the pace of large-scale  
production and intelligent transformation of the workshop  
production line. Factory equipment is obsolete and difficult  
to rebuild, and many links are still dominated by manual  
operations. However, if the factory relies too much on manual  
operations, it will lead to a reduction in automation and  
intelligence. The digital twin platform plays a very important  
role in industrial product design and industrial product  
production. In the current highly informatized and integrated  
industrial production model, when an unexpected failure occurs  
on the production line, it is easy to cause the entire production  
line to stop and stop production. For example, a highly refined  
automobile production line can cause millions of losses  
every day. For some special process production lines, such as  
chemical production lines under high temperature and  
pressure, they even face serious safety risks and derivative  
disasters. Therefore, the industrial production process must  
rely on the help of large-scale data, such as equipment  
diagnosis, chemical production process simulation, and  
simulation prediction of current equipment status and  
production process results in a virtual digital space, so as to  
prevent field failures and production abnormalities to cause  
serious consequences.
In the process of industrial product design, if there is no  
digital help, designing a product will have to go through  
many iterations, which consumes resources and affects the  
delivery time. In the design of a highly integrated industrial  
production line, it is necessary to optimize and coordinate  
various equipment, materials, quality inspection, manual  
assembly and other links based on precise beats to improve  
overall efficiency. The traditional planning process can only  
rely on manual simulation or verification in a real production line.
Challenges of AI in digital twins technology in smart city
The digital twins city is a brand-new technology path for  
the construction of a new type of smart city under the  
background that the accumulated data of the city changes  
from quantitative to qualitative change, and in the context  
of major breakthroughs in information technology such as  
perception modeling and artificial intelligence. It is an  
emerging technology path and advanced mode for urban  
intelligence and sustainable operation. However, in the face  
of many challenges in current urban management, how to break 
through the shackles of traditional smart cities and gradually  
transform and upgrade to a “digital twin city” is a question  
worth considering. The kernel of the digital twins city is the  
model and data, and the establishment of a complete digital  
model is a crucial beginning point. From the perspective of  
Page 15 of 25Digital Twin 2022, 1:12 Last updated: 13 NOV 2024