Figure 2.  The concept of digital twins.
AI, as a discipline of computer science, has not only changed  
our lives, but also changed many industries. It seeks to  
comprehend the basis of intelligence in order to create a new  
intelligent machine capable of responding in a manner akin  
to human intelligence. Robotics, language recognition, image  
recognition, natural language processing, and expert systems  
are all areas of study in this discipline23. Computers, robotics,  
economic and political decision-making, control systems, and  
simulation systems all employ AI. As shown in Figure 3, it is  
quietly 
changing our way of life. We can use map software  
to avoid congestion while out for a drive; the smart watches  
we wear can help us monitor and predict health risks; the robots 
in our home can use the voices of parents to tell stories to our  
babies; our sweeping robot can clean a large duplex house  
easily. Combining artificial intelligence with digital twins will  
produce unimaginable changes in all aspects of our lives24–26.
Application status of AI technology based on digital twins
Artificial intelligence in digital twins is a universally applicable  
theoretical and technical system, with many applications,  
such as product design, equipment manufacturing, medical  
analysis, aerospace and other fields. At present, the most  
in-depth application in China is in the field of engineering  
construction, and intelligent manufacturing has gained the  
most attraction in the research field. The classification diagram  
of application areas is shown in Figure 4.
Application of AI of digital twins technology in the aerospace  
field: The notion of digital twins was originally presented for 
use in the aerospace field. For example, digital twins are used in the maintenance and quality assurance process of flight  
simulation and aerospace flight machines. The real aircraft  model is established in the digital space, and then AI  
technology is applied to analyze aircraft status in the digital  
space. Based on this, the aircraft and the actual flight status  
can be synchronized. In this way, each aircraft’s takeoff and  
landing process is simulated and stored in digital space.  
Through AI-based data analysis in the digital space, it can be  
clearly understood whether the aircraft needs maintenance  
and whether the next flight is ready
27–29.
The purpose of the research by Yurkevich, et al. (2021)30  
is to develop a neural model for digital air traffic control.  
This method adopts the concept of a physical self-organizing  
social network of a distributed organization and technical  
system, and its components are connected to wireless 4G  
and 5G networks. The advantage of this method is that the  
principle of analysis and management is very promising,  
and it has complex integration with hybrid artificial  
intelligence. Li et al. (2021)31 expounded on the characteristics,  
the most advanced composition, and the corresponding  
limitations of the future digital twins in the aerospace field in  
detail. They put forward three dimensions of the aero DTs.  
These include the interaction, standardization, and cognitive  
that could help the aviation DTs research and development  
community. They helped quadruple the efficiency of existing  
and future aerospace systems and their related processes.  
Bécue et al. (2020)32 proposed an innovative cognitive  
modeling and collaborative simulation. They introduced  
holistic 
DTs and AI technology to analyze human behavior  
models and security testing capabilities in aerospace. Finally,  
they demonstrated how to provide new services for optimizing  
and recovering future factories using holistic digital twins  
and AI technology. To illustrate this method, they introduced 
Page 5 of 25Digital Twin 2022, 1:12 Last updated: 13 NOV 2024