intelligent manufacturing in production workshops, unmanned vehicles, and smart city 
transportation, then presents the challenges faced by these four areas. The topics that need to be 
looked forward to in the future is also prospected. The application of digital twinning in other 
fields is also briefly discussed. In general, the logic of the article is relatively clear. The authors 
should address the following questions:
The chapter arrangement is not described in the introduction and the reviews of 
applications and challenges for the four domains are in a different order.  
 1. 
The first part of Section 2 explains digital twins and artificial intelligence respectively. The 
authors should explain the relationship between them.  
 2. 
It is suggested to revise Figure 5 to make it clearer, for example, by using boxes of 
different color or shape to represent judgments.3. 
 
Is the topic of the review discussed comprehensively in the context of the current 
literature?
Yes
Are all factual statements correct and adequately supported by citations?
Yes
Is the review written in accessible language?
Yes
Are the conclusions drawn appropriate in the context of the current research literature?
Yes
Competing Interests:  No competing interests were disclosed.
Reviewer Expertise:  Digital Twins, Tactile Internet
I confirm that I have read this submission and believe that I have an appropriate level of 
expertise to confirm that it is of an acceptable scientific standard.
Reviewer Report  17 February 2022
https://doi.org/10.21956/digitaltwin.18801.r26871
© 2022 Wang X.  This is an open access peer review report distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons 
Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the 
original work is properly cited.
Xi Vincent Wang  
  
1 Department of Production Engineering, KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden  
2 Department of Production Engineering, KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden  
Digital Twin  
 Page 22 of 25Digital Twin 2022, 1:12 Last updated: 13 NOV 2024