a specific use case implemented in the aerospace system  
manufacturing field. Therefore, an internal automated testing  
system for automatic driving platform is presented as a  
way to increase the efficiency and safety of UA V  
development33. With the development of unmanned aircraft  
technology, unmanned aircraft are being employed in an  
increasing number of applications and are regarded as an  
essential component of the future smart city infrastructure34–36. 
Simultaneously, the security and privacy threats connected with 
drone-based applications require proper testing and surveillance 
techniques. For a platform that facilitates the administration  
and performance of drone-based applications on a common  
drone architecture, Grigoropoulos, et al. (2020)37 supplied an  
analog environment and digital twins support. First, the  
simulation environment can perform in-depth testing of the  
platform itself and the functions of the applications running  
on the platform, and it can then be deployed to the actual  
world. After deployment, the digital twin is used to discover  
gaps and expected behaviors between applications, which in  
turn can be used as an error indicator when the simulation  
test is executed or malfunctions have not been found.  
Maintenance has evolved from “post-incident maintenance” and 
“preventive maintenance” to “predictive maintenance,” making  
it one of the most critical components of aviation. Precision  
maintenance is the future development path, with the purpose of ensuring operational safety and lowering the collaborative  
optimization goal and operating cost
38. To improve the effect of 
engine predictive maintenance, Xiong, et al. (2020)39 studied a  
digital twin-driven aircraft engine predictive maintenance  
framework, and discovered an implicit digital twin IDT  
(Implicit Digital Twins) model. The model’s validity is  
determined by evaluating the concordance of virtual and actual  
data assets. The usefulness of the approach is demonstrated  
by integrating the data-driven deep learning (DL) method40  
with the LSTM (Long Short-Term Memory) model41 and using  
an aviation engine as an example.
As shown in Figure 5, Compared with other industries,  
aircraft assembly has the characteristics of complex structure, 
a huge number of parts and extremely strict requirements on  
the aerodynamic shape of the product42. Therefore, a  
professional assembly frame must be used to ensure that the  
parts will not be affected by human factors during the  
installation process, causing the problem of deformation and  
assembly errors43. It is difficult to ensure strict precision  
requirements only by using traditional engineering drawings  
for process design and production and assembly basis. The  
emergence of digital twin technology provides the possibility for timely and effective interaction between the aircraft assembly  
process and on-site information feedback control
44. Liang,  
et al. (2020)45 pointed out that the full-field displacement  
perception of aircraft core components and digital twins play  
a vital role in precision production (such as aviation  
manufacturing). In their research, a real-time full-field  
displacement sensing method combining online multi-point  
displacement monitoring and matrix complete theory is also  
proposed, and a conceptual model of full-field displacement  
sensing based on multi-point observation information is  established. HPP (High Precision Products)46, a multidisciplinary  
coupled high-precision product, is frequently employed in  
aerospace, marine, chemical and other industries. It is precisely 
because the inner core of HPP is complicated and compacted,  
and the assembly process, which incorporates interdisciplinary  
coupling, demands great accuracy. Traditional assembly  
methods relying on hand experience are inefficient and  
inconsistent in quality. In light of the aforementioned issues,  
Sun, et al. (2020)47 researched and proposed a digital  
twin-driven HPP assembly and debugging method. It provides  
the theoretical architecture for digital twin-driven assembly  
and debugging, as well as the method for building an assembly  
and debugging full-element information model based on digital 
twins technology.
With regards to the problems of the civil aircraft quality  
deviation control system, the quality deviation control data  
is dispersed across numerous management systems, making 
it impossible to gather quality data-related information from  
the complete life cycle of the aircraft concerned; there is  
a lack of closed-loop cyber physics for quality data analysis  
and quality deviation control Fusion System48. Therefore,  
locating the quality deviation problems is tough, and dealing  
with these issues takes a long time. Cai, et al. (2021)48  
researched and proposed a quality deviation control model  
based on digital twins. Multi-source heterogeneous qualitative  
deviation data may be retrieved and merged using digital  
twins modeling based on asset management technology, and  
a quality deviation system can be constructed. The FP-growth  
(Frequent Pattern –growth) association rule algorithm is used  
in this system to evaluate aircraft quality deviation data,  
and the system may deliver findings to assist the assembly site  
and maximize the performance and correctness of correcting  
quality problems in the real world49.
According to these discussions above, the digital twin offers  
a wide spectrum of uses in the aerospace industry, including  
digital simulation of aircraft flight routes, timely reporting  
of faults and repairs, and testing of the performance of  
unmanned aerial vehicles. Major breakthroughs and progress  
have been made in these areas.
The application of AI in digital twin technology in autonomous 
driving: AI applications are quickly developing as deep learning  
and big data analysis technologies advance. Among them,  
it is imperative to use artificial intelligence algorithms to  
develop autonomous driving systems. In real life, autonomous  
driving technology can reduce traffic accidents, realize the  
efficiency of time and space and other resource utilization,  
and even provide great convenience for the driving  
process of the disabled. However, due to the high technical  
requirements of autonomous driving, the need for digital twins  
to simulate driving in a virtual simulation environment has  
become an indispensable step50.
Before self-driving cars actually enter the road, they must  
go through rigorous virtual simulation tests to ensure safety51.  
In the traditional virtual simulation test environment, HTL  
Page 7 of 25Digital Twin 2022, 1:12 Last updated: 13 NOV 2024