in the production process, which has made it difficult for  
companies to manage and analyze data. Therefore, in the  
manufacturing process, how to effectively and timely feedback  
the use status of the equipment in the production workshop  
and early warning of failures has become a major problem  
in the current intelligent manufacturing industry.
The development of modern and advance information  
technology, such as big data, AI, IoT, edge computing, etc.  
have promoted the transformation of traditional manufacturing  
to intelligent manufacturing. The most crucial feature of  
intelligent manufacturing is its autonomy and active self-  
optimization. Zhou, et al. (2020)60 researched and proposed a 
knowledge-driven system framework for the transformation  
of digital twin manufacturing units for intelligent  
manufacturing, which can intelligently sense, simulate,  
understand, predict, optimize and control. Not only can it  
maximize product quality, but it can also reduce production  
costs. Smart manufacturing is not so much a challenge faced 
by traditional manufacturing, as it is an opportunity. The  
sustainability characteristics of smart manufacturing are more  
obvious. Xu et al. (2019)61 proposed a two-phase DTs-aided  
fault diagnosis method using deep transfer learning (DFDD).  
The proposed method could find potential problems not  
considered in equipment design by running an ultra-high  
fidelity model in a virtual space. It used deep transfer learning  
to migrate the previously trained diagnostic model from  
virtual to physical space for real-time monitoring and  
predictive maintenance. Finally, the superiority and feasibility  
of this method were demonstrated. Ren et al. (2022)62 proposed 
a technical system that embedded machine learning modules  
into DTs. They built a DTs model for the full life cycle of  
complex equipment. They discussed the joint application  
of sub-models and machine learning. Finally, the effectiveness  
of this management method was verified through experiments.  
An alarm could be given about a week in advance when the  
axle temperature was abnormal. Thus, the possible application 
advantages of the combination of DTs and machine learning  
were revealed in solving the future research direction of  
complex equipment.
Digital twin workshops are the core component of intelligent  
manufacturing. They are composed of a physical workshop,  
a virtual workshop, a workshop service system and workshop  
twin data, among which virtual workshop is the most  
important component. The construction of a virtual workshop  
starts from three directions and consists of several elements:  
using virtual digital geometric models to represent the  
environmental elements of the workshop, including  
workshop staff, machines, products, etc. Behavior elements  
include production elements such as the speed trajectory  
of the equipment in the workshop and different production  
instructions, simulation of the operation status of the equipment  
in the workshop. Rule elements use the existing physical  
environment of the workshop to evaluate, analyze, predict,  
and optimize the production process to realize the establishment  
of a virtual workshop. As shown in Figure 7. In the actual  
production process, equipment failures occur from time to  time, which affects the production schedule and costs. If repairs  
are carried out after the fault occurs, it is often difficult and  
requires a lot of manpower and material resources to perform  
fault screening. Therefore, it is particularly important to carry  
out early warning of the failure of the equipment and the service  
life of the equipment.
The research of Zhao, et al. (2019)63 aimed at the real-time  
visual monitoring of digital twins workshops, and presented  
a 3D visual monitoring method based on real-time data of the  
workshop. The interaction between the workplace of digital  
twins and 3D visualization real-time monitoring is investigated.  
A multi-level 3D visualization monitoring mode and a  
real-time data-driven virtual workshop operation mode are  
proposed. This paper explained workshop geometric  
modeling, workshop real-time data management, workshop  
multi-level 3D visualization monitoring, and workshop status  
board construction methods in detail. The effectiveness of  
the presented method is verified through actual case studies.  
The research of Wu, et al. (2019)64 pointed out that the  
workshop production line combines the use of key digital  
technologies on the basis of intelligent workshop equipment.  
It mainly adopts virtual-real data synchronous communication  
and virtual-real mapping technology to realize surreal virtual  
real-time of physical entity digital simulation. The items  
in the workshop can be developed according to actual  
applications, and a virtual model of the intelligent workshop  
can be built internally. Job shop scheduling is always vital  
in the production process and is one of the most critical  
elements influencing manufacturing efficiency. There are  
some unknown occurrences, information asymmetry, anoma -
lous disturbances, and so on in the real production scheduling  
process that will create execution deviations and impair the  
efficiency and quality of scheduling execution. Traditional  
scheduling strategies are insufficient to address these issues  
effectively. Fang, et al. (2019)65 proposed that due to the  
rise of digital twins, which have the characteristics of virtual  
reality interaction as well as real-time mapping and symbiotic  
evolution, a new job shop scheduling method based on digital  
twins is proposed to reduce scheduling deviation.Based on the above research, it can be shown that digital  
twins have made breakthroughs in the field of intelligent  
manufacturing, especially the use of virtual workshops,  
which can greatly reduce the probability of equipment failures,  
and also help staff to adjust the overall scheduling of the  
workshop in time and improve equipment production  
efficiency. Digital twin technology can realize virtual simulation  
of products, manufacturing processes and even the entire  
factory in the field of intelligent manufacturing, thereby  
improving the production efficiency of product development  
and manufacturing of manufacturing enterprises. In addition,  
it can also create products in a virtual three-dimensional  
space. By modifying the components and products of  
various sizes and assembly relationships, it can greatly simplify  
product geometry verification work, assembly feasibility  
verification work, and process implementation. At the same  
time, the manufacturing times, time and cost of physical  
prototype in the iterative process are greatly reduced.
Page 10 of 25Digital Twin 2022, 1:12 Last updated: 13 NOV 2024