Figure 8.  Schematic diagram of digital twin smart city. IOT, internet of things.
virtual testing and training. However, it is not enough to  
provide digital twins with high-fidelity scenarios. What is  
more important is to derive and generalize the twin scenarios to 
continuously enrich the test scenarios of unmanned vehicles.  
The research of Mavromatis, et al . (2020)69 shows that in  
a world where artificial intelligence has completely changed  
the tasks of reasoning, forecasting and judgment, digital  
twins have become a tool that affects game balance.  
A typical example is the creation and improvement of the  
CITS (Cooperative Intelligent Transportation System),  
which is the integration of cyber-physical digital infrastructure  
and (semi) automated mobility. Derivative generalization is  
the key to digital twin technology. It must be derived from  
reality, but must also be higher than reality and make some  
changes to the reality. Bhatti, et al . (2020)70 pointed out  
that the popularization of smart electric vehicles can reduce  
carbon dioxide emissions by up to 43%. Nevertheless, in order 
to mainstream these automobiles, some support infrastructure  
is required to enhance them in a long-term manner. As a new  
emerging architecture, the related method of digital twins is  
based on a virtual map principle, which can be used as a  
basis for expansion, and it can further help the study of the  
life cycle of multi-system subjects in the virtual environment.  
In the system development, generalization simulations of  
various cases are also carried out based on the twin scenarios,  
such as increasing the generalization of weather changes,  
human driving behaviors, and scenario cases. As an example  
of the generalization of a scenario case, it is assumed that  
the accident scenario of a large truck rolling over a person is  
simulated, but after the model is completed, it is a fixed  
scenario. That is, the vehicle arrives at a fixed position at a  
fixed time, lacking information on the cause and consequence  of the actual accident scene. At this time, you need to do  
some intelligent processing, such as increasing the speed of  
the car, or increasing traffic participants, etc., so that the  
scenario case is similar to the real scenario but is different.  
Here, similarity refers to the reappearance of real accident  
scenes, while the difference is reflected in the more dynamic  
process reappearance in the virtual scene.
In the analysis of traffic accidents, a truck traffic accident is  
taken as an example. Once the accident scene environment  
and the trajectory of traffic participants are tracked and  
restored, the process of the accident can be observed from  
multiple angles. Rudskoy, et al . (2020)71 indicate that  
transportation regulation issues in all cities at the emergence  
stage are very serious. Originally, the control center was  
responsible for resolving this issue. At present, these centers  
have gradually introduced some intelligent traffic management  
methods to help solve the key issues of the transportation  
network. With the help of digital twins and AI, they can  
realize the optimized development of modern traffic control. 
Through the freeze-frame processing, it can be found from  
the perspective of the vehicle that the truck driver cannot  
actually see anyone passing by on a bicycle. The road digital  
twin is an important step to realize the smart city of the future,  
and so for this, ElMarai, et al.  (2020)72 deployed the Digital  
Twin Box on a road with a 360° camera and a collection  
of IoT devices linked to a sole hub on-board computer.  
Digital twins box transforms a physical road into a digital  
replica asset by continuously transmitting real-time data  
(including 360° real-time streaming, GPS (Global Positioning  
System) location, and temperature and humidity measurements)  
to the edge or cloud. The live stream is displayed via a  
Page 12 of 25Digital Twin 2022, 1:12 Last updated: 13 NOV 2024