Figure 7.  Schematic diagram of equipment failure early warning of virtual workshop.
Application of AI in digital twins technology in the smart  
city: The concept of digital twins is simply to map people,  
objects, relationships, and processes in real-world to  
virtual-world, and realize the research and control of real objects  
by observing and analyzing the digital twin in virtual space.  
Applying this concept to the field of urban transportation is  
undoubtedly a boon to the construction of smart cities,  
this is reflected in Figure 8. The major functional region  
management of an urban area is a spatial organization and  
strategy that promotes urban and regional development with  
space control as the main goal. The research of Gao, et al.  
(2017)66 shows that: the construction program of urban  
functional areas is optimized and analyzed according to big  
data and GIS (Geographic Information System). The primary 
goal of urban functional area management is to limit or regulate  
reasonable use of land and to establish a foundation for the  
efficient use of city area. The main basis for urban planning  
includes relevant indicators such as the area’s carrying capacity  
for resources and environment, the density data of the  
existing regional development, and the future regional  
possibility for growth. By the assistance of GIS technology,  
the functional location of urban places can be better optimized  
by architects. Smart transportation is the use of video  
surveillance, fusion of millimeter-wave radar, holographic  
perception of motor vehicles, non-motor vehicles, pedestrians  and other traffic elements to realize the construction of a  
mapping model of the real traffic system in the digital  
space. Through real-time analysis and tracking, it can  
effectively solve the waste of traffic resources, signal system  
function rigidity, unpredictable traffic incidents and rapid  
response to traffic problems67. The application of digital twins  
in smart transportation can be divided into three directions:  
improving the efficiency of driverless training, assisting in  
traffic accident analysis, and assisting in traffic control68.
Digital twins improve the efficiency of unmanned driving  
training68. At present, intelligent research centers are conducting 
research on intelligent unmanned driving virtual training systems  
to provide an open virtual test and training platform for the  
road driving safety and intelligent driving capabilities of  
unmanned car driving algorithms. The goal of this type of  
project is to reproduce real traffic scenarios in the digital  
space, create extreme environments and critical high-risk  
scenarios for unmanned vehicles through generalized  
derivative technologies, and greatly increase the effectiveness  
of unmanned driving training.
Based on the perception of static and dynamic data, we can  
create a digital twin model, realize the scene reproduction  
based on twin data, and help unmanned vehicles conduct  
Page 11 of 25Digital Twin 2022, 1:12 Last updated: 13 NOV 2024