Figure 6.  The overall architecture of the automated driving digital twin virtual scene test.
of this technology. On the one hand, because the test  
environment for autonomous driving is very limited and  
costly, the digital twin can provide customers with an  
autonomous driving simulation system as a solution. The  
automated driving system using virtual simulation can verify  
the sensor performance and the reliability of the vehicle  
algorithm. On the other hand, it can be used as one of the  
mapping data in the actual autonomous driving environment.  
Automobile manufacturers can use the digital test field to  
perform virtual tests on vehicle performance, such as  
vehicle dynamics, comfort, and durability. The virtual test  
track is the road for performing tests on the ground. The vir -
tual environment and real-world scenes are required to be as  
realistic as possible, including fixed vehicles, road signs,  
pedestrians, zebra crossings, obstacles, moving vehicles, and 
the number of road lanes in the scene. Of course, with the  
continuous enhancement of technology in the field of  
autonomous driving, the requirements for the technical  
complexity of virtual test scenarios are getting higher and  
higher, so we need to develop a more complete architecture.
Therefore, at least 80% of the time cost can be saved through 
the digital twin automatic driving test, and the same road  conditions can be tested repeatedly, reducing the parameter  
scale of the actual vehicle dynamics model, and greatly  
improving the accuracy of the test results54. It is the opinion  
of the authors that the process of operating in the virtual  
scene can avoid the probability of accidents that may occur  
in real traffic conditions, and can also reduce unnecessary  
material loss, thereby reducing enterprise costs. Therefore,  
the use of digital twins in the realm of autonomous driving  
opens up new ideas for automobile manufacturing and  
performance testing.
Application of AI in digital twins technology in intelligent  
manufacturing:  With the continuous development of intelli -
gent manufacturing technology in various countries around the  
world, the informatization level of the manufacturing industry 
is gradually improving. In order to enhance product production  
rates and deal with emergencies in the production process  
in a timely manner, enterprises must strengthen the management  
and control measures of each module in the production  
workshop to improve the company’s ability to control the  
production process. Moreover, consumers’ higher individual  
requirements for products have caused companies to face  
a large amount of data, data requirements and data structures  
Page 9 of 25Digital Twin 2022, 1:12 Last updated: 13 NOV 2024