alleviating medical care problems. Fuller et al.  (2020)79  
analyzed the challenges faced by AI, IoT, and DTs and  
explored the use, challenges, and roles of DT in smart urban  
transportation. Shirowzhan et al . (2020)80 discussed the smart  
cities’ need for advanced tools such as mobile scanners,  
geospatial AI, UA V , and DTs technology for geospatial light  
detection and ranging.
In summary, the combination of DTs and AI technology is  
widely used in intelligent urban transportation. DTs technol -
ogy supports the construction of urban information models,  
including building information, geographic information, new  
street view, and real three-dimensional scene. The core of the  
combination of AI and DTs focuses on the end-to-end  
management and operation of global data. Specifically, this  
includes data collection, access, governance, integration,  
lightweight, visualization, and application. A visual model  
of the urban environment facilitates clearer, more efficient,  
faster, and more accurate urban traffic management.
Challenges for artificial intelligence in digital twins
Challenges of AI in digital twins technology in 
autonomous driving
Due to the rapid development of the global intelligent internet  
automotive industry, research on automotive internet related  
technologies is of great significance to promote the development  
of automotive Internet. By using DTs, wireless network,  
and AI technology, the traffic spatial information network is  
constructed to optimize traffic infrastructure. As a further  
extension of the road network traffic network, the traffic  
spatial information network connects various means of  
transportation with the ground broadband network to form an 
intelligent network system. It has great research significance  
and application prospects. In the intelligent system, the  
physical vehicle comprises the vehicle itself and its sensing  
system. The sensing system collects damage-related data  
from the vehicle entity and transmits it to the virtual space  
to support high-precision simulation of the virtual vehicle.  
The physical and virtual data are fused to extract the  
features of the virtual vehicle’s anti-damage performance and  
assist the model’s construction. The virtual model is a  
multi-dimensional fusion high-fidelity model. It includes a  
geometric model, physical model, behavior model, and rule  
model, truly describing and mapping the state of the physical  
vehicle. Dynamic real-time connection is driven by modern  
information transmission technology. Through efficient and  
accurate detection technology, it achieves real-time information  
interaction between physical vehicles, virtual vehicles, and  
services.
The main function of automatic driving is to control the  
simulation car corresponding to the real car in the simulation  
system by receiving the real-time position, speed,  
acceleration, heading angle and other information of the real  
car sent by the data collection visualization system. Realize the  
real vehicle control and the simulation vehicle runs in the  
virtual scene, so that the motion states of the two are  synchronized, and realize the basic function of the real  
vehicle in the loop. Although the current stage of research has 
formed a highly open digital twin autonomous driving test  
capability, a friendly and open test and verification  
environment has also been established to support a variety of 
autonomous driving algorithm experiments and provide open  
testing services for research companies related to autonomous  
driving. However, there are still challenges to solve the test  
solution:
Testing cost issues.  The current test system for autonomous  
driving is not complete yet, but it has already produced high  
test costs. This is a very big challenge for automobile  
manufacturers. The most important issue for automobile  
manufacturers is how to maximize benefits and minimize  
costs. Therefore, the establishment of an efficient and low-cost  
test environment, a structured test process, and a strong test  
standard are all key issues in reducing test costs;
Testing flexibility issues.  The auto-driving system of automo -
biles covers various sensors, processors and controllers such as  
cameras, lidars, millimeter-wave radars, etc. The virtual test  
environment is no longer a single scene, and needs to meet  
the requirements of multiple cars driving test schemes.  
Therefore, this requires the test environment not only to support  
a single car test, but also to support multiple cars driving at  
the same time, and to ensure that no traffic accidents occur. The 
accident puts forward higher requirements on the test environment.
Smooth advancement of the test system.  Autonomous driving  
technology solutions for automobiles will definitely face  
tremendous changes and reforms in the future. First of all,  
the test system needs to smoothly adapt to technological  
advancement. During the test, the vehicles, pedestrians, road  
conditions, traffic signs, etc. in the system must be kept stable  
and orderly. Of course, it also needs to be tested according  
to the test. The number of objects grows and the types of  
cars undergo system upgrades from time to time.
Challenges of AI in digital twins technology in aerospace
Although the artificial intelligence application of digital twins  
has a wide range of research in the aerospace field, there  
are still some technical challenges. Take the aero-engine  
gas path system as an example. Based on the advancement  
of cognition processing innovations and industrial level, the  
data analysis of aero-engines is shifting towards all-round,  
multi-level, and visualization. The analysis of engine  
parameters ranges from engine components to the overall  
engine, from engine condition monitoring to overall health  
management. Data analysis has also gone from traditional  
integration to a digital twin process that combines large  
amounts of data, methods, and models. At present, the  
detection of engine condition monitoring and authorization  
digital electronic control system, fault detection and location  
can basically be completed, but the method of analyzing the  
overall health of the engine is limited, which has also become  
a major challenge for scholars around the world.
Page 14 of 25Digital Twin 2022, 1:12 Last updated: 13 NOV 2024