head-mounted device or using a 360° web-based player.  
The data will be utilized as real-time supervision of traffic  
conditions and other assignment such as historical traffic data  
query. It is also possible to monitor the occurrence of traffic  
accidents by installing smart cameras in cars. As for the  
fast-paced growth of smart cars and driver assistive technologies,  
in the traffic system, there is a varied degree of human  
driver engagement. In this case, Liu, et al.  (2020)73 pointed  
out that the driver’s visual guidance is essential to avert  
possible dangers. To encourage the advancement of visual  
directing mechanisms, an innovative sensor merging technique  
was introduced to integrate camera images from the cloud  
and digital twin knowledge. Combining the findings of the  
target detector operating on the vehicle and the position  
information from the cloud, the bounding box of the target  
vehicle is drawn and matched. Therefore, digital twins have  
great application value in traffic accident analysis scenarios,  
which can help trace and analyze the specific causes of the  
accident and find the person responsible.
In the direction of overall traffic control, digital twin technology  
is used to simulate urban traffic conditions, and then to  
optimize traffic control strategies through evaluation and  
deduction. This is an important application scenario for  
digital twins to empower smart transportation. It mainly involves 
three levels of functions:
The first is monitoring and discovery. Through the digital  
twin system, a closed loop of information acquisition and  
control can be created, and the whole process can be  
controlled. More importantly, in a very large and complex  
scene, some key issues can be discovered and dealt with  
in time. For example, in the autumn and winter season,  
a certain section of high-speed section of the fog frequently  
occurs. The fog has the characteristics of low visibility,  
strong suddenness, and difficulty in weather forecasting,  
and it is easy to cause traffic accidents. Using the digital  
twin technology, real-time detection of dynamic perception  
data can detect the occurrence of cluster fog in time and  
give warnings. For instance, airport traffic control can also 
use digital twins. White et al.  (2021)74 combined the building  
information model (BIM) in smart cities with IoT sensor-native  
big data. They found that using AI made big data analysis  
and prediction in smart cities more accurate and transparent.  
A public and open DTs model could make urban planning  
more accurate. The research of ÜZÜMCÜ, et al.  (2019)75  
pointed out that the personal instructions of the command  
operation center and the participation of information from  
the captain as a participant, as well as the automatic  
identification system, radar system, electro-optical system, 
and physical security outside the traffic service system and the  
participation of different systems makes the overall system  
design difficult to manage. The use of MBSE (Model Based  
System Engineering) technology systems and tools designed  
using digital twin technology help simplify the system design  
overview and check before the execution and combination  
phase begins, the interface definitions on the left side of the 
model75.The second level of functions is deduction and prediction.  
After mastering the data, it is possible to create micro-  
behavior models for some participants, and then through  
simulation calculations for a large number of traffic participants,  
macro-simulation results can be obtained, the development  
of the situation can be deduced, and the prediction function  
can be realized. The rapid development of the national  
highway transportation system is not only based on the  
intelligent construction of the city, but also the result of  
continuous innovation in contemporary information technology, 
and GIS technology has effectively promoted the development  
of country’s highway transportation informatization. GIS  
technology, as a significant geographic data process system,  
has apparent technological benefits in traffic data collecting,  
analysis, and processing, and encourages the growth of road  
traffic in the direction of informatization. In order to hasten  
the maturation of the road traffic system, Wang, et al.   
(2021)76 pointed out that from the aid of GIS technology,  
road traffic digital twins can gradually be built. Digital  
technology fosters the growth of road transportation in a green, 
open, and shared direction as a revolutionary technology  
in the development of road transportation, creating a firm  
basis for the quality of road building. Owing to the complexity 
of cities, smart cities are a complicated process. The city is not  
a computerized system that is easy to understand and predict,  
but rather a living system. Although the research on urban  
digital twins is still in its initial stages, the progress of  
digital twins is developing rapidly and has made feasible  
contributions to enhancing the development of smart cities.  
Shahat, et al.  (2021)77 determine the current and future  
potential and obstacles of digital twin cities, and put forward  
a research agenda to guide future research on urban digital  
twins in order to approach the pinnacle of comprehensiveness  
and completeness of urban digital twins.
The third level of functions is to evaluate and optimize  
countermeasures. Through massively parallel computing, the  
simulation results of many parallel worlds can be evaluated 
at the same time. Then, through intensive learning and other  
technologies, we will continuously improve the traffic control  
plan, and make historical retrospective and review research.  
When an incident occurs, we can use the digital twin  
system to restore the entire process of the traffic accident, 
and explore whether each step of the response was done well  
enough and whether there is room for improvement.  
A digital replica of the infrastructure may be used to perform  
simulations throughout its life cycle, allowing for better  
asset creation, management, and maintenance. These digital  
twins (defined as integrated multiphysics, multi-scale and  
probabilistic simulations of complex products) reflect the  
behavior and environmental response of their corresponding  
twins. Baucas et al.  (2021)78 observed that physical space  
also began to be limited with the rapid growth of medical  
conditions and cases. They reviewed some popular medical  
applications and devices based on the IoT. Then, IoT-native  
devices and AI technology were employed to extract real-time 
health data related to patients in medical care. Their findings  
provided convenient wireless access to medical services,  
Page 13 of 25Digital Twin 2022, 1:12 Last updated: 13 NOV 2024