Reviewer Expertise:  Manufacturing system, digital twin, cyber-physical systems
I confirm that I have read this submission and believe that I have an appropriate level of 
expertise to confirm that it is of an acceptable scientific standard, however I have 
significant reservations, as outlined above.
Author Response 09 Nov 2022
Zhihan Lv  
Comment: Page 4 to 14: The contents described DT research in the area of aerospace, 
automated driving, intelligent manufacturing, and smart cities. Many of the references use 
traditional automation and simulation methods and do not show an explicit connection to 
AI. 
 
Reply:  Thanks for the suggestion. The application of AI in the fields of aerospace, 
autonomous driving, smart manufacturing and smart cities in DT technology has been 
analyzed on pages 4 to 14. Among them, references [27-29], [31, 32] clearly show the 
application of artificial intelligence in DT technology in the aerospace field; references [54, 
55] clearly show the application of artificial intelligence in DT technology in the field of 
autonomous driving; references [61, 62] clearly show the application of artificial intelligence 
in DT technology in the field of intelligent manufacturing; references [74], [78-80] clearly 
show the application of artificial intelligence in DT technology in smart cities.  
 
Comment: The manuscript needs to draw a very clear line between an intelligent system 
and artificial intelligence. In the discussed literature, many of the systems and methods are 
intelligent, but not artificial intelligence. These types of research should be excluded from 
the review.  
 
Reply:  Thanks for the suggestion. Artificial intelligence technology has been highlighted in 
the manuscript. First, the application status of artificial intelligence in DT technology in 
aerospace, autonomous driving, intelligent manufacturing and smart cities in the 
subsection "Application status of AI technology based on digital twins" is highlighted. 
Second, "Challenges for artificial intelligence in digital twins” subsection describes the 
application challenges of artificial intelligence in the fields of aerospace, autonomous 
driving, smart manufacturing and smart cities in DT technology. Ultimately, it highlights the 
research on the combination of artificial intelligence technology and DT technology in 
aerospace, autonomous driving, smart manufacturing and smart cities.  
 
Comment: Page 14 to 15: Similarly, this section discusses the general challenges of DT, 
instead of AI’s challenges in DT.  
 
Reply:  Thanks for the suggestion. The challenges for the application of artificial intelligence 
in the fields of aerospace, autonomous driving, smart manufacturing and smart cities in DT 
technology have been described in the subsection “Challenges for artificial intelligence in 
digital twins” on pages 14 to 15, highlighting the application of artificial intelligence 
technology in DT. It makes the combination of artificial intelligence and DT technology, and 
finally further enhances the quality of manuscripts. Even though it does not affect my Digital Twin  
 Page 24 of 25Digital Twin 2022, 1:12 Last updated: 13 NOV 2024