LRSpeech: Extremely Low-Resource Speech Synthesis and
Recognition
Jin Xu1, Xu Tan2, Yi Ren3, Tao Qin2, Jian Li1, Sheng Zhao4, Tie-Yan Liu2
1Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua University, China,3Zhejiang University, China
2Microsoft Research Asia,4Microsoft Azure Speech
j-xu18@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn,xuta@microsoft.com,rayeren@zju.edu.cn
lijian83@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn,{taoqin,sheng.zhao,tyliu}@microsoft.com
ABSTRACT
Speech synthesis (text to speech, TTS) and recognition (automatic
speech recognition, ASR) are important speech tasks, and require
a large amount of text and speech pairs for model training. How-
ever, there are more than 6,000 languages in the world and most
languages are lack of speech training data, which poses significant
challenges when building TTS and ASR systems for extremely low-
resource languages. In this paper, we develop LRSpeech, a TTS and
ASR system under the extremely low-resource setting, which can
support rare languages with low data cost. LRSpeech consists of
three key techniques: 1) pre-training on rich-resource languages
and fine-tuning on low-resource languages; 2) dual transformation
between TTS and ASR to iteratively boost the accuracy of each
other; 3) knowledge distillation to customize the TTS model on a
high-quality target-speaker voice and improve the ASR model on
multiple voices. We conduct experiments on an experimental lan-
guage (English) and a truly low-resource language (Lithuanian) to
verify the effectiveness of LRSpeech. Experimental results show that
LRSpeech 1) achieves high quality for TTS in terms of both intelligi-
bility (more than 98%intelligibility rate) and naturalness (above 3.5
mean opinion score (MOS)) of the synthesized speech, which satisfy
the requirements for industrial deployment, 2) achieves promising
recognition accuracy for ASR, and 3) last but not least, uses ex-
tremely low-resource training data. We also conduct comprehensive
analyses on LRSpeech with different amounts of data resources, and
provide valuable insights and guidances for industrial deployment.
We are currently deploying LRSpeech into a commercialized cloud
speech service to support TTS on more rare languages.
ACM Reference Format:
Jin Xu1, Xu Tan2, Yi Ren3, Tao Qin2, Jian Li1, Sheng Zhao4, Tie-Yan Liu2.
2020. LRSpeech: Extremely Low-Resource Speech Synthesis and Recog-
nition. In Proceedings of the 26th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge
Discovery and Data Mining (KDD ’20), August 23–27, 2020, Virtual Event, CA,
USA. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 11 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3394486.
3403331
1This work was conducted at Microsoft. Correspondence to: Tao Qin <tao-
qin@microsoft.com>.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
KDD ’20, August 23–27, 2020, Virtual Event, CA, USA
©2020 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-7998-4/20/08. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3394486.34033311 INTRODUCTION
Speech synthesis (text to speech, TTS) [ 28,30,35,41] and speech
recognition (automatic speech recognition, ASR) [ 6,10,11] are
two key tasks in speech domain, and attract a lot of attention in
both the research and industry community. However, popular com-
mercialized speech services (e.g., Microsoft Azure, Google Cloud,
Nuance, etc.) only support dozens of languages for TTS and ASR,
while there are more than 6,000 languages in the world [ 21]. Most
languages are lack of speech training data, which makes it difficult
to support TTS and ASR for these rare languages, as large-amount
and high-cost speech training data are required to ensure good
accuracy for industrial deployment.
We describe the typical training data to build TTS and ASR
systems as follows:
•TTS aims to synthesize intelligible and natural speech from text
sequences, and usually needs single-speaker high-quality record-
ings that are collected in professional recording studio. To im-
prove the pronunciation accuracy, TTS also requires a pronunci-
ation lexicon to convert the character sequence into phoneme
sequence as the model input (e.g., “speech" is converted into “s p
iy ch"), which is called as grapheme-to-phoneme conversion [ 36].
Additionally, TTS models use text normalization rules to con-
vert the irregular word into the normalized type that is easier to
pronounce (e.g., “Sep 7th" is converted into “September seventh").
•ASR aims to generate correct transcripts (text) from speech se-
quences, and usually requires speech data from multiple speakers
in order to generalize to unseen speakers during inference. The
multi-speaker speech data in ASR do not need to be as high-
quality as that in TTS, but the data amount is usually an order
of magnitude bigger. We call the speech data for ASR as multi-
speaker low-quality data1. Optionally, ASR can first recognize
the speech into phoneme sequence, and further convert it into
character sequence with the pronunciation lexicon as in TTS.
•Besides paired speech and text data, TTS and ASR models can
also leverage unpaired speech and text data to further improve
the performance.
1.1 Related Work
According to the data resource used, previous works on TTS and
ASR can be categorized into rich-resource, low-resource and unsu-
pervised settings.
As shown in Table 1, we list the data resources and the corre-
sponding related works in each setting :
1The low quality here does not mean the quality of ASR data is very bad, but is just
relatively low compared to the high-quality TTS recordings.arXiv:2008.03687v1  [eess.AS]  9 Aug 2020