Knowledge	DistillationTTS(single-speaker)ASR(multi-speaker)Dual	TransformationPre-trainingFine-tuningPaired	data	from	rich-resource	languagePaired	data	(single-speakerhigh,	multi-speaker	low)Unpaired	data	(multi-speaker	low)Synthesized	dataFigure 1: The three-stage pipeline of LRSpeech.
To verify the effectiveness of LRSpeech under the extremely
low-resource setting, we first conduct comprehensive experimen-
tal studies on English and then verify on the truly low-resource
language: Lithuanian, which is for product deployment. For TTS,
LRSpeech achieves 98.08% intelligibility rate, 3.57 MOS score, with
0.48 gap to the ground-truth recordings, satisfying the online de-
ployment requirements3. For ASR, LRSpeech achieves 28.82% WER
and 14.65% CER, demonstrating great potential under the extremely
low-resource setting. Furthermore, we also conduct ablation studies
to verify the effectiveness of each component in LRSpeech, and
analyze the accuracy of LRSpeech under different data settings,
which provide valuable insights for industrial deployment. Finally,
we apply LRSpeech to Lithuanian and also meets the online re-
quirement for TTS and achieves promising results on ASR. We are
currently deploying LRSpeech to a commercialized speech service
to support TTS for rare languages.
2 LRSPEECH
In this section, we introduce the details of LRSpeech for extremely
low-resource speech synthesis and recognition. We first give an
overview of LRSpeech, and then introduce the formulation of TTS
and ASR. We further introduce each component of LRSpeech re-
spectively, and finally describe the model structure of LRSpeech.
2.1 Pipeline Overview
To ensure the accuracy of TTS and ASR models under extremely
low-resource scenarios, we design a three-stage pipeline for LR-
Speech as shown in Figure 1:
•Pre-training and fine-tuning. We pre-train both TTS and ASR
models on rich-resource languages and then fine-tune them on
low-resource languages. Leveraging rich-resource languages in
LRSpeech are based on two considerations: 1) a large amount of
paired data on rich-resource languages are already available in
the commercialized speech service, and 2) the alignment capa-
bility between speech and text in rich-resource languages can
benefit the alignment learning in low-resource languages, due to
the pronunciation similarity between human languages [42].
•Dual transformation. Considering the dual nature between TTS
and ASR, we further leverage dual transformation [ 31] to boost
the accuracy of each other with unpaired speech and text data.
•Knowledge distillation. To further improve the accuracy of TTS
and ASR and facilitate online deployment, we leverage knowledge
3According to the requirements of a commercialized cloud speech service, the intelli-
gibility rate should be higher than 98% and the MOS score should be higher than 3.5
while the MOS gap to the ground-truth recordings should be less than 0.5.distillation [ 18,37] to synthesize paired data to train better TTS
and ASR models.
2.2 Formulation of TTS and ASR
TTS and ASR are usually formulated as sequence to sequence prob-
lems [ 6,41]. Denote the text and speech sequence pair (x,y)∈D,
where Dis the paired text and speech corpus. Each element in the
text sequence xrepresents a phoneme or character, while each
element in the speech sequence yrepresents a frame of speech. To
learn the TTS model θ, a mean square error loss is used:
L(θ;D)=−Σ(x,y)∈D(y−f(x;θ))2. (1)
To learn the ASR model ϕ, a negative log likelihood loss is used:
L(ϕ;D)=−Σ(y,x)∈DlogP(x|y;ϕ). (2)
TTS and ASR models can be developed based on an encoder-attention-
decoder framework [ 3,25,40], where the encoder transforms the
source sequence into a set of hidden representations, and the de-
coder generates the target sequence autoregressively based on the
source hidden representations obtained through an attention mech-
anism [3].
We make some notations for the data used in LRSpeech. Denote
Drich_tts as the high-quality TTS paired data in rich-resource lan-
guages, Drich_asr as the low-quality ASR paired data in rich-resource
languages, Dhas the single-speaker high-quality paired data for
target speaker, and Dlas the multi-speaker low-quality paired data.
Denote Xuas unpaired text data while Yuas multi-speaker low-
quality unpaired speech data.
Next, we introduce each component of the LRSpeech pipeline in
the following subsections.
2.3 Pre-Training and Fine-Tuning
The key to the conversion between text and speech is to learn the
alignment between the character/phoneme representations (text)
and the acoustic features (speech). Since people coming from dif-
ferent nations and speaking different languages share similar vocal
organs and thus similar pronunciations, the ability of alignment
learning in one language can help the alignment in another lan-
guage [ 19,42]. This motivates us to transfer the TTS and ASR
models that trained in rich-resource languages into low-resource
languages, considering there are plenty of paired speech and text
data for both TTS and ASR in rich-resource languages.
Pre-Training. We pre-train the TTS model θwith data corpus
Drich_tts following Equation 1 and pre-train the ASR model ϕwith
Drich_asr following Equation 2.