A REPRODUCIBILITY
A.1 Datasets
We list the detailed information of all of the datasets used in this
paper in Table 6. Next, we first describe the details of the data
preprocessing for speech and text data, and then describe what
is the “high-quality” and “low-quality” speech mentioned in this
paper11.
Data Proprocessing. For the speech data, we re-sample it to 16kHZ
and convert the raw waveform into mel-spectrograms following Shen
et al. [35] with 50ms frame size, 12.5ms hop size. For the text, we
use text normalization rules to convert the irregular word into the
normalized type which is easier to pronounce, e.g., “Sep 7th" will
be converted into “September seventh".
High-Quality Speech. We use high-quality speech to refer the
speech data from TTS corpus (e.g., LJSpeech, Data Baker as shown
in Table 6), which are usually recorded in a professional record-
ing studio with consistent characteristics such as speaking rate.
Collecting high-quality speech data for TTS is typically costly [ 13].
Low-Quality Speech. We use low-quality speech to refer the
speech data from ASR corpus (e.g., LibriSpeech, AIShell, Liepa as
shown in Table 6). Compared to high-quality speech, low-quality
speech usually contains noise due to the recording devices (e.g.,
smartphones, laptops) or the recording environment (e.g., room
reverberation, traffic noise). However, low-quality speech cannot
be too noisy for model training. We just use the term “low-quality”
to differ from high-quality speech.
A.2 Model Configurations and Training
Both the TTS and ASR models use the 6-layer encoder and 6-layer
decoder. For both the TTS and ASR models, the hidden size and
speaker ID embedding size is 384 and the number of attention heads
is 4. The kernel sizes of 1D convolution in the 2-layer convolution
network are set to 9 and 1 respectively, with input/output size
of 384/1536 for the first layer and 1536/384 in the second layer.
For the TTS model, the input module of the decoder consists of 3
fully-connected layers. The first two fully-connected layers have
64 neurons each and the third one has 384 neurons. The ReLU non-
linearity is applied to the output of every fully-connected layer. We
also insert 2 dropout layers in between the 3 fully-connected layers,
with dropout probability 0.5. The output module of the decoder
is a fully-connected layer with 80 neurons. For the ASR model,
the encoder contains 3 convolution layers. The first two are 3×3
convolution layers with stride 2 and filter size 256, and the third one
with stride 1 and filter size 256. The ReLU non-linearity is applied
to the output of every convolution layer except the last one.
We implement LRSpeech based on the tensor2tensor codebase12.
We use the Adam optimizer with β1=0.9,β2=0.98,ε=10−9
and follow the same learning rate schedule in Vaswani et al . [40] .
We train both the TTS and ASR models in LRSpeech on 4 NVIDIA
V100 GPUs. Each batch contains 20,000 speech frames in total. The
pre-training and fine-tuning, dual transformation and knowledge
11We show some high-quality speech (target speaker) and low-quality
speech (other speakers) from the training set in the demo page:
https://speechresearch.github.io/lrspeech.
12https://github.com/tensorflow/tensor2tensordistillation take nearly 1, 7, 1 days respectively. We measure the TTS
inference speed on a server with 12 Intel Xeon CPU, 256GB memory,
1 NVIDIA V100 GPU. The TTS model takes about 0.21s to generate
1.0s of speech, which satisfies online deployment requirements for
inference speed.
A.3 Evaluation Details
Mean Opinion Score (MOS). The MOS test is a speech quality
test for naturalness where listeners (testers) were asked to give
their opinions on the speech quality in a five-point scale MOS:
5=excellent, 4=good, 3=fair, 2=poor, 1=bad. We randomly select
20 sentences to synthesize speech for MOS test and each audio is
listened by 20 testers, who are all native speakers. We present a
part of the MOS test results in Figure 5. The complete test report
can be downloaded here13.
Figure 5: A part of the English MOS test report.
Intelligibility Rate (IR). The IR test is a speech quality test for
Intelligibility. During the test, the listeners (testers) are requested to
mark every unintelligible word in the text sentence. IR is calculated
by the proportion of the words that are intelligible over the total
test words. We randomly select 200 sentences to synthesize speech
for IR test and each audio is listened by 5 testers, who are all native
speakers. A part of the IR test results is shown in Figure 6. You can
find more test reports from the demo link.
WER and CER. Given the reference text and predicted text, the
WER calculates the edit distance between them and then normalizes
the distance by dividing the number of words in the reference
sentence. The WER is defined as W ER =S+D+I
N, where the Nis
the number of words in the reference sentence, Sis the number of
substitutions, Dis the number of deletions and Iis the number of
insertions. The WER can be larger than 100%. For example, given
the reference text “an apple” and predicted text “what is history”, the
predicted text needs two substitution operations and one insertion
operation. For this case, the WER is2+1
2=150%. The CER is similar
to WER.
A.4 Some Explorations in Experiments
We briefly describe some other explorations in training LRSpeech
in this paper:
13https://speechresearch.github.io/lrspeech