Fine-Tuning. Considering the rich-resource and low-resource lan-
guages have different phoneme/character vocabularies and speak-
ers, we initialize the TTS and ASR models on low-resource language
with all the pre-trained parameters except the phoneme/character
and speaker embeddings in TTS and the phoneme/character em-
beddings in ASR4respectively. We then fine-tune the TTS model θ
and ASR model ϕboth with the concatenation corpus of Dhand
Dlfollowing Equation 1 and Equation 2 respectively. During fine-
tuning, we first fine-tune the character embeddings and speaker
embeddings following the practice in [ 1,7], and then fine-tune
all parameters. It can help prevent the TTS and ASR models from
overfitting on the limited paired data in a low-resource language.
2.4 Dual Transformation between TTS and
ASR
TTS and ASR are two dual tasks and their dual nature can be
explored to boost the accuracy of each other, especially in the low-
resource scenarios. Therefore, we leverage dual transformation [ 31]
between TTS and ASR to improve the ability to transform between
text and speech. Dual transformation shares similar ideas with back-
translation [ 34] in machine translation and cycle-consistency [ 46]
in image translation, which are effective ways to leverage unla-
beled data in speech, text and image domains respectively. Dual
transformation works as follows:
•For each unpaired text sequence x∈Xu, we transform it into
speech sequence using the TTS model θ, and construct a pseudo
corpus D(Xu)to train the ASR model ϕfollowing Equation 2.
•For each unpaired speech sequence y∈Yu, we transform it into
text sequence using the ASR model ϕ, and construct a pseudo
corpus D(Yu)to train the TTS model θfollowing Equation 1.
During training, we run the dual transformation process on the
fly, which means the pseudo corpus are updated in each iteration
and the model can benefit from the newest data generated by each
other. Next, we introduce some specific designs in dual transforma-
tion to support multi-speaker TTS and ASR.
Multi-Speaker TTS Synthesis. Different from [ 23,31] that only
support a single speaker in both TTS and ASR model, we support
multi-speaker TTS and ASR in the dual transformation stage. Specif-
ically, we randomly choose a speaker ID and synthesize speech of
this speaker given a text sequence, which can benefit the training of
the multi-speaker ASR model. Furthermore, the ASR model trans-
forms multi-speaker speech into text, which can help the training
of the multi-speaker TTS model.
Levering Unpaired Speech of Unseen Speakers. Since multiple-
speaker low-quality unpaired speech data are much easier to obtain
than high-quality single-speaker unpaired speech data, enabling the
TTS and ASR models to utilize unseen speakers’ unpaired speech in
dual transformation can make our system more robust and scalable.
Compared to ASR, it is more challenging for TTS to synthesize
voice on unseen speakers. To this end, we split dual transformation
into two phases: 1) In the first phase, we only use the unpaired
speech whose speakers are seen before in the training data. 2) In
4ASR model does not need speaker embeddings, and the target embeddings and
the softmax matrix are usually shared in many sequence generation tasks for better
accuracy [29].the second phase, we also add the unpaired speech whose speakers
are unseen in the training data. As the ASR model can naturally
support unseen speakers, the pseudo paired data can be used to
train and enable the TTS model with the capability to synthesize
speech of new speakers.
2.5 Customization on TTS and ASR through
Knowledge Distillation
The TTS and ASR models we currently have are far from ready
for online deployment after dual transformation. There are sev-
eral issues we need to address: 1) While the TTS model can sup-
port multiple speakers, the speech quality of our target speaker
is not good enough and needs further improvement; 2) The syn-
thesized speech by the TTS models still have word skipping and
repeating issues; 3) The accuracy of the ASR model needs to be
further improved. Therefore, we further leverage knowledge dis-
tillation [ 18,37], which generates target sequences given source
sequences as input to construct a pseudo corpus, to customize the
TTS and ASR models for better accuracy.
2.5.1 Knowledge Distillation for TTS. The knowledge distillation
process for TTS consists of three steps:
•For each unpaired text sequence x∈Xu, we synthesize the
corresponding speech of the target speaker using the TTS model
θ, and construct a single-speaker pseudo corpus D(Xu).
•Filter the pseudo corpus D(Xu)whose synthesized speech has
word skipping and repeating issues.
•Use the filtered corpus D(Xu)to train a new TTS model dedicated
to the target speaker following Equation 1.
In the first step, the speech in the pseudo corpus D(Xu)are
single-speaker, which is different from the multi-speaker pseudo
corpus D(Xu)in Section 2.4. The TTS model (obtained by dual
transformation) in the first step has word skipping and repeating is-
sues. Therefore, in the second step, we filter the synthesized speech
which has word skipping and repeating issues, and thus the dis-
tilled model can be trained on accurate text and speech pairs. In
this way, the word skipping and repeating problem can be largely
reduced. We filter the synthesized speech based on two metrics:
word coverage ratio (WCR) and attention diagonal ratio (ADR).
Word Coverage Ratio. We observe that word skipping happens
when a word has small or no attention weights from the target mel-
spectrograms. Therefore, we propose word coverage ratio (WCR):
WCR =min
i∈[1,N]{max
t∈[1,Ti]max
s∈[1,S]At,s}, (3)
where Nis the number of words in a sentence, Tiis the number of
characters in the i-th word, Sis the number of frames of the target
mel-spectrograms, and At,sdenotes the element in the t-th row and
s-th column of the attention weight matrix A. We get the attention
weight matrix Afrom the encoder-decoder attention weights in
the TTS model and calculate the mean over different layers and
attention heads. A high WCR indicates all words in a sentence have
high attention weights from target speech frames, and thus is less
likely to cause word skipping.