(a) Baseline #1 (b) Baseline #2 (c) + PF (d) + PF + DT (e) + PF + DT + KD
Figure 3: The TTS attention alignments (where the column and row represent the source text and target speech respectively) of
an example chosen from the test set. The source text is “the paper’s author is alistair evans of monash university in australia”.
Setting WCR ADR (%)
PF 0.65 97.85
PF + DT 0.66 98.37
PF + DT + KD (LRSpeech) 0.72 98.81
Table 4: The word coverage ratio (WCR) and attention diago-
nal ratio (ADR) scores in TTS model under different settings.
•Furthermore, adding knowledge distillation (KD) brings 1.38% IR,
0.29 MOS, 10.12% WER and 5.34% CER improvements. We also list
the speech quality in terms of MOS for the ground-truth record-
ings (GT) and the synthesized speech from the ground-truth
mel-spectrogram by Parallel WaveGAN vocoder (GT (Parallel
WaveGAN)) in Table 3 as the upper bounds for references. It can
be seen that LRSpeech achieves a MOS score of 3.57, with a gap
to the ground-truth recordings less than 0.5, demonstrating the
high quality of the synthesized speech.
•There are also some related works focusing on low-resource TTS
and ASR, such as Speech Chain [ 39], Almost Unsup [ 31], and
SeqRQ-AE [ 23]. However, these methods require much data re-
source to build systems and thus cannot achieve reasonable accu-
racy in the extremely low-resource setting. For example, [ 31] re-
quires a pronunciation lexicon to convert the character sequence
into phoneme sequence, and dozens of hours of single-speaker
high-quality unpaired speech data to improve the accuracy, which
are costly and not available in the extremely low-resource setting.
As a result, [ 31] cannot synthesize reasonable speech in TTS and
achieves high WER according to our preliminary experiments.
As a summary, LRSpeech achieves an IR score of 98.08% and a MOS
score of 3.57 for TTS with extremely low data cost, which meets
the online requirements for deploying the TTS system. Besides, it
also achieves a WER score of 28.82% and a CER score of 14.65%,
which is highly competitive considering the data resource used,
and shows great potential for further online deployment.
3.2.2 Analyses on the Alignment Quality of TTS. Since the quality
of the attention alignments between the encoder (text) and decoder
(speech) are good indicators of the performance of TTS model, we
analyze the word coverage ratio (WCR) and attention diagonal ratio
(ADR) as described in Section 2.5.1 and show their changes among
different settings in Table 4. We also show the attention alignments
of a sample case from each setting in Figure 3. We have several
observations:•As can be seen from Figure 3 (a) and (b), both Baseline #1 and #2
achieve poor attention alignments and their synthesized speech
samples are crashed (ADR is smaller than 0.5). The attention
weights of Baseline #2 are almost randomly assigned and the
synthesized speech is crashed, which demonstrates that simply
adding a few low-quality multi-speaker data ( Dl) onDhcannot
help the TTS model but make it worse. Due to the poor alignment
quality of Baseline #1 and #2, we do not analyze their correspond-
ing WCR.
•After adding pre-training and fine-tuning (PF), the attention
alignments in Figure 3 (c) become diagonal, which demonstrates
the TTS model pre-training in rich-resource languages can help
build reasonable alignments between text and speech in low-
resource languages. Although the synthesized speech can be
roughly understood by humans, it still has many issues such as
word skipping and repeating. For example, the word “in" in the
red box of Figure 3 (c) has low attention weight (WCR), and thus
the speech skips the word “in".
•Further adding dual transformation (DT) improves WCR and
ADR, and also alleviates the words skipping and repeating issues.
Accordingly, the attention alignments in Figure 3 (d) are better.
•Since there still exist some word skipping and repeating issues
after DT, we filter the synthesized speech according to WCR
and ADR during knowledge distillation (KD). The final WCR
is further improved to 0.72 and ADR is improved to 98.81% as
shown in Table 4, and the attention alignments in Figure 3 (e)
are much more clear.
3.3 Further Analyses of LRSpeech
There are some questions to further investigate in LRSpeech:
•Low-quality speech data may bring noise to the TTS model. How
can the accuracy change if using different scales of low-quality
paired data Dl?
•As described in Section 2.4, supporting the LRSpeech training
with unpaired speech data from seen and especially unseen speak-
ers (YuseenandYuunseen ) is critical for a robust and scalable system.
Can the accuracy be improved if using YuseenandYuunseen ?
•How can the accuracy change if using different scales of unpaired
text data Xuto synthesize speech during knowledge distillation?