(a) TTS model (b) ASR model (c) Speaker module (d) Encoder (left) and (e) Input/Output module
Decoder (right) for speech/text
Figure 2: The Transformer based TTS and ASR models in LRSpeech.
Attention Diagonal Ratio. As demonstrated by previous works [ 30,
41], the attention alignments between text and speech are mono-
tonic and diagonal. When the synthesized speech has word skipping
and repeating issues, or is totally crashed, the attention alignments
will deviate from the diagonal. We define the attention diagonal
ratio (ADR) as:
ADR =ÍT
t=1Íkt+b
s=kt−bAt,s
ÍT
t=1ÍS
s=1At,s, (4)
where TandSare the number of characters and speech frames in a
text and speech pair, k=S
T, and bis a hyperparameter to determine
the width of diagonal. ADR measures how much attention lies in
the diagonal area with a width of b. A higher ADR indicates that
the synthesized speech has good attention alignment with text and
thus has less word skipping, repeating or crashing issues.
2.5.2 Knowledge Distillation for ASR. Since the unpaired text and
low-quality multi-speaker unpaired speech are both available for
ASR , we leverage both the ASR and TTS models to synthesize data
during the knowledge distillation for ASR:
•For each unpaired speech y∈Yu, we generate the corresponding
text using the ASR model ϕ, and construct a pseudo corpus D(Yu).
•For each unpaired text x∈Xu, we synthesize the corresponding
speech of multiple speakers using the TTS model θ, and construct
a pseudo corpus D(Xu).
•We combine the above pseudo corpus D(Yu)andD(Xu), as well
as the single-speaker high-quality paired data Dhand multi-
speaker low-quality paired data Dlto train a new ASR model
following Equation 2.
Similar to the knowledge distillation for TTS, we also leverage
a large amount of unpaired text to synthesize speech. To further
improve the ASR accuracy, we use SpecAugment [ 27] to add noise
in the input speech which acts like data augmentation.
2.6 Model Structure of LRSpeech
In this section, we introduce the model structure of LRSpeech, as
shown in Figure 2.
Transformer Model. Both the TTS and ASR models adopt the
Transformer based encoder-attention-decoder structure [ 40]. One
difference from the original Transformer model is that we replacethe feed-forward network with a one-dimensional convolution
network following [ 31], in order to better capture the dependencies
in a long speech sequence.
Input/Output Module. To enable the Transformer model to sup-
port ASR and TTS, we need different input and output modules
for speech and text [ 31]. For the TTS model: 1) The input module
of the encoder is a character/phoneme embedding lookup table,
which converts character/phoneme ID into embedding; 2) The in-
put module of the decoder is a speech pre-net, which consists of
multiple dense layers to transform each speech frame non-linearly;
3) The output module of the decoder consists of a linear layer to
convert hidden representations into mel-spectrograms, and a stop
linear layer with a sigmoid function to predict whether current
step should stop or not. For the ASR model: 1) The input module
of the encoder consists of multiple convolutional layers, which
reduce the length of the speech sequence; 2) The input module of
the decoder is a character/phoneme embedding lookup table; 3)
The output module of the decoder consists of a linear layer and a
softmax function, where the linear layer shares the same weights
with the character/phoneme embedding lookup table in the decoder
input module.
Speaker Module. The multi-speaker TTS model relies on a speaker
embedding module to differentiate multiple speakers. We add a
speaker embedding vector both in the encoder output and decoder
input (after the decoder input module). As shown in Figure 2 (c),
we convert the speaker ID into a speaker embedding vector using
an embedding lookup table, and then add a linear transformation
with a softsign function x=x/(1+|x|). We further concatenate the
obtained vector with the encoder output or decoder input, and use
another linear layer to reduce the hidden dimension to the original
hidden of the encoder output or decoder input.
3 EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
In this section, we conduct experiments to evaluate LRSpeech for
extremely low-resource TTS and ASR. We first describe the experi-
ment settings, show the results of our method, and conduct some
analyses of LRSpeech.
3.1 Experimental Setup