Setting Rich-Resource Low-Resource Extremely Low-Resource Unsupervised
Datapronunciation lexicon ✓ ✓ × ×
paired data (single-speaker, high-quality) dozens of hours dozens of minutes several minutes ×
paired data (multi-speaker, low-quality) hundreds of hours dozens of hours several hours ×
unpaired speech (single-speaker, high-quality) ✓ dozens of hours × ×
unpaired speech (multi-speaker, low-quality) ✓ ✓ dozens of hours ✓
unpaired text ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Related WorkTTS [22, 28, 30, 35] [2, 12, 23, 31]Our Work/
ASR [6, 10, 11] [16, 32, 33, 39] [8, 24, 45]
Table 1: The data resource to build TTS and ASR systems and the corresponding related works in rich-resource, low-resource,
extremely low-resource and unsupervised settings.
•In the rich-resource setting, both TTS [ 22,28,30,35] and ASR [ 6,
10,11] require a large amount of paired speech and text data
to achieve high accuracy: TTS usually needs dozens of hours
of single-speaker high-quality recordings, while ASR requires
at least hundreds of hours multiple-speaker low-quality data.
Besides, TTS in the rich-resource setting also leverages pronun-
ciation lexicon for accurate pronunciation. Optionally, unpaired
speech and text data can be leveraged.
•In the low-resource setting, the single-speaker high-quality paired
data are reduced to dozens of minutes in TTS [ 2,12,23,31] while
the multi-speaker low-quality paired data is reduced to dozens
of hours in ASR [ 16,32,33,39], compared to that in the rich-
resource setting. Additionally, they leverage unpaired speech
and text data to ensure the performance.
•In the unsupervised setting, only unpaired speech and text data
are leverage to build ASR models [8, 24, 45].
As can be seen, a large amount of data resources are leveraged
in the rich-resource setting to ensure the accuracy for industrial
deployment. Considering nearly all low-resource languages are
lack of training data and there are more than 6,000 languages in the
world, it will be a huge cost for training data collection. Although
data resource can be reduced in the low-resource setting, it still
requires 1) a certain amount of paired speech and text (dozens of
minutes for TTS and dozens of hours for ASR), 2) a pronunciation
lexicon, and 3) a large amount of single-speaker high-quality un-
paired speech data that still incur high data collection cost2. What is
more, the accuracy of the TTS and ASR models in the low-resource
setting is not high enough. The purely unsupervised methods for
ASR suffer from low accuracy and cannot meet the requirement of
industrial deployment.
1.2 Our Method
In this paper, we develop LRSpeech, a TTS and ASR system under
the extremely low-resource setting, which supports rare languages
with low data collection cost. LRSpeech aims for industrial deploy-
ment under two constraints: 1) extremely low data collection cost,
and 2) high accuracy to satisfy the deployment requirement. For
the first constraint, as the extremely low-resource setting shown
in Table 1, LRSpeech explores the limits of data requirements by
2Although we can crawl the multi-speaker low-quality unpaired speech data from
the web, it is hard to crawl the single-speaker high-quality unpaired speech data.
Therefore, it has the same collection cost (recorded by human) with the single-speaker
high-quality paired data.1) using single-speaker high-quality paired data as few as possi-
ble (several minutes), 2) using a few multi-speaker low-quality
paired data (several hours), 3) using slightly more multi-speaker
low-quality unpaired speech data (dozens of hours), 4) not using
single-speaker high-quality unpaired data, and 5) not using the
pronunciation lexicon but directly taking character as the input of
TTS and the output of ASR.
For the second constraint, LRSpeech leverages several key tech-
niques including transfer learning from rich-resource languages,
iterative accuracy boosting between TTS and ASR through dual
transformation, and knowledge distillation to further refine TTS
and ASR models for better accuracy. Specifically, LRSpeech consists
of a three-stage pipeline:
•We first pre-train both TTS and ASR models on rich-resource lan-
guages with plenty of paired data, which can learn the alignment
capability between speech and text and benefit the alignment
learning on low-resource languages.
•We further leverage dual transformation between TTS and ASR
to iteratively boost the accuracy of each other with unpaired
speech and text data.
•Furthermore, we leverage knowledge distillation with unpaired
speech and text data to customize the TTS model on a high-
quality target-speaker voice and improve the ASR model on
multiple voices.
1.3 Data Cost and Accuracy
Next, we introduce the extremely low data cost while promising
accuracy achieved by LRSpeech.
According to [ 4,14,15,38,43], the pronunciation lexicon, single-
speaker high-quality paired data and single-speaker high-quality
unpaired speech data require much higher collection cost than
other data such as multi-speaker low-quality unpaired speech data
and unpaired text, since they can be crawled from the web. Accord-
ingly, compared to the low-resource setting in Table 1, LRSpeech 1)
removes the pronunciation lexicon, 2) reduces the single-speaker
high-quality paired data by an order of magnitude, 3) removes
single-speaker high-quality unpaired speech data, 4) also reduces
multi-speaker low-quality paired data by an order of magnitude, 5)
similarly leverages multi-speaker low-quality unpaired speech, and
6) additionally leverage paired data from rich-resource languages
which incur no additional cost since they are already available in the
commercialized speech service. Therefore, LRSpeech can greatly
reduce the data collection cost for TTS and ASR.