Dataset Type Speakers Language Open Source Usage
Data Baker High-quality speech Single Mandarin Chinese ✓ Pre-training
AIShell Low-quality speech Multiple Mandarin Chinese ✓ Pre-training
LJSpeech High-quality speech Single English ✓ Training
LibriSpeech Low-quality speech Multiple English ✓ Training / Engish ASR test
Liepa Low-quality speech Multiple Lithuanian ✓ Training / Lithuanian ASR test
news-crawl Text / English/Lithuanian ✓ English/Lithuanian training and TTS test
Table 6: The datasets used in this paper.
Setting Result
Reference some mysterious force seemed to have brought about a convulsion of the elements
Baseline #1 in no characters is the contrast between the ugly and vulgar illegibility of the modern type
Baseline #2 the queen replied in a careless tone for instance now she went on
+ PF some of these ceriase for seen to him to have both of a down of the old lomests
+ PF + DT some misterious force seemed to have brought about a convulsion of the elements
+ PF + DT + KD (LRSpeech) some mysterious force seemed to have brought about a convulsion of the elements
Table 7: A case analysis for ASR model under different settings.
Figure 6: A part of the English IR test report.
•Pre-training and Finetune We also try different methods such
as unifying the character spaces between rich-resource and low-
resource languages, or learning the mapping between the char-
acter embeddings of rich- and low-resource languages as used in
[9]. However, we find these methods result in similar accuracy
for both TTS and ASR.
•Speaker Module To design the speaker module, we explore
several ways including replacing softsign with ReLU, etc. Experi-
mental results show that the design as Figure 2 (c) can help model
reduce the repeating words and missing words.
•Knowledge Distillation for TTS We try to add the paired tar-
get speaker data for training. However, the result is slightly worse
than that using only synthesized speech.
•Knowledge Distillation for ASR Since the synthesized speech
can improve the performance, we try to remove the real speech
and add plenty of synthesized speech for training. However, theASR model cannot work well for real speech and WER is above
47%.
•Vocoder Training In our preliminary experiments, we only use
the dataset Drich_tts in the rich-resource language (Mandarin Chi-
nese) to train the Parallel WaveGAN. The vocoder can generate
high-quality speech for Mandarin Chinese but fail to work for
the low-resource languages. Considering that the vocoder has
not been trained on the speech in the low-resource languages,
we add single-speaker high-quality corpus Dhand up-sample the
speech data in Dhto make it roughly the same with the speech
data in Drich_tts for training. In this way, we find that the vocoder
can work well for the low-resource languages.
A.5 Case Analyses for ASR
We also conduct a case analysis on ASR as shown in Table 7. Please
refer to Section 3.2 for the descriptions of each setting in this table.
The generated text by Baseline #1 is completely irrelevant to the
reference. Besides, we find from the test set that the generated text
is usually the same for many completely different speech, due to
the lack of paired data (only 50 paired data) for training. Baseline
#2 can generate different text sentences for different speech, but
still cannot generate reasonable results. After pre-training and fine-
tuning (PF), the model can recognize some words like “have”. Similar
to the effect of pre-training on TTS, pre-training ASR on rich-
resource language can also help to learn the alignment between
speech and text. By further leveraging unpaired speech and text,
with dual transformation (DT), the generated sentence is more
accurate. However, for some hard words like “mysterious”, the
model cannot recognize it correctly. TTS and ASR can also help
each other not only in dual transformation but also in knowledge
distillation (KD). During KD, a large amount of pseudo paired data
generated from the TTS model can help the ASR model recognize
most words and give correct results as shown in Table 7.