AI and education: Guidance for policy-makers – AI essentials for policy-makers
62. AI essentials for policy-makers
2.1 The interdisciplinary nature of AI
The term ‘artificial intelligence’ was first used at a 1956 workshop held at Dartmouth 
College, a US Ivy League university, to describe the "science and engineering of making 
intelligent machines, especially intelligent computer programs" (McCarthy et al., 2006, 
p. 2)1. Over the following decades, AI developed in fits and starts, with periods of rapid 
progress interspersed with AI winters (Russell and Norvig, 2016). 
All the while, definitions of AI multiplied and expanded, often 
becoming entangled with the philosophical questions of what 
constitutes ‘intelligence’ and whether machines can ever really 
be ‘intelligent’ . To give just one example, Zhong defined AI as 
a branch of modern science and technology aiming at the 
exploration of the secrets of human intelligence on one 
hand and the transplantation of human intelligence to 
machines as much as possible on the other hand, so that machines 
would be able to perform functions as intelligently as they can. 
(Zhong, 2006, p. 90)
Pragmatically sidestepping this long-running debate, for the 
purpose of this publication AI might be defined as computer 
systems that have been designed 
to interact with the world through 
capabilities that we usually think 
of as human (Luckin et al., 2016). 
More detail is given by UNESCO's 
World Commission on the Ethics of 
Scientific Knowledge and Technology 
(COMEST), who describe AI as 
involving 
machines capable of imitating 
certain functionalities of 
human intelligence, including 
such features as perception, learning, 
reasoning, problem solving, language 
interaction, and even producing creative 
work. (COMEST, 2019)
Currently, we are experiencing an AI 
renaissance, with an ever-increasing 
range of sectors adopting the type 
of AI known as machine learning, 
which involves the AI system 
analysing huge amounts of data. 
This has come about as a result 
of two critical developments: the 
exponential growth of data (IBM has 
calculated that, due to the Internet 
and related technologies, more than 2.5 quintillion2 bytes of data are created every day) and the 
exponential growth of computer processing power (because 
of Moore’s law, today’s mobile phones are as powerful as 
supercomputers were 40 years ago). Big data and powerful 
computers have both been essential to the successes of 
machine learning because its algorithms depend on the 
processing of millions of data points which, in turn, requires 
enormous amounts of computer power.3
Interestingly, the machine learning algorithms that are 
generating the most headlines – ‘deep learning’ and 
‘neural networks’ – have themselves been around for more 
than 40 years. The recent dramatic achievements of AI 
and its disruptive potential have come about because of 
TABLE 1: AI-AS-A-SERVICE EXAMPLES
TECHNOLOGY  
COMPANY‘AI AS A  
SERVICE’  
PLATFORMCOMPANY’S  
DESCRIPTION
Alibaba Cloud Cloud-based AI tools to support the demands of businesses, websites, or 
applications: https://www.alibabacloud.com
Amazon AWS Pre-trained AI service for computer vision, language, recommendations, and 
forecasting. It can quickly build, train and deploy machine learning models 
at scale or build custom models with support for all the popular open-source 
frameworks: https://aws.amazon.com/machine-learning
Baidu EasyDL Supports customers to build high-quality customized AI models without having 
to code: https://ai.baidu.com/easydl
Google TensorFlow An end-to-end open-source platform for machine learning, including an 
ecosystem of tools, libraries and community resources that enables researchers to 
share the state-of-the-art in machine learning and developers to easily build and 
deploy machine-learning-powered applications: https://www.tensorflow.org
IBM Watson Allows users to bring AI tools and apps to the data wherever it resides regardless 
of the host platform: https://www.ibm.com/watson
Microsoft Azure Includes more than 100 services to build, deploy and manage 
applications: https://azure.microsoft.com
Tencent WeStart Maps AI capabilities, professional talent and industry resources to support the 
launch or enhancements of start-ups. It connects industry partners, disseminates 
and applies AI technology in different industry sectors:  
https://westart.tencent.com/ai
Almost all of the world’s big technology companies, and many others, now offer sophisticated ‘AI-as-a-service’ 
platforms, some of which are open-source. These provide various AI building-blocks that the developers can 
implement without having to write AI algorithms from scratch.