AI and education: Guidance for policy-makers – Understanding AI and education: Emerging practices and benefit-risk assessment
18The use of AI to empower teachers and enhance 
teaching 
Despite its potential to empower teachers, the use of teacher-
facing AI applications to augment and enhance teachers and 
teaching has to date received far less attention than student-
facing AI, which by definition replaces the teacher. Currently, 
researchers and developers often design for teachers only at 
the end of the process, for example by adding in a dashboard 
to display ITS student data. However, this is slowly beginning 
to be addressed.
Many teacher-facing AI applications aim to help teachers 
reduce workloads by automating tasks such as assessment, 
plagiarism detection, administration and feedback. This, it 
is often argued, should free up time for teachers to invest 
in other tasks, such as providing more effective support 
to individual students. However, as the AI develops, it is 
possible that teachers will be relieved of so many more 
tasks that the perceived need for teachers will be reduced 
to next to nothing. While this might have some benefits in 
contexts where teachers are scarce, the aim of eliminating 
the need for human teachers reveals a fundamental 
misunderstanding of their essential social role in the 
learning process. 
Nonetheless, it is widely agreed that as AI tools become 
more available in classroom, it is likely that teacher roles will 
change. What is not yet clear is how this will happen. However, 
we know that teachers will need to build new competencies 
to enable them to work effectively with AI, and undertake 
appropriate professional development to foster their human 
and social capabilities.
AI-driven discussion forum monitoring
AI technologies are being used to support online 
education, especially to help teachers or facilitators 
monitor asynchronous discussion forums. On these 
forums, students give responses to given tasks, ask their 
tutors about course materials, and engage in collaborative 
learning opportunities. This typically generates large 
numbers of posts, all of which must be moderated and 
addressed. AI might help in a number of ways: a tool might 
triage the forum posts and automatically respond to the 
simpler ones; aggregate posts that raise overlapping issues; 
or use sentiment analysis to identify posts that reveal 
negative or non-productive emotional states. Together, 
these techniques might also enable human tutors to be 
kept informed of student opinions and collective worries. 
An example, albeit with some ethical issues, was the AI 
assistant ‘Jill Watson’ , which was developed at Georgia 
Tech in the United States of America to triage forum posts 
and answer questions where possible (such as "When 
do I have to submit my assignment?"), while referring 
other more complex posts to human teaching assistants. 
This AI assistant was based on IBM’s Watson platform. 
It automatically responded to some student questions, and sent emails to students about assignments (Goel and 
Polepeddi, 2017). Although it was thought to be successful, 
the ethics were criticized because it tricked students into 
thinking that the AI assistant was a real person – by, for 
example, delaying its responses and using humour.
AI-human ‘dual teacher’ model
Although there are some notable exceptions, much AI in 
education has been designed – whether intentionally or not 
– to replace some teacher tasks, rather than to assist teachers 
to teach more effectively. Some schools in China’s remote rural 
areas already use what is known as a ‘dual teacher model’ . In 
this approach, an expert teacher gives a lecture over a video 
link to students in a distant classroom, who receive additional 
guidance from a less-experienced local teacher (iResearch 
Global, 2019). A future possibility is that an AI teaching 
assistant could support one of these roles. The AI could help 
the human teacher with many tasks, including providing 
specialist expertise or professional development resources, 
collaborating with colleagues, both within and outside the 
particular setting, monitoring the students’ performance, 
and tracking progress over time. What and how to teach the 
students would remain the responsibility and prerogative 
of the teacher. The AI tool’s role would simply be to make 
the teacher’s job easier and more collegiate. An example is 
the ‘LeWaijiao AI classroom’ ,63 which is designed to support 
human teachers so that they may conduct all of the key tasks.
AI-powered teaching assistants
As mentioned, many technologies are designed with the 
aim of relieving teachers of time-consuming activities such 
as taking attendance, marking assignments and answering 
the same questions over and over again. However, in so 
doing they effectively ‘take over' much of the teaching (some 
claim to deliver personalized learning activities ‘better than’ 
teachers), interfere with the teacher-student relationship, and 
can reduce teachers to a functional role. For example, one aim 
of automatic writing evaluation (AWE) is to relieve teachers 
of the burden of marking. However, as we have noted, 
while marking can be onerous, it is often a key opportunity 
for teachers to learn about their students’ strategies and 
capabilities. This can be lost with the use of AWE. 
In addition, this approach clearly undervalues teachers’ 
unique skills and experiences, as well as learners’ social and 
guidance needs. Instead of just automating computer-based 
teaching, AI might help open up teaching and learning 
possibilities that are otherwise difficult to achieve, or that 
challenge or even disrupt existing pedagogies. Such an 
approach would aim to augment a teacher’s expertise, 
perhaps by means of an AI teaching assistant (AI TA) (Luckin 
and Holmes, 2017). There are some AI applications designed 
to empower teachers and schools to facilitate transformation 
in learning. Some research on these has been undertaken, but 
many technical and ethical issues need to be overcome before 
they can be harnessed in real settings.