Understanding AI and education: Emerging practices and benefit-risk assessment – AI and education: Guidance for policy-makers 
193.2 How can AI be best exploited for the common good in education?
As has been explored, AI is already being used in educational 
contexts in multiple ways. However, despite using cutting-
edge technologies, these applications often do little more 
than automate some outmoded classroom practices, rather 
than using the unique affordances of AI to reimagine 
teaching and learning. In other words, the attention of AI 
researchers and developers working in education has so far 
been focused on the relatively easy to address, although 
still complex, low-hanging fruit of memorising and recalling 
knowledge. Few possibilities that address more complex 
educational issues, such as collaborative learning or new 
ways to assess and accredit, have yet to be fully researched, 
let alone made available as commercial products at scale. 
Accordingly, here, in order to stimulate a dialogue, some 
innovative ways in which AI might be exploited for the 
common good in education are suggested. 
AI-driven lifelong learning companions
The desire for every student to have their own personalized 
lifelong tutor is what first inspired the use of AI in learning. 
Technically speaking, it would not necessarily be difficult 
to leverage the capabilities of smartphones and related 
technologies to create an AI-driven learning companion that 
could accompany individual learners throughout their life. 
Rather than setting out to teach the student in the manner 
of an instructionist ITS, a learning companion would provide 
continuous support, building on the individual student’s 
interests and goals, to help them decide what to learn, as 
well as where and how. It could also guide the student along 
individualized learning pathways designed to help them 
address their emerging goals and connect their learning 
interests and achievements, while encouraging them to reflect 
on and revise their long-term learning aims. However, despite 
the profound potential, there are currently no commercial 
AI-enabled lifelong learning products, and little research. 
AI-enabled continuous assessment
Although there is little evidence for their validity, 
reliability or accuracy, high-stakes examinations are 
central in educational systems around the world. With 
such examinations in place, schools and universities often 
teach to the test, prioritizing routine cognitive skills and 
knowledge acquisition (the types of knowledge being 
supplanted by AI) over in-depth understanding and 
authentic application. 
In fact, AI is already being developed to extend existing 
examination practices. For example, AI-driven face 
recognition, voice recognition, keyboard dynamics, and text 
forensics are increasingly being used to verify candidates in 
examinations for distance learners.64 Although this might 
have benefits for some students (e.g. those with disabilities 
who find it challenging to attend face-to-face examinations), these tools have not proved effective at scale, and they 
perpetuate rather than ameliorate the problems of exam-
based assessment practices.
An alternative approach to assessment might be possible with 
AI tools designed to constantly monitor student progress, to 
provide targeted feedback and assess the student’s mastery. 
All of this information might be collated throughout a 
student’s time in formal educational settings. While the use of 
AI-driven continuous assessment to replace high-stakes stop-
and-test examinations may be attractive, it also illustrates 
the two sides of applying AI in education : the benefits and 
the challenges. Allowing students to demonstrate their 
competencies while they learn is advantageous in some 
respects, but how this might be achieved without continuous 
monitoring – i.e. surveillance – is less clear. Such monitoring 
involves many ethical concerns.
AI-enabled record of lifelong learning 
achievements
An ‘AI-driven e-portfolio’ might be used to collate all of the 
continuous assessment information, recorded throughout 
a student’s time in formal education, together with data on 
the student’s engagement with non-formal learning (such 
as learning a musical instrument or a craft) and informal 
learning (such as acquiring a language). This record would 
function as an intelligent and dynamic resumé that could be 
underwritten and authenticated by blockchain technologies.65 
In this way, students would have a robust, accredited record 
of their learning experiences and achievements, potentially 
far more detailed than a collection of exam certificates. 
They would be able to share secure access to relevant parts 
of their e-portfolio with higher education providers and 
prospective employers.
Beijing Consensus on Artificial Intelligence and Education
20. Reaffirm that the guiding principle for achieving SDG 4 is lifelong 
learning, which encompasses formal, non-formal and informal 
learning. Adopt AI platforms and data-based learning analytics as 
key technologies in building integrated lifelong learning systems to 
enable personalized learning anytime, anywhere and potentially for 
anyone, with respect for learners’ agency. Exploit the potential of AI to 
enable flexible learning pathways and the accumulation, recognition, 
certification and transfer of individual learning outcomes.
21. Be mindful of the need to give appropriate policy attention to the 
needs of older people, especially older women, and to engage them 
in developing the values and skills needed for living with AI in order 
to break the barriers to digital life. Plan and implement well-funded 
programmes to equip older workers with skills and options that enable 
them to remain economically active for as long as they choose and to 
engage in their societies.
(UNESCO, 2019a, p. 7)