AI and education: Guidance for policy-makers – AI essentials for policy-makers
12and much more besides. Accordingly, although many tasks 
are likely to be automatable, there are still key roles for 
humans to play, for which we need to be properly prepared 
(Holmes et al., 2019).
In fact, the increasingly complex and nuanced relationship 
between humans and AI has led to calls for AI to be re-configured 
and re-branded as ‘augmented intelligence’ (Zheng, 2017). 
For example, while computers can now easily beat humans at 
chess, computers and humans working together appear to be 
stronger than either working alone. In competitions, amateur chess players using AI have been able to beat computers 
and grandmasters alike (Brynjolfsson and McAfee, 2014). This 
approach involves using AI to enhance, rather than usurp, 
human capabilities. Shifting to augmented  intelligence leads to 
an emphasis on developing AI technologies that complement 
and expand human cognition, suggests ways that humans and 
AI might work together more effectively, queries how tasks 
should be divided between humans and machines, and raises 
the tantalizing possibility that the world’s problems might be 
addressed by means of a judicious mix of artificial and collective 
intelligence (Mulgan, 2018).
2.7 The Fourth Industrial Revolution and impact of AI on employment
AI is said to be a key enabler of the Fourth Industrial 
Revolution (Industry 4.0): 
Of the many diverse and fascinating challenges we face 
today, the most intense and important is how to 
understand and shape the new technology revolution, 
which entails nothing less than a transformation of humankind. 
(Schwab, 2017, p. 1) 
Industry 4.0 technologies include 3D printing, 
autonomous vehicles, biotechnology, nanotechnology, 
quantum computing, robotics, and the Internet of 
Things, all of which are underpinned by AI. In fact, AI 
is already ubiquitous in the modern workplace – from 
manufacturing to banking, construction to transport, 
and beyond – which has implications that require a 
system-wide response. Inevitably, there will be increases 
in both unemployment and new occupations. A recent 
global estimate suggests that 30% of work activities 
could be automated by 2030. Up to 375 million workers 
worldwide could be affected. Both blue-collar workers 
and white-collar employees will be impacted, and it is not 
necessarily the former who will bear the brunt:
The jobs that AI can easily replicate and replace are those 
that require recently evolved skills like logic and algebra. 
They tend to be middle-income jobs. Conversely, the jobs 
that AI cannot easily replicate are those that rely on the deeply 
evolved skills like mobility and perception. They tend to be lower-
income jobs. Hence, AI is hollowing out middle-income jobs and 
maintaining lots of lower-income jobs. 
(Joshi, 2017 © Courtesy of Guardian News & Media Ltd)Meanwhile, however, AI and other frontier technologies are 
increasing the range of high-skill jobs that require unique creative 
and analytical abilities and human interactions. In short, many 
workers’ jobs might disappear, and they will need to develop new 
skill sets – upskilling or reskilling – to enable them to enter the 
new occupations made possible by AI. Education ministries and 
training providers need to anticipate these changes, equipping 
today’s workers and preparing new generations with the 
necessary technical and social job skills, to smooth the transition 
to a world dominated by AI, while ensuring social sustainability.
In fact, many national agencies across the world have begun 
to develop strategic plans to address the future of AI. For 
example, in the United States of America, the National Artificial 
Intelligence Research and Development Strategic Plan 
(National Science and Technology Council, 2016) promotes 
long-term investment and research in a range of theoretical 
and practical AI approaches. These include data analytics, 
AI perception, theoretical limitations, artificial general 
intelligence, scalable AI, AI-driven humanoid robotics, human-
aware AI, and human augmentation. In 2017, the Chinese 
Government announced its Next Generation of Artificial 
Intelligence Development Plan (Government of the People’s 
Republic of China, 2017). Again, this focused on an array of 
theoretical and practical AI approaches, including big-data-
based intelligence, cross-media intelligence, human-machine 
hybrid augmented intelligence, collective intelligence, 
autonomous intelligence, advanced machine learning, 
brain-inspired intelligence, and quantum intelligence. Most 
importantly, both plans emphasize the potential of seamless 
interactions between humans and AI systems, and both aim to 
help realize AI’s potential social and economic benefits while 
minimizing the negative impacts.