Understanding AI and education: Emerging practices and benefit-risk assessment – AI and education: Guidance for policy-makers 
23Beijing Consensus on Artificial Intelligence and Education
6.  We also recognize the distinctive features of human intelligence. 
Recalling the principles set forth in the Universal Declaration of Human 
Rights, we reaffirm  UNESCO’s humanistic approach to the use of AI with 
a view towards protecting human rights and preparing all people with 
the appropriate values and skills needed for effective human–machine 
collaboration in life, learning and work.
17.  Be mindful of the systemic and long-term transformation of the labour 
market, including its gender dynamics, due to AI adoption. Update and 
develop mechanisms and tools to identify current and future skills needs 
in relation to AI development, in order to ensure the relevance of curricula 
to changing economies, labour markets and societies. Integrate AI-
related skills into the school curricula and qualifications of technical and vocational education and training (TVET) and higher education,  taking into 
consideration the ethical aspects and interrelated humanistic disciplines.
18.  Be cognizant of the emergence of a set of AI literacy skills required 
for effective human–machine collaboration, without losing sight of 
the need for foundational skills such as literacy and numeracy. Take 
institutional actions to enhance AI literacy across all layers of society.
19.  Set up mid- or long-term plans and take urgent actions to support 
higher education and research institutions in developing or enhancing 
courses and research programmes to foster local AI talent, in order to 
create a pool of local professionals who have the expertise to design, 
programme and develop AI  systems.
(UNESCO, 2019a, pp. 4 & 6)3.4 How can education prepare humans to live and work with AI?
As we noted earlier, computers are better at tasks that depend 
on data, pattern discovery, and statistical reasoning, while 
humans continue to be more accomplished at tasks that require 
empathy, self-direction, common sense, and value judgements. 
In other words, helping students learn how to live effectively 
in a world increasingly impacted by AI requires a pedagogy 
that, rather than focusing on what computers are good at 
(e.g. memorizing and computation), puts more emphasis on 
human skills (e.g. critical thinking, communication, collaboration 
and creativity) and the ability to collaborate with pervasive AI 
tools in life, learning, and work. 
As noted earlier, the Fourth Industrial Revolution is impacting 
on many aspects of modern life, especially the labour market. 
In many countries, AI is already taking over standardized and 
repetitive work, revolutionizing efficiencies but displacing many 
jobs. Yet, according to some of the world’s leading consultancies,75 
AI is also likely to create many new job opportunities and have an 
overall positive economic benefit, although they disagree about 
how many jobs will be supplanted and created. 
Whatever the long-term outcomes, the very nature of 
employment is likely to change ("working life is impermanent 
and unpredictable" , Barrett, 2017), with millions of workers 
being significantly and often negatively affected. Many will 
have to retrain; multiple careers in a lifetime is fast becoming 
the new normal.76 At the same time, the skills gap77 between 
those who can and cannot work with the new technologies 
will continue to grow, such that increasing numbers of workers 
will be excluded from the job market, and there will be a 
‘hollowing-out’ of the middle classes (Smith and Anderson, 
2014).  The combination of opportunities and risks also requires 
collective work to determine how developments can benefit 
everybody. The recent ILO report, ‘Work for a Brighter Future: 
Global Commission on the Future of Work’ (ILO, 2019) states: Countless opportunities lie ahead to improve the quality 
of working lives, expand choice, close the gender gap, 
[and] reverse the damages wreaked by global inequality. Yet none of 
this will happen by itself. Without decisive action we will be 
sleepwalking into a world that widens existing inequalities 
and uncertainties.
In fact, if the world is to ensure that AI does not exacerbate 
existing inequalities, it will be increasingly important for 
every citizen to have the opportunity to develop a robust 
understanding of AI – what it is, how it works, and how 
it might impact on their lives. This is sometimes called ‘AI 
literacy’ . For this, teachers will play a key role, and educational 
provision will have to shift toward supporting lifelong 
learning so that people can build their agency, employability, 
and ability to contribute to society. In other words, education 
and training approaches worldwide will need to take a 
system-wide response to help prepare all citizens to live and 
work harmoniously in the AI era.
Mainstreaming the necessary human values and skills will 
require a system-wide, even a society-wide, framework 
involving several complementary dimensions: 
(i) facilitating lifelong learning, so that everyone 
(especially older people) gains a robust understanding of 
AI78 (in particular, how data are selected, manipulated by AI 
algorithms, and interpreted, and how this may be biased) 
and its implications for individuals and wider society; 
(ii) integrating fundamental AI learning into K-12 school 
curricula79 (including computational thinking, data and 
algorithm literacy, coding and statistics, to enable young 
people to generate their own AI tools), which we look at in 
more detail later;