AI and education: Guidance for policy-makers – The challenges of harnessing AI to achieve SDG 4
26What the impact might be of using these gender-stereotyped 
technologies in classrooms is an open question.
Addressing these issues of gender equity is a critical goal 
that is only likely to be realized if women are adequately 
represented in the AI workforce, which is itself the subject of much disquiet. A recent LinkedIn analysis revealed that only 
22% of AI professionals globally are female (World Economic 
Forum, 2018). Advancing women’s representation in AI is 
essential for fundamental human rights and to help prevent 
the proliferation and amplification of AI-driven biases.
4.3 Monitoring, evaluation and research into the use of AI in education
Although the application of AI in education has been researched 
for more than 50 years, it is notable that it still remains relatively 
uncommon in schools and universities—even in developed 
countries. In fact, it is not even clear yet whether the technologies 
being imported into education are actually up to the task. 
Much of what exists now as “evidence-based” is mostly 
related to how AI can work in education in a technical 
capacity without pausing to ask and comprehensively answer the 
question of whether AI is needed in education at all. (Nemorin, 2021)
There are few examples of cumulative or replicable research 
on the application of AI in education, and little available robust 
evidence of its efficacy at scale, although some ITS have been 
shown to be broadly effective when compared against traditional 
classroom teaching (du Boulay, 2016). In fact, the purported 
efficacy of many AI tools may be due more to their novelty than 
their substance. We simply do not have sufficient evidence 
(Holmes et al., 2018a).
While there appears little doubt that AI will have a major impact 
on the delivery and management of educational opportunities, 
content and outcomes, we are still unsure about how AI 
solutions can improve those outcomes, and whether they can 
help scientists better understand how learning happens.
In particular, many have suggested that AI has a major role to 
play in addressing the educational problems, such as rising 
inequities, caused by the COVID-19 school closures. During 
the early months of the pandemic, many commercial AI in education companies reported large increases in registered 
users. However, there remains little evidence that these systems 
were being used for much more than virtual child-minding, 
or that young people gained much from engaging with them. 
Accordingly, before policy-makers assume that AI can solve the 
educational problems caused by the pandemic, much further 
research and evaluation is required to distinguish the reality 
from the hyperbole. Ultimately, AI is likely to be able to play 
a useful role, but at present we simply do not have enough 
information to know how helpful it will be.
Beijing Consensus on Artificial Intelligence and Education  
15. Support school-wide pilot tests on the use of AI to facilitate 
innovation in teaching and learning, drawing lessons from successful 
cases and scaling up evidence-based practices.
31.  Be mindful of the lack of systematic studies on the impacts of AI 
applications in education. Support research, innovation and analysis 
on the effects of AI on learning practices and outcomes, and on 
the emergence and validation of new forms of learning. Take an 
interdisciplinary approach to research on AI in education. Encourage 
cross-national comparative research and collaboration.
32.  Consider the development of monitoring and evaluation mechanisms 
to measure the impact of AI on education, teaching and learning, in 
order to provide a valid and robust evidence-based foundation for 
policy-making.
(UNESCO, 2019a, pp. 6 & 9)