AI and education: Guidance for policy-makers – Acknowledgements
Acknowledgements
This publication represents a collective effort of experts 
from the AI and education communities. 
The framework of the publication was conceptualized by 
Fengchun Miao, Chief of UNESCO’s Unit for Technology 
and AI in Education, and Wayne Holmes, former Principal 
Researcher of Education at Nesta in the United Kingdom. 
They also served as the principal authors of the publication. 
The other two authors are Ronghuai Huang and Hui Zhang 
working at the Beijing Normal University of China.
The team members of the Unit for Technology and AI in 
Education who coordinated the review and production 
of the publication are: Huhua Fan, Samuel Grimonprez, 
Shutong Wang, Veronica Cucuiat and Glen Hertelendy. 
UNESCO specialists who provided inputs and peer reviews 
are: Borhene Chakroun, Director for Policies and Lifelong 
Learning Systems; Sobhi Tawil, Director for Future of 
Learning and Innovation; Keith Holmes, Programme 
Specialist at the Future of Learning and Innovation Team; 
Julia Heiss, Programme Specialist at the Office in Harare; 
Natalia Amelina, Senior National Project Officer in Education 
at IITE; Valtencir M. Mendes, Senior Programme Lead, 
Division for Policies and Lifelong Learning Systems; and 
Elspeth McOmish, Programme Specialist at the Gender 
Equality Division.External experts whose contributions have benefited this 
publication are Ethel Agnes Pascua-Valenzuela, Director 
of Southeast Asian Ministers of Education Organizations 
Secretariat; Jianhua Zhao, Professor at China’s Southern 
University of Science and Technology; Shafika Isaacs, 
Research Associate at the University of Johannesburg; 
Werner Westermann, Chief of the Civic Education Program 
at Chile’s Library of Congress; and Mike Sharples, Emeritus 
Professor of Educational Technology at the United 
Kingdom's Open University.
Gratitude is also extended to Jenny Webster for copyediting 
and proofreading the text, and to Anna Mortreux for 
designing the layout. 
UNESCO would like to thank the Weidong Group of China 
for making this publication possible through its financial 
support to UNESCO. The financial support also helps 
Member States leverage technology and AI to achieve 
Sustainable Development Goal 4.