Foreword – AI and education: Guidance for policy-makers 
Stefania Giannini
Assistant Director-General for Education
UNESCOForeword
 
The rapid development of Artificial Intelligence (AI) 
is having a major impact on education. Advances in 
AI-powered solutions carry enormous potential for 
social good and the achievement of the Sustainable 
Development Goals. Making this happen requires 
system-wide policy adjustments and calls for robust 
ethical oversight as well as in-depth engagement with 
practitioners and researchers globally. 
Policy-makers and educators have entered uncharted 
territory that raises fundamental questions on how the future 
of learning will interact with AI. The bottom line is that the 
deployment and use of AI in education must be guided by 
the core principles of inclusion and equity. For this to happen, 
policies must promote equitable and inclusive access to AI 
and the use of AI as a public good, with focus on empowering 
girls and women and disadvantaged socio-economic groups. 
The growing use of novel AI technologies in education will 
only benefit all of humanity if – by design – it enhances 
human-centred approaches to pedagogy, and respects 
ethical norms and standards. AI should be geared to 
improving learning for every student, empowering teachers 
and strengthening learning management systems. Beyond 
this, preparing students and all citizens to live and work safely 
and effectively with AI is a shared challenge at global level. 
Future learning and training systems must equip all people 
with core AI competencies, including understanding of how 
AI collects and can manipulate data, and skills to ensure 
safety and protection of personal data. Finally, AI by nature 
transcends the sectors, the planning of effective AI and 
education policies requires consultation and collaboration 
with stakeholders across disciplines and sectors.
UNESCO has been playing a lead role in fostering dialogue and 
knowledge in all these areas with key public and private sector 
players. A number of events and publications have raised 
awareness of the extensive opportunities and implications of 
AI for education, and helped Member States begin to respond 
to complex challenges. In 2019, the relationship between AI 
and sustainable development was explored at ‘Mobile Learning 
Week’ , the United Nations’ flagship event on Information and 
Communication Technology in education. 
The same year, in cooperation with the Government of 
the People’s Republic of China, UNESCO organized the 
‘International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and 
Education’ in Beijing under the theme ‘Planning Education 
in the AI Era: Lead the Leap’ . This conference examined the 
system-wide impacts of AI on education, and it was here that the Beijing Consensus 
was adopted and released 
as the first-ever document 
to offer recommendations 
on how best to harness 
AI technologies for 
SDG4-Education 2030. 
The Beijing Consensus 
notably recommends that 
UNESCO develop guidelines 
and resources to support 
the capacity-building of 
education policy-makers and the integration of AI skills 
into ICT competency frameworks. More broadly, it calls 
on UNESCO to take a holistic approach to strengthening 
international cooperation in the field of AI and education 
with relevant partners.
'AI and education: Guidance for policy-makers' is developed 
within the framework of the implementation of the Beijing 
Consensus, aimed at fostering AI-ready policy-makers 
in education. It adds to the growing body of UNESCO’s 
intellectual work in the field, and will be of interest to a 
range of practitioners and professionals in the policymaking 
and education communities. It aims to generate a shared 
understanding of the opportunities offered by AI for 
education, as well as its implications for the essential 
competencies required by the AI era. It presents a benefit-risk 
assessment to provoke critical thinking on how AI should 
be leveraged to address the challenges of reaching the 
SDG 4 targets, and how potential risks should be uncovered 
and mitigated. It collects emerging national policies and 
best practices on leveraging AI to enhance education and 
learning. This publication can also be used as a guidebook 
for the development of policies for AI and education, from 
planning a humanistic and strategic objectives, to setting 
out key building policy components and implementation 
strategies. 
It is therefore my hope that the key policy questions, analysis 
of lessons learned, and the humanistic policy approach 
shared herein will help governments and partners to deploy 
AI in a way that transforms education and training systems 
for the common good of society, and for an inclusive and 
sustainable future.