AI and education: Guidance for policy-makers – AI essentials for policy-makers
10TABLE 2: AI TECHNOLOGIES
TECHNOLOGY DETAILS MAIN AI TECHNIQUES DEVELOPMENT EXAMPLES
Natural language 
processing (NLP)AI to automatically generate texts (as in 
auto-journalism), and interpret texts, 
including semantic analysis (as used in 
legal services and translation).Machine learning (especially deep 
learning), regression, and K-means. NLP , speech recognition, and image 
recognition have all achieved accuracy 
in excess of 90%. However, some 
researchers argue that, even with more 
data and faster processors, this will 
not be much improved until a new AI 
paradigm is developed.Otter12 
Speech recognition NLP applied to spoken words, including 
smartphones, personal assistants, and 
conversational bots in banking services.Machine learning, especially a deep 
learning recurrent neural network 
approach called long short-term 
memory (LSTM).Alibaba Cloud13 
Image recognition 
and processingIncludes facial recognition (e.g. for 
e-passports); handwriting recognition 
(e.g. for automated postal sorting); 
image manipulation (e.g. for deep-
fakes); and autonomous vehicles.Machine learning, especially deep 
learning convolutional neural networks.Google Lens14 
Autonomous agents Includes computer game avatars, 
malicious software bots, virtual 
companions, smart robots, and 
autonomous warfare.GOFAI and machine learning (for 
example, deep learning self-organizing 
neural networks, evolutionary learning 
and reinforcement learning).Research efforts are focusing on 
emergent intelligence, coordinated 
activity, situatedness, and physical 
embodiment, inspired by simpler forms 
of biological life.Woebot15 
Affect detection Includes text, behaviour and facial 
sentiment analyses.Bayesian networks and machine 
learning, especially deep learning.Multiple products are being developed 
globally; however, their use is 
often controversial.Affectiva16 
Data mining for prediction Includes financial predictions, fraud 
detection, medical diagnoses, weather 
forecasting, business processes and 
smart cities.Machine learning (especially supervised 
and deep learning), Bayes networks and 
support vector machines.Data mining applications are growing 
exponentially, from predicting shopping 
purchases to interpreting noisy 
electroencephalography (EEG) signals.Research project17 
Artificial creativity Includes systems that can create new 
photographs, music, artwork, or stories.Generative adversarial networks (GANs), 
a type of deep learning involving 
two neural networks pitted against 
each other.
Autoregressive language models 
that use deep learning to produce 
human-like text.GANs are at the cutting edge of AI, such 
that future applications are only slowly 
becoming evident.
An autoregressive language model 
known as GPT-3 can produce impressive 
human-like text. However, despite 
appearances, the system does not 
understand the text that it outputs.18 This Person Does 
Not Exist11
GPT-3 (Brown et 
al., 2020)
2.4 Possible trends in AI developments: ‘Weak’ and ‘strong’ AI
While AI scientists started out with dreams of human-level 
artificial general intelligence (AGI), known as strong AI, each of 
the applications in section 2.1 are in fact examples of narrow 
or weak AI (Searle, 1980). The domain in which each narrow 
application operates is tightly constrained and limited, and the 
AI cannot be directly applied elsewhere. For example, the AI used 
to predict the weather is incapable of predicting movements in 
the stock market, while the AI used to drive a car is incapable of 
diagnosing a tumour. Nonetheless, although not ‘intelligent’ in a 
human sense, each of these applications can often outperform 
humans in efficiency and endurance, and by its ability to identify 
significant patterns in huge amounts of data.
Although there have been some notable successes, it is 
important to recognize that AI is still in its infancy. For 
example, it is impossible to have a real conversation with one of the personal assistants on our smartphones or other 
AI-powered household devices – instead, the AI responds 
only, and often inaccurately, to specific commands. In other 
words, while its performance of some functions (such as 
finding patterns in data) is superior to that of human experts, 
in others (such as holding an in-depth conversation), AI 
performs below the level of a two-year-old child.19 In addition, 
there are signs from across the world that, contrary to the 
hyperbolic predictions, investment in AI technologies might 
be cooling – not yet another AI winter, but AI’s promised 
potential all too often remains tantalisingly beyond the 
horizon (Lucas, 2018). It has even been suggested that 
progress in AI is soon to plateau (Marcus and Davis, 2019). For 
example, autonomous vehicles safely navigating the streets of 
Palermo or Delhi remain some decades away, while image-
recognition apps are still easily fooled (Mitchell, 2019).