The challenges of harnessing AI to achieve SDG 4 – AI and education: Guidance for policy-makers 
274.4 What impact will AI have on teacher roles?
Beijing Consensus on Artificial Intelligence and Education  
12.  Be mindful that while AI provides opportunities to support teachers in 
their educational and pedagogical responsibilities, human interaction and 
collaboration between teachers and learners must remain at the core of 
education. Be aware that teachers cannot be displaced by machines, and 
ensure that their rights and working conditions are protected.
13.  Dynamically review and define teachers’ roles and required competencies 
in the context of teacher policies, strengthen teacher training institutions, 
and develop appropriate capacity-building programmes to prepare 
teachers to work effectively in AI-rich education settings.
(UNESCO, 2019a, p. 5)
Despite the commercial aims of using intelligent tutorial 
systems to do teacher tasks, it is still unlikely that teachers 
will be replaced by machines any time soon. Nonetheless, 
the ambition of many AI developers is to relieve teachers of various burdens (such as monitoring progress and marking 
assignments), so that they may focus on the human aspects of 
teaching (such as social engagement, interacting with empathy, 
and offering personal guidance). However, as AI functionalities 
improve, they will inevitably relieve teachers of increasing 
numbers of burdens. Accordingly, as the AI tools take over the 
knowledge transmission tasks, facilitating students’ lower-order 
thinking, teachers will play a reduced role. Theoretically, this will 
allow teachers to focus more on the design and facilitation of 
learning activities that require higher-order thinking, creativity, 
interpersonal collaboration, and social values – although, no 
doubt, AI developers are already working to automate these 
tasks too. Accordingly, to ensure that teachers continue their 
critical role in the education of young people policy-makers 
must review strategically how AI might transform teachers’ 
roles, and how teachers might prepare to work in AI-rich 
education environments.
4.5 What impact will AI have on learner agency?
Even if the dystopian scenario of replacing teachers with AI is 
avoided, learners’ agency might be undermined by more use 
of adaptive AI in education. This means less time for learners 
to interact with each other, more decisions made by machines, 
and more focus on the type of knowledge that is easiest to 
automate. This could deprive learners of opportunities to 
cultivate their resourcefulness, self-efficacy, self-regulation, 
metacognition, critical thinking, independent thought and 
other 21st century skills that are key to developing the whole 
person (World Economic Forum and Boston Consulting Group, 
2016). It is currently unknown what long-term effects this will 
have on student, civic and educational formulations. 
One ITS, Summit Learning, which was developed by engineers 
from Facebook and is being used in around 400 schools, 
has been the focus of student protests and boycotts. In 
more than one school, the students walked out in protest 
saying that they didn’t have a good experience using the 
programme, which required hours of classroom time sitting in 
front of computers. They were especially concerned that the 
programme eliminated much of the human interaction and 
teacher support needed to develop critical thinking (Robinson 
and Hernandez, 2018). The Chan Zuckerberg Initiative, which 
funded the Summit Learning project, disputes these claims.
In addition, as already noted, AI amplifies hidden features 
of its initial data and effectively reinforces its underlying 
assumptions. In this respect, rule-based and machine-learning AI technologies are similar (Holmes et al., 2019). Their very 
design, their implementation of mostly instructionist methods 
that focus on knowledge transfer and content delivery while 
ignoring contextual and social factors, amplifies existing yet 
contested assumptions about approaches to teaching and 
learning. This is a critical set of issues with which the AI-in-
education community needs to fully engage. All applications of 
AI in education should enhance, not threaten, what it means to 
be fully human.