The challenges of harnessing AI to achieve SDG 4 – AI and education: Guidance for policy-makers 
254. The challenges of harnessing AI to achieve SDG 4
Despite the potential of AI for education, there are many challenges specific to harnessing AI to 
achieve SDG 4. There are also broader obstacles that society must surmount to unleash the 
potential of AI and mitigate its downsides, and build future-proof education systems. To begin 
with, AI’s impact on students, teachers and wider society is yet to be determined. This includes 
questions about the efficacy of AI interventions, the choice of pedagogies used in AI tools, 
students’ privacy, teachers’ jobs, and what we should be teaching at schools and universities. 
In this chapter, we briefly explore some of the key issues that still need to be addressed.
4.1 Data ethics and algorithmic biases 
As has been discussed, data is at the heart of contemporary 
approaches to AI, which raises numerous challenging issues 
centred on data protection, privacy, and ownership, and on 
data analysis. These ethical issues have received a great deal 
of attention (summarized by Jobin et al., 2019). Similarly, the 
ethics of educational data has also been the focus of much 
research (e.g. Ferguson et al., 2016), raising further issues 
centred on informed consent, the management of data, and 
perspectives (e.g. institutional vs individual) on data. Any 
application of AI in educational contexts should properly 
address these many data issues, together with other issues 
specific to education, such as choice of pedagogy.
In addition, it has long been recognized that by design, AI 
amplifies hidden features of its initial data and effectively reinforces its underlying assumptions. In particular, 
if the algorithms 
are trained on data which contains human bias then of 
course the algorithms will learn it, but furthermore they 
are likely to amplify it. This is a huge problem, especially if people 
assume that algorithms are impartial. (Douglas, 2017) 
In short, AI is not biased in itself. Instead, if its data are biased 
or analysed with inappropriate algorithms, the original and 
perhaps unidentified biases can become more noticeable 
and have a greater impact. Making the biases noticeable 
is probably helpful, because it can lead to corrections, but 
allowing the biases to have a greater impact can lead to 
prejudicial outcomes and so should be carefully mitigated.
4.2 Gender-equitable AI and AI for gender equality
Beijing Consensus on Artificial Intelligence and Education  
25.  Underline that the gender gap in digital skills contributes to the low 
share of women among AI professionals and exacerbates existing 
gender inequalities.
26.  Affirm our commitment to developing AI applications in education 
that are free from gender bias and ensuring that the data used for AI 
development are gender sensitive. AI applications should drive the 
promotion of gender equality.
27.  Promote gender equality in the development of AI tools and empower 
girls and women with AI skills to promote gender equality among 
workforces and employers.
(UNESCO, 2019a, p. 8)
If AI is to be of genuine benefit to society, every effort must be 
taken to ensure that fairness and gender equality are among 
its fundamental principles. Yet, various uses of AI have been 
shown to be gender biased. For example, in 2018 the tech 
giant Amazon abandoned the use of machine learning in 
its recruitment because it was systematically discriminating 
against female candidates. The root cause was the fact that the original data, based on historical records of the company’s 
recruitment, had always been unknowingly biased against 
women. The AI, in automating selection, inevitably amplified 
and made obvious those original prejudices. Some have 
suggested that Amazon should not have abandoned their use 
of AI in recruitment but instead should have worked to address 
the bias. Another example centres on the development of AI 
personal assistants, such as Apple’s Siri,20 Amazon’s Alexa,21 and 
Baidu’s DuerOS.22 Many of these tools are given female names 
and voices, leading to subtle but serious implications: 
With their female names, voices and programmed 
flirtatiousness, the design of virtual personal assistants 
reproduces discriminatory stereotypes of female secretaries who, 
according to the gender stereotype, is often more than just a 
secretary to her male boss. It also reinforces the role of women as 
secondary and submissive to men. These AI assistants operate on 
the command of their user. They have no right to refuse these 
commands. They are programmed only to obey. Arguably, they 
also raise expectations for how real women ought to behave.  
(Adams, 2019)