Understanding AI and education:  Emerging practices and benefit-risk assessment – AI and education: Guidance for policy-makers 
133.  Understanding AI and education:  
Emerging practices and benefit-risk assessment
The introduction of AI into educational contexts may be traced 
to the 1970s. At that time, researchers were interested in 
seeing how computers might substitute for one-to-one human 
tutoring, which is thought to be the most effective approach to 
teaching but is unavailable to most people (Bloom, 1984). Early 
efforts used rule-based AI techniques to automatically adapt or 
personalize the learning to each individual learner (Carbonell, 
1970; Self, 1974). Since those beginnings, the application of AI 
in education has developed in multiple directions, beginning 
with student-facing AI (tools designed to support learning 
and assessment) to also include teacher-facing AI (designed to 
support teaching) and system-facing AI (designed to support 
the management of educational institutions) (Baker et al., 2019). 
In fact, the interaction between AI and education goes further, 
beyond the application  of AI within classrooms (i.e. learning 
with  AI) to teaching its techniques (i.e. learning about  AI) and 
preparing citizens to live in the AI era (i.e. learning for human-AI 
collaboration). The introduction of AI into education also shines 
a spotlight on issues of pedagogy, organizational structures, 
access, ethics, equity, and sustainability – in order to automate 
something, you first need to thoroughly understand it.
Furthermore, if the potential of AI to support education 
for sustainable development is to be fully realized, all of 
the possible benefits of the tools need to be identified and 
leveraged, and the risks acknowledged and mitigated. As a 
consequence, the ways in which education is organized also 
need to be continuously reviewed, which might suggest 
a fundamental reshaping of education’s core foundations, 
towards the central aim of addressing SDG 4. We also need 
to question what the introduction of AI into education might 
achieve: What are the real benefits AI might bring? How do we ensure that AI meets real needs, and is not just the latest EdTech 
fad? What should we allow AI to do?
To fully unleash the opportunities and mitigate the potential 
risks, system-wide responses to the following key policy 
questions are needed:
1.  How can AI be leveraged to enhance education?
2.  How can we ensure the ethical, inclusive and equitable use 
of AI in education?
3.  How can education prepare humans to live and work 
with AI?
To help education systems respond to these complex 
challenges, UNESCO, in cooperation with the Chinese 
Government, organized the International Conference on 
Artificial Intelligence and Education in Beijing (2019) under 
the theme ‘Planning Education in the AI Era: Lead the Leap’ . Its 
participants included more than 50 government ministers and 
vice-ministers, and around 500 international representatives 
from more than 100 Member States, United Nations agencies, 
academic institutions, civil society and private sector 
organizations. They examined the system-wide impacts of AI 
in the context of ‘SDG 4 – Education 2030 and the Future of 
Education Beyond 2030’ . The key outcome of the conference was 
the ‘Beijing Consensus on AI and Education’ (UNESCO, 2019a) 
which provides a common understanding of key issues and 
policy recommendations relating to the three aforementioned 
policy questions. The main recommendations made in the 
Beijing Consensus are referenced throughout this publication. 
The remainder of this chapter will review the main trends 
and issues affecting AI in education, as well as the benefit-risk 
dichotomy and implications for policy responses. 
3.1 How can AI be leveraged to enhance education?
Over the past decade, the use of AI tools to support or enhance 
learning has grown exponentially (Holmes et al., 2019). This 
has only increased following the COVID-19 school closures. 
However, evidence remains scarce on how AI can improve 
learning outcomes and whether it can help learning scientists 
and practitioners to better understand how effective learning 
happens (Zawacki-Richter et al., 2019). 
Many of the claims of the revolutionary potential of AI in 
education are based on conjecture, speculation, and 
optimism. (Nemorin, 2021)
Furthermore, we have yet to explore AI’s potential in the 
tracking of learning outcomes across different settings as well as assessing competencies, especially those acquired in non-formal 
and informal contexts. 
AI applications designed for education have elsewhere 
been divided into three main categories: system-facing, 
student-facing and teacher-facing (Baker et al., 2019). However, 
for policy-makers, we propose a set of four needs-based 
categories of emerging and potential applications: (i) education 
management and delivery; (ii) learning and assessment; 
(iii) empowering teachers and enhancing teaching; and (iv) 
lifelong learning. For each of these categories, we also provide 
some illustrative cases. It is important to acknowledge that 
each of the proposed categories are intrinsically interlinked; 
applications of AI in education may have the potential to 
address needs in more than one area. For example, tutorial