Introduction – AI and education: Guidance for policy-makers 
51. Introduction
Within just the last five years, because of some prominent successes and its disruptive 
potential, artificial intelligence (AI) has moved from the backwaters of academic research 
to the forefront of public discussions, including those at the level of the United Nations. 
In many countries, AI has become pervasive in daily life – from smartphone personal 
assistants to customer support chatbots, from recommending entertainment to 
predicting crime, and from facial recognition to medical diagnoses.
However, while AI might have the potential to support the 
achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) 
of the United Nations, the rapid technological developments 
inevitably bring multiple risks and challenges, which have so 
far outpaced policy debates and regulatory frameworks. And, 
while the main worries might involve AI overpowering human 
agency, more imminent concerns involve AI’s social and ethical 
implications – such as the misuse of personal data and the 
possibility that AI might actually exacerbate rather than reduce 
existing inequalities. 
Nonetheless, AI has also entered the world of education. 
‘Intelligent’ , ‘adaptive’ and ‘personalized’ learning systems 
are increasingly being developed by the private sector for 
deployment in schools and universities around the world, 
creating a market expected to be worth US$6 billion in 2024 
(Bhutani and Wadhwani, 2018). Inescapably, the application 
of AI in educational contexts raises profound questions – for 
example about what should be taught and how, the evolving 
role of teachers, and AI’s social and ethical implications. 
There are also numerous challenges, including issues such 
as educational equity and access. There is also an emerging 
consensus that the very foundations of teaching and learning 
may be reshaped by the deployment of AI in education.
All of these issues are further complicated by the massive shift 
to online learning due to the COVID-19 school closures.
Accordingly, this UNESCO guidance seeks to help policy-
makers better understand the possibilities and implications 
of AI for teaching and learning, so that its application in 
educational contexts genuinely helps achieve SDG 4: Ensure 
inclusive and equitable quality education and promote lifelong 
learning opportunities for all .However, we must also be aware that the connection between 
AI and education will inevitably play out in very different 
ways depending on the national and socio-economic 
circumstances. 
With AI in general, the concern is that 
if we continue blindly forward, we should expect to see 
increased inequality alongside economic disruption, social 
unrest, and in some cases, political instability, with the 
technologically disadvantaged and underrepresented faring the 
worst. (Smith and Neupane, 2018, p. 12)
This is no less a concern for AI and education. If AI is to 
support SDG 4, there is also a need to provide low-cost 
models for developing AI technologies, ensure that the 
interests of low and middle income countries are represented 
in key debates and decisions, and create bridges between 
these nations and countries where the implementation 
of AI is more advanced. This publication begins with a 
brief introduction to AI – what it is and how it works – to 
provide a foundation for an in-depth discussion of the 
interaction between AI and education. This is followed by 
an introduction to the multiple ways in which AI is being 
used in education, together with a discussion about how 
AI might enhance inclusion and equity, quality of learning, 
education management, and pedagogy. This discussion also 
considers how education might help all citizens develop the 
skills needed for life and work in the AI era. The main strategic 
objectives – harnessing the benefits and mitigating the risks 
of AI for education – are then detailed, and the challenges 
for achieving those objectives are explored. The guidance 
concludes by proposing a set of recommendations, which are 
designed to inform a comprehensive vision and action plans 
for AI-and-education policies.