AI and education: Guidance for policy-makers – AI essentials for policy-makers
82.2 A brief introduction to AI techniques
Each application of AI depends on a range of complex techniques, which require AI engineers 
to be trained in higher-level mathematics, statistics and other data sciences, as well as 
coding. Therefore, these techniques are too specialized to explore in depth here.8 Instead, we 
will briefly introduce some core AI techniques, followed by some typical AI technologies.
Classical AI
Much early or ‘classical AI’ , variously known as ‘symbolic AI’ , 
‘rule-based AI’ , or ‘good-old-fashioned AI’ (‘GOFAI’), involves 
writing sequences of IF... THEN... and other rules of conditional 
logic, steps that the computer will take to complete a task. 
Over decades, rule-based AI ‘expert systems’ were developed 
for a diverse range of applications, such as medical diagnostics, 
credit ratings, and manufacturing. Expert systems are based 
on an approach known as ‘knowledge engineering’ , which 
involves eliciting and modelling the knowledge of experts in a 
specific domain, a resource-intensive task that is not without 
complications. Typical expert systems contain many hundreds 
of rules, yet it is usually possible to follow their logic. However, as 
the interactions between the rules multiply, expert systems can 
become challenging to revise or enhance.
Machine learning
Many recent AI advances – including natural language 
processing, facial recognition, and self-driving cars – have 
been made possible by advances in machine-learning-based 
computational approaches. Rather than using rules, machine 
learning (ML) analyses large amounts of data to identify 
patterns and build a model which is then used to predict future 
values. It is in this sense that the algorithms, rather than being 
pre-programmed, are said to be ‘learning’ .
There are three main ML approaches: supervised, unsupervised, 
and reinforcement. Supervised learning involves data that has 
already been labelled – such as many thousands of photographs 
of people that have been labelled by humans. The supervised 
learning links the data to the labels, to build a model that can be 
applied to similar data – for example, to automatically identify 
people in new photographs. In unsupervised learning, the AI is provided with even larger amounts of data, but this time the 
data has not been categorized or labelled. The unsupervised 
learning aims to uncover hidden patterns in the data, clusters 
that can be used to classify new data. For example, it may 
automatically identify letters and numbers in handwriting by 
looking for patterns in thousands of examples. 
In both supervised and unsupervised learning, the model 
derived from the data is fixed, and if the data changes, the 
analysis has to be undertaken again. However, the third ML 
approach, reinforcement learning, involves continuously 
improving the model based on feedback – in other words, this 
is machine learning in the sense that the learning is ongoing. 
The AI is provided with some initial data from which it derives a 
model, which is assessed as correct or incorrect and rewarded 
or punished accordingly. The AI uses this reinforcement to 
update its model and then it tries again, thus developing 
iteratively (learning and evolving) over time. For example, if an 
autonomous car avoids a collision, the model that enabled it 
to do so is rewarded (reinforced), enhancing its ability to avoid 
collisions in the future.
ML is so widespread today that it is sometimes thought to be 
synonymous with AI, whereas it is actually a subset of AI. In fact, 
there are still many AI applications that do not use ML, or at 
least there is almost always some GOFAI (rule-based or symbolic 
AI) in the background. For example, many common chatbot 
applications are pre-programmed with human-defined rules 
about how to reply to anticipated questions. In fact, like the 
earlier expert systems, 
Almost every AI product that you see today needs content 
inserted directly by human experts. This may be expertise 
harvested from linguists and phoneticians if the AI is using 
natural language processing, from physicians in cases where the AI is 
used in medicine, or perhaps even from experts in road traffic and 
driving when the AI powers self-driving cars, and so on. Machine 
learning could not create a full AI without the assistance of GOFAI 
components. (Säuberlich and Nikolić, 2018)
Furthermore, it is important to recognize that ML does not 
really learn in the sense that a human learns. Nor does it learn 
independently. Instead, ML is entirely dependent on humans: 
they choose, clean, and label the data; design and train the AI 
algorithm; and curate, interpret, and make value judgements 
about the outputs. For example, a breakthrough object-
recognition tool was said to identify pictures of cats in a database FIGURE 1: THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE, 
MACHINE LEARNING, NEURAL NETWORKS AND DEEP LEARNING.
Deep LearningNeural NetworksMachine LearningArtificial Intelligence