AI and education: Guidance for policy-makers – Understanding AI and education: Emerging practices and benefit-risk assessment
16technology, but one that has, it is worth noting, been designed 
to address a problem only triggered by another use of AI 
technology. It is also an approach that raises issues of human 
rights, especially the right to privacy.
Globally, there are more than 60 commercial ITS available 
today, including Alef,34 ALEKS,35 Byjus,36 Mathia,37 Qubena,38 
Riiid,39 and Squirrel AI.40 An approach known as Hi-Tech 
Hi-Touch, that aims to leverage the best of ITS and the 
best of teachers, is currently being tested by the Education 
Commission in schools in Vietnam.41
Dialogue-based tutoring systems
Dialogue-based tutoring systems (DBTS) use natural language 
processing and other AI techniques to simulate a spoken 
tutorial dialogue between human tutors and students as 
they work step-by-step through online tasks most often in 
computer science topics, but more recently in less structured 
domains. DBTS adopt a Socratic approach to tutoring, probing 
with AI-generated questions rather than providing instruction, 
to develop a conversation in which the students are guided 
towards discovering for themselves an appropriate solution 
for a problem. The aim is to encourage students to co-create 
explanations to reach an in-depth understanding of the topic 
rather than the shallow understanding that can result from 
some instructional ITS.
Currently, there are relatively few DBTS in use. Most exist 
within research projects. The most extensively tested 
one is AutoTutor (Graesser et al., 2001). Watson Tutor is a 
commercial system that has been developed by IBM and 
Pearson Education.42
Exploratory learning environments
An alternative to the step-by-step approaches of ITS and DBTS 
is provided by exploratory learning environments (ELEs). ELEs 
adopt a constructivist philosophy: rather than following a 
step-by-step sequence such as the ‘knowledge transmission’ 
model favoured by ITS, students are encouraged to actively 
construct their own knowledge by exploring the learning 
environment and making connections with their existing 
knowledge schema. The role of AI in ELEs is to minimize the 
cognitive overload that is often associated with exploratory 
learning by providing automated guidance and feedback, 
based on knowledge tracing and machine learning. This 
feedback addresses misconceptions and proposes alternative 
approaches, to support the student while they explore. 
Broadly speaking, ELEs have yet to emerge from research 
laboratories. Examples include ‘ECHOES’ (Bernardini et al., 
2014); ‘Fractions Lab’ (Rummel et al., 2016); and ‘Betty’s Brain’ 
(Leelawong and Biswas, 2008).
Automated writing evaluation
Rather than involving students working on computers while 
receiving immediate adaptive support, automated writing 
evaluation (AWE) uses natural language processing and other AI techniques to provide automatic feedback on writing. 
Generally, there are two overlapping AWE approaches: 
formative AWE to enable a student to improve their writing 
before submitting it for assessment, and summative AWE to 
facilitate the automatic scoring of students’ writing. 
In fact, most AWE focuses on scoring over feedback; they 
have been designed principally to drive down assessment 
costs, and thus may be considered as a component of 
systems-facing applications. However, ever since they 
were introduced, summative AWE have been controversial 
(Feathers, 2019). For example, they have been criticized for 
giving students credit for surface features such as sentence 
length, even if the text does not make any sense – they can 
be ‘fooled by gibberish’ . The systems are also unable to assess 
creativity. Most worryingly, the algorithms underpinning AWE 
are sometimes biased, especially against minority students, 
possibly due to different uses of vocabulary and sentence 
structure. Summative AWE also does not address easy-to-
access ‘deep-fake’ school and university assignments – essays 
that are written by AI technologies, through drawing on 
domain expertise while imitating the writing style of the 
individual student. These are likely to be very difficult to 
detect.43 Finally, the use of AI to mark assignments also does 
not acknowledge the value of marking. Even though marking 
can be time-consuming and tedious, it can also be a teacher’s 
best opportunity to understand their students’ competencies.
However, some student-facing AWE prioritizes giving 
feedback that is designed to be actionable – to help the 
student improve their writing, and to promote higher-order 
processes such as self-regulated learning and metacognition.
AWE, both formative and summative, is currently being used 
in many educational contexts through programs such as 
WriteToLearn,44 e-Rater,45 and Turnitin.46 A related approach, 
using AI to compare a novel student output with a large 
corpus of previous student output assessed by teachers, has 
been used to evaluate musical performances, for example 
with the program Smartmusic.47
AI-supported reading and language learning
Reading and language learning tools are increasingly 
using AI to augment their approach. For example, some 
use ITS-style pathway personalisation along with AI-driven 
speech recognition. Typically, speech recognition is used to 
compare students’ production with sample recordings of 
native speakers, to provide automatic feedback to help the 
student improve their pronunciation. Other uses of automatic 
translation involve helping students read learning materials 
in other languages, and enabling students from different 
cultures to more easily interact with each other. Meanwhile, 
other systems detect and automatically analyse reading skills 
in order to give students individual feedback.
Reading and language learning AI applications include AI 
Teacher,48 Amazing English,49 Babbel,50 and Duolingo.51