Understanding AI and education: Emerging practices and benefit-risk assessment – AI and education: Guidance for policy-makers 
17Smart robots
The use of AI-enabled or ‘smart’ robots in education is also 
being explored (Belpaeme, 2018), particularly in settings for 
children with learning disabilities or difficulties. For example, 
speech-enabled humanoid robots have been created for 
learners on the autism spectrum, providing predictable 
mechanical interactions rather than human ones, which can 
be confusing for such learners. The aim is to develop their 
communication and social skills (Dautenhahn et al., 2009). 
Another example is telepresence robots for students who 
are unable to attend school, perhaps because of an illness or 
a humanitarian or refugee crisis, to access the classroom.52 
A third example is the use of humanoid robots, such as 
Nao53 or Pepper54 in kindergarten classes in Singapore 
(Graham, 2018), to introduce young children to computer 
programming and other STEM subjects.
Teachable agents
It has long been known that one may learn a topic more 
deeply and with better retention by teaching it to others 
(Cohen et al., 1982). This effect has been exploited by 
various AI approaches. For example, in the ELE mentioned 
earlier, Betty’s Brain, students are encouraged to teach a 
virtual fellow student called Betty about a river ecosystem. 
In another example from a Swedish research project, the 
student teaches a virtual agent the rules of an educational 
game based on mathematics (Pareto, 2009). A third example, 
from Switzerland, involves young children teaching 
handwriting to a humanoid robot,55 an approach which has 
been shown to stimulate meta-cognition, empathy, and 
self-esteem (Hood et al., 2015).
Educational virtual and augmented reality
Virtual reality (VR) and augmented reality (AR) are two 
related innovations that have been applied in educational 
contexts, and that are frequently combined with machine 
learning and other AI techniques to enhance the user 
experience. VR has been used in the teaching of many 
subjects, across K-12 and beyond, including astronomy, 
biology, and geology. VR goggles provide an immersive 
experience that shuts out the physical world, enabling 
users to feel as if they have been transported into a range of 
real-world or imagined environments (such as the surface 
of Mars, the inside of a volcano, or a human womb in 
which a foetus is developing). Some VR innovations use AI 
techniques to control lifelike virtual avatars, enable voice 
control using natural language processing, or generate 
entire environments from a few starting images.
AR, on the other hand, overlays computer-generated images 
on the user’s view of the real world (much like a fighter 
pilot’s heads-up display). AR is the aforementioned approach 
used by Lumilo to float information about a student’s ITS 
performance above their head. When a smartphone’s camera 
is pointed at a particular QR code, an AR 3D human heart 
might be revealed that can be explored in detail. AR might also involve AI-powered image recognition and tracking. 
This is the technology that makes it possible, on some 
mobile phones and sites such as Instagram or Snapchat, 
to place rabbit ears or cat whiskers on images of people. 
Examples of VR and AR being used in education include 
Blippar,56 EonReality,57 Google Education,58 NeoBear,59 and 
VR Monkey.60
Learning network orchestrators
Learning network orchestrators (LNOs) are tools that enable 
networks of students and teachers to engage in learning 
and organize learning activities. LNOs typically match 
participants based on their availability, subject domain, and 
expertise, and can facilitate coordination and cooperation. 
One example, ‘Third Space Learning’ , connects pupils in 
the United Kingdom who are at risk of failing maths with 
mathematics tutors from other countries.61 Another is ‘Smart 
Learning Partner’ , which involves an AI-driven platform that 
enables students to choose and connect with a human tutor 
via their mobile phones, somewhat like a dating app, to 
receive one-to-one support.62
AI-enabled collaborative learning
Collaborative learning, where students work together to solve 
problems, is known to enhance learning outcomes (Luckin et 
al., 2017), but effective collaboration between learners can be 
difficult to achieve. AI may transform collaborative learning 
in various ways: a tool could help connect learners remotely; 
it could identify the students best suited for particular 
collaborative tasks and group them accordingly; or it could 
actively contribute to the group discussions, as a virtual 
agent. While no specific examples have been identified, it 
is currently an area of research interest (e.g. Cukurova et 
al., 2017).Beijing Consensus on Artificial Intelligence and Education  
13.  Dynamically review and define teachers’ roles and required 
competencies in the context of teacher policies, strengthen 
teacher-training institutions, and develop appropriate capacity-
building programmes to prepare teachers to work effectively in 
AI-rich education settings.
14.  Be cognizant of trends regarding the potential of AI to support 
learning and learning assessments, and review and adjust 
curricula to promote the in-depth integration of AI and 
transformation of learning methodologies. Consider applying 
available AI tools or developing innovative AI solutions, where 
the benefits of AI use clearly outweigh the risks, to facilitate well-
defined learning tasks in different subject areas and supporting 
the development of AI tools for interdisciplinary skills and 
competencies.
16.  Apply or develop AI tools to support adaptive learning processes; 
to leverage the potential of data to enable the evaluation of the 
multiple dimensions of students’ competencies; and to support 
large-scale and remote assessment.
(UNESCO, 2019a, pp. 5-6)