TP TNACCTP TN FP FN   (1) 
Where  TP, TN, FP, and FN stand for the number of true positives, true negatives, false positives, and false 
negatives, respectively.  
In each experiment, each feature selection method is run ten times , and the mean  and standard deviation 
(square root of its vari ance)  of ten different run s is used to compare different methods. Moreover, in each 
run, each dataset is normalized, and it is randomly divided into a training set (66 % of the dataset) and a test 
set (34 % of the dataset). The training set is utilized for  the feature selection process, while the test set is 
applied for evaluating the proposed feature selection method. To fulfill fair experiments, all evaluated 
methods are carrying out on the same train/test dataset. Due to the randomness of the train and t est set, both 
the average and the standard deviation of the result are reported . In the rem ainder of this section , used 
datasets, utilized  classifiers, evaluated methods , results , and discussion are explained in the following 
subsections.  
 
 4.1. Datasets  
In this study, several datasets, with different specifications, were utilized to evaluate different SI -based 
feature selection methods and compare their performance with each other.  These datasets include 
SpamBase, Sonar, Arrhythmia, Madelon, Isolet , and C olon taken from the UCI repository (Asuncion and 
Newman 2007 ) and have been extensively used in the literature. The basic characteristics of these datasets 
are summarized in Table 3. These datasets have been chosen considering diverse characteristics such as the 
number of features and number of different classes. Fo r example, Colon is a very high dimensional dataset 
with a small sample size, while SpamBase is the example of a low dimensional, with a large sample size 
dataset. Again Isolet is a multi -class dataset that has 26 different kinds of classes.  
In some of the se datasets, different features have different values. In this situation, features with a larger 
value range may dominate the features with a smaller value range, and maybe more likely to be selected. 
To overcome this challenge, before the feature selectio n process, all different datasets are normalized using 
the Max -Min normalization . Using this normalization method, the range of values of all used datasets is 
changed to [0 1] range.  
Moreover, in some of the used datasets, there are several missing values.  To overcome this difficulty, the 
miss values in these features are inserted by averaging the available data corresponding to the available 
features . 
 
 
Table 3: Characteristics of the used medical datasets  
Dataset  Features  Classes  Patterns  
SpamBase  57 2 4601  
Sonar  60 2 208 
Arrhythmia  279 16 351 
Madelon  500 2 4400  
Isolet  617 26 1559  
Colon  2000  2 62 
 
 
4.2. The utilized  Classifier  
To evaluate the generalizability of the proposed methods in different classifiers, in these experiments , three  
classifiers , including Support Vector Machine (SVM), Naïve Bayes (NB), and AdaBoost (AB) are utilized.