criteria are met, production new generation  will begin. This cycle is repeated until one of the termination 
criteria is met  (Hu, Zheng et a l. 2020 , Wang, Pan et al. 2020 ). 
Meta -heuristic approaches can be classified into two categories: The  Evolutionary Algorithms (EA) and 
Swarm Intelligence (SI)  (Zhang, Lee et al. 2015 ). An EA uses mechanisms inspired by biological 
evolution, such as reproduction, mutation, recombination, and selection. Candidate solutions to the 
optimization problem play the role of individuals in a population , and the fitness function determines the 
quality of this solutions. After repetitions of the evolutionary algorithm, the initial population evolves and 
moves toward global optimization (Gong, Xu et al. 2020 ). On the other, SI algorithms usually consist of a 
simple population of artificial agents locally with the environment. This concept is usually inspired by 
nature , and each agent performs an easy job, but local i nteractions and partly random interactions between 
these agents lead to the emergence of "intelligent" global behavior, which is unknown to individual 
agents (Yong, Dun -wei et al. 2016 ).  
In the remainder of this section, SI -based feature selection methods, such as Particle Swarm Optimization 
(PSO), Ant Colony Optimization (ACO), Artificial Bee Colony optimization (ABC), Differential Evolution 
(DE), Gravitational Search Algorithm (GSA), Firefly Algori thm (FA), Bat Algorithm (BA), Cuckoo 
Optimization Algorithm (COA), Gray Wolf Optimization (GWO), Whale Optimization Algorithm (WOA) 
and Salp Swarm Algorithm (SSA) are  reviewed and outlined in Table 2. 
 
3.1. PSO -based methods  
Particle Swarm Optimization is an efficient swarm intelligence -based evolutionary algorithm, introduced 
by Kennedy and Eberhart in 1995 (J. Kenn edy and Eberhart 1995 ). The PSO algorithm, inspired by the 
social behavior of birds and fish, has recently  been utilized in many studies to solve the feature selection 
problem. Under et al. (Unler, Murat et al. 2011 ) proposed a feature selection method, which combined the 
univariate filter model within the PSO -based wrapper model. In (Inbarani, Azar et al. 2014 ), another hybrid 
model is proposed to feature selection in the medical application. In this method, hybrid feature selection 
based on PSO and rough sets theory are utilized to improve disease diagnosis in the medical dataset. 
Moreover, Huang and Dun (Huang and Dun 2008 ) propose a hybrid model for feature selection and 
parameter optimization integration , the PSO algorithm , and support vector machines (SVM) classifier. To 
overcome th e high computational complexity in the high dimensional dataset, in this paper the combined 
PSO–SVM is implemented with a distributed parallel architecture. Furthermore, in (Xue, Zhang et al. 
2014 ) propose new different initialization st rategies and new best particle updating mechanisms are 
proposed to improve feature selection accuracy in the classification task. The purpose of this proposed 
method is to reduce the number of selected features and thus reduce the computational complexity of the 
data classification process. In (Banka and Dara 2015 ), a Hamming distance -based binary particle swarm 
optimization (HDBPSO) algorithm is proposed to reduce data dimensions . In this method, a hamming 
distance is utilized  to update the velocity of particles in a binary PSO search strategy to select the essentia l 
features . In (Yong, Dun -wei et al. 2016 ), and improved multi -objective PSO algorithm is proposed for 
unreliable data classification. In this paper , two new operator s of the reinforced memory and the hybrid 
mutation are introduced to improve the search  ability of the PSO algorithm.  In (Moradi and Gholampour 
2016 ), and efficient PSO -based feature selection method  is proposed by the integration of filter and 
wrapper approaches . The proposed method, called HPSO -LS, introduce d a new local search to select the 
subset of non -redundant and relevant features . In (Zhang, Gong et al. 2017 ) a multi -Objective particle 
swarm optimization approach is developed for cost -based feature selection in classification. The main goal 
of this method is to produce a Pareto front of nondomi nated solutions, that is, feature set, to meet different 
prerequisites of decision -makers in real -world applications. In (Jain, Jain et al. 2018 ), integration of 
correlation feature selection with modified binary PSO algorithm is used for gene selection and cancer 
classification. This method selects a high relevant feature subset by eliminating the irrelevant and 
redundant features. In (Zhang, Ding et al. 2018 ), a combination method of improved mRMR and Shuffled