MOABC 
(Hancer, Xue et 
al. 2015 ) MOP  Wrapper  ABC  Numeric  Inefficient for high -
dimensional 
datasets due to high 
computational 
complexity.  Low probability of 
trapping into the local 
optimum,  
High classification 
accuracy  TMABC -
FS(Zhang, 
Cheng et al. 
2019 ) MOP  Wrapper  ABC  Numeric  
MOPSOFS (Xue, 
Zhang et al. 
2013 ) MOP  Wrapper  PSO Numeric  
MOACO (Ke, 
Feng et al. 2010 ) MOP  Wrapper  ACO  Numeric  
MOWGA 
(Vignolo, Milone 
et al. 2013 ) MOP  Wrapper  GA Face Recognition   
MODEFS 
(Mlakar, Fister 
et al. 2017 ) MOP  Wrapper  DE  Face Recognition   
MONSGA 
(González, 
Ortega et al. 
2019 ) MOP  Wrapper  NSGA -II Motor imagery  
Nested GA 
(Sayed, Nassef et 
al. 2019 ) MOP  Wrapper  NSGA -II Microarray  
 
3. Swarm intelligence -based feature selection  
Feature selection methods based on how to evaluate the features are classified into two categories: feature 
ranking and subset selection  methods . Feature ranking methods, based on a specified criterion, assign a 
score to each feature. Then the features that did not get enough scores are removed. But in subset selection 
methods, the space of possible subsets is searched to find the optimal subset. If the number of initial 
features is 𝑛, the search space for the optimal subset contains all the subsets of the features, which is equal 
to 2𝑛 different states. In other words, in the property r anking methods, the value of each property is 
evaluated independently , and the relationship between features  is not considered.  In these methods, it is 
assumed that the features  are independent of each other and that a possible dependence between the 
features  is not considered. Although this simplistic assumption reduces the computational complexity of the 
feature selection method, in many cases , it may reduce the performance of the feature selection method.  
Feature subset selection  is an NP-Hard probl em. In the simplest way, the best subset can be found by 
evaluating all possible subsets with an exhaustive search strategy. Although this method guarantees an 
optimal feature subset , finding the optimal solution is very time consuming and even impract ical even for 
medium -sized dataset s. Since it is very costly to evaluate all possible subsets, a feature subset  must be 
searched, that, it is acceptable  both in terms of computational complexity and in terms of appropriateness. 
(Li, Chen et al. 2020 , Santucci, Baioletti et al. 2020 ). One approach to solve complex optimization and NP -
Hard problems is meta -heuristics algorithms . Meta -heuristic algorithms are approximate approaches that 
can find satisfactory solutions over acceptable time instead of finding the optimal solution (Zhang, Lee et 
al. 2015 ). These algorithms are one of the categories of approximate optimization algorithms that have s  
strategies to escape from local optima  and can be used in a wide range of optimization problems.   
Many feature selection methods use meta -heuristics  to avoid increasing computational complexity in the 
high dimensional dataset. These algorithms  use primitive mechanisms and operations to solve an 
optimization problem  and search for the optimal solution over a number of iterations  (Barak, Daho oie et al. 
2015 ). These algorithms often start with a population containing random solutions and try to improve the 
optimality of these solutions during each iteration step. At the beginning of most of the meta -heuristic 
algorithms, a number of initial solutions are randomly generated, and then a fitness function is utilized to 
calculate the optimality of the individual solutions of the generated population. If none of the termination