and Sahin 2014 ). Although the wrappers model may select  a better feature subset , they are expensive to run 
and can break down with high dimensional medical dataset . This is due to the use of learning algorithms in 
the feature subset quality calculation.   
2.3. Hybrid model  
The hybrid model attempts to take advantage of both the filter and wrapper models and to provide a model 
that balances the computational efficiency of the filter model and the accuracy of the wrapper model. In 
fact, the purpose of this model is to provide a method that is both efficient and effective .  
2.4. Embedded model  
Moreover, in the embedded model, the feature selection process is considered as part of the learning 
algorithm. In other words, in this model , a learning algorithm  is utilized for searching the optimal feature 
set (Zhang, Wu et al. 2015 ). 
 
 
2.5. Graph -based methods  
Moreover, recently, graph -based methods are used in machine learning techniques to extract the similarity 
relationships among the data. In feature selection, graph -based methods provide an underlying manifold 
structure as a universal framework to reflect t he relationships between features. Several research efforts 
employed graph -based methods for solving the feature selection problem. For example, in 
(Bandyopadhyay, Bhadr a et al. 2014 ), a dense subgraph finding approach is adopted for the unsupervised 
feature selection problem. Another clustering -based feature subset selection algorithm for high dimensional 
data is proposed in (Song, Ni et al. 2013 ). This work utilizes a graph -theoretic clustering method f or similar 
grouping  features. In (Zhang and Hancock 2012 ), a hypergraph -based method is proposed for feature 
selection. This work uses an information -theoretic criterion to evaluate  the appropriateness  of different 
feature s by considering the related class label of each sample . In (Moradi and Rostami 2015 ), the concept 
of graph clustering with the node centrality measure is integrated with the unsupervised feature selection 
process.  This work is extended by the authors of (Ghaemi and Feizi -Derakhshi 2016 ) to choose more 
informative features. In (Henni, Mezghani et al. 2018 ), the authors employed Google’s PageRank centrality 
measure to rank features based on their importance. Hashemi et al. (Hashemi, Dowlatshahi et al. 2020 ) 
propose another graph -based feature selection method for the multi -label high dimensional dataset. The 
authors of this paper utilize the PageRank centrality measure to rank the features based on their value in the 
graph. Also, in this paper, the correlation distance criterion is used to remove irrelevant features.  In (Li, 
Tang et al. 2019 ), an unsupervised graph -based feature selection method for high dimensional data is 
proposed. In this paper, Laplacian graph and local geometrical structure are used for better repres entation 
of the features space . In (Zhu, Zhu et al. 2017 ), a subspace clustering guided unsupervised feature selection 
method is proposed. This work uses the subspace clustering to learning of the clustering and then those 
features with good preservation ability of the cluster labels are selected.  
In Table 1 th e main characteristic of different feature selection method s is summarized. In this table , six 
attributes (i.e. , the number of objectives, Type of method, search strategy, application, weakness , and 
strength) of different feature selection method s are reported. 
 
Table 1 : The main characteristics  of different feature selection meth ods. The synonyms used in this T able are: MOP : 
Multi -Objective Optimization, SOP : Single -Objective Optimization, RB: Ranking -Based, SSB: Subset selection -based, 
ACO:  Ant Colony Optimization, GA: Genetic Algorithm,  ABC:  Artificial Bee Colony, DE: Differential Evolution, 
NSGA:  Nondominated Sorting Genetic Algorithm  
Methods  Number of 
Objectives  Type  
 Search 
Strategy  Application  Weakness  Strength  
RDC (Rehman, 
Javed et al. 
2015 ) SOP Filter -RB Univariate  Textual  Ignoring feature 
dependency,  
Low performance  Fast,  
Independent of 
classifier  
DFS (Uysal and SOP Filter -RB Univariate  Textual