Frog Leaping Algorithm is developed to improve the acoustic defect detection accuracy. In this method, to 
reduce the dimensions of the original features, a single -objective function is defined using the MRMR 
criterion and then this function is optimized using the PSO algorithm. Finally, after selecting the final 
feature subset, the final acoustic defect detection is made using the neu ral network classifier. The authors of 
(Qasim and Algamal 2018 ) proposed a PSO -based regression model for dimensionality reduction in 
medical dataset. This method makes use of the advantages of both PSO and the logistic regression with 
Bayesian information criterion as a fitness function. In (Prasad, B iswas et al. 2018 ), a recursive PSO 
scheme for feature selection in DNA microarray datasets is proposed. In this method, various filter -based 
ranking methods with the proposed recursive PSO based wrapper approach are integrated. Pashaei et al. 
(Pashaei, Pashaei et al. 2019 ) proposed the hybrid feature selection method in cancer classificatio n using 
binary black hole algorithm and modified binary particle swarm optimization. In this method, the binary 
black hole algorithm is embedded in the PSO algorithm to make this more effective and to facilitate the 
exploration and exploitation of the PSO to improve the performance further.  Moreover, in (Gunasundari, 
Janakiraman et al. 2018 ), a multi swarm sophisticated binary particle swarm optimization algorithm using a 
Win-Win approach for feature selection of liver and kidney cancer data is pro posed. Moreover, In (Yan, 
Liang et al.  2019 ), a hybrid feature selection method based on PSO was proposed to improve the accuracy 
of Laser -induced breakdown spectroscopy analysis. This method integrates the advantages of the filter and 
wrapper model. The filter model first eliminated the un correlated and redundant features, and then the 
selected features were further refined by a more accurate wrapper method PSO . In (Xue, Tang et al. 2020 ) a 
PSO-based feature selection with multiple classifiers is proposed for improve for increasing the 
classification accuracy and reducing computational complexity. In this paper, a ne w Self -Adaptive 
Parameter and Strategy are used to deal with the issue of feature selection in high -dimensional dataset. The 
reported results showed that the use of these mechanisms greatly increased the search ability of particle 
optimization algorithms f or high -dimensional datasets.  
 
3.2. ACO -based methods  
In the early 1990s, an algorithm called the Ant System (AS) was proposed as a new heuristic for solving 
difficult optimization problems by Dorigo and his colleagues and was first applied to the TSP prob lem. The 
Ant Colony Optimization Algorithm (ACO) was proposed by Dorrigo and his colleagues as a multi -agent 
to solve the optimization problems (M. Dorigo  and Caro 1999 ). This algorithm is inspired by the behavior 
of ants that are able to find the shortest path between the nest and the food source and also adapt to 
environmental changes. Moreover, ACO has been successfully applied in several studies to feature 
selection. Kabir et al. (Monirul Kabir, Shahjahan b et al. 2012 ) propose a new ACO -based feature selection 
method by the integration of neural network and information gain to select a subset of salient features of 
reduced size. In  (Ying Li, Gang Wang et al. 2013 ), a framework based on the ACO algorithm for gene 
selection in the DNA microarray dataset, which consists of two stages of pivotal genes c hoosing by 
modified ant system and the most important genes selecting by the modifie d ant colony system. Moreover, 
Chen et al. (Chen, Chen et al. 2013 ) propose a feature selection method based on the ACO algorithm. In 
this paper, different from previous ACO -based methods, the feature space represented as a directed graph. 
In (Forsati, Moayedikia et al. 2014 ), a novel variant of ACO was introduced to select the most relevant and 
non-redundant features. This algorithm is combined with a local search strategy to overcome the 
entrapment in local optima by searching the neighborhood of the globally optimal solution. On the other 
hand, in (Ke, Feng et al. 2008 ), an ACO -based  filter model is proposed for feature selection in rough set 
theory. Tabakhi et al. (Tabakhi, Moradi et al. 2014 ) propose an unsupervised feature selection method 
based on ant colony optimizat ion. In this method, the final features are selected considering the similarity 
between the features and without using a learning algorithm. Moreover, in (Moradi and Rostami 2015 ), a 
feature selection method using the ant colony  algorithm and social network analysis technique is proposed. 
In this method, that a clustered graph is used to represent the feature selection problem, no learning