available, each of which is described by taking features values along with the class label, while in 
unsupervised methods , and tr ain data lacks class tags.  In general, it can be said that feature selection 
methods have better efficiency and more reliable performance in the supervised mode due to the use of 
class labels. Therefore, it is more difficult to select a feature in the unsu pervised  mode, and in many 
studies, this area has been considered  (Zhang, Zhang et al. 2019 , Ding, Yang et al. 2020 ).  
Feature selection methods generally search through the solution space to optimize two conflicting 
objectives: maximiz ing the relevancy to the target class and minimizing the redundancy of selected 
features. Many search strategies are employed to optimize these objectives. These methods are generally 
categorized into single -objective and multi -objective methods  (Senawi, Wei et al. 2017 , Hu, Gao et al. 
2018 ). In the single -objective methods, the population is optimized using only one objective in the fitness 
function.  As a result, the choice of objective  and definition of the  fitness function will greatly affect the 
accuracy of the optimization algorithm . Also, there are usually several objectives in many optimization 
issues, and defining a fitness function with just one goal reduces optimization performance . One approach  
to overcome these challenges is to consider is to consider  several different objectives in the fitness function 
of the feature selection problem . Modeling feature selection as a multi -objective problem can obtain a set of 
non-dominated feature subsets to meet different requirements in real -world applications. Most of the 
previous ly proposed  feature selection methods are utilized single -objective  function , and there are only a 
few methods  of multi -objective function , such as MOPSO (Xue, Zhang et al. 2013 ), MOGA (Morita, 
Sabourin et al. 2003 ), MOFSEF (Wu, Liu et al. 2020 ), MOFSEEG (Martín -Smith, Ortega et al. 2017 ) and 
MOFSGADM (Li, Xue et al. 2020 ). 
Previous methods for select optimal  feature set s can be categorized  into four groups  consist of  filter, 
wrapper, embedded, and hybrid models . Also, in recent years, graph theoretic -based techniques have been 
used in many feature selection methods. These categories are explained in the following subsections.  
2.1. Filter model  
The filter model uses statistical and probabilistic data properties to calculate the feature relevance and 
performs the feature selection process independently of machine learning algorithms. In other words, this 
model uses the inherent properties of data to evaluate features (Labani, Moradi et al. 2018 ). The filter 
model based on how features are evaluated is divided into two univariate and multivariate categories . In the 
univariate feature selection approaches , the relevance of each feature is calculated in accordance with a 
given measure such as the Information Gain (IG) (Raileanu and Stoffel 2004 ), Gain Ratio (GR) (Mitchell 
1997 ), Term Variance (TV) (S. Theodoridis and Koutroumbas 2009 ), Mutual information (MI) (Xu, Jones 
et al. 2007 ), Gini Index (GI) (Raileanu and Stoffel 2004 ), Laplacian score (LS) (Xiaofei He, Deng Cai et al. 
2005) and Fisher score (FS) (Quanquan Gu, Zhenhui Li et al. 2011 ). In these univariate methods, it is 
assumed that features independent of each other and possible dependencies between features are not 
considered. This simple default assumption is wrong and , in many cases , may reduce  the efficiency of 
feature selection methods . On the other hand, multivariate methods measure the appropriateness  of features 
with regard to their interdependence. Therefore, multivariate methods have more computational complexity 
than univariate methods, but they also have higher performance.  There are some multivariate methods, 
including Minimal Redundancy Maximal Relevance (mRMR) (Peng, Long et al. 2005 ), Relevance 
redundancy feature selection (RRFS) (Ferreira and Figueiredo 2012 ), MIFS (Battiti 1994 ), Normalized 
Mutual Information Feature S election (NMIFS) (Estévez, Tesmer et al. 2009 ), MIFS -U (Kwak and Choi 
2002 ), Unsupervised Feature S election based on Ant Colony Optimization (UFSACO) (Tabakhi, Moradi et 
al. 2014 ), and Multivariate RDC (MRDC) (Labani, Moradi et al. 2018 ). 
2.2. Wrapper model  
The wrapper -based methods  use a classifier  to measure  the efficiency of the selected feature subset. In this 
approach, a search method is used to find the optimal feature subset , and at each stage of the searching 
strategy , a subset of features  is generated and measured  by a classifier or another learning model. Finally, 
the best-produced feature subset is selected as the final feature subset. (Liu and Yu 2005 , Chandrashekar