based (Liu, Wang et al. 2019 ), ABC -based , SSA-based (Neggaz, Ewees et al. 2020 ) method, 
demonstrated better performance in balancing the factors of exploration and exploitation.  Furthermore, 
among the evaluated filter -based methods, the A CO-based  method (Moradi and Rostami 2015 ) showed 
the best performance for the balance between exploration and exploitation . 
5- A feature selection method can be evaluated from two aspects: efficiency and effectiveness. The  
efficiency of a feature selection method depends on the required time to find the final feature subset. 
While effectiveness depends on the quality of the selected feature subset. These two criteria have been 
in conflict with each other, and usually, the i mprovement of one of them leads to the reduction of the 
other. Therefore, balancing these two criteria is an important and necessary issue in feature selection. 
Wrapper -based feature selection methods, due to the use of the learning algorithm in the featur e 
selection process, will be able to effectively select a feature subset of relevant and non -redundant 
features. Therefore, these wrapper -based methods are usually highly accurate. On the other, these 
methods have high computational complexity and will hav e a high execution time in high -dimensional 
datasets. Also, filter -based methods are much more efficient than wrapper -based methods in terms of 
computational complexity due to the lack of learning algorithms in the feature selection process. But 
most filte r-based methods converge to local optimal, and the quality of the selected subset in this 
approach is usually less than the wrapper -based methods.  
 
5. Conclusion s 
With the advancement of data collection technologies and the increasing capacity of data storage over the last decades, 
high-dimensional datasets have grown significantly. Usually, many features of these datasets are irrelevant or 
redundant , which reduce s the performance of the prediction model . Feature selection plays an essential role in mac hine 
learning and , more specifically , in the high-dimensional dataset . Reducing the size of the medical dataset , on the one 
hand,  reduces the computational complexity and , on the other hand, decrees the parameters of the classification 
algorithm. As a resu lt, the accuracy of the prediction model  will be  increased.  In the past decades, the rapid growth 
of computer and database technologies has led to the rapid growth of large -scale datasets. On the other 
hand, data mining applications with high dimensional datasets that require high speed and accuracy are 
rapidly increasing.  An important issue with these applications is the curse of dimensionality , where the 
number of features is much greater than the number of patterns . One of the dimensionality reduction 
approaches is feature selection that can increase the accuracy of the data mining task and reduce its 
computational complexity. The feature selection method aims at selecting a subset of features with the 
lowest inner similarity and highest relevancy to the  target class. It reduces the dimensionality of the data by 
eliminating irrelevant, redundant, or noisy data.  
In this paper , comparative analysis and categorization of different feature selection methods are presented . 
Moreover, in this paper, wrapper and filter SI-based method  (i.e., PSO, ACO, ABC. DE, GSA, FA, BA, 
COA, GWO, WOA , and SSA)  and its application in feature selection  are studied . Furthermore, the 
strengths and weaknesses of the different studied SI-based feature selection methods are evaluated, and the 
factors that can lead to the superiority of these methods  are analyzed.  
 
References  
Abdel -Basset, M., D. El -Shahat, I. El -henawy, Victor  Hugo  C. de  Albuquerque and S. Mirjalili (2020). 
"A new fusion of grey wolf optimizer algorithm with a two -phase mutation for feature selection." Expert 
Systems with Applications 139: 112824.  
Ahmed K. Far ahat, Ali Ghodsi and M. S. Kamel (2013). "Efficient greedy feature selection for 
unsupervised learning." Knowledge and Information Systems 35(2): 285 -310.