exploitation by searching the most promising regions loca ted by the WOA algorithm. In (Mafarja and 
Mirjalili 2018 ), a wrapper feature selection approach is proposed based on WOA. In this work, tournament 
and roulette wheel selection strategy  and also crossover and mutation operators are utilized  to enhance  the 
exploration and exploitation of the search process of swarm intelligence algorithm s. Nematzadeh et al. 
(Nematzadeh, Enayatifar et al. 2019 ) proposed a frequency -based filter feature selection method using 
whale algorithm on high dimensional medical datasets. In this method, a filter criterion is used to discard 
the irrelevant features using the WOA. T hen, the reminder features are ranked based on another filtering 
method, namely, Mutual Congestion.  
 
3.11. SSA-based methods  
Salp Swarm Algorithm  (SSA)  (Mirjalili, Gandomi et al. 2017 ) another bio -inspired algorith m based on 
swarm intelligence is proposed for solving optimization problems. This algorithm is inspired by the 
swarming behavior of salps when moving and forage in the oceans.  In (Faris, Mafarja et al. 2018 ) an 
efficient binary Salp Swarm Algorithm with crossover scheme is proposed to improve the accuracy of 
feature selection.  Moreover, i n (Ibrahim, Ewees et al. 2019 ) a hybrid optimization method for  the feature 
selection problem is proposed by integration of the slap swarm algorithm with the particle swarm 
optimization. this combination between both swarm optimization algorithms improved the efficacy of the 
exploration and the exploitation steps.  In (Tubishat, Idris et al. 2020 ), integration of Improved SSA and 
novel local search algorithm is developed for the feature selection problem. In this method, the accuracy of 
the classification accuracy of KNN classifier on the training data is used as a fitness function , and the final 
features are selected in a repetitive process.  Also, in this method, to create the initial population, a method 
based on Opposition Based Learning is presented, which has caused d iversity in the initial solutions.  
Furthermore, in (Al-Zoubi, Heidari et al. 2020 ) a Salp Swarm A lgorithm -based feature weighting method is 
developed to predict the presence of liver disorder, heart, and Parkinson’s disease.  Also, i n (Hegazy, 
Makhlouf et al. 2020 ) solution accuracy, reliability and convergence speed of basic SSA is improved by 
adding a new control parameter and inertia weight.  Then this improved algorithm i s tested in feature 
selection problem.  Moreover, in (Neggaz, Ewees et al. 2020 ), a new variant of SSA optimization algorithm 
is proposed for feature selection. In this method, an additional phase is utilized to overcome the problem of 
being stuck in local optima by encouraging the exploration of the search.  
 
 
 
Table 2: Outlining the reviewed swarm intelligence based feature selection method s 
Authors  SI method  Number of Objectives  Type  Application  
(Unler, Murat et al. 2011 ) PSO Single Objective  Hybrid  Numerical  
(Inbarani, Azar et al. 2014 ) PSO Single Objective  Hybrid  Medical  
(Huang and Dun 2008 ) PSO Single Objective  Wrapper  Numerical  
(Xue, Zhang et al. 2014 ) PSO Single Objective  Wrapper  Numerical  
(Banka and Dara 2015 ) PSO Multi  Objective  Wrapper  Medical  
(Yong, Dun -wei et al. 2016 ) PSO Multi  Objective  Wrapper  Numerical  
(Moradi and Gholampour 2016 ) PSO Single Objective  Wrapper  Numerical/Medical  
(Zhang, Gong et al. 2017 ) PSO Single Objective  Wrapper  Numerical  
(Jain, Jain et al. 2018 ) PSO Single Objective  Hybrid  DNA microarray  
(Zhang, Ding et al. 2018 ) PSO Single Objective  Filter  Signal  
(Qasim and Algamal 2018 ) PSO Single Objective  Wrapper  Medical  
(Prasad, Biswas et al. 2018 ) PSO Single Objective  Wrapper  DNA microarray  
(Pashaei, Pashaei et al. 2019 ) PSO Single Objective  Wrapper  Medical  
(Gunasundari, Janakiraman et al. 2018 ) PSO Single Objective  Wrapper  Medical  
(Yan, Liang et al. 2019 ) PSO Single Objective  Wrapper  spectroscopy  
(Xue, Tang et al. 2020 ) PSO Single Objective  Wrapper  Numerical  
(Monirul Kabir, Shahjahan b et al. 2012 ) ACO  Single Objective  Hybrid  Numerical  
(Ying Li, Gang Wang et al. 2013 ) ACO  Single Objective  Wrapper  DNA mi croarray