algorithm is used to evaluate the generated feature subset , and the appropriateness of each  solution is 
evaluated using a filter criterion. Zamani Dadaneh et al. (Dadaneh, Markid et al. 2016 ) proposed 
unsupervised probabilistic feature selection using ACO algorithm. The algorithm looks for the optimal 
feature subset in an iterative process by utilizing the similarity between the features.  In (Liu, Wang et al. 
2019 ) combination of feature selection and ant colony optimization is proposed for improve the 
classification accuracy of imbal anced data.  In this method, instead of using a single -objective fitness 
function, a multi -objective ant colony optimization algorithm is used to improve the performance feature 
selection. The reported results showed acceptable performance of the proposed m ethod in classifying 
imbalanced and high -dimensional datasets.  
 
3.3. ABC -based methods  
The A rtificial Bee Colony algorithm (ABC) is an optimization algorithm based on swarm intelligence and 
intelligent behavior of the bee population that simulates the food search behavior of bee groups. In the early 
version of this algorithm, it performs a kind of local se arch that is combined with a random search and can 
be used for hybrid optimization or functional optimization. This SI -based algorithm has been utilized in 
many studies to search for the optimal feature subset. In (Mauricio Schiezaro and Pedrini 2013 ), an ABC -
based data feature selection is proposed to improve the classification accu racy. In this method, when the 
feature selection problem is represented as a binary vector, the classification accuracy in the classifier is 
used as a fitness function. In (Hancer, Xue et al. 2015 ), a modified artificial bee colony algorithm for 
feature selection problems is proposed. In this method, similarity search mechanisms with existing binary 
ABC variant is integrated for improving the feature selection accuracy. In (Shunmugapriya and Kanmani 
2017 ), Artificial Bee Colony with Ant Colony Optimization is integrated to optimize feature subset 
selection. This hybrid algorithm makes use of the advantages of both ACO and the ABC algorithm, and the 
results show the promising behavior of the proposed algori thm. Cancer et al. (Hancer, Xue et al. 2018 ) 
proposed a feature selection  method by the combination of the ABC algorithm and the pareto -optimal front 
surface. The authors of this paper used a multi -objective fitness function and genetic operators to improve 
the accuracy of the feature selection method and the convergence of the ABC algorithm . The authors of 
(Arslan and Ozturk 2019 ) proposed a Multi Hive Artificial Bee Colony Programming for high dimensional 
feature selection. In this method, the ability of automatic  programming methods to select truly relevant 
features is investigated in training and test data sets. In (Zhang, Cheng et  al. 2019 ), a feature selection 
method using a two -archive multi -objective artificial bee colony algorithm is proposed. In this method, two 
new operators and are utilized  to enhance its search capability and convergence.  In (Wang, Zhang et al. 
2020 ), an ABC -based feature selection is proposed by integrating  of multi -objective optimization algorithm 
with a sample reduction strategy.  This proposed method has both increased classification accuracy and 
reduced computational complexity.  
 
3.4. DE -based methods  
The Differential Evolution (DE) algorithm is an evolutionary algorithm based on swarm intelligence that 
has been proposed to solve various optimization problems. This optimization algorithm is proposed to 
overcome the main flaw of the genetic algorithm, namely the lack of local search in this algo rithm and the 
main difference between it and the genetic algorithms is in the genetic selection operators. DE algorithm is 
utilized in different application s of pattern recognition and feature selection. For example, Al -Ani et al. 
(Al-Ani, Alsukker et al. 2013 ) proposed a wrapper -based feature subset selection using differential 
evolution and a wheel based search strategy. Hancer et al. (Hancer, Xue et al. 2018 ) developed a multi -
objective differential evolution -based method to select the most relevant feature set and improving 
classification accuracy by eliminating irrelevant and redun dant feat ures. In (Zhang, Gong et al. 2020 ), a 
multi -objective feature selection approach called the Binary Differential Evolution with self -learning 
(MOFS -BDE) is proposed. In this method, a new mutation operator  is introduced to escape the local