Review of Swarm Intelligence -based Feature 
Selection Methods  
 
Mehrdad Rostami1, Kamal Berahmand2, Saman Forouzandeh3 
Department of Computer Engineering, University of Kurdistan, Sanandaj, Iran1 
2Technology, Brisbane, Australia Department of Science and Engineering, Queensland University of 
Department of Computer Engineering University of Applied Science and Technology, Center of Tehran Municipality ICT org.Tehran , Iran3 
M.rostami@eng.uok.ac.ir1, kamal.berahmand@hdr.qut.edu.au2, Saman.forouzandeh@gmail.com3 
 
Abstract: 
In the past decades, the rapid growth of computer and database technologies has led to the rapid growth of 
large -scale datasets. On the other hand, data mining  applications with high dimensional datasets that 
require high speed and accuracy are rapidly inc reasing.  An important issue with these  applications is the 
curse of dimensionality , where the number of features is much higher than the number of patterns . One of 
the dimensionality reduction approaches is feature selection that can increase the accuracy of the data 
mining task  and reduce its computational complexity . The feature selection method aims at selecting a 
subset of features with the lowest inner similarity and highest relevancy to the target class. It reduces the 
dimensionality of the data by el iminating irrelevant, redundant, or noisy data.  In this paper , a comparative 
analysis of different feature selection methods  is presented , and a general categorization of these methods is 
performed. Moreover, in this paper , state-of-the-art swarm intelligence - are studied , and the recent feature 
selection methods based on these algorithms  are reviewed . Furthermore, the strengths and weaknesses of 
the different studied swarm intelligence -based feature selection methods are evaluated . 
Keywords:  Machine learning, dimensionality reduction, feature selection, evolutionary algorithms, 
swarm intelligence . 
 
 
1. Introduction  
Pattern recognition is one of the most important applications of machine learning in different  sciences. 
Machine learning methods  utilized in  the many areas of medical diagnosis  (Liu, Gu et al. 2017 , Li, Wu et 
al. 2019 ), marketing  (Cheng -Lung Huang and Tsai 2009 , Yuan, Yuan et al. 2020 ), image processing 
(Liang, Zhang et al. 2017 , Zhou, Gao et al. 2017 ), text mining  (Wang and Hong 2019 , Kou, Yang et al. 
2020 ), information retrieval  (Chuen -Horng Lin, Huan -Yu Chen et al. 2014 , Ji, Shen et al. 2019 ), 
Identification  (Bi, Suen et al. 2019 , Koide, Miura et al. 2020 ), etc. One of the significant goals of modeling 
and classification of data is to predict based on the train data  and available features.  Huge  datasets with 
high dimensional features  space  and a relatively smaller number  of samples  are critical issue s for machine 
learning tasks. Once there are a number of irrelevant and redundant features among the initial feature set , 
dimensionality  reduction is one of the essential techniques  to eliminate these features.  (Chen, Li et al. 
2019 ). It is an efficient technique for improving  accuracy  performance, lowering computational 
complexity, building more generalized models, and decreasing the requi red storage (Tang, Dai et al. 2019 , 
Wang, Zhang et al. 2019 ). During the past few  years, two major techniques have been proposed for the 
reduction of dimensionality : Feature extraction and feature selection (Ahmed K. Farahat, Ali Ghodsi et al. 
2013 ). In feature extraction, the primary feature space is mapped to a s maller space. In fact, in this 
technique, by combining existing features, fewer features are created so that these features contain all (or 
most of) the information contained in the primary features . Moreover , in feature selection, a subset of initial 
features is selected by removing the irrelevant and redundant feature .  
In general, the feature selection process consists of four main stages: subset generation, subset evaluation, 
stopping criteria, and validation of results. In each iteration of the search process, a subset of the candidate 
feature set is generated from the  original features , and its appropriateness  is measured by an evaluation