criterion. The subset generation process and its evaluation are repeated until a predetermined stop criterion 
is reached. At the end of this process, the best subset of the selected f eature is validated on the test data set. 
Feature selection has been an active research area in data mining, pattern recogniti on, and statistics 
communities (Liu, Nie et al. 2019 ). The total search space to find the most relevant and non -redundant 
features, including all possible subsets, is 2𝑛, where 𝑛 is the number of original features. Comprehensive 
search ensures that the most appropriate features are found , but usually , this i s not computationally feasible, 
even for medium -sized datasets . Since the evaluation of all possible subsets is very costly, a solution must 
be searched that is both computationally feasible and useful in terms of quality. Many feature selection 
methods us e metaheuristic algorithms  to avoid increasing computational complexity  (Alshamlan, Badr et 
al. 2015 , Welikala, Fraz et al. 2015 , Singh and Singh 2019 ). These algorithms  will be able to optimize the 
problem of feature selection with appropriate accuracy within an acceptable time . Metaheuristic algorithms  
can be classified into two main categories: Swarm intelligence (SI) and Evolutionary Algorithms (EA). SI 
is a relatively new category of evolutionary computation comparing with EAs and other single -solution 
based approaches. SI algorithms utilized approxi mate and non -deterministic techniques to effectively and 
efficiently explore and exploit the search space in order to find near -optimal solutions The most popular 
nature -inspired meta -heuristic group is swa rm-based techniques.  Swarm Intelligence (SI) is a type of 
artificial intelligence that is based on collective behaviors in decentralized and self -organized systems. 
These systems usually consist of a population of simple actors who interact locally and with their 
environment.   
In recent decades,  many SI-based  algorithms  have been employed to feature section (Figueiredo, Macedo et 
al. 2019 ). Despite the highly acceptable performance of these methods, there are only a few papers 
reviewing SI based feature selection me thods. In (Basir and Ahmad 2014 ) a comparison of swarm 
intelligence -based feature selection method is conducted. The authors of this paper focused only on the 
well-known and traditional SI algorithm, and only the feature selection methods based on these algorithms 
studied.  Moreover, in (Brezočnik, Fister et al. 2018 ) a comprehensive literature review of SI algorithms for 
feature selection is performed.  One of the  limitations of this paper  is that it lacks experiment results  and 
only states the strengths and weaknesses of different SI-based feature selection methods.  With the lack of 
comprehensive review of SI -based feature selection methods, the main purpose of this paper is to fill the 
gap in coverage of SI algorithms for feature selection.  This paper  seeks to provide a comprehensive 
overview of SI -based feature selection methods and their categorization and try to review the state -of-the-
art and most well -known  SI-based method used to feature selection. Also, in this paper, various 
experiments have been designed to compare the performance of different SI -based methods to allow a more 
accurate evaluation of these algorithms.  
The remainder of this paper is organiz ed as follows: Section 2 presents the introduction  of the feature 
selection problem,  Section 3 reviews SI based feature selection methods . Section 4 reports the experimental 
results of different SI -based method s. Finally, Section 5 presents the conclusion.  
2. Background  
An essential issue with machine learning  techniques  is the high -dimensionality problem of a dataset where 
the feature subset size  much greater than pattern size . For example, in the medical applications that include 
very high -dimensional datasets, the classification parameters are also increased. Therefore , the performance 
of the classifier declines significantly  (Liu and Yu 2005 , Saeys, Inza et al. 2007 , Chandrashekar and Sahin 
2014 ). According to a general rule for a classification problem with 𝑛 dimension and 𝐶 class, at least 10×
𝑛×𝐶 training data is required  (Anil K. Jain, Robert P. W. Duin et al. 2000 , Liu and Zheng 2006 , Cadenas, 
Garrido et al. 2013 ). When it is not possible to provide this number of training data practically, reducing the 
feature subset size,  reduces the number of required training data. As a result, the performance of the 
classification algorithm increases (Gokalp, Tasci et al. 2020 , Shu, Qian et al. 2020 ). 
From a general point of view, feature selection methods are divi ded into two categories supervised and 
unsupervised feature selection methods (Tang, Liu et al. 2018 ). In supervised methods, a set of train data is