the most relevant  features  and an improved BA algorithm  as a search strategy  in the wrapper approach is 
presented  to select the final feature subset. 
 
3.8. COA -based methods  
The Cuckoo Optimization Algorithm (COA) is another algorithm based on swarm intelligence, inspired by 
the special lifestyle of a bird called the cuckoo  (Rajabioun 2011 ). The specific habitude of laying eggs and 
the reproduction of this bird has been the basis for the formation of this optimization algorithm.  Like other 
evolutionary algorithms, the cuckoo optimization algorithm begins with an initial population of cuckoos. 
This early population of cuckoos has a number of eggs that are placed in the nest of the host bird. Some 
eggs, which  are more similar to host bird eggs, have a better chance of growing into adult birds. The other 
eggs are identified and destroyed by the host butterfly. Grown eggs show that the nest is a better place in 
the search space , and the usefulness of that area i s higher. The goal of the cuckoo optimization algorithm, 
which is the optimization function, is to find the place where most eggs have a more chance to survive. In 
(Elyasigomari, Lee et al.  2017 ), a COA -based feature selection method is developed to improve the cancer 
classification accuracy . In this method, first, the irrelevant features are removed using a simple and fast 
filter -based feature selection. Then, from these relevant feature s, the final features are selected by 
integration wrapper -based feature selection and COA algorithm. In (Jayaraman and Sultana 2019 ), a 
combination method of cuckoo search algorithm and neural network is developed for feature selection.  In 
this method, after selecting a feature subset of non -redundant a nd relevant features, the final chosen 
features are sent to the classifier , and heart disease is classified.  Moreover, in (Prabukumar, Agilandeeswari 
et al. 2019 ), another cuckoo search -based feature selection method is proposed for improving the disease 
diagnosis accura cy. In this method, the process of feature subset selection is optimized using the cuckoo 
search optimization, and then these selected features are sent to the SVM classifier to identify lung cancer.  
 
3.9. GWO -based methods  
Gray Wolf Optimization (GWO) is  a new meta -heuristic algorithm inspired by grey wolves  (Mirjalili, 
Mirjalili et al. 2014 ). This algorithm is one of the latest bio -inspired techniq ues, which simulate the hunting 
process of a pack of gray wolves in nature. The GWO algorithm mimics the leadership hierarchy and 
hunting mechanism of grey wolves in nature. Recently, some GWO -based method has been used as a tool 
for feature selection in d ata mining. In (Emary, Yamany et al. 2015 ), a Multi -Objective GWO was 
employed to search the search most relevant and non -redundant features. This proposed hybrid method uses 
the low computational complexity of the filt er model to improve the performance of the wrapper model. In 
(Emary, Zawbaa et al. 2016 ), a binary version of the GWO is proposed to select the optimal feature subs et 
for classification tasks. In the wrapper -based feature selection method, classification accuracy, and the 
number of selected features are utilized for the fitness function. In (Tu, Chen et al. 2019 ), to improve the 
previous GWO -based method, a multi -strategy ensemble GWO is proposed for feature selection. Moreover, 
Abdel -Basset et al. (Abdel -Basset, El -Shahat et al. 2020 ) proposed a Grey Wolf Opt imizer wrapper -based 
feature selection method integrated with a Mutation operator for data classification. The mutation operator 
presented in this paper tries to reduce the features that increase the redundancy between the selected 
features and add the fea tures that increase the classification accuracy.  
 
3.10. WOA -based methods  
Whale Optimization Algorithm  (WOA)  is another new swarm -based optimization algorithm inspired by the 
hunting behavior of humpback whales (Mirjalili and Lewis 2016 ). This algorithm included three operators 
to simulate the search for prey, encircling prey , and bubble -net foragin g behavior of humpback whales. 
Recently, the Whale Optimization Algorithm is successfully utilized in many different optimization 
problems. In (Mafarja and Mirjalili 2017 ), a hybrid WOA with a simulated annealing method is proposed 
for feature selection. The goal of using simulated annealing in this hybrid method is to enhance the