Support vector machine SVM is one of the supervised learning algorithm s that was proposed  by Vapnik . 
The goal of SVM is to maximize the margin between data samples , and in recent years it has shown good 
performance for classification and regression problem s. Naïve Bayes  (NB)  is a group of simple 
probabilistic classification algorithms based on the probability that classifies data by assuming the 
independence of rando m variables and using the base theorem. AdaBoost (AB), short for "Adaptive 
Boosting ", which is a machine learning meta -algorithm formulated by Yoav Freund and Robert Schapire . 
An AdaBoost classifier is a meta -estimator that begins by fitting a classifier a nd then fits additional copies 
of it on the same dataset, and then the weights of incorrectly classified instances are adjusted such that 
subsequent classifiers focus more on severe cases.  
The experimental workbench is Weka (Waikato environment for knowle dge analysis) (Hall, Frank et al. ), 
which is a collection of data mining  methods . In this work, SMO, Naïve Bayes , and AdaBoostM1 as the 
WEKA implementation of SVM, NB , and AB were used.  
4.3. The evaluated methods  
In these experiments, to compare the performance of different methods of selecting a feature based on, 
from each SI -based algorithm, one feature selection method was chosen and evaluated in the experimental 
result. For a fair evaluation, all of the methods  examined in this section were selected from among wrapper -
based methods. Due to the inherent differences between filter -based and wrapper -based feature selection 
methods, which usually filter -based model have lower computational complexity and wrapper -based 
models have higher accuracy, it is not possible to compare these methods . For a fairer comparison, the 
performed experiments in this section are divided into two separate parts, in the first part the wrapper -based 
methods and in the second part the filt er-based methods were compared with each other.  
These wrapper -based methods include  PSO-based (Xue, Tang  et al. 2020 ), ACO -based (Liu, Wang et al. 
2019 ), AB C-based (Wang, Zhang et al. 2020 ), DE-based (Hancer 2020 ), GSA -based (Taradeh, Mafarja et 
al. 2019 ), FA-based (Selvakumar and Muneeswaran 2019 ), BA -based (Tawhid and Dsouza 2018 ), COA -
based (Elyasigomari, Lee et al. 2017 ), GWO -based (Abdel -Basset, El -Shahat et al. 2020 ), WOA -based 
(Mafarja and Mirjalili 2018 ) and SSA -based (Neggaz, Ewees et al. 2020 ). Furthermore , filter -based 
methods include PSO -based (Zhang, Ding et al. 2018 ), ACO -based (Moradi and Rostami 2015 ), DE-based. 
(Hancer, Xue et al. 2018 ) and WOA -based (Nematzadeh, Enayatifar et al. 2019 ). 
 Moreover,  all these meth ods are implemented using C# on an Intel Core -i7 CPU with 8GB of RAM.  
4.4. Results  
In these  experiments, the  classification  accuracy  and feature subset size are used as the performance 
evaluation criteria . In the experiments, first , the performances of different  wrapper  SI-based feature 
selection  method s are compared  over different classifiers. Tables 4 summarize the average classification 
accuracy (in %) over ten independent runs of the different SI-based wrapper feature selection  methods  
using SVM, NB , and AB classifiers.  Each entry of the Tables 4 denotes the mean value as well as standard 
deviation (shown in parenthesis) of ten independent runs. The best result is indicated in bold face and 
underlined , and the second -best is in bold face . Table 4 reveals that , in most cases , the PSO-based  method 
performs better than the other  SI-based  feature selection method. For example, in SpamBase dataset on the 
SVM classifier, PSO -based method obtained a 92.84 % classification accuracy . In contrast,  for ACO, A BC, 
DE, GSA, FA, BA, COA, GWO, WOA , and SSA -based method, these values were reported.91.87, 90.32, 
88.78,  88.09, 87.91, 90. 83, 91.16, 91.73, 88.64 and 90.19, correspondingly.  
Table 4: Average classification accuracy rate and as standard deviation (shown in parenthesis) over ten runs of the 
wrapper -based feature selection methods using SVM, Naive Bayes , and AdaBoost classifier.  The best result is 
indicated in bold face and underlined , and the second -best is in bold face.  
Dataset  Method  Classifier