optimal  based. Furthermore, in  (Hancer 2020 ), a new multi -objective differe ntial evolution approach 
feature selection is proposed to feature selection and improve the performance of  the clustering algorithm 
simultaneously.  
 
3.5. GSA -based methods  
Moreover, some Swarm Intelligence algorithms have been inspired by physical laws. Gravitational Search 
Algorithm  (GSA) is (Rashedi, Nezamabadi -pour et al. 2009 ) a physics -based algorithm inspired by 
Newton’s law of universal gravitation. GSA, a popular swarm intelligence technique, has been widely 
employed in data management, and recently, many feature selection methods have been proposed using this 
optimization algorithm. Han et al. (Han, C hang et al. 2014 ) developed a feature selection method by the 
integration of the GSA algorithm with a linear chaotic map for improving classification accuracy. In 
(Xiang, Han et al. 2015 ), a hybrid system for feature sele ction based on an improved gravitational search 
algorithm and k -NN method is proposed. In this method, a piecewise linear chaotic map for exploration, 
and sequential quadratic programming for exploitation are utilized. In (Taradeh, Mafarja et al. 2019 ), and 
efficient hybrid feature selection method is introduced to utilized the advantages of the Swarm Intelligence 
algorithms and the genetic algorithm for improving the performance of the gravitational search algorithm.  
 
3.6. FA -based methods  
The Firefly Algorithm  (FA)  was introduced by Xin -She Yang, in 20 10 (Yang 2010 ), that, the main idea 
was inspired by the optical connection between fireflies. The Firefly Algorithm is a sensible example of 
swarm intelligence in which low -performance agents can work together to achie ve great results with high 
performance . In (Zhang, Song et al. 2017 ) a novel FA -based feature selection method, called return -cost-
based binary FFA is developed. The authors of t his paper provide a variety of strategies to prevent 
premature convergence of the FA algorithm and thus improve the accuracy of feature selection.  In (Zhang, 
Mistry et al. 2018 ), a feature selection method is developed  using the firefly optimization algorithm to 
increase the accuracy of classification and regression models.  In this method , to improve convergence and 
prevent trapping in loca l optimization, some variation is added to standard FA, which improves the 
accuracy of final feature selection.  Moreover, in (Larabi Marie -Sainte and Alalyani 2020 ) FA-based feature 
selection method is proposed . In this method, after selecting the final features, these features are utilized to 
classify Arabic texts using an SVM classifier. Furthermore, in  (Selvakumar and Muneeswaran 2019 ), 
another FA -based feature selection method is presented for network intrusion detection. In this method, a 
combination of filter -based feature selection method (i.e. , Mutual Information) and wrapper -based feature 
selection method (i.e. , C4.5 and Bayesian network) has been utilized to select the final features . 
 
3.7. BA -based methods  
The Bat Algorithm (BA) (Yang 2010 ) is an algorithm inspired by the collective behavior of bats in the 
natural environment, introduced by Yang in 2010. The bat algorithm is a kind of swarm intelligence -based 
algorithm that is inspired by the echolocation behavior of bats. Bats find the exac t path and location of their 
prey by sending sound waves and receiving reflections. When the sound waves return to the transmitter of 
the bat waves, the bird can draw an audio image of the obstacles in front of its surroundings and see the 
surroundings wel l. In (Tawhid and Dsouza 2018 ), a hybrid variant of bat algorithm and improved PSO 
algorithm is to improve the feature selection performance. In thi s proposed method, the PSO algorithm is 
used to improve the convergence power of the hybrid algorithm. Moreover, in (Liu, Yan et al. 2020 ), a 
binary  BA-based feature selection method for im age steganalysis is proposed.  This method select s the most 
relevant feature from raw features extracted to improve the final detection accuracy.  Furthermore, Azmi 
Al-Betara et al. (Al-Betar, Alomari et al. 2020 ) used the bat algorithm to search optimal features subset to 
increase the accuracy of cancer classification. In this method, a combination of filter and wrapper approach 
was used to improve the performance of feature selection. In this method, robust mRMR as  a filter to select