4.5. Discussion  
In this section, the strengths and weaknesses of the methods studied will be evaluated, and the factors that 
can lead to the superiority of a feature selection method will be analyzed . 
1- Since each classifier has certain properties, the single classifiers ar e usually less accurate and 
generalization than the wrapper -based feature selection model that uses a combination of multiple 
classifiers. In other words, multiple -classifiers are usually highly accurate due to the diversity of used 
classifiers and the pre diction performance of each single classifier.  Unlike other compared  wrapper  SI-
based feature selection methods that utilize a single classifier in their feature selection process to 
calculate the quality of a generated feature set, in the wrapper PSO-based feature selection method  
(Xue, Tang et al. 2020 ), four different classifiers include SVM , LDA, KNN, and  ELM, are used as 
evaluation functions.  
2- Given that in a large data set, the number of unrelated and redundant features has also increased, it is 
possible that evolutionary algorithms will be stuck in the local optimal. Moreover, m any SI -based 
methods that use wrapper approaches to search for the optimal features subset are usually highly 
computationally complex and inefficient in high -dimensional datasets. Among the evaluated wrapper 
SI-based feature selection methods in this secti on, the PSO-based (Xue, Tang et al. 2020 ), ACO -based 
(Liu, Wang et al. 2019 ) COA -based (Elyasigomari, Lee et al. 2017 ), and SSA-based (Neggaz, Ewees 
et al. 2020 ) feature selection method s, highly accurate in the high-dimensional dataset (i.e. , colon 
dataset with 2000 features), while other evaluated SI -based methods were only effective in low -
dimensional data sets.  
3- One of the main goals of an efficient feature selection method is to ident ify the optimal number of 
required features for the machine learning task  and prevent the selection of too many or too few 
features during their feature selection process. If too many features are selected in a feature selection 
method, the probability of selecting redundant and irrelevant features will be increased ; as a result, the 
prediction accuracy will be decreased. On the other hand, if too few features are selected, they will not 
be able to represent all the information of original features . Among t he studied methods in this paper, 
multi -objective methods and methods that took into account the number of selected features in their 
fitness function showed better performance , and the number of final selected features by these methods 
were fewer.  
4- Exploration of the search space and exploitation of the best solutions found are two conflicting 
objectives  that must be taken into account when using a swarm intelligence -based method.  Exploration 
means to generate diverse solutions so as to explore the s earch space on a global scale, while 
exploitation means to focus the search in a good solution region. A good balance between these two 
objectives will improve the performance of the searching method.  Good SI -based feature selection 
methods should  employ d ifferent strateg ies for their search process es, in order to develop a powerful 
method with a better balance between exploration and exploitation capabilities and better convergence 
speed.  Among the studied wrapper methods in this paper, PSO-based (Xue, Tang et al. 2020 ), ACO -Madelon  11.34  14.87  12.38  12.98  
Isolet  9.65 10.32  11.94  10.62  
Colon  16.81  19.41  22.67  17.42  
Average  7.81 9.50 10.70  9.20