Figure 4: Recall@5 Qualitative results on the CUB-200-2001 dataset comparing the proposed DR-MS loss performance with
MS-Loss [ 21]. Images with a red border indicate the true positive gallery images for the given query image which DR-MS is
able to correctly identify in its top-5 results whereas MS is not able to.
Our proposed method provides a trivial way of incorpo-
rating direction regularization into existing metric learning
functions and thereby regulating the direction in which the
samples are separated. This helps in creating a stronger em-
bedding separability, leading to better performance.
4.6. Regularization Factor vs Performance
To understand the behavior of the metric learning system
when varying the degree of direction regularization applied
to the loss, we conduct experiments on different values of
the regularization factor γ. The embedding dimension is
set to 64. Table 5ashows performance variations for cer-
tain choices of γand it is seen that the best performance
on the CUB-200 dataset is achieved with a γ= 0.3. We
notice that the performance obtained by the system when
γis a learnable parameter is slightly diminished compared
to when a static γ= 0.3is used. However, despite using
a learnable γwe are able to see a substantial enough per-
formance boost when compared to the non-regularized MS-
loss (γ= 0). The performance starts drastically reducing
when setting γ≥0.4as the regularization term begins to
overpower the metric loss’ contribution and meaningful em-
beddings are harder to discover under such strict constraints
of the direction regularization. From these analyses, we can
conclude that, in general, picking a γvalue in the range of
[0.2,0.4)(under the current experimental setting) seems to
provide the best performance improvements.
4.7. Batch Size vs Performance
We study the variation in performance of MS-Loss hav-
ing direction regularization with different batch sizes. Weperform the experiment on the In-Shop dataset since it is a
larger set compared to Caltech-UCSD CUB-200-2011 and
will help us form a better understanding of the results. We
use a learnable γand ﬁx the embedding size to 512. As is
seen in Table 5b, we ﬁnd that performance increases with
batch size. This can be attributed to the fact that a larger
batch size helps in identifying more informative triplets.
5. Conclusion
Deep metric learning attempts to solve the challenging
task of creating rich representation spaces that encode the
intra-class diversity while maintaining a clear separation be-
tween classes. The discovery of such spaces is extremely
sensitive to the path chosen during optimization. Intelli-
gent updates to the sample embeddings by making judicious
use of all the information available in the neighbourhood of
samples is crucial. In this work, we have identiﬁed an in-
adequacy in the existing metric learning loss formulations
in their lack of consideration of the optimal direction of up-
date. Our proposed solution corrects for this by introducing
a novel direction regularization factor that compels the pairs
towards the most suitable positions in the metric space. In
doing so, the loss function inherently implements a form of
pair weighting based off of the gradients originating from
the relative distribution of the positives and negatives with
respect to the anchor. The method achieves state-of-the-
art results on standard image retrieval datasets and conse-
quently validates the need for such a regularization factor in
the loss formulations.
14598