denote Eq. 10as the direction regularization term which we
apply to the standard metric loss term.
Gradient Dynamics . To understand the dynamics of
minimizing Eq. 10with respect to the embeddings, we inte-
grate this term into the original Triplet loss formulation for
a speciﬁc triplet pair and get:
Lapn=/bardblfa−fp/bardbl2−/bardblfa−fn/bardbl2+α
−γ1−fp·fa
/bardblfn−fa/bardbl/bardblfp−fa/bardbl(11)
Here,γis the direction regularization parameter which
controls the magnitude of regularization applied to the orig-
inal loss. Although having a negative regularization pa-
rameter seems counter-intuitive, we must note that cosine
distance ranges from [−1,+1]. Directly minimizing this
term pushes its value towards −1, which leads to unfavor-
able conﬁgurations where the anchor is placed between the
negative and the positive sample. To avoid forming such
collinearities, we minimize −Cos(AN,AP)which pushes
the negative sample towards the positive quadrant of the
cosine distance spectrum. As Cos(AN,AP)→0, the
negative sample is more orthogonal to the anchor-positive
and the original metric loss is prioritized for optimization.
WhenCos(AN,AP)→+1, the situation in Fig. 2bplays
out and this term acts as a penalty for the original metric loss
terms and reduces the forces of displacement on the current
triplet inherently performing pair weighting (as seen in the
following discussion). This is also the reason for not us-
ing theCos(AN,AP)term as a primary objective, rather
as a penalizer that adaptively determines the contribution
of the original metric loss. Taking the derivatives (step-by-
step analysis can be found in the Appendix) we get the new
gradient vectors as:
∂L
∂fa= 2(fn−fp)−γc(fa−fp)−γdk(fn−fa)
∂L
∂fp= 2(fp−fa)−γc(fp−fa)
∂L
∂fn= 2(fa−fn)−γcd(fa−fn)
(12)
The terms c= (/bardblfn−fa/bardbl/bardblfa−fp/bardbl)−1,d=/bardblfn−
fa/bardbl−2andk=/bardblfn−fa/bardbl−1/bardblfa−fp/bardblare scaling fac-
tors that adaptively control the contributions of the gradients
they are paired with. cspeciﬁcally looks at the relative dis-
tances of the negative and positive embeddings (w.r.t the an-
chor). The value of cis highest only if both the negative and
positive embeddings are similarly very close to the anchor.
In this case the term γc(fa−fp)in∂L
∂faexerts a greater
force on fain the direction leading away from the nega-
tive embedding as compared to the previous formulation in
Eq.4, thereby prioritizing increasing the gap between itself
and the negative sample (see Fig. 2b). However, the thirdtermγdk(fn−fa)also dominates owing to a high dkvalue
(negative close to anchor) and there is a force acting on fa
to move closer to fnso as to decrease the cosine similar-
ity of<fa−fn,fa−fp>. Instead of naively moving
towardsfp, it tries to re-position itself such that the nega-
tive sample is orthogonal to the anchor-positive pair. Note
that in the original Triplet loss, though the anchor is shifted
away from the negative sample, it attempts to move closer
to the positive sample. It doesn’t account for the fact that
the positive may be located close to the negative sample, in
which case the displacement of the anchor is sub-optimal.
The direction regularization term in our formulation effec-
tively addresses this issue.
Interestingly, when considering∂L
∂fp, we ﬁnd that for
highcvalues, the effect of the gradient on fpis dimin-
ished by a factor of γc. This seems counter-intuitive at ﬁrst,
but we see that in such a situation with the negative sam-
ple being close to both anchor and positive samples, this
speciﬁc triplet is not as informative for deducing the ﬁnal
positions of the anchor and positive embeddings and hence
downplays the contribution of the gradient vector arising
from this speciﬁc triplet. Note that this weighting is done
inherently as part of the loss formulation and does not re-
quire any external supervision to implement it (for exam-
ple manually evaluating the available triplets for informa-
tiveness). The gradient of negative embedding fnbehaves
similar to the original Triplet loss, unless the negative sam-
ple is very close to the anchor, in which case the negative
sample would not be shifted signiﬁcantly owing to the loss
formulation assigning the current triplet pair as being un-
informative. The reason being that, in such a situation, it
may be unclear whether the anchor sample is currently an
outlier located in the region of the space occupied by other
negative samples or conversely if the negative sample is the
outlier in a ﬁeld of positive samples. Overall, the proposed
direction regularization inherently computes pair weighting
based on the forces acting upon the current sample set and
hence leads to the system mining for more informative ex-
amples to update the embedding space if the current set is
deemed unﬁt.
3.3. Adapting Metric Learning Losses with Direc­
tion Regularization
In the previous sections, we analyzed the effect of in-
cluding the proposed direction regularization term into the
loss formulation. We observe that the system dynamically
modiﬁes the gradient vector in accordance with the layout
of the current sampling of anchor, positive and negative
samples. As we have highlighted in §3.1, since current met-
ric learning losses lack an explicit enforcement of orthog-
onality of the negative sample with respect to the anchor-
positive pair, it would be beneﬁcial to imbue the properties
of direction regularization into their formulations to make
14595