pairs available. Multi-similarity loss is one of the recent
methods proposed which identiﬁes that not all sample pairs
are to be weighted the same and that the informativeness of
a pair is not easily discernible from their distance/similarity
alone. The loss addresses these issues by computing the rel-
ative similarity amongst the positive samples and the nega-
tive samples and employing it to select the pairs that would
be the most beneﬁcial for optimization.
All of the previous methods primarily focus on either de-
signing a robust sampling strategy or improving the loss for-
mulation by jointly considering additional distances. How-
ever, one aspect that has not been explored is enforcing di-
rection during optimization. Merely pushing the negative
sample in the direction furthest away from the current sam-
ple (anchor) under consideration may not be the optimal ap-
proach. Fig. 1captures one such situation where naively
forcing the negative sample away from the anchor causes
it to shift further into the positive cluster thereby making
optimization difﬁcult in further iterations. In this paper,
we identify the necessity of incorporating the direction of
repulsion as another factor for optimization and propose a
new loss term that quantiﬁes it. With this approach, we are
able to discover metric spaces which are highly discrim-
inable and the classes within them are better separated when
compared to previous approaches. Summarizing, the main
contributions of the paper are:
•identifying the importance of designing metric learn-
ing objectives that jointly optimize the directions of
displacement of the samples.
•proposing a novel loss criterion that explicitly moni-
tors the direction of the samples being displaced and
penalizes it accordingly.
•improving the performance of current state-of-the-art
methods in metric learning with minimal overhead in
computational complexity and parametrization.
2. Related Work
Creating a highly separable feature space using metric
learning is currently an active area of research. We will
focus on some recent metric learning methods to provide a
context to our work, as a full overview of all methods are
outside the scope of this paper.
Lecun et al. proposed [ 4] a siamese network with Con-
trastive loss in which feature embeddings created from the
input images are encouraged to be closer to each other in
the feature space if the images belong to the same class and
away from embeddings belonging to other classes. Triplet
loss [ 17] incorporated a notion of relative distances be-
tween feature embeddings. Lifted structure loss [ 14] and
N-pair loss [ 18] improved the performance of triplet based
losses by intelligently creating batches with images fromall classes, ensuring separation of the anchor from negative
samples of all classes rather than a single class.
Angular loss [ 20] takes angle relationships between the
triplets into account, for learning a stronger similarity met-
ric. Yair et al. proposed proxy based metric learning[ 12],
which avoids the computational overhead related to the cre-
ation of informative triplets. Many of the metric learning
methods discussed above rely on availability of informative
triplets. Semi-hard negative mining [ 17] for face recogni-
tion looks at speciﬁc triplets that violate the triplet margin
constraint. The curriculum learning based approach in [ 1]
used easier negative samples to train the network during ini-
tial epochs and harder negative samples during later stages
of training.
This often becomes a computationally intensive task. To
alleviate this problem, [ 5] proposed smart mining which
combines the triplet model and the global structure of the
embedding space. Weighting the pairs based on the relative
distance was proposed by Wu et al. [24], leading to more
informative and stable samples.
Recently, ensemble methods in deep metric learning
have been gaining popularity. [ 15] divides the last em-
bedding layer of the deep network into ensembles and for-
mulates training as an online gradient boosting problem.
Attention-based Ensemble [ 8] proposed the use of multiple
attention masks so that each learner can attend to different
parts of the image.
None of the prior works have explicitly taken into ac-
count the direction of updates during optimization.
3. Direction Regularized Metric Learning
In this section, we discuss the current approaches for
deep metric learning and analyze their objectives to identify
potential improvements to their formulations with the goal
of improving the representation space being learnt. First,
we revisit existing metric learning approaches in Section
3.1.Section 3.2details the motivation and design for the new
loss term incorporating directionality as a criterion.
3.1. Review of Metric Learning Approaches
Current metric learning approaches attempt to solve
the optimization problem of discovering appropriate metric
spaces by deﬁning loss terms penalizing the distances be-
tween selected samples or points in the space representing
assigned class centers . Typically, a standard CNN is em-
ployed as the feature extractor that produces a feature em-
beddingfxfor a given input image sample x. This feature
embedding is used for optimizing a criterion that essentially
satisﬁes the properties listed previously.
An analysis into the design philosophies for each ap-
proach would give us an insight into how they can beneﬁt
from considering not only the distances, but also the direc-
tions toward which the representations are pushed to. A
14592