Moving in the Right Direction: A Regularization for Deep Metric Learning
Deen Dayal Mohan*, Nishant Sankaran*, Dennis Fedorishin,
Srirangaraj Setlur, Venu Govindaraju,
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University at Buffalo, Buffalo, New York, USA
Abstract
Deep metric learning leverages carefully designed sam-
pling strategies and loss functions that aid in optimizing
the generation of a discriminable embedding space. While
effective sampling of pairs is critical for shaping the met-
ric space during training, the relative interactions between
pairs, and consequently the forces exerted on these pairs
that direct their displacement in the embedding space can
signiﬁcantly impact the formation of well separated clus-
ters. In this work, we identify a shortcoming of existing
loss formulations which fail to consider more optimal di-
rections of pair displacements as another criterion for op-
timization. We propose a novel direction regularization
to explicitly account for the layout of sampled pairs and
attempt to introduce orthogonality in the representations.
The proposed regularization is easily integrated into exist-
ing loss functions providing considerable performance im-
provements. We experimentally validate our hypothesis on
the Cars-196, CUB-200 and InShop datasets and outper-
form existing methods to yield state-of-the-art results.
1. Introduction
The ﬁeld of metric learning has received a lot of interest
in recent years. Traditionally, metric learning had been used
as a method to create an optimal distance measure that ac-
counts for the speciﬁc properties and distribution of the data
points (for example Mahalanobis distance). Subsequently,
research in metric learning has shifted to approaches that
attempt to discover representations optimized for a speciﬁc
distance measure or similarity function (euclidean distance,
cosine distance, etc.). It has found application in a wide
variety of tasks such as image retrieval [ 12], face veriﬁca-
tion [ 17], etc. With the advent of Deep Neural Networks,
metric learning techniques have been adapted to take ad-
vantage of deep non-linear transformations to obtain even
more discriminative metric spaces. Popular CNNs like In-
ception [ 19] and ResNet [ 6] that have been successful at ob-
*Equal contribution authors in alphabetic order
Figure 1: Difﬁculty of Metric Learning Optimization. Blue
squares are objects of a speciﬁc class while red stars are ob-
jects representing a different class. The blue square with
the yellow highlight is the anchor. Greyed out objects are
not considered for the loss with the current pair. A typical
metric learning formulation attempts to push away embed-
dings of objects belonging to different classes while moving
it closer to objects having the same semantic label. How-
ever, as illustrated here, such a formulation may lead to sub-
optimal solutions when an object is moved closer toward an
opposing cluster.
ject recognition and classiﬁcation have been employed for
various metric learning approaches.
Essentially, learning a metric space reduces to ﬁnd-
ing an embedding space such that samples of the same
class/category (positive samples) are mapped to points close
to each other while ensuring that samples of different
classes (negative samples) are maximally separated based
on some notion of distance metric deﬁned for the space.
Out of the various formulations of this approach, one of
the earliest was the Contrastive loss [ 3]. This loss explic-
itly minimizes the distance between positive pair samples
and ensures the negative pair samples are separated by a
margin. Triplet loss [ 17] builds upon Contrastive loss by
simultaneously enforcing minimization of positive pair dis-
tance and maximizing negative pair distance in a single loss
formulation. This requires carefully selecting ”triplets” of
samples (consisting of two positive samples and a negative
sample) to use for optimization to ensure that the training
procedure does not get dominated by the abundance of easy
14591