brief review of a few prominent approaches in metric learn-
ing are presented below.
Triplet Loss : Schroff et al. [17] proposed Triplet loss
as an augmentation over Contrastive loss [ 3]. Triplet loss
jointly minimizes the distances between the feature embed-
dings of a given sample (anchor) and another sample of the
same class (positive) while maximizing the distance of the
embeddings of a suitable sample of a different class (nega-
tive) to the anchor. The loss is deﬁned as below:
L=/summationdisplay
a,p,n⊂N/bracketleftBig
/bardblfa−fp/bardbl2−/bardblfa−fn/bardbl2+α/bracketrightBig
+(1)
The terms fa,fp,fncorrespond to feature embeddings
for the anchor, positive and negative samples, where a,p,n
are sampled from the training dataset N.αdeﬁnes the mar-
gin enforced between the anchor-negative embedding dis-
tance and the anchor-positive distance. Selecting impor-
tant triplets of samples is crucial and so the authors perform
semi-hard negative sample mining for a particular anchor-
positive sample pair in order to ensure fast convergence.
With the above formulation, the loss term pushes the
negative sample radially outward with respect to the anchor
sample as illustrated in Fig. 2a. However, the formulation
fails to take advantage of the existence of the sampled posi-
tive pair for arriving at a more optimal direction to force the
negative sample to move towards.
Proxy Loss : In [ 12], the authors propose the use of prox-
iesin place of actual samples in order to eliminate the need
for sampling from a large subset of positive and negative
pairs, which was identiﬁed as the limitation of the previous
metric learning approaches. The proxies are “placeholder”
embeddings that are statically assigned such that a single
proxy embedding corresponds to a speciﬁc semantic label
or class. They deﬁne the loss as:
L=/summationdisplay
a⊂N−log/parenleftBigg
e(−/bardblfa−p(a)/bardbl2)
/summationtext
ne(−/bardblfa−p(n)/bardbl2)/parenrightBigg
(2)
For every sample in the dataset, the loss attempts to min-
imize the distance of the anchor embedding fato the proxy
corresponding to its class p(a)while maximizing the dis-
tance of the anchor embedding to the proxies corresponding
to every other class p(n). Herenindicates a negative sam-
ple for the current anchor a. Both the sample embeddings
and proxies are learnt simultaneously during training. Even
though in this formulation the optimization criterion jointly
maximizes the distances of the anchor to allthe negative
classes, the lack of an explicit enforcement of an optimal
direction to the negative proxies inhibits the method from
achieving more efﬁcient representations.
Multi-Similarity Loss : One of the more recent ap-
proaches proposed is Multi-Similarity loss [ 21], which aimsto address the inadequacies of the existing loss formulations
by focusing on sampling the most informative pairs for opti-
mization. They accomplish this by considering the relative
similarities amongst the positive samples and the negative
samples in conjunction with the self-similarity measure to
handle all three forms of similarities available. The loss is
derived from the binomial deviance loss and is formulated
as:
L=1
mm/summationdisplay
i=1

1
αlog
1+/summationdisplay
p∈Pie−α(Sip−λ)
+
1
βlog/bracketleftBigg
1+/summationdisplay
n∈Nieβ(Sin−λ)/bracketrightBigg/bracerightBigg (3)
The ﬁrstlogterm deals with the similarity scores Sipfor
the positive samples p∈ Piwhich comprises the set of posi-
tive data-points corresponding to the ithanchor. The second
logterm analogously deals with that of the negative sam-
ples.α,β andλare hyper-parameters. The crucial aspect
here is the formation of the sets PiandNiwhich carefully
selects the hardest positive and negative samples for the an-
chor using their relative similarities. Once again, the simi-
larity measure used merely optimizes the distances and di-
rections originating from individual pair comparisons, viz.,
anchor-positive and anchor-negative pairs. A more thor-
ough deduction of the directions of repulsion originating
from other positive and negative samples in the loss term
would likely yield better optimization performance.
3.2. Direction Regularization
Our review of current metric learning methods in §3.1
highlights a distinct shortcoming that we aim to correct for
improving the optimization criterion. We ﬁrst consider the
simplest scenario involving an anchor, a positive and a neg-
ative sample. Since we are dealing with a triplet of samples,
the most suitable loss formulation that can be applied here
is the Triplet Loss as deﬁned in Eq. 1. To ﬁnd the gradi-
ents and the directions of the update for the unit normalized
embeddings fa,fp,fncorresponding to the anchor, posi-
tive and negative samples, we compute the derivatives of
the loss (Eq. 1) with respect to them as follows:
∂L
∂fa= 2(fn−fp)
∂L
∂fp= 2(fp−fa)
∂L
∂fn= 2(fa−fn)(4)
The above equations deﬁne the vectors used for updating
the current embeddings as illustrated in Fig. 2a. As seen in
the ﬁgure, from this formulation during gradient descent,
14593