Figure 7. Disentanglement of content across different styles. The
same content image is stylized using two different style examples;
the difference in content of two stylzations is computed as L2
norm between activations of the ﬁrst FC-layer of the VGG-16
network[ 27]. All distances are accumulated and presented as a
distribution(blue). The experiment is performed for the model
with(blue) and without(green) disentanglement. Additionally, we
compute the content distance from a photo to its nearest neighbor
as a reference(red). See Sec. 4.2for further explanation.
Table 2. The deception rate indicates how close an obtained styliza-
tion is to the target style (higher is better). Classiﬁcation accuracy
shows how much content of an input photo is left after stylization
(higher is better). Style divergence shows a divergence between the
style distribution obtained by stylization and true style distribution
(lower is better).
Method Deception Classiﬁcation True style
rate accuracy divergence
AST [ 24] 0.45 0.09 1.12
Ours w/o LFPT−style 0.45 0.16 1.14
Ours w/o LFPD 0.52 0.08 0.32
Ours 0.562 0.17 0.21
principal component as a probability density function (see
Fig.8). We observe that the model utilizing LFPT−style can
better match the target distribution of real artworks then the
model without this loss.
4.4. Ablations
To summarize the inﬂuence of the proposed losses on the
ﬁnal model we use three metrics: deception rate, style diver-
gence and classiﬁcation accuracy. The latter corresponds to
the classiﬁcation accuracy of the VGG-16 network on the
ImageNet stylized images.
We take the AST [ 24] model as a baseline, because it is
trained to extract style from a collection of images. The abla-
tion results are summarized in Tab. 2. They indicate that the
LFPT−style is crucial to incorporate style in its entirety. The
LFPD on the other hand is mostly responsible for a better
content preservation but also improves the performance of
the stylization task.
Figure 8. Projection of style features on the ﬁrst principal compo-
nent of the PCA decomposition. Style features are computed for
real artworks (red), stylized images (blue) and images stylized by a
model without the ﬁxpoint triplet style loss (green). The stylized
examples and artworks are taken from two artists only, hence the
bimodal distribution. Evidently the model utilizing a ﬁxpoint triplet
style loss can approximate the distribution of style features of real
artworks better.
5. Conclusion
Although previous works concentrated on improving the
stylization task, they lack a formal investigation of the ques-
tions How much variation do we ﬁnd within one style or
between different styles? andWhat is the relation between
style and content? – both are relevant to understand style.
This paper presents a novel style transfer approach, which
is able to capture subtle variations of style while also being
able to distinguish different styles and disentangle content
and style. We achieve the former by introducing a ﬁxpoint
triplet loss to the trained network. We further demonstrated
that the introduction of a disentanglement loss makes styl-
ization independent to changes in content. We studied the
inﬂuence of content and style on ﬁnal stylizations by mea-
suring the preservation of content and representation of style
in stylized images. Our approach offers control over the
stylization process and enables art historians to study, for
example, stylistic developments of an artist in detail.
Acknowledgements
This work has been funded by the German Research Foun-
dation (DFG) - 421703927 and a hardware donation from
NVIDIA Corporation.
Solution to Fig. 4:
Cezanne: fake, real, fake, real, real, fake
Gauguin: fake, real, fake, fake, real, real
Morisot: fake, fake, real, fake, fake, real
van Gogh: fake, real, fake, fake, real, real
Monet: fake, real, real, fake, real, fake
4429