to subtle style changes in the query style images, even if
examples were taken from the same style.
Another issue is that if the model is only trained with these
three losses, it inadvertently conditions the stylization on the
input content. To overcome this, we introduce two additional
losses which are novel to the task of style transfer: a ﬁxpoint
triplet style loss and ﬁxpoint disentanglement loss.
3.1. Fixpoint Triplet Loss
If the objective is a weighted combination of the three
losses 1,2and3deﬁned above, we immediately observe
that the style encoder Esis only driven by the conditional
adversarial loss Ladv. This loss is minimized by learning
to partition the domain of values of (Es)into distinctive
regions. Thus, we are not able to force the encoder to learn a
smooth space of a style representation displaying continuous
transitions between different styles and pronounced transi-
tions within a single style. To alleviate this we introduce a
ﬁxpoint triplet loss:
LFP−style:=E
x∼X
(y,s)∼Y[/bardblEs(s)−Es(D(Ec(x),Es(s)))/bardbl2],
(4)
which is similar to LFP−content deﬁned in 3. The loss
forces the network to preserve input style. However it shows
a similar behavior as described above when visually very dif-
ferent examples of the same style (y1,s),(y2,s)∼Yare
mapped onto the same point, namely Es(y1)≡Es(y2);
resulting in identical stylizations D(Ec(x),Es(y1))≡
D(Ec(x),Es(y2)).
This reasoning could be formalized as follows: ﬁrst, we
want the stylization to be similar to the input style ex-
ample in the style space. Secondly, a stylization ob-
tained by a different style must also be distant in the
style representation space. This resembles a triplet loss
widely used in metric learning [ 25,9]. In our case, for
the style examples (y1,s1),(y2,s2)∼Yand content
photox∼X, the anchor is the encoded style Es(y1),
the positive sample is Es(D(Ec(x),Es(y1))), the negative
Es(D(Ec(x),Es(y2)))respectively. For a margin rwe de-
ﬁne a ﬁxpoint triplet loss for a style:
LFPT−style:= E
x∼X
(y1,s1),(y2,s2)∼Ymax/parenleftBig
0,
r+/bardblEs(y1)−Es(D(Ec(x),Es(y1)))/bardbl2−
/bardblEs(y1)−Es(D(Ec(x),Es(y2)))/bardbl2/parenrightBig
.(5)
3.2. Disentanglement Loss
The content within an image can be indicative for the style.
For instance particular pieces of clothing may hint at the time
and style of the painting. Thus, the content and style are
entangled. The generated stylizations are also conditionallydependent on the content target of the photo and not only
on the style target. To separate both characteristics, it is
necessary to make the target style independent from the
target content. This could be achieved by minimizing the
following loss:
E[/bardblEs(D(Ec(x1),Es(y)))−Es(D(Ec(x2),Es(y)))/bardbl2].
(6)
However, this loss is too strict and obstructs a successful
training of the model. Therefore we soften the constraint:
instead of minimizing it we simply bind it from the top using
the ﬁxpoint style loss LFP−style. This loss is minimized
by decreasing the LFPT−style loss. Hence, we also mini-
mize 6. In summary: for an input style sample (y,s)∼Y
and two random photos x1,x2∼Xwe deﬁne the ﬁxpoint
disentanglement loss LFPD :
LFPD=E
x1,x2∼X
(y,s)∼Ymax/parenleftBig
0,
/bardblEs(D(Ec(x1),Es(y)))−Es(D(Ec(x2),Es(y)))/bardbl2−
/bardblEs(D(Ec(x1),Es(y)))−Es(y)/bardbl2/parenrightBig
.
(7)
TheLFPD penalizes the model for perturbations which are
too large in the style representation: if given the style vector
s=Es(y), then the style discrepancy of two stylizations is
larger than the discrepancy between stylization and original
style.
The main difference to the ﬁxpoint triplet loss is that the latter
prevents different stylizations from collapsing into the same
style, while the ﬁxpoint disentanglement loss alleviates the
inﬂuence of the content image on the resulting stylization.
3.3. Training and Model Architecture
We summarize all aforementioned losses given the loss
weightsλadv, λpixel, λFP−content, λFPT−style, λFPD
to generate the compound loss L∗. We use it as the ﬁnal
objective for the discriminator-generator minimax game:
min
Gmax
DL∗.The detailed model architecture and training
step descriptions are provided in the supplementary material.
4. Experiments
4.1. Stylization Assessment
The quality of stylized images and thus the representation
of artistic style can be measured in several ways. We assess
the performance with four different methods, in 1:
Expert preference rate We ﬁrst stylize various photos in
the style of one artist using different methods listed in Tab. 1.
In a second step we cut out patches of the same size from all
stylized images and create a batch. We then show different
patches to experts from art history and have them select the
patch which best represents the style of the respective artist.
4425