Figure 2. The training iteration is performed on a pair of content images with content representations c1,c2and a pair of style images having
style representations s1,s2. In a next step, image pairs are fed into the content encoder Ecand style encoder Esrespectively. Now we
generate all possible pairs of content and style representations using the decoder D. The resulting images are fed into the style encoder Es
one more time to compute the LFPT−style on two triplets that share c2|s1by comparing the style representations of generated images with
the styles c1|s1,c2|s1,c1|s2,c2|s2to the styles s1,s2of the input style images. The resulting images are given to the discriminator Dto
compute a conditional adversarial loss Ladvand toEcto compute the discrepancy LFP−content between the stylizations c2|s2,c1|c1and
the original c1,c2. Both depicted encoders Esare shared as well as both encoders Ec.
andsis a style class label, and a collection of photos
x∼X, we want to learn a transformation G:X−→Y.
To measure how well the mapping Gapproximates the
distribution Y, we introduce a discriminator Dwhose task
it is to distinguish between a real sample y∈Yand a
generated sample G(x)forx∈X. In our framework, this
task is equivalent to learning an arbitrary mapping from the
photo domain to the domain of artworks.
On its own this approach induces no constraints on the
original content preservation and therefore can make the
original content of the photo unrecognizable. To prevent this
we force the generated image to be similar to the stylized
image in the pixel domain, namely by minimizing the L2
distance/bardblG(x)−x/bardbl2.
As stated before, we want our image to be conditioned on
the query style image G(x|y)allowing for ﬁner style control.
This requires a conditioning of the generated image on the
input style image y. We propose to condition the output
using the style encoder Esby extracting style Es(y)from
the style image yand then condition the generative network
on this style vector.
Works on unsupervised and supervised domain
translation[ 33,11,22] have shown that the task of
image-to-image translation can be solved by exploiting the
encoder-decoder architectures. We deﬁne our generator
as a combination of three networks: content encoder Ec,
decoderDand style encoder Es. The former two are fully
convolutional feed-forward neural networks responsible for
the task of image generation, while the latter network infers
a style vector Es(y)from the image y. The conditioning of
the generator network is performed by substituting the offset
and scale parameters of the instance normalization layers
[29] of the decoder D. The decision which losses should beminimized depends on our deﬁned goals. First, we aim to
generate artistically convincing stylizations by preserving
the style class of the given painting. Hence, we formulate
the conditional adversarial loss as follows:
Ladv:=E
(y,s)∼Y[log(D(y|s))]+
E
x∼X
(y,s)∼Y[log(1−D(D(Ec(x),Es(y))|s))](1)
Second, the stylization obtained from a style image (y,s)
and the input content image xshould resemble the input
content image x. Thus we enforce a reconstruction loss
between the input content image xand stylization result:
Lpixel:=E
x∼X
(y,s)∼Y[/bardbl(D(Ec(x),Es(y)))−x/bardbl2
2].(2)
We do not, however, aim for a simple pixel-level similar-
ity to the input content photo. Indeed such a loss is adversely
to the style transfer task, because many artists tend to al-
ter color and shape severely, thus a pixel-level loss might
obstruct the stylization task. Considering this, we let the
content encoder Ecto determine which features are relevant
for content preservation and which can be neglected. This is
achieved by using a ﬁxpoint content loss:
LFP−content:=E
x∼X
(y,s)∼Y[/bardblEc((D(Ec(x),Es(y))))−Ec(x)/bardbl2
2].
(3)
Although these losses are sufﬁcient to obtain convincing
stylizations for one particular artist, they are not suitable to
train a model capable to incorporate stylizations for multiple
artists within a single network. Our ablations in Tab. 2show
that these losses do not support the model to be susceptible
4424