Content and Style Disentanglement for Artistic Style Transfer
Dmytro Kotovenko Artsiom Sanakoyeu Sabine Lang Bj ¨orn Ommer
Heidelberg Collaboratory for Image Processing, IWR, Heidelberg University
Abstract
Artists rarely paint in a single style throughout their ca-
reer. More often they change styles or develop variations of
it. In addition, artworks in different styles and even within
one style depict real content differently: while Picasso’s
Blue Period displays a vase in a blueish tone but as a whole,
his Cubist works deconstruct the object. To produce artis-
tically convincing stylizations, style transfer models must
be able to reﬂect these changes and variations. Recently
many works have aimed to improve the style transfer task,
but neglected to address the described observations. We
present a novel approach which captures particularities of
style and the variations within and separates style and con-
tent. This is achieved by introducing two novel losses: a
ﬁxpoint triplet style loss to learn subtle variations within one
style or between different styles and a disentanglement loss
to ensure that the stylization is not conditioned on the real
input photo. In addition the paper proposes various evalu-
ation methods to measure the importance of both losses on
the validity, quality and variability of ﬁnal stylizations. We
provide qualitative results to demonstrate the performance
of our approach.
1. Introduction
Style transfer models synthesize a real image in the style
of a given artwork. To achieve a convincing stylization, mod-
els must preserve the content of the real image and closely
resemble the chosen artistic style. This raises the following
questions: “what does it mean to maintain the content” and
“what characteristics deﬁne style”.
Artworks show different renderings of content: While some
styles disregard content, such as Jackson Pollock’s Abstract
Expressionism or Wassily Kandinsky’s highly abstract style,
others display content but alter it in a speciﬁc manner. The
modern paintings of Marc Chagall or Henri Rousseau trans-
form reality into staged almost dream like scenes. These
observations lead to the conclusion that a more in-depth
study of the relation between artistic style and content is re-
quired to obtain a better image stylization. However, there is
†compvis.github.io/content-style-disentangled-ST/
Figure 1. Stylization examples generated by our network. Paul
Cezanne (top), Vincent van Gogh (middle) and Paul Gauguin and
Ernst Ludwig Kirchner (bottom). Full sized images can be found
in the supplementary material and on our project page†.
no tool which measures the degree to which an artist altered
content. Indeed this would require original content photos
which display the exact content an artist has painted in a spe-
ciﬁc artwork. Let us assume the converse scenario: imagine
we do have a set of photos and a simple way to approximate
4422