the artist’s stylization. Then we are given a collection of
content-stylization-pairs, which can be used to solve the con-
tent alteration problem described above (and if we disregard
the fact that the stylization is still only approximated and not
yet optimized). Thus, if we stylize the same content photo in
two different styles, the results should reﬂect the differences
in style while displaying the same content. On the contrary
if we use the same style but different content images, we
should obtain stylizations in the same style but with different
content. The latter constraint warrants an independence of
style from content. We formulate this objective as a ﬁxpoint
disentanglement loss.
Recently there has been a great interest in the task of style
transfer; existing works produce stylized images by extract-
ing style features from a single artwork [ 7,13,28,18,10,
4,31] or a collection of images [ 24,33]. Although these
approaches reproduce a given style, they lack sensitivity to
subtle variations in style and a comprehensive understanding
of style. Instead of learning all possible variations of a style,
previous models only learn visual clues most dominant in
the style and ignore the rest of the style manifold. How-
ever, artists rarely maintain a single style throughout their
career, but more often change styles or develop variations
of it. While still working in an Impressionist style, Monet’s
later works display a more loose and expressive brushstroke
compared to earlier paintings due to declining health. To
capture these small variations in style, we need a framework
able to simulate this. We thus propose a novel method which
learns the particular style of an artist as a single entity and
adjusts the stylization to the particular example of style by
introducing style similarities and discrepancies within a sin-
gle style. This is achieved by stylizing the same content with
two similar style samples and forcing stylizations which dis-
play identical content to still lie apart in the style space. We
address this objective by introducing a ﬁxpoint triplet style
loss.
We propose the ﬁrst approach which extracts style from a
group of examples of the same overall style but with subtle
variations therein, while still providing ﬁne control over the
stylization. We make the following contributions: (i) we
propose two novel losses, namely a ﬁxpoint disentanglement
loss and a ﬁxpoint triplet style loss to allow for a ﬁner styl-
ization of images and a better coverage of style distributions.
(ii) Moreover we provide an approach to disentangle style
and content of an artwork resulting in artistically compelling
stylizations and a better content preservation as shown in the
experiments section. (iii) Our model also provides a smooth
style space and thus allows to interpolate within one style
and across different styles. We also produce smooth video
stylizations with our method; examples can be found on our
project page.2. Related Work
Style transfer Style transfer methods generate new im-
ages in the style of a speciﬁc artist by rendering an input
content image utilizing style information extracted from an
image of a real artwork. Gatys et al. [ 7] ﬁrst proposed a
neural style transfer to encode the style of an image using
the pairwise correlation matrix between feature activations
of a pretrained Convolutional Neural Network (CNN). Given
a single content image and a single reference style image the
stylization is then produced by an iterative optimization pro-
cedure which matches the style representation of a content
image to a style image. Selim et al. [ 26] further extended
the neural style transfer method [ 7] and applied it to portraits
of faces. To enable faster stylization, other research works
used neural networks [ 13,10,18,30,17] which approxi-
mated the slow iterative algorithm of [ 7]. To model multiple
artistic styles within a single model Dumoulin et al. [ 4] pro-
posed a conditional instance normalization, which enables
to synthesize interpolations between different styles. [ 8,12]
introduced additional control over the results of stylization
by altering color, scale and stroke size. [ 16] introduced a
content transformation module between the encoder and de-
coder to achieve a content-and-style-aware stylization. They
used similar content in photos and style to further learn an
object-speciﬁc stylization.
Most of existing style transfer approaches extract style repre-
sentations from a single artwork [ 7,13,28,18,10,4,17,31]
and treat each artwork as an independent style example. To
the best of our knowledge, only [ 24,33] learn style from a
collection of related style examples. However, they cannot
model multiple styles simultaneously, lack ﬂexibility and
do not have control over the stylization process. In contrast,
our approach utilizes the rich information which is given in
a group of very similar style samples taken from an image
collection of one style, combines multiple styles in the same
network and provides a more ﬁne-grained control over the
stylization process.
Latent space in generative models Learning an inter-
pretable latent space representation has been a prevalent
focus of deep learning research, especially in the ﬁeld of gen-
erative models[ 3,21,1]. In recent years conditional image
synthesis received much attention [ 11,21]. Other research
presents more theoretical approaches such as [ 20,3] or state-
of-the-art approaches, which show good results for image
synthesis of natural images [ 2] and human faces[ 14,15] but
require immense computation power. Recently a lot of works
have focused on the disentanglement of object shape and
appearance [ 6,19,5].
3. Approach
Our initial task can be described as follows: given a
collection of artworks (y,s)∼Y, whereyis an art image
4423