Figure 6. Stylized results from different models (from left to right): ours (in red), AST, Gatys et al. and CycleGAN. We provide style and
content images in row one and two to allow a qualitative judgment of stylizations. The ﬁgure highlights improvements in quality for images
obtained by our model. Images show less artiﬁcial structures (as seen in images of Picasso or Kirchner), contain no artifacts in homogeneous
regions (see Cezanne) and most importantly highlight the successful disentanglement of style and content. This can be seen in the stylized
example of Monet. In comparison the AST model produced ’ﬂowers’, which are common in similar landscape paintings of the artist but not
present in the content image. Results are best seen on screen and zoomed in. Full sized images are provided in the supplementary.
4.3. Distribution Divergence
Next we study how well our method covers the variability
of the style distribution it aims to replicate. We compute the
Kullback-Leibler divergence DKLbetween the true style dis-
tribution and the style distribution of images we have stylized
to measure how well our model represents the distribution
of style it aims to represent.
We use a network /tildewideEstrained to classify the style of paint-
ings to obtain the style distribution as approximated by the
activations of the ﬁrst fully connected layer, namely /tildewideEfc
s.
The true style distribution Part
sis approximated by the /tildewideEfc
s
activations on real artworks. Next we extract activations /tildewideEfc
s
of the stylized images to approximate Pstylized
s and com-pute the divergence between the style distribution of real
artworks and the style distribution of the stylized images
DKL(Pstylized
s/bardblPart
s). We repeat this process for a model
trained without the ﬁxpoint triplet style loss LFPT−style (4)
to compute DKL(PnoLFPT−styles /bardblPart
s). Tab. 2summa-
rizes the style divergences.
Now we visualize style distributions for different styl-
ization approaches. First we ﬁx two artists and train one
model with LFPT−style loss and one without.Then we styl-
ize an identical set of content images using both models
and compute the activations of the network /tildewideEfc
s[24]. As a
reference we compute the distribution of style for the real
artworks for the two selected artists. Next, we run a PCA
on these activations and visualize projections on the ﬁrst
4428