3
multi-view radiomics problems [51]. They compared with
the work from [29] and joined proximity matrices using
linear combinations. The authors explored random forest
parameters to determine the quality of the proximity matri-
ces. They concluded that a large number of maximum-depth
trees produced the best quality proximities, quantiﬁed using
a one-nearest neighbor classiﬁer. Using our proposed ran-
dom forest proximity measure which accurately reﬂects the
random forest predictions from each view may add to the
success of this method, thus creating a truer forest ensemble
for multi-view learning.
Seoane et al. proposed the use of random forest proximi-
ties to measure gene annotations with some improvement in
precision over other existing methods [52]. Zhao et al. pre-
sented two matching methods for observational studies, one
propensity-based and the other random forest-proximity-
based [53]. For the random forest approach, subjects of
different classes were iteratively matched according to the
nearest proximity values. They showed that proximity-
based matching was superior to propensity matching in
addition to other existing matching techniques.
All of these applications used existing deﬁnitions of
random forest proximities that do not match the data ge-
ometry learned by the random forest. In contrast, RF-GAP
accurately reﬂects this geometry. Thus, the applications pre-
sented here should show improvement using our deﬁnition.
Indeed, we show experimentally in Section 5 that using
RG-GAP gives data visualizations that more accurately
represent the geometry learned from the random forests,
outlier scores that are more reﬂective of the random forest’s
learning, and improved random forest imputations.
3 R ANDOM FOREST PROXIMITIES
Here we provide several existing deﬁnitions of random
forest proximities followed by RF-GAP which preserves
the geometry learned by the random forest. Let M=
f(x1; y1);(x2; y2);(xN; yN)gbe the training data where
eachxi2X , is ad-dimensional vector of predictor variables
with corresponding response, yi2Y.
The strength of the random forest is highly dependent
on the predictive power of the individual decision trees
(base learners) and on the low correlation between the
decision trees [17], [54]. To decrease the correlation between
the decision trees, a bootstrap sample of the training data
is used to train each decision tree t. Each decision tree
tin a random forest is grown by recursively partitioning
(splitting) the bootstrap sample into nodes, where splits are
determined across a subset of feature variables to maximize
purity (classiﬁcation) or minimize the mean squares of the
residuals (regression) in the resulting nodes. This process
repeats until a stopping criterion is met. For classiﬁcation,
splits are typically continued until nodes are pure (one
class). For regression, a common stopping criterion is a
predetermined minimum node size (e.g., 5). The trees in
random forests are typically not pruned.
In addition to bootstrap sampling, further correlational
decrease between trees is ensured by selecting a random
subset of predictor variables at each node for split optimiza-
tion. The number of variables to be considered is designated
Fig. 1. An example of a random forest and notation with regards to a
particular observation x1. The red-encircled trees are those in which x1
is out of bag, making up the set of trees S1. A particular tree in S1is
exhibited. The out-of-bag indices for the tree are given in red (i2O(t)),
while the in-bag indices (i2B(t))are shown in black. The indices of
observations residing in the same terminal node as x1are given by the
setv1(t).J1(t)gives the in-bag observation indices in the terminal node
v1(t), while M1(t)provides the corresponding multiset. c4(t)denotes
the number of repetitions of observation x4in the tree t.
by the parameter mtry in some random forest packages
(e.g., randomForest [55] and ranger [56]).
We will use the following notation to deﬁne random
forest proximities (see Figure 1 for a visual example):
Tis the set of decision trees in a random forest trained
onMwithjTj=T.
B(t)is the multiset of indices in the bootstrap sample
of the training data that is randomly selected to train
the tree t2T . Thus B(t)contains the indices of the
in-bag observations.
O(t) =fi= 1; : : : ; nji =2B(t)g. Thus O(t)is the set
of indices of the training data that are not contained in
B(t).O(t)is often referred to as the out-of-bag (OOB)
sample.
Si=ft2Tji2O(t)g. This is the set of trees in which
theith observation is OOB.
vi(t)contains the indices of all observations that end
up in the same terminal node as xiin tree t.
Ji(t) =vi(t)\B(t). This is the set of indices in vi(t)
that correspond with the in-bag observations of t. I.e.,