8
0.00.10.20.30.40.5
0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4
Error Using Training SetTest ErrorProximity
RF−GAP
Original
OOB
PBK
RFProxIH
RF
Fig. 3. Training vs. test error of the proximity-weighted predictions 24
datasets described in the supplemental Table B.1. Errors were aver-
aged across ﬁve runs. We see that the original proximities, PBK, and
RFProxIH, tend to overﬁt the training data, as demonstrated by points
above the line y=x. The random forest errors and RF-GAP nearly
perfectly align in most cases and are each well-described by the line.
original proximities, PBK, and RFProxIH overﬁt the training
data. This is corroborated in Figure 4, which plots the
difference between the random forest out-of-bag error rates
and the proximity-weighted errors across the same datasets,
demonstrating that the RF-GAP predictions nearly perfectly
match those of the random forest for both training and
tests sets. It is clear that the original deﬁnition, PBK, and
RFProxIH generally overﬁt the training data in contrast. We
re-emphasize that PBK and RFProxIH were not intended to
demonstrate the forest’s learning but to use the forest as a
means to construct a similarity measure.
It is well-established that increasing the number of trees
increases the random forest generalization error rate for
standard measures of error [1], [62], while the typical ran-
dom forest default of 500 trees is generally sufﬁcient [55],
[56]. We compared proximity-based predictions for smaller
numbers of trees (5, 10, 50, 100, 250) and demonstrated
that RF-GAP predictions still most accurately match those
of the random forest regardless of forest size. However, for
classiﬁcation problems, tie breaks are more often required
with a small number of trees. Results can be found in
Figure A.5.
In addition to comparing proximity-weighted predic-
tions to the random forest predictions, we compared predic-
tions across the proximity deﬁnitions. Generally, RF-GAP
predictions differed the most from the other proximity-
weighted predictions, especially when using the training
set. This is not surprising as the RF-GAP proximities are
deﬁned to match the random forest OOB predictions. See
more details in Figure A.6.TABLE 1
The regression slopes of each proximity type corresponding to the
points in Figure 3. RF-GAP does not exhibit bias towards the training
data as they have a slope close to one, while the larger slope of the
other proximity deﬁnitions indicates they are overﬁtting the training data.
Type Slope
RF-GAP 1.040
Original 2.434
OOB 1.543
PBK 2.287
RFProxIH 2.147
RFProxIHPBKOOBOriginalRF−GAP
0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4
Proportion of Non−Matching OOB Predictions
RFProxIHPBKOOBOriginalRF−GAP
0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4
Proportion of Non−Matching Test Predictions
Fig. 4. These boxplots show the proportion of proximity-weighted OOB
and test predictions which do not match the respective random forest
predictions. Proximity-based training predictions were compared with
the RF out-of-bag errors. RF-GAP proximity predictions most nearly
match the random forest predictions for both the training (top) and
test (bottom) data, thus, best preserving the geometry learned by the
random forest. Datasets were split into 70% training and 30% test data.
Errors were averaged across 5 runs. The dataset details can be found
in Table B.1.