16
each with a variance of 1. This setup provides a range of variables with varying importance for determining class. The
experiment was repeated 20 times.
The results are shown in Figure A.1. The overall random forest prediction errors are found in Figure A.2. The Original
and OOB proximity predictions more closely match the random forest predictions as the sample size increases, but
this difference does not appear to tend toward zero. It is interesting to note that the original proximities are better
approximations for the random forest test predictions than the OOB proximities, although the reverse is true when
matching the RF OOB predictions. The OOB proximity test and training predictions both appear to be converging to
the same proportion of unmatched random forest predictions for the sample sizes considered. In contrast, the RF-GAP
predictions match the random forest predictions (up to tie breaks) regardless of the sample size.
A.3 RF-GAP and Symmetry
Although the RF-GAP proximities are not symmetric, we show that their symmetry increases with the number of trees
in the forest. We used the same synthetic dataset described in Section A.2 using 500 observations. The experiment was
replicated 10 times. The results are shown in Figure A.3.
5.0e−067.5e−061.0e−05
100 5001000 50001000020000 50000
Number of TreesMSE Between all p(i, j) and p(j, i)Symmetry of RF−GAP
Fig. A.3. Here we show that RF-GAP proximities become more symmetric as the number of trees increases. The data used here had 500
observations with binary class labels and 10 normally-distributed features, as described in Section A.2. The MSE between the proximity matrix
and its transpose was computed across each run. The mean and standard deviations are provided in the scatter plot.
A.4 Minimum Node Size
We show in Figure A.4 that both the random forest and proximity-weighted training errors tend to increase with the
minimum node size. See Section 4 for further discussion.
A.5 Number of Trees
We show to what extent proximity-weighted predictions match the random forest predictions when considering different
sizes of forests. It has been shown that larger forests produce more accurate predictions [1], [62], but there is a consideration
for computational complexity. For all other experiments in this paper, we used the default value of 500 trees to train each
forest. Here, we show that the RF-GAP predictions still match the random forest predictions with small numbers of trees (5,
10, 50, 100, 250). Figure A.5 shows the results compiled across the same 24 datasets described in Table B.1. In the regression
context, the matches are exact. In the classiﬁcation context, we see a decrease in matches as the number of trees decreases.
This is due to an increased need for tie-breaking, which is not needed for regression.
A.6 Agreement Between Proximities
In addition to comparing proximity-weighted predictions with the random forest predictions, we also compared the level
of agreement from proximity to proximity. The proximity-weighted test predictions varied less across proximities, but the
largest differences were found comparing RF-GAP to the others. The original, OOB, and PBK deﬁnitions had the highest
level of agreement for the test predictions, as seen in Figure A.6. Larger discrepancies were found when predicting training
examples. In particular, RF-GAP proximities differed the most from each of the other proximities as their predictions match
the random forest out-of-bag predictions while the others do not.