2
the random forest’s learning. In particular, matching the
random forest’s out-of-bag predictions is a good indication
that the proximities capture the random forest’s learned data
geometry in an unbiased fashion as the out-of-bag samples
were not used to construct the tree. Under Breiman’s orig-
inal deﬁnition, the proximity-weighed predictions do not
match the random forest’s out-of-bag predictions when ap-
plied to the training data (see Section 5). Thus, this deﬁnition
does not capture the data geometry learned by the random
forest, limiting its potential for improved interpretability
of the random forest. Indeed, this inconsistency negatively
affects random forest proximity applications such as data
visualization and imputation.
We deﬁne a new random forest proximity measure
called Random Forest-Geometry- and Accuracy-Preserving
proximities (RF-GAP) that deﬁnes a data geometry such
that the proximity-weighted predictions exactly match those
of the random forest for both regression and classiﬁcation
problems. Under our deﬁnition, an out-of-bag observation’s
proximities are computed via in-bag (training) observations.
That is, the sample used to generate a decision tree also
generates the proximities of out-of-bag observations.
RF-GAP is purposefully designed to match the random
forest predictions and follows the same schema for a classi-
ﬁcation or regression learning problem. Random forests use
in-bag observations or “voting points” [40] within terminal
nodes to make predictions. For our deﬁnition, the prox-
imities between out-of-bag observations are weights gen-
erated using the counts of in-bag observations sharing the
same terminal node. We prove the equivalence between the
proximity-weighted predictions with those of the random
forest and demonstrate this empirically. In this sense, RF-
GAP proximities preserve the data geometry as viewed by
the random forest’s learning. We compare RF-GAP prox-
imities with existing random forest proximities in common
applications: data imputation, visualization, and outlier de-
tection. In these applications, RF-GAP outperforms existing
deﬁnitions, empirically showing clear beneﬁts from the im-
proved random forest geometry representation.
2 R ANDOM FOREST PROXIMITY APPLICATIONS
Random forest proximities have been used in many appli-
cations such as visualization via dimensionality reduction
or clustering. Unsupervised random-forest clustering was
introduced by Shi and Horvath in [41]. In this paper, they
applied both classical and metric multi-dimensional scaling
(MDS) to a number of datasets. Pouyan et al. used un-
supervised random forest proximity matrices to generate
2D plots for visualization using t-SNE [28]. This approach
was used to visualize two Mass cytometry data sets and
provided clearer visual results over other compared distance
metrics (Euclidean, Chebyshev, and Canberra). Similarly,
[30] used an unsupervised random forest for clustering
tumor proﬁlings and showed improvement over other com-
mon clustering algorithms with microarray data. Random
forest proximities have also been used in the supervised
setting for visualizing the data via dimensionality reduction,
typically via MDS [31], [42], but other approaches have
been used [32]. However, these approaches use a proximity
deﬁnition that does not match the data geometry learned bythe random forest. Thus the visualizations do not give an
accurate representation of the random forest’s learning.
Random forest proximities have also been used in outlier
detection in a supervised setting. An observation’s outlier
score is typically deﬁned to be inversely proportional to
its average within-class proximity measure (see Section 6.3
for details). This approach was used to achieve better ran-
dom forest error rates in both classiﬁcation and regres-
sion in pathway analysis [31]. Nesa et al. demonstrated
the superiority of random forests for detecting errors and
events across the internet of things (IoT) device sensors
over other multivariate outlier detection methods [43]. The
random forest outlier detection algorithm has been effective
in other contexts such as modeling species distribution [44],
detecting food adulteration via infrared spectroscopy [45],
predicting galaxy spectral measurements [46], and detecting
network anomalies [47].
Another application of random forest proximities is data
imputation. This is accomplished by replacing missing val-
ues of a given variable with a proximity-weighted sum of
non-missing values. Pantanowitz and Marwala used this
approach to impute missing data in the context of HIV
seroprevalence [38]. They compared their results with ﬁve
additional imputation methods, including neural networks,
and random forest-neural network hybrids, and concluded
that random forest imputation produced the most accurate
results with the lowest standard errors. Shah et al. compared
random forest imputation with multivariate imputation by
chained equations (MICE [48]) on cardiovascular health
records data [39]. They showed that random forest imputa-
tion methods typically produced more accurate results and
that in some circumstances MICE gave biased results under
default parameterization. In [36] it was similarly shown that
random forests produced the most accurate imputation in a
comprehensive metabolomics imputation study.
Variable importance assessment is another application
of random forest proximities. One approach is to use dif-
ferences in proximity measures as a criterion for assessing
variable permutation importance [49]. Variable selection
criteria were compared across various data sets and some
improvement over existing variable importance measures
was achieved. In [50], feature contributions to the random
forest decision space (deﬁned by proximities) are explored.
While many measures of variable importance are generally
computed at a global level, the authors propose a bitwise,
permutation-based feature importance which captures both
the contribution (inﬂuence of the feature in the decision
space) and closeness (position in the decision space rela-
tive to the in- and out-class), giving further insight to the
contribution of each feature at the terminal node level.
Multi-modal/multiview problems can also be ap-
proached using random forest proximities. Gray et al. ad-
ditively combined random forest proximities from different
modalities or views (FDG-PET and MR imaging) of persons
with Alzheimer’s disease or with mild cognitive impair-
ment. They applied MDS to the combined proximities to
create an embedding used for classiﬁcation. Classiﬁcation
on the multi-modal embedding showed signiﬁcantly better
results than classiﬁcation on both modes separately [29].
Cao, Bernard, Sabourin, and Heutte explored variations of
proximity-based classiﬁcation techniques in the context of