4
these are the observations that are in-bag and end up in
the same terminal node as xi.
Mi(t)is the multiset of in-bag indices in the terminal
node shared with the ith observation in tree tincluding
multiplicities.
cj(t)is the in-bag multiplicity of the observation j
in tree t.cj(t) := 0 if observation jis OOB. Thus,PN
j=1cj(t) =N.
The terminal nodes of a random forest partition the input
spaceX. This partition is often used in deﬁning random
forest proximities as in Breiman’s original deﬁnition:
Deﬁnition 1 (Original Random Forest Proximity [17]) .The
random forest proximity between observations iandjis given by:
pOr(i; j) =1
TTX
t=1I(j2vi(t));
where Tis the number of trees in the forest, vi(t)contains the
indices of observations that end up in the same terminal node
asxiin tree t, and I(:)is the indicator function. That is, the
proximity between observations iandjis the proportion of trees
in which they reside in the same terminal node, regardless of
bootstrap status.
Deﬁnition 1 (the original deﬁnition) does not capture the
data geometry learned by the random forest as it does not
take an observation’s bootstrap status (whether or not the
observation was used in the training of any particular tree)
into account in the proximity calculation: both in-bag and
out-of-bag samples are used and equally weighted. In-bag
observations of different classes will necessarily terminate
in different nodes (as trees are grown until pure). Thus
this produces an over-exaggerated class separation in the
proximity values.
Despite these weaknesses, this deﬁnition has been used
for outlier detection, data imputation, and visualization.
However, these applications may produce misleading re-
sults as this deﬁnition tends to overﬁt the training data,
quantiﬁed by low error rates as proximity-weighted pre-
dictors. One attempt to overcome this issue redeﬁnes the
proximity measure between observations iandjusing
only trees in which both observations are out-of-bag (OOB
proximities):
Deﬁnition 2 (OOB Proximity [55], [57]) .The OOB proximity
between observations with indices iandjis given by:
pOOB(i; j) =P
t2SiI(j2O(t)\vi(t))P
t2SiI(j2O(t));
where O(t)denotes the set of indices of the observations that are
out-of-bag in tree t, andSiis the set of trees for which observation
iis out-of-bag. In other words, this proximity measures the
proportion of trees in which observations iandjreside in the
same terminal node, both being out-of-bag.
Deﬁnition 2 [57] is currently used in the
randomForest [55] package by Liaw and Wiener in
theRprogramming language [58]. It may have been
inadvertently used in papers that used this package
but, none made explicit mention of the use of OOB
observations in building proximities. However, we ﬁndthat this deﬁnition also does not characterize the random
forest predictions and generally produces higher error
rates as a proximity-weighted predictor when compared
to the random forest’s OOB error rate (see Section 5). The
reason that the results do not match is two-fold. First,
this deﬁnition does not directly use in-bag observations.
A classiﬁcation or regression forest trains on a training
set (in-bag set) and predicts on an unseen test set (OOB
observations). Thus the OOB proximities are missing a
key factor in the random forest behavior. Second, random
forest predictions are made by voting or averaging in-bag
labels. In contrast, the OOB proximities are generated
without regard to the number of observations within a
given terminal node.
Several alternative random forest proximity measures
beyond Deﬁnitions 1 and 2 have been proposed. In each
case, source code has not been provided. In [59], the authors
deﬁne a proximity-based kernel (PBK) that accounts for the
number of branches between observations in each decision
tree, deﬁning the proximity between iandjaspPBK(i; j) =
1
TPT
t=11
ewgijt, where Tis the number of trees in the forest,
wis a user-deﬁned parameter, and gijtis the number of
branches between observations iandjin tree t.gis deﬁned
to be 0 if the observations reside in the same terminal node.
The proximity quality was quantiﬁed using the classiﬁcation
accuracy when applied as a kernel in a support-vector
machine. This deﬁnition showed some improvement over
the original deﬁnition (Deﬁnition 1) only when considering
very small numbers of trees (5 or 10). It should be noted
that this kernel is an attempt to improve random-forest-
based similarity measures and not necessarily to explain the
random forest. However, PBK is computationally expensive
as all pair-wise branch distances must be computed within
each tree. This is not an issue for small numbers of trees,
but typically the number of trees in a random forest is
measured in hundreds ( randomForest [55] has a default
of 500 trees). Additionally, this method adds a user-deﬁned,
tunable parameter which adds to its complexity.
The authors in [60] describe an approach for computing
random forest proximities in the context of a larger class
of Random Partitioning Kernels. While most random forest
proximities are determined primarily through associations
within terminal nodes, this approach selects a random tree
height and partitions the data based on this higher-level
splitting. The authors do not compare with other proximity
deﬁnitions nor do they frame their work in the context
of random forest proximities, but they do compare this
random forest kernel to other typical kernels (linear, RBF,
etc.) using a log-likelihood test. The random forest kernel
outperformed the others in most cases and the authors
visually demonstrated their kernel using 2D PCA plots. The
code for this approach is not publicly available.
Cao et al. introduced two random forest dissimilarity
measures that were used in the context of multi-view
classiﬁcation [61]. The ﬁrst measure (denoted RFDisNC)
weights the proximity values by the proportion of correctly-
classiﬁed observations within each node, accounting for
both in- and out-of-bag observations. The second (RFDisIH)
is based on instance hardness. Euclidean distances between
observations at each terminal node are calculated using
only feature variables that were used as splitting variables