21
Group setosa, Correct versicolor, Correct versicolor, Incorrect virginica, Correct virginica, Incorrect
RF−GAP Original OOB PBK RFProxIH
Fig. A.10. Fisher’s Iris dataset [63] with MDS applied to the random forest proximities. Here, the point size is proportional to the outlier score
provided by each method. In each case, observations with high outlier scores corresponded to misclassiﬁed points.
Group1, Correct
1, Incorrect2, Correct
2, Incorrect3, Correct
3, Incorrect
RF−GAP Original OOB PBK RFProxIH
Fig. A.11. The seeds dataset compares three varieties of wheat seeds using geometric properties (e.g., width, length) as features. The OOB
and RF-GAP proximities produce more cluster-like structures, vs. the branching seen by the other deﬁnitions. RF-GAP clearly shows why the
misclassiﬁcations are taking place.
measures with a single iteration. For each dataset, values were removed completely at random in amounts of 5%, 10%, 25%,
50%, and 75%. The PBK proximities were omitted from this study due to their slow computational complexity. Additionally,
some datasets were not compatible with RFProxIH due to continuous responses or categorical features.
Missing values were imputed using the three proximity deﬁnitions and only a single iteration. The experiment was
repeated 100 times for each dataset. For each repetition, the same missing data was used across each of the three
proximity types. The mean squared error (MSE) is almost universally lower when using RF-GAP for imputation. Even
when outperformed, RF-GAP usually ranks second place. Refer to the ranking summary in Table 2. The Banknote,
Ionosphere, Optical Digits, Sonar, and Waveform datasets particularly show good examples of RF-GAP for imputation.
In these examples, RF-GAP outperforms each of the other deﬁnitions and the error decreases monotonically.
Figures A.13, A.14, and A.15 show imputation results across multiple iterations. Each experiment was repeated 5 times
Group 1, Correct 1, Incorrect 2, Correct 2, Incorrect 3, Correct
RF−GAP Original OOB PBK RFProxIH
Fig. A.12. The wine dataset consists of three classes (corresponding to locations of cultivation) and 13 features. The tight clusters of each class
using the original, PBK, and RFProxIH proximities suggests overﬁtting to the training data. It seems RF-GAP may show more sensitivity to outliers.