11
GroupBRCA, Correct
COAD, CorrectKIRC, Correct
KIRC, IncorrectLUAD, Correct
LUAD, IncorrectPRAD, Correct
RF−GAP Original OOB PBK RFProxIH
Fig. 7. MDS applied to the random forest proximities computed from the Gene Expression Cancer dataset from UCI [63]. The point sizes are
inversely proportional to the average proximity of a given observation to all other within-class observations. The misclassiﬁcations in RF-GAP , and
OOB, are understandable based on the distance from their respective clusters. The original proximities and RFProxIH do not clearly account for the
misclassiﬁed points. The outlier measure scaling in RF-GAP gives a clear reﬂection of the distance of points to their respective clusters.
Fig. 8. A sorted plot of the outlier measures for the MNIST dataset
as provided by RF-GAP . The vertical axis is the outlier measure as
described in Section 6.3. The top seven outlying images are labeled
with an index and shown in Figure 9.
Index: 2136
Label: 6Index: 6652
Label: 0Index: 4202
Label: 1Index: 1248
Label: 9
Index: 4177
Label: 2Index: 2190
Label: 9Index: 1774
Label: 1
Fig. 9. The top seven outlying digits per RF-GAP (see Figure 8). Some
of these digits may even be difﬁcult for a human to classify, corroborating
the RF-GAP outlier score.7 C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we presented a new deﬁnition of random
forest proximities called RF-GAP that characterizes the ran-
dom forest out-of-bag prediction results using a weighted
nearest neighbor predictor. We proved that the performance
of the proximity-weighted predictor exactly matches the
out-of-bag prediction results of the trained random forest
and also demonstrated this relationship empirically. Thus,
RF-GAP proximities capture the random forest-learned data
geometry which provides empirical improvements over
other existing deﬁnitions in applications such as proximity-
weighted prediction, missing data imputation, outlier detec-
tion, and visualization.
Additional random forest proximity applications can be
explored in future works, including quantifying outlier de-
tection performance, comparing with non-tree-based meth-
ods, assessing variable importance, and applying RF-GAP to
multi-view learning. This latter application shows promise
as classiﬁcation accuracy was greatly increased after com-
bining proximities in [29], [51] using other deﬁnitions. An
interesting visualization application was introduced in [32]
which may see improvements using geometry-preserving
proximities. Multi-view learning may also be paired with
this approach in some domains to visualize and assess con-
tributions from the various modes or to perform manifold
alignment.
An additional area of improvement is scalability. Our
approach is useful for datasets with a few thousand obser-
vations, but we can expand its capabilities by implementing
a sparse version of RF-GAP . Further adaptations may make
random forest proximity applications accessible for even
larger datasets.
REFERENCES
[1] L. Breiman, “Random forests,” Mach. Learn. , vol. 45, no. 1, pp. 5–
32, Oct. 2001.
[2] A. Cutler, D. R. Cutler, and J. R. Stevens, Random Forests . Boston,
MA: Springer US, 2012, pp. 157–175.
[3] L. Benali, G. Notton, A. Fouilloy, C. Voyant, and R. Dizene, “Solar
radiation forecasting using artiﬁcial neural network and random
forest methods: Application to normal beam, horizontal diffuse
and global components,” Renewable Energy , vol. 132, pp. 871–884,
2019.