the PPIPA 13.  In contrast, the HRIP focuses on health information with the purpose of 
“promot ing fair and responsible handling of health information” in particular 14. Such a 
governance structure (personal information + health information) is arguably 
consistent with the structure of our observations in the series of topic analyses  (data 
privacy + healthcare data privacy). This may arguably serve as prima facie evidence 
on the accuracy and reliability of our system.  
Other concerns are mainly related to machine ethics (23%) and fairness (20%). 
Specifically, machine ethics touches on a wide range of topics relating to the morality 
of intelligent machines (e.g., AI cars), how to uphold human rights with robots, and the consciousness of machines. These  discussions reflect the potential fears of the 
general public relating to these unknown but extremely smart machines and the 
dilemma between technology  and ethics.  On the other hand, fairness  indicates  the 
unease of the general public as to  whether AI models can generate fair decisions in 
diverse scenarios. Articles related to AI strategy mainly talk about how to regulate this 
new AI world in a power -shifting theme  (e.g., how to seek a balance between human 
beings and intelligent machines)  and how shall  national strategies and military actions 
involv e in the development of AI techniques.  
In addition to a  general discussion on the issues surrounding AI ethics, surveillance 
seems  to be a n increasing concern , where the authors of these articles call for the  
review and regulation of AI surveillance systems, regardless of  whether  they are used 
for national security, industrial monitoring, or research/individual use.  
5. C onclusions  
In this paper, w e analy zed articles indexed in the Web of Science to investigate the 
ethical issues surrounding AI which are becoming an increasing concern not only to 
academia but also the general public.  We identified the key affiliations, 
countries/regions , and research communities which contribute  to the research on the 
ethical issues surrounding AI via a series of co- occurrence analysis on bibliographical 
information of the  collected articles. We then profiled the AI ethical issues in both 
hierarchical and time dimensions via  intelligent bibliometric approaches, including 
topical hierarchical trees and scientific evolutionary pathways , which helped us answer 
the questions as to  what are the specific ethical issues of concern relating to AI  are 
and how has society’s interests in these issues  changed over time. W e specifically 
concentrated on  the most recent  articles published in Nature , Science , and PNAS , and 
discovered the current urgent issues of interest to the AI ethics  community . We expect 
that the  insightful findings identified in  this study will support the understanding of the 
AI community in relation to AI ethics, especially in profiling the hidden ethical issues 
behind specific  AI techniques. Such findings, bridging the knowledge base of AI 
 
13 S4A states: ‘Except as provided by this Act or the Health Records and Information Privacy Act 
2002,  the definition of "personal information" in section 4 does not include health information within 
the meaning of the Health Records and Information Privacy Act 2002 ’. 
14 See s3 of the HRIP.