4.2. Landscapes and evolution of AI ’s ethic al topics  
In this section, we move our foci to topic analyses by analyzing #1 dataset collected 
from the WoS All Databases . We initially retrieved 93,364 terms from the combined 
titles and abstracts of the 4,375 articles, and we conducted a term clumping process 
[13] to remove noise and consolidate the technical synonyms, reducing  the total 
number of  terms to 52,054. Then, we used the 2,163 terms appearing in more than 2 
articles as the core set of terms to generate the topical hierarchical tree (THT) shown 
in Figure 7 and the map of the scientific evolutionary pathways  (SEP)  shown in Figure 
8. 
Figure 7 enhances the understanding of the details of AI ethical issues , especially  
the connections between specific AI techniques and ethical concerns.  Among its 71 
nodes, the THT lists 27 AI techniques (e.g., machine learning) and AI-driven 
applications, devices, and products (e.g., robots and autonomous vehicles), 28 ethical topics (e.g., fairness and discrimination), and 16 societal topics (most of them in relation to medical and healthcare issues) . The four main branches of this THT  
represent  four major issues relating to AI ethics, that is, #1 AI techniques and potential 
ethical issues, #2 technological and political implications of AI ethics, #3 data privacy, and #4 privacy in healthcare. We discuss these four issues in detail : 
#1 AI techniques and potential ethical issues : Figure 7 reveals  the key AI techniques 
that may raise  ethical concerns , such as  machine learning  (including deep learning, 
computer vision, neural networks, natural language processing, etc.) , ontologies, 
communication technologies, and neuroscience
10. Machine learning, one of the key 
areas  in AI, shares close connections with almost all AI techniques, and thus attracts 
the most attention in this THT  and are connected with all ethical issues , such as 
fairness, discrimination, liability, frauds, and criminals11. It is easy to explain these 
cases. For example, applying AI models to make decisions entails  justiciable “right to 
a well- calibrated machine decision” [45, 46] , AI-driven fraud in social media, political 
elections, and financial markets  (e.g., fake videos and identifications manipulated by 
AI techniques, such as image processing and face recognition)  have become a major 
concern [47] . How to validate AI recommendations with human knowledge in actual 
cases, such as clinical practice , is challenging both the AI community and the 
receptivity of the general publi c [48]. A brand- new topic, brain  computer interface is 
attracting increasing attention from the public, and ethical issues (such as privacy) and related regulations are appearing in public reading materials  [49]. 
#2 technological and political implicati ons of AI ethics : As an extension of the ethical 
issues in #1, #2 further extends AI’s influence from ethics to the broad society through 
specific technological and political implications, such as sustainability, responsibility, and digitalization.  From the  perspective of a complex ecosystem, these societal 
 
10 Neuroscience here mostly refers to techniques of  brain computer interface.  
11 We note that fairness is one constraint in evaluating reinforcement learning approaches and fraud 
detection is a specific task of machine learning, and thus these variations might introduce noise to our 
analysis.