4. Results  
We investigated AI ethics and privacy  by analyzing the articles published in the past 
few decades ( as detailed in our search strategy and data information in Table 1) , and 
we answered the following questions : who are the key players  (e.g., research 
institutions and universities, countries/regions, and research communities ) 
contributing  to the research on the ethical  and privacy  issues relating to AI , from a 
topical perspective what are AI ethics  in detail and how  has the interest of academia 
in these issues changed over time, and what are current emerging issues relating to 
AI ethics.  
4.1. Key players contributing to the work on AI ethics  
We utilized the full bibliographical information provided by the WoS Core Collection 
and analyzed the #3 dataset to identify  1) the key players contributing to the work on 
the ethical and privacy issues relating to AI and their collaborative patterns and 
geographical distribution, and 2) disciplinary interactions in relation to the ethical and 
privacy issues surrounding AI, and the key sources cited by AI ethics -related research 
articles.  Note that #3 is a sub- dataset of #1 but  considering the WoS Core Collection  
database  for indexing ‘high- quality’ research articles, despite possible missing data, 
this key entity analysis should be representative of  the standard of current research 
on AI ethics.  
Table 2 lists the top 15 most productive9 affiliations  (including their countries) 
contributing  to the work on AI ethics  and Figures 3 and 4 visualize the collaborative 
patterns between these affiliations  (a total of  3,377 affiliations)  and between the top 
30 countries/regions , respectively . The following observations can be made: 1) the 
USA dominates in this area in both the total number of relevant publications and the 
number of productive affiliations ; 2) English -speaking countries, such as the UK, 
Australia, and Canada have a  strong interest  in AI ethics  and the fact that the top 15 
productive affiliations are from English- speaking countries  further supports  this 
observation; 3) China is ranked the third m ost productive country  however no other 
Asian countries appear  in this list. Comparably , European countries such as Germany, 
the Netherlands, Italy, Spain, and France, as a union, produce a large volume of 
research on this topic.  
Table 2. Top 15 affiliations and countries contributing to the work on AI ethics  
  # R Affiliation  Country    # R Country  
1 70 Univ Oxford  UK 1 1011  USA 
2 43 Stanford Univ  USA 2 496 UK 
3 37 Univ Edinburgh  UK 3 266 China  
4 30 MIT USA 4 216 Australia  
5 30 UCL USA 5 198 Canada  
6 29 Univ Toronto  Canada  6 193 Germany  
7 28 NYU  USA 7 153 Netherlands  
 
9 The productivity in this work was decided based on the total number of articles published by a given 
entity (e.g., affiliations in Table 2 and publication sources in Table 3).