Particularly, n ote that, since the above discussed principals of AI ethics, concluded 
by diverse parties and from diverse aspects, classified privacy as one specific  
element/principal  of ethics, in this paper we follow this line and mainly use AI ethics 
as a set of these ethical and privacy issues in relation to AI.  
2.4. Bibliometrics  and topic extraction  
Modern bibliometrics can be traced back to the observations of Derek Price on the 
patterns of scientific activities  [27]. Early definitions of bibliometrics emphasize “the 
application of mathematic s and statistical methods to books and other media of 
communication [28]”, involving indicators such as citation/co -citation statistics, word 
co-occurrence, and co- authorships  [15]. The increasing diversity of practical data 
sources rapidly extends the scope of bibliometric data from books to a wide range of 
information resources in science, technology and innovation, such as research articles, 
patents, and academic proposals, as well as to social media data (e.g., Twitter ) [29]. 
Information technologies, especially AI techniques, further strengthen the capabilities 
of bibliometrics in analyzing scalable data with enhanced efficiency, effectiveness, and 
robustness . In this area , some of our pilot studies are spearheading a cross -
disciplinary approach that develops computational models incorporating bibliometric 
indicators with AI techniques , which we call intelligent bibliometrics [30] . 
Topic extraction  identifies  abstract topics from a collection of documents  to 
represent the major content , using either  clustering or classification algorithms  [31]. 
Topic extraction is also of significant  interest to the bibliometric community, in which 
citation statistics and textual elements are heavily used  [8, 32] . These extracted topics 
represent ed by either a sub- collection of documents or a set of terms hold recognized 
capabilities  in knowledge interpretation and exploration, e.g., profiling  research 
disciplines  and technological areas  [7, 33], identifying latent relationships  [10, 15, 34] , 
and predicting potential future changes in either collaborative patterns or research 
interests [35-37]. However, regarding the characteristics of bibliometric documents 
and the urgent need to interpret topics in  depth, we anticipate two emergent directions 
of topic extraction: 1) since research topics are constantly changing (e.g., cross -/inter -
/multi -disciplinary interactions) rather than being stable [15], extracting topics and 
discoverin g their relationships from a dynamic perspective could be practically 
significant for not only the bibliometric community but also business and management 
studies ; and  2) hierarchy is an innate structure of knowledge composition, as well as 
topics . Thus, profiling topics from a hierarchical  dimension would provide an extensive 
understanding of its related knowledge base  [38]. Even though it is  not a new task for 
the computer science discipline, a balance between non -parametric solutions and 
explainable results is still elusive.