Artificial Intelligence  (Recommendations)3 in September 2020, which sets up ten 
important Principles of the Ethics of AI, including: p roportionality and do no hard, safety 
and security, fairness and non- discrimination, sustainability, p rivacy, human oversight 
and determination, transparency and expandability, responsibly and accountability, 
awareness and literacy, and multi -stakeholder and adaptive governance and 
collaboration.   
2.2. Privacy, data privacy, and AI privacy  
Privacy, as one of ten important Principles of the Ethics of AI developed by the 
UNESCO,  may deserve a particular attention. In legal and philosophical literature, 
privacy has been defined in a variety of ways, for example,  privacy is “the right to be 
let alone”, as a component of personhood, control over personal information, and the 
right to secrecy  [6].  
Together with the big data boom and AI age, data privacy4 and control over 
personal information arguably becomes increasingly important aspects of privacy 
protection, and AI brings further threats to privacy protection [22]. Kerry  (2020)  
observed that AI expands the ability to use personal  information in ways that can 
infringe on privacy interests by bringing personal data analysis to new levels of power and speed [23].
 
2.3. Ethical dilemma of AI academia  
As discussed above, ethical dilemmas may exist almost every aspect of human lives, 
including personal, social, and professional. A cademia certainly cannot be exempted 
from this either . The AI community  not only contributes to the development of  novel AI 
techniques but also respon ds to these increasing concerns about  ethical dilemmas  as 
evidenced by the large number of review papers in academic journals and online monographies  on this issue.  Jobin et al.  [24] conducted a meta -analysis  for 84 core 
documents that discuss ethical principles  or guidelines for AI , highlighting eleven 
universal principals for AI ethics: transparency, justice, fairness & equity, non-maleficence, privacy, trust, responsibility, accountability, beneficence, sustainability, and solidarity.  Unfortunately, how to apply these  principles  and abstract guidelines  to 
actual practice is still elusive , and the lack of reinf orcement mechanisms (e.g., 
concrete technical methods and algorithms)  to translate these principles into practice  
remains  an unsolved challenge  [25, 26] . 
Such endeavors  motivate  us to conduct a bibliometric study to systematically 
analyze an extensive collection of research articles on ethical dilemma of AI academia,  
not only  to profile these principles and guidelines but also to discover  their potential 
connections with specific AI techniques. These could provide insightful knowledge to 
guide the AI community  in developing AI techniques and/or applying them in practice.  
 
3 UNESCO, Outcome document: first draft of the Recommendation on the Ethics of Artificial 
Intelligence at https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000373434  
4 Despite differences between data privacy and information privacy in the legal  literature, we do not 
specifically distinguish the two terms in this paper.