which  build the core knowledge pillars on the fundamental research and 
applications  of AI, together with “engineering, electri cal & electronic”, “computer 
science, hardware & software”, and “computer science, software engineering” , 
form the technical backbone of AI  (red nodes) . Its key application areas in 
“medical informatics” and “health care sciences & services”  further extend this 
technical scope (light green nodes) .  
• Ethical  issues (purple and grey -blue nodes)  are discussed in extensive 
categories of social sciences, such as “ethics”, “history & philosophy of science”, 
“philosophy ”, “medical ethics”, and “social sciences, biomedical”.  As 
supplementary sources , “information science & library science”, “managemen t”, 
and “economics” provide analytic approaches  (brown nodes) , while the 
engagement of “regional & urban planning”, “environmental studies”, “political science” , and “education & educational research” involves new application  
scenarios  (blue nodes ).   
To track the knowledge flow through the citation behaviors of the 3,259 articles, we 
collected  their references and retrieved 51,431 journals.  The co -occurrence 
relationships of these cited journals are visualized in Figure 6, providing a new angle 
to identify  the research communities contributing to the research on AI ethical issues. 
We raise the following points:  
• Relatively clear boundaries among five communities  indicate an established 
knowledge system on AI ethics , namely  computer science (purple nodes), 
information system s and management (red nodes), medical sciences  and multi -
disciplinary studies  (green nodes),  and law and general magazines  (blue nodes) . 
• Leading journals play an active role in bridging cross -disciplines,  and the 
publication of AI ethics in reputable newspapers and magazines assists in increasing the awareness of the general public in these issues.  The following 
publications  construct  the backbone of this knowledge system : Nature, Science, 
PNAS, PloS One , JAMA , New England Journal of Medicine, Lecture Notes in 
Computer Science, Communication of ACM , Big Data & Society , Information 
Communication & Society , Guardian, New York Times , Ethics and Information 
Technology , and Science and Engineering Ethics . 
In conclusion, in this section we identified the key players ( e.g., research institutions  
and communities) which contribute to the research on the ethical issues surrounding AI and the countries/regions where this research is being undertaken.  Such insights 
draw a landscape to support the understanding of “who” has  been involved in the study 
of AI ethics and “how” they have contribute d to this topic. In particular , we highlighted 
the role of cross- disciplinary research publications  (e.g., Communications of ACM , and 
Lecture Notes in Computer Science),  multi -disciplinary research journals (e.g., Nature  
and Science ), and newspapers (e.g., New York Times ) in gradually transferring 
technical AI knowledge to inform  public concerns on ethics.