data, as well as data sharing and security.  In 2020, following the topic of bioethics, 
gene editing, the winner  of the 2020 Nobel Biology  prize , attracted the attention  of this 
community. 
As a conclusion for the SEP, 1) data privacy is an urgent topic  relating to AI ethics, 
particularly when data contain sensitive personal information, with  clinical trials and 
genomics ; 2) the increasing threats and fears in relation to AI-driven fraud and 
cybercrime are draw ing attention; and 3) the reliability , transparency, and fairness of 
AI models  are still unsolved issues . 
As discussed and highlighted in the THT and SEP, of particular interest to the AI 
community is the discovery of  potential conflicts between AI techniques and specific 
ethical issues , and thus, referring to our search strategy  (Table 1) and terms appearing 
in Figures 7 and 8, we selected 15 AI technique- related terms  and 17 AI eth ics-related 
terms, and visualized their co- occurrence relationships in Figure 9. We discuss these 
AI techniques and their closely connected ethical issues in the following:   
• Machine learning as a representative technique, including deep learning, 
reinforcement learning, and neural networks, touches all 17 ethical issues, 
particularly, fairness, accountability, and privacy. Despite different emphases, 
data mining  and cloud tech nologies  follow similar patterns.  In this area , all 
concerns come to the balance between AI decisions and the mechanism behind that decision (e.g., data collection and algorithmic transparency).  
• Computer vision (including face recognition and imagine processing techniques) 
is raising concerns from the general public . These are directly linked with crime 
(regarding manipulated fake images and videos and surveillance systems used  
for national and domestic security detection) and accountability issues.  
• Robots, as an engineering- driven AI application, draw attention in relation to  
machine ethics, responsibility, accountability, liability, and privacy, as  do 
autonomous vehicles . Since political regulations for those intelligent machines 
lag its technological progress, the general public worries about the reliability of 
these new technologies (e.g., the safety of an autonomous car) , and broad 
ethical and moral issues (e.g., how shall we charge a machine with a crime , and 
who is liable for a failure).  
• Blockchain techniques, an interdisciplinary area with both AI hardware and 
software, attract criticism in relation to accountabilit y and sustainability.  In fact, 
from a public point of view, blockchain techniques are heavily involved in the internet of things, and thus, compared to traditional ethical issues, sustainability is a special concern in this area . 
• Neuroscience, as a discipline for techniques in brain computer interface, represents current AI activities in collecting personal information, in  clinical trials, 
healthcare records, genomic data, and brain signals. Despite great potential in benefiting hu man beings in precision  medicine, disability and accessibility 
services, and smart home, critical concerns align with privacy and responsibility.