in 2016 and after . One interesting aspect  here is the involvement of face recognition 
techniques in cyber criminals, and the ‘dee pfake’ story  12 may well endorse this 
observation, in which an AI mobile app can insert faces in place of film and TV 
characters  and may result in fraud  by defeating the ‘Face ID’ function in smart phones.  
The other aspect for computer vision is its use in law enforcement  (e.g., surveillance 
systems) for crime detection in national security activities. However, such techniques 
violate personal privacy in these practical uses.  
The study of m achine ethics ( #3) results in a timeline  showing how public concerns 
about social media privacy  have changed over time – e.g., from illicit activities of social 
media platforms  in 2016  to responsibility  one year later , and from a governance 
framework  in 2019 to regulations in relation to ethical behaviors and dimensions  in 
2020.  
From anonymity in 2004, #4 develops into a relatively broad scope of ethical 
concerns in research and health data ( e.g., potential influence of electronic health 
records) , data protection, and privacy . In the other main branch of this community, 
from a technical perspective, autonomous vehicles and cognitive capabilities could act 
as open data source s and benefits, but interestingly,  how to protect sensitive 
information in open data initiatives has becom e an issue  as well and cybersecurity 
further strengthens such protection  [52]. 
#5 is a community investigating  the traditional base of information systems, in which 
multi- agent systems  and intelligent systems were  involved before 2014.  After this, 
increased  constraints  such as accountability, confidentiality , and sustainability  to 
evaluate the capabilities of information systems  indicate the emerging interests of this 
research community . Particularly, rooted in accountability, new concerns  on 
monetization of data were raised in 2019, inspiring global -wide debates on diverse 
aspects, from political governance  to legal and financial regulations. 
#6 is an extension of decision -making in diverse scenarios  such as  health care and 
medical data and with diverse theories, concepts, and techniques, such as ontology, 
neuroscience, and game theory, but in this path, human morality, together with human factors and misleading information, is specifically highlighted . Another highlight  here 
regards to neurosciences. As we discussed in Figure 7, brain computer interface may 
align with this topic, which analyzes brain signals and makes decisions  for human 
beings , and such activities attract comments on human morality – [49] quotes  from 
one of its interviewed ethicists, a device of brain computer interface “was more than a device…the company owned the existence of this new person”. Thus, it is critical to discuss how to regulate these  new AI device s. 
#7 contains the largest number of emerging topics generated in recent years and 
ethical issues in clinical practice are a key concern not only to academia but also to 
the general public.  Like our discussion of  #4, such concerns  mostly revolve around the 
illegal use of various personal data, such as health records, clinical data, and genomic 
 
12 See details of this news on the website: https://www.bbc.com/news/technology -49570418