questions as to what is the topical landscape and how have these topics evolve d over 
time, using an approach of  scientific evolutionary  pathways  [15]. We also target ed a 
core set of articl es published in three world- leading multi -disciplinary journals , namely 
Science , Nature , and Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences  (PNAS) of 
the United States of America , and identified cutting -edge issues that might either  focus 
attention  on emergent ethical  and privacy  issues in the current AI age or  lead to novel 
developments in AI models to address any potential negative impacts.  We anticipate 
that the empirical insights identified  in this study will motivate the AI community to 
extensively and comprehensively discuss the ethical and privacy issues surrounding  
AI and will guide the implementation of AI in line with an ethical framework . 
The rest  of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 presents a review of the 
related work on AI ethics , privacy,  and bibliometrics ; Section 3 introduces the data and 
methodologies used in this study ; Section 4 presents  the results, and our key findings  
and Section 5 concludes the study and suggests future research directions .  
2. Related work  
In this section, w e review  the current debate  on the ethical  and privacy  issues 
surrounding AI  and then briefly introduce the bibliometrics and topic analysis used in 
this study.  
2.1. Ethics, ethical dilemma,  and AI ethics  
In philosophy, ethics describes “ what is good for the individual and for society” , as 
well as the essence of “ duties that people owe themselves and one another ” [16], while 
ethical dilemma refers to certain ethical problems can be extremely complicated and 
the challenges they bring cannot be easily solved.  Ever- improving technologies bring 
along with multiple advantages to human society , but they may also “ generate 
downside risks and challenges, including more complicated ethical dilemma 2. This is 
true with AI technologies.  
With the rapid growth in AI techniques in recent decades, there has been increasing 
controversy over the impact of AI on the daily lives of human beings, for example, the  
potential  for robots to replace  human labor  [17], the accountability and accident risk of 
driverless vehicles  [18], the self -awareness and behavior autonomy of robotics [19] , 
and possible fraud  caused by deep- fake videos and photos  [20]. Such concerns in 
relation to the ethics around AI has attracted attention from global federal governments 
and corporations , in particular, tech giants  such as  Google and SAP , when those 
corporations are willing to form national and industrial committee  to formulate AI ethics 
guidelines  [21]. An increasing number of international organizations have also started 
to take actions to address the ethical challenges brought by AI technology.  As one of 
the most recent development s, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural 
Organization (UNESCO) has issued its first draft of Recommendatio n on the Ethics of 
 
2 the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, Elaboration of a 
Recommendation on the ethics of artificial intelligence at https://en.unesco.org/artificial -
intelligence/ethics