1. Introduction 
A pandora’s box of  artificial intelligence  (AI) has been opened and these disruptive 
technologies  are transforming the daily lives of human beings  in relation to new ways 
of thinking and behavioral  patterns, with enhanced capabilities  and efficiency.  There 
are many examples of AI applications  in use today , such as  smart homes [1] smart 
farming [2], precision medicine [3] and healthcare surv eillance systems [4] .The ethic al 
and privacy issues  surroundin g the use of AI have been a topic of growing interest 
among diverse communities. For example, the general public has expressed concern 
about the impact of the increased use of robots on unemployment and inequality  [5], 
social scientists have raised deep privacy concern s related to  surveillance  systems [6], 
and limited  regulation of social media has raised debate with  technical giants on the 
abuse of private data1. Despite  these  concerns, the AI community  stands behind the 
efficiency and robustness of their AI models  and there is an urgent need to guide the 
research community to understand these  ethical  and privacy  challenges. 
Bibliometrics, which is  a set of approaches for analyzing scientific documents (e.g., 
research articles, patents, and academic proposals), has  been widely used  as a tool  
for science, technology and innovation studies [7] , such as identifying technological 
topics [8], discovering latent relationships  [9], and predicting potential future trends  
[10]. Recently , AI has received recognition in bibliometrics as  an emerging topic for 
empirical investigation  [11, 12] . These  investigations  either  align with the interest  in 
technology management  (e.g., using  AI as a representative case in digital 
transformation)  or emphasize its role in examining the reliability of the proposed 
methods . However, from a practical perspective, a bibliometric  guide which 
summarizes ideas , assumptions, and debate  in the literature would bring significant 
benefits  to the AI community , not only by highlighting the ethical  and privacy  concerns 
raised by the public but also by identifying the potential conflicts between AI 
techniques and these issues of concern . 
To address these concerns, this paper reports on  a bibliometric study to  
comprehensively profile  the key ethical and privacy issues discussed in the research 
articles  and to trace  how such issues  have changed over the past few decades.  We 
integrated a set of  intelligent bibliometric approaches within a framework for diverse 
analy ses. To identify  the key entities , i.e., the leading research institutions and their 
affiliated countries and regions, and the core research journals  and their behind 
research communities,  which report  the ethical  and privacy  issues surrounding A I, we 
used  co-occurrence statistics with diverse bibliographical indicators (e.g., authors, 
affiliations, and sources). With specific  foci in  topic analysis, we initially retrieved terms 
from the combined titles and abstracts of collected articles  and used  a term clu mping 
process [13] to remove  noisy terms  and consolidat e technical synonyms. In parallel, 
we represented each word in the combined field with titles and abstracts as a vector 
using the Word2Vec model [14]  and combined  the word vectors into term vectors by 
matching the core terms refined in  the term clumping process.  We answer ed the 
 
1 More informati on can be found on the website: https://www.bbc.com/news/business -49099364