techniques and ethical discussion in public debates, will be of interest to audiences in 
science policy, technology management, and public administration .  
5.1. Key findings  
Referring to Tables 2 and 3, t his paper found that the key contributors to the 
research on the ethical issues relating to AI  were English -speaking countries such as 
the USA, UK, Australia, and Canada . In comparison, China and the European 
countries  contribute to this research area as well,  but their key research institutions 
are not as equally appealing as those of English- speaking countries.  According to 
Figure 4, intriguingly , those countries mak ing the major contribution to the research on 
AI ethical issues , namely the USA, UK, and China, mostly engage in domestic 
collaboration, however certain European countries , such as Austria, Belgium and 
Sweden, seem to prefer international collaboration. 
In Figures 5 and 6, t he ethical issues relating to AI cover a wide range of disciplines 
(i.e., 199 of the 254 WoS categories), and four research communities play an active 
role in the research associated with AI ethical issues , namely computer science, 
business and management, medical science, and law. The involvement of 
newspapers and magazines in publishing research on AI ethical issues indicates the interest of the general public  in these matters . 
In terms of topic analysis  in Sections 4.2 and 4.3, key AI techniques such as 
machine learning, data analysis, robots and intelligent systems, and cloud technologies,  generate concerns about the ethical issues relating to AI. Fairness, as 
well as discrimination, are among those key concerns  because AI models are applied 
in decision support in diverse scenarios. Data privacy, particularly in the healthcare 
and medical sectors, is a cause of increasing concern. Cybercrime and fraudulent 
behavior  are particularly concerning in the absence of appropriate support from the 
law and regulations. Machine ethics are mostly related to robots, autonomous cars, 
and intelligent machines, highlighting a balance between machine conscious ness  and 
human rights.  
5.2. Limitations and future directions  
We anticipate the future directions of this study by addressing the following 
limitations: 1) Instead of  research publications, f urther broad discussion on AI ethics 
might take place on social media platforms, such as Twitter, Facebook, and 
mainstream medias (e.g.,  BBC and CNN) , and thus, future studies could integrate 
these sources with traditional bibliometric data broadening the study for more comprehensive results ; 2) Although  the WoS All Databases provide a rich collection 
of various types of articles, not all articles (e.g., news) contain abstracts and missing 
abstracts might influence the algorithmic precision and topical coverage of our topic 
analyses ; 3) The labeling strategy (e.g., how to label a node  or a tree branch) is still a 
challenging issue in text analysis -based bibliometrics, and the balance between 
algorithmic logic and semantic s may heavily influence the understanding of the results ; 
and 4) since the key idea of bibliometrics is to quantitatively explore items, patterns,