3. Data and methodology  
3.1. Data  
The Web of Science (WoS)5 owned  by Clarivate  is a well- recognized integrative 
platform of bibliometric data sources . Of these , the WoS  All Databases covers all the 
WoS’s subscribed resources  which we used as our primary data source  when 
considering AI ethics as an emerging topic covering both natural sciences and social 
sciences. I ts major debates exist not only in journal articles but also in a wide range of 
resources (e.g., conference proceedings, and other types of research publications6). 
Our special interest is in the ethical issues surrounding AI  at both the macro and micro 
levels . Thus, topic analyses would focus on the WoS All Databases.  In addition, since 
the WoS Core Collection databas e provides a cleaned  form of full bibliographical 
information (e.g., author affiliations, countries/regions, and forward and backward 
citations ), we particularly focused on an analysis of the key entities  that contribute to 
the research on AI ethics  and the interactions between these entities . Comparably, the 
WoS All Database covers a relatively  “full” collection of various types of articles in  WoS, 
with a priority on data coverage, but the WoS Core Collection only contains journal 
articles collected in selective  indexes (e.g., Science Citation Index), highlighting the 
quality of its data collection.  In other words , the WoS Core Collection is a subset of the 
WoS All Database , with a filt ered data collection.  
Referring to the literature discussed in Sections 2.1- 2.3 on AI ethics , together with 
the IEEE ’s Ethically Aligned Design  [39] and the AI Ethics Principles  reported by 
Australia’s Department of Industry, Science, Energy and Resources 7, we proposed a 
search string and collected data on October 14 , 2020 ( see Table 1 )8. We set #1 as the 
full dataset  for understanding the topic landscape of AI ethics , and # 3 (a subset of #1)  
as the dataset  for identifying key research entities (e.g., affiliations  and communities) 
that contribute to the research on AI ethics.  As a specific interest, we collected a nother  
subset #2 from #1, containing articles published in the three world -leading multi -
disciplinary journals – i.e., Science, Nature, and PNAS, to disco ver potential  emerging  
issues in AI ethics.  
Table 1. Search strategy  and data information 
Dataset  #R Search strategy  
 
5 More information on the WoS database can be found on the website: 
https://clarivate.com/webofsciencegroup/solutions/web- of-science/  
6 As an example, in Nature, they have ‘news & views’, ‘insights, reviews and perspectives’, and 11 
other types of contributions, but the WoS Core Collection only indexes ‘research articles’ while we 
believe AI ethics could be an appealing topic in various types of contributions.  
7 Details of the AI Ethics Principles are listed on the website: https://www.industry.gov.au/data- and-
publications/building -australias -artificial- intelligence -capability/ai -ethics -framework/ai -ethics -principles  
8 We specifically remove d the term “privacy” from the search string with the following reasons: 1) 
privacy is heavily related to techniques and algorithms in the research area of cybersecurity, 
blockchain, and internet of things, and thus a large number of technical records (but without any 
content on AI ethics) might be retrieved. 2) We tested the overlaps between search strings with and without the term “privacy” and noticed that those highly relevant records could be involved even in the latter search string – we considered “ethics” may mainly cover “privacy” in terms of search strategy.