We employed co- occurrent statistics between a ffiliations , between countries  and 
regions, and between research sources  to investigate the key entities involved in t his 
global discussion on AI ethic s. These entities include 1) universities and research 
institutions , with their geographical distribution, and 2) journals  and their citation 
patterns.  
B. Topic analysis  
Topic analysis in this study comprises  two parts : 1) profiling the topical landscape 
of AI ethics  in the literature  via a topical hierarchical tree [40]; and 2) tracking how 
concerns about  AI ethics have changed over time using  a scientific evolutionary 
pathways  (SEP)  approach [15] .  
A topical hierarchical tree (THT) is a network -based algorithm that identifies a 
hierarchical relationship hidden behind research topics . The assumption is that, in a 
hierarchical structure, 1) the relationships between a superior and its subordinates are 
stronger than the relationships with its neighbors, and 2) superiors receive dominant  
attention  compared to their subordinates. When measuring these relationships  in this 
study as the prevalence of terms in a corpus of documents,  the THT approach exploits 
the algorithm for the  maximum spanning tree to retrieve the largest undirected graph 
from a wei ghted term co- occurrence network. Then, in that graph, we set the terms 
which receive high prevalence as superiors and their connected terms which receive 
low prevalence as their subordinates, with directed edges  (i.e., arrows)  starting from 
superiors to subordinates.  The output of the THT approach is a list of topics with their 
hierarchical relationships, and we visualized this  in the form of mind maps.  
The key assumption of the SEP approach is that the accumulative changes of 
established scientific inventions will trigger scientific evolution once such changes achieve a significant level. Thus, the SEP  simulates a corpus  of bibliometric records  
as a bibliometric stream  based on their ‘publication year ’ and  tracks  the change in  a 
topic  by monitoring its feature space and the distribution of these features  in sequential 
time slices . When geometrically assuming a topic is  a circle with a centroid and a 
boundary, the SEP measures the Euclidean distance between the centroid of a topic 
and that of all ‘coming’ sub-topics  generated in a current time slice. When the 
Euclidean distance exceeds the boundary of the topic, the SEP identifies that sub-
topic as a descendant and the original topic is its predecessor.  The result  of the SEP 
approach is a list of topics and their predecessor -descendant relationships, and we 
considered each topic is a nod e and those relationships as direct ed edges between 
them . We use d Gephi  [41] to visualize the SEPs as a network  and its integrated 
function of community detection ‘modularity’ [42]  groups similar and proximate nodes 
as a community for further understanding.  
Incorporating the results of these topic analyses, we identified a list pairing potential 
conflicts between current AI techniques and special ethical and privacy issues , which 
might provide certain insightful knowledge to  guide the AI community in future 
fundamental research and technological development.