IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PARALLEL AND DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS 4
formed by his predecessors (i.e. each participant’s marginal
contribution is computed based on the same sequence as
they joined the federation). The Fair-value game scheme
[27] is a marginal loss-based scheme. Under this scheme,
a participant’s share of the total payoff is determined by the
sequence following which the participants leave a federa-
tion. The Shapley game proﬁt-sharing scheme [27] is also
a marginal contribution-based scheme. Unlike the Labour
Union game, Shapley game aims to eliminate the effect of
the participants joining the collective in different sequences
in order to more fairly estimate their marginal contributions
to the collective. Thus, it averages the marginal contribution
for each participant under all different permutations of him
joining the collective relative to other participants. This
approach is computationally expensive.
For gradient-based federated learning approaches, the
gradient information can be regarded as a type of data.
However, in these cases, output agreement-based rewards
are hard to apply as mutual information requires a multi-
task setting which is usually not present in such cases.
Thus, among these three categories of schemes, model im-
provement is the most relevant way of designing rewards
for federated learning. There are two emerging federated
learning incentive schemes focused on model improvement.
A scheme which pays for marginal improvements
brought about by model updates was proposed in [28].
The sum of improvements might result in overestimation
of contribution. Thus, the proposed approach also includes
a model for correcting the overestimation issue. This scheme
ensures that payment is proportional to model quality im-
provement, which means the budget for achieving a target
model quality level is predictable. It also ensures that data
owners who submit model updates early receive a higher
reward. This motivates them to participate even in early
stages of the federated model training process.
In addition to the contributions made by participants, [8]
proposed a joint objective optimization-based approach to
take costs and waiting time into account in order to achieve
additional notions of fairness when distributing payoffs
to FL participants. Different from the aforementioned ap-
proaches, the proposed FPPDL framework does not utilize
monetary payoffs to achieve fair treatment of FL partici-
pants. Instead, it allocates each of them a different version
of the FL model with performance commensurate with
his contributions. This represents a alternative paradigm to
existing federated learning in which all participants receive
the same ﬁnal FL model.
3 P RELIMINARIES
In this section, we introduce key technologies which form
the building blocks of the proposed FPPDL framework, in-
cluding differential privacy, homomorphic encryption, and
blockchain.
3.1 Differential Privacy
Differential privacy 1 [29] trades off privacy and accuracy
by perturbing the data in a way that is (i) computationally
efﬁcient, (ii) does not allow an attacker to recover the
original data, and (iii) does not severely affect utility.Deﬁnition 1. A randomized mechanism M:D ! R with
domainDand rangeRsatisﬁes (;)-differential privacy if for
all two neighbouring inputs D;D02D that differ in one record
and for any measurable subset of outputs SR it holds that
PrfM(D)2Sg  exp()PrfM(D0)2Sg+ :
FurthermoreMis said to preserve (pure) -differential privacy if
= 0.
The formal deﬁnition of differential privacy has two
parameters: privacy budget measures the privacy leakage;
andbounds the probability that the privacy loss exceeds
. The values of (;)are accumulated as the algorithm
repeatedly accesses the private data [30].
3.2 Homomorphic Encryption
Homomorphic encryption is a form of encryption that is
widely used to derive the aggregate in a secure man-
ner. Existing homomorphic encryption techniques include
fully homomorphic encryption, somewhat homomorphic
encryption and partially homomorphic encryption. Fully
homomorphic encryption can support arbitrary computa-
tion on ciphertexts, but is less efﬁcient [31]. On the other
hand, somewhat homomorphic encryption and partially
homomorphic encryption only support a limited number of
operations [32].
However, all these techniques generally result in longer
ciphertext than the plaintext, incurring extra communication
costs. To address this issue in this paper, we take inspirations
from stream ciphers [33] to develop efﬁcient homomorphic-
ciphertext compression, which also allows additive homo-
morphic operation over ciphertexts encrypted under dif-
ferent parties’ key streams. More details are provided in
Section 5.2.1.
3.3 Blockchain
Blockchain is a decentralized ( i.e., a peer-to-peer, non-
intermediated) system that is maintained by all the
participants in the system. There are two types of
blockchains, namely permissionless blockchain and permis-
sioned blockchain. With permissionless blockchains, such as
Bitcoin [34], participants can join and leave at anytime and
the number of participants is not pre-deﬁned nor ﬁxed. With
permissioned blockchains (a.k.a. consortium blockchains),
such as IBM’s Hyperledger Fabric, participants require
permissions from the system to join or leave. The set of
participants are normally predeﬁned [35].
For the application with a relatively stable set of partic-
ipants, a permissioned blockchain is preferred. It can serve
as a distributed key-value store, where a fault tolerance
(a.k.a. Byzantine agreement) scheme is required for reaching
consensus on the global state. Blockchain is well known for
its transparency, accountability and robustness – data and
all operations are recorded on the blockchain in an append-
only manner and are accessible by all the participants.
Intuitively, the incremental characteristic of federated deep
learning makes it suitable for leveraging Blockchain. How-
ever, a reasonable approach to integrate Blockchain with
privacy-preserving deep learning needs to be developed.