IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PARALLEL AND DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS 16
system terminates within ﬁrst 5 epochs at 2nd stagesystem terminates at the 1st stage, 2nd stage will not start!
system terminates at the 1st stage, 2nd stage will not start!
Fig. 12: How cthaffects fairness and accuracy in normal and malicious settings. First two ﬁgures correspond to setting 2
with sharing level of [0:01;0:1;0:25;0:35]and[0:1;0:2;0:3;0:4], and setting 3 with data shard of [437;980;150;833] among
four honest parties. The last ﬁgure simulates setting 3 with data shard of [437;980;150;833]) among four honest parties
and one more malicious party indicated in Section 7.
.
local training, thus enabling each party to verify the claims
of other parties and update their local credibility values
as per the received gradients during collaborative learning
process. One obstacle is that differentially private models
may signiﬁcantly reduce utility for small values.
Attacker Prevention. Although the capability of detect-
ing and isolating malicious parties is not the main focus of
this paper, we next discuss how our design can help prevent
certain behaviours of inside attacker, and resist the outside
attacker as a by-product of FPPDL.
For an inside attacker who is a participant in the decen-
tralized system, we specially consider an interesting case:
a free-rider without any data, and we remark that this free-
rider belongs to the category of low-contribution party. Dur-
ing initialization, this free-rider may choose to send the fake
information to other parties. For example, it may randomly
sample from 10 classes as predicted labels for the received
DPGAN samples, then release them to the corresponding
party who publishes these DPGAN samples and requests
labels. When the publisher receives the returned random
labels from the free-rider and detects that most of them
are not aligned with the majority voting, i.e.,mj
uicth,
then the free-rider will be reported as a “low-contribution”
party. If the majority of parties report the free-rider as “low-
contribution”, then the Blockchain rules out the free-rider
from the credible party set, and all parties would terminate
the collaboration with the free-rider. In this way, such a
malicious party is isolated from the beginning, while the col-
laboration among the remaining parties will not be affected.
Even though the free-rider might succeed in initialization
somehow, its local credibility would be signiﬁcantly lower
compared with the other honest parties.
To further detect and isolate this malicious party dur-
ing the collaborative learning process, we repeat mutual
evaluation at each round of collaborative learning by using
samples generated at the initialization phase, i.e., each party
randomly selects and shares a subset of DPGAN samples as
per individual sharing level in each round of collaborative
learning, then updates the local credibility values of other
parties by comparing the majority labels with the received
labels output by the local models of other parties in current
round of training. Hence, the chance of the survival of themalicious party is signiﬁcantly reduced, thus it will not
dominate the whole system. Note that the lower bound
of the acceptable credibility threshold can be agreed by
the system requirement. For the outsider attacker like the
eavesdropper who aims to steal the exchanged information
by eavesdropping on the communication channels among
parties, differential privacy used in the ﬁrst stage and three-
layer onion-style encryption applied in the second stage
inherently prevent the success of this attack.
We recognize that our current design may not be resis-
tant to all the malicious parties who can arbitrarily deviate
from the protocol, sending incorrect and/or arbitrarily cho-
sen messages to honest parties, aborting, omitting messages,
and sharing their entire view of the protocol with each other.
For example, a malicious party who aims to compromise
other parties’ local model integrity (prevent other parties
from learning reasonable models) may adaptively or alter-
natively adjust its behaviour by behaving normally during
releasing DPGAN samples to avoid being detected and
kicked out, while poisoning the second stage by sending
random local gradients or local gradients with the embed-
ded backdoor behavior to the requester. However, in this
case, this malicious party is unlikely to obtain a reasonable
local model or steal any party’s personal information.
Moreover, to prevent the success of the poisoning at-
tack, one potential solution is to let each party repeat local
prediction process on its hold-out validation set by using
individually aggregated gradients. Each party will release a
signal to indicate whether its aggregated gradients can give
a reasonable accuracy result, or help improve prediction on
local validation set, if majority party report local validation
accuracy lower than a threshold, or negative gain on local
validation accuracy, then the system terminates to avoid
being further poisoned. We leave this open problem to
our future work, and our current design is mainly for the
business applications, where parties act with legal liabilities.
8 C ONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
This paper proposes FPPDL, a decentralized privacy-
preserving deep learning framework with fairness consid-
erations. Our enhanced framework shows the following