IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PARALLEL AND DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS 6
joining and departure of each party, further facilitating in-
dependence and modularity of the federation. Blockchains,
with no single point of failure, also enhances robustness.
Here, we design two types of blocks in the Blockchain for
FPPDL, namely the init block and the operation block .
An init block initializes benchmarking of the usefulness
of each party’s training data, as a set of init transactions.
An init transaction contains the initial points that the trans-
action creator earned, its contributed DPGAN samples, and
its public key that will be used for authenticating future
transactions. The genesis block ( i.e., the ﬁrst block) of the
Blockchain is an init block, which contains the initial points
and local credibility values to all the participants according
to their relative contributions, as stated in Algorithm 1. If
any party joins or adds new data during later updates, a
new init block will be created and added to the existing
Blockchain.
An operation block contains a set of transactions deﬁn-
ing the UPLOAD operation and/or DOWNLOAD oper-
ation. All UPLOAD and DOWNLOAD transactions are
signed by their creator using the private key associated
with the public key recorded in the init transaction. An UP-
LOAD operation commits that a data owner has uploaded
local model gradients to the party who sent a download
request. A DOWNLOAD operation states that a participant
is committed an order to request some local model updates
from other participants. Upon receiving a DOWNLOAD
transaction, Blockchain miners verify its signature, check
if the requester has enough balance points to download
the number of requested gradients, and record the veriﬁed
transactions in an operation block. Once the DOWNLOAD
transaction is recorded in the Blockchain, the requested local
model gradients will be encrypted and uploaded by the
owner to a publicly accessible storage, and re-encrypted
using the recipient’s public key deﬁned in the DOWNLOAD
transaction.
The privacy of local model gradients is protected
through a three-layer onion-style encryption scheme (see
Section 5.2). The ﬁrst layer encrypts the local model gra-
dients through our proposed symmetric key based homo-
morphic encryption (Algorithm 3), which allows each party
to learn the aggregate of the received gradients without
revealing individual gradients, i.e., party obliviousness. The
second and third layers present a standard hybrid encryp-
tion process: the second layer uses a freshly generated
symmetric key fsk to re-encrypt the ﬁrst layer ciphertext,
and the third layer encrypts fsk with the requester party
i’s public key pki. In this way, we minimize the required
computational cost incurred by the asymmetric key based
encryption. The commitment of the uploaded encrypted
local model gradients ( e.g., hash value of the ciphertext,
as presented in Fig 3) will be included in the UPLOAD
transaction.
In our private Blockchain, only the requester who pays
can read the plaintext. Others can verify that this transac-
tion has happened, but cannot read the plaintext. When
a requester blames a data uploader, the data uploader
reveals the plaintext as evidence. In this case, the requester
will be forced to pay a ﬁne that it deposits when ﬁling a
claim if it is shown to be an dishonest claim. Once an UP-
LOAD transaction is recorded in the Blockchain, the pointswill be automatically transferred from the requester to the
uploader. An example of INITIALIZE and DOWNLOAD
transaction stored by the Blockchain are shown in Fig. 2
and Fig. 3, respectively. For our application scenario, we
expect a relatively stable and small set of participants, such
as ﬁnancial institutions acting with legal liabilities, which
falls under the umbrella of horizontal federated learning
(HFL) involving business participants [37]. This allows us
to adopt a permissioned blockchain.
Inittransaction tx_iinitial points:p𝑖FlagInitialization𝑆𝐷$Genesis blockConsensus	agreementMerkle	tree	of	transactionsTX	:=	{tx_i}𝑝𝑘$
Fig. 2: An example structure of the genesis block . It mainly
contains two key components, one is a set of init transactions
organized as leaves of a Merkle tree; and the other one is the
consensus agreement reached by the participants through
the underlying consensus protocol ( e.g., PBFT or PoS), which
is speciﬁc to the deployed Blockchain. The pk0
iin the init
transaction is a signature veriﬁcation key of party i.
DOWNLOAD transactionUpdatepoints:p𝑖FlagDOWNLOADrequest(Operation blockConsensus	agreementMerkle	tree	of	transactionsPrev_Block_hash
Hash(Senc(Enc(∆𝑤+,𝑘j),𝑓𝑠𝑘),Aenc(𝑓𝑠𝑘, 𝑝𝑘())UPLOAD transactionDLD_requestFlagUPLOAD𝑝𝑘(Updatepoints:p𝑗𝑆𝑖𝑔(𝑆𝑖𝑔+
Fig. 3: An example structure of the operation block . It
mainly contains three key components, namely, the hash
value Prev Block hash of the previous block, a set of UP-
LOAD/DOWNLOAD transactions organized as a Merkle
tree, and the consensus agreement of this block. In par-
ticular, a Prev Block hash links the current block to the
previous one, and the request in the UPLOAD transaction
acts as a reference to the associated DOWNLOAD transac-
tion.pkiin the DOWNLOAD transaction is the public key
that will be used in the last layer of our three-layer onion-
style encryption scheme, requestiis a unique request ID of
this transaction and will be referenced in the corresponding
UPLOAD transaction via DLD request, and Sigiis the
signature on this transaction. Enc ,Senc , andAenc refer to
homomorphic encryption, symmetric key encryption, and
public key encryption, respectively.
5 I MPLEMENTATION OF FPPDL
This section details the two-stage implementation of FPPDL
to enforce both fairness and privacy. These include how to