IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PARALLEL AND DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS 1
Towards Fair and Privacy-Preserving Federated
Deep Models
Lingjuan Lyu,Member, IEEE , Jiangshan Yu, Karthik Nandakumar, Senior Member, IEEE , Yitong Li,
Xingjun Ma, Jiong Jin, Member, IEEE , Han Yu, and Kee Siong Ng
Abstract —The current standalone deep learning framework tends to result in overﬁtting and low utility. This problem can be addressed
by either a centralized framework that deploys a central server to train a global model on the joint data from all parties, or a distributed
framework that leverages a parameter server to aggregate local model updates. Server-based solutions are prone to the problem of a
single-point-of-failure. In this respect, collaborative learning frameworks, such as federated learning (FL), are more robust. Existing
federated learning frameworks overlook an important aspect of participation: fairness. All parties are given the same ﬁnal model
without regard to their contributions. To address these issues, we propose a decentralized Fair and Privacy-Preserving Deep Learning
(FPPDL) framework to incorporate fairness into federated deep learning models. In particular, we design a local credibility mutual
evaluation mechanism to guarantee fairness, and a three-layer onion-style encryption scheme to guarantee both accuracy and privacy.
Different from existing FL paradigm, under FPPDL, each participant receives a different version of the FL model with performance
commensurate with his contributions. Experiments on benchmark datasets demonstrate that FPPDL balances fairness, privacy and
accuracy. It enables federated learning ecosystems to detect and isolate low-contribution parties, thereby promoting responsible
participation.
Index Terms —Federated Learning, Privacy-Preserving, Deep Learning, Fairness, Encryption.
F
1 I NTRODUCTION
DEEP learning has become an important technology
to deal with challenging real-world problems such
as image classiﬁcation and speech recognition. Empirical
evidence has shown that deep learning models can beneﬁt
signiﬁcantly from large-scale datasets [1]. However, large-
scale datasets are not always available for a new domain,
due to the signiﬁcant time and effort required for data col-
lection and annotation [2], [3]. Moreover, training complex
deep networks on large-scale datasets is computationally
expensive and may not be feasible for a single party in
practice. Therefore, there is a high demand to perform deep
learning in a collaborative manner among a group of parties.
This trend is motivated by the fact that the data owned
by a single party may be very homogeneous, resulting in
overﬁtting which negatively impacts accuracy when the
model is applied to previously unseen data, i.e., poor gener-
alizability. Utilizing data from diverse parties to train deep
L. Lyu is with The Department of Computer Science, National University
of Singapore. E-mail: lyulj@comp.nus.edu.sg.
J. Yu is with the Faculty of Information Technology, Monash University,
Clayton, Australia. E-mail:jiangshan.yu@monash.edu.
K. Nandakumar is with IBM Singapore Lab, 018983. E-
mail:nkarthik@sg.ibm.com.
Y. Li and X. Ma are with the School of Computing and Information
Systems, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia, 3010. E-
mail: yitongl4@student.unimelb.edu.au; xingjun.ma@unimelb.edu.au.
J. Jin is with the School of Software and Electrical Engineering,
Swinburne University of Technology, Melbourne, Australia. E-mail:
jiongjin@swin.edu.au.
Han Yu is with the School of Computer Science and En-
gineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. E-mail:
han.yu@ntu.edu.sg.
Kee Siong Ng is with the Software Innovation Institute, Australian
National University, Australia. E-mail: keesiong.ng@anu.edu.au.
Corresponding authors.models can help mitigate this problem. However, collabora-
tive model training may not be viable due to privacy con-
cerns. Federated learning (FL), which incorporates privacy
preservation techniques into collaborative model training,
offers a potential solution to this challenge [4].
In the current federated learning paradigm [5], all par-
ticipants receive the same federated model at the end of
collaborative model training regardless of their contribu-
tions. This makes the paradigm vulnerable to free-riding
participants. For example, several banks may want to work
together to build model to predict the creditworthiness of
small and medium enterprises. However, but larger banks
with more data maybe reluctant to train their local model
based on high quality local data for fear of smaller banks
beneﬁting from the shared FL model and eroding its market
share [4]. Without the guarantee of privacy and the promise
of collaborative fairness, participants with high quality and
large datasets may be discouraged from joining federated
learning, thereby negatively affect the formation of a healthy
FL ecosystem. Existing research on fairness mostly focuses
on protecting sensitive attributes or reducing the variance
of the prediction distribution across participants [6], [7]. The
problem of treating federated learning participants fairly
remains open [4].
In this paper, we address the problem of treating FL
participants fairly based on their contributions to build a
healthy FL ecosystem. We refer to the proposed frame-
work as the decentralized Fair and Privacy-Preserving Deep
Learning (FPPDL) framework. Unlike existing work such
as [8] which uses monetary rewards to incentivize good
behaviour, our proposed solution fundamentally changes
the current FL paradigm so that participants may not receive
the same FL model in the end. Instead, each of them willarXiv:1906.01167v3  [cs.CR]  19 May 2020