IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PARALLEL AND DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS 2
receive a ﬁnal FL model with performance reﬂecting their
individual contributions to the federation. FPPDL does not
require participants to trust each other or any third party.
It records all operations, including uploading and down-
loading differentially private artiﬁcial samples and encrypted
model updates , as transactions through blockchain technol-
ogy. Through mutual evaluations of local credibility that
considers the relative contribution of each party during both
initial benchmarking and privacy-preserving collaborative
deep learning, FPPDL achieves collaborative fairness. For
privacy preservation, instead of leveraging differential pri-
vacy at the cost of utility, we propose a three-layer onion-
style encryption scheme to guarantee accuracy and privacy.
To the best of our knowledge, this paper is the ﬁrst to
achieve collaborative fairness in federated learning through
adjusting the level of performance of the version of the
FL model allocated to each participant based on his con-
tribution. Extensive experiments based on two benchmark
datasets under three realistic settings demonstrate that FP-
PDL achieves high fairness, delivers comparable accuracy
to existing centralized and distributed deep learning frame-
works, and outperforms standalone deep learning.
In terms of the threat model, FPPDL adopts an honest-
but-curious setting: each party is assumed to be curious
in inferring sensitive information of other parties; and yet,
it is assumed to be honest in operations. This setting is
reasonable as the main incentive for parties to participant in
the collaborative system is to get better local models com-
pared to their standalone models without any collaboration.
Moreover, in our scenario parties are considered as organ-
isations such as ﬁnancial or biomedical institutions acting
with responsibilities by laws. However, we also discuss how
our local credibility mutual evaluation mechanism can help
prevent certain malicious behaviours of the insider attacker,
and resist the outsider attacker in Section 7.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2
reviews the existing deep learning frameworks, and the
related literatures on privacy-preserving collaborative deep
learning, and fairness in federated learning which are major
problems we aim to tackle. Section 5 presents technical de-
tails of the proposed FPPDL framework. Section 6 evaluates
the performance of FPPDL in terms of accuracy and fairness
for different SGD frameworks under different settings, fol-
lowed by discussions in Section 7. Section 8 concludes the
paper and points out potential future research directions.
2 R ELATED WORK
In this section, we review relevant literature on deep learn-
ing frameworks, privacy preservation and fairness in feder-
ated learning to position our research in relation to existing
research.
2.1 Overview of Deep Learning Frameworks
In general, deep learning frameworks fall into the following
categories: Standalone framework ; server-based frameworks
including Centralized framework and Distributed framework ;
and Decentralized framework . In particular, in distributed
framework and decentralized framework, parties are all
involved in the global or consensus model improvementprocess. Hence, we refer to them as collaborative deep
learning frameworks. A comparison among different deep
learning frameworks is provided in Table 1.
Standalone framework : Parties individually train stan-
dalone models on their local training data without any
collaboration (Fig. 1(a)). However, standalone models might
fail to generalise to the unseen data.
Centralized framework : Participants pool their data into
a centralized server to train a global model (Fig. 1(b)). This
centralized framework is very effective, but it violates data
privacy as all participants’ data are exposed to the server.
Distributed framework : Dean et al. [9] ﬁrst introduced
the concept of distributed deep learning, where parties
collaboratively train a model by sharing local model updates
with a parameter server. Distributed learning had been
extensively studied in [5], [10], [11].
It should be noted that both the centralized framework
and the distributed framework require a central server to
mediate the training process, which makes them susceptible
to the following issues: (1) Party policies: due to privacy con-
cern, parties may not want to cede control to an untrusted
server; (2) Single-point-of-failure: if the central server fails
or is shut down for maintenance, the whole network stops
working.
Decentralized framework : the above issues in the central
server-based frameworks can be addressed by a decen-
tralized framework [12], [13], [14], [15], [16], [17], which
parallelizes the computation among all parties (Fig. 1(d)).
In particular, Kuo et al. [12] ﬁrst proposed a decentral-
ized machine learning framework: ModelChain, which in-
tegrates Blockchain with privacy-preserving machine learn-
ing. [15], [16] investigated privacy-preserving deep learning
on blockchain. [17] studied the problem of fairness in
load sharing in blockchain-based privacy-preserving learn-
ing, which is different from the collaborative fairness in
our work. Speciﬁcally, their decentralized architecture is
developed under a less secure setting, where one site can
access the models of all the other sites. [13], [14] utilized
differential privacy for privacy-preserving machine learn-
ing on blockchain. However, [14] had pointed out that
the proposed algorithms in [13] cannot guarantee privacy-
preserving properties correctly as they did not consider
composition for a repeated additive-noise mechanism.
In summary, existing collaborative frameworks (dis-
tributed or decentralized) focus on how to learn a global
consensus model with higher accuracy than individual stan-
dalone models. In reality, some parties may contribute more
compared with other parties, while others may contribute
nearly nothing or even negatively. The reason is that data
owned by different parties may be of different quality, and
there may exist unpredictable random errors during data
collection and storage. On the other hand, parties may
choose only to use a limited part of its data for collaborative
model training.
2.2 Privacy Preserving Collaborative Learning
As pointed out by Shokri et al. [11], centralized deep
learning commonly comes with many privacy concerns.
Speciﬁcally, all the sensitive training data are revealed to
a third party; data owners have no control over the learning