IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PARALLEL AND DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS 3
DParty1D1w1DParty2D2w2DParty3D3w3DParty4D4w4
DCentralserverParty1Party2Party3Party4D1D2D3D4
CentralserverParty1Party2Party3Party4∆w1∆w2∆w4∆w3wwww
Party1Party3Party2Party4∆w1,∆w2∆w1,∆w3∆w1,∆w4∆w3,∆w4∆w2,∆w4∆w2,∆w3
Fig. 1: (a): Standalone framework. (b): Centralized framework. (c): Distributed framework. (d): Decentralized framework.
TABLE 1: Comparing different deep learning frameworks.
Frameworks Standalone Centralized [18], [19] Distributed [5],
[10], [11], [20]Decentralized [12],
[13], [14], [15], [16],
[17]Decentralized (our
FPPDL)
Architecture Fig. 1(a) Fig. 1(b) Fig. 1(c) Fig. 1(d) Fig. 1(d)
Global model No Yes Yes Depends Depends
Local models Yes No Yes Yes Yes
Collaborative Fairness NA NA No No Yes
Quality control NA No No No Yes
objective; the learned model is not directly available to
data owners. To mitigate these privacy risks, Gilad-Bachrach
et al. [18] developed CryptoNets to run deep learning on
homomorphically encrypted data. However, CryptoNets
assumes that neural network model has been trained be-
forehand, hence their system is mainly used to provide
encrypted outputs to users. In contrast, SecureML [20]
conducts privacy-preserving learning via secure multiparty
computation (SMC), where data owners need to process,
encrypt and/or secret-share their data among two non-
colluding servers in the initial setup phase. SecureML allows
data owners to train various models on their joint data
without revealing any information beyond the outcome.
However, such an approach incurs high computational and
communication costs [21], [22].
The most relevant work is Distributed Selective Stochas-
tic Gradient Descent (DSSGD) [11]. To preserve privacy,
instead of explicitly sharing training data, each party com-
putes and shares (with the PS) its local model gradients
based on local training data, while updating its local model
by downloading the most-updated parameters from the PS.
To further mitigate privacy leakage from the shared model
updates, each party adds noise to local model updates to
ensure per-parameter differential privacy. However, their
system requires a central parameter server to mediate train-
ing process. Therefore, it suffers from the common issues in
the central server-based frameworks.
The disadvantages of having a centralized parameter
server can be summarized as follows:
1) Privacy leakage: As evidenced in [23], local data in-
formation may be leaked to an honest-but-curious PS,
even if only a small portion of local model updates
is released to the PS. In particular, a PS can infer the
true data or label of the participates with non-negligible
probability for the local neural network with only
one neuron. The above observations similarly hold for
general neural networks, with both cross-entropy and
squared-error cost functions. Even for general neural
networks with regularization, the released local gradi-
ents can still reveal the truth value.
2) Vulnerability to active adversaries: Most distributed
learning frameworks assume that all the parties arehonest. In reality, if a party turns out to be malicious, it
can sabotage the learning process by spooﬁng random
samples to infer information about the victim party’s
private data.
A special case of distributed deep learning is federated
learning [4]. In FL, to preserve privacy of individual model
updates, Bonawitz et al. [24] proposed a practical secure
aggregation protocol, which is proven to be secure under
the honest-but-curious and active adversary settings, even
if an arbitrarily chosen subset of users drop out at any
time. In particular, secure multi-party computation (SMC)
is leveraged to compute sums of model parameter updates
from individual users’ devices in a secure manner, which
comes at the cost of extra computation and communication
overheads. Another more efﬁcient method is to use differ-
ential privacy by enabling the server to add the tailored
noise to the weighted-average user updates to guarantee
user-level privacy [25]. However, the default trusted Google
server is entitled to see all users’ update clearly, aggre-
gate individual updates and add noise to the aggregation.
Thus, their method is not preferred when the server is not
a trusted party. We also remark that when the server is
untrusted, the weighted aggregation becomes unrealistic,
as the server may not know the data size of each party
for weight calculation. Instead, the proposed FPPDL allows
each party to integrate other parties’ updates based on their
local credibility and sharing level.
2.3 Fairness in Federated Learning
Existing approach for promoting collaborative fairness
among federated learning participants is based on incentive
schemes. In general, participants shall receive payoffs that
is commensurate with their contributions. Equal division
is an example of egalitarian proﬁt-sharing [26]. Under this
scheme, the available total payoff at a given round is equally
divided among all participants. Under the Individual proﬁt-
sharing scheme [26], each participant i’s own contribution
to the collective (assuming the collective only contains i) is
used to determine his share of the total payoff.
The Labour Union game [27] proﬁt-sharing scheme de-
termines a participant’s share of the total payoff based on
his marginal contribution to the utility of the collective