5874 N. S. Punn, S. Agarwal 
1 3
4.4  Ensemble U‑Nets
With the immense application of U-Net model in the medical domain, Isensee et al. (2021) 
proposed a self-adapting framework, no-newU-Net (nnU-Net) to establish the generalized 
architecture and training mechanism for vivid modalities, inspired by the medical segmen-
tation decathlon (MSD) challenge. The nnU-Net framework comprises an ensemble of 2D 
U-Net, 3D U-Net and 3D U-Net cascade, along with an automated pipeline to adapt the 
requirements of the dataset such as preprocessing, data augmentation and post-processing. 
The model achieved state-of-the-art segmentation results without manual intervention for dif-
ferent modalities in the medical segmentation decathlon challenge.
With the recent success of transformer models in sequence-to-sequence modelling (Vas-
wani et al. 2017), it has also been integrated with U-Net for medical image segmentation and 
has achieved satisfactory results. In vanilla U-Net, there is limited learning of global context 
information due to the local convolutions and hence, it cannot capture long-range dependen-
cies. To address this challenge, Cao et al. (2021) proposed Swin-Unet which is a Unet-like 
pure transformer architecture. This model uses Swin transformer (Liu et al. 2021) with shifted 
windows as the encoder for feature extraction and patch-expanding Swin transformer for resto-
ration of image resolution. In similar context, to further improve the performance, Wang et al. 
(2021) introduced a mixed transformer module (MTM) in U-Net that refined the self attention 
mechanism by simultaneously obtaining intra- and inter-correlations while using local-global 
Gaussian-weighted self attention (LGG-SA) and external attention, respectively. These MTM 
blocks are arranged in U-Net topology for medical image segmentation. Though these models 
achieved better results; however, rely on large-scale pre-training and have high computational 
complexity.
5  U‑Net in COVID‑19 diagnosis
The ongoing pandemic of the severe acute respiratory syndrome - coronavirus (SARS-
CoV-2) also known as COVID-19 has brought the worldwide crisis along with the ram-
pant loss of lives. This contagious virus initiated from Wuhan, the People’s Republic of 
China in December 2019 and till November 17, 2021, have caused 254,174,536 infections 
and 5,112,325 deaths worldwide (Hopkins 2020). Currently, the most reliable COVID-19 
diagnosis approach follows the reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) 
testing; however, it is time consuming and less sensitive to identify the virus at the early 
stages.
With the advancements in the technology and data acquisition systems (Agarwal et al. 
2020; Shi et  al. 2020), deep learning based approaches are developed to assist in the 
COVID-19 diagnosis with the help of CT and X-ray modalities (Huazhu et al. 2020) to 
control the exponential growing trend (Punn et al. 2020a) of the spread. Wu et al. (2020) 
proposed a JCS framework (similar to cU-Net) for joint classification and segmentation of 
COVID-19 from chest CT scans using the U-Net model. In another U-Net based imple-
mentation, a feature variation block is introduced in the COVID-SegNet model (Yan et al. 
2020) to better segment the COVID-19 infected regions by highlighting the boundaries 
and diverse infected regions. The lung infection segmentation deep network (Inf-Net) (Fan 
et al. 2020a) followed U-Net topology with diverse modifications including reverse atten-
tion and parallel partial decoder. The authors validated the performance in the super -
vised and semi-supervised modes to address the challenge of limited availability of the