5869
Modality specific U‑Net variants for biomedical image…
1 3
3.4.2  Attention U‑Nets
The integration of PET and CT modalities offer metabolic and anatomical information 
simultaneously. High contrast in PET scan enables the network to effectively segregate soft 
tissues around the tumor boundaries that are identified using CT imaging with high spatial 
resolution. In this context, Fu et al. (2021) proposed multi-modal spatial attention module 
(MSAM) to segment tumor using PET-CT modalities. The MSAM block can be integrated 
with any U-Net model to leverage the multi-modalities features. Two individual encoder-
decoder models are used, where one model is trained with PET imaging to generate spatial 
attention maps and another model utilizes this attention map at different scales by aggre-
gating with each decoder layer to perform tumor segmentation using CT imaging. These 
PET based multi-scale attention maps guide the CT model towards the areas with high 
tumor likelihood. This approach of cross-modality multi-scale attention achieves promising 
results; however, the performance could further be improved by performing 3D volumetric 
analysis.
3.4.3  Inception U‑Nets
Zhao et al. (2018) proposed to utilize the multi-modalities (PET and CT) for computer-
aided cancer diagnosis and treatment with the help of 3D FCN based V-Net  (Milletari 
et al. 2016) model, which is an extension of the U-Net model for volumetric segmenta-
tion. A feature or intermediate level fusion approach is adopted, where two independent 
sub-segmentation networks are constructed to extract dedicated feature maps from each 
modality and are later fused with the cascaded convolution blocks that follow the V-Net 
model scheme to finally compute the tumor segmentation mask. The proposed framework 
is trained and validated on a limited clinical dataset of 84 patients suffering from lung can-
cer that consists of PET and CT imaging, where a dice value of 0.85 is achieved while 
outperforming other traditional models that use unary modality. In a similar approach, Guo 
et al. (2019) adopted the fusion of PET and CT modalities to segment head and neck can-
cer (HNC) labelled as gross tumor volume (GTV). Due to resources limitations, the images 
are cropped during pre-processing. The authors utilized the modified 3D U-Net model in 
which the convolution blocks in encoder and decoder paths are replaced by dense convolu-
tion blocks (Huang et al. 2017) that aggregates the multi-scale feature maps across various 
levels. The authors trained and evaluated the model on TCIA-HNC dataset, while achiev -
ing the DSC value of 0.73 on the dedicated test set. The performance could be improved by 
analyzing complete 3D volume and obtain better affinities.
3.4.4  Ensemble U‑Nets
To address the need for a reliable and robust PET based tumor segmentation model, Leung 
et al. (2020) proposed a novel physics guided deep learning based framework comprising 
three dedicated modules that segment each slice of PET volume to generate a complete 
mask. The first module tends to extract the realistic tumors with the available ground-truth 
boundaries via stochastic kernel-density estimation and physics based approach to gener -
ate simulated images. These images are fed to the improved U-Net model in the second 
module, which has minimal convolution and pooling blocks accompanied by dropout lay -
ers to aid in learning the complex features and generate efficient masks. Later, in the third 
module, the network is fine-tuned with delineation provided by the radiologist as surrogate