5866 N. S. Punn, S. Agarwal 
1 3
of FCN based U-Net model for brain tumor segmentation via MRI sequences, where the 
authors achieved significant improvement over the traditional segmentation approaches. 
SegNet is another model that is most widely used for semantic segmentation (Badrinaray -
anan et al. 2017). Following this, Kumar et al. (2018) proposed a hybrid approach, U-Seg-
Net, by integrating skip connections into the base SegNet model. This enabled the model 
to efficiently identify the tissue boundaries concerning the white matter (WM), gray matter 
(GM), and cerebro-spinal fluid (CSF). The authors achieved significant improvement over 
the base SegNet and U-Net models with DSC value of 0.90 on IBSR-18 dataset.
In recent years, to improve the biomedical image segmentation results, multi-modal-
ity fusion (MMF) (James and Dasarathy 2014) approaches are utilized. The fused scans 
are rich in information and offer multi-dimensional features. In this context, Kermi et al. 
(2018) proposed a modified U-Net model to segment the whole tumor and intra tumor 
regions like enhancing tumor, edema and necrosis affected with high grade glioma (HGG) 
and lower grade glioma (LGG) following from the BraTS 2018 challenge. The authors 
fused the T1, T2, T1c and FLAIR modalities and resized them to form the input feature 
map with rich tumor information. In the modified model, residual blocks (He et al. 2016b) 
are added between two convolution blocks and the max-pooling operation is replaced 
with the strided convolutions  (Ayachi et  al. 2018). The model is trained and evaluated 
with fused modalities to obtain the multi-class segmentation masks. Though the authors 
achieved good results but lacked the 3D volumetric analysis. In another application, skull 
stripping is an essential step to study brain imaging, where Hwang et al. (2019) proposed to 
utilize a standard 3D U-Net model to automate the process of skull stripping (brain extrac-
tion) from T1 MRI scans for faster diagnosis and treatment. The training is carried with 
dice loss and adam optimizer on neurofeedback skull-stripped (NFBS) dataset. The authors 
achieved a dice value of 0.99; however, the comparative study is limited to brain surface 
extractor (BSE) and robust brain extraction (ROBEX) algorithms.
3.3.2  Attention U‑Nets
With the introduction of modality transformations, Dong et al. (2019a) proposed a deep 
attention U-Net (DAU-Net) model to automate the process of multi-organ segmentation 
for prostate cancer diagnosis via synthetic MRI, that is generated by processing the com-
puted tomography scans using a cyclic generative adversarial network (CycleGAN) (Zhu 
et al. 2017). Initially, the CycleGAN model is trained to learn CT to MRI transformation 
which tends to add additional soft-tissue information without additional data acquisition 
techniques to produce sMRI data. Later, the sMRI data is used to train 3D DAU-Net model 
which incorporates conventional attention scheme (Oktay et al. 2018) and deep supervi-
sion (Wang et al. 2019a) with the U-Net model. The approach is trained and evaluated with 
140 datasets from prostate patients to achieve DSC value of 0.95, 0.87 and 0.89 for seg-
mentation of bladder, prostate and rectum respectively, while also showing improvement 
over using raw CT images.
The prostate cancer diagnosis is another challenging task for which Rundo et al. (2019) 
proposed an automated approach, USE-Net, that uses the U-Net model by incorporating the 
squeeze-and-excitation (SE) blocks (Hu et al. 2018) in skip connections to perform multi-
class segmentation. Similar to the attention scheme (Oktay et al. 2018), the SE blocks tend 
to calibrate the channel-wise correlation while improving the generalization capability of 
the model across multi-institutional datasets. The USE-Net model outperformed its com-
petitors when trained and evaluated on all datasets combined, where for other scenarios