5873
Modality specific U‑Net variants for biomedical image…
1 3
and the corresponding decoded layer. Furthermore, the dense connections are added at the 
bottleneck layer to extract and propagate features with minimal parameters. The authors 
achieved promising results across DRIVE, ISIC 2018 and LUNA datasets.
4.2  Inception U‑Nets
Gu et al. (2019) addressed the loss of spatial information while using the strided convolu-
tions and pooling in U-Net with context-encoder network (CE-Net) to capture and preserve 
the information flow for BIS. In CE-Net the encoder unit is loaded with pre-trained ResNet 
blocks, the bottleneck layer (context extractor) includes dense atrous convolution (DAC) 
and residual multi-kernel pooling (RMP) blocks, and decoder block follows consecutive 
convolution and deconvolution blocks. The DAC module combines the design of Incep-
tion-ResNet-V2 model and atrous or dilated convolution, whereas RMP generates stacked 
feature maps followed from the pooling operations with varying window sizes to effec-
tively model the target feature representations. This arrangement of operations achieved 
promising results on multiple modalities.
For histopathological image segmentation, Punn and Agarwal (2020c) proposed an incep-
tion U-Net model where standard convolution layers are replaced by inception blocks that 
consist of parallel convolutions of varying filter sizes and a hybrid pooling operation. The 
hybrid pooling operation draws the potential feature maps from the spectral domain via Hart-
ley transform (Zhang and Ma 2018) to preserve more spatial information and spatial domain 
with the help of max pooling to aim for sharp features, by using the 1×1 convolution. The 
authors achieved significant improvement over other models using KDSB18 dataset with less 
number of parameters. Ibtehaz and Rahman (2020) proposed another extension of the U-Net 
model as MultiResU-Net, where the convolution operations are replaced with MultiRes blocks 
in encoder-decoder paths, and Res path is added in the bottleneck layer. Inspired from the 
inception and residual model, the MultiRes blocks are built using stacked convolutions with a 
succession of 3×3 filters, and a residual 1×1 convolution connection is added. The Res path 
tends to propagate the feature maps from the encoder phase to decoder phase with the series 
of residual convolution blocks. The model is evaluated on different datasets covering fluores-
cence images, ISBI-2012, ISIC-2017, CVC-ClinicDB and BraTS17.
4.3  Attention U‑Nets
In most of the U-Net models, the long-range dependencies are gradually acquired with local 
convolutions which limit the overall efficiency and effectiveness of the model. Inspired from 
the transformer models (Vaswani et al. 2017), Wang et al. (2020b) proposed non-local Unet 
(NL-Unet) that comprises of self attention based global context aggregation module to extract 
full context information which can be easily integrated with feature extraction and reconstruc-
tion operation in any U-Net model. The traditional spatial (Oktay et  al. 2018) and channel 
attention (Hu et al. 2018) mechanisms lack to establish correlations with different targets and 
features, due to which non-local attention based models exhibit potential to perform better in 
biomedical image segmentation.