5879
Modality specific U‑Net variants for biomedical image…
1 3
In general, the decision made in the rule-based applications can be traced back to its ori-
gin; however, deep CNN models lack transparency in the decision making process, where 
the input and output are well-presented but the processing in the hidden layers is difficult 
to interpret and understand, and hence these are also termed as black-box models. To better 
interpret these models various visualization based approaches are proposed such as local 
interpretable model-agnostic explanations (LIME) (Mishra et al. 2017), shapley additive 
explanation (SHAP) (Lundberg and Lee 2017), partial dependence plots (PDP) (Friedman 
2001), anchor (Ribeiro et al. 2018), etc. Currently, these approaches are applied to explain 
and interpret the obtained results from deep learning models, but still, a concrete bench-
mark scheme is required to be established.
7.2  Specific challenges
In addition to the general challenges each modality also exhibit unique challenges. Some 
of these major challenges that are profound in X-ray, CT, MRI, PET and US imaging are 
shown in Fig.  8. In X-ray imaging because of 2D projection of the 3D human body, fea-
tures representing physiological structures overlap each other which may result in variation 
in the anatomy representation. For instance, in chest X-rays, due to the presence of scarring 
the lung contours are substantially blurred and hence segmentation models must learn the 
global concept for resolving the ambiguities and producing the correct mask. This chal-
lenge is mostly addressed by using U-Net based models that use long skip connection vari-
ants to transfer the knowledge from extraction to reconstruction phase (Rashid et al. 2018; 
Frid-Adar et  al. 2018a), and adversarial learning strategies  (Gaál et  al. 2020). However, 
such model requires a large amount of pixel-level annotated training data which can be 
addressed by using data augmentation, self-supervised learning (Punn and Agarwal 2021a) 
Fig. 8  Challenges involved in biomedical image segmentation