5865
Modality specific U‑Net variants for biomedical image…
1 3
experts. The trained model is evaluated on LIDC-IDRI and Cityscapes datasets which 
outperformed other approaches in reproducing the segmentation probabilities and masks. 
Inspired by this work many other variants have been developed to capture the uncertainties, 
e.g. (Raghu et al. 2019; Baumgartner et al. 2019; Tanno et al. 2019).
Motivated by the success of adversarial techniques, Dong et  al. (2019b) proposed 
a U-Net-GAN framework in which a set of U-Nets is trained as a generator to produce 
organs-at-risk (OARs) segmentation and FCN as a discriminator to distinguish segmented 
masks from the ground-truth masks. The generator and discriminator networks followed 
adversarial training, where each network competes to achieve optimal segmentation masks 
of OARs. The model achieved satisfactory improvements at the cost of heavy computa-
tions and resource requirements, moreover, the model struggles in the presence of complex 
structures. In another work, Liu et  al. (2019c) proposed a liver CT image segmentation 
framework named GIU-Net, inspired by the supervised interactive segmentation approach 
named, graph cut (Boykov and Funka-Lea 2006). The improved U-Net model is designed 
with increased depth to better extract semantic features that are trained to generate the seg-
mentation mask of the liver regions. Later, to further refine the segmentation results, a slice 
covering the maximum liver region is used as an initial slice to generate graph cut energy 
function followed by the maximum flow minimum cut algorithm. The process is then 
repeated for all the slices to generate a complete sequence of precise and stable segmenta-
tion masks with smother boundaries.
In another application, a Bayesian CNN with U-Net model and Monte Carlo (MC) drop-
out is introduced by Hiasa et al. (2019) for automated muscle segmentation from CT imag-
ing for musculoskeletal modelling. The design comprises two cascaded U-Net models, 
where first is standard U-Net that localizes the skin surface and later individual muscles 
(21 muscles) are segmented with Bayesian U-Net (Kendall et al. 2015) that uses MC drop-
out based on the structure-wise uncertainty, predictive structure-wise variance (PSV) and 
predictive dice coefficient (PDC). Besides, the authors employed an active learning method 
to produce segmentation and uncertainty from the unlabeled data, where the high uncer -
tain data are relabeled manually by experts while other data is directly used as training 
data. The authors achieved promising results; however, the data samples were very limited 
which limits the diversity of the model.
3.3  Magnetic resonance imaging
Magnetic resonance imaging is synthesized by using the principles of nuclear magnetic 
resonance (NMR) (Morris and Slesnick 2018). It is utilized in radiology to visualize the 
anatomy and physiological process of the body organs. It uses a large magnetic field and 
radio waves to create detailed images of organs and tissues within the body. Based on the 
different attenuation values of the tissues e.g. T1-weighted (T1), fluid attenuation inver -
sion recovery (FLAIR), Dixon, etc., the electromagnetic waves emitted from the gradient 
magnetic field is detected using the applied strong magnetic field by which the position and 
type of the nucleus can be drawn inside the object. Unlike the X-rays, CT scans and PET 
scans; MRI scans do not involve the usage of ionizing radiations.
3.3.1  Better U‑Nets
MRI is mostly utilized in computer-aided diagnosis systems involving brain tumor segmen-
tation. Inspired from the BraTS 2015 challenge, Dong et al. (2017) analysed the potential