5868 N. S. Punn, S. Agarwal 
1 3
cosine similarity and cross entropy using the manually annotated institutional dataset and 
MICCAI PROMISE12 dataset, where authors achieved the DSC values of 0.86 and 0.88 
respectively. However, this achievement comes at the cost of complex computations due 
to group dilated convolutions (Wang et al. 2018a). Recently, Punn and Agarwal (2020d) 
proposed a 3D U-Net based framework for volumetric brain tumor segmentation. The pro-
posed architecture is divided into three components: 1) multi-modalities fusion - to merge 
the MRI sequences with hierarchical inception convolution blocks, 2) tumor extractor - 
to learn the tumor patterns with 3D inception U-Net model using fused modalities, and 
3) tumor segmenter - to decode the multi-scale extracted features into multi-class tumor 
regions. To achieve a better understanding of the input feature maps, each inception block 
aggregates multi-scale feature representation by using multiple filters equipped with short 
skip connections. With such dedicated components trained using a weighted average of 
dice and IoU loss functions, the authors achieved significant improvement over the existing 
approaches for BraTS 2017 and BraTS 2018 datasets. The increased computations due to 
inception convolution in each module could be reduced by using depthwise separable con-
volutions (Chollet 2017).
3.4  Positron emission tomography
The positron emission tomography (Ollinger and Fessler 1997) is a widely used imaging 
in various clinical applications like oncology, brain, heart, etc., that helps in visualizing the 
biochemical and physiological reaction processes within the human body. The PET images 
are obtained by injecting a full dose of radioactive tracer or inhalation of gas to meet the 
clinical requirements. However, for minimal harm to human health, low-dose PET imaging 
is adopted to produce high quality imaging (Wang et al. 2018c).
3.4.1  Better U‑Nets
With the huge success of U-Net in biomedical image segmentation, Blanc-Durand et al. 
(2018) demonstrated the potential of 3D U-Net model in 18F-fluoro-ethyl-tyrosine ( 18F-
FET) PET lesion detection and segmentation. F-FET PET/CT scans were acquired using a 
dynamic protocol from 37 patients, where the ground-truth segmentation masks were gen-
erated using manual delineation and binary thresholding. The 3D U-Net model comprises 
three stages of encoder and decoder paths with standard convolutions and pooling opera-
tions. The authors achieved a DSC value of 0.79 on training and validation sets. However, 
the results could further be improved by increasing the data size with GAN based data aug-
mentation techniques (Frid-Adar et al. 2018b) and other U-Net based approaches. Recently, 
Lu et  al. (2020) proposed U-Net based automatic tumor segmentation approach in PET 
scans. The authors employed a transfer learning approach, where pre-trained VGG-19 
blocks are added in the encoder phase to address the challenge of limited data availability. 
The authors adopted the DropBlock as a replacement for dropout to effectively regularize 
the convolution blocks. The model is fine-tuned using the Jaccard distance (IoU) as the loss 
function and the performance is validated with 1,309 PET images provided by the Shang-
hai Xinhua hospital (XH), which displayed improvements over the vanilla U-Net model.