5854 N. S. Punn, S. Agarwal 
1 3
3  U‑Net variants for medical imaging
The numerous development in medical imaging acquisition systems and deep learning 
technologies have resulted in the rise of usage frequency of modalities for computer-aided 
diagnosis. Despite vanilla U-Net being super-efficient in the ISBI cell tracking challenge, 
there is still a void to fill with improvements in certain aspects. The most apparent prob-
lem in the vanilla U-Net is that the learning may slow down in deeper layers of the U-Net 
model which increases the possibility of the network ignoring the layers representing 
abstract features of the target structure. This slack in the learning process is due to the gen-
eration of diluted gradients in the deeper layers. Another major issue is concerned with the 
localized convolutions which tend to limit the capability of the model to efficiently capture 
global and long-range dependencies. Furthermore, the distinct challenges (discussed in a 
later section) introduced in performing segmentation using different modalities needs to be 
addressed; however, it is not optimal with vanilla U-Net. Following this context, various 
U-Net variants are proposed to improve the segmentation performance across vivid modal-
ities. To establish a better understanding of these variants, the present review performs: 1) 
inter-modality categorization - to show variation in the segmentation approaches across the 
different modalities (X-ray, CT, MRI, PET and ultrasound), and 2) intra-modality categori-
zation - to group each U-Net variant within the same modality based on its most profound 
technical contribution (better U-Nets, attention U-Nets, inception U-Nets and ensemble 
U-Nets), as shown in Fig.  7. Within each modality, a similar type of categorization is per -
formed to better distinguish the type of approaches introduced for each modality. In the 
case where a U-Net variant uses multiple modifications, then based on its most profound 
Fig. 5  Typical approaches for model training
Fig. 6  Illustration of transfer learning approach to adapt to new task