5847
Modality specific U‑Net variants for biomedical image…
1 3
The search for the articles is performed on Google Scholar, which is one of the best aca-
demic search engine (SearchEngines 2020), where relevant articles are identified using 
the search string, SS1 as shown in Table  3. Among the acquired papers, the high qual-
ity journals or conferences are confirmed by analyzing its impact factor (high), h-index 
(high), peer-review process (transparent), indexing (MEDLINE, Elsevier Scopus and 
EMBASE, Clarivate Analytics Web of Science, Science Citation Index, etc.) and sci-
entific rigor. These reputed journals are identified from the ranked list, CORE (CORE 
2020). However, some articles are also included from popular preprint servers such as 
arXiv. With such a huge pool of acquired articles, the most relevant articles are filtered 
with a thorough examination (journal or conference quality, cite score and contribution) 
to include in this survey. These articles are analysed by categorizing it in one of the 
proposed classes and highlighting the architectural design of U-Net variant along with 
the achieved results and further possible improvements to address modality specific seg-
mentation challenges.
1.3  Research trend in BIS
A comparative literature exploration is conducted on the Google Scholar search engine 
using the search strings, SS2 and SS3, as shown in Table  3. The number of BIS approaches 
without U-Net are acquired by subtracting the number of BIS U-Net articles from the pool 
of BIS articles, to understand the latest trend of research. Fig.  1 illustrates that the latest 
approaches are developed by employing the U-Net framework while experiencing expo-
nential growth every year. In order to analyse such trend, this article aims to provide an 
exhaustive review of the variants of U-Net architectural design developed for segmenta-
tion. It is evident that the U-Net model incorporates the huge potential for further advance-
ments due to its mutable and modular structure that would result in a state-of-the-art diag-
nosis system.
1.4  Article structure
The remaining portion of the article is divided into several sections, where Sect.  2 presents 
the overview of biomedical image analysis and in Sects.  3, 4 and  5 the comprehensive 
analysis of U-Net variants is presented that covers implementation strategies and advance-
ments. Later, Sect.  6 presents the observations concerned with the current advancements in Table 1  Medical imaging approaches for diagnosis
Imaging type Approach Usecase Duration (in min.)
MRI Magnetic fields and 
radio wavesMultiple sclerosis, stroke, tumors, spinal cord 
disorders, etc.45–60
X-ray Ionizing radiation Fractures, arthritis, osteoporosis, breast 
cancer, etc.10–15
CT/CAT Ionizing radiation Trauma injuries, tumors and cancers, vascular 
and heart diseases, etc.10–15
US Sound waves Gallbladder illness, breast lumps, genital 
disorder, joint problems, etc.30–60
PET Radioactive tracer Alzheimer, epilepsy, seizures, parkinsons’ 
disease, etc.90–120