5878 N. S. Punn, S. Agarwal 
1 3
7.1  General challenges
One major challenge is concerned with the computational power requirement which tends 
to limit the feasibility of the approach. Following this many cloud based high performance 
computing environments are developed for mobile, efficient and faster computations. 
Although progress is also made towards the model compression and acceleration tech-
niques (Cheng et al. 2017) with great achievements; however, it is still required to estab-
lish the concrete benchmark results for real-time applications. Recently, Tan and Le (2019) 
proposed an EfficientNet framework that uses compound coefficients for uniform scaling 
in all dimensions. This could make the U-Net design streamlined for complex segmenta-
tion tasks with minimal change in the parameters. Besides several attempts are also made 
towards automation of model architecture design (Ren et  al. 2021) to develop optimal 
model for different applications; however, there is still long way to go.
Furthermore, these powerful deep learning approaches are data-hungry i.e. the amount 
of data available directly affects the model performance towards achieving robust results. 
However, the expense of data acquisition and delineation, and data security, results in the 
limited availability of the data which bottlenecks the development of real-world systems. 
In this context, various data augmentation strategies (Shorten and Khoshgoftaar 2019) are 
proposed that tend to alleviate the performance of the model while drawing the advantages 
of big data. Generally, the image augmentation strategies involve geometric transforma-
tions, color space augmentations, kernel filters, mixing images, random erasing, feature 
space augmentation, adversarial training, generative adversarial networks, neural style 
transfer, and meta-learning. However, the diversity of augmented data is limited by the 
available data which could result in overfitting. In another approach, U-Net models utilize 
transfer learning approaches (Byra et al. 2020b) to optimize the pre-trained model to adapt 
to the targeted task while having insufficient training data. These deep transfer learning 
techniques are categories under four broad areas: instances based, mapping based, network 
based and adversarial based  (Tan et  al. 2018). The self-supervised learning (SSL)  (Jing 
and Tian 2020) is an emerging technology that also addresses this challenge. In SSL strate-
gies initially, pre-training is performed with un-annotated samples for some pretext task 
to learn feature representations such as predicting rotations, identifying the image patch, 
solving jigsaw puzzles, etc. and later model is fine-tuned to perform actual segmentation. 
The potential of this approach attracts many researchers to advance the U-Net based BIS 
approaches. Furthermore, with the fusion of different modalities, rich information can 
be extracted concerning desired features for training the model. However, developing an 
appropriate fusion approach representing vivid modalities is still a challenging task.
The performance of models are also affected by the low imaging quality caused by the 
noise and artefacts, where noise may obscure features of an image, while artefact adds 
irrelevant features following some pattern. For instance in CT imaging, noise can make 
images grainy with small variations in contrast, whereas a streak artefact appears to make 
the region of low density. There are several pre-processing strategies proposed to remove 
or minimize the presence of noise and artefacts from data. For denoising the most com-
mon approaches that are followed are wavelets thresholding, partial differential equations 
(PDEs) (minimization problem of total variation method), NL-means and fast NL-means 
algorithms, anisotropic diffusion, etc. (Oulhaj et al. 2012; Ravishankar et al. 2017). The 
artefacts can be reduced by using newer reconstruction or metal artefact reduction (MAR) 
techniques (Chen et al. 2019b; Triche et al. 2019).