5867
Modality specific U‑Net variants for biomedical image…
1 3
(individual dataset and mixed datasets), USE-Net struggled to achieve better results. Dong 
et al. (2020) integrated 3D U-Net model with deformable convolutions (Dai et al. 2017) for 
cardiac MRI segmentation. The deformable U-Net (DeU-Net) includes a temporal deform-
able aggregation module (TDAM) to generate fused feature maps using an offset predic-
tion network. The fused feature maps are then fed to deformable global position attention 
(DGPA) network to map the multi-dimensional contextual information into generalized and 
localized features. The proposed approach outperformed other models to generate efficient 
segmentation masks involving subtle structures. Recently, Li et al. (2021) proposed multi-
scale attention enabled U-Net model (MA-Unet) to segment lumbar spinar using MRI. The 
dual branch multi-scale attention block represents the most relevant feature maps at differ -
ent target scales by using aggregating features obtained from two branches, where the first 
branch works as a multi-scale feature extraction block by using dense connections and the 
second branch uses the channel and spatial attention network to suppress irrelevant infor -
mation. The authors achieved promising results; however, the introduction of MSA block 
across every stage in the entire network results in expensive computation and resources 
which could be reduced by using depthwise separable convolutions.
3.3.3  Inception U‑Nets
Chen et al. (2018b) improved the performance of the vanilla 3D U-Net model by adding 
spatiotemporal-separable 3D convolutions (Xie et al. 2018) to form S3DU-Net model. The 
S3D convolution involves two convolution layers i.e. 2D convolution operation to extract 
spatial features and then additional 1D convolution to learn temporal features, furthermore, 
inception (Szegedy et al. 2015) and residual connections (He et al. 2016a) are added to 
better learn the complex patterns. The S3DU-Net model is trained with dice loss and evalu-
ated on dice coefficient and Hausdorff distance metrics. The authors achieved average dice 
scores of 0.69, 0.84 and 0.78, for enhancing tumor, whole tumor and tumor core respec-
tively on BraTS 2018 challenge. For real-time applications, Wang et al. (2019b) proposed a 
multiscale statistical U-Net (MSU-Net) to segment cardiac regions in MRI. The MSU-Net 
incorporates statistical CNN (SCNN) (Wang et al. 2019c) to fully exploit the temporal and 
contextual information present in various channels of an input image or feature map along 
with the multiscale parallelized data sampling approach. For multi-scale data sampling, 
independent component analysis (ICA) (Wang et al. 2019c) is applied over the patches of 
data to form clusters of canonical form distributions which represent spatio-temporal cor -
relations at coarser scales. This data sampling parallelization tends to speed up the perfor -
mance significantly by 26.8% as compared to the standard U-Net model and achieved an 
increased dice score by 1.6% on ACDC MICCAI 2017 challenge, while also improving 
significantly over state-of-the-art GridNet (Zotti et al. 2018) model.
3.3.4  Ensemble U‑Nets
Wang et  al. (2019a) proposed a 3D FCN model with deep supervision and group dila-
tion (DSD-FCN model) to address various challenges concerning the automated MRI 
prostate segmentation like inhomogeneous intensity distribution, varying prostate anat-
omy, etc., which makes it hard for manual intervention. The proposed architecture follows 
vanilla U-Net topology in which deep supervision is adopted to learn discriminative fea-
tures, whereas group dilated convolutions tend to acquire multi-scale contextual informa-
tion. The model is trained with the objective function defined as the weighted average of