5857
Modality specific U‑Net variants for biomedical image…
1 3
2018). The wide and easy availability of X-ray imaging has encouraged the research com-
munity to contribute towards smart diagnosis systems.
3.1.1  Better U‑Nets
The segmentation of lungs from chest X-ray (CXR) imaging is a crucial step for any CAD 
system. Following this, Rashid et al. (2018) exploits the potential of U-Net model to gener -
ate the segmentation masks of the lungs from CXR images, where the produced masks are 
iteratively refined with post-processing techniques such as flood fill algorithm and mor -
phological operations. Significant improvement is observed as compared to traditional seg-
mentation approaches such as adaptive region growing, edge detection, statistical shape 
models, etc., over multiple datasets. To further improve segmentation performance, Frid-
Adar et al. (2018a) employed a pre-trained VGG-16 model in the encoder phase, where 
the decoder or the expansion phase uses upsampling and standard convolution opera-
tions sequentially for multi-class segmentation involving anatomical structures like lungs 
field, heart and clavicles in chest X-ray samples. While training, the pre-trained weights 
are fine-tuned to better extract or encode the desired features of the target classes. Unlike 
the approach by Rashid et al. (2018), this model with transfer learning achieved promising 
results without any post-processing overhead. Besides, the authors also analysed the pro-
posed model with multiple loss functions like DSC, IoU, Tversky and BCE, where the use 
of DSC produced the best results.
In another work, Abedalla et  al. (2020) proposed a deep learning framework 2STU-
Net to perform segmentation of pneumothorax (collapsed lung) in the CXR samples. It 
comprises a state-of-the-art residual network (ResNet-34) that is pre-trained on the Ima-
geNet dataset and arranged in the U-Net topology. Similar to the work by Frid-Adar et al. 
(2018a), the encoder is built with ResNet-34 (He et al. 2016a) by removing the last lay -
ers, whereas the decoder follows standard blocks of CNN with upsampling. Initially, the 
data is pre-processed to produce images of dimensions 256×256 and 512×512 for 2 
stage training scheme and multi-scale feature learning. The ResNet34U-Net is first trained 
with lower resolution images and later the same model is fine-tuned (keeping previously 
learned weights as initial weights) to adapt high resolution images. The authors also uti-
lized stochastic weight averaging (SWA) and test-time augmentation (TTA) techniques to 
improve the test results. The significance of 2 stage training is justified with the faster con-
vergence of the second training stage and better segmentation results, thereby highlight-
ing the effectiveness of multi-scale feature representation learning. However, the overall 
training overhead is increased due to two stage training. Wang et al. (2020a) synthesized a 
CXR dataset annotated with clavicles, anterior ribs, posterior ribs and bones, on which a 
multi-task dense connection U-Net (MDU-Net) is trained for multi-class segmentation. A 
feature separation network is introduced for multi-label segmentation where a pixel value 
is associated with more than one label e.g. the pixels in the overlapped regions of anterior 
and posterior ribs have multiple tags. For every CXR image, multiple masks are generated 
concerning different annotations, thereby multiple networks are trained to generate the cor -
responding mask. The implication of increased training time is addressed with the help of 
transfer learning, where the network uses a pre-trained DenseNet201 (Huang et al. 2017) 
model for feature extraction. However, due to the 2D projection of X-ray imaging, each 
annotated mask also covers features representing other masks categories which may devi-
ate the network from learning the class specific feature representations.