5853
Modality specific U‑Net variants for biomedical image…
1 3
2.1.3  Implementation strategies
The implementation strategies of segmentation architectures can be divided into two cat-
egories: 1) training from scratch and 2) training using a pre-trained model (also known 
as transfer learning). In first approach (as shown in Fig.  5(a)), an entire model is trained 
in which training parameters are initialized with Xavier initialization (Glorot and Bengio 
2010) or Kaming initialization (He et al. 2015a). Due to which this approach requires a 
large number of labelled data samples to optimize the training parameters and learn the 
desired task. Hence, this approach requires intensive time and effort to develop and train 
the model. In the transfer learning paradigm, as simulated in Fig.  6, a pre-trained model 
(models trained on benchmark datasets such as ImageNet) is utilized as a backbone model 
to train on different data involving similar or different tasks such as object detection and 
image segmentation. As shown in Fig.  5(b) and Fig.  5(c), the transfer learning or domain 
adaptation can be applied in two schemes, either freezing the base model and training the 
later layers for prediction, or semi-freezing the base model, where few high level layers are 
retrained along with the prediction layers. The transfer learning approach typically pro-
duces better results than the random initialization of the training parameters (Garcia-Garcia 
et al. 2018).
2.1.4  Performance metrics
The performance metrics are the key factors to evaluate and compare the segmentation 
performance of the models. Due to the unavailability of the standard metrics, each system 
requires an appropriate and different selection of metrics that can quantify time, computa-
tional and memory space requirements and overall performance (Fenster and Chiu 2006). 
Table  4 presents the most popular evaluation metrics that are utilized to analyse the perfor -
mance in BIS models. In BIS, mostly the datasets are imbalanced i.e. the number of pixels/
voxels concerning the target region (region of interest) are relatively less than the dark pix-
els/voxels (background region), due to which the metrics such as accuracy, which are best 
suited for a balanced distribution of data samples, are not recommended for BIS evaluation 
of the models. Among the discussed metrics intersection-over-union (IoU or Jaccard index) 
and dice similarity coefficient are the most widely used evaluation metrics in BIS for vari-
ous modalities. More details can be found in the recent review articles (Haque and Neubert 
2020; Minaee et al. 2020).
2.1.5  Loss functions
The loss functions or objective functions drive the training procedure of the deep learning 
models. For the BIS task, loss functions are tuned to alleviate the above discussed class 
imbalance problem by refining the distributions of the training data. With each dataset 
introducing its complexities and challenges, the loss functions are grouped into four cat-
egories based on the distribution, region, boundary and hybrid  (Ma 2020), as shown in 
Table  5, along with their respective usecases. For ease in representation, the loss functions 
are summarized for the semantic segmentation scenario, where the number of classes is 
limited to two (background and target region). The effect of these loss functions for bio-
medical image segmentation using various modalities over nnU-Net model (Isensee et al. 
2021) is explored by Nasalwai et al. (2021), and also proposed an accelerated tversky loss 
(ATL) function to achieve faster model training or convergence.