5850 N. S. Punn, S. Agarwal 
1 3
tends to extract high and low level features, whereas the expansion phase follows from 
the features learned in the corresponding contraction phase (skip connections) to recon-
struct the image into the desired dimensions with the help of transposed convolutions or 
upsampling operations. The U-Net model won the ISBI 2015 challenge and outperformed 
its predecessors. Later, a similar approach is proposed by Çiçek et al. (2016) in the three 
dimensional feature space to perform volumetric segmentation of Xenopus kidney and 
achieved promising results. Following from the state-of-the-art potential of the U-Net 
model, many variants have been proposed based on the variation in the convolution and 
pooling operations, skip connections, the arrangement of the components in each layer and 
hybrid approaches that make use of the state-of-the-art deep learning models, to tackle the 
challenges associated with different applications.
2.1.1  U‑Net
With the sense of segmentation being a classification task where every pixel is classified 
as being part of the target region or background, Ronneberger et  al. (2015) proposed a 
U-Net model to distinguish every pixel, where input is encoded and decoded to produce 
output with the same resolution as input. As shown in Fig.  3, the symmetrical arrangement 
of encoder-decoder blocks efficiently extracts and concatenates multi-scale feature maps, 
where encoded features are propagated to decoder blocks via skip connections and a bot-
tleneck layer.
The encoder block (contraction path) consists of a series of operations involving valid 
3×3 convolution followed by a ReLU activation function (as shown in Fig.  4(a)), where 
a 1-pixel border is lost to enable processing of the large images in individual tiles. The 
obtained feature maps from the combination of convolution and ReLU are downsampled 
with the help of max pooling operation, as illustrated in Fig.  4(b). Later, the number of 
feature channels are increased by a factor of 2, following each layer of convolution, acti-
vation and max pooling, while resulting in spatial contraction of the feature maps. The 
extracted feature maps are propagated to decoder block via bottleneck layer that uses cas-
caded convolution layers. The decoder block (expansion path) consists of sequences of up-
convolutions (as shown in Fig.  4(c)) and concatenation with high-resolution features from 
the corresponding encoded layer. The up-convolution operation uses the kernel to map 
each feature vector to the 2×2 pixel output window followed by a ReLU activation func-
tion. Finally, the output layer generates a segmentation mask with two channels compris-
ing background and foreground classes. In addition, the authors addressed the challenge to 
segregate the touching or overlapping regions by inserting the background pixels between 
Fig. 2  Schematic representation of deep learning based segmentation architectures