5880 N. S. Punn, S. Agarwal 
1 3
or semi-supervised learning (Yu et al. 2018) strategies. In another challenge, a model needs 
to be designed with dynamic feature adaption to generate segmentation masks at different 
locations in the human body. It can be considered as one of the important aspects for bone 
segmentation (Wang et al. 2020a) while using X-ray imaging.
With CT imaging most of the challenges arise due to overlapping anatomical structures 
and large variations in the shape, size and location of the organs from person to person. 
For example, in the case of an abnormal lung CT segmentation, lung parenchyma (Skourt 
et al. 2018) needs to be segregated from the bronchus regions that represent similar fea-
tures as lung tissue, along with the segmentation of nodules and blood vessels. Moreover, 
pulmonary inflation with an elastic chest wall can result in large variation in volumes and 
margins (Mansoor et al. 2015). To address these challenges mostly attention based U-Net 
models are employed in CT image segmentation (Fan et al. 2020b; Seo et al. 2019; Song 
et al. 2019), while the performance could further be improved by incorporating other net-
works or operational designs such as object dependent filters, residual blocks, etc.
Unlike other modalities, MRI is most widely used for segmentation (brain tissue, tumor, 
skull, prostate, etc.) due to the ample availability of datasets. However, automated analy -
sis using MRI is challenging due to intensity inhomogeneity, changes in settings for the 
acquisition of MRI scans, fluctuations in the appearance of pathology, anatomical vari-
ations in brain morphology, and imperfections in image acquisition. For instance, the 
performance of brain tumor segmentation models is affected by large variations in brain 
tumors location, size, shape and heterogeneity (image uniformity, contrast uptake and tex-
ture) (Akkus et al. 2017; Wadhwa et al. 2019). To address these challenges multi-modality 
fusion based approaches are most widely studied to effectively learn the inconsistent tumor 
features  (Zhou et  al. 2019b). Depending on the segmentation problem under considera-
tion these challenges can be addressed by integrating several state-of-the-art architectural 
designs (inception, cascaded, attention, dense, etc.) and operational designs (atrous, spec-
tral, hybrid, etc.) resulting in ample possibilities of approaches (Dong et al. 2020; Punn 
and Agarwal 2020d; Zhang et al. 2019). Similar to MRI, PET imaging analysis is mostly 
utilized by oncologists to diagnose and analyse severe problems such as gliomas, perfusion 
evaluation, cerebrovascular accidents, parkinson’s disease, etc. This brings similar chal-
lenges of large variations in the appearance and location of pathologies (Weller et al. 2013) 
in addition to very limited data availability due to privacy and security concerns which can 
be addressed by using U-Net based models assisted with data augmentation, self-super -
vised learning or transfer learning strategies (Lu et al. 2020).
There are various clinical applications of ultrasound imaging including cardiology, 
breast cancer, prostate, and other diseases  (Noble and Boukerroui 2006) which can be 
assisted with automated segmentation. However, the heterogeneous appearance of the 
organ due to variations in depth, neighbouring tissues and location is one of the major 
challenges in ultrasound image segmentation  (Zhou et  al. 2020). In this regard, most of 
U-Net based approaches uses inception based attention with dense encoder modules to 
develop multi-scale feature representation (Yang et al. 2019; Li et al. 2019b; Wang et al. 
2018b). Another major challenge is concerned with the high variability in the inter and 
intra-observer among physicians and sonographers, which depends on the acquisition pro-
tocols and observer preference, thereby a larger training dataset is required to alleviate the 
variation (Liu et al. 2019a).