5870 N. S. Punn, S. Agarwal 
1 3
masks to improve the learned features. The proposed framework achieved dice scores of 
0.87 and 0.73 to segment primary tumors on simulated and patient images and outper -
formed several semi-automated approaches. This approach could perform 3D segmentation 
by generating a mask for each slice, but avoids the 3D correlations of the voxels which is 
crucial for real-time applications.
3.5  Ultrasound
Ultrasound is acoustic energy in the form of waves having a frequency beyond the human 
hearing range. These are generated with the help of piezoelectric crystals which deform 
under the influence of electric field and generate compression waves when an alternating 
voltage is applied. Ultrasonography (Moore and Copel 2011) is an ultrasound based diag-
nostic imaging technique used for visualizing the internal body organs by processing the 
reflected signals. The deep learning technologies aid in diagnosing US imaging to seg-
ments regions of interest like breast mass, pelvic floor levator muscle discontinuity, etc.
3.5.1  Better U‑Nets
In consideration of breast cancer being the deadliest cancer among women, Almajalid et al. 
(2018) proposed an automatic breast ultrasound (BUS) image segmentation system to aid 
in its diagnosis and treatment. The authors utilized the vanilla U-Net model on the pre-
processed BUS images. The images are preprocessed using the contrast enhancement with 
histogram equalization and noise reduction with speckle reducing anisotropic diffusion 
(SRAD) (Yu and Acton 2002) techniques to improve the image quality. Finally, with the 
assumption of the presence of a single tumor region the authors filtered the false positive 
regions to remove the noisy regions. This assumptions limits the capability of the model 
to generate masks for multiple tumor regions. In this regard, Li et al. (2019b) incorporated 
dense connections in the U-Net model (DenseU-Net) to efficiently segment levator hiatus 
from ultrasound images. The implication of dense connections enabled feature reuse and 
reduction in the trainable parameters. The DenseU-Net model is trained to generate the 
binary segmentation mask which is post-processed with binary thresholding to generate 
mask sharp boundaries, and localized regions are generated with active contour model (Li 
et al. 2016) without compromising the performance of the model.
3.5.2  Attention U‑Nets
In another application of eyeball segmentation, Lin et  al. (2019) proposed a semantic 
embedding and shape-aware U-Net model (SSU-Net), where the authors employed a signed 
distance field (SDF) instead of a binary mask as the label to learn the shape information. 
In addition, the model is equipped with a semantic embedding module (SEM) to fuse the 
semantic information at coarser levels of the SSU-Net model. The SEM block draws fea-
tures from two low-level stages and one corresponding stage, where lower level features 
are convolved and bilinear interpolation is applied to restore the resolution at the same 
scale. This enabled the network to efficiently identify the ambiguous and discontinuous 
boundaries and achieved better segmentation performance. Due to the low signal to noise 
ratio (SNR) in US imaging, real-time analysis is still a challenging task. Recently, Zhang 
et al. (2020b) proposed a U-Net based deep learning approach to realize the multi-needle