5864 N. S. Punn, S. Agarwal 
1 3
majority voting scheme 3D segmentation mask is generated. The deformable U-Net (Dai 
et al. 2017) follows standard encoder-decoder architecture, where convolution operations 
are replaced with deformable convolutions (DC). In DC, the regular convolution operation 
is accompanied by another convolution layer to learn 2D offset for each pixel. It leverages 
the deep network’s ability to learn the required receptive field rather than being fixed for 
segmenting the regions having varying geometrical structures. This can also be understood 
as a learnable dilated convolution.
Unlike other U-Net variants that applies multi-scale feature fusion, Fan et al. (2020b) 
recently proposed a multi-scale attention U-Net model that uses a self attention scheme 
for adaptive feature extraction. The self attention design comprises position-wise attention 
block (PAB - installed on bottleneck layer) and multi-scale fusion attention block (MFAB - 
installed on every stage of encoder path), where PAB captures feature interdependencies in 
spatial dimension and MFAB captures the channel dependencies for any feature map. The 
MA-Net is trained and evaluated on the 2017 LiTS challenge and achieved a DSC score of 
0.96 and 0.75 for liver and liver-tumor segmentation respectively. However, the results are 
not as promising as achieved using mU-Net model (Seo et al. 2019).
3.2.3  Inception U‑Nets
Recently, Xia et  al. (2021) proposed MC-Net that uses a multi-scale context extraction 
module with a context residual attention approach to model the local and global semantic 
information of the target regions using CT imaging and alleviate the problem of not captur -
ing the long-range dependencies by most of the U-Net models. Overall, MC-Net is built 
with a multi-feature extraction module (MIE) to obtain multi-scale feature maps similar to 
inception network (Szegedy et al. 2017), context information extraction (CIE) with parallel 
dilated convolutions and residual attention enabled skip connections. Though the model 
achieved promising results over multiple CT datasets; however, the diversity of multi-scale 
feature extraction is limited to a feature map at a single level, which could be improved by 
considering feature maps across different encoding layers.
3.2.4  Ensemble U‑Nets
Janssens et al. (2018) proposed a cascaded 3D FCN based deep learning model consist-
ing of “LocalizationNet” and “SegmentationNet” to estimate the bounding box (RoI) and 
generate volumetric segmentation masks of lumbar vertebrae respectively. The Localiza-
tionNet comprises a 3D FCN regression model which is trained to regress the displace-
ment vectors associated with a voxel, representing diagonal corners of the rectangular box. 
The localized information is fed to SegmentationNet comprising an FCN 3D U-Net model 
to produce a segmentation mask for lumbar vertebrae. This two stage approach exhib-
ited significant improvement over the existing approaches but with the overhead compu-
tations of two dedicated models. In the real world scenario, modalities may suffer from 
inherent ambiguities that coagulate the actual nature of the disease. Following this, Kohl 
et al. (2018) introduced a probabilistic U-Net framework that combines the standard U-Net 
model with conditional variational autoencoder (CVAE). For a sample image, CVAE gen-
erates diverse plausible hypotheses from a low-dimensional latent space which are fed to 
U-Net to generate the corresponding segmentation mask. It is shown that the model can 
generate diverse segmentation samples, given the ground-truth delineation from multiple