5871
Modality specific U‑Net variants for biomedical image…
1 3
segmentation in the 3D transrectal US (TRUS) images of high dose rate (HDR) prostate 
brachytherapy. The U-Net model is loaded with the attention scheme in the skip connec-
tions to address the challenge of identifying the smaller needles, while spatial continuity 
of the needles is maintained with total variation regularization. The model is trained with 
a deep supervision approach, where patches of needle masks are generated to compute the 
cross entropy loss and accordingly optimize the training weights. With the proposed frame-
work, the authors achieved adequate performance gain on multi-needle segmentation for 
prostate brachytherapy.
Byra et  al. (2020a) proposed a selective kernel U-Net (SKU-Net) model for breast 
mass segmentation in US imaging while also addressing the challenge of variable breast 
mass size and image properties. In SKU-Net, each convolution layer of the U-Net model 
is replaced by an SK block, that tends to dynamically adapt the receptive field. Similar 
to the concept of dual path U-Net (Yang et al. 2019), the SK module (Li et al. 2019c) is 
designed using two branches, where one uses dilated convolutions and other is without 
dilation to generate feature maps. Later, these features are merged and global average pool-
ing, followed by FC layer and sigmoid activation is applied to construct attention coef-
ficients for each channel in the feature map. With this approach, authors achieved signifi-
cant improvement over the vanilla U-Net model across multiple datasets. In another work, 
Punn and Agarwal (2021b) proposed residual cross-spatial attention (CSA) block in the 
skip connections of inception U-Net model (Punn and Agarwal 2020c) to further improve 
the segmentation performance. The authors validated the performance of the model with 
breast cancer segmentation using ultrasound imaging. In contrast to standard attention 
(Oktay et al. 2018), the CSA block uses multi-level encoded feature maps to obtain better 
spatial correlation and develop spatial attention feature maps that are concatenated with 
corresponding decoder block to reconstruct the multi-scale spatial information. To address 
computational and memory challenges model uses depth-wise separable convolutions. The 
model achieved promising results on multiple US datasets and establishes scope for further 
utilization of this model across different modalities.
3.5.3  Inception U‑Nets
In another approach, Yang et al. (2019) proposed a dual path U-Net model for segmenta-
tion of lumen and media-adventitia from the IntraVascular UltraSound (IVUS) scans to aid 
in cardiovascular diseases diagnosis. Due to the limited availability of the data samples, the 
DPU-Net is trained with the real-time augmentor that generates and integrates three types 
of artefacts: bifurcation, side vessel, and shadow, and other common augmentation opera-
tions with training images. In contrast to vanilla U-Net, DPU-Net involves multi-branch 
parallel encoding and decoding operations, where feature maps are extracted and recon-
structed with different kernel sizes at the same hierarchical level to address the challenge of 
a large variation in shape and size of lumen or media region. With this network-in-network 
architecture and real-time augmentation approach, the authors achieved Jaccard measure 
(IoU) of 0.87 and 0.90 on 40 MHz and 20 MHz frames respectively from IVUS dataset.
3.5.4  Ensemble U‑Nets
Wang et al. (2018b) proposed a multi-feature guided CNN model for classification and seg-
mentation of the bone surfaces in the US scans. The US images are initially processed with 
a pre-enhancing (PE) net to synthesize a US scan that highlights the bone surface, by using