5849
Modality specific U‑Net variants for biomedical image…
1 3
classification, localization or detection, it offers very rich information about the disease and 
infected regions. With this interest, many architectures have been proposed for the segmen-
tation of the targeted regions from vivid modalities (Haque and Neubert 2020). In addition, 
segmentation is the most widely researched application of deep learning in biomedical 
image analysis (Litjens et al. 2017), where U-Net based segmentation architectures have 
gained significant popularity to develop computer-aided diagnosis (CAD) systems.
2.1  Rise of segmentation architectures
Despite the advancements in deep learning, segmentation is still one of the challenging 
tasks due to the varying dimensions, shape and locale of the target tissues. Tradition-
ally, the segmentation process was carried manually by expert clinicians to illuminate the 
regions of interest in the whole volume of samples, thereby it is ideal to automate this 
process for faster diagnosis and treatment. In recent years, various deep learning models 
are developed for BIS that are categorized into manual, semi-automatic and fully auto-
matic approaches (Haque and Neubert 2020). Fig.  2 presents the schematic representation 
of the pipeline of the recent deep learning based segmentation frameworks for biomedi-
cal images, which is divided into data preprocessing (Bhattacharyya 2011), deep learning 
model (Minaee et al. 2020), and post-processing (Zhou et al. 2019a; Christ et al. 2016). 
In the data preprocessing stage, the data undergoes a certain set of operations like resize 
and normalization to reduce the intensity variation in the image samples, augmentation 
to generate more training samples for avoiding the class biasness and overfitting prob-
lem, removal of irrelevant artefacts or noise from the data samples, etc. The pre-processed 
data is then fed to train the deep neural segmentation network, where mostly U-Net based 
architectures are deployed. The output of the network undergoes post-processing with 
techniques such as morphological and conditional random field based feature extraction to 
refine the final segmentation results.
Initiated from the sliding window approach by Ciresan et  al. (2012) to classify each 
pixel while also localizing the regions using patch based input, the model outperformed 
in the ISBI 2012 challenge; however, the training was slow because of a large number of 
overlapping patches and also lacked the balance of context and localization accuracy. Long 
et al. (2015) proposed fully convolutional neural network (FCN) for semantic segmenta-
tion, defined on the state-of-the-art classification networks like Alex-Net, VGG-Net and 
Google-Net. This model can process images of arbitrary size and produce the segmentation 
mask of same size by using deconvolution; however, it does not utilize global information 
context and hence generates fuzzy segmentation masks. Later, the U-Net model proposed 
by Ronneberger et al. (2015), consists of FCN along with the contraction-expansion paths 
and skip connections to gradually adapt the long-range affinities. The contraction phase 
Fig. 1  Research trend in biomedical image segmentation per year