5875
Modality specific U‑Net variants for biomedical image…
1 3
labelled data. Recently, Punn and Agarwal (2020b) introduced a hierarchical segmentation 
approach, CHS-Net that involves two cascaded residual attention inception U-Net (RAIU-
Net) models, where first generates lungs contour, which is fed to the second model to iden-
tify COVID-19 infected regions using CT images. The RAIU-Net model is designed with 
a residual inception U-Net model and spectral-spatial-depth attention blocks. The authors 
achieved promising results in generating the infected segmentation masks.
Furthermore, similar approaches are also developed for X-ray imaging for the screening 
of COVID-19 (Punn and Agarwal 2020a). Zahangir Alom et al. (2020) proposed a robust 
classification and segmentation framework of coronavirus infected X-ray and CT images, 
where classification is performed using inception residual recurrent convolutional neural 
network (IRRCNN) with transfer learning and NABLA-N model is used for localizing the 
infected regions. In addition, other deep learning based application areas are also explored 
to control the spread of the virus such as automated social distancing monitoring (Punn 
et al. 2020b), mask detection (Chowdary et al. 2020), etc. Furthermore, the survey of deep 
learning based approaches for COVID-19 diagnosis (Shi et al. 2020) reveals the significant 
impact of U-Net for CAD systems. Following these developments, it is believed that these 
artificial intelligent approaches will continue to evolve and contribute towards the faster 
and efficient diagnosis of the coronavirus.
6  Analysis
Over the years, the advancements in deep learning and computer vision techniques have 
attracted many researchers to contribute to the healthcare domain with a variety of tasks 
e.g. classification, detection, segmentation, etc. With segmentation being a critical task that 
drives the diagnosis process  (Hesamian et  al. 2019), researchers have developed a keen 
interest to develop a computer-aided diagnosis system to speed up the treatment process.
Among the published approaches or frameworks, U-Net appears to be the prominent 
choice  (Minaee et  al. 2020) to develop novel architectures to adapt multiple modalities 
with optimal segmentation performance. Following such high utility of the model, this arti-
cle presented the recent developments in U-Net based approaches for biomedical image 
segmentation. Due to the high mutability and modularity design, U-Net topology can eas-
ily be integrated with other state-of-the-art deep learning models such as AlexNet (Kriz-
hevsky et al. 2012), VGGNet (Simonyan and Zisserman 2014), ResNet (He et al. 2016a), 
GoogLeNet  (Szegedy et  al. 2015), MobileNet  (Howard et  al. 2017), DenseNet  (Huang 
et al. 2017), etc., to produce the desired results depending on the application. This ease 
of integration opens a wide spectrum of applications for U-Net with endless possibilities 
of novel architecture designs. In the most recent developments of U-Net based biomedical 
image segmentation models following observations are drawn:
– More emphasis is given to multi-scale feature extraction and fusion to explicitly model 
global and long-range feature dependencies.
– Inspired by the state-of-the-art performance of self attention mechanism in transformer 
models many transformer based U-Net variants are utilized to enhance its capability to 
capture global contexts.