5863
Modality specific U‑Net variants for biomedical image…
1 3
are generated with the help of the 3D U-Net model, where the segmentation results are fur -
ther refined with the upsampling and segmentation error correction. The authors utilized 
CT volumes from multiple centres (hospitals) to evaluate the model performance while 
achieving significant improvements.
3.2.2  Attention U‑Nets
When the target is the segmentation of the internal organs, then models adopting the atten-
tion mechanism help to focus the network on regions of interest. Oktay et al. (2018) pro-
posed a novel attention gate based U-Net framework to focus on pancreas regions and 
generate the corresponding segmentation masks. The attention approach tends to sup-
press irrelevant features and highlight the prominent features corresponding to the target 
regions. The authors utilized the FCN with U-Net connectivity, where the skip connections 
are loaded with these attention filters. Inspired from the work of Shen et al. (2017), each 
pixel is associated with a gating vector to determine the regions to focus. The incorpora-
tion of this attention mechanism allowed the authors to achieve significant improvements 
in the segmentation results over other approaches. The performance of this model could 
easily be improved by incorporating transfer learning, multi-stage training, etc. To exploit 
the potential of attention mechanism, Seo et al. (2019) proposed a modified U-Net (mU-
Net) framework that addressed the classical problems associated with the standard U-Net 
model concerning skip connection (Han and Ye 2018) and pooling operation (loss of spa-
tial information). In the mU-Net, the standard skip connections are replaced by object-
dependent filters to dynamically filter the feature maps based on the object size, where 
features concerning the small objects are preserved by blocking the deconvolution path and 
in the case of large objects, feature maps indicating boundary information is propagated 
to avoid duplication. The authors verified the effectiveness of adaptive filters to preserve 
the features using the permeation rate while achieving the DSC values of 0.98 and 0.89 on 
the liver and liver-tumor segmentation respectively. The approach could be extended for 
3D volumetric analysis, where computation cost can be addressed by modifying operation 
schemes such as depthwise separable convolution instead of standard convolution. These 
object-dependent filters could easily be integrated with other networks and modalities for 
segmentation.
Song et al. (2019) proposed a U-NeXt model to segment CT images of gallstones, which 
is one of the common and frequently occurring diseases worldwide. The U-NeXt model is 
equipped with the attention up-sampling blocks, spatial pyramid pooling (He et al. 2015b) 
of skip connections (SkipSPP), and multi-scale feature extraction with the series of convo-
lution layers along with the dense connections. The overall architecture design is similar 
to U-Net++ model (Zhou et al. 2018b) with slight variation in connections, convolution 
and pooling operations. The authors trained and evaluated the model on the proposed data-
set with 5,350 images using deep supervision and reported improvement in IoU by 7% 
over baseline biomedical image segmentation models. However, for complex target struc-
tures, the network produces soft edges in the mask. To address this issue, a deep Q net-
work (DQN) (Mnih et al. 2015) driven approach is proposed by Man et al. (2019) that uses 
deformable U-Net to efficiently generate the segmentation mask of the pancreas from CT 
scans with the extraction of its contextual information and anisotropic features. Initially, 
the 3D volumes are split into axial, coronal and sagittal 2D slices for each of which, DQN-
based deep reinforcement learning (DRL) agents tend to localize the pancreas to form 
RoI slices. These slices are fed to the deformable U-Net models and finally, based on the