5862 N. S. Punn, S. Agarwal 
1 3
the limited availability of the data samples, authors utilized data augmentation strate-
gies such as rotation, zooming, shearing, etc. Due to the possibility of the presence of 
noise in the output masks, post-processing is applied to keep the binary contours that 
represent the largest area. Later, the processed output mask is utilized to compute the 
cardiothoracic ratio defined as CTR =(L+R)∕(T ) , where L and R  indicates the maxi-
mum distances from the center to the left and right farthest boundaries of the heart 
region, and T is the maximum horizontal distance between the lungs boundaries. The 
CTR  value is then utilized to determine the cardiomegaly from the generated masks. 
In another approach, Subramanian et al. (2019) proposed an automated system involv -
ing two U-Net models, where the output features are exploited to identify the type 
of central venous catheters (CVC) as peripherally inserted central catheters (PICC), 
internal jugular (IJ), subclavian and Swan-Ganz catheters. The first U-Net model is 
utilized for CVC segmentation by using the exponential logarithmic loss to address the 
class imbalance problem, whereas the other U-Net model tends to extract the anatomi-
cal structures to distinguish the ambiguous classes such as PICC and subclavian lines. 
Clinicians manually annotated the CVCs to obtain the signature spatial priors which 
undergo pixel-wise multiplication with the segmentation output. Later, the produced 
output is fed to the pre-trained neural network random forest (NN-RF) classifier to dis-
tinguish the type of CVC. This hybrid combination of segmentation and classification 
achieved promising results on the NIH database.
3.2  Computed tomography
Computed tomography imaging is based on the principle of utilizing the series of the sys-
tem of rotating X-rays to develop cross-sectional images or series of slices of bones, blood 
vessels and soft tissues of the body (Bercovich and Javitt 2018). In contrast to plain X-ray 
imaging, CT scans provide rich information with high quality images. This is generally uti-
lized to examine people with serious injuries or diseases like trauma, tumors, pneumonia, 
etc., and also to plan medical, surgical or radiation treatment. Hence, various deep learning 
based approaches are developed for faster diagnosis and treatment using CT imaging.
3.2.1  Better U‑Nets
Tong et al. (2018) proposed a U-Net framework for lung nodule segmentation, where mini 
residual connections are introduced within the encoder and decoder phases to address the 
vanishing gradient problem. The algorithm initiates with the process of generating the seg-
mentation of lung parenchyma with morphological operations and removal of irrelevant 
features. The segmented lung parenchyma images are divided into 64×64 slices along 
with the input images. Finally, the improved U-Net model is trained and validated against 
the preprocessed dataset for segmenting the pulmonary nodules. The authors evaluated the 
approach on LUNA2016 dataset against various models and achieved promising results 
with a dice score of 0.74; however, the samples of pulmonary nodules were very limited 
and the approach also lacked the 3D volumetric analysis. Recently, Park et al. (2020) uti-
lized a 3D U-Net model to segment the lung lobe regions while also addressing the miss-
detection of the lobar fissure. Initially, the volumetric CT scans are preprocessed with 
thresholding to identify lungs parenchyma, and region growing techniques (Leader et al. 
2003) to separate overlapping left and right lung regions. Later, these lobe segmentations