5872 N. S. Punn, S. Agarwal 
1 3
a B-mode US scan and three filtered image features, including local phase tensor image 
(LPT), local phase bone image (LB) and bone shadow enhanced image (BPE). The fea-
ture enriched images are then used by a classification embedded U-Net model (cU-Net) to 
produce the segmentation mask and identify the type of the bone surface. This multi-task 
deep learning framework achieved promising segmentation and classification results with 
F1-score of 0.96 and 0.90 on SonixTouch and Clarius C3 datasets respectively. In another 
application area, Dunnhofer et al. (2020) emphasized on the tracking of knee femoral con-
dyle cartilage during ultrasound guided invasive procedures. The Siam-U-Net model com-
bines the potential of the U-Net model with siamese framework (Gomariz et al. 2019) for 
tracking the cartilage in the real-time ultrasound sequences. In Siam-U-Net two encoder 
blocks are adopted which are fed with resized-cropped US sequences named as, searching 
area and target cartilage. After five blocks of encoding layers, the acquired feature maps of 
two inputs are cross-correlated using convolution operation applied to searching area fea-
ture maps with target embedding as a filter, which results in localizing the implicit position 
of the cartilage in the searching area slice. Later, the slice is reconstructed in the decoder 
phase to generate the segmentation mask of the cartilage. The Siam-U-Net model achieved 
an average dice score of 0.70 with significant improvement over other approaches. How -
ever, the results could further be improved by expanding the dimension of the model into 
3D space for considering the neighbouring voxels correlation.
4  Other U‑Net variants and imaging
In this section, various U-Net variants are presented that are introduced as the biomedi-
cal image segmentation networks, where each model acts as a generic architecture that is 
trained and evaluated on multiple/different modalities.
4.1  Better U‑Nets
In the growing phase of biomedical image segmentation, Alom et al. (2018) integrated the 
potential of multiple state-of-the-art deep learning models such as recurrent CNN (Mikolov 
et al. 2011), residual CNN (He et al. 2016a) and U-Net to form RU-Net and R2U-Net for 
BIS. In the RU-Net model, the standard convolution and up-convolution units are improved 
by incorporating recurrent convolutional layers (RCL), whereas in R2U-Net both RCL 
and residual units are added. These models are trained and evaluated on three different 
modalities such as retina blood vessel segmentation (DRIVE, STARE, and CHASH-DB1 
datasets), skin cancer segmentation (ISIC 2017 Challenge), and lung segmentation (KDSB 
2017 challenge). Zhou et al. (2018a) proposed a nested U-Net architecture, U-Net++, to 
narrow down the gap between the encoded and decoded feature maps. In contrast to the 
U-Net model, U-Net++ model follows convolutions on dense and nested skip connec-
tions to effectively capture the coarser details. Furthermore, a deep supervision approach is 
adopted to prune the model based on the loss (combined binary cross entropy and dice coef-
ficient) estimated at different semantic levels. The performance of the model is validated 
with multiple datasets involving KDSB18, ASU-Mayo, MICCAI 2018 LiTS Challenge and 
LIDC-IDRI, while outperforming other models. Azad et al. (2019) proposed another exten-
sion of U-Net, where bi-directional ConvLSTM (BConvLSTM) with densely connected 
convolutions (BCDU-Net) is introduced for BIS. The skip connections are equipped with 
BConvLSTM (Song et al. 2018) to concatenate the feature maps between the encoded layer