5846 N. S. Punn, S. Agarwal 
1 3
variety of medical imaging such as magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), X-ray, comput-
erized tomography/computerized axial tomography (CT/ CAT), ultrasound (US), positron 
emission tomography (PET), etc., the medical domain has experienced exponential growth 
in the diagnosis practices. Each of these scans varies in the imaging procedure, usecases 
and its average diagnosis duration (Hughes 2019; TMI 2019), as shown in Table  1. For any 
radiologist, analyzing such complex scans is tedious and time consuming, thereby to fill 
this void of complexity, deep learning approaches are well explored to address the auto-
mated assistance in diagnosis procedure, resulting in faster and better practices for monitor, 
cure and treatment of the diseases (Elnakib et al. 2011; Masood et al. 2015; Deepa et al. 
2011; Maintz and Viergever 1998).
Segmentation (Minaee et al. 2020) is one such automation task that helps to identify 
and detect the desired regions or objects of interest for the concerned issue. Depending 
on the depth of identifying the classes of objects, segmentation is divided into two lev -
els as semantic and instance. The semantic segmentation (Liu et al. 2019b) segregates the 
objects belonging to different classes, whereas instance segmentation (Chen et al. 2019a) 
goes deeper to also segregate the objects within the common class. With the exhaustive 
analysis (Minaee et al. 2020; Haque and Neubert 2020), it is observed that among the lat-
est advancements to perform segmentation, mostly U-Net (Ronneberger et al. 2015) based 
frameworks are adopted to achieve state-of-the-art segmentation performance which fol-
lows from its symmetrical encoder-decoder structure to extract and reconstruct the feature 
maps.
1.1  Motivation and contribution
With recent developments in deep learning technologies, there are a lot of review arti-
cles on biomedical image segmentation (BIS) using deep learning. The understanding of 
the available methods is critical for developing computer-aided diagnosis systems; how -
ever, to contribute to this domain as a researcher, one needs to understand the underlying 
mechanics of the methods that make those systems achieve promising results. For instance, 
the work of Zhou et  al. (2019b) explored the comprehensive analysis focused on multi-
modality fusion approaches, whereas Haque and Neubert (2020) reviewed the standard 
deep learning approaches for BIS using different modalities. Table  2 shows the overview 
of some of the survey articles proposed for biomedical image analysis using deep learn-
ing approaches. In contrast to the existing review articles, the present article is intended to 
contribute for an exhaustive analysis of the state-of-the-art modality specific U-Net based 
approaches by performing inter-modality and intra-modality categorization, and establish-
ing better insights of technological solutions for each modality. Furthermore, the present 
article also uncovers general and modality specific challenges to perform biomedical image 
segmentation and make the researchers or readers reap the most benefits from the current 
advancements in U-Net and aid in further contributions towards the research in this area.
1.2  Review process
The basis of including a research article in this survey is that the article describes the 
research on U-Net based biomedical image segmentation. The articles confirming vivid 
architectures or frameworks are only included if the authors claimed certain advance-
ments or novel contributions, whereas articles with pure discussions are excluded; for -
tunately, such articles are limited and hence will not affect the outcome of this survey.