5876 N. S. Punn, S. Agarwal 
1 3
– For the training phase, most models employed a hybrid loss function that combines 
the binary cross entropy loss with dice similarity coefficient loss or with Jaccard loss, 
which tends to better penalize the false positive and false negative predictions
– Considering the implementation strategies mostly authors applied an end-to-end train-
ing-from-scratch approach with minimal pre-processing i.e. resizing and normalization 
and without any post-processing.
– Mostly depthwise separable convolutions are employed to reduce the overall number of 
computations and training parameters of the model.
– Multi-modality fusion based approaches are also developed for better feature represen-
tation learning concerning target regions.
From the reviewed articles it is observed that some of the segmentation approaches uti-
lize the local dataset (datasets that are not publicly accessible), which tend to limit their 
reusability and reachability. In order to develop a widely acceptable solution, the summary 
of most widely utilized publicly available datasets for BIS is provided in Table  7. These 
benchmark datasets aid the research community to validate the existing performance and 
propose further improvements. Among the reviewed articles, CT and MRI modalities cover 
a wide range of U-Net variants for biomedical image segmentation. Moreover, for PET 
scan and ultrasound imaging most of the proposed approaches are validated on the local 
dataset, whereas for X-rays the approaches aim to localize the target structure with the 
bounding boxes. Despite such variants, it is difficult to conduct an effective comparative 
analysis of the results because each approach is evaluated with different evaluation metrics 
such as accuracy, F1-score, Jaccard index, etc. However, among these metrics, dice simi-
larity coefficient is most widely utilized to quantize segmentation performance.
Considering the present survey it is also observed that each modality requires a dif-
ferent approach to address the corresponding challenges. Though there are segmentation 
approaches that are validated on multiple modalities to form generic architectures like nn-
UNet, U-Net++, MR-Unet, etc. but it is difficult to achieve optimal performance in all seg-
mentation tasks. The main reason is due to the diverse variation in the features correspond-
ing to the target structures involving lungs nodule, brain tumor, skin lesions, retina blood 
vessels, nuclei cells, etc. and hence require different mechanisms (dense, residual, incep-
tion, attention, fusion, etc.) to integrate with U-Net model to effectively learn the complex 
target patterns. Moreover, the presence of noise or artefacts in different modalities adds 
another factor to propose different segmentation methods.
7  Scope and challenges
Deep learning technologies have played a vital role in advancements towards medical diag-
nosis and applications. Generally, deep learning based technologies such as U-Net aims 
to develop CAD systems to achieve the desired results with minimal error. Despite U-Net 
based models being superefficient for biomedical image segmentation, there are various 
challenges involved, as shown in Fig.  8 with general and modality specific challenges, for 
developing the real-world implications of the deep learning models. With regular advance-
ments in deep learning, these challenges are tackled with hardware and software oriented 
approaches which consequently attracts researchers to develop novel architectures and 
frameworks for biomedical image segmentation.