5861
Modality specific U‑Net variants for biomedical image…
1 3
3.1.2  Attention U‑Nets
Motivated by the success of squeeze-and-excitation network (SENet) (Hu et al. 2018) to 
suppress the irrelevant features, Li et al. (2019a) proposed an attention guided deep learn-
ing framework divided into three components: preprocessing, region of interest (RoI) 
segmentation with transfer learning followed by pneumonia detection model. In the pre-
processing stage, apart from the trivial processes like resizing, the authors synthesized the 
adversarial samples to gain attention of the model towards pneumonia. The pneumonia 
infected area is erased by replacing it with an average pixel value of the image and then 
labelled as non-pneumonia, which helped to distinguish between noise and relevant data. 
To further suppress the background interference, authors adopted the approach proposed 
by Rashid et  al. (2018) to perform the lungs segmentation followed by post-processing 
with conditional random fields. The segmented, original and synthesized images together 
form the training and validation set for the pneumonia segmentation network. The network 
follows SENet design in which SE-ResNet34 is utilized as a backbone architecture. The 
proposed framework tends to learn the pneumonia features effectively and achieves a sig-
nificant reduction in the false positive predictions with an FPR value of 0.19, in contrast to 
mask R-CNN (He et al. 2017) and RetinaNet (Lin et al. 2017) on RSNA challenge; how -
ever, the overall framework relies heavily on the pre-processing and post-processing of 
data, thereby limiting its usability across multiple datasets.
3.1.3  Inception U‑Nets
In another U-Net variant, Zhang et al. (2020a) proposed a DEFU-Net model that uses 
the fusion of dual encoder models to better extract the spatial features and a stand-
ard decoder network with upsampling. The dual encoder network is equipped with 
a densely connected recurrent convolutional (DCRC) neural network (inspired from 
DenseNet (Huang et al. 2017) and R2U-Net (Alom et al. 2018)) and dilated inception 
convolution neural network (inspired from GoogleNet (Szegedy et al. 2015)), where 
the output from each layer is merged by addition operation which is later concatenated 
with the corresponding decoder layer. The DCRC aids in extracting high level features, 
whereas the inception block facilitates to increase the network width and improve the 
horizontal feature representation using various receptive fields with dilated convolu-
tions. The advantage of using dilated convolutions is that it tends to increase the recep-
tive field without changing the number of training parameters (Yu and Koltun 2016). 
The significance of each module of the network is established by achieving considera-
ble improvements over several U-Net variants such as residual U-Net (He et al. 2016b), 
BCDU-Net  (Azad et  al. 2019), R2U-Net and attention R2U-Net  (Alom et  al. 2018), 
etc. with dice score of 0.97 on the chest X-ray dataset.
3.1.4  Ensemble U‑Nets
With cardiomegaly being one of the most common inherited cardiovascular diseases, 
Que et al. (2018) proposed a CardioXNet framework to identify and localize the car -
diomegaly present in the chest X-ray images. CardioXNet is equipped with two parallel 
U-Net models to generate the segmentation masks for cardiac and thorax respectively, 
that follows typical CNN architecture in contraction and expansion paths. To address