photograph generated photograph generated photograph generated photograph generatedtraining set holdout set indoor outdoorLSUN bedrooms data Unrelated images
Figure 7. Inverting layers of a Progressive GAN bedroom generator. From top to bottom: uncurated reconstructions of photographs from the
LSUN training set, the holdout set, and unrelated (non-bedroom) photographs, both indoor and outdoor.
(b): Direct learning of E.Another natural solution [ 10,
51] is to learn a deep network Ethat inverts Gdirectly, with-
out the complexity of layer-wise decomposition. Here, we
learn an inversion network with the same parameters and
architecture as the network Eused in our method, but train
it end-to-end by directly minimizing expected reconstruc-
tion losses over generated images, rather than learning it by
layers. The method does beneﬁt from the power of a deep
network to learn generalized rules [ 13], and the results are
marginally better than the direct optimization of z. However,
both qualitative and quantitative results remain poor.
(c): Optimization of zafter initializing with E(x).This
is the full method used in [ 51]. By initializing method (a) us-
ing an initial guess from method (b), results can be improved
slightly. For smaller generators, this method performs better
than method (a) and (b). However, when applied to a Pro-
gressive GAN, the reconstructions are far from satisfactory.
Ablation experiments. The last three columns of Figure 6
compare our full method (f) to two ablations of our method.
(d): Layer-wise network inversion only. We can simply
use the layer-wise-trained inversion network Eas the full
inverse, and simply use the initial guess z0=E(x), setting
x′=G(z0). This fast method requires only a single forward
pass through the inverter network E. The results are better
than the baseline methods but far short of our full method.
Nevertheless, despite the inaccuracy of the latent code
z0, the intermediate layer features are highly correlated with
their true values; this method achieves 95.5%correlationversus the true r4. Furthermore, the qualitative results show
that when reconstructing real images, this method obtains
more realistic results despite being noticeably different from
the target image.
(e): Inverting Gwithout relaxation to Gf.We can im-
prove the initial guess z0=E(x)by directly optimizing
zto minimize the same image reconstruction loss. This
marginally improves upon z0. However, the reconstructed
images and the input images still differ signﬁcantly, and the
recovery of zremains poor. Although the qualitative results
are good, the remaining error means that we cannot know if
any reconstruction errors are due to failures of Gto generate
an image, or if those reconstruction errors are merely due to
the inaccuracy of the inversion method.
(f): Our full method. By relaxing the problem and regu-
larizing optimization of rrather than z, our method achieves
nearly perfect reconstructions of both intermediate represen-
tations and pixels. Denote the full method as r∗=Ef(x).
The high precision of Efwithin the range of Gmeans
that, when we observe large differences between xand
Gf(Ef(x)), they are unlikely to be a failure of Ef. This
indicates that Gfcannot render x, which means that Gcan-
not either. Thus our ability to solve the relaxed inversion
problem with an accuracy above 99% gives us a reliable tool
to visualize samples that reveal what Gcannot do.
Note that the purpose of Efis to show dropped modes,
not positive capabilities. The range of Gfupper-bounds the
range ofG, so the reconstruction Gf(Ef(x))could be better
4508