reconstructed z 
componentsreconstructed 
layer4 featuresreconstructed 
pixel channelsoriginal image 
(goal)baseline (a)
optimize zbaseline (b)
learn E directlyablation (d)
layered E aloneablation (e)
layered E then zour method (f)
layered E then rgenerated
n/a
real photo evaluating reconstructions of sample of generated images evaluation
reconstructed 
pixel channels
baseline (c)
direct E then z
Figure 6. Comparison of methods to invert the generator of Progressive GAN trained to generate LSUN church images. Each method
is described; (a) (b) and (c) are baselines, and (d), (e), and (f) are variants of our method. The ﬁrst four rows show behavior given
GAN-generated images as input. In the scatter plots, every point plots a reconstructed component versus its true value, with a point for every
RGB pixel channel or every dimension of a representation. Reconstruction accuracy is shown as mean correlation over all dimensions for z,
layer4 , and image pixels, based on a sample of 100images. Our method (f) achieves nearly perfect reconstructions of GAN-generated
images. In the bottom rows, we apply each of the methods on a natural image.
4.4. Layer­wise inversion vs other methods
We compare our layer-wise inversion method to several pre-
vious approaches; we also benchmark it against ablations of
key components of the method.
The ﬁrst three columns of Figure 6compare our method to
prior inversion methods. We test each method on a sample of
100images produced by the generator G, where the ground
truthzis known, and the reconstruction of an example image
is shown. In this case an ideal inversion should be able toperfectly reconstruct x′=x. In addition, a reconstruction
of a real input image is shown at the bottom. While there is
no ground truth latent and representation for this image, the
qualitative comparisons are informative.
(a) Direct optimization of z.Smaller generators such as
5-layer DCGAN [ 32] can be inverted by applying gradient
descent on zto minimize reconstruction loss [ 51]. In column
(a), we test this method on a 15-layer Progressive GAN and
ﬁnd that neither znorxcan be constructed accurately.
4507