Image generation methods are typically tested on images
of faces, objects, or scenes. Among these, scenes are an
especially fertile test domain as each image can be parsed
into clear semantic components by segmenting the scene
into objects. Therefore, we propose to directly understand
mode dropping by analyzing a scene generator at two levels:
the distribution level and instance level.
First, we characterize omissions in the distribution as
a whole, using Generated Image Segmentation Statistics :
we segment both generated and ground truth images and
compare the distributions of segmented object classes. For
example, Figure 1a shows that in a church GAN model,
object classes such as people, cars, and fences appear on
fewer pixels of the generated distribution as compared to the
training distribution.
Second, once omitted object classes are identiﬁed, we
want to visualize speciﬁc examples of failure cases. To do
so, we must ﬁnd image instances where the GAN should
generate an object class but does not. We ﬁnd such cases
using a new reconstruction method called Layer Inversion
which relaxes reconstruction to a tractable problem. Instead
of inverting the entire GAN, our method inverts a layer of
the generator. Unlike existing methods to invert a small gen-
erator [ 51,8], our method allows us to create reconstructions
for complex, state-of-the-art GANs. Deviations between the
original image and its reconstruction reveal image features
and objects that the generator cannot draw faithfully.
We apply our framework to analyze several recent GANs
trained on different scene datasets. Surprisingly, we ﬁnd that
dropped object classes are not distorted or rendered in a low
quality or as noise. Instead, they are simply not rendered at
all,as if the object was not part of the scene . For example, in
Figure 1b, we observe that large human ﬁgures are skipped
entirely, and the parallel lines in a fence are also omitted.
Thus a GAN can ignore classes that are too hard, while
at the same time producing outputs of high average visual
quality. Code, data, and additional information are available
atganseeing.csail.mit.edu .
2. Related work
Generative Adversarial Networks [15] have enabled
many computer vision and graphics applications such as
generation [ 7,21,22], image and video manipulation [ 19,
20,30,35,39,41,52], object recognition [ 6,42], and text-
to-image translation [ 33,45,49]. One important issue in
this emerging topic is how to evaluate and compare different
methods [ 40,43]. For example, many evaluation metrics
have been proposed to evaluate unconditional GANs such as
Inception score [ 34], Fr´echet Inception Distance [ 17], and
Wasserstein Sliced Distance [ 21]. Though the above met-
rics can quantify different aspects of model performance,
they cannot explain what visual content the models fail to
synthesize. Our goal here is notto introduce a metric. In-stead, we aim to provide explanations of a common failure
case of GANs: mode collapse. Our error diagnosis tools
complement existing single-number metrics and can provide
additional insights into the model’s limitations.
Network inversion. Prior work has found that inver-
sions of GAN generators are useful for photo manipula-
tion [ 2,8,31,51] and unsupervised feature learning [ 10,12].
Later work found that DCGAN left-inverses can be com-
puted to high precision [ 25,46], and that inversions of a
GAN for glyphs can reveal speciﬁc strokes that the gener-
ator is unable to generate [ 9]. While previous work [ 51]
has investigated inversion of 5-layer DCGAN generators,
we ﬁnd that when moving to a 15-layer Progressive GAN,
high-quality inversions are much more difﬁcult to obtain. In
our work, we develop a layer-wise inversion method that
is more effective for these large-scale GANs. We apply a
classic layer-wise training approach [ 5,18] to the problem of
training an encoder and further introduce layer-wise image-
speciﬁc optimization. Our work is also loosely related to
inversion methods for understanding CNN features and clas-
siﬁers [ 11,27,28,29]. However, we focus on understanding
generative models rather than classiﬁers.
Understanding and visualizing networks. Most prior
work on network visualization concerns discriminative clas-
siﬁers [ 1,3,23,26,37,38,48,50]. GANs have been visual-
ized by examining the discriminator [32] and the semantics
of internal features [ 4]. Different from recent work [ 4] that
aims to understand what a GAN has learned, our work pro-
vides a complementary perspective and focuses on what
semantic concepts a GAN fails to capture.
3. Method
Our goal is to visualize and understand the semantic concepts
that a GAN generator cannot generate, in both the entire dis-
tribution and in each image instance. We will proceed in
two steps. First, we measure Generated Image Segmentation
Statistics by segmenting both generated and target images
and identifying types of objects that a generator omits when
compared to the distribution of real images. Second, we
visualize how the dropped object classes are omitted for indi-
vidual images by ﬁnding real images that contain the omitted
classes and projecting them to their best reconstruction given
an intermediate layer of the generator. We call the second
stepLayer Inversion .
3.1. Quantifying distribution­level mode collapse
The systematic errors of a GAN can be analyzed by exploit-
ing the hierarchical structure of a scene image. Each scene
has a natural decomposition into objects, so we can estimate
deviations from the true distribution of scenes by estimating
deviations of constituent object statistics. For example, a
4503