photograph generated photograph generated photograph generated photograph generatedtraining set holdout set indoor outdoorLSUN outdoor church data Unrelated images
Figure 8. Inverting layers of a Progressive GAN outdoor church generator. From top to bottom: uncurated reconstructions of photographs
from the LSUN training set, the holdout set, and unrelated (non-church) photographs, both indoor and outdoor.
than what the full network Gis capable of. For a more com-
plete picture, methods (d) and (e) can be additionally used
as lower-bounds: those methods do not prove images are
outsideG’s range, but they can reveal positive capabilities
ofGbecause they construct generated samples in range(G).
4.5. Layer­wise inversion across domains
Next, we apply the inversion tool to test the ability of genera-
tors to synthesize images outside their training sets. Figure 7
shows qualitative results of applying method (f) to invert and
reconstruct natural photographs of different scenes using a
Progressive GAN trained to generate LSUN bedrooms. Re-
constructions from the LSUN training and LSUN holdout
sets are shown; these are compared to newly collected unre-
lated (non-bedroom) images taken both indoors and outdoors.
Objects that disappear from the reconstructions reveal visual
concepts that cannot be represented by the model. Some
indoor non-bedroom images are rendered in a bedroom style:
for example, a dining room table with a white tablecloth
is rendered to resemble a bed with a white bed sheet. As
expected, outdoor images are not reconstructed well.
Figure 8shows similar qualitative results using a Progres-
sive GAN for LSUN outdoor church images. Interestingly,
some architectural styles are dropped even in cases where
large-scale geometry is preserved. The same set of unrelated
(non-church) images as shown in Figure 7are shown. When
using the church model, the indoor reconstructions exhibit
lower quality and are rendered to resemble outdoor scenes;
the reconstructions of outdoor images recover more details.5. Discussion
We have proposed a way to measure and visualize mode-
dropping in state-of-the-art generative models. Generated
Image Segmentation Statistics can compare the quality of dif-
ferent models and architectures, and provide insights into the
semantic differences of their output spaces. Layer inversions
allow us to further probe the range of the generators using
natural photographs, revealing speciﬁc objects and styles
that cannot be represented. By comparing labeled distribu-
tions with one another, and by comparing natural photos with
imperfect reconstructions, we can identify speciﬁc objects,
parts, and styles that a generator cannot produce.
The methods we propose here constitute a ﬁrst step to-
wards analyzing and understanding the latent space of a
GAN and point to further questions. Why does a GAN de-
cide to ignore classes that are more frequent than others
in the target distribution (e.g. “person” vs. “fountain” in
Figure 1)? How can we encourage a GAN to learn about a
concept without skewing the training set? What is the impact
of architectural choices? Finding ways to exploit and address
the mode-dropping phenomena identiﬁed by our methods
are questions for future work.
Acknowledgements
We are grateful for the support of the MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab,
the DARPA XAI program FA8750-18-C000, NSF 1524817 on
Advancing Visual Recognition with Feature Visualizations, NSF
BIGDATA 1447476, the Early Career Scheme (ECS) of Hong Kong
(No.24206219) to BZ, and a hardware donation from NVIDIA.
4509