Figure 4. Sensitivity test for Generated Image Segmentation Statis-
tics. This plot compares two different random samples of 10,000
images from the LSUN bedroom dataset. An inﬁnite-sized sample
would show no differences; the observed differences reveal the
small measurement noise introduced by the ﬁnite sampling process.
trained on LSUN bedroom images [ 47]. In addition, for Pro-
gressive GAN we analyze a model trained to generate LSUN
church images. To segment images, we use the Uniﬁed Per-
ceptual Parsing network [ 44], which labels each pixel of an
image with one of 336object classes. Segmentation statistics
are computed over samples of 10,000images.
4.1. Generated Image Segmentation Statistics
We ﬁrst examine whether segmentation statistics correctly
reﬂect the output quality of models across architectures. Fig-
ure2and Figure 5show Generated Image Segmentation
Statistics for WGAN-GP [ 16], StyleGAN [ 22], and Progres-
sive GAN [ 21] trained on LSUN bedrooms [ 47]. The his-
tograms reveal that, for a variety of segmented object classes,
StyleGAN matches the true distribution of those objects bet-
ter than Progressive GAN, while WGAN-GP matches least
closely. The differences can be summarized using Fr ´echet
Segmentation Distance (Table 1), conﬁrming that better mod-
els match the segmented statistics better overall.
Model FSD
WGAN-GP [16] bedrooms (Figure 2) 428.4
ProGAN [21] bedrooms (Figure 5) 85.2
StyleGAN [22] bedrooms (Figure 2) 22.6
Table 1. FSD summarizes Generated Image Segmentation Statistics
4.2. Sensitivity test
Figure 4illustrates the sensitivity of measuring Generated
Image Segmentation Statistics over a ﬁnite sample of 10,000
images. Instead of comparing a GAN to the true distribution,
we compare two different randomly chosen subsamples of
the LSUN bedroom data set to each other. A perfect test with
inﬁnite sample sizes would show no difference; the small
differences shown reﬂect the sensitivity of the test and are
due to sampling error.
original image x generated image original image x generated imageProgressive GAN on LSUN Bedrooms
generated vs training object statistics
 training images vs reconstructions
Figure 5. A visualization of the omissions of a bedroom generator;
a Progressive GAN for LSUN bedrooms is tested. On top, a com-
parison of object distributions shows that many classes of objects
are left out by the generator, including people, cushions, carpets,
lamps, and several types of furniture. On the bottom, photographs
are shown with their reconstructions G(E(x)), along with segmen-
tations. These examples directly reveal many object classes omitted
by the bedroom generator.
4.3. Identifying dropped modes
Figure 1and Figure 5show the results of applying our
method to analyze the generated segmentation statistics for
Progressive GAN models of churches and bedrooms. Both
the histograms and the instance visualizations provide in-
sight into the limitations of the generators.
The histograms reveal that the generators partially skip
difﬁcult subtasks. For example, neither model renders as
many people as appear in the target distribution. We use
inversion to create reconstructions of natural images that
include many pixels of people or other under-represented
objects. Figure 1and Figure 5each shows two examples
on the bottom. Our inversion method reveals the way in
which the models fail. The gaps are not due to low-quality
rendering of those object classes, but due to the wholesale
omission of these classes. For example, large human ﬁgures
and certain classes of objects are not included.
4506