Seeing What a GAN Cannot Generate
David Bau1,2, Jun-Yan Zhu1, Jonas Wulff1, William Peebles1
Hendrik Strobelt2, Bolei Zhou3, Antonio Torralba1,2
1MIT CSAIL,2MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab,3The Chinese University of Hong Kong
Abstract
Despite the success of Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs), mode collapse remains a serious issue during GAN
training. To date, little work has focused on understand-
ing and quantifying which modes have been dropped by a
model. In this work, we visualize mode collapse at both the
distribution level and the instance level. First, we deploy a
semantic segmentation network to compare the distribution
of segmented objects in the generated images with the tar-
get distribution in the training set. Differences in statistics
reveal object classes that are omitted by a GAN. Second,
given the identiﬁed omitted object classes, we visualize the
GAN’s omissions directly. In particular, we compare speciﬁc
differences between individual photos and their approximate
inversions by a GAN. To this end, we relax the problem
of inversion and solve the tractable problem of inverting a
GAN layer instead of the entire generator. Finally, we use
this framework to analyze several recent GANs trained on
multiple datasets and identify their typical failure cases.
1. Introduction
The remarkable ability of a Generative Adversarial Network
(GAN) to synthesize realistic images leads us to ask: How
can we know what a GAN is unable to generate? Mode-
dropping or mode collapse, where a GAN omits portions of
the target distribution, is seen as one of the biggest challenges
for GANs [ 14,24], yet current analysis tools provide little
insight into this phenomenon in state-of-the-art GANs.
Our paper aims to provide detailed insights about dropped
modes. Our goal is not to measure GAN quality using a sin-
gle number: existing metrics such as Inception scores [ 34]
and Fr ´echet Inception Distance [ 17] focus on that problem.
While those numbers measure how far the generated and
target distributions are from each other, we instead seek to
understand what is different between real and fake images.
Existing literature typically answers the latter question by
sampling generated outputs, but such samples only visualize
what a GAN is capable of doing. We address the complemen-
tary problem: we want to see what a GAN cannot generate.
original image reconstruction original image reconstruction
Progressive GAN on LSUN Churches
(a)generated vs training object segmentation statistics
(b) real images vs. reconstructions
Figure 1. Seeing what a GAN cannot generate: (a) We compare the
distribution of object segmentations in the training set of LSUN
churches [ 47] to the distribution in the generated results: objects
such as people, cars, and fences are dropped by the generator. (b)
We compare pairs of a real image and its reconstruction in which
individual instances of a person and a fence cannot be generated.
In each block, we show a real photograph (top-left), a generated re-
construction (top-right), and segmentation maps for both (bottom).
In particular, we wish to know: Does a GAN deviate from
the target distribution by ignoring difﬁcult images altogether?
Or are there speciﬁc, semantically meaningful parts and
objects that a GAN decides not to learn about? And if so,
how can we detect and visualize these missing concepts that
a GAN does not generate?
4502