WGAN -GP on LSUN Bedrooms
 StyleGAN on LSUN Bedrooms
Figure 2. Using Generated Image Segmentation Statistics to understand the different behavior of the two models trained on LSUN
bedrooms [ 47]. The histograms reveal that WGAN-GP [ 16] (left) deviates from the true distribution much more than StyleGAN [ 22] (right),
identifying segmentation classes that are generated too little and others that are generated too much. For example, WGAN-GP does not
generate enough pixels containing beds, curtains, or cushions compared to the true distribution of bedroom images, while StyleGAN correctly
matches these statistics. StyleGAN is still not perfect, however, and does not generate enough doors, wardrobes, or people. Numbers above
bars indicate clipped values beyond the range of the chart.
GAN that renders bedrooms should also render some amount
of curtains. If the curtain statistics depart from what we see
in true images, we will know we can look at curtains to see
a speciﬁc ﬂaw in the GAN.
To implement this idea, we segment all the images using
the Uniﬁed Perceptual Parsing network [ 44], which labels
each pixel of an image with one of 336object classes. Over
a sample of images, we measure the total area in pixels for
each object class and collect mean and covariance statistics
for all segmented object classes. We sample these statistics
over a large set of generated images as well as training set
images. We call the statistics over all object segmentations
Generated Image Segmentation Statistics .
Figure 2visualizes mean statistics for two networks. In
each graph, the mean segmentation frequency for each gen-
erated object class is compared to that seen in the true dis-
tribution. Since most classes do not appear on most images,
we focus on the most common classes by sorting classes by
descending frequency. The comparisons can reveal many
speciﬁc differences between recent state-of-the-art models.
Both analyzed models are trained on the same image distri-
bution (LSUN bedrooms [ 47]), but WGAN-GP [ 16] departs
from the true distribution much more than StyleGAN [22].
It is also possible to summarize statistical differences in
segmentation in a single number. To do this, we deﬁne the
Fr´echet Segmentation Distance (FSD), which is an inter-
pretable analog to the popular Fr ´echet Inception Distance
(FID) metric [ 17]:FSD≡ ||µg−µt||2+ Tr(Σ g+ Σt−
2(ΣgΣt)1/2). In our FSD formula, µtis the mean pixel
count for each object class over a sample of training images,
andΣtis the covariance of these pixel counts. Similarly,
µgandΣgreﬂect segmentation statistics for the generativemodel. In our experiments, we compare statistics between
10,000generated samples and 10,000natural images.
Generated Image Segmentation Statistics measure the en-
tire distribution: for example, they reveal when a generator
omits a particular object class. However, they do not single
out speciﬁc images where an object should have been gener-
ated but was not. To gain further insight, we need a method
to visualize omissions of the generator for each image.
3.2. Quantifying instance­level mode collapse
To address the above issue, we compare image pairs (x,x′),
wherexis a real image that contains a particular object class
dropped by a GAN generator G, andx′is a projection onto
the space of all images that can be generated by a layer of
the GAN model.
Deﬁning a tractable inversion problem. In the ideal
case, we would like to ﬁnd an image that can be per-
fectly synthesized by the generator Gand stay close to
the real image x. Formally, we seek x′=G(z∗), where
z∗= argminzℓ(G(z),x)andℓis a distance metric in im-
age feature space. Unfortunately, as shown in Section 4.4,
previous methods [ 10,51] fail to solve this full inversion
problem for recent generators due to the large number of lay-
ers inG. Therefore, we instead solve a tractable subproblem
of full inversion. We decompose the generator Ginto layers
G=Gf(gn(···((g1(z)))), (1)
whereg1,...,gnare several early layers of the generator, and
Gfgroups all the later layers of the Gtogether.
Any image that can be generated by Gcan also be gen-
erated by Gf. That is, if we denote by range(G)the
4504