2 M.C.H. Lee, O. Oktay, A. Schuh, M. Schaap, B. Glocker
Fig. 1: A toy example (vessel trees on white box) illustrating the benet of
structure-guided image registration. The initial alignment of images (a,b) is
shown in (c) and after intensity-based ane registration in (d). Registration
focuses on aligning the white box ignoring Structures-of-Interest (SoI), i.e., the
vessels. Our ISTNs learn to focus on the SoI yielding accurate alignment in (e).
neural network is trained to predict the transformation directly using examples of
images and their ground truth transformation. Because actual ground truth for
Tis not available, either random transformations are used to generate synthetic
examples or a well established traditional registration method is employed to ob-
tain reference transformations. Neither is optimal, as synthetic transformations
might not be realistic and/or yield poor generalisation, while when employing a
traditional method the prediction accuracy of the trained network is inherently
limited by the accuracy of that method. One might argue that in this case the
neural network is mostly learning to replicate the traditional method, although
with a potentially remarkable computational speed up.
Due to the limitations of supervised methods, a number of works have then
considered so called unsupervised approaches [6, 7] where a neural network is
trained based on the original cost function of traditional intensity-based meth-
ods minimising a dissimilarity measure such as mean squared intensity dier-
ences and others. While training over large number of examples might indeed be
benecial for optimising the cost function (it could have a regularisation eect
or improve generalisation), these unsupervised approaches cannot be expected
to perform fundamentally better compared to traditional methods as the exact
same function is optimised. One might even argue that traditional methods are
more 
exible, as they can adapt to any new pair of test images, and are not lim-
ited to register images of similar appearance as the training data. For example,
many of the traditional methods discussed in [1] can be equally used for brain
MRI and lung CT with maybe only a few changes to some hyper-parameters.
A recent hybrid approach [8] is combining an unsupervised and supervised cost
function using a traditional method to generate training deformation elds.
Overall, one may argue that neural network based image registration, so
far, has not taken full advantage of deep representation learning but mostly led
to a speed up in the time it takes to register two images. At the same time,
one may argue that registration accuracy is of higher importance than speed
in many clinical applications. We observe that neither the supervised nor the
unsupervised methods exploit two key advantages of neural networks, which are
1) the ability to learn new representations that are optimised for a downstream