Image-and-Spatial Transformer Networks
for Structure-Guided Image Registration
Matthew C.H. Lee, Ozan Oktay, Andreas Schuh
Michiel Schaap, and Ben Glocker
HeartFlow, USA
Biomedical Image Analysis Group, Imperial College London, UK
Shared senior authorship.
Abstract. Image registration with deep neural networks has become an
active eld of research and exciting avenue for a long standing problem in
medical imaging. The goal is to learn a complex function that maps the
appearance of input image pairs to parameters of a spatial transforma-
tion in order to align corresponding anatomical structures. We argue and
show that the current direct, non-iterative approaches are sub-optimal,
in particular if we seek accurate alignment of Structures-of-Interest (SoI).
Information about SoI is often available at training time, for example,
in form of segmentations or landmarks. We introduce a novel, generic
framework, Image-and-Spatial Transformer Networks (ISTNs), to lever-
age SoI information allowing us to learn new image representations that
are optimised for the downstream registration task. Thanks to these rep-
resentations we can employ a test-specic, iterative renement over the
transformation parameters which yields highly accurate registration even
with very limited training data. Performance is demonstrated on pairwise
3D brain registration and illustrative synthetic data.
1 Introduction
Image registration remains a fundamental problem in medical image computing,
where the goal is to estimate a spatial transformation T:Rd!Rdmapping cor-
responding anatomical locations between d-dimensional images. The most widely
used approach is intensity-based registration formalised as an optimisation prob-
lem seeking optimal transformation parameters that minimise a dissimilarity
measure (or cost function) L(MT;F), whereMis the moving source image
undergoing spatial transformation and Fis the xed target image. We refer the
reader to [1] for a detailed overview of what we here call traditional methods, i.e.,
non-learning based approaches making use of iterative optimisation strategies to
minimise the cost function for a given pair of images.
Recently, the use of neural networks to learn the complex mapping from
image appearance to spatial transformation has become an active eld of re-
search [2{7], providing a new perspective on tackling challenging registration
problems. So called supervised approaches [2,3] have been used, which are sim-
ilar in nature to methods used for image segmentation, where a convolutionalarXiv:1907.09200v1  [cs.CV]  22 Jul 2019