Image-and-Spatial Transformer Networks 3
𝑀
𝐹𝜃
𝐹′𝑀′ 𝑀
𝐹𝜃ITN
ITNmoving fixed
𝑆𝑀
𝑆𝐹STN STNℒ𝐼𝑇𝑁𝑀
ℒ𝐼𝑇𝑁𝐹𝐹𝑀𝜃 ℒ𝑆𝑇𝑁−𝑢
𝑆𝐹 𝑆𝑀;𝜃 ℒ𝑆𝑇𝑁−𝑠
𝑆𝐹𝑀𝜃′ℒ𝑆𝑇𝑁−𝑖𝑀
𝐹′𝑆𝑀;𝜃 ℒ𝑆𝑇𝑁−𝑖𝐹
Spatial Transformer Network Image -and-Spatial Transformer Network Training ApproachesUnsupervised STN
ℒ𝑆𝑇𝑁−𝑢
Structure -guided STN
ℒ𝑆𝑇𝑁−𝑠
Structure -guided ISTN explicit
ℒ𝐼𝑇𝑁𝑀+ℒ𝐼𝑇𝑁𝐹+ℒ𝑆𝑇𝑁−𝑠
Structure -guided ISTN implicit
ℒ𝑆𝑇𝑁−𝑖𝑀+ℒ𝑆𝑇𝑁−𝑖𝐹+ℒ𝑆𝑇𝑁−𝑠loss function
representation mapping
shared
weights
Fig. 2: Overview of image registration using Spatial Transformer Networks
(STNs), with the classical model shown on the left mapping an image pair M;F
directly to parameters of a spatial transformation (cf. [6, 7]). Our Image-and-
Spatial Transformer Networks (ISTNs) introduce a dedicated image transformer
network (ITN) to learn to produce image representations M0;F0optimised for
the downstream registration task, as well as predicting . This gives raise to mul-
tiple ways of training ISTNs by combining dierent loss functions (see Sec 2.2).
task, and 2) the ability to incorporate and benet from additional information
during training that is unavailable (or very dicult to obtain) at test time.
Some exceptions to the second point are works that consider extra informa-
tion such as segmentations or weak labels during training [4{6]. This additional
supervision can help to guide the registration at test time in a dierent way
than using image intensities alone. For example, the registration may focus on
particular SoI (cf. Fig 1). However, the current approaches do not retain or
explicitly extract such extra information, so it cannot be used further at test
time, for example, for rening the predicted, initial transformation parameters.
In fact, most of the current works consider neural network based registration
as a one-pass (non-iterative) process, which might be sub-optimal as we show
in our results. The few works that discuss subsequent renement either suggest
to use a traditional (iterative) method [6], or to use the network in an auto-
regressive way [7]. As both rely again on optimising the original intensity-based
cost function the advantage over a traditional method remains unclear, and any
extra information that was available during training is somewhat lost.
1.1 Contributions
To overcome these limitations, and to make best use of the key ability of neural
networks to learn representations, we introduce Image-and-Spatial Transformer
Networks (ISTNs) where a dedicated Image Transformer Network (ITN) is added
to the head of a Spatial Transformer Network (STN) aiming to extract and retain
information about SoIs, for which annotations are only required during training.
While the STN predicts the parameters of the spatial transformation, the ITN
produces a new image representation which is learned in an end-to-end fashion