Image-and-Spatial Transformer Networks 7
Fig. 4: Visual results for ane registration with SoI overlaid in red (moving),
and green (xed). On the left: the input images before registration. Close-ups
from left to right: initial alignment, STN-u, STN-s, ISTN-e, ISTN-i.
image, segmentations of sub-cortical structures are available. Images are skull-
stripped and intensity normalised. Binarised segmentation label maps are used
as the SoI information. Due to space reasons, we focus on the results while
our publicly available code2contains details on architectural choices, hyper-
parameters and training congurations.
We assess agreement of SoI after registration by calculating Dice scores and
average surface distances (ASDs). We compare the explicit and implicit variants
(ISTN-e and ISTN-i) with unsupervised and supervised models (STN-u and
STN-s). These baselines are conceptually similar to the approaches in [6,7]. The
baselines have been set up in a competitive way and we checked for proper
convergence and best possible performance on the validation set.
Table 1 summarizes the quantitative results before and after iterative re-
nement using the four dierent approaches with ane and non-linear B-spline
transformation models. For the B-splines we use a 30 mm control point spacing
and start registration from rigidly pre-aligned images. For both ane and B-
splines we provide numbers for the initial state (Id) and results when the SoI is
used directly for registration as an upper bound \best-case" reference. We note
that ISTN-e/i outperform STN-u/s for the one-pass predictions. Test-specic
renement boosts the accuracy signicantly for all approaches. ISTNs achieve
overall highest Dice scores and lowest ASDs, sometimes close to the best-case.
STN-u/s after renement converge to the same lower accuracy as no SoI infor-
mation can be leveraged. Fig. 4 shows qualitative results after renement for
ane registration, while Fig. 5 shows an example of learned SoI representations.
We repeat the experiments but with 1,000 pairs for training instead of 100.
The one-pass predictions improve for all four methods with Dice scores of 0.75
(STN-u), 0.77 (STN-s), and 0.80 (ISTN-e/i) for ane, and 0.79, 0.83, and 0.86
(same order) for non-linear. Iterative renement yields quasi identical results for
STN-u/s as before when trained with 100 pairs, and slightly improves for ISTNs.
Remarkably, ISTNs trained with only 100 pairs achieve much higher accuracy
than STN-u and STN-s trained with 1,000 pairs, indicating excellent data ef-
ciency and benet of iterative, test-specic renement for image registration.
2https://github.com/biomedia-mira/istn