ing [ 1,62] assumes that the test set contains the samples
from unseen classes only, while in the recent proposed Gen-
eralized Zero-Shot Learning (GZSL) [ 10,71], the test set
is composed of the test samples from both seen and un-
seen classes. A large body of conventional ZSL methods
learns a semantic embedding function to map the visual fea-
tures into the semantic descriptor space [ 18,2,58,75,22].
In the semantic space, we can conduct the ZSL classiﬁca-
tion by directly comparing the embedded data points with
the given class-level semantic descriptors. Semantic em-
bedding methods excel in conventional ZSL, yet their per-
formance degrades substantially in the more challenging
GZSL scenario, owing to their serious bias towards seen
classes in the testing phase [ 69]. Conventional ZSL is un-
necessary to worry about the bias problem towards seen
classes as they are excluded from the testing phase. But
in GZSL the bias towards seen classes will make the GZSL
model misclassify the testing images from unseen classes.
To mitigate the bias problem in GZSL, feature genera-
tion based GZSL methods have been proposed [ 7,50,38,
70,72,61] to synthesize the training samples for unseen
classes. The feature generation method can compensate for
the lack of training samples of unseen classes. Merging the
real seen training features and the synthetic unseen features
yields a fully-observed training set for both seen and un-
seen classes. Then we can train a supervised model, such as
a softmax classiﬁer, to implement the GZSL classiﬁcation.
However, the feature generation methods produce the syn-
thesized visual features in the original feature space. We
conjecture that the original feature space, far from the se-
mantic information and thus lack of discriminative ability,
is suboptimal for GZSL classiﬁcation.
To get the best of both worlds, in this paper, we propose
a hybrid GZSL framework, grafting an embedding model
on top of a feature generation model. In our framework,
we map both the real seen features and the synthetic unseen
features produced by the feature generation model to a new
embedding space. We perform the GZSL classiﬁcation in
the new embedding space, but not in the original feature
space.
Instead of adopting the commonly-used semantic em-
bedding model [ 18,2], we propose a contrastive embed-
ding in our hybrid GZSL framework. The traditional se-
mantic embedding in ZSL relies on a ranking loss, which
requires the correct (positive) semantic descriptor to be
ranked higher than any of wrong (negative) descriptors with
respect to the embedding of a training sample. The seman-
tic embedding methods only utilize the class-wise supervi-
sion. In contrastive embedding, we wish to exploit not only
the class-wise supervision but also the instance-wise super-
vision for GZSL, as depicted in Figure 1. Our proposed
contrastive embedding learns to discriminate between one
positive sample (or semantic descriptor) and a large numberof negative samples (or semantic descriptors) from differ-
ent classes by leveraging the contrastive loss [ 24,53,67].
We evaluate our method on ﬁve benchmark datasets, and
to the best of our knowledge, our method can outperform
the state-of-the-arts on three datasets by a large margin and
achieve competitive results on the other two datasets.
Our contributions are three-fold: (1) we propose a hybrid
GZSL framework combining the embedding based model
and the feature generation based model; (2) we propose
a contrastive embedding, which can utilize both the class-
wise supervision and the instance-wise supervision, in our
hybrid GZSL framework; and (3) we evaluate our GZSL
model on ﬁve benchmarks and our method can achieve the
state-of-the-arts or competitive results on these datasets.
2. Related Work
Zero-shot learning [ 39,54] aims to transfer the ob-
ject recognition model from seen to unseen classes via
the shared semantic space, in which both seen and unseen
classes have their semantic descriptors. Early ZSL works
focus on the conventional ZSL problem. These works typ-
ically learn to embed visual samples and the semantic de-
scriptors to an embedding space [ 18,1,19,2,21,35,20,
58,6,36,8] (e.g. the visual space or the semantic descriptor
space). In the embedding space, the visual samples from the
same class are supposed to center around the corresponding
class-level semantic descriptor. They implement conven-
tional ZSL recognition by searching the nearest semantic
descriptor in the embedding space. In the more challenging
GZSL scenario, however, embedding-based methods suffer
from the seen classes overﬁtting problem due to the data-
imbalance nature of ZSL [ 71]. To relieve the overﬁtting
problem, some methods [ 10,44,3,29,73,74,49] have
designed new loss functions to balance the predictions be-
tween seen and unseen classes. Some other works [ 46,31,
13] have regarded GZSL as an out-of-distribution detection
problem. Moreover, some researches [ 40,66,43] have in-
troduced the knowledge graph in GZSL to propagate the
learned knowledge from seen to unseen classes through the
knowledge graph.
To further mitigate the data imbalance problem, feature
generation methods learn to complement the visual sam-
ples for unseen classes [ 7,50,38,70,72,56,59,64].
The feature generation methods ﬁrst learn a conditional
generative model based on such as Variational Autoen-
coder (V AE) [ 34] and Generative Adversarial Networks
(GAN) [ 23,4], conditioned on the semantic descriptors.
With the learned generative model, they can synthesize
the missing visual examples for unseen classes using the
corresponding semantic descriptors. With the real ex-
amples from seen classes and the synthesized examples
from unseen classes, they can transform the GZSL prob-
lem into a standard supervised classiﬁcation problem and
2372