learn a supervised classiﬁer to implement GZSL recogni-
tion. Recently, Shen et al . [61] have introduced Genera-
tive Flows [ 14,15,33] into zero-shot learning and achieved
good performance for GZSL and conventional ZSL.
Though existing methods have achieved great success on
GZSL, as discussed before, the original visual feature space
lacks the discriminative ability and is suboptimal for GZSL
classiﬁcation. Therefore, we propose a hybrid GZSL frame-
work, integrating a feature generation model with an em-
bedding based model. Inspired by the emerging contrastive
representation learning [ 24,53,67,26,32], we propose a
contrastive embedding model for our hybrid GZSL frame-
work, in which we consider both the instance-wise supervi-
sion and the class-wise supervision. In contrast, the tradi-
tional semantic embedding for ZSL only utilizes the class-
wise supervision. Our hybrid GZSL framework maps the
real seen samples and the synthetic unseen samples into a
new embedding space, where we learn a supervised classi-
ﬁer, e.g. softmax, as the ﬁnal GZSL classiﬁer.
3. Contrastive Embedding for GZSL
In this section, we ﬁrst deﬁne the Generalized Zero-Shot
Learning (GZSL) problem, before introducing the proposed
hybrid GZSL framework and the contrastive embedding in
it.
3.1. Problem deﬁnition
In ZSL, we have two disjoint sets of classes: Sseen
classes in YsandUunseen classes in Yu, where we
haveYs∩ Yu=∅. Suppose that Nlabeled instances
from seen classes Ysare provided for training: Dtr=
{(x1,y2),...,(xN,yN)}, wherexi∈ X denotes the in-
stance and yi∈ Ysis the corresponding seen class la-
bel. The test set Dte={xN+1,...,x N+M}containsM
unlabeled instances. In conventional ZSL, the instances
inDtecome from unseen classes only. Under the more
challenging Generalized Zero-Shot Learning (GZSL) set-
ting, the instances in Dtecome from both seen and un-
seen classes. At the same time, the class-level semantic de-
scriptors of both seen and unseen classes are also provided
A={a1,...,a S,aS+1,...,a S+U}, where the ﬁrst Sse-
mantic descriptors correspond to seen classes in Ysand the
lastUsemantic descriptors correspond to unseen classes in
Yu. We can infer the semantic descriptor afor a labeled
instancexfrom its class label y.
3.2. A Hybrid GZSL Framework
Semantic embedding (SE) in conventional ZSL aims to
learn an embedding function Ethat maps a visual feature x
into the semantic descriptor space denoted as E(x). The
commonly-used semantic embedding methods rely on a
structured loss function proposed in [ 2,18]. The structured
loss requires the embedding of xbeing closer to the seman-tic descriptor aof its ground-truth class than the descriptors
of other classes, according to the dot-product similarity in
the semantic descriptor space. Concretely, the structured
loss is formulated as below:
Lreal
se(E) =Ep(x,a)[max(0,∆−a⊤E(x)+(a′)⊤E(x))],(1)
wherep(x,a)is the empirical distribution of the real train-
ing samples of seen classes, a′/ne}ationslash=ais a randomly-selected
semantic descriptor of other classes, and ∆>0is a margin
parameter to make Emore robust.
Semantic embedding methods are less effective in GZSL
due to the severe bias towards seen classes. Recently,
many feature generation methods [ 70,38,50,28,5] have
been proposed to synthesize the missing training samples
for unseen classes. Feature generation methods learn a
conditional generator network Gto produce the samples
˜x=G(a,ǫ)conditioned on a Gaussian noise ǫ∼ N(0,I)
and a semantic descriptor a. In the meanwhile, a discrimi-
nator network Dis learned together with Gto discriminate
a real pair (x,a)from a synthetic pair (˜x,a). The feature
generator Gtries to fool the discriminator Dby produc-
ing indistinguishable synthetic features. The feature gener-
ation methods hope to match the synthetic feature distribu-
tion with the real feature distribution in the original feature
space. The feature generator network Gand the discrimina-
tor network Dcan be learned by optimizing the following
adversarial objective:
V(G,D) =Ep(x,a)[logD(x,a)]
+EpG(˜x,a)[log(1−D(˜x,a))],(2)
wherepG(˜x,a) =pG(˜x|a)p(a)is the joint distribution of a
synthetic feature and its corresponding semantic descriptor.
The feature generation methods learn to synthesize the
visual features in the original feature space. However, in
the original feature space, the visual features are usually not
well-structured and thus are suboptimal for GZSL classiﬁ-
cation. In this paper, we propose a hybrid GZSL framework,
integrating the embedding model and the feature generation
model. In our hybrid GZSL framework, we map both the
real features and the synthetic features into an embedding
space, where we perform the ﬁnal GZSL classiﬁcation. In
its simplest form, we just choose the semantic descriptor
space as the embedding space and combine the learning
objective of semantic embedding deﬁned in Eq. 1and the
objective of feature generation deﬁned in Eq. 2. To map
the synthesized features into the embedding space as well,
we introduce the following embedding loss for the synthetic
features:
Lsync
se(G,E) =Ea[max(0,∆−a⊤E(G(a,ǫ))
+(a′)⊤E(G(a,ǫ)))].(3)
Notably, we formulate Lsync
se(G,E)only using the seman-
tic descriptors of seen classes. Therefore, the total loss of
our basic hybrid GZSL approach takes the form of
max
Dmin
G,EV(G,D)+Lreal
se(E)+Lsync
se(G,E). (4)
2373