the cross-entropy loss of this S-way classiﬁcation problem
as below:
ℓcls
ce(hi,a+) =−logexp/parenleftbig
F(hi,a+)/τs/parenrightbig
/summationtextS
s=1exp(F(hi,as)/τs), (7)
whereτs>0is the temperature parameter for the class-
level contrastive embedding and Sis the number of seen
classes. The class-level contrastive embedding relies on the
class-wise supervision to strengthen the discriminative abil-
ity of the samples in the new embedding space.
We deﬁne the following loss function for the class-level
contrastive embedding:
Lcls
ce(G,E,F) =Ehi,a+/bracketleftbig
ℓcls
ce(hi,a+)/bracketrightbig
, (8)
which is the expected loss over the samples, either real or
synthetic, in the new embedding space, and their corre-
sponding semantic descriptor, i.e. the positive descriptor.
Total loss In our ﬁnal hybrid GZSL framework, we re-
place the semantic embedding (SE) model in the basic hy-
brid framework in Eq. 4with the proposed contrastive em-
bedding (CE) model. As described above, the contrastive
embedding model consists of an instance-level loss function
Lins
ceand a class-level loss function Lcls
ce. Thus, the total
loss of our ﬁnal hybrid GZSL framework with contrastive
embedding (CE-GZSL) is formulated as:
max
Dmin
G,E,H,FV(G,D)+Lins
ce(G,E,H)+Lcls
ce(G,E,F).
(9)
Figure 2illustrates the whole structure of our method. In
our method, we learn a feature generator G(together with
a discriminator D) to synthesize the missing unseen class
features; we learn an embedding function Eto embed the
samples, both real and synthetic, to a new embedding space,
where we conduct the ﬁnal GZSL classiﬁcation; to learn a
more effective embedding space, we introduce a non-linear
projection Hin the embedding space which is used to de-
ﬁne the instance-level contrastive embedding loss; and to
enforce the class-wise supervision, we learn a comparator
networkFto compare an embedding and a semantic de-
scriptor.
GZSL classiﬁcation We ﬁrst generate the features for
each unseen class in the embedding space by composing
the feature generator network Gand the embedding func-
tionE:˜hj=E(G(au,ǫ)), whereu≥S+1andauis the
semantic descriptor of an unseen class. We map the given
training features of seen classes in Dtrinto the same em-
bedding space as well: hi=E(xi). In the end, we utilize
the real seen samples and the synthetic unseen samples in
the embedding space to train a softmax model as the ﬁnal
GZSL classiﬁer.4. Experiments
Datasets We evaluate our method on ﬁve bench-
mark datasets for ZSL: Animals with Attributes 1&2
(A WA1 [39] & A WA2 [69]), Caltech-UCSD Birds-200-
2011 ( CUB ) [65], Oxford Flowers ( FLO ) [52], and SUN
Attribute ( SUN ) [55]. AWA1 and AWA2 share the same
50 categories and each category is annotated with 85 at-
tributes, which we use as the class-level semantic descrip-
tors. AWA1 contains 30,475 images and AWA2 contains
37,322 images; CUB contains 11,788 images from 200 bird
species; FLO contains 8,189 images of 102 ﬁne-grained
ﬂower classes; SUN contains 14,340 images from 717 dif-
ferent scenes and each class is annotated with 102 attributes.
For the semantic descriptors of CUB and FLO, we adopt the
1024-dimensional class embeddings generated from textual
descriptions [ 57]. We extract the 2,048-dimensional CNN
features for all datasets with ResNet-101 [ 27] pre-trained on
ImageNet-1K [ 37]without ﬁnetuning . Moreover, we adopt
the Proposed Split (PS) [ 69] to divide all classes on each
dataset into seen and unseen classes.
Evaluation Protocols We follow the evaluation strategy
proposed in [ 69]. Under the conventional ZSL scenario,
we only evaluate the per-class Top-1 accuracy on unseen
classes. Under the GZSL scenario, we evaluate the Top-
1 accuracy on seen classes and unseen classes, respectively,
denoted as SandU. The performance of GZSL is measured
by their harmonic mean: H= 2×S×U/(S+U).
Implementation Details We implement our method with
PyTorch. On all datasets, we set the dimension of the em-
beddinghto 2,048, and set the dimension of the non-linear
projection’s output zto 512. The comparator network Fis
a multi-layer perceptron (MLP) containing a hidden layer
with LeakyReLU activation. The comparator network F
takes as input the concatenation of an embedding hand a
semantic descriptor a, and outputs the relevance estimation
between them. Our generator Gand discriminator Dboth
contain a 4096-unit hidden layer with LeakyReLU activa-
tion. We use a random mini-batch size of 4,096 for AWA1
and AWA2, 2,048 for CUB, 3,072 for FLO, and 1,024 for
SUN in our method. In the mini-batch, the instances from
the same class are positive instances to each other, while
the instances from different classes are negative instances
to each other. The large batch size ensures a large number
of negative instances in our method.
4.1. Comparison with SOTA
In Table 1, we compare our CE-GZSL method with the
state-of-the-art GZSL methods. Our method achieves the
bestUon four datasets and achieves the best Hon AWA2,
CUB, and FLO. Notably, on CUB, our CE-GZSL is the
2375