Contrastive Embedding for Generalized Zero-Shot Learning
Zongyan Han1†, Zhenyong Fu1*†, Shuo Chen2,1and Jian Yang1*†
1PCALab, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, China
2RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project, Japan
{hanzy, z.fu, csjyang }@njust.edu.cn shuo.chen.ya@riken.jp
Abstract
Generalized zero-shot learning (GZSL) aims to recog-
nize objects from both seen and unseen classes, when only
the labeled examples from seen classes are provided. Re-
cent feature generation methods learn a generative model
that can synthesize the missing visual features of unseen
classes to mitigate the data-imbalance problem in GZSL.
However, the original visual feature space is suboptimal for
GZSL classiﬁcation since it lacks discriminative informa-
tion. To tackle this issue, we propose to integrate the gen-
eration model with the embedding model, yielding a hybrid
GZSL framework. The hybrid GZSL approach maps both
the real and the synthetic samples produced by the genera-
tion model into an embedding space, where we perform the
ﬁnal GZSL classiﬁcation. Speciﬁcally, we propose a con-
trastive embedding (CE) for our hybrid GZSL framework.
The proposed contrastive embedding can leverage not only
the class-wise supervision but also the instance-wise su-
pervision, where the latter is usually neglected by existing
GZSL researches. We evaluate our proposed hybrid GZSL
framework with contrastive embedding, named CE-GZSL,
on ﬁve benchmark datasets. The results show that our CE-
GZSL method can outperform the state-of-the-arts by a sig-
niﬁcant margin on three datasets. Our codes are available
onhttps://github.com/Hanzy1996/CE-GZSL .
1. Introduction
Object recognition is a core problem in computer vision.
This problem on a ﬁxed set of categories with plenty of
training samples has progressed tremendously due to the ad-
*Corresponding authors.
†Zongyan Han, Zhenyong Fu and Jian Yang are with PCA Lab, Key
Lab of Intelligent Perception and Systems for High-Dimensional Informa-
tion of Ministry of Education, and Jiangsu Key Lab of Image and Video
Understanding for Social Security, School of Computer Science and Engi-
neering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, China.
class-level
semantic descriptor
Laysan Albatross:
white throat
white forehead
black eyes
...
black wing
black back
white leg
white belly
...
Laysan
Albatross
California
Gull
Red Legged 
Kittiwake
?
?
 ?Figure 1: Existing semantic embedding methods merely uti-
lize the class-wise supervision, which may be unsuitable for
some examples as they do not match exactly with the class-
level semantic descriptor. The proposed contrastive embed-
ding can utilize not only the class-wise supervision but also
the instance-wise supervision.
vent of deep convolutional neural networks [ 37]. However,
realistic object categories often follow a long-tail distribu-
tion, where some categories have abundant training samples
and the others have few or even no training samples avail-
able. Recognizing the long-tail distributed object categories
is challenging, mainly because of the imbalanced training
sets of these categories. Zero-Shot Learning (ZSL) [ 39,54]
holds the promise of tackling the extreme data imbalance
between categories, thus showing the potential of address-
ing the long-tail object recognition problem. Zero-shot
learning aims to classify objects from previously unseen
categories without requiring the access to data from those
categories. In ZSL, a recognition model is ﬁrst learned on
the seen categories, of which the training samples are pro-
vided. Relying on the category-level semantic descriptors,
such as visual attributes [ 16,39] or word vectors [ 47,48],
ZSL can transfer the recognition model from seen to unseen
object categories in a data-free manner.
In zero-shot learning, we have the available data from
seen classes for training. Conventional zero-shot learn-
2371