26 
 accuracy and robustness . By applying the surrogate modeling and HOpt methods to four benchmark examples,  we 
investigated the impact of HOpt on the accuracy, robustness, and computational costs of t he surrogate models . 
In general, the HOpt can improve MLA -based surrogate models with lower error. The improvement made by 
the HOpt depends on the specific problems with various complexity. The performance of HOpt may not be stable 
when handling complex pr oblems with mixed variables and relative higher -dimensional  design space. In addition , 
GPR is recommended with HOpt due to its low training cost and relatively high accuracy.  
The training costs before and after hyperparameters t uning are also evaluat ed through a single training process . 
Followed by the RFR , the tr aining time of ANN exhibits the highest sensitivity to the HOpt . ANN training cost is 
closely related to the learning rate and mini -batch size. The mini -batch size could speed up the convergence and 
reduce the iteration cost. The RFR training cost is linearly related to the scale of forest ( i.e. the number of trees and 
each tree’s nodes). GPR and SVM are insensitive to the hyperparameter s tuning . A high computational cost  for 
SVM  may occur  under the condition of  the narrow 
 -bound s and the high weight  (C) of the error term , which 
should be avoided . 
A parametric study conducted on the  hyperparameters ' influence on RMSE and MXAE  is discussed  in the 
supplement file . The results indicate that  the polynomial and Laplacian kernels are recommended for the GPR  for a 
high modeling accuracy . The low degree  (2 or 3)  of the polynomial kernel and low sigma of Laplacian kernel are the 
good choices for the SVM -based surrogate modeling . Meanwhile, The ANN trained with the  tanh or relu activation 
functions using  sgd or adagrad optimizers shows a good performance . 
In the future work, the codes can be integrated as software with a graphic user interface, and open source will be 
an option.  
Code repository  
A working  repository of this study is available at: https://github.com/Seager1 989/HOpt4SMSD.git . 
Acknowledgements  
The first author would like to thank ERAU for the partial financial support through the FIRST grant and Ph.D . 
program, and the  Cooperative  Internship Program  provided by University of Connecticut  and Embry -Riddle 
Aeronautical University . 
Conflict  of Interest