2 
 Understanding the effect of hyperparameter optimization on machine 
learning models for structur e design problems  
Xianping Du1+, Hongyi Xu2, Feng Zhu1,3* 
1 Department of Mechanical Engineering, Embry -Riddle Aeronautical University, Daytona Beach, FL 32114, USA  
2 Department of Mechanical Engineering,  University of Connecticut , Storrs, CT 06269, USA  
3 Hopkins Extreme Materials Institute  and Department of Mecha nical Engineering , Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, 
21218, USA  
Abstract : 
To relieve the computational cost of  design evaluation s using expensive finite element (FE) simulations , surrogate 
model s have been widely applied in computer -aided engineering design . Machine learning al gorithm s (MLA s) have 
been  implement ed as  surrogate models due to their capability of learning the  complex interrelations  between the 
design variables  and the response from big datasets . Typically,  an MLA  regression model contain s model 
parameters  and hyperparameters . The model parameters are obtained  by fitting the training data . Hyperparameters , 
which  govern  the model structure s and the training proces ses, are assigned  by users  before  training . There is a lack 
of systematic studies on the effect of h yperparameters  on the accuracy and robustness  of the surrogate model . In this 
work , we proposed to establish  a hyperparameter optimiz ation  framework to deepen our understanding of the effect . 
Based on the sequential model -based optimization method, the Pareto front is generated by running the optimal 
acquisition and updating the surrogate model iteratively. The optimum acquisition works by repeating a design 
space s hrinking process. Using the acquired optimum, the surrogate model is updated, which describes the 
relationship between the hyperparameter combinations (inputs) generated by Latin hypercube sampling from the 
design space and structural response (outputs) to  evaluate the modeling accuracy. The updated model will then be 
used for the next iteration of optimal acquisition until the termination criterion is met . Four frequently used  MLAs,  
namely Gaussian Process Regression (GPR), Support Vector Machine (SVM), Ra ndom Forest Regression (RFR), 
and Artificial Neural Network (ANN) , are tested on four benchmark examples of structure design optimization . For 
 
+ Current affiliation: Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA  
* Corresponding author: Hopkins Extreme Materials Institute, Johns Hopkins University, 3400 N Charles St, Baltimore, MD 21218, USA  
E-mail: fengzhume@gmail.com  (Dr. Feng Zhu) ; Xianping Du ( DUX1@my.erau.edu ); Hongyi Xu (hongyi.3.xu@uconn.edu )