17 
 Figure 3(b) represent different thicknesses. Each thickness is considered as one design variable and therefore, there 
are 9 design variables in total. The OMcT  FE model impacts a fully constrained rigid wall (velocity: 30 km/h) with 
the rear end attached to a mass  block (600 kg) to represent the vehicle inertia effect. The coefficient force efficiency 
(CFE) is calculated as the response  to assess the energy -absor bing efficiency in Equation (12), 
 
0
max()dF x dx
CFEdF=
, (12) 
where 
0()dF x dx d  is the average d crushing force and 
maxF is the peak crushing force.  The detailed material 
parameters, loading, and boundary conditions can be seen in [96]. These two models were validated in these studies 
and the details are not repeated  here. In the current study, the impact speed of OMcT is increased to 50 km/h to 
represent the loading condition defined in NCAP standard (National Highway Traffic Safety Ad ministration: 
https://www.nhtsa.gov/laws -regulations ). The four models were  simulated by the FE simulation using  implicit 
(TbPT and TqA) and explicit (ShB and OMcT) solvers , that is, the ANSYS  Workbenc h (Ansys , Inc. , Workbench,  
Canonsburg , PA) and LS -DYNA ( Ansys, Inc., LSTC, Livermore, CA), respectively.  For each structure, 1000 design 
cases are generated for MLA learning . This same dataset will be used as the training dataset for all of the four 
MLAs.  
5. Results  
5.1 Pareto front  of hyperparameters  
The Pareto fronts are generated through the SMBO  as shown the supplement file . Although the optimal 
hyperparameters may vary  for different datasets,  the values  of hyperparameters  in Pareto front  would be  close  for 
the dataset s with similar  sample sizes and design space dimensions [23, 98]. In other words, the optimal 
hyperparameter value s obtained from this study  can be applied to the other similar design problems without 
significant change or used as the basis for optimization  [21].  
From the Pareto front of multi -objective optimization, a solution, representing a set of hyperparameter values, 
should be determined as the final optimum considering the articulation of the user’s preference [99]. In this study, 
the posteriori method [100] is used to evaluate each point on the Pareto front after it is generated. By excluding the 
alternatives with relatively high RMSE or MAXE loss, we select a solution randomly from the remained solutions 
due to their similar performance. This  random selection is used to ensure data generality. A comparison is then made