9 
 In the framework, within a single iteration , a group of designs  (hyperparameters combinations)  will be sampled 
in the design  space  of this iteration by Latin Hypercube Sampling (LHS), which aims to spread a group of samples 
almost uniformly over the design space  [74]. The response of design alternatives is predicted  by the RFR surrogate 
model.  The best alternative will be selected and a smaller subspace will be generated around this point. The 
construction of the new subspace need s to consider both exploration and exploitation. A small subspace improves 
convergence speed but may lose the optimum . Similarly, a larger subspace may seize the optimum but causes  a low 
convergence speed. In this study, the  (i+1)th subspace i s defined as 
_hp ix ∩
*
__hp i p hp iX r x , where 
_hp ix  and 
_hp ix
 represent  the hyperparameters space of the ith iteration  and its sizes and 
*
_hp iX  is the optimum of 𝑖th 
iteration . ∩ and 
pr  are the intersection operation of two subspaces and a proportion to define the  expanded space 
size centered on  the best design of the current iteration. In this smaller subspace, a  new rou nd of sampling and 
evaluation process will be implemented until the termination criterion is reached. The total number of the space 
shrinking  iteration is limited to
itn . After  the iterations  are terminated , an optimum design can be obtained . 
To fully explore the design space  and improve robustness , this optimi zation process will be repeated  
ren times. 
Then, a group of designs  is generated  by taking the Pareto front  from  each of  the 
ren  optimization  processes , where  
each process  is implemented with 
itn  iterations for space shrinking as described above . The overall Pareto front  will 
be obtained from this group  of designs  and used to determine the hyperparameter values of corresponding  MLA  
models.   
3. Implementation  of hyperpara meters optimization  
Based on available  datasets , the hyperpara meters can be optimized by the above framework . Before this, the 
hyperparameters  domain, measures , and formulation should be implemented . 
3.1 Design  synthesis  and post -processing  
The dataset used for MLA training can often be generated  by the design of experiment (DoE).  Many  algorithms 
are available to create  DoE, e.g. Pseudo -Monte Carlo Sampling (PMCS), Latin Hypercube Sampling (LHS), and 
Orthogonal Array Sampling (OAS) [75]. In this study, the LHS is also used since it could fill the design space 
uniformly to well explore the design space.