23 
 ANN training time is related to the combined  effect of the mini-batch size, learning rate, and optimizer and so 
on. As indicated  in Table 4 and Figure 6, after  HOpt , the ANN trained by TbPT is reduced slightly, which is caused 
by the larger  learning rate , which accelerate s the training convergence . however , the other structural cases present ed 
lower  convergence speed  although they have  larger learning rate s, which are caused by the smaller mini -batch size s. 
This increases the number of batch training within a single  epoch , which rises the training time of a single epoch but 
lowers the number of epochs  for convergence. These suggest that the mini -batch size takes the primary effect on the 
training  time and is follo wed by the learning rate under a fixed  training epoch . The other hyperparameters are more 
related to model accuracy than the training cost.  
In summary , compared with GPR and SVM, the training time of ANN and RFR is more  sensitive to 
hyperparameter values. HOpt improved  the ANN performance  most significantly , which is followed by the GPR.  
Therefore, it is recommended to conduct HOpt for ANN if enough computational sources  are available . Otherwise, 
the GPR is recommended f or applying the HOpt.  Besides , in the HOpt for SVM , small -bounds or large error 
penalization C should be avoided , because they will cause a too complex  training objective function and then 
unexpected singularities and  a high convergence  cost. 
6. Discussion  
In this section, an analysis is carried out on the re lationship be tween the p erformance of HOpt method  to 
improve the MLA modeling  performance  and characteristics of the design problems, as summ arized in Table 6. The 
characteristics include  the structure type, the types and number of design va riables, load type , and the d esign domain 
continuity , whic h performances  are mainly RMSE, MXAE and computational time . Previous studies have 
demonstrated that the dimensionality  and nonlinearity of design problems , which partially depends on the structure 
and load types,  have a strong  impact on the surrogate model  accuracy and robustness  [16, 101]. In addition to 
structure and load types, the dimensionality of the design space, contin uity of the feasible domain, and the design 
variable type also influence the complexity of the problem.  Due to the design constraints , the feasible domain s of 
TbPT and TqA  are broken into discontin uous subdomains . The nonlinear boundaries of discontinuous feasible 
domains pose  an additional level of challenge to MLA model training . Furthermore , mixed -variable problems are 
more challenging for MLA models .  
In Table 6, the improvement  in accuracy (mean) and robustness (SD) of each MLA model after HOpt are listed 
for each benchmark problem. The improvement is presented as the percentage of reduction in the v alues of mean