4 
 example,  the constants of  the linear regression can be determined by the least square error method ; polynomial 
response surface  parameters can be determined  by gradient -based  methods. Unlike  the traditional  surrogate 
modeling approach es, a typical MLA  contains  not only model parameters but also  hyperparameters  [19-21], which 
have to be assigned  before  model  training  to control the training process and model structures  [22]. They  have a 
great impact  on model  flexibility , accuracy , and robustness  [20, 21, 23, 24]. 
Up to date, no system atic studies have been conducted regarding the effect of hyperpara meters on the MLA -
based surrogate modeling  in engineering design . Most of  the existing studies  [25], which applying MLAs as 
surrogate models,   either directly use  the default values provided by the MLA package  [26], or determine their 
values based on experience  [27] or trial-and-error  [28]. Although these surrogate models were trained with good 
accuracy  under pre -determined loss function(s) , the potential of the MLAs has not been fully exploited and the way 
that hyperparameters affect  the surrogate modeling performance has  not been clarified . To analyze the influence of 
hyperparameters on the prediction performance, several studies have been performed by parametric analysis in 
various areas, including the  biomechanical analysis  [29], material design  [30] and miner al exploration  [31]. In these 
studies, however, only a small portion of hyperparameters were tuned  from a specific dataset , and the final values of  
hyperparameters  were  determined subjectively . Also, t he effect of MLA hyperparameters has not been investigated  
in the area of  structural  design . Lacking this knowledge, it would be very difficult to fully understand  and improve 
the surrogate modeling of MLAs  in the structural  design practice.  Furthermore , the potential of MLAs cannot  be 
fully exploited  solely by traditional parametric studies  [32]. The HOpt  in structural design is therefore needed.  
HOpt , which adapts the optimization  method s in hyperparameters tuning  by taking the hyperparameters as design 
variables,  has been considered  as an effective technique to search  optimal values of selected hyperparameters. With 
the help of HOpt , the great improvement  of MLAs prediction accuracy  has been confirmed based on many public 
datasets [21, 23, 24, 33]. Howe ver, no studies have been reported on HOpt  in structur e engineering . 
In this work, by develop ing a multi -objective HOpt  framework, the effort  is made to analyze the surrogate 
modeling performances of four frequently used MLAs , namely , Gaussian Process Regression (GPR), Support 
Vector Machine (SVM),  Random Forest Regression (RFR) , and Artificial Neural Network  (ANN ). These MLAs  are 
selected  as they are widely applied in structural engineering problems , as summarized in Table 1 [11, 27, 28, 31, 34-
56]. After a discussion  of their accurac y, training cost , and model robustness  before and after the HOpt , the 
hyperparameters tuning  of two superior MLAs are also discussed . The method developed in this study can be used