14 
 construct the initial surrogate model. Another  70 evaluations ( i.e., iterations , 
TN=100 ) are used to optimize the 
hyperparameters.  𝑁𝑇=100  is verified to be sufficient to ensure the convergence of Pareto front by a separate 
parametric analysis with a reasonable computational cost  as shown in Appendix A . The 5 -folds cross -validation is 
used to train the model, which divides the training datas et into five subsets to train the model in iterations.  Each 
subset is used for validation and the rest are used to train a new model with five validation errors generated. The 
average of the validation errors from the 5-folds is used as the final validatio n error. The cross -validation approach 
is widely used and could reduce the bias more effectively compared to the traditional single train/validation split 
method. Since bias is considered as the cause of overfitting, the cross -validation approach tends to reduce overfitting 
[87, 90, 91]. 
 Find: 
xhp  
Minimize: RMSE  and MXAE  
Subject to: 
_ _ _
_ _ _
12
_ _ _ _min( ) : max( )
min( ) max( )
,,x x x
x x x
x
 
 
hp I hp I hp I
hp C hp C hp C
NCa
hp Ca hp Ca hp Ca hp Ca x x x  (10) 
where 
_xhp I
_xhp C
_xhp Ca  are the integral, continuous and categorical variables , respectively.  Their domains, possible 
values or ranges , have been defined in Table 2. The datasets generated by DoE  are used for MLAs training since the 
final aim is to construct surrogate models that predic t the structural response(s) accurately.  
4. Benchmark  problems for the study of MLAs  
In this study, four representative engineering structures are taken as examples to demonstrate the effect of 
hyperparameters by the HOpt . In these four problems, the variation of geometry (bar, sheet, and block), loading 
(static vs. dynamic) and boundary conditions (fully constrained and contact), as well as deformation modes (small 
vs. large deformation) are all considered. Hence,  the methods and results associated with these case studies can be 
easily extended to a wide range of structures . 
4.1 Structures  subject to static loading  
Under the static loading condition , two typical structures, i.e. a ten-bar planer truss (TbPT) [32] and a torque 
arm (TqA) [92-95], are introduced  in Figure 2, since they are frequently taken as examples  to verify structural 
design algorithms. In the TbPT model, the circular cross -section areas are taken as design variables with the range