7 
 of the present study.  These software tools are focused on MLA performance but not designed and directly used for 
surrogate modeling in the structural design.  
 
Figure 1 The framework  for the multiobjective  HOpt  based on the sequential model -based method  and the detailed 
workflow of the optimum acquisition  
The sequential model -based optimization (SMBO) [19, 67] was used as the basic method as it can reach the 
optimum efficiently. For a specific MLA, the HOpt  problem was formulated first to determine the objective(s) (i.e. 
searching criteria), tuned hyperparameters, and ranges. The design of experiments (DoE), i.e. multiple combinations 
of hyperparameters, are generated by Latin hypercube sampling (LHS) functi on in lhs package [68] and evaluated 
by traini ng the corresponding MLA. The model accuracy quantified by the predefined measures of accuracy is 
considered as the response of each DoE. Based on this hyperparameters dataset, a surrogate model is trained to 
represent the relation between the hyperparamet ers and accuracy measures. I n this study , RFR is used as the 
surrogate  model to fit measure values  with respect to hyperparameters  since it could deal with the categorical  
features directly , for example, the selection of GPR and  SVM  kernels  and ANN activat ion functions . The other 
surrogate methods are less flexible and deal with categorical data by converting to numerical values.  
Using the constructed RFR surrogate model, the optimal hyperparameters  are predicted and evaluated by 
training their MLA . The tuning process is terminated when the termination criterion, e.g. , the maximum number of 
RFR surrogate 
prediction DoE in current 
hyperparameters space
The best design
nit  ≥ Nit?nit =1
nit =nit+1
nre≥ Nre?nre =1
nre=nre+1
Final optimum(s)Shrinking the
current space
The iteration optimum
No
YesNo
YesRepeat Nretimes
NititerationsA specific MLA
Hyperparameters 
optimization formulation
The initial DoE (N=1)
MLA training
RFR surrogate modeling
RFR predicted Nth 
optimum acquisition
MLA accuracy trained 
by the optimumAdding the optimum
Ni≥ NT ?No
Yes
The ultimate optimumHyperparameters dataset
Ni=Ni+1Optimum 
acquisition