3 
 each MLA  model, the model accuracy and robustness before and after the hyperparameters optimization ( HOpt ) are 
compared . The results show that HOpt can  generally  improve  the performance  of the MLA  model s in general  with 
dependency on model complexity . HOpt leads to unstable  improvements in  the MLA s accuracy  and robustness  for 
complex problems , which are featured by high-dimensional  mixed -variable design space . We also investigated the 
additional computational costs incurred by HOpt.  The training cost is clos ely related to the MLA architecture.  After 
HOpt, the training cost of ANN and RFR is increased more  than that of the GPR and SVM.  In summary , this study 
benefits the selection of HOpt method for  different type s of design problems based on their complexity  (i.e. design 
domain continuity and the number of design variables , etc.). 
Keywords:  Structur e design ; Surrogate models; Machine learning; Hyperpara meters op timization ; Gaussian process 
regression; Support vector machine; Random forest regression; Artificial neural network  
 
1. Introduction  
In the development of complex structures , such as  a vehicle  or aircraft, a large number of full -scale numerical 
simulations are often needed. As the supplement and partial substitute of these expensive simulations, surrogate 
model s have been widely used in engineering design and optimization to reduce the computational cost  [1-3]. A 
surrogate model is established  from the design or simulation datasets through regression, to approximate the real 
model . It provides an efficient way of predicting the responses of new design alternatives without running additional 
simulations [4]. Surrogate -based  methods have been applied successfully  in engineering  practices, for example,  
vehicle crashworthiness design [5], crane bridge optimization [6], transportation facility de sign [7] and so on . To be 
adapt ed to various engineering problems , which  are characterized  by a different number of design variables, degree 
of nonlinearities , and loading rates  and so on,  several  surrogate models  have been proposed, such as polynomial 
response surfa ce model, radial basis function and  Kriging model [5]. However, it is impossible  to use one surrogate 
modeling method to provide accurate predictions for all types of problems  [8]. Therefore, much effort w as made on 
the selection of a suitable algorithm  for a specific engineering problem [8-10], and the e nsemble and aggregation  of 
multiple surrogate models [11, 12] for a higher modeling accuracy .  
To comply with the requirement  of surrogate modeling with higher accuracy , MLAs  have been applied to 
implement surrogate models  for a wide range of problems  due to their powerful learning ability  and high flexibility  
[8, 10, 13-18]. The traditional surrogate methods contain only model parameters that can be fitted by data . For