13 
 convex opt imization but increase s the training  cost of a single epoch.  Optimizers  determine the strategies to move 
toward s the optim um. The sgd (stochastic  gradient descent)  updates  weights  in the form of   
 
11t t t tw w w w +−= −  +  , (7) 
where 
tw  and
tw  are the weight matric and gradient of the current  epoch, respectively, and 
1tw−  is the step size 
of last epoch. 
 and 
  are the learning rate and momentum, respectively.  A large learning rate accelerates the 
convergence  speed but may lose the optimum while the too small value cause s the high convergence  cost. F or other 
optimizers,  adaptive  learning rate s are also used  to speed up the learning process  [87]. In this study, ANN training 
epochs were limited to 2,000, which is proven to be enough for training convergence by an additional test. 
3.3 Measures  of accuracy  
During the surrogate modeling , a number of statistical  indices , such as  the root mean square error (RMSE) , 
maximum absolute error (MXAE) , mean absolute  error, correlation , and decision coefficient , are frequently used as 
measures of accuracy  [17, 88, 89]. Although there is no physical meaning, they are calculated based on the 
quantiti es obtained in the simulations/experiments with physical meaning, such as force, stress, deformation, and 
energy absorption, etc. These quantities are often design objectives and may vary in each particular design problem. 
To keep consistent in all of the structural design scenarios in the present work and with the studies by other 
researchers, In this study, the RMSE  (Equation (8)) and MXAE  (Equation (9)) are used as two HOpt objective  
measures [88] as the global and lo cal accuracy measures, respectively , to estimate the modeling accuracy . 
 
1( ( ) ( ))N
ii
if x f x
RMSEN=−
=
, (8) 
 
Max( ( ) - ( ) )iiMXAE f x f x=
, (9) 
where 
( ) ( )iif x f x−
  is the error of the predicted response  relative to its real value of the ith design ( xi); N is the 
dataset size . Also, the training computational time ( T) of MLAs is evaluated. This helps  understand the effect of 
HOpt  on the cost and make  a decision  on the selection of a suitable  MLA in terms of computational cost.  
3.4 Optimization  formula tion 
Based on the  hyperparameters and measures , the optimization problem is formulated in  Equation  (10). RMSE 
and MXAE are taken as the objectives of the HOpt . For each HOpt task of MLA , 30 initial designs are generated to