8 
 iterations  (NT), is reached. Otherwise, this optimal design will be added to the hyperparameters dataset and then 
update the RFR surrogate model for the next HOpt ite ration.  Finally , a Pareto front can be generated.  
In Figure 1, the core part is the optimum acquisition , and its  details  are introduced as follows. Base d on the  
accuracy measure  responses , a number of effective search criteria can be generated  as objectives  to achieve the 
trade -off between the exploration and exploitation, for example,  the individual or combination of expected 
improvement (EI), GP upper confidence bound, the maximum  possibility of improvement, minimum conditional 
entropy and the lower confidence bound (LCB) [23, 24, 69]. In this study, the LCB  is used, and it is  defined as, 
 𝐿𝐶𝐵(𝑥ℎ𝑝,𝜑)=𝜇̂(𝑥ℎ𝑝)−𝜑𝑠̂(𝑥ℎ𝑝), (1) 
where 
xhp is the vector of hyperparameter s and the  
ˆ()xhp  and 
ˆ()xhps are the posterior mean and standard deviation 
of accuracy measures, respectively, from the five cross -validations. 𝜑 is a constant to count the weight of 
ˆ()xhps , 
where 
 = 1 is used for MLA with all numerical hyperparameters and 𝜑 equals 2 if at least one hyperparameter is 
categorical. This  counts  the possible  larger variatio n caused by  categorical hyperparameter(s) . 
ˆ()xhp  will be 
estimated by the RFR surrogate output  directly, but 
ˆ()xhps  should be  approximated by multi -responses generated by 
bagging technique  in RFR . This criterion  demonstrates the lower bound  of the  accuracy measures reflects  the error 
induced by RFR prediction  (
ˆ()xhps ). 
Using LCBs  as objectives, the multi -objective HOpt  will be implemented by using a design space shrinking  
procedure  recursivel y. The design space shrinking refines the design space iteratively for reaching the final optim um 
or satisfying design. Khan et al (2019) proposed an interactive generative design s ystem for yacht hull by including 
the design space shrinking, space -filling sampling [70], and human evaluator  [71]. The genetic algorithm was also 
implemented to enhance optimal searching [72]. However, the intensive involvement of manual evaluation by a 
human may increase the degree of uncertainty. Thus, the surrogate models were developed to replace the evaluator 
and realize a semi -auto process using ML tools, e.g., the ANN [73]. In the present work, the RFR method is adapted 
as the surrogate model for the response of design alternatives to enable an automatic process to seek the optim um. 
Compared with other regression methods, RFR can handle the categorical parameters more efficiently with a 
relatively lower computational cost. In addition, the space shrinking process was repeated multiple times with 
different initial designs to increa se the probability of reaching the true optimum.