Attentive CutMix: An Enhanced Data Augmentation
Approach for Deep Learning Based Image
Classiﬁcation
Devesh Walawalkar Zhiqiang ShenZechun Liu Marios Savvides
Carnegie Mellon University,
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Pittsburgh, PA, USA
Abstract
Convolutional neural networks (CNN) are capable of learning robust representation
with different regularization methods and activations as convolutional layers are
spatially correlated. Based on this property, a large variety of regional dropout
strategies have been proposed, such as Cutout [ 1], DropBlock [ 2], CutMix [ 3], etc.
These methods aim to promote the network to generalize better by partially occlud-
ing the discriminative parts of objects. However, all of them perform this operation
randomly, without capturing the most important region(s) within an object. In this
paper, we propose Attentive CutMix , a naturally enhanced augmentation strategy
based on CutMix [3]. In each training iteration, we choose the most descriptive
regions based on the intermediate attention maps from a feature extractor, which
enables searching for the most discriminative parts in an image. Our proposed
method is simple yet effective, easy to implement and can boost the baseline sig-
niﬁcantly. Extensive experiments on CIFAR-10/100 datasets with various CNN
architectures (in a uniﬁed setting) demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed
method, which consistently outperforms the baseline CutMix and other methods by
a signiﬁcant margin.
1 Introduction
Regularization in deep neural networks such as dropout, weight decay, early stopping etc. are popular
and effective training strategies to improve the training accuracy, robustness, model performance,
while also avoiding overﬁtting to some extent on limited training data. Among these, dropout is a
widely-recognized technique in training neural network which is mainly used in fully connected layers
of CNN [ 4] due to its spatial correlation and dependence property. In recent years, an interesting range
of regional dropout or replacement strategies have been proposed, such as Cutout [ 1], DropBlock [ 2],
CutMix [ 3], etc. Speciﬁcally, Cutout proposed to randomly mask out square regions of input during
training in order to improve the robustness and overall performance of CNNs. DropBlock developed
a structured form of dropout that is particularly effective in regularizing CNNs. During training,
a contiguous region of a feature map is dropped instead of individual elements in the feature map.
CutMix is motivated by Mixup [ 5], where the regions in an image are randomly cut and pasted
among training images and the ground truth labels are also mixed proportional to the area of the
regions. Although regional dropout or replacement operation methods have shown great effectiveness
of recognition and localization performance in some benchmarks, the dropping or replacing operation
is usually randomly conducted on the input. We argue that this strategy may reduce the efﬁciency of
training and also limit the improvement if the networks are unable to capture the most discriminative
regions. A representative comparison of our method with other strategies is shown in Fig. 1.
Corresponding author.
Technical Report.arXiv:2003.13048v2  [cs.CV]  5 Apr 2020