overﬁt on a particular subject and forces it to learn more important features associated with a given
subject.
However, the patch cutout is of random size and taken from a random location, thus creating the
possibility of cutting an unimportant background patch and simultaneously pasting it onto the
background in the second image. Since the composite label contains a part of ﬁrst label, we are
theoretically associating the background region to that label for the model to learn. This hinders
the empirical gains of CutMix and this is where Attentive CutMix provides improvements over its
CutMix counterpart.
Rather than randomly selecting the patch, Attentive CutMix takes help of a pretrained network to
determine the most important or representative regions within the image for the classiﬁcation task.
This technique’s effectiveness thus directly co-relates to the pretrained model used. The better the
model the more effective Attentive CutMix will be. Also, the cutout attentive patch is pasted onto the
same area in the second image as it was in the original image. This further helps to better occlude
the image since the pasting randomization in CutMix does provide a possibility of the patch being
pasted onto the background rather than the object of interest. Thus Attentive CutMix improves on
dual fronts of patch selection and pasting by removing the randomness and using attentive intuition
to make more robust fusing of images.
4 Experiments and Analysis
4.1 Datasets and Models
To prove the effectiveness of our data augmentation technique we perform extensive experiments
across wide range of popular models and Image classiﬁcation datasets. We select four variants each of
ResNet [ 6], DenseNet [ 7] and EfﬁcientNet [ 8] architectures. We selected these particular architecture
since they provide substantial variation in their architectural concepts. The individual variants in
each architecture help us test the method across different depths/sizes of each architecture. For image
classiﬁcation datasets we chose CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100 [ 15] as these are widely used benchmark
datasets to compare our method against.
4.2 Implementation Details
We trained the individual models from scratch (except the efﬁcientnet which is too costly to train
from scratch) to prevent any pretraining bias to affect our evaluation results. We run the baselines
according to the hyperparameter conﬁgurations used in their original papers, but due to some absence
of implementation details, on some particular datasets/networks the settings may be slightly different.
All the data augmentation techniques for a given architecture and dataset were run for a ﬁxed number
of epochs which were enough for the models to converge onto a test set accuracy, considering our
prime objective was to test other data augmentation techniques against ours rather than matching
state-of-the-art results. All the models were implemented in Pytorch [ 16] framework and all data
augmentation technique implementation was also done in requirements with the Pytorch framework.
4.3 Results on CIFAR-10
For CIFAR-10 dataset, each of the models for a given data augmentation technique was trained for
80 epochs. The batch size was kept at 32 and the learning rate at 1e-3. The model weights were
initialized using Xavier Normal technique. Weight decay was incorporated for regularization and it’s
value was kept at 1e-5. Results are presented in Table 1. Our method provides better results over all
tested models compared to CutMix, Mixup and the baseline methods.
4.4 Results on CIFAR-100
For CIFAR-100 dataset, every model was trained for 120 epochs. The batch size was kept at 32
and the learning rate at 1e-3. The model weights were initialized using Xavier Normal technique.
Weight decay was incorporated for regularization and it’s value was kept at 1e-5. Our experiments
are presented in Table 2. Our method again provides better overall results compared to other data
augmentation methods.
4