Energies 2020 ,13, 5739 25 of 42
Energies 2020, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW  25 of 42 
 
Figure 16. A schematic of applying deep learning for energy management  applications in smart grids  
based on data from the internet of things (IoT) device (Adapted and retuned to smart grid context 
based on the artwork with permission from [134], 2020, IEEE).  
Table 3 shows some common advantages and disadvantages of DL [ 134]. Integrating such 
methods allow the system to extract the most relevant attributes for carrying out the analysis. 
Additionally , it helps in captur ing the  ESN’s distributions pa tterns where there is a scope for 
analyzing the complex  data . 
Table 3. The c ommon advantages and disadvantages of deep learning  (A portion of the Table is 
adapted with permission from [134], 2020, IEEE).  
Methods  Advantages  Disadvantages  
CNN  CNN’s are robust, extremely competitive 
performing, supervised DL approaches. With 
added features of CNNs, its scalability is 
improved , and the duration of their training 
combined with those of ANNs is enhanced. CNN ’s 
provide possible IoT privacy uses because they c an 
dynamically learn functionality from raw data on 
protection.  CNN’s include high  computational costs . 
Therefore , it is challenging to implement 
them on commodity -constrained 
platforms to support onboard safety 
features.  
RNN  RNNs also includes their equi valents better 
performance with serial data in many scenarios. In 
some cases, IoT security data consists  of serial data . 
Thus , RNNs have a possible application in IoT 
protection.  The major downside of RNNs is the 
problem of gradients vanishing or 
exploding . 
AE AEs are theoretically significant for the extraction 
of functionality. For representation learning, AEs 
can be used effectively to learn features instead of 
the manually designed features used in 
conventional ML and minimize dimensionality 
without pr ior knowledge of the data.  AEs use a large number of computing 
resources. While AEs can easily train to 
capture training data characteristics, if the 
training dataset is not representative of a 
test data set, AEs can only confuse the 
learning process rathe r than reflect the  
characteristics.  
RBM  Using  a feedback system on RBMs allows multiple 
critical features to be extracted from an 
unsupervised approach.  RBMs include high  computational costs . 
Hence, it is challenging  to incorporate 
them on resource -constrained IoT devices 
to support onboard protection systems.  
DBN  DBNs are non -supervised methods of learning, 
trained iteratively with unlabeled data to represent 
significant features.  DBNs have high  computational costs due 
to the large number of parameters 
generated by the lengthy initialization 
process.  
GAN  In GA N, the only way to produce a sample is by 
going through the model, as with DBNs and RBMs, GAN is unpredictable and demanding 
preparation. It  is a difficult task to learn 
Figure 16. A schematic of applying deep learning for energy management applications in smart grids
based on data from the internet of things (IoT) device (Adapted and retuned to smart grid context
based on the artwork with permission from [134], 2020, IEEE).
Table 3 shows some common advantages and disadvantages of DL [ 134]. Integrating such methods
allow the system to extract the most relevant attributes for carrying out the analysis. Additionally, it helps
in capturing the ESN’s distributions patterns where there is a scope for analyzing the complex data.
Table 3. The common advantages and disadvantages of deep learning (A portion of the Table is adapted
with permission from [134], 2020, IEEE).
Methods Advantages Disadvantages
CNNCNN’s are robust, extremely competitive
performing, supervised DL approaches. With
added features of CNNs, its scalability is
improved, and the duration of their training
combined with those of ANNs is enhanced.
CNN’s provide possible IoT privacy uses because
they can dynamically learn functionality from
raw data on protection.CNN’s include high computational costs.
Therefore, it is challenging to implement
them on commodity-constrained platforms to
support onboard safety features.
RNNRNNs also includes their equivalents better
performance with serial data in many scenarios.
In some cases, IoT security data consists of serial
data. Thus, RNNs have a possible application in
IoT protection.The major downside of RNNs is the problem
of gradients vanishing or exploding.
AEAEs are theoretically signiﬁcant for the extraction
of functionality. For representation learning, AEs
can be used e ectively to learn features instead of
the manually designed features used in
conventional ML and minimize dimensionality
without prior knowledge of the data.AEs use a large number of computing
resources. While AEs can easily train to
capture training data characteristics, if the
training dataset is not representative of a test
data set, AEs can only confuse the learning
process rather than reﬂect the characteristics.
RBMUsing a feedback system on RBMs allows
multiple critical features to be extracted from an
unsupervised approach.RBMs include high computational costs.
Hence, it is challenging to incorporate them
on resource-constrained IoT devices to
support onboard protection systems.
DBNDBNs are non-supervised methods of learning,
trained iteratively with unlabeled data to
represent signiﬁcant features.DBNs have high computational costs due to
the large number of parameters generated by
the lengthy initialization process.
GANIn GAN, the only way to produce a sample is by
going through the model, as with DBNs and
RBMs, in which the Markov network requires an
unknown number of iterations.GAN is unpredictable and demanding
preparation. It is a di cult task to learn how
to generate discrete data through GAN.
EDLNMixing DL optimization algorithms may lead to a
diversity of models, enhancing model e ciency
and generalization of models.The system’s time complexity can be
increased signiﬁcantly.
Note: Artiﬁcial Neural Network (ANN), Deep Learning (DL), Internet of Things (IoT), Conventional Neural Network
(CNN), Recurrent Neural Network (RNN), Autoencoder (AE), Machine Learning (ML), Restricted Boltzmann
Machine (RBM), Deep Belief Network (DBN), Generative Adversarial Network (GAN), Ensemble of Deep Learning
Network (EDLN).