Energies 2020 ,13, 5739 28 of 42
7.1.1. Advanced Sensing and Measurement
SG incorporates smart metering, which gathers data on electricity prices and usage for customers
and utilities, including the time and amount of electricity consumed. This assesses system safety,
grid integrity and supports advanced protective relays [ 144–146]. This allows customer choice and
response to demand and helps to alleviate grid congestion. Advance monitoring and analysis improve
grid stability through early identiﬁcation of faults, allowing operating system isolation and power
outage prevention.
7.1.2. Automatic Monitoring and Control
SG provides real-time tracking and display of energy system device conditions and e ciency
through linkages and over large geographic areas, helping device operators and users recognize and
optimize power system modules, actions, and output [ 145,147,148]. SG’s monitoring and control
technologies produce data and provide a visual representation of the system status to help inform the
decision, mitigate wide-area disturbances, and improve distribution capacity and reliability.
7.1.3. Renewable Resources Forecasting
The challenges of the intermittent nature of renewable, particularly wind and solar, call for an
accurate forecast. Advanced precise estimates of wind and solar energy availability can alleviate
negative impacts on the grid’s required spinning reserves [ 149]. Advanced forecasting will provide
preliminary information on resources, load, and grid conditions. This would help in e ective scheduling
and dispatch, which assist in proper planning according to consumers’ load requirements from analyzed
data. The forecast would bring about a dynamic nature in all power system levels while balancing
variable generation by keeping the grid stable [150].
7.1.4. Information and Communication Technology
The present power system infrastructure involves connections of all signiﬁcant power system
operational facilities (generating, transmission, and primary distribution substation) to the system
control center, part of a conventional power system [ 151,152]. However, this communication is extended
throughout distribution networks and o ers high-speed two-ways communication ﬂows that make the
SG dynamic interactive for real-time information exchange [ 153–155]. SG employs ICT technology at
each level of the power system right from generation down to consumer appliances to improve electric
power services, grid reliability and e ciency, cost reduction, and enhanced environmental-friendliness.
7.1.5. Distribution Automation
Distribution automation (DA) is a technique for automated control that maximizes electricity
distribution networks’ performance to make the grid more reliable and e cient. DA is an essential
component of SG. It helps to readjust the distribution topology to incorporate renewable variability,
power ramping, and bi-directional power ﬂows [ 156]. DA provides for sensing and monitoring of
voltage and power factors at di erent points on the distribution circuit. If it senses deviation from
the expected range, it triggers automatic control of voltage regulating devices [ 157]. This allows
the injection of reactive power and voltage to be regulated to the pre-set value. When a fault or
outage occurs, with DA, the fault’s real-time occurrence can be identiﬁed and located faster and more
accurately by operators, even at remote locations. Therefore, there will not be a need for time wastage
on manual fault tracing, and consumers will not need to report to the distribution company.
8. Application of Blockchain in Smart Grids
Blockchain (BC) technology ﬁrst came to the limelight with the bitcoin and has been widely
accepted by researchers in various disciplines. Followed by the bitcoin blockchain, the di erent BC
platforms were developed. Though there were other BC platforms, they have classiﬁed into three main