Energies 2020 ,13, 5739 19 of 42
4. Power Electronic Components and Their Control in Smart Grids
Power electronics in the SG system performs the essential function of coupling the DERs to the
electric power grid. It also boosts, regulates, and does the conversion of DC to DC or DC to AC
electricity, particularly in grid integration of RE [ 106,107]. The unregulated voltage output of RE
sources’ distributed energy and intermittency requires power electronics to interface to the grid [ 108].
The DER’s voltage output could be in DC or AC form with variable frequency. Power electronics like
high voltage direct current (HVDC), voltage source inverter (inverter), and boost converter provide
ancillary services for the grids in the form of power quality improvement, reactive power support,
and electric grid stability and control. Of crucial importance among power electronics is the inverter.
The inverter integrates most RE technologies and ESS to the electric grid. A smart inverter can serve
several di erent operations to help an electric power system operate with better stability, reliability,
and e ciency [12,13].
4.1. Volt-V AR Control
The injection of reactive power to control voltage is known as Volt-VAR control [ 109,110].
Smart inverters are capable of providing reactive power at the point of connections to the grid to
regulate the grid voltage. Thus, preventing the severe stability challenges of grid voltage ﬂuctuations
occasioned by the variability of renewable solar photovoltaics even during sunny hours of the day.
An inverter is designed and programmed in such a way that its reactive power output at any time
is dependent on the grid voltage at that time [ 110]. Another way is to employ a communication
link to enable the power converter to inject its reactive power by the command of the grid operator.
In their control functions at the point of interfacing with the grid, the inverter can monitor current,
voltage, frequency, and phase angles and communicate this data to the grid operator in real-time.
This information can further process for appropriate actions or decision-making.
4.2. Ramp-Rate Control
Non-dispatchable RE production output like PV and wind goes up and down swiftly several times,
even within a couple of minutes, which may create complications for the operators [ 111]. A smart
inverter with a built-in small amount of a supercapacitor can limit or reduce the rate of up and down
output power ramping.
4.3. Frequency and Voltage Event Ride-Through
As a requirement, the inverter cannot release their output into the grid when the output
parameters like voltage and frequency from the renewable are not within the acceptable range for
grid characteristics [ 112]. Nonetheless, there may be a very brief momentary period of low and high
voltage or low and high frequency on the grid. In this period, further loss from renewable sources
might aggravate these grid conditions. Frequency and voltage event ride through is technologies or
techniques that permit the inverter to remain online and assist the grid during this short period of
voltage and frequency deviation.
5. Communication and Cybersecurity in a Smart Grid
In SG, ensuring e ective communication between the peer is essential, and, at the same time,
the data related to SG operations should be protected. In this regard, the role of communication and
ensuring cybersecurity is discussed in Sections 5.1 and 5.2.
5.1. Role of Communication in the Smart Grid
One of the SG system’s critical features is the two-way ﬂow of information and two-way ﬂow of
electricity and real-time communication among components in the system.