Energies 2020 ,13, 5739 26 of 42
7. Application of Internet-of-Things and Energy Internet in Smart Grids
IoT and the Energy Internet (EI) are two other areas in which their roles in SG is quite
considerable [ 135]. These two concepts are emerging communication technologies. In Figure 17,
a summary of di erent IoT components is shown. IoT implementations in related applications have
many beneﬁts, such as reducing human interference in the interconnecting devices process. The most
signiﬁcant impacts in the power market, home appliances, garbage management, and smart cities (SC)
are seen in the literature [ 136–141]. The IoT gateways are joining the “data collection, transmission,
and processing” networks of SG [ 139]. For instance, an IoT gateway device allows the data to
be routed through the IoT network and bi-directional communication (i.e., device-to-gateway and
gateway-to-cloud) [136,138,140].
Energies 2020, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW  26 of 42 
in which the Markov network requires an 
unknown number of iterations.  how to generate discrete data through 
GAN.  
EDLN  Mixing DL optimization algorithms may lead to a 
diversity of models, enhancing model efficiency 
and generalization of models.  The system ’s time complexity can be 
increased significantly.  
Note: Artificial Neural Network (ANN), Deep Learning (DL), Internet of Things (IoT), Conventional 
Neural Network ( CNN ), Recurrent Neural Network ( RNN ), Autoencoder ( AE), Machine Learning 
(ML), Restricted Boltzmann Machine ( RBM ), Deep Belief Network ( DBN ), Generative Adversarial 
Network ( GAN ), Ensemble of Deep Learning Network (EDLN ). 
7. Application of Internet -of-Things and Energy Internet in Smart Grids  
IoT and the Energy Internet (EI) are two other areas in which their  roles in SG is quite 
considerable  [135] . These two concepts are emerging communication technologies . In Figure 1 7, a 
summar y of different IoT components is shown.  IoT implementations in related applications have 
many benefits, such as reducing human interference in the interconnecting devices process . The most 
significant impacts in the power market, home appliances, garbage management , and smart cities 
(SC) are seen  in the literature  [136–141]. The IoT gateways are joining the “data collection, 
transmission, and p rocessing” networks of SG [139] . For instance, an IoT gateway device allows the 
data to be routed through the IoT network and bi -directional communication (i.e., device -to-gateway 
and gateway -to-cloud ) [136,138,140] . 
 
Figure 17. A summary of different components of the Internet of Things technologies platform  (Note: 
M2M—machine 2 machine, IoT —internet of things).  
SG, ESN , and IoT nodes may be the potential solutio n to t omorrow ’s global energy crisis  [142]. 
The existing SG framework , combined with IoT and EI , can be applied to  numerous  energy -related 
application s. These include SC, intelligent home monitoring systems, and energy -harvesting 
technologies  like metering, monitoring , and EMS . One of SG’s critical components  is continuous 
connectivity and communication, which provides equipped  devices  with these capabilities. In 
Reference [143], Kabalci et al.  presented different decentralized networking such as Neighbour  Area 
Network (NAN), Home Area Network (HAN), Wide Area Network (WAN), and Field Area Network 
(FAN) , which are  responsible for the roles -based data transfer between utility data centers, 
substations , and smart meters within and outside of the ESN, as shown in Fig ure 18. 
Figure 17. A summary of di erent components of the Internet of Things technologies platform (Note:
M2M—machine 2 machine, IoT—internet of things).
SG, ESN, and IoT nodes may be the potential solution to tomorrow’s global energy crisis [ 142].
The existing SG framework, combined with IoT and EI, can be applied to numerous energy-related
applications. These include SC, intelligent home monitoring systems, and energy-harvesting
technologies like metering, monitoring, and EMS. One of SG’s critical components is continuous
connectivity and communication, which provides equipped devices with these capabilities.
In Reference [ 143], Kabalci et al. presented di erent decentralized networking such as Neighbour Area
Network (NAN), Home Area Network (HAN), Wide Area Network (WAN), and Field Area Network
(FAN), which are responsible for the roles-based data transfer between utility data centers, substations,
and smart meters within and outside of the ESN, as shown in Figure 18.