Energies 2020 ,13, 5739 2 of 42
consumption and economic development [ 2]. Similarly, energy is an indispensable input for social
development [ 3]. Apart from energy, socio-economic growth is also inﬂuenced by global geopolitical
scenarios, new technological developments, and available natural resources [ 2,4,5]. Since all these factors
inﬂuence the socio-economic growth, it becomes quite challenging to predict the associated uncertainties,
which again have an inﬂuence on the energy supply and demand patterns [ 4]. Any adverse shocks to
the energy sector will negatively impact socio-economic development [ 2]. Thus, a quest for adequate,
reliable, resilient, equitable, secure, and a ordable energy supplies is given a primary priority [ 2].
On the other side, the Internet’s role and other smart systems in social progress are highly noticeable
and are expected to increase in the near future [ 6]. Besides, there have been raised concerns about
environmental safety, and it is argued that future energy supplies should meet the low carbon and other
clean energy standards [ 7]. Thus, smart and sustainable energy supplies are commanded to ensure
socio-economic development. Therefore, the impacts on socio-economic developments from providing
energy through renewable energy resources (RER) as a substitute for fossil fuel generation technologies
are more signiﬁcant [ 4]. The trend for using distributed energy resources (DER), particularly renewable
energy (RE) and energy storage systems (ESS), in the conventional electric grid (CEG) and also in the
present power system infrastructure, has been given high priority in most nations. However, DER and
ESS have increased progressively in the modern power system [ 8]. The main reason for the increased
use of DER is due to the need for developing a decarbonized energy sector for the future. Additionally,
RER’s energy security, consistent improvements in power conversion e ciencies, and RE technologies
falling cost favor the DER growth [9].
The CEG is a centralized system that generally connects the many small and large power generation
plants under one roof and steadily transfers the power from the remote-generation station to the
demand centers through extended transmission lines. The power ﬂow would be high to a low voltage
level in such systems, creating the one-directional ﬂow from the electricity systems networks (ESN) to
consumers [ 10]. Whereas the RE-based DER, in most cases, is localized and small in terms of megawatt
production, generated voltages are relative to conventional power plants. When RE is integrated
into CEG, severe frequency ﬂuctuation can be seen, and this is due to regular loss of energy mostly
elicited by RE’s intermittent nature. Therefore, its integration to CEG poses a constraint [ 11]. However,
with technological evolution seen in the electrical infrastructure in recent years, the use of RE-based
DER in the electric grid has become possible [ 11]. The CEG has transitioned to the next level and
is aided by technological changes and innovative energy generation, transmission, and distribution
approaches. For having a detailed considerate of the electric grid evolution, the signiﬁcant events that
took part in its journey are considered, and these are depicted in Figure 1. In addition, these signiﬁcant
events were brieﬂy described, which are as follows.
 The electric battery’s invention that produces a continuous supply of electric current by Alessandro
Volta is the ﬁrst most signiﬁcant event in 1800.
 The discovery of electromagnetic induction by Michael Faraday is the second most signiﬁcant
event in 1831.
 The incandescent bulb development by Thomas Edison and Joseph Sawm is the third most
signiﬁcant event that happened between the years 1878–1879. This event has spread its roots in
developing new kinds of bulbs.
 The development of direct current (DC) streetlamps in New York, the United States of America
(USA) in 1882, is the fourth most signiﬁcant event.
 The widespread use of alternating current (AC) systems since 1886 is the ﬁfth most signiﬁcant
and the fate changing event in electric grid evolution.
 The invention of the ﬁrst working models of induction motor by two eminent scientists Nikola
Tesla and Galileo Ferraris had revolutionized the alternating current power system. It is the most
signiﬁcant event in the evolution of the electric grid.