Energies 2020 ,13, 5739 20 of 42
The communication system is crucial in grid integration of DER’s and aid in restructuring the
ESN topology based on the need for adjusting for the e cient ﬂow of electric power [ 113]. Being a
vast system, SG needs a range of networking and communication technologies that can enable timely
and high-speed two-way interactions among components, users, and operators. The medium of these
communications can be wired (power line communication, ﬁber optics, and copper cables) and wireless
communication, including Wi-Fi, cellular, microwave, etc. [114,115].
In the traditional approach, technicians go physically to power equipment /systems to collect data
and consumer’s terminal to take readings on a periodical basis for system monitoring and billing
purposes. In SG systems, smart meters and sensors will provide real-time information and remote
monitoring and store all previous data. All this information is made available on a communication
platform to the central location with all concerned points through communication technologies using
wired or wireless communication for access [ 115,116]. This helps operators be fully aware of the
power system’s health and predict and ascertain the system’s condition ahead of time and, thereby,
give appropriate notiﬁcation to consumers. Examples are notiﬁcations on possible outages with
duration, energy price, and amount of energy available at a given time. Consumers also can adjust
their power usage patterns based on available information on their consumption rate and energy cost,
which they can easily access on a communication platform even through their mobile phone in the
comfort of their location.
5.2. Role of Cybersecurity in a Smart Grid
Cybersecurity in SG is essential as there is a need to prevent abuse, malicious activities,
and unauthorized access to a two-way ﬂow of information on the grid system [ 115,116]. Consumers or
the prosumer or any other peer within ESN have a lot of information about their consumption
and trading patterns. Hence, the data needs to be protected from hacking, theft, and loss.
Full implementation of the SG system without adequate cybersecurity measures can open the system
to a sophisticated cyber-attack, which can compromise the system and cause stability problems for the
grid. Cyber-attack can also cause fraud, like the destruction of information and manipulation of energy
consumption data. Cybersecurity should be aimed at integrity, conﬁdentiality, and timely availability
of data [ 113,117]. The cybersecurity system should also detect cyber-attacks and information security
violations and automatically send alerts to the peer. This will help the peer to respond to protect the
integrity of the system.
6. Application of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Machine Learning, and Deep Learning in Smart Grids
With the growth of computational methods, particularly in data management and analysis,
several ML approaches have been implemented in various industries [ 118]. According to the current
situation, most of the researchers have concentrated their studies on DL too. The DL has been treated
as an emerging area for feature extraction and handling a considerable amount of data where ML
methods fail. Altogether, AI encloses numerous subﬁelds, counting as ML, DL, Big Data computer
vision, neural network, natural language processing, etc. [ 118]. DL employs large neural networks
with many layers of processing units, advancing computing power, and enhancing training techniques
to learn versatile patterns from vast amounts of data. DL is typically a sub-branch of ML, and DL is
another sub-branch of AI, as shown in Figure 14.
The appropriate proliferation of AI technologies is essential for suitable applications, especially in
the SG applications [ 119]. SG is a collection of existing and emerging technologies working together
to monitor and manage the ESN properly. Based on its nature, SG was able to generate huge data,
given the scope for data analysis [120]. At present, in SG, standard data mining methods are applied.
The traditional data mining analysis tool adopted by industries were ML, ANN, genetic algorithm
(GA), FL, KbS, support vector machine (SVM), etc. [ 119–123]. These methods were mainly used to get
better outcomes in terms of exact electricity demand estimation. These methods were also applied to
forecast energy production and consumption patterns based on peer behaviour in the ESN. Among all