Energies 2020 ,13, 5739 31 of 42
Energies 2020, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW  31 of 42 
  
(a) (b) 
  
(c) (d) 
Figure 19. Blockchain for smart grid  (a). hybrid renewable energy microgrid with microgrid manager  (Note: PV—photovoltaics, MG —microgrid, PV —electric 
vehicle ) (b). A three -layer blockchain architecture for enhancing security and data protection in a smart grid along with applications  (Note: ICT —information and 
communication technologies)  (Reprinted with permission [167 ], 2019, IEEE ). (c). A new cyber layer for smart grids using blockchain  (Reprinted with permission 
[167], 2019, IEEE ), and ( d). Using blockchain for microgrid services automation  (Reprinted with permission [167 ], 2019, IEEE) . 
Figure 19. Blockchain for smart grid ( a). hybrid renewable energy microgrid with microgrid manager
(Note: PV—photovoltaics, MG—microgrid, PV—electric vehicle) ( b). A three-layer blockchain
architecture for enhancing security and data protection in a smart grid along with applications
(Note: ICT—information and communication technologies) (Reprinted with permission [ 167], 2019,
IEEE). ( c). A new cyber layer for smart grids using blockchain (Reprinted with permission [ 167], 2019,
IEEE), and ( d). Using blockchain for microgrid services automation (Reprinted with permission [ 167],
2019, IEEE).
9. Discussion on the Beneﬁts and Services O ered by the Smart Grid
A comprehensive discussion on DER and di erent digital technologies like AI, ML, DL, IoT, EI,
and BC in the SG context is carried out in the previous sections. Based on the knowledge provided in
Sections 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, it is understood that the RER’s contribution to future SG development would
be very high.
It is also clear that the EV penetration to SG would increase in the near future and be a vital
component in the SG conﬁguration. Based on its inherent nature, SG will be able to “detect, react,
and pro-act” to changes in system functioning and energy usage, ensuring timely grid operations.
These features in DER-based SG can be accomplished at the fullest level using AI, IoT, and BC.
The investigation of these digital technologies had also informed the same. However, the cost involved
in transitioning from the CEG to the SG is very high, but the beneﬁts are numerous and will eventually
reduce electricity costs. With the shift to SG, the current ESN could have the following services.
 Support a more signiﬁcant proportion of RE as SGs are well-designed with technology support
that e ectively controls the ESN by taking the uncertainties associated with RE,
 Acts as a better response system that mitigates the sudden disturbance by o ering the services
related to repair and faster restoration,
 Live statistics on the energy consumptions patterns and suggestions on improving energy e ciency,
 Live information on electricity generation prices along with the forecasted price based on the time
of use,
 Peak demand adjustment within the ESN, based on the ﬂexible and convenient time of operation,
 Enhanced grid e ciency and improvements in energy trading, metering, and RE integration,