Energies 2020 ,13, 5739 8 of 42
As mentioned earlier in Sections 1.1 and 1.2, the integration of DER into the CEG at the distribution
level poses several technical challenges: islanding, grid stability, power quality issues, frequency
variation, and reverse power ﬂow [ 49–51]. These challenges can be adequately taken care of in the
SG system. DER can be categorized as controllable loads such as distributed generation (DG), EES,
and Demand Side Management (DSM).
In the following subsections, various types of DER that are used in SG are discussed.
2.1. Distributed Generation Technologies
DG is the small-scale power plants that feed MG that are a part of an SG. As mentioned earlier,
these are small distribution units and are usually located very close to the load it powers [52].
In general, diverse energy resources can be integrated to form electrical energy systems to provide
the locality’s power needs. It can either be renewable or non-renewable generation. Non-renewable DG
includes fossil fuel generation (e.g., coal, diesel, and natural gas). Renewable DG can be dispatchable
in which the output power generated can be controlled by the amount of fuel injected into the
system [53,54].
The dispatchable renewable DG includes hydro and biomass. Few non-dispatchable ones
include solar PV and WT, in which the generated output cannot be controlled but is dependent on
weather conditions.
Overall, the most common technologies for DG include only a selected DG considered here [ 8,53,54]:
 Solar PV power plants (SPVPP)
 Wind power plants (WPP)
 Hydroelectric power generation (HPG)
 Thermal power plants (TPP)
 Nuclear power plant (NPP)
 Energy storage systems (ESS)
Apart from the ESS, the electric loads that are integrated with the SG would include as follows:
 Electric vehicle (EV)
 Smart houses (SHs)
 Cities
 Factories
A typical schematic view of DG-based SG, showing various technologies used for power generation,
is shown in Figure 3.
Energies 2020, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW  8 of 42 
2.1. Distributed Generation  Technologies  
DG is the small -scale  power plants that feed MG that are a part of an SG. As mentioned earlier, 
these are small distribution un its and are usually located very close to the load it power s [52]. 
In general , diverse energy resources can be integrated to form electrical energy systems t o 
provide the locality’s power need s. It can either be renewable or non -renewable generation. Non -
renewable DG includes fossil fuel generation ( e.g., coal, diesel, and natural gas). Renewable DG can 
be dispatchable in which  the output power generated can be control led by the amount of fuel injected 
into the system  [53,54]. 
The dispatchable renewabl e DG include s hydro  and biomass. Few non -dispatchable ones 
include  solar  PV and WT, in which the generat ed output cannot be control led but is dependent on 
weather condition s. 
Overall, the most common technologies for DG include  only a selected DG considere d here 
[8,53,54]: 
 Solar PV power plants (SPVPP)  
 Wind power plants (WPP)  
 Hydroelectric power generation (HPG)  
 Thermal power plants  (TPP)  
 Nuclear power plant (NPP)  
 Energy storage systems (ESS)  
Apart from the ESS, the electric loads that are integrated with the SG would include as follows:  
 Electric vehicle (EV)  
 Smart houses (SHs)  
 Cities  
 Factories  
A typical schematic view of DG-based SG , showing various technologies used for power 
generation , is shown in Fig ure 3. 
 
Figure 3. A schematic view of the smart grid showing a few of the dispatchable and non -dispatchable 
distributed generation technologies . Redrawn from  Reference  [53], 2018  eolas magazine . 
A summary of the DG technologies highlighted in Figure 3 and a few others are explained briefly 
in the following  subsections. The power modeling equations and related parameters that affect the 
power outputs are also  briefly discussed  in Table 1.  
Figure 3. A schematic view of the smart grid showing a few of the dispatchable and non-dispatchable
distributed generation technologies. Redrawn from Reference [53], 2018 eolas magazine.