Energies 2020 ,13, 5739 15 of 42
Bioenergy
This is one of the RER that is mainly used for generating gas and other fuels. Di erent energy
conversion approaches like combustion, gasiﬁcation, and pyrolysis convert the biomass into useful
electricity or other fuels [84].
In biomass power generation, China is leading, and it provides over 50% of new installations.
The bioenergy market is relatively high in China, and the most concentrated bioenergy projects
include co-generation and solid biomass to electricity. Brazil and India are the next-largest markets for
bioenergy after China, whereas the EU record 3 GW new installations in 2018 [63].
Nuclear Power Plants
These power plants generally fall under the TPP . In NPP , the nuclear ﬁssion principle is used to
generate electricity. In NPP , the nuclear reactors that act as a heat source are used in combination with
the Rankine cycle for power generation. The heat liberated in the reactor is used for converting the
water to steam, which, ultimately, spins the turbo-generator [85].
All the above-discussed TPPs are widely used in most countries for power generation. TPP drives
most of the country’s national energy mix and can be a vital DER in the electric grid. However, few of
the above-discussed TPPs, e.g., combined heat and gas recovery systems, are restricted to localized
energy grids (e.g., industrial MG, SG, etc.) within the industries. Overall, the role played by TPP as
DER in SG is critical.
2.2. Electric Storage Systems
ESS can provide stability and enhance reliability for SG with massive penetration of RE [ 8,86].
In other words, it can compensate for RE intermittency. Energy storage facilities would allow the energy
that would have been unused to be captured and retained in one form or the other and, later, converted
to electrical use during peak periods or no renewable generation. ESSs are being developed in many
ways and can be in the form of pumped hydro, compressed air, ﬂywheel, batteries, and electromagnetic
(supercapacitor), as shown in Figure 10 [ 86–90]. Storage plants can also assist in additional services like
frequency stability and black start capability [ 8]. The ESS can also support the MG or SG by o ering
voltage support when there is low voltage in the ESN.
Energies 2020, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW  15 of 42 
with the Rankine cycle for power generation. The heat liberated in the reactor is used for converting 
the water to steam, whic h, ultimately, spins the turbo -generator [85].  
All the above -discussed TPPs are widely used in most countries for power generation. TPP 
drives most of the country’s national energy mix and can be a vital DER in the electric grid. However, 
few of the above -discussed TPPs, e.g., combined heat and gas recovery systems, are restricted to 
localized energy grids (e.g., industrial MG, SG, etc.) within the industries. Overall, the role played by 
TPP as DER in SG is critical.  
2.2. Electric Storage  Systems  
ESS can provide stability and enhance reliability for SG with massive  penetration of RE  [8,86]. 
In other words, it can compensate for RE intermittency. Energy storage facilities would allow the 
energy that would have been unused to be captured and retained in  one form or the other and , later , 
converted to electrical use during peak periods or no renewable generation . ESSs are  being developed 
in many ways and can be in  the form of pumped hydro, compressed air, flywheel, batteries, and 
electromagnetic ( supercapacitor) , as shown in Fig ure 10 [86–90]. Storage plants can also assist in 
additional services like frequency stability and black start capability [8]. The ESS can also support the 
MG or SG by offering voltage support when there is low voltage in th e ESN.  
 
Figure 10. Different types of energy storage systems  (Note: ESSs —energy storage systems) . 
2.3. Demand Side Management/Controllable Loads  in a Smart Grid  
Load management from the consumer ’s side would in balancing the supply and demand 
patterns in SG. For this,  DSM  techniques are used. These techniques are generally based on  the 
consumer side ’s initiativ e to achieve the desired change in the demand profile  [91]. The different 
DSM techniques used for the re -shaping load  profile are presented in Figure 1 1. 
Figure 10. Dierent types of energy storage systems (Note: ESSs—energy storage systems).