Energies 2020 ,13, 5739 5 of 42
1.2. Role of Smart Grid in the Existing Power System and Its Implementation Barriers
As mentioned earlier in Section 1.1, SG is an intelligent digital electric grid with a pool of
technologies and services. Depending upon the load type served and ESN type (e.g., residential,
commercial, and industrial), the technologies and services used in SG vary, and they are clearly shown
in Figure 2.
Energies 2020, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW  5 of 42 
 
Figure 2. Smart grid services conceptual representation  highlight s renewable energy resources, 
energy storage systems, power electronics, information and communication technologies, energy 
management platforms, and cyber technologies . 
From Figure 2, it can be understood that SG facilitates the  consumers and prosumers to have 
increased choice s in terms of controlling their electricity use and production . The SG also  helps 
prosumers respond to electricity prices based on  the changes in  consumption and generation 
patterns . Not only the residential, commercial, and industrial  loads, SG also facilitates connection 
and integrated operation  with electric vehicle (EV) charging systems.  In brief, “SG brings all elements 
of the electricity system production, delivery, and consumption closer together to improve overall 
system operati on for the benefit of consumers and the environment.” Overall, the SG enhances ESN 
operation and control  in the three significant domains (generation, transmission, and distributions)  
[19]. 
The existing SG framework is combined with multiple design scenari os and varies based on the 
operational area or the deployed application. Few of those operations and applications include  
energy -dependent operations in smart cit ies, energy -related home operations computerization , and 
energy conservation schemes  by considering metering and tracking  processes [ 20]. SG technologies 
and concepts will significantly reduce RER barriers  and allow power grids to support a more 
significant  percentage of variable and intermittent supplies from RER [ 21]. SG is crucial for the 
efficient use of DER and  provides management of demand and supply of electricity from RE 
technologies and ESS by both users and suppliers of electricity.  
One of SG’s crucial aims  is to encourage peer’s active participation  with automated transactions 
[20,22]. For build ing an automated distributed energy distribution network, data and data -driven 
decisions are needed. SG provides such data -driven decisions as they provide a two-way flow of 
electricity and the associated data . The SG’s smartness  will allo w for the time -shifting of electricity 
demand as influenced by RE’s intermittent nature  and incorporation of ESS  [23,24 ]. 
Overall, using SG, the CEG services will be replaced with high -level automation services, control 
techniques, sensors, computer servers for energy transaction record -keeping, power asset 
management platform, and many other new and emerging technologies, and all these are expected 
to operate collectively, thereby enhancing the power grid operations [22] . SG’s components  will 
respond  intelligently and digitally on time to the grid conditions based on energy demand, supply, and 
fault occurrences on the system  working hand -in-hand to produce, deliver, and utilize energy most 
efficiently and reliably . With this, SG  can automatically loca te the fault, isolate it , and even  restore 
services once the fault is cleared a nd record  its activities on the grid  performance data . This helps the 
grid reduce the number, impact, and duration of outages and interruptions  [25]. 
Figure 2. Smart grid services conceptual representation highlights renewable energy resources, energy storage
systems, power electronics, information and communication technologies, energy management platforms,
and cyber technologies.
From Figure 2, it can be understood that SG facilitates the consumers and prosumers to have
increased choices in terms of controlling their electricity use and production. The SG also helps
prosumers respond to electricity prices based on the changes in consumption and generation patterns.
Not only the residential, commercial, and industrial loads, SG also facilitates connection and integrated
operation with electric vehicle (EV) charging systems. In brief, “SG brings all elements of the electricity
system production, delivery, and consumption closer together to improve overall system operation for
the beneﬁt of consumers and the environment.” Overall, the SG enhances ESN operation and control
in the three signiﬁcant domains (generation, transmission, and distributions) [19].
The existing SG framework is combined with multiple design scenarios and varies based
on the operational area or the deployed application. Few of those operations and applications
include energy-dependent operations in smart cities, energy-related home operations computerization,
and energy conservation schemes by considering metering and tracking processes [ 20]. SG technologies
and concepts will signiﬁcantly reduce RER barriers and allow power grids to support a more signiﬁcant
percentage of variable and intermittent supplies from RER [ 21]. SG is crucial for the e cient use of
DER and provides management of demand and supply of electricity from RE technologies and ESS by
both users and suppliers of electricity.
One of SG’s crucial aims is to encourage peer’s active participation with automated
transactions [20,22] . For building an automated distributed energy distribution network, data and
data-driven decisions are needed. SG provides such data-driven decisions as they provide a two-way
ﬂow of electricity and the associated data. The SG’s smartness will allow for the time-shifting of
electricity demand as inﬂuenced by RE’s intermittent nature and incorporation of ESS [23,24].
Overall, using SG, the CEG services will be replaced with high-level automation services, control
techniques, sensors, computer servers for energy transaction record-keeping, power asset management
platform, and many other new and emerging technologies, and all these are expected to operate