Energies 2020 ,13, 5739 7 of 42
In the literature, few studies were carried out by the researchers, and they showed the roles of
these technologies in ESN operations [ 27–45]. On the other side, these promising technologies have
gone through fast technological evolution in the past decade, and their applications have increased
rapidly in ESN. Furthermore, new technologies are emerging, which enable data-driven decisions.
Hence, this study discusses the SG and applications of AI, the IoT, and BC.
1.3. Key Contributions
This study mainly considers the three technologies, such as AI, IoT, and BC. Based on the
considered technologies, a critical review is carried out to understand the o ered services to the ﬁeld
of SG. The key contributions of this study are as follows.
 A comprehensive study of the DER, power electronics components and their control, electric
vehicles (EVs) as load components, and communication and cybersecurity issues in SG are
carried out.
 The techniques associated with AI, e.g., fuzzy logic (FL), knowledge-based systems (KbS),
and artiﬁcial neural networks (ANN), have been brieﬂy summarized, and their roles in DER-based
SG are also thoroughly discussed.
 The IoT components, along with energy Internet architecture for SG applications, is presented.
 The role played by AI-based analytics in improving SG services is thoroughly presented.
 A comprehensive study on the IoT and BC enabled services like data sensing, data storage, secured,
transparent, and traceable digital transactions among the peers within ESN and its clusters is
carried out.
 Discussion is made on the AI, IoT, and BC to provide automated services to peers by monitoring
the ESN’s real-time information, determining reliability, availability, resilience, stability, security,
and sustainability.
The paper is structured into ten sections. The role of numerous distributed energy resources and
the DC, AC, and hybrid microgrids SG is brieﬂy presented in Sections 2 and 3, respectively. The role
of power electronic components and their control are brieﬂy discussed in Section 4. In Section 5,
the issues related to communication and cybersecurity are brieﬂy presented. The application of AI, IoT,
and Blockchain in SG is brieﬂy discussed in Sections 6–8, respectively. The discussions in the context of
reliability, availability, resilience, stability, security, and sustainability are made in Section 9, and, lastly,
in Section 10, the concluding remarks were drawn.
2. Distributed Energy Resources in Smart Grids
The DER-based power system is a small to medium-scale decentralized power generation system
that uses RER, and mostly these DER are located close to the load centers. DER provides an alternative
or enhancement to the conventional power grid and can feed entire distribution systems [46,47].
DER-based onsite power generation is a less expensive option and a quick process, especially with
the PV , wind turbine (WT), fuel cells, etc. Whereas the central power generating systems are relatively
more extensive in installed peak capacities, their erection time is also relatively high compared to
onsite DER-based power plants. The high-voltage transmission lines erection also takes more time [ 48].
DER reduces the load on electrical transmission lines. Besides, the DER-based ESN would o er energy
to consumers at a lesser price.
At the same time, the DER-based ESN provides higher service reliability, improved power quality,
and ensures consumer’s energy independence. When DER uses any renewable technology, it has an
excellent contribution to the power generation mix and is a part of the green solution for a sustainable
environment. Government, policymakers, and power engineers worldwide are encouraging the
incorporation of DER, primarily RER-based MG and SG, into power distribution systems. In recent
years, nano-grids and mini-grids have also become quite popular in the ESN.