Energies 2020 ,13, 5739 4 of 42
Energies 2020, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW  3 of 42 
 
Figure 1. Fifteen  most significant events in the evolution of t he electricity grid (Note: DC —direct 
current , AC—alternating current , USA—United States of America , MOSFET —metal -oxide -
semiconductor field -effect transistor ). 
 The invention of the first working models of induction motor by two eminent scientists Nikola 
Tesla and Galileo Ferraris had revolutionized the alternating current power system. It is the most 
significant event in the evolution of the electric grid.  
 The power plant infrastructure development for supplying energy to the small communities 
began to st art in 1896. Different types of AC power generating units have evolved in other parts 
of the world, which is considered the seventh most significant event in the electric grid evolution.  
 The commercialization of power metal -oxide -semiconductor field -effect  transistor (MOSFET) is 
the eighth most significant event. It is regarded as another big game -changer in the electric grid ’s 
evolution, which allowed integrating RE technologies into the grid.  
 The ninth most significant event in the electric grid evolution  is the deregulation of wholesale 
power from renewables and other power plants.  
 The interconnection of photovoltaics  (PV) and other power plants into the electric grid 
infrastructure is the tenth most significant event.  
 DER integration with the electric gr id had become popular between 2003 and 2004, and it is the 
eleventh most significant event in the electric grid evolution.  
 Between 2008 to 2010, the guidelines for implementing microgrids (MGs), nanogrids (NGs) have 
evolved. Later, the methodology for impl ementing pilot -scale smart grids (SGs) also became a 
discussion topic among researchers and industr ialists.  
Figure 1. Fifteen most signiﬁcant events in the evolution of the electricity grid (Note: DC—direct current,
AC—alternating current, USA—United States of America, MOSFET—metal-oxide-semiconductor
ﬁeld-e ect transistor).
1.1. Overview of a Smart Grid
Today, there is no generally acceptable SG deﬁnition. Its description and deﬁnition are not
unique. It is still evolving, developing, and the concept is becoming more and more mature with
time. The SG combines DER-based micro, mini, and nano-grids and supply systems control with
a ﬁne branch [ 15]. SG incorporates technology, structures, and protocols to make the ESN more
intelligent and e cient. It is merely a radical modiﬁcation of the existing ESN. In general, the SG
is intended to substitute the fossil fuel-rich CEG with the DER and pools numerous existing and
emerging know-hows like information and digital communications technologies together to manage
countless operations [ 16]. The SG features such as computational ability, controllability, self-diagnosis,
and healing pave the way for broader incorporation of RER, more active consumer and prosumer
participation, the implementation of energy e ciency initiatives, and the consequent possible reduction
of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. The SG enables the two-way ﬂow of electricity and data between
the ESN peers and its clusters. SG’s self-healing capabilities allow the peers to become active partakers
in ESN [ 17]. With this, the SG will be able to “detect, react, and pro-act” to disparities in usage and
manifold issues and enhances the reliability, availability, resilience, stability, security, and, at the same
time, ensures grid operations sustainably and a ordably [13,18].