Energies 2020 ,13, 5739 6 of 42
collectively, thereby enhancing the power grid operations [ 22]. SG’s components will respond
intelligently and digitally on time to the grid conditions based on energy demand, supply, and fault
occurrences on the system working hand-in-hand to produce, deliver, and utilize energy most e ciently
and reliably. With this, SG can automatically locate the fault, isolate it, and even restore services once
the fault is cleared and record its activities on the grid performance data. This helps the grid reduce
the number, impact, and duration of outages and interruptions [25].
Overall, the SG o ers many beneﬁts to the CEG. Here, the beneﬁts associated with the
renewable-based SG are summarized as follows.
 It enables a broader range of RER, DER, and ESS technologies that allow higher RE deployment
with cost-e ectiveness while increasing reliability and quality of power.
 Rapid response to ESS, such as ﬂywheels, can address intermittency problems, enhancing the
grid’s overall reliability and power.
 Exchanges of real-time information make for a more ﬂexible grid, achieving almost
complete forecasting.
 Greater visibility enhances strategies for the price of forecasting.
 Assimilating clients into the power network as active players; energy savings made by reducing
the peak demands and increasing energy quality and lowered GHG emissions.
 Regulation of voltage and subsequent load allows operating costs to be minimized based on the
marginal output cost.
Even though SG o ers many beneﬁts, its implementation is also a challenging one. The challenges
mainly lie with technology use. In addition to the technology, for the successful implementation of
SG, each country needs to develop and articulate its SG vision, strategies, and means of achieving
it. This helps to motivate fervor and resources (both technical and capital) toward modernizing the
existing electric grid infrastructure.
Digital energy vision and its full understanding are fundamental for a smooth transition from
conventional to SG systems and deploying existing and emerging technologies. Change to SG can be
gradual and piecemeal until its full implementation is realized. It can start from the existing grid by
introducing each of the SG technologies one at a time. It can also begin with a small pilot project as a
nano grid, mini-grid, or microgrid in a remote geographical location and gradually be improved and
extended. There are already numbers of such SG pilot projects worldwide in the USA, South Korea,
Austria, and Canada. Furthermore, most countries in the advanced world are already gradually
upgrading their existing grid to SG.
The obstacle to implementing SG reﬂects the preposition of interest by the provider and the
consumer, accompanied by regulatory restrictions and technical norms obstructing SG solutions [26].
On the other side, issues associated with information ﬂow, communication between the peers, and ESN
resources management must be addressed. The question is, who will be managing these, the human
workforce, or the digitalization? What would be an e cient way?
Furthermore, the questions related to ensuring reliability, resilience, and security should be
considered while designing SG. Additionally, ensuring the computational and energy e ciency of the
SG operations as it undergoes digitalization becomes critical. For handling such digital operations,
computational tools are suggested. Possibly, fast computing methodologies have become one of the most
vital tools in determining an SG service’s success in the market. There exist numerous computational
and digital tools, which include artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) [ 27,28], Internet-of-Things (IoT) [ 29–31],
Big Data analytics [32–34], machine learning [35,36], deep learning [37–39], cloud computing [40–42],
and Blockchain (BC) [ 43–45]. These technologies have been intelligently applied with various
applications in networking, manufacturing, building management, transportation, and shipping to
construct energy-e cient and sustainable systems. We believe such technologies can be leveraged in
the energy sector, especially in the SG operations.