Energies 2020 ,13, 5739 17 of 42
vehicle-to-grid (V2G), and may be used as an energy storage backup for the grid [ 100]. A typical
control diagram of the EV charging station both in AC and DC conﬁguration is shown in Figure 12.
Energies 2020, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW  17 of 42 
 
Figure 12. Control of electric vehicle charging system  both in alternating current and direct current 
configuration s (Note: EV —electric vehicle, EMI —electromagnetic interferen ce filter, DC —direct 
current, ECU —electronic control unit, SoC —state of charge, BMS —battery management system, 
AC—alternating current) . 
EV charging can be through the AC or DC grid, and this will enable the vehicle to discharge its 
battery electrical energ y into the grid (V2G) when demand is very high. This serves to mitigate the 
intermittent nature of RE and provide the needed stability for the SG. The fallen price of solar PV, 
battery for EV, and the developments seen in an electric grid can absorb many  intermittent 
renewables, which is expected to enhance EV adoption [59,84]. The EV technology can even be 
extended to serve as an electrical source or sink with bi -directional charging ability in which it can be 
charged and discharged between vehicle and hom e (V2H), vehicle and building (V2B), providing 
electric power for the home, building, and to the grid and from home by building a charging point to 
EV [97–100]. The full benefit of EV being a part of the SG system will lead to a new energy business 
model a nd provide a unique value for energy customers. The EV batteries can be charged in off -peak 
times. The same charged EV batteries can be used as a source of energy supply when peak periods 
occur. EV controls in SG are not well defined yet and are still evol ving. Besides, the development of 
standards for EVs is also in progress.  
3. AC, DC, and Hybrid Microgrids -Based Distributed Generation  
MG is a segment of the main electric power grid that can be disconnected or isolated from the 
central grid and operate s independently. MG has its autonomous power generating source s 
(prefe rably more than one  source of power generation ), which may also include ESS and is situated 
Figure 12. Control of electric vehicle charging system both in alternating current and direct current
conﬁgurations (Note: EV—electric vehicle, EMI—electromagnetic interference ﬁlter, DC—direct
current, ECU—electronic control unit, SoC—state of charge, BMS—battery management system,
AC—alternating current).
EV charging can be through the AC or DC grid, and this will enable the vehicle to discharge its
battery electrical energy into the grid (V2G) when demand is very high. This serves to mitigate the
intermittent nature of RE and provide the needed stability for the SG. The fallen price of solar PV ,
battery for EV , and the developments seen in an electric grid can absorb many intermittent renewables,
which is expected to enhance EV adoption [ 59,84]. The EV technology can even be extended to serve
as an electrical source or sink with bi-directional charging ability in which it can be charged and
discharged between vehicle and home (V2H), vehicle and building (V2B), providing electric power
for the home, building, and to the grid and from home by building a charging point to EV [ 97–100].
The full beneﬁt of EV being a part of the SG system will lead to a new energy business model and
provide a unique value for energy customers. The EV batteries can be charged in o -peak times.
The same charged EV batteries can be used as a source of energy supply when peak periods occur.
EV controls in SG are not well deﬁned yet and are still evolving. Besides, the development of standards
for EVs is also in progress.