Energies 2020 ,13, 5739 16 of 42
2.3. Demand Side Management /Controllable Loads in a Smart Grid
Load management from the consumer’s side would in balancing the supply and demand patterns
in SG. For this, DSM techniques are used. These techniques are generally based on the consumer side’s
initiative to achieve the desired change in the demand proﬁle [ 91]. The di erent DSM techniques used
for the re-shaping load proﬁle are presented in Figure 11.
Energies 2020, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW  16 of 42 
 
Figure 11. The six different demand -side management approaches are used in the smart grid  
(Redrawn with permission from [91], 2014, Elsevier) . 
DSM should result in the upkeep  of electricity usage patterns efficient ly. While having DSM -
based decisions, the ESN peer can either reduce  their energy consumption patterns or limit their 
electricity load s (i.e., the connected load ) [92]. While managing the energy supply and demand 
patterns between ESN peers, DSM also manages  real-time energy prices based on peer decisions . 
The c ontrollable loads (CL) are also favorable in managing the ESN ’s energy consumption 
patterns . The ESN peer would shut down their loads based on the informed decision and condition  
by the SG.  In controlla ble loads, such decisions on load s shutting down happen without affecting the 
peer’s comfort . Additionally , the peer ’s convenience is preferred in most cases, and , in some cases, 
the interruption would occur automatically, which is done only to ensure the critical operations [93]. 
The use of DSM and CL  offers numerous advantages, including  fast load balance, frequency control, 
peak shaving, and voltage stability.  
2.4. Electric Vehicles as a Load Component in a Smart Grid  
EV is an emerging technology that ca n be an essential SG component  in the future [94–96]. As a 
result of the decarbonized transportation sector, EV’s became the most crucial loads in SG  [84]. The 
SG and EV will both have an impact on each other. Massive adoption of EV will substantially increase 
demand on the power grid, but this can be effectively managed through demand response (DR) and 
load scheduling. On the other hand, EV can provide support for the grid through its battery ESS. EV 
can capture excess non -dispatchable RE and use it to  enable and support SG [ 97]. It is , thereby , 
balancing electric power demand with supply on the grid. The EV is part of green solutions for 
environmental and energy source sustainability [ 98,99 ].  
If the EV technology is deployed widely, it will provide a large distributed energy storage 
capacity for the grid. The EV batteries are charged by SG at a time of excess generation, described as 
the vehicle -to-grid (V2G), and may be used as an energy storage backup for the grid [1 00]. A typical 
control diagram of the EV charging station both in AC and DC configuration is shown in Figure 12.  
Figure 11. The six di erent demand-side management approaches are used in the smart grid
(Redrawn with permission from [91], 2014, Elsevier).
DSM should result in the upkeep of electricity usage patterns e ciently. While having DSM-based
decisions, the ESN peer can either reduce their energy consumption patterns or limit their electricity
loads (i.e., the connected load) [ 92]. While managing the energy supply and demand patterns between
ESN peers, DSM also manages real-time energy prices based on peer decisions.
The controllable loads (CL) are also favorable in managing the ESN’s energy consumption
patterns. The ESN peer would shut down their loads based on the informed decision and condition by
the SG. In controllable loads, such decisions on loads shutting down happen without a ecting the
peer’s comfort. Additionally, the peer’s convenience is preferred in most cases, and, in some cases,
the interruption would occur automatically, which is done only to ensure the critical operations [ 93].
The use of DSM and CL o ers numerous advantages, including fast load balance, frequency control,
peak shaving, and voltage stability.
2.4. Electric Vehicles as a Load Component in a Smart Grid
EV is an emerging technology that can be an essential SG component in the future [ 94–96]. As a
result of the decarbonized transportation sector, EV’s became the most crucial loads in SG [ 84]. The SG
and EV will both have an impact on each other. Massive adoption of EV will substantially increase
demand on the power grid, but this can be e ectively managed through demand response (DR) and
load scheduling. On the other hand, EV can provide support for the grid through its battery ESS.
EV can capture excess non-dispatchable RE and use it to enable and support SG [ 97]. It is, thereby,
balancing electric power demand with supply on the grid. The EV is part of green solutions for
environmental and energy source sustainability [98,99].
If the EV technology is deployed widely, it will provide a large distributed energy storage capacity
for the grid. The EV batteries are charged by SG at a time of excess generation, described as the