Energies 2020 ,13, 5739 13 of 42
is constructed, which allows water to free fall from the dam or reservoir height to the turbine
generator [56].
Run-of-the-River Hydropower
The run-of-the-river HPG also harvests the energy from ﬂowing water. Unlike the conventional
HPG, the run-of-the-river HPG does not need a large dam or reservoir-like structures to store the water.
Here, in most cases, water is freely falling from the river’s upstream to rotate the turbine generator.
In some situations, small dams may be used, and this is done only to allow the water ﬂow to the
penstock during speciﬁc uncertainties in terms of water ﬂow [74].
Pumped Storage Hydropower
The pumped HPG also harvests the energy from water stored in overhead storage tanks.
The principle behind power generation is the same as the conventional type. Here, in pumped
storage hydropower, the excess energy is stored in water (e.g., motors were operated to pump the
water to the overhead storage tank or the reservoir). During the peak hours, the stored water is allowed
to free-fall onto the turbine, which spins the electric generator to produce electricity [ 75]. Mostly, in the
hydropower sector, the above highlighted three types of HPG plants are used. In Figure 8, the annual
energy generation from the hydropower plants across the globe is shown.
Energies 2020, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW  13 of 42 
Run-of-the-River Hydropower  
The run -of-the-river HPG also harvest s the energy from flowing water. Unlike the conventional 
HPG, the run -of-the-river HPG does not need a large dam o r reservoir -like structures to store  the 
water. Here, in most cases, water is free ly falling from the river's upstream  to rotate the turbine 
generator . In some situations, small dam s may be  used , and this  is done only to allow  the water flow 
to the penstock  during specific uncertainties in  terms of water flow  [74]. 
Pumped Storage  Hydropower  
The pumped HPG also harvests the energy from  water stored in overhead storage tanks. The 
principle behind power generation is the same as the conventional type. Here, in pumped storage 
hydropower, the excess energy is stored in water (e.g. , motors were operated to pump the water to 
the overhead stora ge tank or the reservoir). During the peak hours, the stored water is allowed to 
free-fall onto the turbine, which spins the electric generator to produce electricity  [75]. Mostly,  in the 
hydropower sector, the above highlighted three types of HPG plants  are used. In Figure 8, the annual 
energy generation from the hydropower plants across the globe is shown.  
 
Figure 8. A global map highlights the annual hydropower generation in terawatt -hours (TWh)  for the 
year 2019  [76] (Data s ource: B ritish Petroleum  (BP) Statistical Review of World Energy, 2020 ). 
From Figure 8, it is understood that the role played hydropower in the modern power system is 
crucial. In countries like China, Canada, Brazil, and the USA, hydropower is considered one of the 
most preferred p ower generation s based on potential availability [76]. In Figure 9, the hydropower 
generation statistics between the years 2000 –2019 are shown for selected countries .  
 
Figure 9. A chart showing annual hydropower generation in terawatt -hours (TWh) in selected 
countries  [76] (Data s ource: B ritish Petroleum  (BP) Statistical Review of World Energy, 2020 ). 
Figure 8. A global map highlights the annual hydropower generation in terawatt-hours (TWh) for the
year 2019 [76] (Data source: British Petroleum (BP) Statistical Review of World Energy, 2020).
From Figure 8, it is understood that the role played hydropower in the modern power system is
crucial. In countries like China, Canada, Brazil, and the USA, hydropower is considered one of the
most preferred power generations based on potential availability [ 76]. In Figure 9, the hydropower
generation statistics between the years 2000–2019 are shown for selected countries.
It is revealed that China is leading in hydropower production, followed by Brazil, Canada, and the
USA [ 76]. The increase in energy generation trends presents hydropower’s scope as one of the DER’s
for SG.