Energies 2020 ,13, 5739 14 of 42
Energies 2020, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW  13 of 42 
Run-of-the-River Hydropower  
The run -of-the-river HPG also harvest s the energy from flowing water. Unlike the conventional 
HPG, the run -of-the-river HPG does not need a large dam o r reservoir -like structures to store  the 
water. Here, in most cases, water is free ly falling from the river's upstream  to rotate the turbine 
generator . In some situations, small dam s may be  used , and this  is done only to allow  the water flow 
to the penstock  during specific uncertainties in  terms of water flow  [74]. 
Pumped Storage  Hydropower  
The pumped HPG also harvests the energy from  water stored in overhead storage tanks. The 
principle behind power generation is the same as the conventional type. Here, in pumped storage 
hydropower, the excess energy is stored in water (e.g. , motors were operated to pump the water to 
the overhead stora ge tank or the reservoir). During the peak hours, the stored water is allowed to 
free-fall onto the turbine, which spins the electric generator to produce electricity  [75]. Mostly,  in the 
hydropower sector, the above highlighted three types of HPG plants  are used. In Figure 8, the annual 
energy generation from the hydropower plants across the globe is shown.  
 
Figure 8. A global map highlights the annual hydropower generation in terawatt -hours (TWh)  for the 
year 2019  [76] (Data s ource: B ritish Petroleum  (BP) Statistical Review of World Energy, 2020 ). 
From Figure 8, it is understood that the role played hydropower in the modern power system is 
crucial. In countries like China, Canada, Brazil, and the USA, hydropower is considered one of the 
most preferred p ower generation s based on potential availability [76]. In Figure 9, the hydropower 
generation statistics between the years 2000 –2019 are shown for selected countries .  
 
Figure 9. A chart showing annual hydropower generation in terawatt -hours (TWh) in selected 
countries  [76] (Data s ource: B ritish Petroleum  (BP) Statistical Review of World Energy, 2020 ). 
Figure 9. A chart showing annual hydropower generation in terawatt-hours (TWh) in selected
countries [76] (Data source: British Petroleum (BP) Statistical Review of World Energy, 2020).
2.1.4. Thermal Power Plants
The power generation using TPP is the conventional approach where fossil fuel resources are
burned, which is then used to generate steam. The produced steam activates a turbine, which, in turn,
drives an electric generator. In TPP , the combustion approach is used, and the type of fuels used in the
boiler are coal, natural gas, heating oil, and biomass [13].
Combined Cycle Gas Power Plants
Shortly abbreviated CCGPP , and these plants generally combine two di erent types of TPP .
In CCGPP , in addition to the conventional TPP , gas turbines are used, which helps in using the residual
gases to generate power by another cycle. By combining gas and thermal plants, the overall energy
eciency of the plant will be enhanced. Besides, the overall emissions from the residual gases are
reduced [77].
Combined Recovery of Blast Furnace and Coke-Oven Gas
These plants come under the TPP category. They are most commonly used as a captive power
plant in the blast furnace application industries, e.g., iron and steel. In most industries, conventional
types of TPP are used. Still, few gases like blast furnace gas, coke-oven gas, etc. are released as
by-products during industrial activity, especially in iron and steel [ 78–80]. For enhancing energy
and environmental e ciency, these waste gases were recovered and used for power generation [ 78].
The most commonly used systems for this are the top-recovery turbines and gas expansion turbines.
These types run on a combined mode with the captive power plant. On the other side, the residual
heat is further recovered and used in the combined cycle for power generation [78–80].
Combined Heat and Power
Shortly, abbreviated CHP typically comes under the TPP category. In these power plants,
simultaneous electricity generation and other usable thermal energy are possible. The usable thermal
energy is captured within the system, which, otherwise, could be a waste. The CHP power plant
is otherwise called a cogeneration system. The generated electricity can be used within a facility
and exported to the electrical grid in the condition of surplus production [ 81,82]. The heat energy
produced from the CHP plant can be used for industrial processes, and district heating, and other
heat on-demand services [ 83]. The CHP-based power plants are fueled by various fuels, e.g., natural
gas, fossil oil, and di erent fuel blends. With a CHP-based power plant, an approximate 30% GHG
emission can be reduced compared to the conventional TPP [77].