Energies 2020 ,13, 5739 21 of 42
methods, DL plays a vital role in SG applications. Several AI techniques are summarized in Table 2.
It can be examined that, with a certain success level, AI tools are applied for forecasting the electrical
load. This also improves the neural network’s training ability to achieve positive outcomes of the load
forecast model instead of traditional techniques. A variety of hybrid forecasting approaches are used
to increase predictive accuracy. DL is a subset of ML that has deeper inner hidden layers cascaded into
the network, which initially occasioned from a multi-layer ANN [124–126].
Energies 2020, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW  20 of 42 
purposes. In SG systems, smart meters  and sensors will provide real -time information and remote 
monitoring and  store all previous data. All this information  is made available on a communication 
platform to the central location  with  all concerned points through communication technologies using 
wired or wireless communication for access  [115,116] . This helps operators be fully aware of the 
power system ’s health  and predict and ascertain the system’s condition ahead of time and , thereby , 
give appropriate notification to consumers. Examples are notifi cation s on possible outage s with 
duration, energy price , and amount of energy available at a given time. Consumers also can adjust 
their power usage pattern s based on available information on their consumption rate and energy 
cost, which they can easily ac cess on a communication platform even through their mobile phone in 
the comfort of their location.  
5.2. Role of C ybersecurity  in a Smart Grid  
Cyber security in SG is essential  as there is a need to prevent abuse, malicious activities , and 
unauthorized  access to a two-way flow of information on the grid system  [115,116 ]. Consumer s or 
the prosumer or any other peer  within ESN  have a lot of information about  their consumption and 
trading  patterns . Hence, the data  needs  to be protected from hacking, theft , and loss. Full 
implementation of the SG system without adequate cybersecurity measures can open the system to a 
sophisticated cyber -attack , which can compromise the system and cause stability problem s for the 
grid. Cyber -attack can also cause fraud , like the destruction of information and manipulation of 
energy consumption data. Cybersecurity should be aimed at integrity, confidentiality , and tim ely 
availability of data  [113,117]. The cybersecurity system should also detect cyber -attacks  and 
information se curity violation s and automatically send alerts to the peer. This will help  the peer to  
respond to protect the integrity of the system.  
6. Application of Artificial Intelligence, Machine Learning, and Deep Learning in Smart Grids  
With t he growth of computational methods , particularly in data management and analysis , 
several  ML approaches ha ve been implemented in various industries [118] . According to the current 
situation, most of the researchers have concentrated their studies on DL  too. The DL has been treated 
as an emerging area  for feature extraction and handling a considerabl e amount of data where ML 
methods fail. Altogether, AI encloses numerous subfields, counting as ML, DL, Big Data computer 
vision, neural network, natural language processing,  etc. [118] . DL employs large neural networks 
with many layers of processing units, advancing computing power, and enhancing training 
techniques to learn versatile patterns from vast amounts of data. DL is typically a sub -branch of ML, 
and DL is another su b-branch of AI, as shown in Fig ure 1 4. 
 
Figure 14. Representation of artificial intelligence, machine learning, and deep learning  (Note: AI —
artificial intelligence, DL —deep learning, ML —machine learning) . 
Figure 14. Representation of artificial intelligence, machine learning, and deep learning (Note: AI—artificial
intelligence, DL—deep learning, ML—machine learning).
Having said that, DL has a broader application in all data mining, data performance, and prediction.
There are di erent types of methods associated with DL shown in Figure 15.
Energies 2020, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW  21 of 42 
The appropriate proliferation  of AI technologies is essential for suitable applications , especially in 
the SG applications  [119] . SG is a collection of existing and emerging technologies working together to 
monitor and manage the ESN properly . Based on its nature, SG was able to generate  huge data, given the 
scope for data analysis  [120] . At present, in SG, standard data mining method s are  applied . The traditional  
data mining analysis tool adopted by industries were ML, ANN,  genetic algorithm (GA),  FL, KbS, support 
vector machine ( SVM ), etc. [119–123]. These methods were mainly used t o get better outcomes in terms 
of exact electricity demand estimation. These methods were also  applied to forecast energy production 
and consumption  patterns based on peer behaviour  in the ESN . Among all methods , DL plays a vital role 
in SG applications. Several  AI techniques are summarized in Table 2. It can be examined that, with a 
certain success level, AI tools are applied for forecasting the electrical load. This also improves the neural 
network’s training ability  to achieve positive outcomes of the load forecast model instead of  traditional 
techniques. A variety of hybrid forecasting approaches are used to increase predictive accuracy. DL is a 
subset of ML that has deeper inner hidden layers cascaded into the network, which initially occasioned  
from a multi -layer ANN [124–126]. 
Having said that, DL has a broader application in all data mining, data performance, and 
prediction. There are different types  of method s associated with DL  shown in Figure 1 5. 
 
Figure 15. Methods associated with deep learning . 
Among the above -listed methods in Figure 15, the two approaches, namely CNN and RNN, are 
commonly used in SG research. For analyzing and understanding the spatial distribution data, the 
CNN method can be used. The other method, RNN, can handle the time -series data effectively . SG is 
presented as massive data  mining, load forecasting, and load balancing opportunities. DL is a handy 
tool that improves and builds an intelligent SG. Figure 16 shows a schematic of the DL in the 
application of SG. Despite growing technology for SG and EMS, there are still many barr iers to 
accurate load forecasting in large -scale data.  
Figure 15. Methods associated with deep learning.
Among the above-listed methods in Figure 15, the two approaches, namely CNN and RNN,
are commonly used in SG research. For analyzing and understanding the spatial distribution data,
the CNN method can be used. The other method, RNN, can handle the time-series data e ectively.
SG is presented as massive data mining, load forecasting, and load balancing opportunities. DL is
a handy tool that improves and builds an intelligent SG. Figure 16 shows a schematic of the DL in
the application of SG. Despite growing technology for SG and EMS, there are still many barriers to
accurate load forecasting in large-scale data.