Energies 2020 ,13, 5739 32 of 42
 Flexible and sustainable energy trading is ensured and a choice of low carbon electricity selection
while trade is possible,
 Advanced support for EV penetration and home energy management,
 Extended support is o ered for plug-in energy infrastructures (e.g., city surveillance systems,
public lighting, energy on-demand services).
In addition to the above highlighted beneﬁts, with digital advancement, the SG services were
further enhanced. Especially with the use of AI, IoT, and BC, automated peer services have improved.
This has become possible by monitoring real-time information about the ESN in the context of
reliability, availability, resilience, stability, security, and sustainability. In the following paragraphs,
the discussion on AI, IoT, and BC’s contribution to reliability, availability, resilience, stability, security,
and sustainability enhancement is made.
Reliability, availability, and stability are the SG’s critical services to the peers in the ESN. Due to
the increased complexity of the ESN in the modern power sector, meeting reliability, availability,
and stability objectives are becoming more challenging. E ective monitoring of the SG using the digital
tools could help address the issues related to aggravated grid congestion and massive transfers of
energy over long distances. Furthermore, the challenges of increasing energy consumption and peak
demand, and aging infrastructure are addressed by promoting maximizing asset utilization [ 160,178].
Digital tools like AI, IoT, and BC could provide the fullest control and allow e ective monitoring of the
above-highlighted issues, improving the overall ESN performance [13].
Resilience is another key criterion that needs to be ensured in the SG. An ESN can sustain, rapidly
recover, and learn to adapt its structure to unexpected disruptive events. It is believed that SG is
capable of being resilient to disruptions. The causes of disruption might be “extreme weather events,
asset failure, natural disasters, power surges, acute accidents, and even operational errors by the
workforce” [ 13,18]. Such uncertain situations should be predicted earlier to have informed decisions.
Digital tools like AI, IoT, and BC help predict the disruption based on the systems’ knowledge it has.
For example, the IoT tools can detect any sought of faults that might cause a resilience issue and
inform those to carry out the analytics for understanding the ESN robustness [ 160]. The AI-based
analytics estimates the system robustness and allows the data-driven decisions to take appropriate
actions to improve the robustness and ensure a quick recovery [ 178]. Here, the BC o ers its service
in providing the energy balances by facilitating the involved peers to be a part of the energy trading
schemes. This allows the ESN to bounce back to its normal state [169].
Security issues that lie with peer communication in the ESN can be addressed using IoT and
BC systems [ 158]. The BC’s trust and transparent features ensure that information ﬂow between the
peers is always secure and happens through a speciﬁc channel based on the deﬁned agreement on the
smart contracts [ 162,163]. Additionally, the BC traceability feature allows us to quickly identify the
destruction of information and manipulation of energy consumption data. Similarly, the IoT and BC
systems provide data integrity, data conﬁdentiality, and timely data [158].
Sustainability is another crucial criterion that a modern power system should have, and it is
clearly deﬁned under sustainable development goal 7 (SDG7) [ 55]. Ensuring ESN’s sustainability
might be a di cult task as it involves numerous components, and each contributes to a certain amount
of GHG. Tracking each component and the type of resources based on the sustainability indicators may
not be possible in CEG [ 179,180]. The amount of emissions released based on the type of DER used can
also impact SG’s sustainability. In SG’s case, the concept of asset management or ESN infrastructure
management could help us monitor these data [ 179]. However, the digital advancement of SG with IoT
and BC could help us to monitor and estimate the number of resources consumed for a typical SG [ 179].
The BC enabled product traceability, and the life cycle assessment tool can easily allow sustainability
scores for SG [180,181].
Overall, this critical investigation of the selected three digital technologies revealed a broader
scope in SG. On the other side, the above discussion also in line with the existing literature.