Energies 2020 ,13, 5739 29 of 42
types: public blockchain, private blockchain, and federated blockchain. These three BC types have
various technical features. Bitcoin and Ethereum are the two typical public blockchains. Any BC node
is open to all participants in the public BC type, and each user can participate. Therefore, in public BC,
all the participants will have access to public BC transaction information.
Private BC is the second type, where the participants will have restricted access to the transaction
information. In Private BC, a participant can only participate in and view information regarding
the transaction if the node is given access rights. The third BC type is the federated one, where it
has combined features of public and private BC [ 158]. Its emergence in the energy sector o ered
numerous applications in SG [ 159–161]. BC-based on the smart contract allows a peer in the ESN or SG
to perform an energy trading transaction (e.g., electricity sale) directly with another peer (peer-to-peer)
and invoice it. This peer-to-peer concept needs transactions to be stored on a platform that is part
of the ESN. The peers are the participants involved in the electricity trades (typically, the consumer,
prosumer, regulatory authority, etc.) [ 162,163]. For several years, the centralized model has performed
well, but with the rise in the volume of data shared during the trading process, there is a possibility that
the servers encounter bottlenecks and a single point of failure, making them vulnerable to attack [ 10].
The BC servers’ critical function that is part of the distributed energy network is to ensure trust and
preserve a backup of all the transactions. The trust process is one of BC’s main principles, preventing
the spread of tainted information. In a permission-less or public BC (system without access limitation),
the introduction of new information on to block must be allied with speciﬁc resources like fuel cost and
computational tools. For example, the consensus proof-of-work (PoW) mechanism entails participating
nodes to solve the hash code and to validate the node [ 10,162,163]. Hence, the PoW consensus creates
computational expenses due to adding new information (the next block) [ 164]. A BC o ers a centralized
computing architecture that allows peers to communicate without a single governing body. However,
in the absence of intermediaries, the BC-based systems still rely on the predeﬁned laws’ consistency
while maintaining protection, e ciency, and accuracy. The BC platform is currently evolving and
tackles many problems, but many issues remain open, posing a challenge to scholars.
More recently, there has been a fast growth of automated decision-making support
systems [165,166]. A BC is a useful tool in this environment for recording the activities and decisions
by practicing the proof-of-work needed to attach a veriﬁed block to the chain. The machines may
also be used to build the proof-of-work for a mining method. ML methods may be used to detect
any suspicious and illicit behaviour that may occur on the BC in real-time. ML and BC will also have
plenty of synergies and immersive implementations. For data mining and security, the two systems
can work together. When Big Data-based AI solutions are implemented through a BC deployment,
the way the systems operate can be continuously tested by a comprehensive and accurate database of
all the decisions. AI systems exploit data collected from sensors for analytics, and decision-making can
be tracked at various points while the process is placed into a BC paradigm. One of the key beneﬁts of
implementing Big Data technology in BC is increasing accuracy and data security. Both are described
as critical aspects of the BC paradigm. The data exchange should become easier and more common,
as BC deployment guarantees protection and originality.
An “intelligent contract” is a virtual protocol that automatically performs the default transaction
processes without needing a third-party intervention. An example of this in smart energy systems
would include developing fully self-governing smart contracts between an energy supplier and a
customer who controls both the sale and the payment separately and safely [ 167,168]. If the client
does not make the price, the smart contract system would immediately terminate the supply until
the transaction is completed, provided the partners have already agreed to use this provision in their
contract. However, such growth presents a challenge to conventional business models related to energy
ﬁnance, which may risk being removed from the consumer sector for payments.
The use of the BC in SG could provide our present and future energy grid with multiple
advantages. The developed decentralized trading network gives much of its advantages to the electrical
system, connected explicitly with the BC features and working concepts. BC’s key beneﬁts in ESN