Energies 2020 ,13, 5739 18 of 42
3. AC, DC, and Hybrid Microgrids-Based Distributed Generation
MG is a segment of the main electric power grid that can be disconnected or isolated from
the central grid and operates independently. MG has its autonomous power generating sources
(preferably more than one source of power generation), which may also include ESS and is situated
close to the load center [ 101–104]. The MG can integrate multiple DER’s (the DER’s include the
renewables like wind, solar, biomass, or non-renewable or energy storage like pump hydro, batteries,
ﬂywheel, etc.) that are brieﬂy discussed in Section 2.1. Currently, with the available DERs, we can
design the AC and DC MG. In addition to these, their combination, i.e., hybrid AC /DC MGs, can be
designed. In Figure 13, the few common conﬁgurations of MGs are shown [103,104].
Energies 2020, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW  18 of 42 
close to the load center  [101–104]. The MG can integrate multiple DER ’s (the DER’s include the 
renewables like wind, solar, biomass, or non -renewable or energy storage like pump hydro, batteries, 
flywheel, etc.) that are briefly discussed in Section  2.1. Currently, with the available DERs, we can 
design the AC and DC MG. In addition to these, their combination, i.e., hybrid AC/DC MGs , can be 
designed. In Figure 1 3, the few common configurations of MGs are shown [1 03,104 ]. 
 
Figure 13. Typical microgrid design  configuration  showing the alternating current , direct current , and  
hybrid alternating current /direct current  microgrid  (Note: DC —direct current, AC —alternating 
current).  
During the operation, the power system can choose any of the DER. Depending on each 
consumer or prosumer's load demand and power availability, this may be selected automati cally to 
balance the load with supply. With this, the MG enables the reliability and resilience of the power 
system  [13,55]. MG’s can automatically isolate themselves from the main electric grid due to an 
islanding issue and continue to power its loads  [18]. Power quality issues, outage occur rence , and 
electric grid supply change can be broadly considered  as the islanding issues in the main electric grid 
[101]. The microgrid in  an islanded mode enables it to maintain high reliability to the supplied 
territo ry. The switch that performs islanding and connecting operation usually has an intelligent 
controller that monitors the c entral grid ’s conditions and responds  appropriately to disconnect from 
or reconnect to the main electric grid. The electric power can f low in either direction, from MG to 
grid, and vice versa, depending on which  is most technically and economically favorable. In other 
words, MG can inject its excess generated power into the main electric grid and can also take supply 
from the conventional  grid if its sources are not available or available . Still,  the price of the central 
grid is lower  [12]. Depending upon the MG configuration, the cost of the electricity would vary  [55]. 
As mentioned earlier, MG offers energy trading opportunities to its p eers, depending on the 
price, time of use, and supply and demand  patterns  [13]. In contrast,  this feature is not applicable for 
CEG. The CEG s are not designed to accommodate DER at the distribution level [1 05]. Therefore, 
incorporating DER s to the grid directly at distribution pose s many  technical challenges. Hence, it is 
necessary to follow specific  technical procedures and standards in integrating DER s into MG, 
consider ing SG’s building block . 
4. Power Electronic Components and their Control in Smart G rids 
Power electronics in the SG system performs the essential function of coupling the DER s to the 
electric power grid. It also boosts, regulates , and does the conversion of DC to DC or DC to AC 
electricity , particularly in grid integration of RE  [106,107 ]. The u nregulated voltage output of RE 
sources’ distributed energy and intermittency  requires power electronic s to interface to the grid [ 108]. 
Figure 13. Typical microgrid design conﬁguration showing the alternating current, direct
current, and hybrid alternating current /direct current microgrid (Note: DC—direct current,
AC—alternating current).
During the operation, the power system can choose any of the DER. Depending on each consumer
or prosumer’s load demand and power availability, this may be selected automatically to balance the
load with supply. With this, the MG enables the reliability and resilience of the power system [13,55].
MG’s can automatically isolate themselves from the main electric grid due to an islanding issue and
continue to power its loads [ 18]. Power quality issues, outage occurrence, and electric grid supply
change can be broadly considered as the islanding issues in the main electric grid [ 101]. The microgrid
in an islanded mode enables it to maintain high reliability to the supplied territory. The switch that
performs islanding and connecting operation usually has an intelligent controller that monitors the
central grid’s conditions and responds appropriately to disconnect from or reconnect to the main
electric grid. The electric power can ﬂow in either direction, from MG to grid, and vice versa, depending
on which is most technically and economically favorable. In other words, MG can inject its excess
generated power into the main electric grid and can also take supply from the conventional grid if its
sources are not available or available. Still, the price of the central grid is lower [ 12]. Depending upon
the MG conﬁguration, the cost of the electricity would vary [55].
As mentioned earlier, MG o ers energy trading opportunities to its peers, depending on the
price, time of use, and supply and demand patterns [ 13]. In contrast, this feature is not applicable
for CEG. The CEGs are not designed to accommodate DER at the distribution level [ 105]. Therefore,
incorporating DERs to the grid directly at distribution poses many technical challenges. Hence,
it is necessary to follow speciﬁc technical procedures and standards in integrating DERs into MG,
considering SG’s building block.