Energies 2020 ,13, 5739 10 of 42
for 131.3 GW, 75.9 GW, 63.0 GW, and 42.8 GW, respectively [ 61]. Coming to the Asia-Paciﬁc region
alone, the cumulative PV installations in Australia and Korea were accounted for 14.6 GW and 11.2 GW,
respectively, whereas, in the EU, Germany was leading in terms of its cumulative PV installations
(approximately 49.2. GW) when compared with other EU countries. Next to Germany, with lesser than
50% installations, i.e., 20.8 GW, Italy stood in second place, and then the United Kingdom (U.K.) stood
in third place with 13.3. GW of installations. The rest of the countries have their cumulative solar PV
installations less than 10 GW.
Energies 2020, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW  10 of 42 
2.1.1. Solar Photovoltaic  Power Plants  
Solar PV power plants are the most commonly used renewables for power generation in the 
modern power system. At present, we see different types of SPVPP , e.g., rooftop, roof -integrated, 
building integrated, building attached, floating solar, etc.  [57–60]. More or less, all these types of solar 
PV plants are capable of meeting the electricity loads with varying range and type from domestic to 
industrial. As of 2019, the global cumulative installed capacity is around 627 GW. In Figure 4, the 
cumulative inst alled PV capacities across the globe, measured in gigawatts (GW), are shown. F igure 
3 shows  that, among all other countries, China continues to lead in terms of its cumulative 
installations that accounted for approximately 204.7 GW. The European Union (EU) , the US A, Japan, 
and India are also leading in global solar installations, and their cumulative installations are 
accounted for 131.3 GW, 75.9 GW, 63.0 GW, and 42.8 GW, respectively  [61]. Coming to the Asia -
Pacific region alone, the cumulative PV installa tions in Australia and Korea were accounted for 14.6 
GW and 11.2 GW, respectively, whereas , in the EU, Germany was leading in terms of its cumulative 
PV installations (approximately 49.2. GW) when compared  with other EU countries. Next to 
Germany, with les ser than 50% installations, i.e., 20.8 GW, Italy stood in second place, and then the 
United Kingdom (U.K.) stood in third place with 13.3. GW of installations. The rest of the countries 
have their cumulative solar PV installations less than 10 GW.  
 
Figure  4. A global map highlights the cumulative installed solar photovoltaic capacity, measured in 
gigawatts (GW)  [62]. (Data Source: British Petroleum (BP) Statistical Review of World Energy, 2020 ). 
Overall, from Figure 4, it is understood that solar is widely  accepted in many nations. PV is perhaps 
the most flexible of all the power generating technologies among the renewables. It is also  easy to install 
with a minimal running cost, and , while its operation, the noise levels are almost negligible except for the 
buzzing sound of the electrical equipment  [59]. On the other side, PV power plants are considered to be 
environmentally -friendly. PV technology is mature . It is still growing, and day by day, many 
advancements are seen in terms of power conversion effi ciency  and flexible design of the solar cells that 
are apt for installation on to any surface  of new applications  [57–60]. Most recently, the use of PV 
technology for distributed power generation is given high priority. In Figure 5, the distributed solar PV  
(DSPV) capacity growth by country/region  is measured in gigawatts (GW)  [63]. 
Even though PV has many benefits, it has a few significant disadvantages because its output is 
zero at night and can vary considerably during the day, depending on weather condit ions [64]. 
Hence, in the PV plants, especially in DSPV, an ESS is highly recommended that enhances the 
operating reliability by providing the continuous power supply even in the night time [13].  
SPVPP’s also possesses a few main challenges: grid integratio n, performance -related issues, and 
power quality issues [64 –66]. In addition to these, financing and social acceptance are also hindering 
Figure 4. A global map highlights the cumulative installed solar photovoltaic capacity, measured in
gigawatts (GW) [62]. (Data Source: British Petroleum (BP) Statistical Review of World Energy, 2020).
Overall, from Figure 4, it is understood that solar is widely accepted in many nations. PV is
perhaps the most ﬂexible of all the power generating technologies among the renewables. It is also easy
to install with a minimal running cost, and, while its operation, the noise levels are almost negligible
except for the buzzing sound of the electrical equipment [ 59]. On the other side, PV power plants are
considered to be environmentally-friendly. PV technology is mature. It is still growing, and day by day,
many advancements are seen in terms of power conversion e ciency and ﬂexible design of the solar
cells that are apt for installation onto any surface of new applications [ 57–60]. Most recently, the use of
PV technology for distributed power generation is given high priority. In Figure 5, the distributed
solar PV (DSPV) capacity growth by country /region is measured in gigawatts (GW) [63].
Even though PV has many beneﬁts, it has a few signiﬁcant disadvantages because its output is
zero at night and can vary considerably during the day, depending on weather conditions [ 64]. Hence,
in the PV plants, especially in DSPV , an ESS is highly recommended that enhances the operating
reliability by providing the continuous power supply even in the night time [13].
SPVPP’s also possesses a few main challenges: grid integration, performance-related issues,
and power quality issues [ 64–66]. In addition to these, ﬁnancing and social acceptance are also
hindering solar PV growth. However, compared to other RER, the acceptance of PV as one of the DER
is very high.