Energies 2020 ,13, 5739 3 of 42
 The power plant infrastructure development for supplying energy to the small communities
began to start in 1896. Di erent types of AC power generating units have evolved in other parts
of the world, which is considered the seventh most signiﬁcant event in the electric grid evolution.
 The commercialization of power metal-oxide-semiconductor ﬁeld-e ect transistor (MOSFET) is
the eighth most signiﬁcant event. It is regarded as another big game-changer in the electric grid’s
evolution, which allowed integrating RE technologies into the grid.
 The ninth most signiﬁcant event in the electric grid evolution is the deregulation of wholesale
power from renewables and other power plants.
 The interconnection of photovoltaics (PV) and other power plants into the electric grid
infrastructure is the tenth most signiﬁcant event.
 DER integration with the electric grid had become popular between 2003 and 2004, and it is the
eleventh most signiﬁcant event in the electric grid evolution.
 Between 2008 to 2010, the guidelines for implementing microgrids (MGs), nanogrids (NGs) have
evolved. Later, the methodology for implementing pilot-scale smart grids (SGs) also became a
discussion topic among researchers and industrialists.
 In 2011, the smart power infrastructure demonstration took place, which emphasized
ensuring reliability and security with ESN’s intelligent elements, which is the thirteenth most
signiﬁcant event.
 High penetration of renewables-based MGs with higher peak capacities has become quite popular
since 2013, which is the most signiﬁcant achievement in electric grid evolution.
 From 2014 onwards, grid modernization has taken place, and the SG’s have become economically
viable for power generation. Their integration with the electric grid has also become possible due
to the availability of technology.
With the above highlighted 15 most signiﬁcant events, the CEG has taken a massive transition
and is backed up by many new technologies playing their roles in achieving the SG motive.
The rise of RE use for electriﬁcation and o ered support by the electronic power industry has
given the scope for the development of DER-based MG [ 12]. MG consists of RER, most commonly
small in size, and mainly used for generating power locally and sometimes distributed. However,
when it comes to functionality, MG su ers from ensuring ﬂexibility in managing the energy between
loads. Besides, the lack of smart modulation of peers in the ESN makes the MG operations di cult [ 13].
Also, the intermittent nature of RER and uncertainties associated with EES and the loads are quite
unpredictable, and the existing MG control cannot tackle them at the fullest. Thus, the deployment
of RER-based MG and other DER components in the ESN experiences’ reliability and resilience
issues opens up the scope for the smart modulation of peers (e.g., consumer, producer, prosumer,
regulatory authority, etc.) [ 13]. Therefore, ESN needs active network management techniques. For this,
the existing MG should undergo a digital transition. To maximize RER’s use, spur the need to develop
alternatives to MG, a next-generation digital electric grid system called the SG is needed [10,14].