and we also compare the claims of the existing pre-
trained language models in English to see if their
modiﬁcation still holds true in another language.
6.1 Effectiveness of MacBERT
We carried out ablations to examine the contribu-
tions of each component in MacBERT, which was
thoroughly evaluated in all ﬁne-tuning tasks. The
results are shown in Table 9. The overall average
scores are obtained by averaging the test scores of
each task (EM and F1 metrics are averaged before
the overall averaging). From a general view, re-
moving any component in MacBERT will result in
a decline in the average performance, suggesting
that all modiﬁcations contribute to the overall im-
provements. Speciﬁcally, the most effective modi-
ﬁcations are the N-gram masking and similar word
replacement, which are the modiﬁcations on the
masked language model task. When we compare
N-gram masking and similar word replacement, we
could see clear pros and cons, where N-gram mask-
ing seems to be more effective in text classiﬁcation
tasks, and the performance of reading comprehen-
sion tasks seems to beneﬁt more from the similar
word replacement task. By combining these two
tasks will compensate each other and have a better
performance on both genres.
The NSP task does not show as much impor-
tance as the MLM task, demonstrating that it is
much more important to design a better MLM task
to fully unleash the text modeling power. Also,
we compared the next sentence prediction (Devlin
et al., 2019) and sentence order prediction (Lan
et al., 2019) task to better judge which one is much
powerful. The results show that the sentence order
prediction task indeed shows better performance
than the original NSP, though it is not that salient.
The SOP task requires identifying the correct order
of the two sentences rather than using a random
sentence, which is much easy for the machine to
identify. Removing the SOP task will result in no-
ticeable declines in reading comprehension tasks
compared to the text classiﬁcation tasks, which sug-
gests that it is necessary to design an NSP-like task
to learn the relations between two segments (for
example, passage and question in reading compre-
hension task).
6.2 Investigation on MLM Task
As said in the previous section, the dominant pre-
training task is the masked language model and
its variants. The masked language model task re-
1M 1.1M 1.2M 1.5M 1.8M 2M71.572.072.573.073.574.074.5EM
MacBERT
Random Replace
Partial [MASK]
All [MASK]
1M 1.1M 1.2M 1.5M 1.8M 2M88.589.089.590.090.591.091.5EM
MacBERT
Random Replace
Partial [MASK]
All [MASK]Figure 2: Results of different MLM tasks on CMRC
2018 and DRCD.
lies on two sides: 1) the selection of the tokens
to be masked, and 2) the replacement of the se-
lected tokens. In the previous section, we have
demonstrated the effectiveness of the selection of
the masking tokens, such as the whole word mask-
ing or N-gram masking, etc. Now we are going to
investigate how the replacement of the selected to-
kens will affect the performance of the pre-trained
language models. In order to investigate this prob-
lem, we plot the CMRC 2018 and DRCD perfor-
mance at different pre-training steps. Speciﬁcally,
we follow the original masking percentage 15% of
the input sequence, in which 10% masked tokens
remain the same. In terms of the remaining 90%
masked tokens, we classify into four categories.
•MacBERT : 80% tokens replaced into their
similar words, and 10% replaced into random
words.
•Random Replace : 90% tokens replaced into
random words.
•Partial Mask : original BERT implementa-
tion, with 80% tokens replaced into [MASK]
tokens, and 10% replaced into random words.