Revisiting Pre-trained Models for Chinese Natural Language Processing
Yiming Cui1;2, Wanxiang Che1, Ting Liu1, Bing Qin1, Shijin Wang2;3, Guoping Hu2
1Research Center for Social Computing and Information Retrieval (SCIR),
Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China
2State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Intelligence, iFLYTEK Research, China
3iFLYTEK AI Research (Hebei), Langfang, China
1fymcui,car,tliu,qinb g@ir.hit.edu.cn
2;3fymcui,sjwang3,gphu g@iflytek.com
Abstract
Bidirectional Encoder Representations from
Transformers (BERT) has shown marvelous
improvements across various NLP tasks, and
consecutive variants have been proposed to
further improve the performance of the pre-
trained language models. In this paper, we
target on revisiting Chinese pre-trained lan-
guage models to examine their effectiveness
in a non-English language and release the Chi-
nese pre-trained language model series to the
community. We also propose a simple but
effective model called MacBERT, which im-
proves upon RoBERTa in several ways, espe-
cially the masking strategy that adopts MLM
as correction (Mac). We carried out extensive
experiments on eight Chinese NLP tasks to
revisit the existing pre-trained language mod-
els as well as the proposed MacBERT. Ex-
perimental results show that MacBERT could
achieve state-of-the-art performances on many
NLP tasks, and we also ablate details with sev-
eral ﬁndings that may help future research.1
1 Introduction
Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Trans-
formers (BERT) (Devlin et al., 2019) has become
enormously popular and has proven to be effec-
tive in recent natural language processing stud-
ies, which utilizes large-scale unlabeled training
data and generates enriched contextual representa-
tions. As we traverse several popular machine read-
ing comprehension benchmarks, such as SQuAD
(Rajpurkar et al., 2018), CoQA (Reddy et al.,
2019), QuAC (Choi et al., 2018), NaturalQuestions
(Kwiatkowski et al., 2019), RACE (Lai et al., 2017),
we can see that most of the top-performing mod-
els are based on BERT and its variants (Dai et al.,
2019; Zhang et al., 2019; Ran et al., 2019), demon-
strating that the pre-trained language models have
1https://github.com/ymcui/MacBERTbecome new fundamental components in natural
language processing ﬁeld.
Starting from BERT, the community have made
great and rapid progress on optimizing the pre-
trained language models, such as ERNIE (Sun et al.,
2019a), XLNet (Yang et al., 2019), RoBERTa (Liu
et al., 2019), SpanBERT (Joshi et al., 2019), AL-
BERT (Lan et al., 2019), ELECTRA (Clark et al.,
2020), etc. However, training Transformer-based
(Vaswani et al., 2017) pre-trained language models
are not as easy as we used to train word embed-
dings or other traditional neural networks. Typi-
cally, training a powerful BERT-large model, which
has 24-layer Transformer with 330 million parame-
ters, to convergence needs high-memory comput-
ing devices, such as TPU, which is very expensive.
On the other hand, though various pre-trained lan-
guage models have been released, most of them
are based on English, and there are few efforts on
building powerful pre-trained language models on
other languages.
In this paper, we aim to build Chinese pre-trained
language model series and release them to the
public for facilitating the research community, as
Chinese and English are among the most spoken
languages in the world. We revisit the existing
popular pre-trained language models and adjust
them to the Chinese language to see if these mod-
els generalize well in the language other than En-
glish. Besides, we also propose a new pre-trained
language model called MacBERT, which replaces
the original MLM task into MLM ascorrection
(Mac) task and mitigates the discrepancy of the pre-
training and ﬁne-tuning stage. Extensive experi-
ments are conducted on eight popular Chinese NLP
datasets, ranging from sentence-level to document-
level, such as machine reading comprehension, text
classiﬁcation, etc. The results show that the pro-
posed MacBERT could give signiﬁcant gains in
most of the tasks against other pre-trained languagearXiv:2004.13922v2  [cs.CL]  2 Nov 2020