2.3 XLNet
Yang et al. (2019) argues that the existing pre-
trained language models that are based on autoen-
coding, such as BERT, suffer from the discrepancy
of the pre-training and ﬁne-tuning stage because
the masking symbol [MASK] will never appear
in the ﬁne-tuning stage. To alleviate this prob-
lem, they proposed XLNet, which was based on
Transformer-XL (Dai et al., 2019). XLNet mainly
modiﬁes in two ways. The ﬁrst is to maximize the
expected likelihood over all permutations of the
factorization order of the input, where they called
the Permutation Language Model (PLM). Another
is to change the autoencoding language model into
an autoregressive one, which is similar to the tradi-
tional statistical language models.3
2.4 RoBERTa
RoBERTa (Robustly Optimized BERT Pretraining
Approach) (Liu et al., 2019) aims to adopt original
BERT architecture but make much more precise
modiﬁcations to show the powerfulness of BERT,
which was underestimated. They carried out care-
ful comparisons of various components in BERT,
including the masking strategies, training steps, etc.
After thorough evaluations, they came up with sev-
eral useful conclusions to make BERT more power-
ful, mainly including 1) training longer with bigger
batches and longer sequences over more data; 2)
removing the next sentence prediction and using
dynamic masking.
2.5 ALBERT
ALBERT (A Lite BERT) (Lan et al., 2019) pri-
marily tackles the problems of higher memory as-
sumption and slow training speed of BERT. AL-
BERT introduces two parameter reduction tech-
niques. The ﬁrst one is the factorized embedding
parameterization that decomposes the embedding
matrix into two small matrices. The second one
is the cross-layer parameter sharing that the Trans-
former weights are shared across each layer of AL-
BERT, which will signiﬁcantly reduce the parame-
ters. Besides, they also proposed the sentence-order
prediction (SOP) task to replace the traditional NSP
pre-training task.
3We also trained Chinese XLNet, but it only shows compet-
itive performance on reading comprehension datasets. We’ve
included these results in the Appendix.2.6 ELECTRA
ELECTRA (Efﬁciently Learning an Encoder that
Classiﬁers Token Replacements Accurately) (Clark
et al., 2020) employs a new generator-discriminator
framework that is similar to GAN (Goodfellow
et al., 2014). The generator is typically a small
MLM that learns to predict the original words of
the masked tokens. The discriminator is trained to
discriminate whether the input token is replaced by
the generator. Note that, to achieve efﬁcient train-
ing, the discriminator is only required to predict a
binary label to indicate “replacement”, unlike the
way of MLM that should predict the exact masked
word. In the ﬁne-tuning stage, only the discrimina-
tor is used.
3 Chinese Pre-trained Language Models
While we believe most of the conclusions in the pre-
vious works are true in English condition, we won-
der if these techniques still generalize well in other
languages. In this section, we illustrate how the ex-
isting pre-trained language models are adapted for
the Chinese language. Furthermore, we also pro-
pose a new model called MacBERT, which adopts
the advantages of previous models as well as newly
designed components. Note that, as these models
are all originated from BERT without changing the
nature of the input, no modiﬁcation should be made
to adapt to these models in the ﬁne-tuning stage,
which is very ﬂexible for replacing one another.
3.1 BERT-wwm & RoBERTa-wwm
In the original BERT, a WordPiece tokenizer (Wu
et al., 2016) was used to split the text into Word-
Piece tokens, where some words will be split into
several small fragments. The whole word mask-
ing (wwm) mitigate the drawback of masking only
a part of the whole word, which is easier for the
model to predict. In Chinese condition, WordPiece
tokenizer no longer split the word into small frag-
ments, as Chinese characters are not formed by
alphabet-like symbols. We use the traditional Chi-
nese Word Segmentation (CWS) tool to split the
text into several words. In this way, we could adopt
whole word masking in Chinese to mask the word
instead of individual Chinese characters. For imple-
mentation, we strictly followed the original whole
word masking codes and did not change other com-
ponents, such as the percentage of word masking,
etc. We use LTP (Che et al., 2010) for Chinese
word segmentation to identify the word boundaries.