BERT ERNIE XLNet RoBERTa ALBERT ELECTRA MacBERT
Type AE AE AR AE AE AE AE
Embeddings T/S/P T/S/P T/S/P T/S/P T/S/P T/S/P T/S/P
Masking T T/E/Ph - T T T WWM/NM
LM Task MLM MLM PLM MLM MLM Gen-Dis Mac
Paired Task NSP NSP - - SOP - SOP
Table 1: Comparisons of the pre-trained language models. (AE: Auto-Encoder, AR: Auto-Regressive, T: Token,
S: Segment, P: Position, W: Word, E: Entity, Ph: Phrase, WWM: Whole Word Masking, NM: N-gram Masking,
NSP: Next Sentence Prediction, SOP: Sentence Order Prediction, MLM: Masked LM, PLM: Permutation LM,
Mac: MLM as correction)
models, and detailed ablations are given to better
examine the composition of the improvements. The
contributions of this paper are listed as follows.
• Extensive empirical studies are carried out to
revisit the performance of Chinese pre-trained
language models on various tasks with careful
analyses.
•We propose a new pre-trained language model
called MacBERT that mitigates the gap be-
tween the pre-training and ﬁne-tuning stage
by masking the word with its similar word,
which has proven to be effective on down-
stream tasks.
•To further accelerate future research on Chi-
nese NLP, we create and release the Chinese
pre-trained language model series to the com-
munity.
2 Related Work
In this section, we revisit the techniques of the
representative pre-trained language models in the
recent natural language processing ﬁeld. The over-
all comparisons of these models, as well as the
proposed MacBERT, are depicted in Table 1. We
elaborate on their key components in the following
subsections.
2.1 BERT
BERT (Bidirectional Encoder Representations
from Transformers) (Devlin et al., 2019) has proven
to be successful in natural language processing
studies. BERT is designed to pre-train deep bidi-
rectional representations by jointly conditioning on
both left and right context in all Transformer lay-
ers. Primarily, BERT consists of two pre-training
tasks: Masked Language Model (MLM) and Next
Sentence Prediction (NSP).•MLM : Randomly masks some of the tokens
from the input, and the objective is to predict
the original word based only on its context.
•NSP: To predict whether sentence Bis the
next sentence of A.
Later, they further proposed a technique called
whole word masking (wwm) for optimizing the
original masking in the MLM task. In this setting,
instead of randomly selecting WordPiece (Wu et al.,
2016) tokens to mask, we always mask all of the to-
kens corresponding to a whole word at once. This
will explicitly force the model to recover the whole
word in the MLM pre-training task instead of just
recovering WordPiece tokens (Cui et al., 2019a),
which is much more challenging. As the whole
word masking only affects the masking strategy of
the pre-training process, it would not bring addi-
tional burdens on down-stream tasks. Moreover, as
training pre-trained language models are compu-
tationally expensive, they also release all the pre-
trained models as well as the source codes, which
stimulates the community to have great interests in
the research of pre-trained language models.
2.2 ERNIE
ERNIE (Enhanced Representation through kNowl-
edge IntEgration) (Sun et al., 2019a) is designed to
optimize the masking process of BERT, which in-
cludes entity-level masking and phrase-level mask-
ing. Different from selecting random words in the
input, entity-level masking will mask the named
entities, which are often formed by several words.
Phrase-level masking is to mask consecutive words,
which is similar to the N-gram masking strategy
(Devlin et al., 2019; Joshi et al., 2019).2.
2Though N-gram masking was not included in Devlin et al.
(2019), according to their model name in the SQuAD leader-
board, we often admit their credit towards this method.