2 Problem Formulations
2.1 Few-Shot Learning
We are interested in a prototypical FSL: train a K-way classiﬁer on an N-shot support setS, whereN
is a small number of training samples per class ( e.g.,N=1 or 5); then test the classiﬁer on a query set
Q. As illustrated in Figure 1, we have the following two paradigms to train the classiﬁer P(yjx;),
predicting the class y2f1;:::;Kgof a sample x:
Fine-Tuning . We consider the prior knowledge as the sample feature representation x, encoded by
the pre-trained network 
on datasetD. In particular, we refer xto the output of the frozen sub-part
of
and the rest trainable sub-part of 
(if any) can be absorbed into . We train the classiﬁer
P(yjx;)on the support setS, and then evaluate it on the query set Qin a standard supervised way.
Meta-Learning . Yet, 
only carries prior knowledge in a way of “representation”. If the dataset D
can be re-organized as the training episodes f(Si;Qi)g, each of which can be treated as a “sandbox”
that has the same N-shot-K-way setting as the target (S;Q). Then, we can model the “learning
behavior” fromDparameterized as , which can be learned by the above ﬁne-tuning paradigm for
each (Si;Qi). Formally, we denote P(yjx;)as the enhanced classiﬁer equipped with the learned
behavior. For example, can be the classiﬁer weight generator [ 19], distance kernel function in k-
NN [ 62], or even’s initialization [ 18]. Considering L(Si;Qi;)as the loss function of P(yjx;)
trained onSiand tested onQi, we can have  arg min (;)Ei[L(Si;Qi;)], and then we ﬁx
the optimized and ﬁne-tune for onSand test onQ. Please refer to Appendix 5 for the details of
various ﬁne-tuning and meta-learning settings.
2.2 Structural Causal Model
From the above discussion, we can see that (;)in meta-learning and in ﬁne-tuning are both
dependent on the pre-training. Such “dependency” can be formalized with a Structural Causal Model
(SCM) [ 44] proposed in Figure 3(a), where the nodes denote the abstract data variables and the
directed edges denote the (functional) causality, e.g.,X!Ydenotes that Xis the cause and Y
is the effect. Now we introduce the graph and the rationale behind its construction at a high-level.
Please see Section 3 for the detailed functional implementations.
𝐷
𝑋𝐶
𝑌
(a)
……Channel 1𝑐3Image:
School Bus
Channel 2 Channel 3 (b)
Class Manifold
Unicycle
Class Manifold
Street Sign
Class Manifold
Ashcan𝒄𝟑=𝟎.𝟏𝟎𝟑
𝒄𝟐=𝟎.𝟐𝟏𝟏
𝒄𝟏=𝟎.𝟑𝟕𝟔
Image: School Bus (c)
Figure 3: (a) Causal Graph for FSL; (b) Feature-wise illustration of
D!C: Feature channels of pre-trained network( e.g.1: : :512for
ResNet-10). X!C: Per-channel response to an image (“school
bus”) visualized by CAM[ 77]; (c) Class-wise illustration for D!
C: features are clustered according to the pre-training semantic
classes (colored t-SNE plot[ 37]).X!C: An image (“school
bus”) can be represented in terms of the similarities among the base
classes (“ashcan”, “unicycle”, “sign”).D!X. We denote Xas the fea-
ture representation and Das the pre-
trained knowledge, e.g., the datasetD
and its induced model 
. This link as-
sumes that the feature Xis extracted
by using 
.
D!C X. We denote Cas the
transformed representation of Xin
the low-dimensional manifold, whose
base is inherited from D. This as-
sumption can be rationalized as fol-
lows. 1)D!C: a set of data
points are usually embedded in a low-
dimensional manifold. This ﬁnding
can be dated back to the long history
of dimensionality reduction [ 59,50].
Nowadays, there are theoretical [ 3,
8] and empirical [ 77,71] evidences
showing that disentangled semantic manifolds emerge during training deep networks. 2) X!C:
features can be represented using (or projected onto) the manifold base linearly [ 60,9] or non-
linearly [ 6]. In particular, as later discussed in Section 3, we explicitly implement the base as feature
dimensions (Figure 3(b)) and class-speciﬁc mean features (Figure 3(c)).
X!Y C. We denote Yas the classiﬁcation effect ( e.g., logits), which is determined by Xvia
two ways: 1) the direct X!Yand 2) the mediation X!C!Y. In particular, the ﬁrst way can be
removed ifXcan be fully represented by C(e.g., feature-wise adjustment in Section 3). The second
way is inevitable even if the classiﬁer does not take Cas an explicit input, because any Xcan be
3