Interventional Few-Shot Learning
Zhongqi Yue1,3,Hanwang Zhang1,Qianru Sun2,Xian-Sheng Hua3
1Nanyang Technological University,2Singapore Management University,3Alibaba Group
yuez0003@ntu.edu.sg, hanwangzhang@ntu.edu.sg,
qianrusun@smu.edu.sg, xiansheng.hxs@alibaba-inc.com
Abstract
We uncover an ever-overlooked deﬁciency in the prevailing Few-Shot Learning
(FSL) methods: the pre-trained knowledge is indeed a confounder that limits the
performance. This ﬁnding is rooted from our causal assumption: a Structural Causal
Model (SCM) for the causalities among the pre-trained knowledge, sample features,
and labels. Thanks to it, we propose a novel FSL paradigm: Interventional Few-
Shot Learning (IFSL). Speciﬁcally, we develop three effective IFSL algorithmic
implementations based on the backdoor adjustment, which is essentially a causal
intervention towards the SCM of many-shot learning: the upper-bound of FSL
in a causal view. It is worth noting that the contribution of IFSL is orthogonal
to existing ﬁne-tuning and meta-learning based FSL methods, hence IFSL can
improve all of them, achieving a new 1-/5-shot state-of-the-art on miniImageNet,
tiered ImageNet, and cross-domain CUB. Code is released at https://github.
com/yue-zhongqi/ifsl .
1 Introduction
Few-Shot Learning (FSL) — the task of training a model using very few samples — is nothing short
of a panacea for any scenario that requires fast model adaptation to new tasks [ 64], such as minimizing
the need for expensive trials in reinforcement learning [ 29] and saving computation resource for
light-weight neural networks [ 26,24]. Although we knew that, more than a decade ago, the crux
of FSL is to imitate the human ability of transferring prior knowledge to new tasks [ 17], not until
the recent advances in pre-training techniques, had we yet reached a consensus on “what & how to
transfer”: a powerful neural network 
pre-trained on a large dataset D. In fact, the prior knowledge
learned from pre-training prospers today’s deep learning era, e.g.,D= ImageNet, 
= ResNet in
visual recognition [23, 22]; D= Wikipedia, 
= BERT in natural language processing [61, 15].
Pre-Training
DMeta-Learning
fFine-tune (Si;Qi)g
Fine-Tuning
(S;Q)Fine-Tuning
(S;Q)
or



Figure 1: The relationships among different FSL
paradigms (color green and orange). Our goal is to
remove the deﬁciency introduced by Pre-Training.In the context of pre-trained knowledge, we de-
note the original FSL training set as support
setSand the test set as query setQ, where
the classes in (S;Q)are unseen (or new) in
D. Then, we can use 
as a backbone (ﬁxed
or partially trainable) for extracting sample rep-
resentations x, and thus FSL can be achieved
simply by ﬁne-tuning the target model on Sand
test it onQ[11,16]. However, the ﬁne-tuning
only exploits theD’s knowledge on “what to
transfer”, but neglects “how to transfer”. Fortu-
nately, the latter can be addressed by applying
a post-pre-training and pre-ﬁne-tuning strategy:
meta-learning [52]. Different from ﬁne-tuning
whose goal is the “model” trained on Sand tested onQ, meta-learning aims to learn the “meta-model”
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.