with our ﬁndings using other evaluation metrics. These results suggest that IFSL helps models use
the correct visual semantics for prediction by removing the confounding bias.
Cross-Domain Generalization Ability. In Table 3, we show the testing results on CUB using the
models trained on the miniImageNet. The setting is challenging due to the big domain gap between
the two datasets. We chose linear classiﬁer as it outperforms cosine and k-NN in cross-domain
setting and compared with transductive method — SIB. The results clearly show that IFSL works
well in this setting and brings consistent improvements, with the average 1.94% of Acc. In addition,
we can see that applying IFSL brings larger improvements to the inductive linear classiﬁer than to
the transductive SIB. It is possibly because transductive methods involve unlabeled query data and
performs better than inductive methods with the additional information. Nonetheless we observe that
IFSL can further improve SIB in cross-domain (Table 3) and single-domain (Table 1) generalization.
6 Conclusions
We presented a novel casual framework: Interventional Few-Shot Learning (IFSL), to address
an overlooked deﬁciency in recent FSL methods: the pre-training is a confounder hurting the
performance. Speciﬁcally, we proposed a structural causal model of the causalities in the process
of FSL and then developed three practical implementations based on the backdoor adjustment. To
better illustrate the deﬁciency, we diagnosed the classiﬁcation accuracy comprehensively across
query hardness, and showed that IFSL improves all the baselines across all the hardness. It is worth
highlighting that the contribution of IFSL is not only about improving the performance of FSL, but
also offering a causal explanation why IFSL works well: it is a causal approximation to many-shot
learning. We believe that IFSL may shed light on exploring the new boundary of FSL, even though
FSL is well-known to be ill-posed due to insufﬁcient data. To upgrade IFSL, we will seek other
observational intervention algorithms for better performance, and devise counterfactual reasoning for
more general few-shot settings such as domain transfer.
7 Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank all the anonymous reviewers for their constructive comments and
suggestions. This research is partly supported by the Alibaba-NTU Singapore Joint Research Institute,
Nanyang Technological University (NTU), Singapore; the Singapore Ministry of Education (MOE)
Academic Research Fund (AcRF) Tier 1 and Tier 2 grant; and Alibaba Innovative Research (AIR)
programme. We also want to thank Alibaba City Brain Group for the donations of GPUs.
8 Broader Impact
The proposed method aims to improve the Few-Shot Learning task. Advancements in FSL helps the
deployment of machine learning models in areas where labelled data is difﬁcult or expensive to obtain
and it is closely related to social well-beings: few-shot drug discovery or medical imaging analysis
in medical applications, cold-start item recommendation in e-commerce, few-shot reinforcement
learning for industrial robots, etc.. Our method is based on causal inference and the analysis is rooted
on causation rather than correlation. The marriage between causality and machine learning can
produce more robust, transparent and explainable models, broadening the applicability of ML models
and promoting fairness in artiﬁcial intelligence.
References
[1]Joshua D Angrist and Alan B Krueger. Instrumental variables and the search for identiﬁcation:
From supply and demand to natural experiments. Journal of Economic Perspectives , 2001. 4
[2]Antreas Antoniou, Amos Storkey, and Harrison Edwards. Data augmentation generative adver-
sarial networks. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations
Workshops , 2018. 6
[3]Sanjeev Arora, Nadav Cohen, Wei Hu, and Yuping Luo. Implicit regularization in deep matrix
factorization. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2019. 3
9