inherently represented by C. To illustrate, suppose that Xis a linear combination of two base vectors
plus a noise residual: x=c1b1+c2b2+e, any classiﬁer f(x)=f(c1b1+c2b2+e)will implicitly
exploit theCrepresentation in terms of b1andb2. In fact, this assumption also fundamentally
validates unsupervised representation learning [ 5]. To see this, if C6!Yin Figure 3(a), uncovering
the latent knowledge representation from P(YjX)would be impossible, because the only path left
that transfers knowledge from DtoY:D!X!Y, is cut off by conditioning on X:D6!X!Y.
An ideal FSL model should capture the true causality between XandYto generalize to unseen
samples. For example, as illustrated in Figure 2(b), we expect that the “Lion” prediction is caused by
the “lion” feature per se , but not the background “grass”. However, from the SCM in Figure 3(a), the
conventional correlation P(YjX)fails to do so, because the increased likelihood of YgivenXis not
only due to “X causes Y” via X!YandX!C!Y, but also the spurious correlation via 1)
D!X,e.g., the “grass” knowledge generates the “grass” feature, and 2) D!C!Y,e.g., the
“grass” knowledge generates the “grass” semantic, which provides useful context for “Lion” label.
Therefore, to pursue the true causality between XandY, we need to use the causal intervention
P(Yjdo(X))[45] instead of the likelihood P(YjX)for the FSL objective.
2.3 Causal Intervention via Backdoor Adjustment
By now, an astute reader may notice that the causal graph in Figure 3(a) is also valid for Many-Shot
Learning (MSL), i.e., conventional learning based on pre-training. Compared to FSL, the P(YjX)
estimation of MSL is much more robust. For example, on miniImageNet, a 5-way-550-shot ﬁne-tuned
classiﬁer can achieve 95% accuracy, while a 5-way-5-shot one only obtains 79%. We used to blame
FSL for insufﬁcient data by the law of large numbers in point estimation [ 14]. However, it does not
answer why MSL converges to the true causal effects as the number of samples increases inﬁnitely.
In other words, why P(Yjdo(X))P(YjX)in MSL while P(Yjdo(X))6P(YjX)in FSL?
To answer the question, we need to incorporate the endogenous feature sampling xP(XjI)
into the estimation of P(YjX), whereIdenotes the sample ID. We have P(YjX=xi):=
ExP(XjI)P(YjX=x;I=i) =P(YjI),i.e., we can use P(YjI)to estimateP(YjX). In Fig-
ure 4(a), the causal relation between IandXis purelyI!X,i.e.,X!Idoes not exist, because
tracing theX’s ID out of many-shot samples is like to ﬁnd a needle in a haystack, given the nature that
a DNN feature is an abstract and diversity-reduced representation of many samples [ 21]. However, as
shown in Figure 4(b), X!Ipersists in FSL, because it is much easier for a model to “guess” the
correspondence, e.g., the 1-shot extreme case that has a trivial 1-to-1 mapping for X$I. Therefore,
as we formally show in Appendix 1, the key causal difference between MSL and FSL is: MSL
essentially makes Ianinstrumental variable [1] that achieves P(YjX):=P(YjI)P(Yjdo(X)).
Intuitively, we can see that all the causalities between IandDin MSL are all blocked by col-
liders1, makingIandDindependent. So, the feature Xis essentially “intervened” by I, no
longer dictated by D,e.g., neither “yellow grass” nor “green grass” dominates “Lion” in Fig-
ure 2(b), mimicking the casual intervention by controlling the use of pre-trained knowledge.
Many -shot
𝑋 𝑌 𝐼𝐷
✘
Few-shot
𝑋 𝑌 𝐼𝐷𝐶
Few-shot
𝑋 𝑌 𝐼𝐷
𝐶
𝑋 𝑌𝐶𝑑1⋯𝑑𝑛𝐷
(a)
Many -shot
𝑋 𝑌 𝐼𝐷
✘
Few-shot
𝑋 𝑌 𝐼𝐷𝐶
Few-shot
𝑋 𝑌 𝐼𝐷
𝐶
𝑋 𝑌𝐶𝑑1⋯𝑑𝑛𝐷 (b)
Many -shot
𝑋 𝑌 𝐼𝐷
✘✘
Few-shot
𝑋 𝑌 𝐼𝐷𝐶
Few-shot
𝑋 𝑌 𝐼𝐷
𝐶
𝑋 𝑌𝐶𝑑1⋯𝑑𝑛𝐷 (c)
Figure 4: Causal graphs with sampling process. (a) Many-Shot
Learning, where P(YjX)P(Yjdo(X)); (b) Few-Shot Learn-
ing where P(YjX)6P(Yjdo(X); (c) Interventional Few-Shot
Learning where we directly model P(Yjdo(X)).In this paper, we propose to use the
backdoor adjustment [ 44] to achieve
P(Yjdo(X))without the need for
many-shot, which certainly under-
mines the deﬁnition of FSL. The back-
door adjustment assumes that we can
observe and stratify the confounder,
i.e.,D=fdg, where each dis a strat-
iﬁcation of the pre-trained knowledge.
Formally, as shown in Appendix 2, the
backdoor adjustment for the graph in
Figure 3(a) is:
P(Yjdo(X=x)) =X
dP(YjX=x;D=d;C=g(x;d))P(D=d); (1)
1In causal graph, the junction A!B Cis called a “collider”, making AandCindependent even though
AandCare linked via B[44]. For example, A= “Quality”, C= “Luck”, and B= “Paper Acceptance”.
4