50%Weak Ω
StrongΩ
0.40.50.60.70.80.91
1-shot 5-shot 10-shot 1-shot 5-shot 10-shot 1-shot 5-shot 10-shotChart Title
ResNet10 WRN28-101510 1510 151060%70%80%90%(a)
 (b)Accuracy
SQ AverageS6QSupport Set
“Lion”
“African Hunting Dog”Query Set
Classiﬁed as “Dog”
(due to “yellow grass”)
Classiﬁed as “Lion”
(due to “green grass”)
Figure 2: Quantitative and qualitative evidences of pre-trained knowledge misleading the ﬁne-tune FSL paradigm.
(a)miniImageNet ﬁne-tuning accuracy on 1-/5-/10-shot FSL using weak and strong backbones: ResNet-10 and
WRN-28-10.SQ (orS6Q ) denotes the pre-trained classiﬁer scores of the query is similar (or dissimilar)
to that of the support set. “Average” is the mean of both. The dissimilarity is measured using query hardness
deﬁned in Section 5.1. (b) An example of 5-shot S6Q .
— a learning behavior — trained on many learning episodes f(Si;Qi)gsampled fromDand tested
on the target task (S;Q). In particular, the behavior can be parametrized by using model parameter
generator [ 46,19] or initialization [ 18]. After meta-learning, we denote 
as the new model starting
point for the subsequent ﬁne-tuning on target task (S;Q). Figure 1 illustrates the relationships among
the above discussed FSL paradigms.
It is arguably a common sense that the stronger the pre-trained 
is, the better the downstream
model will be. However, we surprisingly ﬁnd that this may not be always the case in FSL. As shown
in Figure 2(a), we can see a paradox: though stronger 
improves the performance on average, it
indeed degrades that of samples in Qdissimilar toS. To illustrate the “dissimilar”, we show a 5-shot
learning example in Figure 2(b), where the prior knowledge on “green grass” and “yellow grass” is
misleading. For example, the “Lion” samples in Qhave “yellow grass”, hence they are misclassiﬁed
as “Dog” whoseShas major “yellow grass”. If we use stronger 
, the seen old knowledge (“grass”
& “color”) will be more robust than the unseen new knowledge (“Lion” & “Dog”), and thus the
old becomes even more misleading. We believe that such a paradox reveals an unknown systematic
deﬁciency in FSL, which has been however hidden for years by our gold-standard “fair” accuracy,
averaged over all the random (S;Q)test trials, regardless of the similarity between SandQ(cf.
Figure 2(a)). Though Figure 2 only illustrates the ﬁne-tune FSL paradigm, the deﬁciency is expected
in the meta-learning paradigm, as ﬁne-tune is also used in each meta-train episode (Figure 1). We
will analyze them thoroughly in Section 5.
In this paper, we ﬁrst point out that the cause of the deﬁciency: pre-training can do evil in FSL, and
then propose a novel FSL paradigm: Interventional Few-Shot Learning (IFSL), to counter the evil.
Our theory is based on the assumption of the causalities among the pre-trained knowledge, few-shot
samples, and class labels. Speciﬁcally, our contributions are summarized as follows.
We begin with a Structural Causal Model (SCM) assumption in Section 2.2, which shows that
the pre-trained knowledge is essentially a confounder that causes spurious correlations between
the sample features and class labels in support set. As an intuitive example in Figure 2(b), even
though the “grass” feature is not the cause of the “Lion” label, the prior knowledge on “grass”
still confounds the classiﬁer to learn a correlation between them.
In Section 2.3, we illustrate a causal justiﬁcation of why the proposed IFSL fundamentally works
better: it is essentially a causal approximation to many-shot learning. This motivates us to develop
three effective implementations of IFSL using the backdoor adjustment [44] in Section 3.
Thanks to the causal intervention, IFSL is naturally orthogonal to the downstream ﬁne-tuning
and meta-learning based FSL methods [ 18,62,27]. In Section 5.2, IFSL improves all base-
lines by a considerable margin, achieving new 1-/5-shot state-of-the-arts: 73.51%/83.21% on
miniImageNet [ 62], 83.07%/88.69% on tiered ImageNet [ 49], and 50.71%/64.43% on cross-
domain CUB [65].
We further diagnose the detailed performances of FSL methods across different similarities
betweenSandQ. We ﬁnd that IFSL outperforms all baselines in every inch.
2