Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
D.2 F EW-SHOT MINIIMAGENET
Setup MiniImagenet (Vinyals et al., 2016; Ravi & Larochelle, 2017) is a sub-sample of the Imagenet
dataset (Deng et al., 2009). Speciﬁcally, it is a subset of 100 classes sampled randomly from the 1000
classes in the ILSVRC-12 training set, with 600 images for each class. We follow the standard protocol
(Ravi & Larochelle, 2017) and split classes into a non-overlapping meta-training, meta-validation, and
meta-tests sets with 64, 16, and 20 classes in each, respectively. The datasset is licenced under the MIT
licence and the ILSVRC licence. The dataset can be obtained from https://paperswithcode.
com/dataset/miniimagenet-1 .M-shot-N-way classiﬁcation tasks are sampled following
standard protocol (Vinyals et al., 2016). For each task, M= 5classes are randomly sampled from
the train, validation, or test set, respectively. For each class, Kobservations are randomly sampled
without replacement. The task validation set is constructed similarly from a disjoint set of L= 5
images per class. We follow the original MAML protocol for meta-training (Finn et al., 2017), taking
Ktask adaptation steps during meta-training and 10adaptation steps during meta testing.
We study how the data-efﬁciency and computational efﬁciency of the BMG meta-objective compares
against that of the MG meta-objective. To this end, for data efﬁciency, we report the meta-test set
performance as we vary the number of meta-batches each algorithm is allow for meta-training. As
more meta-batches mean more meta-tasks, this metric captures how well they leverage additional
data. For computational efﬁciency, we instead report meta-test set performace as a function of total
meta-training time. This metric captures computational trade-offs that arise in either method.
For any computational budget in either regime (i.e. Nmeta-batches or Thours of training), we
report meta-test set performance across 3 seeds for the hyper-conﬁguration with best validation
performance (Table 4). This reﬂects the typical protocol for selecting hyper-parameters, and what
each method would attain under a given budget. For both methods, we sweep over the meta-learning
rate; for shorter training runs, a higher meta-learning is critical to quickly converge. This however
lead to sub-optimal performance for larger meta-training budgets, where a smaller meta-learning
rate can produce better results. The main determinant for computational cost is the number of steps
to backpropagate through, K. For BMG, we sweep over K2f1;5g. For MG, we sweep over
K2f1;5;10g. We allowK= 10 for MAML to ensure fair comparison, as BMG can extend its
effective meta-learning horizon through the target bootstrap; we sweep over L2f1;5;10g. Note
that the combination of KandLeffectively lets BMG interpolate between different computational
trade-offs. Standard MG does not have this property, but several ﬁrst-order approximations have been
proposed: we allow the MG approach to switch from a full meta-gradient to either the FOMAML
approximation (Finn et al., 2017) or the ANIL approximation (Raghu et al., 2020).
Model, compute, and shared hyper-parameters We use the standard convolutional model
(Vinyals et al., 2016), which is a 4-layer convolutional model followed by a ﬁnal linear layer.
Each convolutional layer is deﬁned by a 33kernel with 32channels, strides of 1, with batch
normalisation, a ReLU activation and 22max-pooling. We use the same hyper-parameters of
optimisation and meta-optimisation as in the original MAML implementation except as speciﬁed in
Table 4. Each model is trained on a single machine and runs on a V100 NVIDIA GPU.
Table 4: Hyper-parameter sweep per computational budget.
MAML BMG
f0:0001;0:001g f 0:0001;0:001g
Kf1;5;10g f 1;5g
L — f1;5;10g
 —fKL (~xk);KL (k~x)g
FOMAMLfTrue, Falseg —
ANILfTrue, Falseg —
Total 24 24
31