Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022
We argue that deﬁning the meta-learner’s objective directly in terms of the learner’s objective—i.e. the
performance after Kupdate steps—creates two bottlenecks in meta-optimisation. The ﬁrst bottleneck
is curvature: the meta-objective is constrained to the same type of geometry as the learner; the second
is myopia: the meta-objective is fundamentally limited to evaluating performance within the K-step
horizon, but ignores future learning dynamics. Our goal is to design an algorithm that removes these.
The algorithm relies on two main ideas. First, to mitigate myopia, we introduce the notion of
bootstrapping a target from the meta-learner itself, a meta-bootstrap , that infuses information about
learning dynamics in the objective. Second, to control curvature, we formulate the meta-objective
in terms of minimising distance (or divergence) to the bootstrapped target, thereby controlling
the meta-loss landscape. In this way, the meta-learner learns from its future self. This leads to
a bootstrapping effect where improvements beget further improvements. We present a detailed
formulation in Section 3; on a high level, as in previous works, we ﬁrst unroll the meta-learned
update rule for Ksteps to obtain the learner’s new parameters. Whereas standard meta-objectives
optimise the update rule with respect to (w.r.t.) the learner’s performance under the new parameters,
our proposed algorithm constructs the meta-objective in two steps:
1.Itbootstraps atarget from the learner’s new parameters. In this paper, we generate targets
by continuing to update the learner’s parameters—either under the meta-learned update rule
or another update rule—for some number of steps.
2.The learner’s new parameters—which are a function of the meta-learner’s parameters—and
the target are projected onto a matching space . A simple example is Euclidean parameter
space. To control curvature, we may choose a different (pseudo-)metric space. For instance,
a common choice under probabilistic models is the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence.
The meta-learner is optimised by minimising distance to the bootstrapped target. We focus on
gradient-based optimisation, but other optimisation routines are equally applicable. By optimising
meta-parameters in a well-behaved space, we can drastically reduce ill-conditioning and other
phenomena that disrupt meta-optimisation. In particular, this form of Bootstrapped Meta-Gradient
(BMG) enables us to infuse information about future learning dynamics without increasing the
number of update steps to backpropagate through. In effect, the meta-learner becomes its own teacher.
We show that BMG can guarantee performance improvements (Theorem 1) and that this guarantee
can be stronger than under standard meta-gradients (Corollary 1). Empirically, we ﬁnd that BMG
provides substantial performance improvements over standard meta-gradients in various settings. We
obtain a new state-of-the-art result for model-free agents on Atari (Section 5.2) and improve upon
MAML (Finn et al., 2017) in the few-shot setting (Section 6). Finally, we demonstrate how BMG
enables new forms of meta-learning, exempliﬁed by meta-learning "-greedy exploration (Section 5.1).
2 R ELATED WORK
Bootstrapping as used here stems from temporal difference (TD) algorithms in reinforcement learning
(RL) (Sutton, 1988). In these algorithms, an agent learns a value function by using its own future
predictions as targets. Bootstrapping has recently been introduced in the self-supervised setting (Guo
et al., 2020; Grill et al., 2020). In this paper, we introduce the idea of bootstrapping in the context of
meta-learning, where a meta-learner learns about an update rule by generating future targets from it.
Our approach to target matching is related to methods in multi-task meta-learning (Flennerhag et al.,
2019; Nichol et al., 2018) that meta-learn an initialisation for SGD by minimising the Euclidean
distance to task-optimal parameters. BMG generalise this concept by allowing for arbitrary meta-
parameters, matching functions, and target bootstraps. It is further related the more general concept
of self-referential meta-learning (Schmidhuber, 1987; 1993), where the meta-learned update rule is
used to optimise its own meta-objective.
Target matching under KL divergences results in a form of distillation (Hinton et al., 2015), where
an online network (student) is encouraged to match a target network (teacher). In a typical setup,
the target is either a ﬁxed (set of) expert(s) (Hinton et al., 2015; Rusu et al., 2015) or a moving
aggregation of current experts (Teh et al., 2017; Grill et al., 2020), whereas BMG bootstraps a target
by following an update rule. Finally, BMG is loosely inspired by trust-region methods that introduce
a distance function to regularize gradient updates (Pascanu & Bengio, 2014; Schulman et al., 2015;
Tomar et al., 2020; Hessel et al., 2021).
2