Dorothy Kenny
(9) I like working with you.
(10) Ich kooperiere gern mit Ihnen.
‘I cooperate happily with you.’
While such examples tell us something interesting about how psychological
states are expressed in English and German, they don’t really constitute a trans-
lation problem – for a human being, at least. A speaker of German with basic
competence in English will be able to translate sentence (9) with little difficulty.
Non-isomorphismbetweenlanguages,theideathatlanguagesarestructureddif-
ferently, does not in itself cause problems for translators.
Anotherlinguisticphenomenonthatissaidtobetrickyinvolvesdiscontinuous
dependencies, where two words that belong together are separated by one or
more intervening words. “Send” and “back” in example (11), for instance, should
be understood as a single lexical item meaning ‘return’. Again, readers with a
basic grasp of English generally have no problem working this out.
(11) Send your certificate of motor insurance back.4
Another frequently posited difficulty in translation is presented by idioms. Id-
ioms are understood here as phrases whose meaning cannot be inferred on the
basis of their constituent parts. Idioms, in other words, are non-compositional.
A good example is “old hat”, as used in 1 of this chapter. If you describe some-
thing as “old hat” you mean that it is so familiar that it has become tedious even
to speak of it. The expression has nothing to do with head wear. Idioms, like
other types of figurative language, where a word or expression should not be
interpreted literally, can sometimes cause confusion for readers who have not
encountered them before, but even if you did not understand “old hat” at first
glanceinthischapter,youarelikelytohavereasonedthatthediscussionhadnot
moved on to millinery, and that a non-literal interpretation was in order. When
this happens to a translator, she is likely to simply look the idiom up in an on-
line dictionary, on the well-founded assumption that the expression is common
enough to be included in such a dictionary. In other words, although the expres-
sion is non-compositional and figurative, it is still conventional. Despite the fact
that the translator has hit a problem, in the sense that her flow has been bro-
ken, the problem is easily resolved and finding the solution will probably bring
thetranslatorconsiderablepleasure.(Translators,likealllinguists,generallylike
learning new things about their working languages.)
4There are five intervening words in this case, making it one of the longest instances of a dis-
continuous phrasal verb in the sample of English known as the British National Corpus.
28