7 How neural machine translation works
3.3 Layers of neurons
Imagine that you are an absolute beginner and want to learn some basic tech-
niques to paint landscapes in oils. A manual might teach you a step-by-step
over-simplified method with, for example, these four stages: drawing (a rough
composition is sketched in), colour distribution, drawing refinement, and finish
(when the final touches are made). The point here is not the number of stages
or the particular characteristics of each of them, but the fact that the whole pro-
cess flows in an incremental manner in such a way that the output of one step
becomes the input to the next one. Each step refines the previous outcome: the
outcome of the second step (colour distribution) is more of an actual landscape
painting than the outcome of the first one (drawing) and, similarly, the outcome
of the fourth stage (finish) can be conceptually considered as a better painting
than those resulting from any of the previous steps.
It turns out that neural computation benefits from a similar step-by-step in-
cremental process. Back in the sixties, researchers discovered that by including
multiple layers of neurons more complex tasks could be tackled. Each layer in a
multilayer neural network refines the output of the previous layer and takes a
bigger or smaller step towards the ultimate solution. The resulting architecture
would be similar to that in Figure 3 but with a number of additional hidden lay-
ers. One can clearly see this layered structure in the simple network in Figure 3:
computation, performed by two layers, takes place in two steps.
A model made of neurons organised in layers is referred to as a layered neu-
ral network . In spite of theoretical results proving that a two-layer network has
enough computational power to perform virtually any task (Hornik 1991), in the
realworld,thecomputationalpowerofneuralnetworksappearstobecorrelated
withthenumberoflayers;modelswithmorethanafewlayersareoftenlabelled
asdeep neural networks andthe corresponding trainingalgorithms areknownas
deep-learning algorithms .
As an example of the complexity that these deep models may reach, GPT-
3 (Brown et al. 2020), one of the largest neural networks released in 2020 in the
fieldofnaturallanguage generation,has 96layerswithtensofthousands ofneu-
rons each, which results in around 175,000 million weights to be learned by the
training algorithm. Supercomputers were used to train the GPT-3 system, a pro-
cess that can take several weeks or even months, but it has been estimated that
learning the weights for such a model with a single powerful gaming desktop
personal computer would have taken more than 350 years.1
1“OpenAI’s GPT-3 language model: A technical overview” (2020). Retrieved from https://
lambdalabs.com/blog/demystifying-gpt-3.
147