Caroline Rossi & Alice Carré
The first method gives results ranging from 0 to 1, while the second gives
percentages,rangingfrom0%to100%.Thehigherthetype-tokenratio,themore
varied the vocabulary in the text under scrutiny.
However, several warnings have to be issued regarding this metric. Firstly,
TTRishighlysensitivetotext-length.Indeed,thelongeratextis,themoreoften
suchwordsasdeterminersandarticleswillberepeated.Moreover,becausetexts,
especiallyspecializedtexts,haveathematicunity,termsarerepeated.Therefore,
the longer the text segment under consideration, the lower the TTR. Because of
this sensitivity of TTR to text length, TTR may have to be standardized across
blocks of a given number of tokens (e.g. 1,000 tokens) depending on the task at
hand. Standardizing in this way would allow you to compare the TTR of your
machine translated corpus with that of a corpus of different length in the same
(target) language.
Secondly, while lemmatization does not matter when comparing texts in the
same language, TTR has to be lemmatized when comparing two or more lan-
guages as some languages have richer inflectional morphology than others and
thus would be expected to have more lexical variety, simply because they have,
forexample,moreformsforanygivenverb.Ifyouaresimplyusingstandardized
TTRstocomparethelexicalvarietyofmachinetranslatedtextswiththatofother
texts in the same language however, then lemmatization will not be necessary.
Lastly, bear in mind that a higher TTR, that is, one that indicates more lexical
variety, does not necessarily equate with higher complexity. For example, con-
sider the sentences “The girl saw a fire.” and “The lexicographer observed the
conflagration.” Both sentences are made up of five words (tokens), but while the
former has five types, the latter has only four (because the token “the” occurs
twice). The first sentence thus has a TTR of 1 or 100%, while the second has a
TTR of 0.8 or 80%. But in spite of being less varied than the first sentence, the
second sentence is more complex.21
As already indicated, segment-level comparisons of TTRs might not make
much sense, but at text or corpus level, same-language comparisons of standard-
ized TTRs could give us valuable information, depending on the kind of text we
are dealing with. This chapter has focused on specialized translation. But there
are different kinds of specialized translation, which follow different conventions.
Contrary to literary or marketing translation, where higher lexical variety (and
thusahigherTTR)couldbeassociatedwithhigherqualityandmakethereading
allthemorepleasantfortheuserofthetargettext,technicaltranslationoftenhas
to comply with certain conventions that tend to decrease the lexical variety of
21The authors would like to thank Dorothy Kenny for this comment.
76