Olga Torres-Hostench
3.2 English as Lingua Franca (ELF), Local Languages (LLs) and
machine translation
Universities’ internationalization strategies are numerous, but mobility and run-
ning English or bilingual programmes are possibly the most visible ones. The
latterstrategygoesunderdifferentnames,forexampleEnglishasLinguaFranca
(ELF),Englishization,andEnglish-mediuminstruction(EMI).Ithasbeendefined
astheuseof“Englishasmediumofinstructionininstitutionsofhighereducation
in non-English speaking countries” (Multilingual Higher Education 2016).
The decision to use English allows for attendance by international students.
However, local students who are not fluent in English may feel betrayed if their
local university worries more about international students than about them, es-
pecially if it is for economic reasons (as international students’ fees are higher
than local students’ fees). Some universities opt to deliver MOOCs in English as
a strategy to attract international students, but recent research suggests that the
impactofMOOCsoninternationalstudentenrolmentisstillminimal(Zakharova
2019).
AsawaytoovercomethetensionsbetweenEnglishasLinguaFrancaandlocal
languages, House (2003) distinguishes between “languages for communication”
and“languagesforidentification”.AccordingtoHouse(2003:560),languagesfor
communicationareinstrumentalinenablingcommunicationwithotherswhodo
not speak one’s own L1. Languages for identification, on the other hand, are
normally local languages, and particularly an individual’s L1(s), which are
likelytobethemaindeterminantsofidentity,whichmeansholdingastake
in the collective linguistic-cultural capital that defines the L1 group and its
members … and the type of affective-emotive quality involved in identifica-
tion. (House 2003: 561)
Under this approach, English would be used for communication between
speakers who do not share the same language and for “pockets of expertise”
(House 2003: 561) and languages for identification would be used between same-
language speakers.
House(2003)presentsacasestudyinvolvingtheuseofEnglishasamediumof
instruction at Hamburg University (Germany), in which she examines how En-
glish interacts with the local language, and how international students perceive,
and react to this “diglossic situation” (House 2003: 570). Results showed that En-
glish was not seen as being in competition with German. English was described
as being in “a class of its own”, a supranational, auxiliary means of communica-
tion. In this project “there were no signs (yet) of a threat to a native language
14