Dorothy Kenny
casually in language learning contexts; and people who are either already work-
ing as translators or training to become translators. We take the view that all
users of machine translation should have some basic understanding of why the
technology is important, and where it fits into the maintenance of multilingual
regimes. And all users should have some basic understanding of how the tech-
nology works, so they can use it intelligently and avoid common pitfalls. Some
users, who may wish to engage more deeply with the technology, may bene-
fit from knowing how to get the best out of machine translation, for example,
by writing texts in a way that makes them easier to translate by machine. The
same users might also be interested in ways to improve machine translation out-
puts. Those working in, or about to join, the translation industry, will have a
particular interest in evaluating machine translation output, in order to gauge
whether it is “fit for purpose”. They might even get involved in integrating ma-
chine translation into the workflow of their company or need to know how to
customize machine translation so that they can better serve the needs of particu-
larclients.Theywillalsobeinterestedinhowmachinetranslationmightimpact
on their working conditions. Such readers require more in-depth knowledge of
the technology itself, and of the techniques and tools they can use to implement
it. All users should have some basic knowledge of the ethical issues that arise
when we use machine translation, for different reasons. Some users may be con-
cerned about the possibility of cheating: in what cases might the use of machine
translation constitute a breach of trust in educational environments, for exam-
ple? Others, mainly professional translators, may have to consider how the use
of certain types of machine translation might constitute a breach of contract.
And everybody has to be concerned these days about protecting the privacy and
data rights of others. Contemporary machine translation is also one of the many
technologies that can be implicated in processes that degrade our natural envi-
ronment. And it has been known to produce biased outputs, preferring male to
female forms, for example. Like all communication technologies, it can be used
for nefarious causes or positive humanitarian purposes. These are issues that
concern us all.
2 How to use this book
In this book we attempt to guide readers through all of the above issues. We
do not assume any prior knowledge of either translation in general or machine
translation in particular. When we do move on to the more technical aspects
of machine translation, and especially neural machine translation – a state-of-
vi