3 How to choose a suitable neural machine translation solution
metric (e.g. TER) while 1 could be the best score and 0 the worst for another (e.g.
BLEU).
We have also seen that caution should be exercised when comparing metrics
computed with different tools: indeed, the algorithms behind apparently similar
AEMs might differ in ways the non-specialist user is unaware of.
Finally,itshouldbesaidthattomakethemostofthesedifferentmetrics,users
will need to reflect on what the scores mean for their purposes and get used to
them. Comparing different AEMs and combining them with human evaluation
will help, even though you might be faced with differences (Doherty 2017: 134).
Human evaluation can take into account context in a better way, provided that
it is not done with segments presented in a random order: evaluators can then
lookforerrorsinpronouns,forinstance,whileAEMsmostlyoperateatwordand
sentence level. One interesting way to combine measures is to use both HTER,
which gives you a measure of technical post-editing effort, and a temporal mea-
sure, which tells you how long post-editing took.20O’Brien (2022 [this volume])
gives an overview of measures of post-editing effort.
2.6 Type-token ratios
Thetype-token ratio (TTR) is not quality metric as such. Rather, it provides a
global insight on the lexical variety of a text. It is mentioned here because it has
becomeoneofthemetricsusedtocommentonwaysinwhichmachinetranslated
text can differ from other texts in the same language (see Toral 2019), and some
evaluation interfaces, including that of MutNMT, are now reporting this metric.
TTR basically measures vocabulary variation (or lexical variety , Williamson
2009) within a text or corpus. The number of running words in a text is referred
to as the number of tokens. But words can be repeated in a text; if the same word
occurs three times in a text, for example, it counts as three tokens, but only as
onetype. The relationship between number of tokens and number of types is
called type-token ratio and is computed as follows:
type token ratio =no. of types
no. of tokens(15)
or
type token ratio =no. of types
no. of tokens⋅ 100 (16)
20While averaging them into a single score might not be very telling, looking for correlations
could help to identify the most serious problems.
75