Chapter 2
Human and machine translation
Dorothy Kenny
Dublin City University
This chapter introduces the reader to translation and machine translation. It at-
tempts to dispel some myths about translation, and stresses the importance of
translators in creating equivalence between source and target texts. Ultimately,
thechapteraimstohelpreadersconstruehuman-producedtranslationsastraining
data for machine translation. The chapter goes on to presentsome of the most use-
fuldistinctionsmadeinmachinetranslation:betweentypesofmachinetranslation
systems and different uses of machine translation output. In particular, it attempts
to explain contemporary machine translation as an application of the branch of
artificial intelligence known as machine learning, and, more specifically, of deep
learning.
1 What is translation?
This is a book about machine translation, which can be succinctly defined as
translation performed by a computer program. This definition still leaves open
the question, however, of what translation is. The reader should be made aware,
at this point, that there is a vast amount of scholarship in the area known as
translation studies that asks precisely this question, and that tracks the role of
translationindiversecultural,scientificandpoliticalarenas,tonamejustafew.It
wouldbeimpossibletodojusticetothisrichfieldhere,andthereaderisreferred
instead to sources such as Baker & Saldanha (2020) for further information. We
will content ourselves here by saying that most commentators would agree that
translation is the production of a text in one language, the target language, on
the basis of a text in another language,the sourcelanguage. The notion of text is
important. It refers to instances of real language use, whether spoken or written.
In general, we expect texts to meet certain criteria: they should be coherent and
Dorothy Kenny. 2022. Human and machine translation. In Dorothy Kenny
(ed.),Machinetranslationforeveryone: Empoweringusersintheageofartificial
intelligence , 23–49. Berlin: Language Science Press. DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.
6759976