2 Human and machine translation
The term “phrase” is something of a misnomer here however, as the strings
in question don’t necessarily correspond to phrases as commonly understood in
linguistics. Rather they are 𝑛-grams, that is, strings of one, two, three or 𝑛words
that appear contiguously in the training data. In the previous sentence, “appear
contiguously”isabigram,forexample,and“appearcontiguouslyin”isatrigram.
The second model, known as the language model is a monolingual model (or
combination of models) of the target language. Again, it is based on 𝑛-grams. A
trigramtargetlanguagemodel,forexample,wouldgivetheprobabilityofseeing
aparticularwordinthetargetlanguage,giventhatyouhadalreadyseenthetwo
words in front of it. A trigram model could tell you the probability of seeing the
word “gorgonzola” if you have already seen “I like” in the Europarl corpus, for
example.Itturnsouttobe0.024,whichmeansthatwhile“Ilikegorgonzola”does
occur in the training data (it actually occurs four times) there are many words
other than “gorgonzola” that are much more likely to follow “I like”.10
InSMTsystems,thetranslationmodelissupposedtocaptureknowledgeabout
how individual words and 𝑛-grams are likely to be translated into the target lan-
guage, while the language model tells you what is likely to occur in the target
languageinthefirstplace.Whatisreallyimportantfromthecurrentperspective,
isthatlinguistsdon’thavetohand-craftthesemodels.Rathertheyarelearneddi-
rectlyfromthedatabythemachineina training phase.Inasecondphase,called
tuning, system developers work out the weight that should be assigned to each
model to get the best output. Once the system is trained and tuned, it is ready to
translate previously unseen source sentences. Translation (as opposed to train-
ing) is called decoding in SMT. It generally involves generating many thousands
of hypothetical translations for the input sentence, and calculating which one is
the most probable, given the particular source sentence, the models the system
has learned, and the weights assigned to them.
SMTwasstate-of-the-artinmachinetranslationforatleastadecadeupto2015.
It represented a huge advance compared to the RBMT systems that preceded it,
but suffered from a number of deficiencies, most of them due to the fact that
relatively short 𝑛-grams were used to build models and that 𝑛-grams in the same
sentence were translated almost as if they were independent of each other. SMT
performed particularly poorly on agglutinative and highly inflected languages.
Other problems included word drop, where a system simply failed to translate a
word, and inconsistency, where the same source-language word was translated
two different ways, sometimes in the same sentence. By 2015, SMT was already
10The version of Europarl used here and in Table 1 is accessible through the Sketch Engine
interface at sketchengine.eu.
37