1 Europe, multilingualism and machine translation
(v) Multilingual visiting scholars; (vi) Multilingual curricula; (vii) Multilingual
research journals; (viii) Multilingual extracurricular activities and (ix) Cultural
diversity visibility.
And last, but not least, the university could provide multilingual orientation
programmes, multilingual support and multilingual libraries.
3.4 Ideas for using machine translation in teaching, research and
administration in multilingual universities
Multilingual universities could employ machine translation systems capable of
translating as much as possible between English and local languages. One strat-
egymightbeusingfreeonlinemachinetranslationservices,buttheusersshould
be aware of machine translation mistakes and be able to handle them properly,
either by correcting them themselves or asking for professional post-editing ser-
vices. Further information on post-editing can be found in O’Brien (2022 [this
volume]).
Another strategy would be to develop university-customized quality machine
translation resources between local languages and English, as explained further
in Ramírez-Sánchez (2022 [this volume]). If resources allowed, a customized ma-
chine translation system could be shared between universities in Europe and
beyond.
In the truly multilingual campuses of the future:
• International students could mix with local students, and have machine
translation resources available to follow the class in any local language
as there would be: (i) teaching materials in different languages (assuming
copyright issues have been resolved); (ii) access to multilingual glossaries
and databases for specialized terminology; (iii) a recording of the class us-
ing available voice recognition, transcription and machine translation fea-
tures, etc.
• Students would learn post-editing skills to review machine translation re-
sults, either in English and/or other languages, in order to be able to use
machine translation output wisely.
• Universitieswouldprovidepost-editingservicesforgood-qualityteaching
guides and teaching materials.
• Multilingual research dissemination and multilingual publications would
be encouraged, providing embedded machine translation features.
17