6 Ethics and machine translation
and there are several problems with crowd evaluation, in which anonymous and
presumably untrained internet users rank or rate segments of sequential trans-
latedmaterial. Freitagetal.(2021)foundthatexpert(professionaltranslator)eval-
uators produced markedly different results to crowd workers when carrying out
a detailed error analysis with access to full source and target documents, and
demonstrated a clear preference for human rather than MT output. Additionally,
there are issues with crowd work related to poor rates of pay, labour conditions,
opaque user rating systems, and use of humans (crowd workers) as research
participants without oversight or ethical review. Nonetheless, published results
based on automatic evaluation and crowd work are almost always reported cur-
sorily, devaluing human translation and creating an unrealistic and uncritical
perception of MT among the general public, including translation clients. This
perception increases the likelihood of MT being introduced into professional
workflows.
3 The ethical use of MT in professional workflows
3.1 Translation stakeholders
The case studies presented in §2.1 prompt us to think not just about ethics and
MT system development, but also about the ethical use of MT in professional
workflows. For example, the company who engages Translator A makes a uni-
lateral decision to move translation production to post-editing, when ideally the
introduction of MT into a workflow would be based on consultation and agreed
by all stakeholders. The stakeholders in the use cases in §2.1 are the translation
agency or language service provider, comprising a number of internal roles, and
the freelance translators. In addition, the translation client should be aware that
MT will be used as part of the translation process and cognizant of the attendant
benefitsandrisks(see§3.2).Almostallresearchonpost-editingproductivityhas
shown a boost in output when compared with translation from scratch or us-
ing translation memory. However, the orthodoxy is that the use of translation
automation should relate to the shelf-life and level of risk attached to the trans-
lated text, and the client relies on translation agency expertise in choosing an
appropriate and cost-effective workflow. The end user relies on the client to pro-
vide them with a text that does not expose them to unexpected risk. In addition,
Pym (2012) suggests that, when even a low-risk target text is made less compre-
hensible by poor quality MT, the translation may conform to the needs of the
client (who reduces costs by applying light or full post-editing) but will require
extra effort on the part of the end reader.
129