3 How to choose a suitable neural machine translation solution
find relatively high tolerance for MT errors (Castilho & O’Brien 2016). Now con-
sider a completely different setting that also involves technical texts, but with
an added legal dimension: users of translated patents need precise and relevant
information, so tolerance for MT errors will be much lower. Looking at NMT
for the patent domain, Castilho et al. (2017: 113) have, for instance, evidenced
a tendency of NMT to omit elements from the source text, in a context where
a piece of information missing from the machine-translated text may have se-
rious consequences. In both cases, a pragmatic approach to quality assessment
would imply using measurable indicators of usefulness, such as user satisfac-
tion ratings, productivity increases in post-editing, or increased sales based on
machine-translated descriptions of products.
Overall, assessing translation quality is far from trivial, and several factors
come into play when evaluating a translation, whether it is done by humans or
machines. For a start, there is usually more than one valid solution in transla-
tion: the same source text can have several translations, all equally acceptable.
What is more, if the evaluation of a translation is entrusted to human evaluators,
the evaluation process will often be subjective: indeed, it is not uncommon for
evaluators to disagree on the level of quality of a given translation. Evaluations
based on what humans dowith translations can be objective, however, when
they use productivity measures. Overall, in order to compensate for subjectivity,
it is essential to clearly define the objectives and indicators of each evaluation.
Another disadvantage of human evaluation is that it is also a time-consuming
and resource-intensive process. As an alternative to human evaluation, it is pos-
sible to use algorithms to carry out an automatic evaluation, which is certainly
cheaper and faster than human evaluation, but also sometimes less relevant, be-
cause it may not track usefulness in a particular application. Both types of eval-
uation thus have advantages and disadvantages; and your choice should depend
above all on your translation project and needs.
1.2 Good-enough quality: Think twice!
Using a pragmatic approach to MT assessment, as proposed above, it becomes
clear that not all MT errors or approximations have the same impact. Cooking
recipes often provide us with a good testing ground, because the results of the
translation are easy to see (and taste), and as a matter of fact they have been
used for some time now to produce jokes about MT errors. Here is an example
of a lasagne recipe, machine translated from French into English, together with
a question: would you be able to make the lasagne if you could use only this MT
output?
53