Pilar Sánchez-Gijón & Dorothy Kenny
confirming, in their view, the particular usefulness of pre-editing in multilingual
SMT settings (ibid.: 54). The same researchers subsequently studied the influ-
ence of pre-editing on the output of two NMT systems, but this time found that
there was very little correlation between the amount of pre-editing done and
the amount of post-editing that was needed after pre-edited texts were machine
translated from Japanese into English, Chinese or Korean (Miyata & Fujita 2021).
Miyata and Fujita (ibid.) also looked at the effect of different types of pre-edits,
and found that the edits that had been traditionally recommended in the context
of MT were less frequently encountered in NMT workflows:
Contrary to the acknowledged practices of pre-editing, the operation of
making source sentences shorter and simpler was not frequently observed.
Rather, it is more important to make the content, syntactic relations, and
word senses clearer and more explicit, even if the ST becomes longer. (Miy-
ata & Fujita 2021: 1547).
Other studies suggest that pre-editing is simply not an effective strategy with
NMT systems. Marzouk & Hansen-Schirra (2019), for example, found that pre-
editsimprovedtheperformanceofanRBMT,anSMT,andahybridMTsystem,in
thecontextofGerman-to-Englishtechnicaltranslation,buttheydidnotimprove
the performance of the NMT system they tested.2Among the few studies that
are enthusiastic about pre-editing in the context of NMT is that by Hiraoka &
Yamada (2019). They applied just three pre-editing rules to Japanese TED Talk
subtitles, namely:
• fill in missing punctuation,
• fill in missing grammatical subjects and/or objects,3and
• write out proper nouns in the target language.
According to Hiraoka and Yamada (ibid.), the implementation of these three
edits improved the translation into English of the subtitles using an off-the-shelf
NMTsystem.Insomerarecases,however,itresultedindis-improvementsinthe
MT output.
2Like other authors, Marzouk & Hansen-Schirra (2019) are careful to point out that their re-
search is based on so-called black-box systems, that is, off-the-shelf systems whose internal
workings cannot be scrutinized by the analyst.
3Japanese, like Spanish, is a “pro-drop” language (see Kenny 2022: §1 [this volume]), meaning
thatcertainpronounscanbeomittedwithoutimpedingcomprehension.InJapanese,thesecan
be either subject or object pronouns.
84