3 How to choose a suitable neural machine translation solution
texts while making them easier to use for the end user. The main example used
in this chapter comes from a user manual, which means in turn that it should
followsuchconventionsasusingasingletermforasingleconcept,withnovari-
ation, and that instructions should as far as possible be written following the
same pattern. For example, if “transceiver” was translated at times by “émetteur-
récepteur”, and at others by “radio” and by “appareil”, it would lead to a higher
TTR, while introducing uncertainty for the end user.
This leads us to conclude this section with a second word of caution.
3 Conclusion
In this chapter we have sought to illustrate what a pragmatic approach to MT
evaluationimpliesforspecializedtranslatorsortrainees.Thisapproachhasbeen
called pragmatic because it considers evaluation as a means to an end, and im-
plies choosing among different methods depending on the situation, often using
a combination of human and automatic evaluation.
While the comparison of MT outputs has been used as a method through-
out this chapter, it is worth noting that specialized translators are rarely given
a choice about what evaluation metric to use in current translation scenarios.
Rather, they often need to make a quick judgement on whether a given MT so-
lution is fit for purpose, or provide a general assessment of its quality.
We have thus explained how evaluations of MT outputs might be conducted,
using a combination of human and automatic evaluation metrics. We have ex-
plained the latter in great detail because we believe that, for all their limitations,
they can be put to good use if understood properly, and combined with human
evaluation.
References
Aziz, Wilker, Sheila Castilho & Lucia Specia. 2012. PET: a tool for post-editing
andassessingmachinetranslation.In Proceedingsoftheeightinternationalcon-
ference on language resources and evaluation (LREC’12) , 3982–3987.
Castilho,Sheila.2020.Onthesamepage?Comparinginter-annotatoragreement
insentenceanddocumentlevelhumanmachinetranslationevaluation.In Pro-
ceedings of the 5th conference on machine translation (WMT) , 1150–1159. https:
//aclanthology.org/2020.wmt-1.137.pdf.
77