A. Carré, D. Kenny, C. Rossi, P. Sánchez Gijón & O. Torres-Hostench
corpora give you access to a series of translation choices whose context is usu-
ally easy to retrieve. MT, on the other hand, outputs results that are based on
complex computations from training data that are not always accessible (they
are typically hidden in FOMT interfaces). This can make it difficult for users to
determine whether a proposed translation is indeed reliable.
6 Error analysis
One of the key skills that is needed to leverage MT for the purposes of second or
foreign language learning is a keen awareness of errors. Various activities might
be set forth in order to develop this skill, but because proposals are still scarce,
we provide readers with one commented example in what follows.10
Based on a text and its MT, learners make a list of the types of errors they are
abletodetectandcorrectinthelanguagepairinquestion.Theysubmitthelistto
their teacher and then receive their teacher’s feedback and a second list contain-
ing all the errors they hadn’t noticed, with additional explanations, suggestions
for further improvements and helpful examples. This exercise will be difficult
if the target (machine translated) text is in the L2, and we suggest that teach-
ers might start with translation into the mother tongue. While such tasks have
been excluded from the language classroom for a long time, as indicated in the
earlier part of this chapter, recent proposals integrating translation into situated
tasks have been made, with a view to turning the learner into a “self-reflective,
interculturally competent and responsible meaning maker in our increasingly
multilingual world” (Laviosa 2014: 105).
Table 4 contains an example of an NMT output for a short text translated
from English into French.11Errors in the NMT output are highlighted in bold
and commented on below.12
10FurtherrecentideasontheintegrationofMTintolanguageteachingandlearningcanbefound
in Vinall & Hellmich (2022).
11The text is taken from a textbook for French learners of English (Joyeux 2019:22). In order to
turn this activity into a situated task, learners could be asked to provide a good translation to
a French person with virtually no knowledge of English (e.g. a visitor to the class on a special
occasion). They would need to receive minimal information about MT and about the need to
correct the output that has been provided to them.
12Error analyses of MT output generally depend on error typologies , which list various types of
problems that can be found in MT output. These usually incorporate accuracy errors (e.g. the
meaning of the target segment is not consistent with that of the source segment) and errors
that affect the fluency or well-formedness of the target segment (e.g. errors in grammatical
agreement, word order, collocation, etc.). For more information, see Rossi & Carré (2022 [this
volume]) on MT evaluation and O’Brien (2022 [this volume]) on post-editing.
202