Sharon O’Brien
Apart from keyboard logging, technical effort is also measured using what is
callededit distance metrics. Put simply, edit distance counts the minimum num-
ber of operations required to transform one string of text into another. An “op-
eration” could be deletion of a word,insertion of a word,or movementof a word
or phrase to another location. There are several metrics for measuring edit dis-
tance, each of which counts the operations slightly differently. One basic metric
is called the Levenshtein distance . It counts the minimum number of character
insertions, deletions or substitutions needed to change to transform one word,
phrase or sentence into another.
For example: Take the word drinkand the word drunk. How many characters
have to change to transform one into the other? One: ‘i’ is substituted by ‘u’. Let
usmakethisabitmorecomplex:ifwetransformthephrase“Hedrinks”into“He
is drinking”, the Levenshtein distance is 6. (Insert ‘i’, ‘s’ and one space character
after ‘He’; substitute ‘i’ for ‘s’ at the end of ‘drinks’ and insert ‘n’ and ‘g’.)5More
sophisticated edit distance measures can be deployed and one that is often used
to measure PE edit distance is called TER, or the Translation Edit Rate (Snover
et al. 2006). This can be measured on a scale of 0–1 or 0% to 100%. The lower the
score, the lower the PE effort. For example, a score of 30% means, approximately,
that 30% of the raw MT output was edited to create the post-edited version of
a text string. Challenges exist regarding how best to calculate edit distance and
consequentlythereareseveraldifferentapproaches,withdifferentmetricsbeing
proposed on a regular basis.
Temporal and technical effort are relatively easy to measure. Measuring the
third dimension – cognitive effort – is much more complex. Cognitive effort
refers to hidden cognitive processes such as reading, understanding, comparing
source language meaning to that of the MT output, decision making, while tak-
ing into account the guidelines and expectations, and monitoring the text as it is
revised. These processes take place in the brain and cannot be seen or measured
directly. Nonetheless, cognitive effort is still an important aspect to consider.
Post-editingissometimesreportedasbeingmoredemandingataskthantransla-
tionwithoutMTasanaid.Thisisprobablyduetothelistofprocessesmentioned
aboveandalsotothefactthatitisarelativelynewtaskforsome.Eveniftransla-
tors can produce text faster with MT, they may feel more tired than they would
do if they were to produce the translation themselves. Working faster suits com-
mercial production, but not if it results in translator burnout, and that is why
cognitive demand is important to consider when measuring PE effort.
Buthowcanwemeasurecognitiveeffort?Infact,thisisaquestionforanyone
who seeks to measure cognitive effort for any task. Sometimes the effort can be
5These alculations can be done online using, for example, https://planetcalc.com/1721/.
116