7 How neural machine translation works
webuildthe interpretation of each sentence by combining the individual inter-
pretations of its component words, and the order in which they are combined is
dictated by the syntactic structure of the sentence in which words form phrases,
phrases form larger phrases, until one gets to the whole sentence. A translator
would then analyse this interpretation and perform the inverse procedure, but
in the target language. Of course, translators do not always process sentences as
a whole, particularly when they are long, and they may take shortcuts to avoid
building interpretations of whole sentences, but let us stick to this simplification
for a while.
NMT works in a similar way. When translating a sentence, during the en-
codingphase, the system assigns a neural representation , orembedding , to each
source-text word in isolation. These neural representations are then combined
to produce a similar representation, but this time at sentence level. As they are
combined, individual representations are also modified according to their con-
text; one could consider this a contextualised representation of interpretation
or meaning. Then, in the decoding phase, the sentence-level representations are
unravelled step by step to predict, one by one, the words in the target sentence.
Theencoder and the decoder performing these two phases are artificial neural
networks interconnected into a single composite neural network.
As in the case of translators, current neural architectures do not really work
byconsideringthewholesourcesentencewhenproducingeachtargetword,but
rather have learned to pay attention to the relevant source words and the target
words already produced when they do so.
In the remaining sections of this chapter we will describe in more detail the
nature of these representations, the structure of the artificial neural networks
(which we may simply call ”neural networks” from now on) that build and trans-
form them by selectively paying attention to what is important, and the ways
in which these artificial neural networks can be trainedto do this task using
translation examples.
3 Artificial neural networks
To make sense of NMT, one needs to consider in more detail the artificial neural
networks (Goodfellow et al. 2016) that perform it: what they are made of, how
they work and how they are trained.
The name neuralclearly invokes neurons and the way in which the nervous
systems of animals, and particularly people’s brains, work. Artificial neural net-
works are indeed made up of thousands or millions of artificial units that resem-
ble neurons whose activation (that is, how excitedorinhibited they are) depends
143