Juan Antonio Pérez-Ortiz, Mikel L. Forcada & Felipe Sánchez-Martínez
instance, the three most likely words, and clonethe system into three systems,
eachofwhichwouldbedeterminedrespectivelybyeachofthethreechoices,and
seehowtheyfare.Butonecannotdothisindefinitely,asonewouldtriplicatethe
numberofsystemstranslatingthesentenceateachstep,andtheirnumberwould
grow exponentially. To avoid that, only a certain number of systems are allowed
tosurvive, namely those obtaining the best value in an approximate calculation
of the probability of the full sentence that would be produced. This is usually
calledbeam search andisacommonapproximationinotherprobabilisticmodels
of human language processing such as speech recognition.
8 Conclusions
To train an NMT system, one needs thousands or even millions of examples of
source sentence–target sentence pairs. For many language pairs, many domains
and many text genres, such resources do not exist, which constrains many spe-
cific applications, but for well-resourced languages, general-purpose NMT is a
reality and is very widely used, not only by translators. Moreover, scientific ad-
vances in approaches such as multilingual models or unsupervised NMT have
recently started to produce promising results in low-resource scenarios.7
This chapter has introduced – and provided technical details of – the key ele-
mentsinNMTsystems,andexploredhowtheyinteractinthetwocurrentlymost
populararchitectures,namelytransformer-basedandrecurrentneuralnetworks.
Research activity in the area is so intense at the time of writing that proposals
for new models arise almost every month. Transformers are currently the para-
digmofchoiceifenoughparallelcorporaareavailablefortraining,becausethey
requireshorter trainingtimes and allowsubtle quality improvementsin compar-
ison to recurrent neural networks, but the picture may change dramatically at
any time.
7Amultilingual model is a single neural network that is trained to translate between many dif-
ferent language pairs so that knowledge from well-resourced languages may be transferred to
low-resourced ones. Interestingly, multilingual models bring the possibility of zero-shot trans-
lation(Ko et al. 2021) in which a system may be able to translate with reasonable quality, for
example, between Spanish and Upper Sorbian using a multilingual model trained on German–
Upper Sorbian and Spanish–German corpora, even when no Spanish–Upper Sorbian parallel
corpus is available. Unsupervised NMT goes a step further by learning NMT systems from
monolingual corpora only.
162