8 Custom machine translation
The amount and quality of available data is a key factor in deciding when to
go ahead and train a system, or when to try customizing a system using more
and/or higher quality data. Also, if there is data beyond parallel sentences that
you want to include, it is necessary to make sure that technology will support it.
The purpose of most neural MT systems is to produce the best raw output
possible, but additional requirements usually need to be met. Before you opt for
a particular service provider you might need to consider whether their language
modelscanbeaccessedremotelyorwhetheryouactuallyneedaccesstothemon
yourownpremises.Willthesystembeusedonlinewithconcurrentusersorasa
batch one-at-at-time queued process? Will the system translate text strings? Or
doesitneedtosupporttranslationusingdifferentfileformats?Willitbeaccessed
through an API, web app, or a connector to a third-party tool? And so on.
DeploymentofcustomMTmightrequireatradeoffbetweenqualityandmeet-
ing a delivery deadline. The best possible system may need more training days
than you can afford.
Finally, hardware is also a key component, both for training and for later use
of a system in production. Depending on other factors, you may need a service
that is available 24/7, and uses several GPUs/CPUs at the same time.
4.3 Getting the right data
CustomMTsystemsheavilydepend ontheavailabilityandquality ofin-domain
parallel data that is similar to the texts we ultimately wish to translate. In 3.2.1,
I discussed data sizes and ways to select or extend such data depending on the
scenario.HereIcoveraverybasicquestion:wherecanyoufindtherightparallel
data for your system?
In the first instance, you might try getting existing parallel data for free: there
is a myriad of data repositories that offer free and publicly available bilingual
corporareadytouseforMT.Mostoftheserepositoriesorcorporacanbeaccessed
through the OPUS website, which is maintained by the University of Helsinki,
and hosts corpora in more than 200 language combinations.6
Purchasing parallel data is also an option. (Selling parallel data for MT is a
business.) What is on offer varies from very large to very small collections, each
withdifferentusagerights,andusingdifferentbusinessmodelsandpricing.One
of the largest MT-specific data collections is offered by TAUS and covers more
than 600 language combinations.7
It is also possible to assemble parallel data yourself. Although probably not
ideal for assembling large amounts of data, parallel corpora can be created by:
6See https://opus.nlpl.eu/index.php, last accessed 26 June 2022.
7See https://www.taus.net/, last accessed 26 June 2022.
179