Sharon O’Brien
There are different ways in which MT can be embedded in a TM environment.
For example, the MT system might be called on by the translator if there is no
useful match offered from the TM. Alternatively, the translator could customise
theirTMtoolsettingstoensurethatanMTsuggestionispresentedautomatically
when a specific set of conditions are met (for example, when no match is found
in the TM).
It is generally accepted that, if the TM is well-maintained and kept up to date,
anexactmatchfromtheTMdatabaseismorevaluabletothetranslatorthanone
from the MT system because the latter might contain errors whereas the former
(ideally) should not. It used to also be assumed in industry circles that a “fuzzy
match” from the TM of 75% similarity or higher was better than an MT sugges-
tion,forthesamereason.MThas,however,becomemoreadvancedrecentlyand
the suggestions may be very useful to a translator, possibly even more so than
a 75% match from the TM. Thus, depending on the TM, the MT system, the lan-
guage pair and the topic, a translator might customise their TM tool settings so
that they see both TM matches and MT suggestions at the same time. In fact,
they could even opt to have suggestions from multiple MT systems presented
simultaneously. The translator can select the suggestion that they deem to be
most useful and edit it as required.
ThebenefitofusingTM/MTintegrationisthatthetranslatorgetsmorechoice
andassistancewiththetranslationprocess.Therearesomechallengestoo.With
this set up, a lot of information is presented to the translator, which means that
they have to process all of this information (the TM match and its match value,
the MT suggestion(s), possibly also terminology, and meta data such as who cre-
ated the TM match and when etc. (see Teixeira & O’Brien 2017), while making
a decision on which match to work with and what needs to be revised from a
linguistic perspective. This can lead to a high cognitive demand and even over-
load,andpossiblyexplainswhysometranslatorsreportthatpost-editingismore
demanding and tiring than other forms of translation and revision.
A further challenge with this mixed interface is presented by the post-editing
guidelines mentioned above. The translator needs to keep those guidelines in
mind when they are working with an MT suggestion, but if they are working
withamatch fromthe TM,then theyaredealingwith atranslationgenerated by
a translator (as opposed to an MT system) and so are no longer officially “post-
editing”. This mix of post-editing, revising and translating potentially makes the
task quite complex and we should also acknowledge that the task is typically
done under pressure of time too!
112