Gema Ramírez-Sánchez
(in languages like English) to lower case.10Truecasing only applies to lan-
guages that distinguish uppercase and lowercase so it is not applicable to
Chinese, Arabic, Hebrew and many others.
• Sub-word splitting: depending on the tokenization performed on a text,
further splitting of words into sub-words, characters or other chunks of
text may apply. This splitting may be based on frequency counts or a
linguistically-motivatedsegmentationthattakesintoaccountmorphemes,
stems, and additional morphological information. This is not always con-
figurable in custom environments as it requires the neural network to be
able to cope with special types of input and output, and sometimes only
one method is supported in pre- or post-processing.
So, what if you have texts that you want to use as training data, but they
are not in the right format? Don’t worry, because most of the time, tokeniza-
tion,truecasingandsubwordsplitting–ifapplicable–areincludedbydefaultas
pre-training,pre-processing(andpost-processing)stepsinstandardtrainingkits.
They are mentioned here so that users of these training kits know what’s going
on.Therearealsoplentyofstand-alonetoolsyoucanusetoperformthesesteps.
To find these tools, you can go to platforms like Hugging Face11or Github,12, or
simply open a search engine and start typing: sentence splitter, sentence aligner,
parallel corpus filtering, anonymizer, tokenizer, truecaser, etc. For more refined
searches, add the source and target languages. You will discover a whole world
of tools.
4.5 Training the custom model
Training an MT model once we have the right data, in the right format, is just a
matter of clicking a button in many current training environments. Some envi-
ronments allow users to tweak a number of parameters to get the best out of the
combination of data-training environment and system architecture. Sometimes
users are allowed to tweak settings for educational or research purposes.
Themostcommonparametersthatcanbeadjustedbytheuserbeforetraining
are as follows:
•Vocabulary size specifies the number of different words or sub-words (also
calledsub-wordunits,typesorwordtypes)allowedinthevocabularycom-
puted from the training corpus.
10Note that all nouns in German begin with upper case, and, like proper nouns in English, these
should not be truecased.
11https://huggingface.co/, last accessed 26 June 2022.
12https://github.com/, last accessed 26 June 2022.
182