9 Machine translation for language learners
5.1 MT versus online dictionaries
Generally speaking, a dictionary is “a book that contains a list of words in al-
phabetical order and explains their meanings, or gives a word for them in an-
other language” ( Cambridge advanced learner’s dictionary and thesaurus , 2020).
The definition further extends to electronic products like online dictionaries or
apps, which are usually well-known to language learners. Examples of online
dictionaries include more traditional ones like the Oxford English Dictionary,6
and new forms in which at least part of the information has been crowdsourced,
such as Wiktionary7or Urban Dictionary.8
Whether you have already been using them on a regular basis or not, the
question for every user faced with such varied resources is: how can you tell
that a dictionary is reliable? Lexicography (the writing of dictionaries) defines
best practices and is constantly evolving to take into account the development
of new dictionary forms and formats. Many dictionaries are now based on large
collections of texts (also known as corpora) that can be used as references, but
a lexicographer will never be happy with a mere quote from a corpus. Instead,
corpora are often used to check language use and find relevant examples. Before
doing so, a lexicographer’s job crucially involves finding the relevant entries for
agivendictionary,and writingupgooddefinitions. Tohelpyouappreciatewhat
this involves, learners’ dictionaries are particularly telling because they include
a really careful selection of entries, definitions and examples. With most dictio-
naries now freely available online, it should be easy for you to identify one or
two learners’ dictionaries and look for words that you have learnt recently or
that you particularly like.
Here is another important point: the Linguee website claims to include a dic-
tionary, but what kind of dictionary is it? Distinguishing between corpus-based
and corpus-driven dictionaries may help: while corpus-based dictionaries still
relyonalexicographer’sintuitionsandarebuiltaccordingtothemethodsoflex-
icography, corpus-driven dictionaries are based on automatic extractions from
a corpus. Linguee includes a corpus-driven, bilingual dictionary that does not
provide you with definitions of words or carefully selected examples.
Before looking at online corpora, let us sum up the main differences between
an NMT output and a dictionary entry:
6https://www.oed.com/
7https://en.wiktionary.org/, last accessed 20 June 2022.
8https://www.urbandictionary.com/, last accessed 20 June 2022.
199