Sharon O’Brien
already used in the early stages of development of MT systems, when technol-
ogy was somewhat slower, or certainly less instantaneous than it is now. A text
would be sent electronically to the MT system, the system would translate, the
textwouldbereturnedtothesenderwhowouldtheneditit,post–orafter–the
automatictranslationstage.Thetermhasstuck,andisevenusedtodescribecon-
temporaryprocessesinwhicherrorfixinghappensatthesametimeasautomatic
translation (see §3.1).
Post-editing is a bilingual language processing task. It is typically, though not
exclusively, undertaken by experienced professional translators. When a person
is engaged in this task, they are usually referred to as a post-editor . However, the
usefulness of this name is debatable, especially because the professional transla-
tor’s typical work environment involves the use of a computer-aided translation
tool that combines technologies such as translation memory, terminology man-
agement and machine translation (see Kenny 2022: §4 [this volume] and §3 be-
low). Within this working environment, the translator might be editing a fuzzy
match for one sentence, translating the next sentence, and post-editing the one
that follows. Does the translator change from being a revisor, to a translator, to
a post-editor for each of these sentences? Not really! Essentially, the task is still
all about translation and revision. The main difference lies in the technological
input or support the translator is using from one moment to the next.
When post-editing, the translator has to understand the source language sen-
tence and the target language proposal from the MT system. They have to then
identify any errors, devise a strategy for fixing them, and implement those revi-
sions. Fundamentally, post-editing is a revision task.
MT systems can produce a variety of error types, ranging from grammatical
errors,tosyntacticerrors,tounnecessaryadditionsoromissions,toerrorsinlex-
icalorterminologicalchoice,errorsincollocationorstyle.Thetypeandnumber
of errors that might exist in a text produced by an MT system will vary depend-
ing on many factors, such as the language pair and direction, the content type,
and the data or techniques used to train the MT engine.
Here are just a few examples in English of some of these error types and their
fixes.
(1) Grammatical error
a. The cat is very protective of her kittens. She scratches anyone which
tries to touch them.
b. The cat is very protective of her kittens. She scratches anyone who
tries to touch them.
106