A. Carré, D. Kenny, C. Rossi, P. Sánchez Gijón & O. Torres-Hostench
ally more neutral ( 15 minutes de trajet pour l’école ‘15 minutes of journey for the
school’) with precisions added only if necessary (e.g. à pied‘on foot’).
There are many more possible examples, but the above will hopefully be
enough to show that although the French NMT output looks good enough, with
no major grammatical or lexical mistakes, there is still a lot of room for improve-
ment. Finding out what learners can and cannot correct will certainly be illumi-
nating for teachers (see Loock & Léchauguette (2021) on this point).
We encourage readers to get NMT outputs for their own language pair, trans-
lating in the first instance into their L1. Activities including NMT outputs in an
L2 in situated tasks can be used at a later stage of language learning, especially
if the task involves detecting and fixing errors in the output.
7 Conclusions
In this chapter we have presented some of the main findings of research to date
into the use of MT in language learning, focusing on more recent sources that
take into account the progress made in MT since the arrival on the scene of
NMT. We have also offered some basic tips on using MT in language learning,
before building on the pragmatic approach to quality evaluation presented in
Rossi & Carré (2022 [this volume]), focusing on what it implies for second and
foreignlanguagelearners.Unlikespecializedtranslators,whomaynotbegivena
choiceaboutthetoolstheyuseincurrenttranslationscenarios,languagelearners
have choices, but they first need to decide whether and when to use MT. To
this end, we presented a list of situation-based parameters that can help them
make this decision. We also contrasted MT with complementary online tools
suchasdictionariesandcorpora,stressingtherelativemeritsofeach.Finally,we
proposed activities to harness the potential of NMT and include it in the second
or foreign language classroom.
References
Bowker, Lynne. 2020. Machine translation literacy instruction for international
business students and business English instructors. Journal of Business & Fi-
nance Librarianship 25(1-2). 25–43. DOI: 10.1080/0896.1794739 .
Bowker, Lynne & Jairo Buitrago Ciro. 2019. Machine translation and global re-
search. Bingley: Emerald Publishing.
Cambridge University Press. 2020. Cambridge advanced learner’s dictionary and
thesaurus . https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/.
204