Dorothy Kenny
(16) A little birdie tells me that you are married. (DeepL UK)
Google Translate, on the other hand, outputs the inappropriately literal trans-
lation in (17).
(17) My little finger tells me you’re married. (Google Translate)
Also at the time of writing, DeepL’s French-to-American English engine out-
puts (18) but if the sentence is changed by a single word as in (19), then DeepL’s
French-to-American English engine performs much better, as seen in (20).
(18) My little finger tells me that you are married. (DeepL US)
(19) Mon petit doigt me dit que tu es parti.
(20) A little birdie tells me that you’ve left. (DeepL US)
By the time the reader reads this, however, the outputs of both systems may
have changed completely, as models are retrained and users correct faulty out-
puts.
10 Conclusions
In one way, NMT is just the latest in a line of technologies designed to auto-
mate translation, albeit one that has risen to prominence remarkably quickly. Its
success could lead to policy makers and ordinary citizens questioning the value
of learning foreign languages or training human translators. But such positions
wouldignorethefactthatNMTstillreliesonhumantranslationsoratleasttrans-
lationsvalidatedbyhumansastrainingdata.AndbecauseNMT,likeothertypes
of machine translation, is not invincible, its outputs still need to be evaluated
and sometimes improved by people who can understand both source and target
texts. There is also a pressing need for machine translation literacy among even
casual users of the technology, so that they do not suffer unnecessarily because
ofignorance of howthe technology works.Giventhe right conditions, NMT can
be a vital pillar in the promotion and maintenance of multilingualism, alongside
language learning and continued translation done or overseen by humans. The
rest of this book is dedicated to creating those conditions.
References
Baker,Mona&GabrielaSaldanha(eds.).2020. TheRoutledgeencyclopediaoftrans-
lation studies . 3rd edition. London/New York: Routledge.
46