3 How to choose a suitable neural machine translation solution
targettextwillhavetobetranslatedintoFrenchandwillhavethesamefunction
as the source text: it will be provided to customers along with the transceiver.
Inwhatfollows,wewillconsiderthisexcerptandthewayitwastranslatedby
three different MT tools. The first one (hereafter system A , the output of which
is called candidate A ) is eTranslation, the EU’s MT tool.6The second one (here-
aftersystem B , which outputs candidate B ) is Google Translate.7The third one
(hereafter system D , which outputs candidate D ) is DeepL Translator.8At the
time of writing, these systems are freely accessible to the general public, with
one proviso: eTranslation requires would-be users to register and to belong to
one of three categories of users: SMEs, Public Service Officials and Public Sector
Service Providers.
Some of the more basic AEMs that we will present in this section can be com-
puted by hand. However, for the more complex metrics we will use MutNMT to
compute scores.9While we are presenting an example to give readers an idea of
how these metrics work, we would like to make it clear here that the exact com-
putation of an AEM score varies depending on the particular implementation
details of each metric: if you use different tools to compute what seems to be the
sameAEM(say,BLEU,forinstance),youmaywellgetdifferentresults.10Thedis-
crepancy in results may have its origins in the way the tool deals with quotation
marks, hyphens, breaking and non-breaking spaces, etc., before computation, in
the way it defines tokens (does it take into account apostrophes, hyphens, punc-
tuation or linguistic information such as lemmas or multiple-word units?), in its
sensitivenesstocase,orinmetricparametrizationspecifics(e.g.,whatorderof n-
grams is used for the exact implementation?).11In our example, we changed the
apostrophes in candidate D to those used in the reference translation. This way,
thedifferentcodingofsmartandstraightquoteswillnotinterferewiththeAEM
results,andwecanfocusonthetranslationoutput per se.Furthermore,whenwe
compute AEMs by hand for the purposes of explanation, we consider hyphens
and apostrophes as word “breaks”. This means that the total word count of our
reference translation (see Figure 3) is eight.
6https://webgate.ec.europa.eu/etranslation/translateTextSnippet.html
7https://translate.google.com/?hl=en
8https://www.deepl.com/en/translator. Note that we are referring to DeepL as “system D” and
not “system C” in order to avoid confusion in cases where we use Cto refer to a candidate
translation.
9https://mutnmt.prompsit.com/index
10Note, however, that there has recently been an effort to normalize and group reference imple-
mentations of AEMs in software such as Matt Post’s sacrebleu (Post, 2018).
11The authors would like to thank Gema Ramírez-Sánchez for her explanations.
61