9 Machine translation for language learners
3 Machine translation in language learning
3.1 Is it acceptable to use MT in language learning?
Research conducted in the 2010s suggests that MT was, by and large, still taboo
in the language classroom at the time. Based on the results of a survey of teach-
ers worldwide, Pym et al. (2013) showed that very few reported working with
machine translated texts in their language classes. There also appeared to be a
causal link between MT and reluctance to use translation in language teaching,
as reported by one informant in the study: in secondary schools the decision
not to use translation was often based on “fear of students preferring to rely on
machine translation tools” (Pym et al. 2013: 93).
There is, however, a growing realization that the use of Free Online MT
(FOMT) is widespread among language learners, regardless of what teachers
think, and that the effects of this use are worthy of investigation. Researchers
such as Lee (2021) and Jolley & Maimone (2022) review the burgeoning litera-
ture on the use of MT in language learning. Among the trends they recognize is
thetendencytoviewtheuseofMTascheating.Thishasledsomecommentators
to write about how MT use could be “detected” in students’ L2 writing. When
MTqualitywasgenerallypoor,itsusewaseasilydetectedinthekindofmistakes
that were typical of the technology. Nowadays, researchers now argue that:
AsMTtechnologiescontinuetoimprove,identifyingtranslation“mistakes”
will likely become increasingly difficult for language instructors. Instead, it
will be the technology’s subtle successes, rather than its breakdowns, that
will signal MT use. (Ducar & Schocket 2018: 787)
Inotherwords,studentswillgetcaughtoutnotbecausetheirwritingisriddled
witherrors,butbecauseitistoogoodfortheirlevel.AbeginnerlearnerofFrench
who produces a subjunctive verb form that would not normally be encountered
until they had reached an advanced stage, for example, might thus be suspected
of using MT.
But whether someone is cheating or not depends not on the technology they
are using, but on the rules of the game. If learners are forbidden from using MT
in their L2 writing, but nonetheless use the technology surreptitiously, then that
is cheating. Even if they are not expressly forbidden from using MT, but use
it without letting the teacher know, and with the intention of passing the MT
output off as their own writing, then this is still a dishonest action that is carried
out to gain some kind of advantage. Indeed, the presentation of “someone else’s
words” as one’s own belongs to the category of cheating known as plagiarism ,
189