Joss Moorkens
There is a tension between the idea that an action can be universally good and
moral,suchasupholdingjusticeortruthfulness,andthepositionthatvaluesmay
differ depending on the person or group under examination. There have been
many suggestions for ways of untangling whether an action is ethical or uneth-
ical based on agency, relationships, or a surrounding narrative. This is where
theoretical ethics moves into applied ethics, in trying to guide how we should
act in a given situation.
Applied ethics in a working situation will often involve a set of codes or stan-
dardstoguideprofessionalbehaviour.Ifthesecodesaretoorestrictive,theymay
hamper potential progress or societal benefits. Rigid codes could also cause diffi-
cultiesasethicaldecisionsarerarelybinaryandchoicesmaybegovernedbythe
uniquescenarioandpressuresbroughttobearonthepersonmakingthatchoice.
For this reason, differentfields of applied ethics have sprung up to consider com-
mon problems and dilemmas within their particular context. This chapter will
drawonthefieldsmostrelevanttomachinetranslation(MT)includingcomputer
and information ethics and data ethics when discussing the ethical use of MT
by humans in system development. §3 on the ethical use of MT in professional
workflows will draw on business ethics and the growing literature on transla-
tion ethics. §4 on computers as ethical agents will draw on machine ethics and
computer and information ethics. The final sections will draw on more recent
diverse work on ethics and artificial intelligence when looking at sustainability
and diversity.
Ethics is a growing area of interest in technology in general, as technology
becomes an increasingly integral part of all of our lives and many regions move
towardsubiquitouscomputing.Weneedtobeawareoftheimpactofthechoices
we make when we design, implement, or use technology. There is an assump-
tion often expressed that technology is ethically neutral and that bias may be
introduced only in our use of that technology. However, the consensus among
ethicists and philosophers of science is that technology is not ethically neutral,
but rather reflects the values of the designer. These values govern the problem
addressed by the technology, the decision to create the technology, the method
of implementation, its intended users, the references or training data used, the
processing of that data, the location and security of data storage, and the limits
to access to the technology based perhaps on cost or geographical location.
The speed and scale of technological development means that regulation is
inevitably a step or two behind and we are thus reliant on ethical behaviour on
the part of engineers and developers. We rely, to a greater or lesser extent, on
large technology companies with political power and wealth to act in our col-
lective best interests, but a series of reports and revelations in recent years have
122