Caroline Rossi & Alice Carré
scores for different MT engines or systems. They also typically have functions
designed for use by project managers in translation companies, as well as the
actual evaluators. Non-commercial tools such as PET ( Aziz et al. 2012) are also
available to help in human evaluations of MT outputs, and are frequently used
by academic researchers.
Other familiar tools that can be used to support human evaluations include
spreadsheet programs. These allow manual input of scores into tables like that
suggested in Table 3. In-built functions can then be used to compute average
scores for the quality indicators you have used. A variety of free-to-use online
forms can also be used to conduct human evaluations.3These are particularly
useful for conducting surveys, and can often automatically compute summary
and other statistics in the same way that spreadsheets do.
Table 3: Suggested spreadsheet for comparing MT solutions
Source text NMT1 NMT2 NMT3 Preferred output Comments
Segment 1
Segment 2
2.4 Error typologies
Sometimes human evaluators are asked not just to score a machine translated
segment or document using one of the metrics described above, but to say pre-
cisely what is wrong with the particular output, by assigning each error in the
segmenttoacategoryspecifiedinan errortypology .Categorizingerrorsisanim-
portant step in diagnosing problems in MT output, often in an effort to provide
feedback to system developers.
Error typologies tend to be rather complex, however. The Multidimensional
Quality Metrics (MQM) framework, for instance, includes an extensive list of er-
rorcategories(Marianaetal.2015:140).Forthesakeofsimplicityandease,alim-
itedsetofcommonerrorscouldbeusedinanevaluation,suchastheoneselected
by Moorkens for a practical in-class translation evaluation exercise (Moorkens
2018: 380). It includes:
• Word order errors (incorrect word order at phrase or word level)
3Perhaps the best known example is Google Forms. See https://support.google.com/docs/
answer/6281888?hl=en&co=GENIE.Platform%3DDesktop
58