Juan Antonio Pérez-Ortiz, Mikel L. Forcada & Felipe Sánchez-Martínez
7 Additional settings
7.1 Words and sub-words
According to what has been presented in this chapter, independently of whether
a transformer or a recurrent model is used, an embedding is obtained for each
word after training. Does this mean that we end up having an embedding for ev-
ery possible word in the language? Not really. Languages, specially those which
are highly inflected or agglutinative, may easily have hundreds of thousands or
even millions of different word forms. In order to understand why this poses a
challenge for NMT systems you should know that the number of word embed-
dings (which is referred as the vocabulary ) conditions the number of weights in
the neural network and that large neural networks often struggle to generalise
to unseen data. The size of the vocabulary could be reduced by considering only
thosewordformspresentinthetrainingcorpusbutthisusuallystillimpliescon-
sidering a substantial number of words and raises a new issue: when training is
finished and the NMT system undertakes the translation of new sentences con-
taining words not in the training set, these unseen words will make the model
perform clumsily and lose accuracy as every unknown word is assigned a single
non-contextual embedding reserved for this situation.
The solution engineers came up with is to split words into so-called sub-word
units. Ideally, these units should make linguistic sense and carry some compo-
nents of meaning; for instance, splitting demystifying asde-+-myst-+-ify-+
-ingsurely makes more linguistic sense (and is therefore likely to be more help-
ful when it comes to performing machine translation) than splitting it as dem-
+-ystif-+-yi-+-ng. But performing a linguistically sound splitting requires the
existence of a set of splitting rules and procedures for the language in question,
a resource that may not be available for many languages.
A commonly-used workaround is to automatically learn splitting rules by in-
specting large texts, such as one containing all the source or all the target sen-
tences in the training set. A popular approach5is called byte-pair encoding (BPE)
(Sennrich et al. 2016), and starts with letter-sized units which are joined into
two-letter, three-letter, etc. units when they appear frequently in the corpus.6
Byte-pair encoding would probably identify a frequent -ingsuffix in many verb
5There are more advanced methods such as SentencePiece (Kudo & Richardson 2018), which
treats the whole text as a sequence of characters and performs word division ( tokenization )
and sub-word division in one fell swoop.
6Byte-pair encoding was originally a text compression algorithm: frequent letter ( byte) se-
quences would be stored once and replaced by short codes to reduce the total storage needed.
160