Joss Moorkens
TranslatorsAandB,forexample,couldhavetheirtranslationdataaggregated
with other personal data, allowing a third party to make inferences about them
individuallyorasmembersofagroup.Theuseofweb-basedplatformsfortrans-
lationisincreasinglycommon,givingtranslatorslesscontroloftheirtranslation
data and allowing surveillance of work activities. If personal circumstances lead
to a temporary downturn in productivity or translation quality as gauged via
translatoractivitydatagleanedfromtheworkplatform,thatcouldnegativelyaf-
fecttheirprospectsforfutureemployment.Ifidentifiabletranslationactivitydata
for an individual that encodes this downturn is shared outside of a single organi-
zation, that could have far-reaching consequences for that individual. This does
not necessarily mean that it is unethical to monitor quality or productivity. An
agencyorcompanyneedstobeabletostandovertheirtranslations.However,by
automating employmentdecisions or communication, as is the case with project
management in the example of Translator B, a company will leave the translator
with no opportunity to explain translation choices or to build a long-term rela-
tionshipbasedontrust.Thereisnoguaranteeofethicalbehaviouronthepartof
the translator or user of a platform at the best of times, but when relationships
are purely transactional, research has shown that trust and the assumption of
good faith on both sides are particularly undermined, with knock-on effects on
satisfaction and performance (Whipple & Nyaga 2010).
2.6 Ethics in MT evaluation
Rossi & Carré (2022 [this volume]) look at methods of human and automatic
MT evaluation. There are a number of ethical issues related to MT evaluation
that are worth raising here. Most MT systems’ output is evaluated automatically
during training and again afterwards for a quick, easy, and cost-effective mea-
sure of quality. In competitive shared tasks, where development teams pit their
systems against one another, either automatic or crowd evaluation tends to be
used. Basedon theseevaluations,output maybeconsidered tohavereachedpar-
ity with human translation quality if a segment-level crowd rating or automatic
evaluationachievesthesamescoreasa“reference”human-translatedtargettext.
If the evaluation score for MT surpasses that of the human reference, it is con-
sidered “super-human” output.
This language is problematic, especially when disseminated more widely in
research publications and marketing materials, which in turn may be reported
in news media, giving the impression that MT produces perfect quality output
without risk and that human translators are no longer necessary. However, au-
tomatic evaluation metrics tend to show little correlation with human judgment
128