Olga Torres-Hostench
recognize national and regional minority languages, and language policies are
highly controversial.
Meanwhile,theEUpridesitselfonstandingupforlanguagediversitythrough
the use of the 24 official languages in the main EU institutions. From a practi-
cal point of view, this position involves a major challenge that deserves closer
attention.
For instance, in the European Parliament, parliamentary documents are pub-
lished in all the official languages “as EU citizens must be able to read legislation
affectingtheminthelanguageoftheirowncountry”(EuropeanParliament2020)
and members of the European Parliament have the right to speak and write in
any of the official languages. Rule 167 of the Rules of Procedure of the European
Parliament is related to languages, and specifies that: (i) all documents of Par-
liament shall be drawn up in the official languages; (ii) all members shall have
the right to speak in Parliament in the official language of their choice; (iii) in-
terpretation services shall be provided and (iv) the President of the Parliament
shall rule on any alleged discrepancies between the different language versions
(European Parliament 2021).
AsforthecitizensoftheEU,accordingtotheTreatyontheFunctioningofthe
European Union (TFEU1), all European citizens have the right to address the offi-
cialEUinstitutionsinanyoftheEU’sofficiallanguagesandtoreceiveananswer
in that language. This is intended to make the EU institutions more democratic
and accessible to EU citizens. Other provisions related to multilingualism in the
TFEU are contained in articles 20, 24 and 342.
Some people think that 24 official languages is too many, and others that 24
official languages is not enough. Some countries try alternative approaches. For
instance, Catalan, Euskara and Galician, all spoken in Spain, are considered “ad-
ditionallanguages”bytheEU (theyareco-officiallanguagestogether withSpan-
ish in their respective territories). This status means that any communication
from an EU citizen in these languages has to be translated in Spain into a “pro-
cedural language” of the EU, and the answer from the EU institution will be also
translated from the procedural language into the additional language. The cost
of these translations is borne by Spain.
The use of three procedural languages, English, French and German, is in-
tended to simplify multilingual communication in the EU: given 24 official lan-
guages, the EU is faced with a total of 552 possible translation combinations,
“since each language can be translated into 23 others” (European Parliament
1The most recent, consolidated version of the TFEU is available from https://eur-lex.europa.eu/
legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:12012E/TXT&from=EN. Unless otherwise indicated,
all urls mentioned in this chapter were more recently accessed in January 2022.
4