Joss Moorkens
the CO2 output of a car (including fuel) during its full lifetime.6However, most
traininginstancesarefarlessresource-intensivethantheonereportedinthispa-
per.Furthermore,whilehardwarebecomesmorepowerfulandcostlytoengineer
and produce, optimization of power consumption and the potential to run mas-
sive amounts of parallel processes mean that the power required for training is
dropping.Nonetheless,itremainsthecasethattraininganNMTsystemiscostly
and requires a good deal of power. How that impinges on the environment will
depend on the source of that power. There is currently no agreed benchmark for
powerconsumptionwhenpublishingdetailsofMTsystems,althoughsomehave
beenproposedinthecontextofsuggestionsforsustainableAIdevelopment.The
point made strongly by Van Wynsberghe (2021) is that without a focus on sus-
tainability in the development and deployment of AI (and, by extension, NMT),
AI development itself will not be sustainable.
5 Diversity
5.1 Among developers and users
The cost and power requirements are a huge barrier to entry into NMT devel-
opment. The data requirements meant that early systems had to use publicly
available data (see §2), usually creating systems for major European languages.
It comes as no surprise then, that initial published work on NMT was conducted
mostly by well-resourced academic research groups in North America and Eu-
rope.Thishaschangedsomewhatfortwomainreasons.Firstly,largetechnology
companies have thrown their weight behind research efforts in NMT, building
very well-resourced teams that lead the way in optimizing MT systems between
major languages. This means that many academic research groups struggle to
compete in major European languages and have moved to the more “niche” area
of low-resource and minority languages. Secondly, the ability to create synthetic
parallel data by machine-translating monolingual data from the intended target
language into the intended source language7has led to a jump in quality for
under-resourced language pairs. Thus the Fifth Conference on Machine Transla-
tion (WMT20) includes translation in Inuktitut and Tamil to and from English.
However, another way to improve quality for low-resource languages is to build
large multilingual systems, which are usually the preserve of the large commer-
cial teams.
6We note also that only the largest companies can afford the costs of training such large-scale
models.
7MT researchers call this process “back-translation”. It is not to be confused with “back-
translation” used as a glossing technique in standard translation studies sources such as Baker
(2018).
134