4 Selecting and preparing texts for machine translation
Consequently, in the case of languages that reflect relationships between ref-
erent and pronominal forms through mechanisms such as gender and number
agreement, the agreement may be lost. This particular kind of problem can usu-
ally be minimized by the use of simple sentences.
An example may help here. Example (1) contains an instance of a possessive
determiner su, which, taken out of context, can mean either ‘his’ or ‘her’. In
example (1), the only possible interpretation is ‘her’, as indicated in the gloss
translation provided. DeepL,5, however, translates the instance of suin question
as ‘his’, as it cannot establish the referential link between suandMaría.
(1) María llamó, pero Pepe no llamó. El sonido de sullamada me despertó.
‘Maria called, but Pepe didn’t call. The sound of hercall woke me up.’
DeepL: ‘Maria called, but Pepe didn’t call. The sound of hiscall woke me
up.’
Asregardsextratextualreferences,inadditiontoallthereferencesinherentto
the nature of the documentation being translated – for example, specific legisla-
tion in documents of a legal nature – there are two types of references that need
to be taken into account during the pre-editing phase: 1) those that address the
reader, and 2) any cultural references the reader identifies with.
As argued in the previous section, from a stylistic point of view it is best to
compose simple, short sentences and use a direct style with the active voice or
passive sentences that include the agent and patient. This style is especially ap-
propriateforinstructivetexts.Inthecaseofinstructivetexts,thedirectstyleand
active voice mean that the text always addresses a reader directly. In this type
of sentence, MT tends to reflect the most frequent use found in the corpus, so if
the target language allows the reader to be addressed in more than one way, it
could alternate between the different options – more or less formal or explicit –
and cause cohesion problems throughout the text that could be avoided by pre-
editing.
Extratextualreferencestoculturalaspectswithwhichthereaderofthesource
text particularly identifies are difficult to deal with generically. In many cases,
pre-editing the text consists of making all the implicit information related to
these cultural references as explicit as possible, keeping the global audience in
mind.
Inbothcases(referencestothereaderandculturalreferences),MTpre-editing
should take into account the target reader’s language and profile.
5https://www.deepl.com/en/translator accessed January 2022
95