Gema Ramírez-Sánchez
notice that they look at each other in an even more inimical way. After some
time,youdiscoverthattheirlackoffriendlinessisduetoakeyfactor:theydon’t
understand one another; one is an L1 speaker, the other an L2 speaker and they
did not know about the library. You need to help them! As a polyglot, you’ve
done this before, and you have no option: you will teach them translation from
L1 to L2 and the other way round.
Howwillyoudothis?Bytryingtolearnaboutthelanguagesindividuallyfirst
andthendivingintohowtotranslatebetweenthem?(Thiswilltaketoolong.)Or
by going directly to the bilingual texts and lists? (This seems more promising.)
You might start with the list of words and observe further relationships between
other words, phrases and longer chunks. Or you could use the fact that texts can
be classified into those with stamps and those without stamps. You could, for
example,startgroupingtogethertextscarryingsimilarstamps.Oryoucoulduse
all the texts at the same time. A myriad of possibilities is open to you to start
learning from data about translation between L1 and L2.
At this point, when an MT system is learning how to translate, it is in the
same situation as you are on this mission: you both have texts, bilingual (and
monolingual), maybe also terminology lists, but nothing else. These are the only
sources to learn from, but there are different ways of carrying out the learning
process.
Back on your newly discovered planet, you first open your mind and try to
learn from what you can observe in the bilingual L1-L2 texts. You use the lists
already compiled to check if your assumptions are right and then try to build on
these assumptions by forming new assumptions. You soon move from words to
longerchunks.Atthispointyoudon’tpayattentiontowhetheratextisstamped
or not; you try to use all resources together as a whole.
Inasimilarway,tobuildafirstMTsystem,oneusuallystartsbyconcatenating,
or stringing together, all bilingual data, regardless of the different domains they
comefrom,andbyperforminginitialtrainingusingthedefaultsoftwaresettings.
Afterafirsteffort,youstartgettingmessagesfromtheL1speakerandtranslat-
ingthemintotheL2.ThenyoushowyourtranslatedmessagestotheL2speaker
to validate them. And then you repeat the process working the other way round.
You keep improving your knowledge as you interpret the expressions on the L1
and L2 speakers’ faces. Sometimes they laugh, but most of the time they nod
their heads, and sometimes they even look as if they get it. You learn from their
feedback and keep going.
In MT development, evaluation is not usually based on human (or extrater-
restrial) assessment. Rather, we use automatic metrics to compute quality scores
172