Gema Ramírez-Sánchez
Anything that helps your company improve communication with its internal
staff, train car salespeople, or convince buyers, is deemed a key activity, and
in a multilingual environment like this one, MT can be very helpful. Your com-
panythususesMTtoproducethefirstdraftofnearlyallitstranslations.Review-
ers, known as post-editors (see O’Brien 2022 [this volume]), then improve these
drafts.
YourcompanystartsoutonitsMTjourneyusingagenericMTsystemandim-
proving the output through post-editing. Soon, the post-editors begin to realize
that they need to fix the same terminology, genre and style mistakes over and
over again: this is not very appealing or efficient. Your company then remem-
bers that it has been producing translations for decades, and wonders whether it
could use these existing translations to somehow improve the process.
The answer is yes. But how? First, by including its own past translations as
training data, your company allows the MT engine to learn from them. That is,
it uses its own training data to create a custom MT engine. The custom engine
produces draft translations which are much closer to the company’s past trans-
lations and have far fewer errors in terminology and style, and the post-editors
are happier.
But are things really as simple as that? Well, yes, but only if you have a suffi-
cient amount of data (millions of translated sentences) which is in the right for-
mat(alignedparalleldata;seeKenny2022[thisvolume]),isinternallyconsistent
(otherwise be prepared for inconsistent output), and is in the desired language
pair or pairs. You also need engineers or external providers to train the system
and integrate it into the company’s translation workflow, as well as the right
hardware and software. All this just to start with. Then you need a retraining
planifyouwanttotakeadvantageofthenexttranslationsthatwillbeproduced:
this can be on-the-fly if you work with adaptive MT, every six hours if you have
crazy production numbers, every six months or once a year if you just want to
keep the system up-to-date and consistent.
So maybe “simple” is not the word, and you might ask whether all the effort
will be worth it? Let’s set reasonable expectations.
2.1 What can we expect from custom machine translation?
Once the preserve of MT experts, custom MT is now commonly encountered
by all sorts of users. It is even shown to us raw, without any revision, and is
performed on-the-fly when we click a “get a translation” button. We see it on
online hotel booking websites, online technical support for specialized software,
job vacancy listings, teachers’ messages in educational apps, etc.
168