Dorothy Kenny
“hangtogether”properly;theyshouldservesomekindofpurpose,evenifitisjust
tosay“hello”tosomeone.Wealsousuallyhaveparticularexpectationsregarding
what texts will or should be like, given the particular language and context. This
chapter, for example, hopefully meets the reader’s expectations of a chapter in a
collected English-language volume that is designed to be used as a textbook. It
addresses a particular subject field or domain, namely machine translation, and
adopts the conventions of a particular genre, that of a textbook.
The idea that translation involves texts is old hat to anyone who works in
the area; it is so obvious that is doesn’t need to be said. But in a world where
most people don’t think too much about translation, it is worth reminding our-
selvesthatwetranslatetextsandnotlanguages.Languagesarevast,complicated,
abstract systems that are put to use in potentially infinite examples of human
communication and expression. Texts are concrete instances of language in use.
Theynormallyhaverecognizablebeginningsandendings,andevenifindividual
languages seem to offer endless potential for creating sometimes unpredictable
meanings and high levels of ambiguity, in any given text much of that potential
simply falls away. It does not matter, for example, that showerin English can
mean (1) a brief period of rain, (2) a device used for personal washing, or (3) a
gift-giving party, all of which would be translated differently into a language
like French, if what we are doing is translating a shower installation guide for a
manufacturer of bathroom fittings. Unless the author is engaging in some witty
wordplay, which is unlikely given the genre, we are dealing with the second
meaning of shower. Focusing on texts rather than languages keeps things real,
and manageable.
Asecondelementofthedefinitionoftranslationgivenaboveisthecontention
that translation involves the production of a text on the basis of another, pre-
existing text. This clearly establishes translation as involving a relationship be-
tween two texts , commonly known as the source text and the target text .1Some
commentators would go further than this and say that the relationship in ques-
tion is one of having the “same meaning”, but many philosophers and linguists
– who understand meaning admittedly in quite sophisticated, technical ways –
tend to shy away from claims of “same meaning” in translation. One reason for
doing so is that it can be difficult to isolate the meaning of a text from the situ-
ations in which it is created and used. We might consider the meaning of a text
1A third element of our definition, of course, relates to the fact that source and target texts are
in two different languages. We are thus concerned with interlingual translation . Some com-
mentators, most notably Jakobson (1959), have recognized other types of translation, such as
intralingual and intersemiotic, but a discussion of these categories is beyond the scope of this
chapter.
24