8 Custom machine translation
As general users, our main goal is usually to understand information we have
retrieved from somewhere, often a website. In such cases, we might expect that
custom MT will, at the very least, do a better job in outputting accurate termi-
nology and idioms than generic MT would; and we might also expect better ad-
herence to text style.
Forexample,ifwearelookingforinformationaboutnursinghomesonaweb-
site, we expect hometo be translated to communicate the sense ‘main page’ on
the navigation menu but ‘institution where people are cared for’ in the website
content. If we are looking at a baseball website, there should be no confusion
betweenthe‘mainpage’,‘base’or‘team’sowngrounds’sensesof home.Inother
contexts, homeshould be not translated at all; for example, when it is part of a
brand name. Better management of specific translations for specific contexts is
something that we can expect from custom MT.
For language professionals, other, seemingly small, details take on particular
importance. They appreciate when their custom MT engine outputs the right
upper and lower case forms of words, or can cope with formatting conventions
likebulletedlists,orrendersnumbersappropriately.Whenthesephenomenaare
not handled correctly (as in Table 3), post-editors need to review the output of
the MT engine carefully and correct these “little” mistakes, which is both irri-
tating and time-consuming. Adherence to textual conventions and style is also
something expected in a professional environment.
Table 3: Machine translation output details matter
Input Output: generic MT
English Spanish French Italian
For this match,
the following
players will be
excluded
a) One
b) Four
c) 6Para este partido,
los siguientes
jugadores serán
excluidos:
uno
b) cuatro
c) seisPour ce match,
les joueurs
suivants seront
exclus:
un
b) Quatre
c) SixPer questa
partita, saranno
esclusi i seguenti
giocatori:
un solo
b) Quattro
c) Sei
Given sufficient effort and the right resources, custom MT is capable of out-
putting text without the kinds of error in Table 3. Among the resources required
are suitable human resources, which I address in the next section.
169