A. Carré, D. Kenny, C. Rossi, P. Sánchez Gijón & O. Torres-Hostench
a topic that is addressed by Mundt & Groves (2016) in the context of MT use
in language learning. A number of studies (e.g. Correa 2011; Clifford & Munné
2013; Ducar & Schocket 2018) show, however, that attitudes to the use of MT in
language learning can differ between learners and teachers, or depending on the
extent of the use of MT, or a host of other issues, and so the situation may not
be as clear cut as it first seems.
If you are learning a language in a formal setting, the best advice is to talk to
your teacher, to make sure you understand what does and does not constitute
cheatinginyourparticularcircumstances.Ifyouarealanguageteacher,thebest
advice is to talk to your students to ensure that they know what is expected of
them. Either way, the wish to avoid cheating is just one thing that needs to be
takenintoconsiderationwhendecidingwhetherornotitisacceptabletouseMT
in a language learning assignment. Other considerations are listed under “situa-
tional parameters” in §3 of this chapter, and in Moorkens (2022 [this volume])
on ethics. For now, we limit ourselves to a discussion of the nature of the “ad-
vantage” that might be gained in using MT, with or without the approval of a
teacher.
3.2 What do you gain by using MT in language learning?
There is some evidence that learners can gain an advantage in the short term
by using MT to accomplish particular tasks. In the study reported on by O’Neill
(2019), for example, 310 American intermediate-level university students wrote
short compositions in French and Spanish, under different conditions, involving
the use of: Google Translate with prior training for students; Google Translate
withoutpriorstudenttraining;anonlinedictionarywithpriortraining;anonline
dictionary without prior training; or no technical aid at all. The students who
usedGoogleTranslate,andhadpriortrainingintheuseofthetool,scoredbetter
than all others on their compositions, followed by those who used an online
dictionary,again with prior training. Ina post-test conducted abouta week later,
andadelayedpost-testconductedsomethreetofourweekslater,wherestudents
no longer had access to the tool in question, the Google Translate + Training
group no longer performed better than the other groups. It appears that any
advantage they had gained by using the tool was short-lived and dependent on
the continued availability of the tool.
In a separate study, Fredholm (2019) tracked lexical diversity in compositions
written, over the course of a full school year, by 31 Swedish upper secondary
school pupils of Spanish as a foreign language, in which roughly half the pupils
used a printed dictionary as a translation tool, and the other half used Google
190