2 Human and machine translation
engines like Google Search or Microsoft Bing, for example, machine translation
can be used to expand a search and then to translate relevant foreign-language
web pages back into the user’s language.
But it’s not all about web pages. Machine translation is also used in combina-
tion with technologies like automatic speech recognition and speech synthesis,
or optical character recognition and digital image processing, allowing users to
have spoken conversations in two or more languages, or read road signs writ-
ten in unfamiliar writing systems, often using an app installed on their mobile
phones. In some cases, these apps now even work offline and users can justifi-
ably claim to be carrying a machine translation system in their pocket. Machine
translation is also increasingly used in areas previously considered beyond the
capacity of the technology, for example in audio-visual translation, to translate
the subtitles of foreign-language movies and TV series into the language of a
new market. Indeed, subscription video streaming services thrive on a model
that brings the so-called long tail of lesser-known titles to a new audience, and
many of these titles are lesser-known partly because they were originally made
in a foreign language. Audio-visual content is thus becoming just the latest in a
long line of commercial products whose markets can be expanded through ma-
chine translation. In the seventy or so years since its inception, machine transla-
tion has thus moved from being the preserve of governments and international
organizations to being a mass consumer good.
Despitetheundoubtedusefulnessofmachinetranslationinthekindofscenar-
iosaddressedaboveanditscapacitytodogoodinother,forexample,humanitar-
ian settings (Nurminen & Koponen 2020), it comes with some health warnings.
First, just like human translators, machine translation systems can make mis-
takes. Errors might range from the amusing but trivial to the extremely serious
(for example in healthcare, news translation or international diplomacy). Whole
branches of research are thus devoted to estimating the quality that given ma-
chinetranslationsystemsarelikelytoproduce, evaluating particularoutputs,de-
signingwaystocorrecterrorsby post-editing machinetranslationoutputorhelp-
ing the machine produce better output in the first place, usually by pre-editing
source texts to make them easier to translate. These areas are discussed in detail
in Chapters 3 to 5 of this book. Machine translation also raises a surprising num-
ber of moral and legal issues, as addressed by Moorkens (2022 [this volume])
on ethics, and to a lesser extent by Carré et al. (2022 [this volume]) on machine
translation for language learners.
Many casual users of machine translation may feel that they do not need to
know much about any of these areas to get what they need from the technology:
ifyouaresimplyusingmachinetranslationtogetthegistofatext,tounderstand
33