9 Machine translation for language learners
Translate. He found that use of MT was associated with higher lexical diversity,
and hence better performance, as long as students continued to have access to
the tool, but once access was removed, the effect vanished. Again, the benefit
bestowed by use of MT seemed dependent on the continued availability of the
tool.
So does this mean that it is not worthwhile using MT in language learning?
Not quite. In both studies, the use of MT did not harm students in the long run;
there was simply no difference between students who used MT and students
who did not, once the tool was no longer accessible. In the short term, however,
the students who used MT did better than the others. So whether you benefit or
not from MT use appears to depend on whether you take a short or long term
view, and whether you focus on a particular task as an end it itself or on your
development as a language learner.
AnotherlessonfromO’Neill’s(2019)studyisthat–intheshorttermatleast–
trainingmatters.Learnerswhoaretrained,evenbriefly,inhowMTworks,write
better compositions than those with no training.
3.3 What, exactly, can MT help you with?
WehavealreadyseenthattheuseofMThasbeenshowntohelpcertainlearners
write better compositions generally, or write compositions with more diverse
vocabularythanotherlearners.Ingeneral,studiesthattracktheeffectofMTuse
on L2 (or L3) written composition tend to focus on learners’ use of vocabulary ,
grammar , andsyntax. According to Lee (2021):
Numerous studies have confirmed that MT helps students reduce ortho-
graphic, lexical, and grammatical errors and focus more on content, and
as a result, students with MT produce revisions with a greater number of
successful edits and a better quality of L2 writing. (Lee 2021: 4)
But it should be noted that individual studies can produce seemingly conflict-
ing results. Fredholm (2015), for example, found that Swedish pupils who used
FOMT in their written compositions in Spanish made fewer mistakes in spelling
and article/noun/adjective agreement, but more mistakes in syntax and in verb
conjugation, than pupils who did not use FOMT.
Other studies are interested in learners’ metalinguistic awareness , defined as:
the ability to focus attention on language as an object in and of itself, to
reflect upon language, and to evaluate it. (Thomas (1988: 531) in Thue Vold
2018: 67)
191