4 Selecting and preparing texts for machine translation
Table 2: Aspects related to structure and style in pre-editing
Guideline Explanation
Short and
simple
sentencesAvoid unnecessarily complex sentences that introduce ambiguity.
This makes it easier to understand the text, both the source and
translation.
Syntactic structures based, for example, on anaphoric or cataphoric
references may not be correctly handled by the NMT system and
may lead to omissions or mistranslations. Avoid syntactic
ambiguities subject to interpretation.
Complete
sentencesAvoid eliding or splitting information. The compensation
mechanisms for the not explicitly mentioned information typical of
the source language do not necessarily work in the target language.
For instance, a sentence with a verb in passive form which does not
make the agent explicit can lead to misunderstanding in target texts.
The same can happen when one of the sentence complements is
presented as a list of options (in a bulleted list, for example). In such
cases, the sentence complement is broken down into separate
phrases which the NMT system may process incorrectly. Remember
that MT systems normally use the sentence as a translation unit
(seeKenny 2022: §7 [this volume]), i.e., the text between
punctuation marks such as full stops, or paragraph breaks.
Use parallel
structures in
related
sentencesUse the same syntactic structure in sentences in a list or that appear
in the same context (e.g., section headings, direct instructions). This
kind of iconic linkage (see Byrne 2006) usually makes it easier to
understand the text, both the source and translation. In addition, it
allows for the systematic identification of errors during a
post-publishing phase.
Active voice Where appropriate, use mainly the active voice or other structures
that make “participants” in an action explicit (taking into account
the conventions of the text genre and the languages involved).
Homogenous
styleMaintain a homogeneous style. This facilitates understanding the
text, both the source and translation. This is particularly related to
preparing texts for a global audience.
93