Gema Ramírez-Sánchez
• crawling multilingual websites: if a URL contains bilingual content, you
can download such content for a given language pair, and either align it
yourself (see Kenny 2022 [this volume] for an example of an aligned text),
or use a third-party service to align it.
• aligningyourowntranslateddocuments:ifyouhavetranslateddocuments
and their original source texts, you can use standard open-access or pro-
prietary tools to align them at sentence level.8
4.4 Getting the data right
Once we’ve got the right data, we need to prepare it before training our system.
This means making sure that we have:
• Onetextfileperlanguage(orlanguagecombination):plaintextfilesarethe
usual food for MT training. One per language is the ideal, although some
systems can cope with spreadsheet-type formats that use one column per
language, or even TMX files (see Kenny 2022 [this volume]).
• One sentence per line: the text files need to be formatted so that each sen-
tence takes up a single line. This effectively means that each sentence be-
comes a one-sentence paragraph. Longer or shorter units are not usually
allowed,9although headings can be treated as if they are sentences.
• One-to-one aligned sentences: independently of the format, every line in
the source file needs to correspond to the same line in the target file.
• Clean data: there should be no duplicates, typos, or noisy sentences (e.g.
thosewithonlynumbers,orthatarebadlyencoded,ornotinthelanguage
you want, etc.).
• Anonymizeddata(ifnecessary):youmightneedtoeliminateanysensitive
data, and especially personal data, from your training corpora.
• Organized data: corpora need to be divided into three sets corresponding
tothedifferentphasesofthetrainingprocess.Thesesetsareusuallynamed
thetraining set (trainfor short), the validation set (alsodevelopment set or
devfor short) and the test set(or just test).
8Free alignment tools include LF Aligner (https://sourceforge.net/projects/aligner/, last ac-
cessed 26 June 2022); while well-known paid-for alignment tools include those provided with
translation memory tools (see Kenny 2022 [this volume]).
9I am assuming here sentences as the training unit, not documents.
180