Pilar Sánchez-Gijón & Dorothy Kenny
similar effect on the reader of the target text as the source text did on its reader,
to the extent that this is possible. It is a question of making a text available to a
global audience and attempting to have the same effect on readers in each target
language.
Whether the text is to be translated with an MT system or not, from a com-
munication perspective, for years it has been considered advisable to have the
translation already in mind during the drafting phase of the source text. In fact,
the preparation of documentation for translation forms part of their training for
technical writers (Maylath 1997).
Overthelast50years,thetranslationindustry,andallrelatedinterestedparties
from translators to major technology developers and distributors, have learned
thatthebesttranslationstrategyrequiresappropriateinternationalizationofthe
product (Fry 2003: 14). The best way to adapt a product to any other region is to
excludethoseaspectswhichareuniquetothesourcetextregionwhereitisbeing
designed and developed. In this way, any digital product can be localized and
used in the target language and on any device or platform, without its original
design having to be modified. Something similar also appears to have happened
with texts designed to be published in different languages.
Both language service providers and developers of localized digital products
have found that pre-editing source texts is the key to their global communica-
tion strategy. Many language service companies advertise on their websites that
good multilingual communication strategies begin with developing an appropri-
atesourcetext.Digitalproductdevelopershavelikewisediscoveredthatthebest
strategyforcommunicationwiththeirusersandpotentialcustomersisbasedon
keeping a global user in mind. This strategy is embodied in a set of guidelines
that should be taken into account when drawing up the contents of any text.
Google’s documentation style guide, for example, features a basic “writing for
a global audience” principle, and sets out a series of guidelines in English that
facilitate the translation of documentation into any target language. These in-
clude, among others, general dos and don’ts, such as use present tense, provide
context, avoid negative constructions when possible, write short sentences, use
clear, precise, and unambiguous language, be consistent and inclusive (Google
2020).
Today’s translation technologies make it possible to combine the use of com-
puter-aided translation tools like translation memory tools (see Kenny 2022: §4
[this volume]) and MT systems. So, the limitations of MT in this sense are not
technological, but rather determined by the quality of the raw MT output (is it
error-free?) and appropriateness for the target communicative context (register,
88