Sharon O’Brien
they believe that they can produce a better translation and that it will take less
timethanpost-editing.Whilethefirstbeliefwascertainlytruesometimeago,the
development of neural machine translation has, in general, increased the quality
ofMTtosuchanextentthatrawoutputisnowmuchmoreusefulandusable.The
ideathattranslationwouldtakelesstimethanpost-editingis,ontheotherhand,
opentodebate.Studieshaveshownthatpost-editingcancertainlybefasterthan
translation, even if translators think that they are faster (e.g. Guerberof Arenas
2014). Being able to rapidly assess the output from an MT system, decide if it is
usable,andwhateditsarerequiredissomethingthatcanbehonedwithpractice.
Levels of post-editing are conceptually linked with levels of quality, though
as will be shown in the examples below this linkage is problematic. Light post-
editing is seen to be linked with “good enough quality”, or text that is “merely
comprehensible”, i.e. text that should be accurately translated, but that does not
necessarily have to flow very naturally or be stylistically sophisticated. On the
other hand, full post-editing is linked with “quality similar or equal to human
translation”. Here again, we run into some difficulty because the inherent as-
sumption is that “human translation” is alwaysof a high standard, something
that is frankly not always the case.
To better understand the complex, and sometimes confusing, relationship be-
tween levels of post-editing and levels of quality, let us look at an example:
(5) a. In a new report on the quality of teaching practice, inspectors said
pre-school teachers could be training to integrate languages such as
French, German and Polish in early learnsettings.
b. In a new report on the quality of teaching practice, inspectors said
pre-school teachers could be trainedto integrate languages such as
French, German and Polish in early learning settings.
Thetwoerrorsin(a)arequicklyfixedtorendersentence(b).Ontheonehand,
we could say that we have edited (a) lightly; we implemented two rapid edits.
However, if we were to follow the light post-editing guidelines, we probably
wouldnotimplementanyeditsatall.Implementationof“fullpost-editing”guide-
lines would mean that the two errors must be fixed to produce a translation that
issemantically,syntacticallyandgrammaticallycorrect.So,withthesetworapid
edits, have we engaged in light or full post-editing?
Let us take a look at another example.
(6) a. In addition, it reiterates the instinct of modern language into the
primary school curriculum as a fitting step .
110