2 Human and machine translation
require human intelligence. The machines in question don’t necessarily have to
thinklikehumans,rathertheyneedto actlikeanintelligenthumanwould.They
might be designed to solve fairly narrowly defined problems, like recognizing
faces. Such goals are the stuff of narrow AI , also known, somewhat unkindly,
asweak AI . So-called strong AI is a more aspirational undertaking. It would in-
volveeither generalAI –inwhichmachineswouldhavehuman-likeintelligence,
be self-aware, able to learn and plan for the future – or superintelligence , which
would involve intelligence that exceeds the abilities of any human. It is fair to
saythattranslation,aspractisedbyprofessional,humantranslators,requiresthe
kind of intelligence that strong AI aspires to, but that such intelligence still re-
mains beyond the capacity of machine translation systems.
6.1 Rule-based machine translation
One way to tackle the challenges of AI is to attempt to give a computer program
alltheknowledgeitwouldneedtosolveaparticularproblem,andrulesthatspec-
ifyhowit can manipulate this knowledge.In the case of machine translation, for
example, you can give the program a list of all the words in each of the source
and the target languages, along with rules on how they can combine to create
well-formed structures. You can then specify how the words and structures of
one language can map onto the words and structures of the other language, and
give the machine some step-by-step instructions (an algorithm ) on how to use
allthisinformationtocreatetranslatedsentences.Thisapproach,knownas rule-
based machine translation (RBMT), dominated machine translation up until the
early part of this century. When free online machine translation first became
available in 1997, for example, it was based on RBMT (Joscelyne 1998). RBMT
was beset by a number of problems, however. It was very expensive to develop,
requiring highly skilled linguists to write the rules for each language pair and,
likeotherknowledge-basedapproachestoAI(Goodfellowetal.2016),itsuffered
from knowledge bottlenecks: it was simply impossible in many cases to antici-
pate all the knowledge necessary to make RBMT systems work as desired. This
appliesbothtoknowledgeaboutlanguageandknowledgeaboutthewiderworld,
so-called real-world knowledge .7
7Although RBMT has fallen out of favour generally, at the time of writing, it is still used in
a small number of systems, especially for translation between very closely-related languages.
See, for example, Apertium (Forcada et al. 2011).
35