Gema Ramírez-Sánchez
3.2.2 Data quality
Data quality also plays a role in the customization of MT systems, impacting
directly on the quality of the final output. This has become a topic of interest
particularly with the rise of neural MT (see Kenny 2022 [this volume] and Pérez-
Ortizetal.2022[thisvolume]),asstudiesshowthatitisverysensitivetonoisein
thetrainingdata(Khayrallah&Koehn2018).Mostoftheworkdonetoovercome
this problem consists in filtering out noise using a mix of patterns and rules
to remove obvious noise, scoring sentences for quality, and classifying them to
discriminate between high-quality and low-quality content. It also includes the
removal of duplicates (Khayrallah & Koehn 2018).
3.2.3 Data organization
Finally, data organization is also becoming a topic of interest (Mohiuddin et al.
2022).Somestudiesorganizetrainingdatausingsentenceswithsimilarlengthto
improve training and translation speed. Others feed the models with sentences
from more simple to more complex to improve quality. Others use documents
instead of shuffled sentences to take advantage of the wider textual context, in
order to get improved MT outputs.
3.3 Customization through techniques
Oncewehavecompiledandcleanedallthedatawecangetourhandsontotrain
an in-domain MT system, how do we use these data? What type of system ar-
chitecture is best for our purposes? Do we have different options to constrain
the output? This is what customization through techniques is all about. The
techniques in question may have to do with modifying the architecture of the
network, adjusting parameters during training or combining different systems
during training or translation time (also called inference).
Below I review some of the most popular techniques to get domain-specific
MT. Koehn (2020: Ch. 13) provides a more detailed discussion.
3.3.1 Self-taught systems
In the self-taught systems approach, we would use first only the generic data to
train a system. Then, taking this system as a starting point, we would perform a
second training pass using only the in-domain data. This would result in a fine-
tuned system with some general knowledge of the languages and a very specific
knowledge of the in-domain vocabulary, structures, etc.
176