3 How to choose a suitable neural machine translation solution
• Mistranslations (incorrectly translated word, wrong gender, number, or
case)
• Omissions (words from the source text have been omitted from the target
text)
• Additions (words not in the source text have been added in the target text)
ItmightturnoutthatthesmallsampleofMToutputselectedforevaluationis
not representative enough of each engine’s performance, and, ideally, the com-
parison should be repeated on different samples before choosing the best engine
or system. However, while large institutions may have the means of conducting
large-scale evaluation campaigns, smaller translation services and freelancers
may do better to turn to automatic metrics and measuring post-editing effort.
2.5 Using automatic evaluation metrics
Being much faster and cheaper than human assessment, automatic evaluation
metrics(AEMs)allowMTuserstoassessthequalityofMToutputsasfrequently
as required. For example, if you are training your engine, running tests after
each change allows you to check whether your engine has improved for your
purposes. If you are not training an engine yourself, but are able to choose one
fromamongseveralforagivenproject,AEMsallowyoutoevaluatemultipleMT
outputs for the same source text sample.
Human translators often produce widely different translations for the same
source text. MT systems therefore cannot be expected to match a human trans-
lation exactly. But because a machine translation that is very similar to a human
translation might be better than one that differs greatly from it, many AEMs
are based on the principle of similarity: the evaluation tool is fed both a human-
generated“goldstandard”or referencetranslation ,andthesystemoutput,known
as thecandidate translation (sometimes called hypothesis ). It then compares the
candidateagainstthereferencetranslationandcomputesthesimilarityordissim-
ilarity. To take variation across reference translations into account, some evalu-
ation tools can be fed multiple reference translations.4
A large number of AEMs, or variations of existing AEMs, have been proposed
over the last two decades. In this section we concentrate on just a handful of
AEMs however, basing our selection on what readers are likely to encounter in
4In such cases, a decision needs to be made on how to compute the length of the reference
translation. Multi-reference BLEU, for example, uses the length of the reference “closest in
size to the candidate translation” (Qin & Specia 2015: 114)
59