Dorothy Kenny
the basic contents of a web page, for example, then this might be true. Such uses,
whichoftenfallundertheheadingofmachinetranslationfor assimilation ,gener-
ally involve low-stakes, private use of the translated text in question, with little
riskofreputationalorotherdamage.If,however,youwanttousemachinetrans-
lation for dissemination , for example to publish your blog in a second language,
ortoadvertiseyourbusiness,thenitiswisetounderstandtherisksinvolvedand
even to take measures to mitigate them. The ability to do so is a component of
what is now known as machine translation literacy (Bowker & Ciro 2019). Other
components include having a basic understanding of how machine translation
actually works, and of the wider societal, economic and environmental implica-
tions of its use. While this might seem like esoteric knowledge, it turns out to be
highly transferable, as contemporary machine translation is based on the same
principlesasawholehostofothertechnologiesthatarecontributingtoprofound
changes in many aspects of contemporary life, and especially how we work. In
short, machine translation is now, for the most part, an application of machine
learning, and more specifically of deep learning. These concepts are explained
briefly below, and treated in greater depth by Pérez-Ortiz et al. (2022 [this vol-
ume])onhowneuralmachinetranslationworks.Ifyouareatranslationstudent,
a professional translator, or are employed in some other capacity in the trans-
lation industry, then you are probably strongly motivated to learn about what
happens“underthehood”inmachinetranslationsystems.Youareprobablyalso
interested in how you can get the best out of the technology, by customizing it
for your needs. This is addressed in Ramírez-Sánchez (2022 [this volume]). The
following paragraphs, on the other hand, should be read by anyone who is cu-
rious about how machine translation can be said to be the linguist’s entrée into
the wonderful world of machine learning.
6 Artificial intelligence, machine learning and machine
translation
Contemporary machine translation is frequently mentioned alongside a num-
ber of other related concepts, including artificial intelligence, machine learning,
artificial neural networks and deep learning, some of which can be difficult to
differentiate for the uninitiated. Sources like Goodfellow et al. 2016 use a Venn
diagramtoexplainhowtheyrelatetoeachother.Artificialintelligence(AI)isthe
mostgeneralcategory,representedbythebiggestcircle.Itisoftendefinedasthe
branch of computer science that aims to create machines – or more specifically
computer programs – that can solve problems of the kind that would normally
34