Dorothy Kenny
more sense if we say that vectors are quite good at representing relationships
between words. The vector [1.20, 2.80, 5.50], for example, could be the vector for
pear. It differs from the vector for applein just the last number. If we see the
numbers in the vector as representing dimensions in an imaginary three dimen-
sional space, this would make the words appleandpearvery close to each other.
And presumably they would both be far from less related words, like helicopter
orvery. Vectors have other interesting properties that make them particularly
attractive to computer scientists. You can add a vector to another vector, for ex-
ample, or multiply them and so on. Try doing that with the words themselves,
or with drawings of apples and pears!
So how did our vectors for appleandpearend up so suspiciously similar in
the above example? The truth is, we just made them up. In a real NMT scenario,
wewouldgetacomputerprogramto learnsuitablevectorsforallinstancesofall
words in our corpus directly from that corpus. (Remember, in machine learning,
the computer program has to work these things out for itself, with or without
humansupervision.)Thevector-basedrepresentationsofwordsthatthemachine
learnsarecalled wordembeddings .Thereasonwhyembeddingsforrelatedwords
enduplookingsimilartoeachotheristhattheyarebuiltuponthebasisofwhere
particularwordsarefoundinthetrainingdata.Ifitturnsoutthattwowordstend
to keep turning up in the same or similar co-texts – both appleandpearoccur
very regularly before the word treefor example; both appear regularly after peel,
sliceanddice– then they will end up with similar embeddings.
Word embeddings are not built in one go, but rather in successive layers, as
described in Pérez-Ortiz et al. (2022 [this volume]). An artificial neural network
that has multiple layers sandwiched between its external layers is known as a
deep neural network .
Deep learning , in turn, is simply the branch of machine learning that uses mul-
tiplelayerstobuildrepresentations.Inadeepneuralnetwork,theexternallayers
correspond to inputs and outputs of the network and are visible to the human
analyst. The intermediary, or hidden, layers have traditionally been less open to
scrutiny, however, giving deep learning a reputation for opacity, and encourag-
ing some commentators to misleadingly use the word “magic” to describe the
internal workings of deep neural networks. The mystique of NMT is added to
whenbigtechcompaniesreportontheirsuccessesinbuildingmultilingualtrans-
lation models, sometimes involving hundreds of languages, and which can cope
with translation between languages for which there was no “direct” bilingual
trainingdata.19ResearchersinAIhavenotbeenoblivioustoproblemscausedby
19See https://ai.googleblog.com/2016/11/zero-shot-translation-with-googles.html and https://
about.fb.com/news/2020/10/first-multilingual-machine-translation-model.
42