5 How to deal with errors in machine translation: Post-editing
3.1 Traditional, adaptive and interactive post-editing
Above, we have outlined the typical interface used for post-editing in a tradi-
tional translation setting using a TM tool, with the MT match appearing as a
static suggestion that can be selected and edited or discarded in favour of a TM
match or full translation of the source sentence. As with all technologies, new
inventions appear and we now have some variations on the default, traditional
set up. Two such innovations are adaptive MT and interactive MT.
Adaptive MT is a feature developed by TM/MT integrators whereby the MT
system learns in real time from the edits implemented by the translator. This
tacklesoneoftheweaknessesofMTthattranslatorspreviouslyfoundfrustrating,
i.e.theywouldfixanerrorgeneratedbytheMTsystem,butthesystemwouldnot
learn from their revisions. Therefore, if the same sentence occurred again later
on, the post-editor had to fix the error again. The integration with translation
memory tackled this problem to some extent: Once a sentence was fixed in a
TM environment, it would be saved to the TM database. If the same sentence
reoccurred later on, it would be presented to the translator as an exact match
from the TM database. However, outside that TM environment with that exact
database, the MT system would reproduce the error. With adaptive MT, the MT
system “learns” from the edit and, theoretically, should adapt so that the same
error is not produced by the MT system again. An example of a tool where this
feature has been implemented is Trados Studio.
Interactive MT can be seen as a special form of adaptive MT. Whereas the
default way of working with MT is as described above, where the MT system
pre-translates the entire segment and it is then presented in full to the transla-
tor, interactive MT reacts to each decision the translator makes word by word,
phrase by phrase. As the translator accepts or confirms a word, the MT system
adjuststheoutputinrealtime.Thisisaconsiderablydifferentwayofinteracting
with MT output, but it is similar to the concept of predictive texting, to which
many people have become accustomed. Lilt is an example of a tool where this
is one of the primary features. In fact, Lilt is positioned explicitly as an adaptive
andinteractive interface.2(For other examples of interactive MT, see Torregrosa
Rivero 2018.)
Interactive MT calls into question the term “post-editing”. As explained ear-
lier, this term came into use many decades ago when the editing was always
doneafterthe full text had been translated by the MT system and returned to
the requester. With the interactive mode, the machine translation happens in
real time, changing as the translator makes decisions in the current moment. As
2https://lilt.com, last accessed June 2022
113