3 How to choose a suitable neural machine translation solution
2.5.1.1 𝑛-grams
𝑛-grams (see Kenny 2022 [this volume]) are normally understood in translation
asn-word sequences. In our example sentence, “battery” is a 1-gram or unigram ,
“battery pack” is a 2-gram or bigramand “battery pack is” is a 3-gram or trigram.
Other orders of n-gram are simply called 4-gram, 5-gram, etc., making “battery
pack is attached” a 4-gram.
𝑛-grams are commonly used in language modelling, where, for example, a tri-
gram probability states the probability of seeing a word given that you have
already seen the two words before it.
When we discuss AEMs, n-grams are merely n-word sequences in the candi-
datetranslationthatalsooccurinthereferencetranslation.Morerecently,AEMs
havebeenproposedwhichconsidersequencesofcharactersinsteadofwords. N-
grams are then understood as sequences of ncharacters, rather than sequences
ofnwords.
We will be using the notion of n-grams asn-word sequences when discussing
BLEU(see2.5.4.),andof n-grams asn-charactersequences whendiscussingChrF3
(see 2.5.5).
2.5.1.2 Precision and recall
Precision is a very basic concept used in various branches of natural language
processing. It can be explained using a very simple example. If a teacher asked a
student to name the days of the week in English, and the student replied “Mon-
day, Tuesday”, then the student would have given two correct answers and no
incorrect answers. Because precision is understood as the ratio of correct an-
swers given to the total number of answers given, the student would score two
out of two, which is equal to an impressive precision score of 100%.
But the teacher would see the student’s answer as very problematic, because
the teacher knows what the answer should have been , and that the student has
neglectedtomentionfiveofthesevendaysoftheweek.Theteachercouldthere-
fore object that the student’s recallis bad, where recall is understood as the ratio
of correct answers given to the total number of correct answers (in the ideal re-
ply). In this case, the student’s recall score would be two out of seven, or just
under 29%.
InthecontextoftheautomaticevaluationofMT,precisioncomputestheratio
of correct words in the candidate translation, i.e., those that also occur in the
reference translation, to the total number of words in the candidate:
63