1 Europe, multilingualism and machine translation
2020)andthiswouldbedifficulttohandleforallEUdocumentation.Forthisrea-
son, there are norms to establish which documents are translated into the other
23 languages and which are translated just into the three procedural languages.
TheEuropeanCommission’sDirectorate-GeneralforTranslation(DGT)trans-
lates texts for the institutions and the citizens of the EU. As of 2022 it produces
more than 2.75 million translated pages per year, 91% of which are translations
fromEnglish,2%fromFrench,justunder1%fromSpanish,andslightlylessagain
from German. Other source languages combined account for around 5% of trans-
lation activity. Of all translated documents, 63% are translated internally by the
DGT and 37% are outsourced to external companies. Some 55% of translations
involve EU law-making, 22% external communication and the web, 12% commu-
nicationwithotherEUinstitutionsandnationalparliaments,5%correspondence
with EU citizens, 4% other official documents, and 2% public consultation on EU
policies. The translation budget for 2022 was 355 million euros, or 0.2% of the
whole EU budget (European Commission, Directorate-General for Translation
2022).
2.2 Machine translation enters the fray
The DGT has an in-house staff of 2,000, between linguists and support staff, and
works with several thousand selected external translators (European Commis-
sion, Directorate-General for Translation 2022). The translations they produce,
in all language combinations, are stored in the Euramis system (the EURopean
Advanced Multilingual Information System), which includes, for instance, the
Acquis Communautaire , a corpus of the EU’s legislative documents in all 24 of
its official languages (European Commission, EU Science Hub 2022). In order to
increaseproductivityandreducecosts,theDGThasincorporatedmachinetrans-
lation into some of its workflows, most recently using a system called eTransla-
tion.2TheuseofeTranslationisexpectedtosavetimeandmoneyfortheEU,but
not only that. Eventually, as machine translation develops further, it could con-
tribute to an increase not only in the number of documents that are translated
and that otherwise would not have been considered for translation, but also, at
sometimeinthefuture,toanexpansionofthesetoflanguagesforwhichtransla-
tion is available, and hence to a better reflection of European language diversity;
an ideal that, without machine translation, would have been inconceivable just
a few years ago. This might be the only way that indigenous or regional minor-
itylanguages,aswellas“non-territorial”orevenimmigrantminoritylanguages,
will gain representation in the EU institutions alongside official, national lan-
guages.
2https://ec.europa.eu/info/resources-partners/machine-translation-public-administrations-
etranslation_en
5