Olga Torres-Hostench
• Rather than struggling through talks and conference papers in faltering
English,visitingprofessorswhowishtowouldexpressthemselvesintheir
native languages and translation/interpreting services would be provided,
either human (if there is funding), or machine.
• Multilingual activities would be organized on campus, in various fields
suchasmusic,theatre,cuisine,politics,literature,solidarity,socialservice,
etc.
In a truly multilingual university, local languages, English, and other lan-
guages brought by mobility students should be able to coexist. This strategy
would help international students integrate into a multilingual environment.
4 Conclusion
This chapter has championed the idea of machine translation as a tool to foster
multilingualisminEurope.Asseeninthechapter,theEUhaspublishedcharters,
treatiesandparliamentarydocumentspromotingmultilingualismasacorevalue
in Europe that has to be fostered and preserved. However, despite all efforts and
resources put into language learning, the goal of learning one’s “mother tongue
plus two” is difficult to reach. On the one hand, in practice, most EU citizens
are learning only English as a foreign language. On the other hand, the learning
curve in language learning is long and slow. In this context, machine translation
seems to offer some support to those who do not have the time or resources to
keep learning more and more languages.
Thechapteralsoexploresthecaseofuniversitiesassmallmultilingualcommu-
nitieswhocandesignlanguagepoliciesthatpromotemultilingualism.Language
policies may generate tensions on campuses for a number of reasons, but most
campuses are multilingual in practice nowadays, either through the internation-
alization/Englishizationoftheuniversityorduetothearrivalofforeignstudents.
In this context, the chapter explores the need to design language policies that
acknowledge the potential of machine translation to facilitate multilingualism,
without forgetting the challenges that machine translation presents, especially
those related to quality and ethics. As we say in Spanish, my aim here is to abrir
el melón (literally to ‘open the melon’) of machine translation in multilingual-
ism and language learning. Opening the melon means tackling a question that
needs to be dealt with sooner or later, although nobody wants to do it because
the consequences are unknown. In other words, nobody knows if the melon will
besweetenoughtoeat,butthereisonlyonewaytofindout.Evenifexistingma-
chine translation systems do not communicate the non-literal meaning of abrir
18