Olga Torres-Hostench
proportion? How many multilingual strategies are enough to become a multilin-
gual university? Which languages are needed to guarantee further integration
of the university student into the geographical region or local economy? Will
international students live in English-only “bubbles”?
Onatrulymultilingualcampus,universitiescouldwelcomelanguagesfromin-
ternationalstudentsaswellaslanguagesfromsociallyorculturallymarginalized
groups. Many local languages have been historically undervalued in academia,
with doubts expressed, for example about the extent of their academic vocabu-
lary. An extreme case in point is that of Quechua: the first doctoral thesis fully
written in Quechua was defended in 2019, some 468 years after the first univer-
sity was established in Peru.10
The e-course Multilingualism and plurilingualism in education developed as
part of the Erasmus+ project Multilingual Higher Education (2016), describes
the language policies for different multilingual universities. For instance, at the
University of Fribourg (Switzerland), there are courses offered in French and
German. At the University of Helsinki (Finland), there are courses offered in
Finnish, Swedish and English. At the Free University of Bozen-Bolzano, subjects
are taught in German, Italian and Ladin, and in English as a lingua franca. At
the University of Luxembourg, at least 20% of all courses should be taught in the
three languages of instruction – French, English and German.
Gao(2019:89)proposesmeasurementdimensionsandindicatorstodistinguish
between strategic aspiration and reality when it comes to internationalization.
Her proposals have been adapted below specifically to multilingualism, our field
of interest.
Under the dimension of university governance, actions promoting multilin-
gualism could include: (i) A supportive multilingual policy framework/organiza-
tional structure; (ii) A languages office/translation services; (iii) Machine trans-
lation infrastructure; (iv) Multilingual presence/signage at the university; (v) De-
velopment of multilingual awareness and skills among staff; (vi) Budget for mul-
tilingualisminitiatives;and (vii)Monitoring/evaluationsystems for multilingual
performance.
From an academic perspective, actions promoting multilingualism could in-
clude: (i) Multilingual courses (why does a course have to be in one and only
one language?); (ii) Multilingual teaching, normalizing multilingual classes; (iii)
Multilingual research and multilingual conferences; (iv) Multilingual students
in the class, involving interaction between international and local students; and
10https://www.theguardian.com/world/2019/oct/27/peru-student-roxana-quispe-collantes-
thesis-inca-language-quechua
16