9 Machine translation for language learners
from NMT outputs in some of the participants. It remains to be seen whether
learners will also be influenced by the errors in the MT. Without good MT lit-
eracy and good-enough knowledge of the target language, it is more likely that
they simply won’t see the mistakes. (See, for example, Loock & Léchauguette
2021.)
Our advice, therefore, is that you should always ask a linguist: your teacher is
a good start, as they will have a good idea of your L2 language proficiency and
of the good and bad sides of using FOMT for a given language pair in a given
context.
4.4 Situational parameters
In order to help language learners to decide when to use MT and when not, Ta-
ble 1 includes a short list of situations with suggested decision parameters. Our
proposal is based on the use of free online NMT solutions. (Note: If the answer
to parameter 1 in Table 1 is negative, then don’t use MT.)
5 Machine translation and competing digital resources
FOMT is quick and easy to use, and because you can use full texts as inputs, you
might be content with what you get and tempted to look no further. But more
often than not, MT won’t be enough, and in some situations it might even be
inappropriate. How does MT compare to other digital resources? Here is a list
of four questions that will be discussed in turn in what follows, with a view to
shedding light on what MT is, and what it is not. Gathering answers to these
questions is a good way of starting a discussion on uses of MT versus other
online tools:
• Do you use online dictionaries, and if so, which ones?
• How would you define a corpus?
• Have you used an online corpus before?
• Do you know what a concordance is?
The aim of the series of comparisons presented in what follows is to help L2
learners and foreign-language users in general reach beyond the immediacy of
MT. One of the key points that we would like to make with these comparisons
is the following: just because they are easy to use and provide you with almost
instant translations does not mean that NMT solutions should be the preferred
choice all the time.
197