5 How to deal with errors in machine translation: Post-editing
(2) Lexical error
a. The cat is very protective of her pups. She scratches anyone who tries
to touch them.
b. The cat is very protective of her kittens. She scratches anyone who
tries to touch them.
(3) Syntactic error
a. The new-born cygnets on the lake swam.
b. The new-born cygnets swamon the lake.
(4) Collocation error
a. The house had no flowing water .
b. The house had no running water .
2 Levels of post-editing and guidelines
One of the main objectives of MT is to enable more information to be trans-
lated between more languages, but to achieve this more rapidly than is possible
throughtranslationunaidedbyMTand,indeed,atalowercost.Theseobjectives
have led to a distinction between different levels of post-editing, mainly charac-
terised as light post-editing orfull post-editing .
Lightpost-editingisunderstoodtomeanthatonlyessentialfixesshouldbeim-
plemented and that this should be done rapidly. Full post-editing, on the other
hand,meansthatallerrorsintheMToutputshouldbefixed,andthisisexpected
to take more time when compared with “light” post-editing. For both levels, it is
generally expected that the translation can be produced faster than translation
without computer-assisted translation tools. The International Standards Organ-
isation(ISO)hasproducedastandardforpost-editingknownas“ISO18857:2017”
(ISO 2017). In this standard light post-editing is described as the “process of post-
editingtoobtainamerelycomprehensibletextwithoutanyattempttoproducea
product comparable to a product obtained by human translation” (p.2). Full post-
editing is defined as the “process of post-editing to obtain a product comparable
to a product obtained by human translation” (ibid.).
These definitions are, however, conceptually problematic. In the first instance,
it is difficult to articulate what exactly the differences are between the two, ex-
cept in the very general way we have described them above. What, exactly, is an
“essential” fix? This might differ from one organisation to the next, depending
onrequirements.Whatdoes“merelycomprehensible”meanandhowwouldthat
107