8 Custom machine translation
Some rules of thumb for organizing data are as follows:
• Overlap between the sentences in these three sets must be avoided at all
costs. Indeed, if possible, sentences from different sources should be used
in each set to guarantee their balance and independence.
• Trainingsetscanvaryinsizefromseveralthousandtoseveralmillionsen-
tences,butvalidationandtestsetsdonotnormallyexceed5,000sentences.
• Trainingdatamaycontaingenericandcustomdata,butvalidationandtest
datashouldbeasin-domainaspossibletotestthesuitabilityofthetrained
model for its intended purpose.
• When the training set contains both generic and in-domain data, the pro-
portion of in-domain data needs to be as large as possible, otherwise the
model will take most of its knowledge from the generic data.
Thus far, nothing we have mentioned is peculiar to custom engines; all this
preparation applies equally to generic and custom MT. The next steps, related
to pre-processing, also apply in both scenarios but may vary for particular lan-
guages or language combinations:
• Text needs to be tokenized: you need to provide the training process
with texts where tokens can be clearly identified. Tokens are the differ-
ent units into which one can divide a text. They can be words, spaces
or punctuation marks, for example. Tokenizing is mostly about identify-
ing word boundaries, and this sometimes involves guessing where a word
starts and ends, often using the spaces between written words to guide
us. Languages like Thai are not written with spaces between words how-
ever, which makes word tokenization challenging. Tokenizers for these
languages sometimes simply split sentences into chunks containing seem-
ingly arbitrary sequences of characters. This approach has the advantage
ofbeinglanguageindependent,evenifithasnoconceptof“unitsofmean-
ing”.
• Text may need to be truecased: we may want our training process to cap-
ture the fact that a word spelled with an initial capital letter at the begin-
ning of sentences in our training data (for example, The) is the same word
asthatspeltallinlowercase(inthiscase, the)inothersentencepositionsin
the data. We thus use truecasers to convert all words except proper names
181