Caroline Rossi & Alice Carré
Source text: Ceci n’est pas une pipe.
Candidate Translation (fictional): That is not a pipe .
Reference: This is not a pipe .
Figure9:candidateandreferencetranslationforthesentenceCecin’est
pas une pipe, showing one 4-gram overlap.
Because the BLEU score computes the ratio of n-grams in the candidate trans-
lationthatalsooccurinthereferencetranslation,itisaprecisionmetric.Table12
thus presents the precision scores (expressed as a ratio and a decimal fraction)
for each order of n-gram in our candidate translation.16
Table 12: Precision (from 1-grams to 4-grams) for the candidate trans-
lation ‘That is not a pipe’.
Metric
Precision (1-gram) 5/6 0.83
Precision (2-gram) 4/5 0.80
Precision (3-gram) 3/4 0.75
Precision (4-gram) 2/3 0.66
TocomputeanoverallBLEUscoreforacandidatetranslation,wecomputethe
geometric mean (a special type of “average”) of these individual precision scores.
It turns out to be just under 0.76 or 76%.17(This is actually a very high BLEU
score, but then the example was a very simple one.)
Itshouldbenoted,however,thatBLEUscoresareusuallycomputedoverentire
corpora, not individual sentences. And because precision metrics can be tricked
by systems that produce translations only for words the system is sure of (think
of the student who refuses to name more days of the week, in case they get any
wrong),BLEUusesa brevitypenalty .Thebrevitypenaltyistheratiobetweenthe
numberofwordsinthecandidatetranslationandinthereferencetranslation(for
more on this, see Koehn 2020: 227). It kicks in when the candidate translation is
shorter than the reference translation. No brevity penalty is imposed in the case
16The presentation used in Table 12 is borrowed from (Koehn 2010: 227).
17Readers can use familiar spreadsheet software to calculate geometric means. A specifically-
designed BLEU score calculator may also need to take into account any extra weight for, e.g.,
longern-grams, and should have a way of smoothing out any zeros that appear in the n-gram
precision scores. For details, see Post (2018).
72