2 Human and machine translation
meaning. What we are more likely to agree on is the idea that translations ap-
proximate their source texts. For all sorts of reasons, translators have to make
decisions about what to prioritize when translating, what they need to say and
what they should leave up to readers to work out for themselves.2The mean-
ings that they help target-text readers to construct for themselves are likely to
be compatible to a very large extent with the meanings that source-text readers
construct, but in many cases they will not be identical. And that is generally not
a problem.
But if we cannot call the relationship between a source text and a target text –
or more probably snippets of such texts – one of “same meaning”, then what can
we call it? One answer is to call this relationship one of equivalence . Equivalence
asatermhasachequeredhistoryintranslationstudies,butifitisunderstoodasa
relationshipthatemergesfromthedecision-makingofatranslator,arelationship
thatarisesbetweentwotextsnippetsbecausethetranslatorhasdeemedthemto
be of equal value in their respective co-texts and contexts, then equivalence can
be a perfectly serviceable term. It allows us to say things like “salió” in example
(7) is equivalent to “he stomped” in example (8). This equivalence is clearly not
fixedforalleternity,anditcertainlycannotbegeneralizedtoallothercontextsin
which the word “stomped” might appear, but this does not matter, if we concede
that “salió” was a fair exchange for “he stomped” in this particular case.3
2 What makes translation difficult?
Books about machine translation frequently start with discussions of why trans-
lation is difficult, homing in on the kind of monolingual ambiguity and the sys-
tematic differences between languages alluded to above. Inter-linguistic differ-
ences might also be exemplified using cases where two languages are said to
distribute meaning differently across the words in equivalent sentences. In ex-
amples (9) and (10), taken from the proceedings of the European Parliament, for
example, the fact of liking something is expressed in the verb “like” in English,
and what is liked is expressed in a complement to that verb “working with you”.
In German, what is liked is expressed in the verb “kooperiere”, while the fact of
liking is expressed in an adverb “gern”.
2The examples we have given here are primarily caused by mismatches between linguistic sys-
tems,butatranslatormightchosetoomitorchangeadetailinasourcetextforculturalreasons,
to avoid confusing readers with unfamiliar references, or even to avoid offending readers or a
censor. Or they may be constrained by space, as often happens in the production of subtitles.
3The idea of equivalence being based on exchange value is developed in the work of the trans-
lation scholar Anthony Pym. See, for example, Pym (2010).
27