3 How to choose a suitable neural machine translation solution
Table 2: Example of mistranslation of an idiomatic expression (under-
lined)
French source textaEnglish NMT output
L’indépendance du parquet, véritable
tarteàlacrèmeremisesurleplateauà
chaquecampagneprésidentielle,était
aussi une proposition du candidat
Macron. Il ne l’a pas tenue.The independence of the public pros-
ecutor’s office, a veritable pie in the
sky put forward in every presidential
campaign,wasalsoaproposalbycan-
didate Macron. He did not keep it.
aFrench source text: https://www.grasset.fr/livres/ministere-de-linjustice-9782246827504
fluent the MT output, the more caution is needed: recent studies have shown
thatstudents’correctionrateswerelowerwithNMTthanotherlessfluenttypes
of MT (Yamada 2019). Getting used to the recurrent problems found in NMT out-
puts for a given language pair (and domain) will help you detect them and fix
them more efficiently.
To conclude, even though NMT quality has undeniably been getting better, it
is probably not easier to deal with than other types of MT, and MT is never a
simple recipe for success. Instead, you will need to pay attention to small mis-
takes hidden in a fluent MT output, and to carefully consider your needs before
deciding whether an MT solution is appropriate.
2 Choosing a suitable MT engine for specialized
translation purposes
While the previous section has been mostly concerned with general aspects of
NMT use and assessment, choosing a suitable MT engine for professional trans-
lation purposes means taking into account a variety of other aspects. Crucially,
an MT engine that suits your professional purposes has to respect the privacy
requirements of your client, be seamlessly buildable into your workflow, offer
your language pairs and provide you with an output that you can post-edit with
minimal effort to meet your client’s needs. The quality of the output will depend
on the specialized domain and text type, the trainability of the engine, and the
pre-editing and post-editing effort you are willing to put in.
55