A. Carré, D. Kenny, C. Rossi, P. Sánchez Gijón & O. Torres-Hostench
Enkin&Mejías-Bikandi(2016)propose(butdonottest)exercisesinwhichstu-
dents are presented with machine translations into Spanish of sentences involv-
ing “structures of interest” in English, and where contrastive differences mean
that MT traditionally has not been very successful. This is the case, for exam-
ple, with non-finite subordinate clauses that are best translated into Spanish us-
ing finite subordinate clauses. The idea is that students can reflect on where the
machine goes wrong, thus honing their own metalinguistic, and especially con-
trastive awareness. The authors note, however, that as MT improves, “materials
may need to be updated” (Enkin & Mejías-Bikandi 2016: 145). It is probably fair
to say, however, that neural MT engines for language pairs like English-Spanish
have already reached such a level of quality that it is no longer reasonable to
expect them to translate any given structure of interest incorrectly, as a matter
of course, and that the kind of exercise envisaged by these authors needs to be
rethought,sothatstudentsareencouragedtoreflectonthesuccesses,ratherthan
the failures, of MT.
The same observation can be made about studies that rely on learners correct-
ing errors in MT output. Not only can exposure to “bad models” (Niño 2009) be
controversial in language learning, but it might also be increasingly difficult to
spot errors in contemporary neural MT in the first place (Castilho et al. 2017;
Loock & Léchauguette 2021), making post-editing type tasks (see O’Brien 2022
[this volume]) less suitable for use in certain language learning contexts than
was previously the case (cf. Zhang & Torres-Hostench 2019).2
Thue Vold (2018) reports on another study on metalinguistic awareness. This
time learners of French as an L3 in an upper secondary school in Norway had to
read two different machine-translated versions of the same text (one translated
byGoogleTranslate,theotherbyMicrosoft’sBingTranslator),decidewhichma-
chine translated version was better and explain why. The exact proficiency level
of the students was not ascertained, although the author ( Thue Vold 2018: 73)
intimates that it was unlikely to be above B1 on the Common European Frame-
workofReferenceforLanguages.3ThueVoldconcludesthatwhiletheuseofMT
texts to develop learners’ metalinguistic awareness has “considerable potential”,
“training,scaffoldingtechniquesandguidancefromtheteacherareofparamount
importance” (ibid.: 89) as, left to their own devices, learners may not explore
fruitful avenues of analysis, and their group conversation may even reinforce
misconceptions about language (ibid.).
2Having said that, recent studies, like that conducted by Loock & Léchauguette (2021), may
be more interested in developing MT literacy – rather than metalinguistic awareness per se
– among language learners, and teacher-guided error analysis of MT output may serve this
purpose well.
3https://www.coe.int/en/web/common-european-framework-reference-languages
192