Caroline Rossi & Alice Carré
and measures that can be used to reach beyond the apparent ease and fluency of
NMT outputs.
The overarching question that this chapter seeks to answer is: how can NMT
solutions be assessed in a trustworthy and useful way? The answer may vary,
for example, according to use cases and text types. In what follows, we explain
thekeyissueswithMTevaluation,withaviewtohelpinguserstochooseanMT
engine that suits their specific needs.
1.1 Assessing Machine Translation quality: What are we talking
about?
Starting from a broad definition of quality in translation, we see that it covers
both product and process: “Quality in translation is both the quality of an end-
product (the translated material) and the quality of the transaction (the service
provided)”(Gouadec2010:270).Besides,translationqualityassessmentwillvery
much depend on the context in which the translation is done, and the expecta-
tionsoftranslatortrainerswillcertainlydifferfromthoseofaclientwhoneedsa
translationforspecificpurposes.Inotherwords,“thenotionofqualityisrelative”
(Grbić 2008: 232). In translation studies, quality has been notoriously difficult to
define and inevitably variable: a number of review studies thus relate changes in
translation theories to changing views of quality (see e.g. Drugan 2013; House
2015). And when it comes to assessing the quality of MT outputs, different def-
initions of quality are again used. “The evolution and widespread adoption of
translation technologies, especially machine translation (MT), have resulted in a
plethora of typically implicit and differently operationalized definitions of qual-
ity and respective measures thereof” (Doherty 2017: 131). As far as MT is con-
cerned, quality has been seen more as a means to an end (namely improving
systems), and so a pragmatic approach has prevailed, often involving a combina-
tion of human and automatic evaluation (Doherty 2017: 133). Before moving on
to present existing means of evaluation and how they might be combined, let us
explain why a pragmatic approach is needed.
From the point of view of MT users, the quality of an MT output is a complex
thing to assess. Indeed, if quality crucially depends upon the system used, the
context of the translation and the needs of end-users are also key factors to take
into account. Consider a fairly simple example: you have probably found it easy
to adjust to poorly translated instructions in a user manual, because you already
had quite a clear idea of how to use the product you had bought, or because
the pictures were enough to guide you. In such circumstances, we are likely to
52