9 Machine translation for language learners
3.4 Tips on using MT in language learning
The jury is still out on the precise benefits of using MT in language learning. It
islikely,however,thatsuchbenefitsdependonawholehostoffactorsincluding
students’ proficiency levels and the text genres used in L2 writing tasks (see
Chung & Ahn 2021), as well as the language pair concerned (see §4.1 below).
What is increasingly agreed upon in existing research is, however, that:
• Language learners use MT and rather than trying to outlaw its use, it is
better to take a nuanced approach, based on an understanding of where
MT can be more or less helpful, depending, perhaps, on the extent and
context of use.
• Language learners make better use of MT when they have received appro-
priate training.
• LanguagelearnerscangenerallybenefitmorefromMTiftheyalreadyhave
reasonablygoodproficiencyintheforeignlanguage(O’Neill2012;Resende
& Way 2021).
Assuming that we do embrace MT in language-learning contexts there are
some basic points that should be noted by both teachers and learners, as they
may not be self-evident (see also Bowker 2020).
First, there is more than one option available to learners who wish to use MT.
Many learners appear to be aware only of Google Translate (see, for example,
Dorst et al. 2022), but there is much to be learned by comparing the outputs of
different FOMT systems, such as Bing Translator, DeepL or Baidu.
Second, MT outputs change over time as engines are re-trained or improved
by users. This means that systems should not be written off based on a single
use. It also means that researchers who use FOMT in their publications should
always say exactly when they created the outputs in question, but this is rarely
done.
Third, if you are using a FOMT system to create a language-learning exercise,
to make a point about the technology, or to help you with a written composi-
tion, you should make sure that you give the system a fair chance to succeed.
Very slight changes in input can have a big impact on outputs. An example may
help here: in a generally very helpful discussion of MT in L2 learning, Ducar &
Schocket (2018: 785) present an example of where Google Translate apparently
produces a poor output based on “the more frequent and literal meaning of the
word milk rather than the intended metaphorical meaning.” The example is re-
produced here in Figure 1.
193