A. Carré, D. Kenny, C. Rossi, P. Sánchez Gijón & O. Torres-Hostench
MT are, among other factors. These factors, which are often subsumed under
the heading of MT literacy (Bowker & Ciro 2019) have been covered in depth in
Chapters 2 to 6 of this book. Torres-Hostench (2022 [this volume]), meanwhile,
presented compelling arguments as to why MT needs to be considered as a vital
building block of multilingual societies alongside language learning. What has
been missing so far is a deeper engagement with the use of MT withinlanguage
learning. In this chapter we aim to complete the jigsaw by addressing precisely
this issue. We start by looking at the role of translation in language learning,
and then ask whether it is acceptable to use MT for this purpose, and what ben-
efits can be gained by doing so. We go on to suggest contexts in which language
learners should or should not use MT, depending on a number of contextual pa-
rameters, and given the other, often more appropriate digital resources available
to them. Finally, we give practical examples of how MT can be used in language
learning contexts.
2 Translation in language learning
Before considering the role of MT in language learning, it is worth remember-
ing that the role translation itself might play in language learning has long been
a matter of debate. The much criticized grammar-translation method, in which
learners were asked to learn vocabulary and grammar rules before translating
sentences out of context, is generally rejected as a narrow pedagogical use of
translation, but this rejection is itself based on a very narrow understanding of
translation.Atthesametime,thereisrenewedinterestinwhatCook(2010)aptly
dubbed TILT (Translation in Language Teaching) and “studies exploring transla-
tioninthelanguageclassroomhavemultipliedinthelastdecadewithinavariety
of disciplines” (Pintado Gutiérrez 2018: 12). Reported benefits include improved
“plurilingual, pluricultural and communicative competences” as well as better
writing skills, language awareness and control (ibid.: 13). The use of translation
in the language classroom has also been shown to reduce anxiety and cognitive
load among language learners (Kelly & Bruen 2017). The vibrancy of TILT is ex-
emplified in sources such as Noriega-Sánchez et al. (2021), which presents the
latest trends in the integration of translation-related activities in the language
curriculum.
188