Olga Torres-Hostench
2.3 What does multilingualism mean to the EU?
Policies on multilingualism are a way of organizing the above-mentioned lan-
guage diversity, and affirming its richness. In the EU, multilingualism is also
seen as a means of social cohesion and worker mobility: “[l]anguage compe-
tences contribute to the mobility, employability and personal development of
European citizens” (Council of the EU 2014).
A multilingual approach to linguistic policies aims at promoting languages
not only in multilingual states but also within organizations. We may talk about
multilingualism in many forms, including:
• A multilingual policy, which is the policy of an organization, company or
institution to use more than two languages for its internal and external
communication.
• A multilingual European Union, which means that different languages co-
exist in the EU.
• A multilingual citizen, who has the capacity to use several languages.
• Amultilingualhealthsystem,whichisahealthsystemwhichincorporates
linguistic diversity to improve health delivery to newly arrived people, for
instance.
ThemainEUpoliciesonmultilingualismarereflectedinaseriesofdocuments
(EuropeanCouncil2002;EuropeanCommission2008;CounciloftheEU2008a,b;
2011; 2014; European Council 2017).
In these EU policies and pronouncements on multilingualism, constant refer-
enceismadetolanguagelearningand,specifically,the“mothertongueplustwo”
policy, according to which citizens would learn “at least two foreign languages
from a very early age” (European Council 2002). But would implementation of
thispolicymakeEuropeancitizensmultilingualenough?Frommypointofview,
there is a need to incorporate further elements into European policies on multi-
lingualism.
Multilingualism is related to language policies, but that is not the full story.
Cenoz (2013), who provides a wide spectrum of definitions of multilingualism,
remindsusthatmultilingualismismultidimensional,involving,forexample,the
individual versus the social dimension, the proficiency versus use dimension,
bilingualism versus multilingualism, etc. It can also be applied to geographical
areas or social spheres. Moreover, it can be studied from different perspectives,
6