Pilar Sánchez-Gijón & Dorothy Kenny
language rules, which stipulate the specific words or structures that are allowed
in a text, and prohibit others (see, for example, O’Brien 2003). Alternatively, it
can involve applying a short list of simple “fixes” to a text, to correct wrong
spellings, or impose standard punctuation, for example. Depending on the con-
text, it might involve both of the above. Whatever the case, its main purpose, as
understood here, is to improve the chances of getting a better quality target text
once the source text has been machine translated. In cases where a source text is
tobetranslatedintomultipletargetlanguages,thebenefitsofpre-editingshould,
in theory, be observed over and over again in each of the target language texts.
It is thus traditionally recommended in multilingual translation workflows.
Another way to ensure that a text is translatable is to write it that way in
the first place. Writers whose work will ultimately be translated into multiple
languages are thus often asked to write with a global audience in mind. As well
as applying principles of “clear writing”, they are asked, for example, to avoid
references that may not be easily understood in cultures other than their own.
This applies also to writers whose work will be read in the original language by
international readers who are not native speakers of that language.
Given their similar aims, it is not surprising that there is often overlap be-
tween pre-editing rules, controlled languages and guidelines for clear writing or
writing for global audiences. In this chapter, we give an overview of the kind
of guidance commonly encountered in such sources, without attempting to be
exhaustive. The reader must also remember that such guidance is always lan-
guage specific: advice about the use of tense forms, for example, applies only
to languages that have grammatical tense. Many do not. Guidance can also be
language- pairspecific or specific to a particular machine translation (MT) type
or engine. A construction that caused problems in rule-based MT (RBMT) may
no longer be an issue in neural MT (NMT), or it might be associated with errors
in a neural engine trained on legal texts but not one trained on medical texts.
In the case of writing with MT in mind, what turns out to be useful advice thus
depends heavily on the context.
The advent of NMT, in particular, has made us rethink the usefulness of ad-
vice on pre-editing and controlled writing (see Marzouk & Hansen-Schirra 2019
and §2 below), but for much of the history of MT, pre-editing helped ensure the
success of the technology. A good knowledge of MT made it possible to predict
those aspects of the source language or the source text that would likely gener-
ate errors in translations produced by a given MT system, whether rule-based
or statistical. However, one of the aspects that characterize NMT is precisely its
lack of systematic error: it can be difficult to predict with any certainty what
type of error will occur, and so attempting to pre-empt particular errors may
82