6 Ethics and machine translation
demonstrated that our confidence in these companies is sometimes misplaced.
While technology opens up access to new avenues and benefits, it also exposes
the public to risk. By discussing some of the choices and risks inherent in the de-
velopmentanduseofMTsystemsinthischapter,Ihopetoguideusersinmaking
informedandethicaldecisions.Thefocusthroughoutismostly(butnotentirely)
on MT for dissemination, where MT output is not the final step in production.
2 The ethical use of MT by humans in MT system
development
2.1 Case studies of data use
Thissectionlooksatlegalandethicalissuesregardingtheuseoftranslationdata
inMTsystemdevelopment.AsPérez-Ortizetal.(2022[thisvolume])attest,data-
driven MT and particularly neural MT (NMT) requires a lot of data for training.1
WhileitmaybeperfectlylegaltoreusetranslationdatafortrainingMTsystems,
is it ethical? It may be helpful to introduce some of the issues to be discussed in
this section by considering the following examples.
Translator A has freely signed a contract with their regular employer to carry
out a translation on a freelance basis using a proprietary web-based platform,
giving explicit permission for their translation data to be reused for MT training.
TheemployertrainsMTsystemsusingthedatafromTranslatorAandothers.In
time, NMT quality improves for Translator A’s language pair to the extent that
thecompanymovesitstranslationworktopost-editingandimposesaunilateral
30% discount on their per-word payment rate. This discount is applied on the
basis that productivity has generally improved by roughly 30%, visible to the
companyfromthetranslationactivitydatagatheredviathetranslationplatform.
Inordertoraiserevenue,thecompanydecidestosellMTservicesexternally.This
includes some work for an arms manufacturer.
Translator B is opposed to MT as a matter of principle. B accepts work for a
companythatexpectstranslatorstosubmittheirtranslationmemorywithtrans-
latedtargettexts,whichtheywillrepurposeforfuturehumantranslation.Trans-
lator B is not aware that the work has been automatically assigned by an auto-
matedprojectmanagementsystem,butthereisnotranslationbriefandnodirect
communication with the company. Translator B is also not aware that the com-
pany will soon be acquired by a large conglomerate who will use all available
1Datarefers to recorded information in any form, usually stored digitally, and when data are
available in huge volumes and processed at scale, we talk of big data.
123