2 Human and machine translation
a problem to which we already know the answer. Typically, we ask it to predict
the translation of several sentences it has never seen before but for which we
already have good (human) translations that we set aside specifically for this
purpose.
When an NMT system has been trained to our satisfaction, it can be put into
use in a real translation scenario. We no longer talk about “testing” the system,
and instead talk about “using” it. When an NMT system is in actual use, most
people say that the system is “translating”. As with SMT, computer scientists
also use the term decoding for the moment when an NMT system produces an
output in the target language.
6.4.2 Representing words in NMT
We have already said that a mathematical model is a representation of some sys-
tem, event or phenomenon. There is much debate over the status of mathemat-
ical and other scientific models, but that need not detain us here. We will take
the view that a model represents something quite complex, with many intercon-
nected parts, and that if we want to talk about a simpler or more granular entity
– a number like 5, for example, or an object like an apple – we can simply use
the generic term representation to refer to ways in which that entity is depicted.
Representations are important, because, as Goodfellow et al. (2016) point out,
howideasarerepresentedaffectswhatwecandowiththem,incomputerscience
and in daily life. A good example of how representation affects human beings’
performance is given by the difference between Arabic and Roman numerals.
Most people would find it much easier to divide 125 by 5, for example, than to
divide CXXV by V, even though CXXV and 125 (and V and 5) represent exactly
the same quantity.
Words can also be seen as representing ideas. So the word apple, for example,
might be understood as representing a particular type of fruit. Another way of
representing the same fruit would be to draw a picture of it. The word and the
picture would have different properties, of course, which allow you to do differ-
ent things with them. You can spellcheck a (written) word, for example, but not
a drawing.
InNMTyetanothertypeofrepresentationisused:thevector,whichisafixed-
sized list of numbers. The word applecould be represented by a vector like [1.20,
2.80, 6.10] for example. To many people this seems incredible. It is difficult to
see how a list of numbers can represent a word.18Things start to make slightly
18Note how we have shifted here from talking about the representation of ideas to the represen-
tations of words. What we have in training corpora are millions of identifiable words. They
are what we try to represent in NMT.
41