Gema Ramírez-Sánchez
Afterapredeterminednumberoftrainingsteps(setbythevalidationfrequency),
the engine’s performance is evaluated, and then training resumes. When further
training fails to improve the engine’s performance, or the performance starts to
degrade, the training stops. There it is, our model!
4.6 Testing the custom model
Once we’ve trained an MT system, we need to test or evaluate it. The many
options for testing can be summarized as follows:
• Try it yourself (or ask someone else to try it)! If you know the languages
you are working with and the purpose for which the system was trained,
and you have the time, just take a bunch of sentences, translate them and
takealookattheresultingtranslation!Withthecorrecttools,youcanalso
inspect not just the one best translation output by the system, but also the
list ofn-best translations considered by it for each sentence.
• Measure it! There are automatic metrics that one can compute to see how
the system behaves (see Rossi & Carré 2022 [this volume]). Most metrics
are based on comparing the output of the system to a “reference” transla-
tion created by a professional (human) translator (see Rossi & Carré 2022
[this volume]). The meaning of these metrics can vary considerably: some
are useful for comparing two different systems with each other, but mean
verylittlebythemselves.Thisappliesto n-gramorcharacter-basedmetrics
such as BLEU (Papineni et al. 2002), METEOR (Denkowski & Lavie 2014)
and CHRF1-3 (Popović 2015). Others are useful to see how much work is
needed to turn the automatic translation into the professional translation.
This applies to post-editing effort-oriented metrics such as WER (Popović
& Ney 2007) or TER (Snover et al. 2006). Yet others tell you about the char-
acteristics of the individual texts translated by the system. Textual metrics
include those that measure lexical variety or lexical density. Finally, some
metrics are used to rank systems, and will tell you whether your system is
preferred to others.
• Get feedback from real-life usage! You can assess whether the system is
useful in a real setting, professional or casual, taking into account the pur-
pose of the system. Did you train a system to help people write e-mails? If
yes, then ask people to write e-mails using it and tell you about their expe-
rience.Didyoutrainasystemtohelppeopleunderstandrecipes?Thenask
users to follow recipes translated by your system and give you feedback.
184