6 Ethics and machine translation
2.5 Privacy, personal data
If data can render an individual identifiable, it can be considered personal data.
Thisincludestranslationmemorieswithanamedorcoded(pseudonymized)cre-
ator. Within the EU, the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR)3has re-
stricted the sharing and reuse of personal data since 2018, providing guidelines
fornationallegislationthatwouldimposeheavyfinesinthecaseofadatabreach.
Thishashadtheeffectofincreasingcybersecurityandlimitingtheuseofservers
innon-EUlocations.Anysecondaryuseofpersonaldatamustbecoveredbythe
permissions given for the original use, with some exceptions for research pur-
poses. There are a number of other national regulations outside of the EU that
govern the use of personal data.
Companies should report any data breach, but there have been many media
reports of breaches being covered up. One reason to do so is to avoid GDPR
fines (of up to €20 million or 4% of annual turnover, whichever is the greater,
accordingtoArticle83ofthe Regulation),butcompaniesmayalso wishtoavoid
negative publicity, loss of consumer confidence, and loss of stock market value,
in the case of publicly-traded companies. Ideally, transparency would lead to
greater public trust in an organization, but the problem of data security in large
organizations is not always well understood, with their sheer size presenting a
data protection difficulty. What is more, not all data breaches are equal, as they
canbedueto“ethicalhackers”whoareemployedbytheorganizationtoidentify
cybersecurityvulnerabilitiesorwhoidentifyvulnerabilitiestoprotectthepublic,
or malicious hackers who intend to access data for their own gain.
Oncepersonalattributesareremovedanddataareanonymized,personaldata
becomes(just)data, andshareable.4Ofcourse,evenwithoutthe metadata,some
data may be recognizable if its content or style is identifiable or if biometric data
could be used to link to an individual. If data are shared or pooled, data from an
individualorgroupmaybeusedtomakeinferences,forexampleaboutattributes
thatarecarefullyprotectedbytheGDPRsuchasraceorsexuality.Astheseinfer-
ences are made on the basis of combining data rather than being explicitly con-
tainedinanysingledataset,theyarenotusuallycoveredbytheGDPR(Wachter
& Mittelstadt 2019). This presents a risk to “group privacy”, where a group may
be discriminated against due to the content of data that does not identify any
individual (Floridi & Taddeo 2016).
3EU Regulation 2016/679, available from https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/
HTML/?uri=CELEX:32016R0679&from=EN
4There are a number of ongoing efforts to automate anonymization for translation data at the
time of writing, but this is difficult to do reliably.
127