8 Custom machine translation
based on a comparison of the machine’s output with translations already pro-
ducedbyprofessionaltranslators(seeRossi&Carré2022[thisvolume]).Inmost
cases, the more similar the machine output is to the human translation, the bet-
ter it is deemed to be. If the automatic metrics suggest that things are OK, and a
quickinspectionoftheoutputsuggeststhatitdoesnotpresentanymajorissues,
the system can be considered as a functional baseline. Otherwise, we keep train-
ing, maybe adding some pre-processing or post-processing. After each round of
training, we check our automatic metrics. When the scores are as good as we
think we can get them, we stop training.
Back on the newly discovered planet, as you progress in your learning pro-
cess, you discover that there is more than one translation for some words in the
same language combination, but that correspondents are consistent across texts
markedwiththesamestamp.Soyoudecidetoseparatethetextsbytheirstamps
and to compile specific correspondences in separate lists. You start further in-
specting non-stamped texts and then move to stamped ones. Stamped texts look
a bit different to non-stamped ones: for example, sentences tend to be very long
in some stamped texts while in non-stamped texts they are very short.
Given this situation, depending on how much data we have and the final goal
of the system, we could train an MT engine using only texts that share the same
stamp (and where the stamp represents a domain). Our in-domain system could
use both generic and domain-specific texts or just domain-specific ones. And we
will definitely make the most of state-of-the-art MT techniques to make the sys-
tem as domain-aware as possible. This is exactly what customization is about:
playing with data and techniques. In what follows we explain each of these ap-
proaches in basic terms. A more comprehensive survey of domain adaptation in
neural MT is provided by Saunders (2021).
3.2 Customization through data
MT can be adapted to fit a specific purpose by using specific texts: we can build
a very good MT system for mobile phone descriptions provided that we have a
sufficient number of texts that describe mobile phones and that they are trans-
lated into the language we want to target. We can also use monolingual texts
or bilingual vocabulary lists that are specific to the domain in question. This is
what we call in-domain data . The ideal situation is to have access to bilingual
in-domain data in the form of parallel sentences.3
3Pairs of source-target sentences that are translations of each other, and are ideally ordered as
theyappearedinthetextstheycamefrom,totakeadvantageoftheco-textinrecentsentences
(see Kenny 2022 [this volume]).
173