3 How to choose a suitable neural machine translation solution
2.3 Human evaluation
Human assessment relies on human evaluators assessing the output of one or
more systems. This is usually done sentence by sentence (or “segment” by “seg-
ment”), but document-level evaluations have also been carried out (see, for ex-
ample, Castilho 2020). Human evaluators are usually asked to score each seg-
ment using two different criteria. The first, known as adequacy , measures the
amount of meaning in the source segment that is rendered in the machine trans-
lated segment. Adequacy is usually measured on an ordinal scale: a typical scale
ranges from 1 (understood as indicating that none of the meaning expressed in
the source segment is expressed in the machine translated segment) to 4 (un-
derstood as meaning that all the meaning expressed in the source segment is
expressed in the machine translated segment). Sometimes five-point scales are
used,butwithanunevennumberofpointsinthescale,thereisalwaysariskthat
evaluatorswilloverusethemiddlepoint.Thesecondcriterion,knownas fluency,
measures “the extent to which the translation follows the rules and norms of the
target language” (Castilho et al. 2018: 18). In principle, fluency judgements can
be made without the evaluator even looking at the source segment. They also
usually rely on four-point ordinal scales, with 1 indicating that there is “no flu-
ency” in the machine translated segment, while 4 denotes a native-like segment
(Castilho 2020: 1152-1153). Adequacy and fluency evaluations are generally con-
sidered to be extremely time-consuming and, therefore, expensive to conduct.
A more straightforward — and thus faster — comparison of outputs from two
different MT systems can be conducted by simply asking evaluators to rank the
outputs, that is, to say which one is “better” without specifying why. This ap-
proach has been used by many MT providers to get fast feedback from online
users. A good example was Microsoft’s use of this approach to get user evalua-
tions of outputs from its statistical and neural MT systems in 2017, as reported
inMoorkens (2018).
Other MT providers have developed more elaborate interfaces to assist in hu-
man evaluations of MT outputs. Kantan AI, for example, offers a tool call Kan-
tanLQR (for “Language Quality Review”) which allows users to specify which
quality criteria (for example, adequacy, fluency, terminology use, etc.) are most
important for their purposes and then to compare up to four different MT out-
puts, based these quality indicators.2Tools like this are particularly useful, as
they provide visualizations, often in the form of pie charts and bar charts, of hu-
man evaluators’ scores for individual segments, and they can compute overall
2For more information, see: https://kantanmt.zendesk.com/hc/en-us/articles/115003644483-
What-is-KantanLQR- and https://twitter.com/i/status/1466392446552657927.
57