Introduction
the-art translation technology based on artificial neural networks – we first de-
scribe these technologies without recourse to mathematical concepts that may
not be familiar to readers. We attempt to use insightful explanations, and espe-
cially metaphors, that will help readers understand the general concepts that
inform the area. In so doing, we provide a gentle introduction to the contempo-
rary world of machine learning. We gradually build up a rich picture of machine
translation. In general, readers will find the earlier chapters less specialized than
the later ones, and earlier sections of later chapters less specialized than subse-
quent sections. Some readers may be able to skip some chapters completely, but
even machine translation specialists might benefit from reading “non-technical”
chapters, for example, on machine translation and ethics.
3 The structure of this book
ThisbookopenswithOlgaTorres-Hostench’sdiscussioninChapter1ofmultilin-
gualism, what it means, and how it is operationalized, in particular in the Euro-
pean Union. She makes the case for the considered integration of machine trans-
lation into both language learning and translation. In Chapter 2, Dorothy Kenny
discusses translation in general and machine translation in particular, aiming to
dispel some myths about translation before gently introducing the reader to the
basic concepts behind contemporary approaches to machine translation, includ-
ingartificialintelligenceandmachinelearning.Chapter3,byCarolineRossiand
Alice Carré, brings us into the world of machine translation evaluation, an area
of considerable scientific and economic importance. In Chapter 4, Pilar Sánchez-
Gijón and Dorothy Kenny address the ways in which we can make translation
easierformachinesbeforethefact,whileinChapter5,SharonO’Brienguidesus
through approaches to after-the-fact improvement of machine translated texts
through the activity known as post-editing . Chapter 6, by Joss Moorkens, dis-
cusses the many ethical issues that arise in contexts where machine translation
is used. Chapter 7 is the most technical chapter in the book. In it, Juan Antonio
Pérez-Ortiz, Mikel Forcada and Felipe Sánchez-Martínez explain how neural ma-
chine translation works, covering the basic techniques that are most commonly
used in contemporary systems. Gema Ramírez-Sánchez’s guide to custom neu-
ral machine translation follows in Chapter 8. The volume closes with a chapter
dedicated to machine translation and language learning, written by Alice Carré,
Dorothy Kenny, Caroline Rossi, Pilar Sánchez-Gijón and Olga Torres-Hostench.
vii