Gema Ramírez-Sánchez
3.2.1 How much data do we need?
It is difficult to say how much data is enough. For generic MT, the answer would
be take as much as you can get, then maybe filter it based on qualitative factors,
discarding, for example, very repetitive sentences (where there is not much to
learn from), very ugly sentences (e.g. ones made up mostly of numbers), or very
long sentences (which are too difficult to learn from). For custom MT, the an-
swer could be the same, but this time also taking into account that in-domain
data needs to represent a generous proportion of the whole training data set,
otherwise our system will not be able to learn how to produce in-domain trans-
lations.
The unspecific measure “a generous proportion” is used here on purpose as
we know that it is very rare to have enough in-domain data to train a system.
After all, we will need at least several million sentence pairs; maybe less than for
genericMT,butstillalot.So,wenormallyendupmixingtheavailablein-domain
data with generic or out-of-domain data.
Depending on the language combination, when adding the available in-
domain data to the out-of-domain data as the first step in customizing an MT
system, we are usually faced with one of two very different scenarios: we either
have too much data or too little data. When it comes to data, size matters.
3.2.1.1 A “too much” data scenario
A scenario in which we have too much data can lead us to impractical situations
inwhichweneedanunreasonableamountoftimeandnumberofserversupand
running to train systems. It is difficult to give a precise figure, so let’s say that
you have too much data when you realize that with less data, you get the same
results and, as a bonus, you need fewer computational resources and less time to
achieve them. (For more details on how developers use metrics such as BLEU to
tell if an engine has stopped learning, see Pérez-Ortiz et al. (2022 [this volume]),
especially 7.2).
In custom MT, the available in-domain data is prioritized and we use all of
it. For the out-of-domain data, however, we will need to select a subset of the
available parallel sentences. Data selection is normally performed using the in-
domaindataasa modelofwhat wewant.Selection canbedone automaticallyin
many different ways, for example by:
• Scoringtheout-of-domainsentencesbytextual,semanticorsyntacticsim-
ilarity to the in-domain ones
174