Dorothy Kenny
were extracted from the web and aligned with each other to create the multilin-
gual Europarl Corpus (Koehn 2005), which in turn gave a significant boost to
machine translation research. Aligned parallel corpora do not have to be in tmx
format. Often they take the form of files with thousands (or even millions) of
lines, each line occupied by a single sentence, whose position in the file matches
exactlythatofitstranslationinanotherfileinagiventargetlanguage,soline xin
the target language file contains the translation of line xin the source language
file.
5 What is machine translation?
Based on the definitions given at the start of this chapter, we can say that ma-
chine translation involves the automatic production of a target-language text on
the basis of a source-language text. As with other types of translation, we can
expect the target text to allow an interpretation that is in most ways compatible
with that of the source text. Although if we have already conceded that human
translations can result in slightly different meanings to their source texts, then
maybeweshouldallowmachinetranslationstodothesame.Theimportantthing
is that obvious divergences between source and target text, for example, where
Japanese gives more information than English, should be motivated by the lan-
guage pair, the genre or some other reasonable cause.
Machine translation was one of the first non-numerical applications of the
digital computers that emerged in the aftermath of the Second World War. Early
efforts to automate translation seem primitive by today’s standards, although
it has to be acknowledged that the protagonists were working with extremely
limited resources in the 1950s and 1960s (Hutchins 2000). Nevertheless, auto-
matic translation systems were in operation primarily in defence, government
and international organisations by the late 1960s and 1970s, and by the end of
the century their use was expanding in commercial settings. The technology be-
came available to millions of internet users in 1997, when the American search
engine AltaVista starting giving access to free, online machine translation un-
der the Babel Fish name. In the decades since then, the internet has expanded
rapidly, and now boasts some 4.66 billion users (Johnson 2021). By 2016, perhaps
the best-known free, online machine translation system, Google Translate, was
reported to have over half a billion users, translating over 100 billion words per
day and supporting 103 languages (Turovsky 2016).6In combination with search
6As of May 2022, Google Translate supports 133 different languages, although to varying de-
grees (Caswell 2022).
32