Joss Moorkens
datafor MTtraining andoffer itfor sale.Thedata shouldhaveallpersonal infor-
mation removed before being shared (see §2.5), but this information is retained
by accident when the data are uploaded to one purchaser. The company tries to
keep this quiet so as to avoid liability.
What ethical issues can you identify in these two scenarios? What would
change if the employers or translators made different ethical decisions? In the
following subsections, we look at data ownership, permissions, distribution, pri-
vacy, and legal frameworks for data sharing. These subsections will, it is hoped,
help guide your thinking about the above questions.
2.2 Data ownership
The commonly-used metaphor of data as oil suggests that big data is naturally
occurring, whereas in reality it was originally created by humans. The exponen-
tial growth in data produced in recent years has meant that there is now more
dataavailableforMTtrainingandmoredemandfortranslationthaneverbefore,
far more than is possible for human translators to produce. MT training data are
usually stored in the form of parallel or aligned bilingual segments of text that
have been translated by humans, often in translation memories (although MT
output is also sometimes used for MT training). The source of this translation
data is likely to be shared in public repositories, such as the European Commis-
sion’s Directorate-General for Translation data, which can be “re-used and dis-
seminated, free of charge… both for commercial and non-commercial purposes”
(Steinberger et al. 2012: 457), privately held repositories of translation data, or
parallel data crawled from the web.
TheBerneConvention,firstenactedin1886,formsthelegalbasisofcopyright
fortranslations,consideringthemtobederivativeworksthat“shallbeprotected
as original works without prejudice to the copyright in the original work” (Arti-
cle 2, World Intellectual Property Organization 1979). The convention grants the
authorofanoriginalworktheexclusiverighttoauthorizeatranslation,although
it fails to define “original work” or “originality”, allowing for different interpre-
tations in different jurisdictions. Troussel & Debussche (2014) believe that an
argument could be made for originality in a creative translation, although this
has yet to be tested in courts. The authors further believe that ownership rights
to a translation memory database may be asserted where there has been “a sub-
stantial investment in either the obtaining, verification or presentation of the
contents”, according to the European Database Directive (European Parliament
1996: Article 7). In practice, translation memories are usually sent to the client,
whether or not there is a contractual agreement in place for waiving any claim
of ownership on the part of the translator.
124