Chapter 9
Machine translation for language
learners
AliceCarréa,DorothyKennyb,CarolineRossia,PilarSánchez-
Gijónc& Olga Torres-Hostenchc
aUniversité Grenoble-AlpesbDublin City UniversitycUniversitat Autònoma de
Barcelona
Machine Translation (MT) has been controversial in second and foreign language
learning, but the strategic integration of MT might be beneficial to language learn-
ing in certain contexts. In this chapter we discuss the conditions in which MT can
be useful in language learning, set out digital alternatives to MT, and provide ex-
amples of how MT can support language learners.
1 Introduction
Machinetranslation(MT)hasbeencontroversialinsecondandforeignlanguage
learning,1with some commentators arguing that it can encourage plagiarism,
promoteerrorsordeflectlearnersfromwhattheyshouldbedoing.Insomecases,
however, MT has been found to help students complete certain tasks, and there
appears to be merit in considering MT as just one among many digital resources
that contemporary language learners can use. The successful integration of MT
into language learning requires us to understand, even at a basic level: how the
technologyworks,howwecanjudgethequalityofitsoutputs,howthoseoutputs
can be improved through intervention either before or after the fact of transla-
tion (through pre-editing or post-editing), and what the ethical issues in using
1Note that we use the generic terms language learning andlanguage learner in this chapter to
cover instances of foreign language learning and second and subsequent language learning. If
astudent’sfirstlanguageistheirL1,thenthelanguagelearningtowhichwerefercorresponds
to their learning of an L2, L3 or L n.
Alice Carré, Dorothy Kenny, Caroline Rossi, Pilar Sánchez-Gijón & Olga
Torres-Hostench. 2022. Machine translation for language learners. In
Dorothy Kenny (ed.), Machine translation for everyone: Empowering users in
the age of artificial intelligence , 187–207. Berlin: Language SciencePress. DOI:
10.5281/zenodo.6760024