Juan Antonio Pérez-Ortiz, Mikel L. Forcada & Felipe Sánchez-Martínez
similar, to the situation in which we pay attention to something or someone in
our everyday lives.
Byconvenientlyusingattentiontoconcentrateonsomewordsinthesentence,
the embedding vector corresponding to the word season, for example, will differ
between the sentences in examples 1 and 2 below:
1. The first episode will pick up right where the previous season left off.
2. Summer is the hottest season of the whole year.
In principle, it may sound as if the purpose of contextual word embeddings is
thatthedifferentmeaningsofawordgetdifferentrepresentations,but,whilethis
will be usually true, the idea goes beyond this. The contextual word embeddings
forseasonin the sentences “Winter is the coldest season of the year in polar and
temperate zones”, “Summer is the hottest season of the whole year” and even
“Of the whole year, summer is the hottest season” will all be different, although
presumably closer to each other than the representation of seasonin “The first
episode will pick up right where the previous season left off”. These divergences
result from the fact that the words in the sentences or the order in which they
are placed differ. Remarkably, the two instances of thein each of our examples
will get two different contextual vectors because the context of each instance is
also different.
Howarecontextualembeddingsmathematicallycomputedthroughattention?
Given the sentence in example 2 above (”Summer is the hottest season of the
whole year.”), the procedure starts by obtaining the non-contextual word embed-
dings that were introduced in Section 4. As the sentence has nine words, the
result is a collection of nine vectors which are the ingredients for the next step.
Now,inordertocomputethecontextualwordembeddingfortheword seasonin
the sentence, an attention vector is mathematically produced by the neural net-
work. This attention vector will have nine percentages representing the degree
ofattentionthatneedstobepaidtoeachofthewordsinthesentenceinorderto
obtain the representation of the word season. The element at a certain position
in the vector corresponds to the attention to the word at that position in the sen-
tence. For example, an attention vector [25%, 8%, 10%, 15%, 25%, 8%, 2%, 0%, 7%]
would indicate that in order to compute a contextual vector representation of
the word seasonin the running sentence, the word embeddings for summer and
seasonwill be equally highly relevant (together, they receive fifty percent of the
total attention), which makes sense as they are semantically connected to the
concept of a meteorological season. Notice that the preceding determiner gets
154