7 How neural machine translation works
forms(marching ,considering )andchopitoff,evenforunseenforms(suchas bart-
simpsoning );-ingwouldthenbeturnedintoacontextualembeddingcarryingits
atomic meaning.
7.2 Stopping criteria and metrics
As mentioned in section 3.5, in addition to a large training corpus, a small de-
velopment corpus is usually held out and not used for training. The purpose of
this corpus is to monitor the performance of the NMT system while it is being
trained, to decide, for instance, when training should stop. Training tries to min-
imise an error function (or, in NMT, actually maximise the probability of the
target sentences in the training corpus). One possible problem that may occur is
that training too deep on the training corpus hurts generalisation as the neural
network ends up memorising the example translations too much. This is where
the development corpus comes into play: after a certain number of iterations or
steps of the training algorithm, the source sentences in the development corpus
aretranslatedwiththeneuralnetworkandtheoutputisautomaticallycompared
tothedesiredtargetsentencesinthecorpususingsimpleapproximateautomatic
evaluation metrics (see Rossi & Carré 2022 [this volume]), the most common of
which is BLEU (Papineni et al. 2002). BLEU measures how many one-word, two-
word, three-word and four-word sequences in the output are found in the refer-
ence, and computes a score that varies from 0 (no match) to 100% (all stretches
found). If, during training, BLEU on the development set starts to signal a degra-
dation of performance, training may be stopped, or the current set of weights
may be stored and training then continued for a while to see if BLEU improves
again. Of course, there are many other automatic evaluation metrics which can
take the place of BLEU in this process.
7.3 Beam search
The decoder in NMT systems produces the output sentence sequentially, one
target word at a time, as explained in Sections 6.1 and 6.2. At each time step,
the neural network produces a probability or likelihood (a value between 0 and
100%) for every single word in the target vocabulary. One way of using this in-
formation is to pick the most likely target word and output it, ignoring other
possibilities. It is worthwhile noting that, in doing so, we are completely deter-
mining the ensuing steps taken by the NMT system as the current prediction is
given as input to the decoder in the next step (see, for example, the word zorro
in Figure 6). One possible way to explore more possibilities is to consider, for
161