1 Europe, multilingualism and machine translation
universitiesfocusedonmobility,digitallearning,andthestrengtheningofstrate-
gic cooperation. Regarding languages, the communication notes that:
proficiency in English is de facto part of any internationalization strategy
for learners, teachers and institutions and some Member States have intro-
duced,orareintroducing,targetedcoursesinEnglish(especiallyatMasters
level) as part of their strategy to attract talent which would otherwise not
come to Europe. (European Commission 2013)
At the same time, multilingualism is a significant European asset: it is highly
valued by international students and should be encouraged in teaching and
research throughout the higher education curriculum (European Commission
2013).
Indeed,theEUremainscommittedtomultilingualismonuniversitycampuses:
firstly, because multilingual campuses reflect European linguistic diversity; sec-
ondly, because they provide students with more mobility and employment op-
portunities; and thirdly, because they promote contact with different cultures
and learning approaches. In a similar vein, Gao (2019) lists different reasons
for universities to engage in internationalization, including the fact that inter-
nationalization can help prepare students to interact with people from different
cultures as a way to create cultural understanding and reduce mutual hostility
between countries. Internationalization poses challenges for universities how-
ever (ibid.), not least those related to multilingualism. Firstly, a lack of transla-
tion resources (including human resources) can prevent a university from be-
coming fully English-speaking. Secondly, internationalization can involve the
displacement of native languages and a loss of language diversity. I see a role,
however, for machine translation in counteracting these dangers. And the tech-
nology seems particularly promising, given shifting understandings of interna-
tionalization: traditionally, universities have developed plans to do “internation-
alizationathome”(toattractforeignstudents),and“internationalizationabroad”
(tosendstudentsabroad).Mittelmeieretal.(2020)incorporatetheconceptof“in-
ternationalizationatadistance”todeveloponlineinternationaldistancelearning
modelsforcampus-basedinstitutions.TheCOVID-19pandemichasundoubtedly
given extra impetus to this third way. Technologies may change the way inter-
nationalization is conceived and machine translation is a technology that has
potential to contribute to the internationalization game.
13