8 Custom machine translation
•Batchsize isthenumberoftokens13thatwillbeprocessedtogetherineach
training step. This is needed because it is not possible to feed all the data
in the training set to the neural network at once.
•Beam size is the number of translation hypotheses (i.e. translation candi-
dates) that are taken into account when translating a word. Hypotheses
are produced during the training process and when the system is actually
translating.
•Duration refers to the number of epochs allowed in the training process.
Anepochis a full training pass over all the sentences in the training set.
Each epoch comprises all the training steps necessary to see all the data
once.14
•Validationfrequency isthenumberofstepsincludedbeforeeachevaluation
ofthestatusofthetrainingtakesplace.Typically,validationcycleshappen
many times in each epoch.
•Stopping condition specifies the maximum number of validation cycles al-
lowed where no improvement of the engine’s performance is registered.
When this maximum is reached, the training process is ended, regardless
ofthenumberofepochsinitiallyset.Improvementscanbemeasuredbased
on any automatic metric, or on a combination of metrics. Common auto-
matic metrics include as BLEU, chrF1 and perplexity.15
Alloftheseparametersusuallycomewithdefaultvaluesthatdevelopershave
set after optimizing the training process for a particular environment.
Onceparametershavebeenset–orthedefaultparametershavebeenaccepted
– training proceeds as follows: at each training step, a batch of training data is
fed into the neural network, the output for each sentence in the batch is com-
puted, the error loss is computed, weights are updated, and it all starts again!
13Batch size in tokens(see Rossi & Carré 2022 [this volume]) instead of sentences has become
the most used batch type in the last years in order to make batches more similarly sized.
14Given the large amounts of data used in NMT, the use of epochs to measure the duration of
the training can be impractical. Rather than using epochs, you can use the number of steps, in
relation to a particular batch size, to help you measure duration independently of the model,
language pair or amount of data.
15Perplexity in natural language processing, and more specifically in MT, measures how uncer-
tain a translation model is about predicting the next word when translating. A low perplexity
is obtained when the translation model assigns a high probability to each word/token in a
given target sentence. For more information on BLEU and chrF1, see Rossi & Carré (2022 [this
volume]).
183