Olga Torres-Hostench
language learner, it could, in theory, be used to help learners read complex texts
and develop more advanced written skills in their second language. They could
learnhowtomakethemostofmachinetranslationinthesecondlanguagesothat
they could detect and edit machine translation mistakes based on their knowl-
edge of the second language. And while empirical studies of the use of machine
translation in language classes are still thin on the ground, a small number of
sourcessuggestinterestingavenuesofresearch.Relevantstudiesarediscussedin
Carréetal.(2022[thisvolume]),whichincludesfurtherideasandstrategiesthat
can be used in language learning classes. Yet others are included in the database
of activities of the MultiTraiNMT project (MultiTraiNMT 2020). My view is that
there are many ways of using machine translation in language learning classes
and there is no need to forbid its use if it is used in a conscious and critical way.
On occasion, however, there is just no time to train second language students.
Indeed, in the history of machine translation there have been many occasions
on which research was partially triggered by a perceived lack of people learning
a particular foreign language. Cold War research into Russian-English machine
translation is one such case (Gordin 2016). More recently, the Japanese organiz-
ers of the Tokyo 2020 Olympic Games (actually held in 2021 due to COVID-19)
realized that learning Japanese was out of the question for most foreigners and
that they needed a faster approach to overcome language barriers during the
Olympics. The Japanese internal affairs ministry thus allocated ¥1.38 billion to
machine translation research to improve the quality of real-time speech trans-
lation technology, with the aim of covering 90% of the language needs of the
Olympic teams and tourists who, it was hoped, would go to Japan (Murai 2015).
The Japanese government funded the research for a specific machine translation
system to be used during Tokyo Olympics and private companies were tasked
with the development of devices and mobile apps to run the system. The plan
was that companies would recover their investment by selling the devices and
apps subscriptions to users. In this case, the introduction of machine translation
was the chosen shortcut to bring multilingualism to Japan, instead of language
learning.
3 Case study: Multilingual universities
3.1 Internationalization and multilingualism
The European Commission’s communication on “European higher education in
the world” establishes the key priorities for the internationalization of European
12