2 Human and machine translation
6.4 Neural Machine Translation
SMT had its heyday between 2004 and 2014. Most major users and suppliers of
machine translation, including Google Translate (from 2007) and the European
Commission (from 2010) were using the technology and in so-called shared task
evaluations13SMT constantly came up trumps. Until 2015, that is. That year a
neural machine translation (NMT) system developed at Stanford University beat
anumberofSMTsystems–byawidemarginandonwhatwasconsideredadiffi-
cultlanguage pair,namely English-German(Bentivoglietal. 2016).The Stanford
successheraldedthebeginningofwhatBentivoglietal.(2016)call“thenewNMT
era.”The excitementwas palpable among researchersand especially in the press.
Grand claims were made about the new technology, for example, that it was as
good as professional, human translation and had thus reached human parity .14
It was also claimed, with some justification, that NMT could learn “idiomatic ex-
pressions and metaphors”, and “rather than do a literal translation, find the cul-
tural equivalent in another language” (Marking 2016).15But while there is some
truthinsuchclaims,theyshouldnotbeover-interpreted.AnNMTsystemmight
indeed produce an idiomatic translation, but this is generally because the data it
haslearnedfromcontainhundredsormaybethousandsofexamplesofthatvery
translation. An NMT system (in this case Google Translate) does not knowit is
being idiomatic, or using a cultural equivalent, when it correctly translates the
German idiom:
(13) Ich habe die Nase voll.
‘I have the nose full.’
as
(14) I’m sick of it.
Rather it is outputting what it has learned from data.16
But why is NMT so much better that SMT, if it is simply learning from data?
Is that not what SMT was already doing? The answer lies in the kind of repre-
sentations that NMT systems use and in the kind of models they learn.
13In shared task evaluations, computer scientists pit their systems against each other to see
which performs best for a given language-pair and with different types of training data.
14ThisclaimwasfamouslymadebyresearchersatMicrosoftwhohadbeenworkingonChinese-
to-English translation (Marking 2016). It was contested by many commentators, including
Toral et al. (2018).
15These comments were made by Alan Packer of Facebook in 2016 (Marking 2016).
16This particular translation has also been verified by Google Translate’s user community.
39