6 Ethics and machine translation
At scale, big translation data has become a valuable resource for MT and ma-
chine learning system training (Moorkens & Lewis 2019a). This does not mean
thattranslatorsreceiveanysecondarypaymenthowever,andthegranularreuse
in MT training means that the source of training data is usually not identifiable.
Thisisalsotrueofdatagatheredbywebcrawlingforparalleltexts.TranslatorsA
and B in our case study probably have little option other than to hand over their
translationdataandtoaccepttheconsequences,especiallyconsideringthatmost
translators work on a freelance basis, and thus have limited scope for argument
with their employers. It is reasonable to argue that a more equitable system of
dataownershipwouldcontributetothesustainabilityofthetranslationindustry
(see also §5).
2.3 Permission to use data
In some jurisdictions, it is considered that the employer who pays for a trans-
lation is the rightful owner, whereas in others, ownership may be transferred,
granting permission for reuse. We might assume that there is “a degree of colle-
gialityatplayamongthosetranslatorswhofavourresourcesharing”withfellow
translators, even with those who they do not know (Moorkens & Lewis 2019b:
8). However, the acceptance of this reuse for human translation may be eroded
whentranslationdataareinsteadusedfortrainingMTsystems,especiallyamong
translators who believe that progress of MT technology is not in their best inter-
ests. Some translation contracts may explicitly state that translation data will be
reusedwithinhumanormachinetranslationworkflows,butitisrarefortransla-
tors to control how their work is reused. There is also no evidence of permission
being sought or granted for reuse of webcrawled data.
This means that Translators A and B will contribute towards future projects,
the purpose and end use of which will be opaque to them. Translator A may
be ethically opposed to working for the arms manufacturing company, but will
nonetheless be an unknowing participant in their work. This opacity is a prob-
lem faced more generally by those whose data are collected and reused, along
with those who contribute work towards large technology projects without the
opportunity to ask the questions “What is the final application and use of the
products of my work?” and “Am I content or ashamed to have contributed to
this use?” (see Moorkens 2020, Weizenbaum 1986).
Whendataarecreatedduringtranslation,dependingontheformatforrecord-
ing and exchange, a number of attributes are recorded. These usually include a
name or ID for the translator (see §2.5), the date and time of creation, language
codes, software used, and a project ID. This information is useful for deciding
125