Sharon O’Brien
Takingthefirstquestion,acommonsuggestionisthattobeagoodpost-editor,
one first has to be a good translator. Intuitively we know that some people are
great translators but not great revisors and vice versa. By deduction then, some
will be good post-editors and others not.
But what does it mean to be a good post-editor? This question has received
some attention already. de Almeida & O’Brien (2010), for example, suggest that
a good post-editor has:
1. The ability to identify issues in the raw MT output that need to be ad-
dressed and to fix them appropriately;
2. The ability to carry out the post-editing task with reasonable speed, so as
to meet the expectations of daily productivity for this type of activity;
3. The ability to adhere to the guidelines, so as to minimise the number of
“preferential” changes, or changes that are not strictly speaking necessary,
and which are normally outside the scope of PE.
Itcouldbearguedthatpoint(1)meansthatthepost-editormustfirsthavemas-
tered translation skills. Points (2) and (3) suggest that a post-editor needs to be
abletoworkquicklyandtoadheretoguidelines,resistingthetemptationtoover-
edit. Ultimately, being a “good” post-editor is closely linked with an individual’s
attitude towards MT as a technology (see Guerberof Arenas 2013 for a deeper
discussion). If a translator dislikes MT as a technology, he or she will possibly
be tempted to delete or ignore every MT suggestion. Assuming this in turn leads
to more time being required for the translation task, as well as a higher cost for
the commissioner, then that person cannot be classified as a “good” post-editor,
though,again,muchdependsonthecontextandthequalityproducedbytheMT
system in the first instance.
As for the second question, there has been a growing focus on training in the
past decade. As MT was slowly integrated into other CAT tools and translation
productionprocesses,professionaltranslatorsneededtrainingintheformofcon-
tinuous professional development, e.g. workshops dedicated to learning about
MTandpost-editing.Overtime,MTandPEhavebeenincorporatedintotransla-
tor training programmes in universities. There are many different approaches to
this training. Some universities offer entire stand-alone courses on post-editing,
some incorporate it into revision courses, and others weave it into translation
technology courses (see O’Brien & Vázquez 2019).
A core focus of this training is ensuring that translation students understand
themostrecentapproachestoMT,itsstrengthsanditslimitations,howtoevalu-
ateitandhowtopost-edit.Importantly,understandingwhenandhowMTought
118