5 How to deal with errors in machine translation: Post-editing
estimated by asking the person who performs the task to “think aloud” as they
work. By doing this, they can highlight cognitive difficulties they encounter. Of
course,thinkingaloudasyouworkinterfereswithandslowsdownthetaskitself,
sotherearedisadvantagestothistechnique.Analternativeapproachistorecord
thetaskonthecomputerscreenasitunfolds,thentoreplaythatasavideowhen
the task is completed, and ask the task performer to retrospectively discuss the
problemstheyencountered.Thishastheadvantageofnotslowingdownthetask
itself, but it has the disadvantage that the person may not remember all of the
issues they encountered. Finally, researchers have attempted to measure cogni-
tive effort in post-editing using eye tracking, a technology that records where
the eyes fall on the screen, as well as how long the eyes rest on parts of the text
(calledfixationduration ),andeventhe pupildilation ,ameasurementofpupilsize.
These are known to be good measures of cognitive effort. Yet, the challenges are
obvious: you need expensive eye tracking technology, sophisticated knowledge
in how to use it and interpret the data it produces, and you need to control the
data collection environment so that users do not move their heads too much, or
the light does not change substantially because this affects the pupil size, and
so on. Since measuring cognitive effort is a considerable challenge, understand-
ably few include it when they measure PE effort. Nonetheless, it is important
to recognise cognitive effort as an essential component of the effort involved in
post-editing.
There is a final note to add here on measuring PE effort. The amount of effort
shouldindirectlytellussomethingaboutthequalityoftheoutputproducedbya
specificMTsystem,foralanguagepairandtopic.Therefore,wecanusePEeffort
as a form of MT quality evaluation. The lower the quality from the MT system,
themorechangesandtimewillberequired.MTqualitycanbemeasuredinother
ways,by,forexample,identifying,classifyingandcountingthenumberoferrors
produced. This is a useful form of MT quality evaluation but taking the PE effort
into consideration is potentially even more informative because it reveals how
easy or difficult it is to work with the MT output to produce a defined level of
quality.
5 Post-editor profiles and training
What makes a good post-editor? And what kind of training should be provided?
As MT has become more of a mainstream technology, these are two questions
thathavepreoccupiedthoseinthelanguageindustryaswellasinacademia(see,
for example, Nitzke & Hansen-Schirra 2021).
117