Caroline Rossi & Alice Carré
Reference translation: La batterie est installée sur l’émetteur-récepteur.
Figure 3: reference translation for example
Figure 4 shows the source text, candidate translations and reference transla-
tion that we will consider in what follows.
Source text: Battery pack is attached to the transceiver.
Reference: La batterie est installée sur
l’émetteur-récepteur.
Candidate A (eTranslation): Le bloc-batterie est fixé à l’émetteur-récepteur.
Candidate B (Google Translate): La batterie est fixée à l’émetteur-récepteur.
Candidate D (DeepL) : Le bloc-piles est fixé à l’émetteur-récepteur.
Figure 4: Main example for this section – source text, reference trans-
lation and candidate translations
What can a human evaluator say about these examples? Firstly, the term “bat-
tery pack” should be translated by “batterie”, unless the customer has speci-
fied otherwise. The translation “bloc-piles” (candidate D) is plainly wrong: this
transceiverdoesnotfunctionon“piles”,whichareelectrochemicalcellsdesigned
to be used once and then discarded, but rather on a “batterie”, that is a recharge-
able pack of cells. In this case, the transceiver operates on a lithium-ion battery.
Talking of “bloc-batterie” (candidate A) is not intrinsically incorrect. Rather, it
is not idiomatic; it is a calque, i.e. an overly word-for-word translation, of the
English sentence. Secondly, the verbal form “is attached to” can just as well be
renderedby“estinstalléesur”orby“estfixéeà”:thisisamatterofpersonalpref-
erence. Thirdly, “transceiver”, which is a contraction of “transmitter-receiver”
should ideally be translated by “émetteur-récepteur”, as is the case in all trans-
lations shown in Figure 4. However, “radio” or even “appareil” (“device”) would
haveworkedjustaswellforthepurposesofthistranslationproject(formoreon
translation and equivalence, see Kenny 2022 [this volume]). Now, let us take an
in-depth look at how AEMs would assess these candidate translations.
2.5.1 Core concepts: 𝑛-grams, precision, recall and F-measure
In this section, we present four concepts that constitute the building blocks of
the more elaborate AEMs we present in subsequent sections: n-grams ,precision ,
recallandF-measure .
62