Juan Antonio Pérez-Ortiz, Mikel L. Forcada & Felipe Sánchez-Martínez
3.4 Neural machine translation
Ifwemanagetorepresentasourcesentenceasasetofinputstoaneuralnetwork,
and we can interpret the neural network’s outputs as a target sentence, we have
aneuralmachinetranslation (NMT)system.NMTfirstprocessesthewordsinthe
source sentence. Each time a source word is ingested by the encoder part of the
neuralnetwork,theactivationsofsetsofspecificneuronsinthenetworkchange.
When the whole source sentence has been processed, the decoder part of the
networkstartsitswork.Ithasbeentrainedtoprovide,stepbystep,aprobability
score for each possible target word in the translation, given the target words it
has already output. This is similar to how predictive keyboards in contemporary
smartphones work, but, as we will see, word predictions in NMT also depend on
the source sentence, as they are meant to be a translation of it.
NMT systems are deep neural networks with architectures that will be dis-
cussedlaterinsection6.Theyhavethousandsofneuronsandmillionsofweights
(or many more) which have to be trained by providing examples taken from a
parallel corpus containing millions of source sentences and their translations.
Mathematical representations of the words in a given sentence in the source lan-
guagearefedasinputstotheneuralnetworkandthewordsinthecorresponding
target-language sentence are used to represent the desired output. As you might
expect, training a large network in reasonable time is computationally demand-
ing: one needs very powerful, specialised number-crunching hardware to train
the network by showing it the examples over and over again. On each iteration,
small changes are made to the weights in the network to improve its prediction
of target words.
3.5 Training neural networks
Traininganeuralnetworkistheprocessofdeterminingtheweightoftheconnec-
tions between its neurons so that, given a training set of input–output examples,
it produces an actual output which is as close as possible to that in the relevant
example.
Trainingstartswithasetofrandomweightsorwithweightstakenfromaneu-
ral network solving a similar task. During training weights are modified in such
a way that the value of an error function (also known as a loss function ), which
measures how much actual outputs deviate from the desired outputs, is made as
smallaspossible. Trainingalgorithms (alsocalled learningalgorithms )repeatedly
compute small corrections (updates) to weights until the error function is mini-
malorsmallenoughforallexamplesinthetrainingset,oracertainperformance
148