Juan Antonio Pérez-Ortiz, Mikel L. Forcada & Felipe Sánchez-Martínez
And you are indeed right! But the approximation currently carried out by com-
puters follows a completely different path: millions of mathematical operations
are performed in a fraction of a second to obtain a translation which may some-
times be labelled as adequate and may sometimes not. And it turns out that the
percentage of times they happen to be adequate has dramatically in the last few
years. But, historically, artificial neural networks were devised as a simplified
modelofhow natural neural networks suchasourbrainswork,andthecognitive
processes carried out in it are also the result of distributed neural computation
processes which are not that different from the mathematical operations men-
tioned above.
This chapter will teach you the key elements of NMT technology. We will
start off by pointing out the connection between how translation could be car-
ried out in a human brain and how an NMT system undertakes it. This will help
us to introduce the basic concepts needed to get a comprehensive overview of
theprinciplesof machinelearning andartificialneuralnetworks ,whichconstitute
two of the cornerstones of NMT. After that, we will discuss the essential princi-
ples ofnon-contextual word embeddings , a computerised representation of words
with many interesting properties that, when combined through a mechanism
knownas attention ,willproducetheso-called contextual word embeddings ,akey
factor in the realisation of NMT. All these ingredients will allow us to present an
overallpictureoftheinnerworkingsofthetwomostusedNMTmodels,namely,
thetransformer and the recurrent models. The chapter wraps up by introducing
a series of secondary themes that will improve your knowledge on how these
systems run behind the scenes.
2 An imperfect analogy between human translation and
NMT
Tosimplifythediscussionabit,letusmaketheradicalapproximationthattrans-
lating a text is equivalent to translating each of its sentences independently of
each other. Let us now assume for a minute that translating a sentence is a two-
step process: the translator first determines the interpretation ormeaning of the
whole source sentence and then produces in one go a sentence that allows more
or less the same interpretation, but is nowwritten in the target language. But ev-
ery day translators encounter sentences that they have never seen before, such
as “The pencil slipped from my hand, stood up, and started talking to me”, and
can still translate them: how is that possible? Linguistics has formulated the an-
swer to this question as a principle, the principle of semantic compositionality :
142