Dorothy Kenny
6.4.1 Models in NMT
Let’sstartwithmodels.Acomputer modelisanabstract,mathematicalrepresen-
tation of some real-life event, system or phenomenon. One use of such a model
is to predict an answer to a previously unseen problem. A computational model
of translation, for example, should be able to predict a target-language sentence
given a previously unseen source-language sentence.17
We have already seen that SMT systems use probabilistic models of transla-
tion and the target language that are encapsulated in phrase tables and 𝑛-gram
probabilities.NMTsystems,incontrast,usemodelsthatareinspired,evenifonly
loosely, by the human brain. They use artificial neural networks, in which thou-
sandsofindividualunits,or artificialneurons ,arelinkedtothousandsofotherar-
tificialneurons(let’sjustcallthem neurons fromnowon).Insuchanetwork,each
neuron is activated depending on the stimuli received from other neurons, and
the strength or weightof the connections between neurons. As Forcada (2017)
explains, the activation states of individual neurons do not make much sense by
themselves. It is, instead, the activation states of large sets of connected neurons
that can be understood as representing individual words and their relationships
withotherwords.ThetrickintraininganNMTsystemistolearnpreciselythose
weights that will result in the best performing model of translation, that is, the
model whose activation states allow it to predict the best translations.
So how is this done? Like in all machine learning, the system learns from
data. A neural model of translation is built step by step by exposing a learning
algorithm to vast quantities of parallel data. In successive passes, the algorithm
learns weights and keeps adjusting those weights, so that the predictions of the
model it builds get closer and closer to a desired “correct” answer. More precise
detailsofhowthisfeatisaccomplishedaregivenbyPérez-Ortizetal.(2022[this
volume]), and readers looking for a comprehensive technical discussion of NMT
can also refer to Koehn (2020). It suffices to say here that data-driven machine
translationistypicalofmachinelearninginthatitinvolvestechnologiesthatare
developed to solve problems to which humans already know the answer and to
which, in fact, humans have already supplied at least one, if not several correct
answers. Such correct answers may be present in the training data or they may
be arrived at through generalization from the training data. When a machine
translation system is tested to see whether it is improving during training or to
compareittoanothersystemoncetraininghasfinished,wealsotestbygivingit
17When speaking of mathematical models, it is common to speak of predicting answers. For
our purposes, however, there is little practical difference between predicting andoutputting an
answer, which is what machine translation systems do when they are actually being used.
40