9 Machine translation for language learners
be accurate at sentence level, but fine-grained correspondences are not always
identified automatically in bilingual or parallel concordancers.
Note also that online concordancers often display the full paragraph or text
for each concordance, as shown in Table 2, or links to the relevant part of the
corpus.
In contrast, an MT output will provide you with a proposed translation only
for the words in your search, with no other contextual elements.
Table 2: Sample concordance lines for nous allons faire le nécessaire in
the Hansard parallel corpus
French translation English source text
Nous vous disons que nous allons
faire le nécessaire , mais aidez-nous à
nous assurer que tout le monde
respecte les règles.
Monsieur le Président, nous avons
promis que nous allions faire le
nécessaire pour ratifier l’accord.But we’re saying, hey, we’ll do it,
we’ll set it up , but help us to make
sure everybody abides by the rules.
Mr. Speaker, we promised that we
were going to do what was required to
ratify the agreement.
Table 3: Sample NMT output for nous allons faire le nécessaire (MT by
https://www.bing.com/translator, 2021-11-01)
French query English NMT output
Nous allons faire le nécessaire.
Nous allons faire le nécessaire pour
ratifier l’accord.We will do what is necessary.
We will take the necessary steps to
ratify the agreement.
Table 3 presents a comparison of two queries, the first one being shorter and
moreambiguousthanthesecond.ItshowsthatNMTenginesareabletoadjustto
sentence contexts: linked with the explicit mention of an objective ( pour ratifier
l’accord) a different construction is used in the English NMT output, where faire
le nécessaire becomes take the necessary steps to .
Overall,itmakesmuchmoresensetouseNMTwithfullsentences(seeKenny
2022: §7 [this volume]) or texts than with isolated words or phrases. When look-
ing for a word, a collocation or a phrase, it might be more efficient and reliable
to use a dictionary and/or a corpus, since you will get controlled results. Parallel
201