6 Ethics and machine translation
shown strong leadership on ethics and sustainability, as discussed by Moorkens
& Rocchi (2021).
Theearlyviewoftranslationtechnology,asexpressedbyKayin1980,wasthat
thetranslatorshouldremainincontrolwithtechnologyassistingwithworkthat
is mechanical and routine, and possibly boring (Kay 1980). What we have seen
insteadformanytranslatorsisthattheirworkhasgraduallybeencircumscribed.
Some translators have seen their work reduced to quality checks, annotation, or
the correction of repetitive errors in mixed-quality MT output. In the latter case,
theMToutputmayevenhavebeendecomposedtoindividualsentencesthatlack
any accompanying context, with some automatically passed and others marked
for review.
Some translators enjoy post-editing and, even with discounts applied (as in
the case in the first case study in §2), find the work worthwhile and lucrative.
However, there is a balance to be struck between short-term efficiency and long-
term gains for all stakeholders in a technologized translation process.
Workers find satisfaction in doing work that has meaning, in mastering their
task,andinworkingwithsupportivecolleagues.Theyaremotivatedbyasenseof
achievement and recognition for that achievement. If this is not a consideration
in translation production, better workers will leave and there will be a shortage
ofskilledtranslatorsand/orpost-editors.Suchashortagewouldaffectreliableac-
cess to multilingual information and the gathering of high-quality bilingual data
on which MT training relies. Docherty et al. (2008: 4) consider that a sustainable
work system must satisfy the needs of many rather than few stakeholders, and
thatinsteadoffocusingexclusivelyon“short-term,staticefficienciessuchaspro-
ductivityandprofitability;wemustalsofocusonlong-term,dynamicefficiencies
such as learning and innovation”. UN Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 8 is
to provide decent work and economic growth, but environmental sustainability,
as addressed by SDGs 13 and 15, is also relevant to MT.
4.2 Environmental concerns
Itmightreasonablybearguedthatthereisacontradictionbetweensettingagoal
for economic growth and for environmental sustainability. Cronin (2017) makes
this point particularly about the growth dependency of the localization indus-
try. The ICT industry, on which MT relies, requires the mining of rare metals
and has a reputation for poor recycling and polluting. Neural MT is particularly
resource intensive, requiring powerful GPUs (Graphical Processing Units) for
training and large amounts of power. Strubell et al. (2019) estimate that training
for one large transformer neural network model will produce almost five times
133