Caroline Rossi & Alice Carré
Table 1: Examples of NMT errors (underlined) found in a translated
recipe (FR>EN)
French source textaEnglish NMT output
Préchauffez votre four à 180°C. Dans
un plat à gratin beurré, versez un peu
de béchamel. Déposez une couche de
pâte et poser une couche de farce a la
viande. Déposez à nouveau des pâtes,
béchamel et viande.
Terminerparunecouchedepâteavec
de la béchamel et saupoudrez de fro-
mage râpé. Laissez cuire 35 à 40 min-
utes.Preheat your oven to 180°C. In a
buttered gratin dish, pour a little
béchamel. Put a layer of dough and
a layer of meat stuffing. Put a layer
ofpasta,béchamelandmeatfillingon
top.
Finish with a layer of dough with
béchamel and sprinkle with grated
cheese.Leavetocookfor35to40min-
utes.
aLasagnes de grand-mère (French recipe): https://www.750g.com/lasagnes-r66998.htm
You would certainly be surprised at the result, since variation in the French
source text between the singular and plural of “pâte(s)” results in the appear-
ance of dough in a recipe that really only includes pasta. You might be cautious
and cunning enough to guess, but trusting the rather fluent MT output would
haveresultedinbakingadifferentdish,andthemistakewasinducedbyjustone
letter (a plural ending). Even though the machine-translated text is very fluent
and reasonably accurate on the whole, and would require only small changes
to improve it, we see that one serious issue is enough to make the translation
dysfunctional. The recipe’s relative simplicity, together with knowledge about a
common dish, could help readers work their way around this problem, but with
manyothertexttypesandspecializeddomainstheseelementswon’tapply.What
is more, the evaluation method proposed here involves humans, ingredients and
a kitchen: it would be a very expensive test, and one that is hardly ever used.
Besides such misfires, most MT users are likely to encounter problems with
abstract notions and metaphorical expressions. In the example in Table 2, which
shows part of the blurb for a book published in French alongside its translation
into English by an NMT system, would an English-speaking reader be able to
guess that “a veritable pie in the sky” (English MT output for the French “vérita-
ble tarte à la crème”) meant a well-trodden path or prefabricated subject?
If you’re already used to dealing with MT, you probably recognise these mis-
takes, and a number of others. Experience makes a difference! And the more
54