1 Europe, multilingualism and machine translation
(German) and to multilingualism” (House 2003: 574) and international students
were invited to learn German during the academic year.
3.3 A truly multilingual university
Current multilingual universities are universities which include EMI for interna-
tional students, and/or universities in borderlands and/or areas with more than
two official languages. Such universities may be multilingual for historical, po-
litical, geographical, economic, or other reasons, and finding the balance in their
language policy may be a challenge for them. Neither internationalization nor
multilingual policies can be improvised. Knight (1994: 12) proposed a six-phase
model of the process of institutional internationalization:
• Awareness of need, purpose, and benefits
• Commitment by all university actors
• Planning:Identifyresources,purposesandobjectives,prioritiesandstrate-
gies
• Operationalize: Develop academic activities and services
• Review: Assess and enhance the quality, impact, and progress and
• Reinforcement: Develop incentives, recognition, and rewards.
Related specifically to multilingualism, this plan would require us to answer
questions like: will EMI be restricted to international students/courses? Can a
university be considered multilingual if EMI is used only for international stu-
dents? Will international students be considered “multilingual” if they use only
English in the “multilingual” university? Is it enough for a university to have
its website in its official languages and English but deliver courses in local lan-
guages? Are courses to be delivered using more than one language or will in-
structiontakeplaceinjustonelanguage?Couldthenativelanguagesofstudents
(which may not be the official languages of the university) be incorporated into
thecourses?Isthelanguageofinstructiontheonlyparametertoidentifya“multi-
lingualuniversity”?Inwhichlanguagesaretrainingmaterialstobeoffered?Will
languageproficiencybeassessedtogetherwithnon-linguisticcontent?Howcan
local students be prepared for EMI? Does being multilingual mean using EMI?
Does being multilingual mean using local languages and English? If so, in what
15