8 Custom machine translation
Did you train a system to translate legal documents? If so, ask users to use
it for their next translation, and report back to you on how they felt about
using the system, whether they saved time by using the system, and so on.
By gathering this kind of feedback, you will not only be able to judge the
current status of your system, but you will also get information that will
help you work out how you might improve the system.
Finally, if you have gone to the trouble of creating a custom system, with all
the excitement and pain that this might entail, you might want to compare the
output of your system with that of a generic system, using any of the relevant
testing options above. If your custom system outperforms the generic system,
then it is a success. Well done! Otherwise, try to keep having fun!
5 Conclusion
This chapter has provided a brief overview of the customization of MT. Hav-
ing differentiated between custom MT and generic MT, the chapter stressed the
importance of managing expectations when it comes to customization, before
introducing the professional roles involved in custom NMT, and asking where
MT sits in the translation workflow. Customization through both data and tech-
niques was discussed, and analogies with real-life learning processes were sug-
gested. The chapter concluded with a practical section on tools, customization
strategy, data compilation and preparation, training and – finally – testing, in a
bid to help readers get hands-on experience of custom MT.
References
Denkowski, Michael & Alon Lavie. 2014. Meteor universal: Language specific
translationevaluationforanytargetlanguage.In Proceedingsoftheninthwork-
shop on Statistical Machine Translation , 376–380. Baltimore: Association for
Computational Linguistics. DOI: 10.3115/v1/W14-3348 .
Kenny, Dorothy. 2022. Human and machine translation. In Dorothy Kenny (ed.),
Machine translation for everyone: Empowering users in the age of artificial intel-
ligence, 23–49. Berlin: Language Science Press. DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.6759976 .
Khayrallah,Huda&PhilippKoehn.2018.Ontheimpactofvarioustypesofnoise
on neural machine translation. In Proceedings of the 2nd workshop on neural
machine translation and generation , 74–83. Melbourne: Association for Com-
putational Linguistics. https://aclanthology.org/W18-2709.pdf.
185