Gema Ramírez-Sánchez
2.2 Who customizes machine translation?
As you will learn from this short section, MT is a truly interdisciplinary field in
which computer engineers work alongside linguists.
Back in the days when linguistically-aware, rule-based MT was state-of-the-
art, both engineers and linguists had an active role in building systems: the lin-
guistswrotethegrammaticalrulesanddictionaries,andtheengineerswrotethe
computer programs that implemented the rules.
Later on, in statistical MT times, engineers took almost full responsibility
for the process. Linguists were occasionally involved in output evaluation, but
hardly ever in error analysis and never in defining action points to improve the
machine translated output.
The technology was still reliant on human translators, however, as they pro-
vided the translations that fed the translation models.1But I can confirm that, in
theheydayofstatisticalMT,linguistsweremoreorlessexcludedfromtheactual
building of the systems.
Nowadays, little by little, linguistics-savvy engineers have started to pay at-
tention not only to tweaking parameters and hardware or automatic evaluation
metrics, but also to the quality of the translations produced by their systems,
at a very fine-grained level. At the same time, technology-savvy linguists have
startedtogetinvolvedinassessingandcuratingthedataneededtotrainengines,
inplayingwithtrainingkits,inevaluatingsystems,andindefiningastrategynot
only to improve them but also to integrate them into the translation workflows
of client companies.
The ideal situation given the nature of the task is collaboration between pro-
fessionalsfromthetwofields,professionalswhoareinterestedinlearningabout
and contributing to each other’s areas. This is particularly effective for custom
MT where the need to tune systems to a particular domain means that there
are significant benefits to be gained from linguists assessing the usefulness of
the training data, taking control over (or at least understanding) the strategy fol-
lowed during the training process, and analyzing the output. Custom MT also
benefits from engineers understanding the specifics of the texts and the lan-
guages they are working with in order to be creative in finding solutions to ad-
vance and solve the main issues present in the output: is a new module or a pre-
or post-processing step needed to cope with rich morphology, product names or
alphanumeric codes, for example?
1Keep this in mind next time you hear that “machine translation is achieving human parity
without human intervention ”. So, what about the texts used to train the engines?
170