Dorothy Kenny
(3) selection of polygon
(4) selection of line
(5) selection of ellipse
(6) selection of rectangle
and so on.
Thiskindofexplicitation,whichresultsintranslationssayingmorethantheir
source texts, is not uncommon. The converse can also happen of course; in cases
where it would be impossible or unusual for a target text to be as explicit as its
source text, the translator can choose to leave out information. This can some-
times happen for language-typological reasons. For example, English belongs to
a group of languages that frequently use verbs to describe the manner in which
something or someone moves. Spanish, on the other hand, tends to use verbs
to describe the paththat is followed; it can encode the manner of motion in an
adverbial phrase, but sometimes translators into Spanish will choose not to refer
to manner of motion at all, as to do so wouldgive it undue prominence, fromthe
Spanish point of view. Slobin (2003) gives examples (7) and (8), by way of illus-
tration. While the verb “stomped” in the English describes a way of walking in
which the feet strike the ground heavily and noisily, the verb in Spanish “salió”
simply captures the fact that the character in question has left the house.
(7) He stomped from the trim house
(8) Salió de la pulcra casa
‘exited from the trim house.’
There is a second way in which the Spanish sentence in (8) says less than
its English counterpart in (7): the Spanish does not contain a subject pronoun
equivalentto“he”.ThisisbecauseSpanishispredominantlyapro-droplanguage,
meaning it can happily omit subject pronouns as most of the information they
contain is available anyway from the ending on the verb in question, in this
case,“salió”,whichindicatesthird-personsingular,pasttense.What’smissingin
Spanish but present in English is, of course, the gender of the subject. A reader
of the Spanish text will, however, carry over knowledge of the (male) subject
from the earlier co-text, and so they are not left in the dark. So by omitting the
pronouninSpanish,thetranslatorhasfollowedthenormsofthetargetlanguage
and done no harm to the reader’s ability to know what is going on in the novel.
The arguments and examples given above are intended to explain why so
many scholars are reluctant to say that a source and target text have the same
26