Pilar Sánchez-Gijón & Dorothy Kenny
thecaseofNMT,theoptionsadoptedinthesourcetextactivateorinhibittransla-
tionoptions.Anunnecessarilycomplexandambiguoustextstructurethatallows
objectively different interpretations increases the possibility of the NMT system
proposingcorrecttranslationsofmicrostructuralelements(terminology,phrases
or syntactic units) which, when joined together in the same text, generate texts
that are internally incoherent, suggest a different meaning to the source text, or
are simply incomprehensible.
Table2 gives pre-editing guidelines regarding the style and structure of the
text. Most of them are not only aimed at optimizing the use of NMT systems,
but also at the success of the translated text in terms of comprehensibility and
meaning.
Most of the guidelines listed in Table 2 are aimed at producing a simple text
thatcanbeeasilyassimilatedbythereaderofthesourcetext.InthecaseofNMT
enginestrainedwithdatasetsalreadytranslatedunderthesecriteria,sourcetext
pre-editing helps to obtain the best raw MT output possible. Note, however, that
if an engine is trained on “in-domain” data, that is, using a specialized and ho-
mogeneous dataset, based on texts of a particular genre and related to a partic-
ular field of activity (see Ramírez-Sánchez 2022: §2.1 [this volume]), then the
bestpossiblepre-editing,ifneeded,willinvolveintroducingeditsthatmatchthe
characteristics of that genre and domain. In addition to this general advice, in
many cases it is also necessary to take into account guidelines that are specific
tothesourceortargetlanguage.Thismightmeanavoidingformulationsthatare
particularly ambiguous, not only for the MT system, but also for the reader.
If we take English for instance, avoiding ambiguous expressions means, for
example, avoiding invisible plurals. A noun phrase such as “the file structure”
could refer to both “the structure of files” and “the structure of a particular file”.
Although this ambiguity is resolved as the reader moves through the text, the
wordingofthenounphraseitselfisnotclearenoughtoprovideanunambiguous
translation. Another example of ambiguous structures in many languages, not
only in English, is often the way in which negation is expressed. Sentences such
as “No smoking seats are available.” are notorious for giving rise to different
interpretations and, consequently, incorrect translations.
Verb tense forms are another aspect that may be simplified for the sake of in-
telligibility for the reader and error-free translations. Although the translation
of the different verb tense forms and modes does not necessarily pose a problem
forMT,aninappropriateuseofverbtensesinthe targetlanguage,despiteresult-
ing in well-formed sentences, can lead to target translation text comprehension
errors. Typical guidance related to verb forms is given in Table 3.
92