Dorothy Kenny
You might ask why it is so important to sketch how human translators work
in a book about machine translation. The answer is twofold: firstly, in a very
real way (elaborated upon by Rossi & Carré 2022 [this volume]) human trans-
lation sets the standard by which machine translation is judged, and anything
that contributes to the maintenance of high quality in human translation is ul-
timately of relevance to machine translation. Likewise, human translation pro-
cesses can help to put into sharp relief occasional deficits in machine translation.
Human translation has a role to play, in other words, in both the evaluation of
machine translation output and in the diagnosis of problems in that output. Sec-
ondly, and even more crucially, most contemporary machine translation relies
on translations completed by humans to learn how to translate in the first place.
This point is expanded upon below.
Before we close off our discussion of how human translators work however,
weneedtointroduceatechnologythathasbecomeindispensableformanytrans-
lators: translation memory.
4 Translation memory
Inthe1990stranslatorsworkingintheburgeoningsoftwarelocalizationindustry
foundthemselvestranslatingtextsthatwereeitherextremelyrepetitiveinthem-
selvesorthatrepeatedverbatimwholesectionsofearlierversionsofadocument.
Thiswasthecase,forexample,withsoftwaremanualsthathadtobeupdatedany
timetherewasanewreleaseofthesoftware.Ratherthantranslateeachsentence
from scratch, as if it had never been translated before, they invented a tool that
would store previous translations in a so-called translation memory , so that they
could be reused. The tool, known as a translation memory tool , would take in
a new source text, divide it into segments – sentences or other sensible units
like headings or cells in tables – and then compare each of these segments with
the source-language segments already stored in memory. If an exact match or
a very similar segment was found, then the corresponding target-language seg-
ment would be offered to the translator for re-use, with or without editing. As
translators worked their way through a new translation assignment, they would
get hits from the translation memory, accept, reject or edit the existing transla-
tion and update the memory as they went along, adding their own translations
for the source-language segments for which no matches existed. Over time, the
translation memories grew extremely large. Some companies who were early
adopters of the technology built up translation memories containing hundreds
of thousands and then millions of translation units , that is source-language seg-
mentsalignedwiththeirtarget-languagesegments.Example(12)showsasimple
30