Joss Moorkens
value if the translator feels that they are in a trust partnership, without which
they may rationalize unethical behaviour (see, for example, Abdallah 2010).
Asidefromconcernsaboutrisk,translatorsandusersmaynotwishtouseMT
due to the processes described in §2 or due to the impact of artificial intelligence
(AI)onthe worldof workandsustainability.The followingsectionexaminesthe
latter point with respect to NMT.
4 Sustainability
4.1 Payment, conditions, job satisfaction among
translators/post-editors
Translation is a highly skilled task, but portions of the workflow have been auto-
mated (to an extent) in the examples of Translators A and B, with automatic job
assignment, the imposition of post-editing, and the repurposing of translation
data for tasks that the translators may not expect. There is growing consensus
thatAIwillhaveamajorimpactonworkinmanyareaspreviouslyconsideredto
be immune from automation. While this might not directly cause higher unem-
ployment rates, the changes could affect economic returns, work organization,
and skills management in ways that are difficult to predict. These are consider-
ations for the future in many industries, but in translation the impacts are well
underway for a couple of reasons. Firstly, MT post-editing has been the fastest-
growing area of the translation market since 2010 or so, predating the shift from
statistical to neural MT. Stockpiling of translation data has been commonplace
sincetheadventoftranslationmemorytoolsintheearly1990s,althoughthecol-
lection of translation activity data for monitoring and automation is relatively
recent. Secondly, the largely freelance workforce means that translators have
flexibility and autonomy, but work on a project-by-project timeframe. This has
created a disparity of power, whereby translators have little say in processes
andconditionsthatcanbechangedunilaterallybyagenciesandemployersfrom
one project to the next. The effect of the disparity of power is apparent from
the discussions regarding data in §2. As the pace of mergers and acquisitions
has increased, creating large publicly-traded translation conglomerates, the dis-
connect has grown between those making decisions on business operations and
freelance workers doing translation, post-editing, revision, annotation, review,
subtitling, or another of the vast and growing array of roles that engage directly
with texts. Suggestions from the industry to automate project management and
to use blockchain to attribute authorship or contribution are not likely to im-
prove this situation. More generally, the translation industry has not historically
132