Dorothy Kenny
beingdisplacedbyacompetingapproachtodata-drivenmachinetranslation,the
above-mentioned neural approach. Within a matter of two years the transition
to neural machine translation was complete.
But if SMT is becoming obsolete, you might wonder why it is mentioned here
at all. SMT is introduced here for the purpose of opening up the area of ma-
chine learning to the reader. SMT showed that machine translation systems that
learnedfromdataworkedbetterthanthosethatdidn’t.Itthuspavedthewayfor
machinelearningapproachesinmachinetranslation.SMTdevelopersalsomade
remarkable contributions to machine translation research, by promoting new
methodsandsharingtheirprograms,butalsobycollectingtranslationdata,from
bilingual and multilingual parliaments, international organizations, the world
wide web and so on, and sharing these data with the global research community.
It should also be noted that SMT is still used in the translation industry, albeit in
limited contexts: a supplier of machine translation services might, for example,
first create an SMT system to see how viable the project is and whether or not
it is worthwhile investing time and effort in subsequently developing a neural
system.
Our main interest in discussing SMT is, however, to show that there is more
than one way of learning from data11and, more importantly for our purposes, of
representingthosedata.Aswehaveseen,SMTrepresentstranslationknowledge
in phrase tables, and target language knowledge in separate 𝑛-gram models. In
such models, words (and strings of words) are still recognizable as themselves
but, crucially, they are related to each other using probability scores. And it is
these scores that allow the systems to work. The probability of any given target
sentencebeingthetranslationofagivensourcesentencecanbecomputedsimply
by multiplying the translation probabilities of its component 𝑛-grams as found
in the phrase table, and the probability of any given target-language sentence
occurring can be computed by multiplying the probabilities of its component 𝑛-
grams, as indicated by the language model. A single equation can then be used
to bring the different models together to compute the most likely translation.12
Another reason to address SMT is that doing so gives us a convenient excuse
for introducing concepts such as 𝑛-grams, which turn out be to extremely im-
portant in other areas in natural language processing in general, and in machine
translation evaluation in particular, as addressed by Rossi & Carré (2022 [this
volume]).
11In fact, we have said very little about the specific algorithms used by SMT systems to learn.
The interested reader is referred to Koehn (2010).
12The equation in question is based on Bayes Theorem, and SMT offers the translation scholar
an entrée into the machine learning approach known as Bayesian optimization.
38