4 Selecting and preparing texts for machine translation
8 Who should pre-edit? And when?
TextstobetranslatedbyMThavetraditionallybeenpre-editedin-houseinlarge
corporations as part of the technical writing phase, which requires a high level
of proficiency in the source language, while knowledge of the target language(s)
is not essential.
Today, the accessibility of NMT and the quality of its results allow transla-
tors in many major languages to consider including MT in their own workflows.
“MT-literate” translators (Bowker & Ciro 2019) can determine whether they can
benefitfromincorporatingNMTbasedontheirownexperience,orevenbytrans-
lating small samples of the source text. The typical way to assess the use of
NMT is usually by analysing the resulting translated text. If the text requires
limited post-editing, it is considered suitable for NMT. However, the wording of
thesource text is rarely questioned. There are texts that, due to their function
and visibility, should be translatable through NMT without any major difficul-
ties. However, if the text is unnecessarily complex, incoherent, or does not meet
the established editorial standard, translating it via NMT may only accentuate
these problems. In these cases, pre-editing could prove useful so that the source
texthasthenecessarycohesion,styleanduseofrhetoricaldevicestorespectthe
author’s intention, the function of the text and, at the same time, guarantee its
comprehensibilityandtranslatability.Thisisnotataskwhichiscommonlyprac-
tised in the translation industry, but it is one that may become more common in
the near future as a response to the need to publish content in several languages.
When the client has no previous language strategy for producing linguistic
content, the skills translators have acquired make them best suited to take on
the task of pre-editing texts in their mother tongue or the first foreign language
into which they usually translate. Their knowledge of contrastive grammar and
lexical nuances in the language combination allows them to perform the neces-
sary edits to produce a text in the source language that is functional and under-
standable by the reader, and which in turn generates as few errors as possible
in the text translated via NMT. In addition, their knowledge of the correspond-
ing societies and cultures allows them to assess which referential aspects can be
successful in both texts, source and target, and how to make them explicit. Their
skillsinbothlanguagesaswellastheirknowledgeofbothculturesandsocieties,
mean translators are the experts best suited to prepare monolingual content in-
tended for bilingual or multilingual publication. Their main working language
will still be their mother tongue, but in this case, they do not produce a final text,
but rather a machine translated text that can be understood by the end reader in
99