Pilar Sánchez-Gijón & Dorothy Kenny
7 Pre-editing tools and resources
As can be seen from the previous subsections, pre-editing has to be carried out
within the framework of a translation (or multilingual publication) project, so
the same conditioning factors that guide a translation project need to be taken
into consideration in pre-editing. A style guide is used to detail how to pre-edit
theoriginaltextsproperly.Itsetsouthoweachoftheaspectsshouldbeeditedin
a structured manner, with examples of sentences with and without pre-editing.
It is comparable to a post-editing guide, with the difference that examples are
usually given in the source-text language only.
The purpose of pre-editing guides is to provide orientation about language
use when preparing the text contents. These writing guidelines aim to avoid MT
errors when translating the source text to different languages and to ensure that
the best possible text is produced for a global audience. For this reason, they
give both micro-structural (recommended or required words or recommended
syntactic structures) as well as macro-structural indications on writing. The lat-
ter are aimed at providing the source text, and its subsequent translations, with
the necessary mechanisms to guarantee intratextual and extratextual cohesion.
When the text is embedded in a digital product or is part of the documentation
linked to a consumer good, consistent use of language and referential elements
(such as terminology) in all texts related to that consumer good contributes to
extratextual cohesion.
Aguide oriented to the preparationof contents to be published and translated
alsoincludesinstructionsaboutactionstobetakenandtoolsthatfacilitatethem.
Comparabletothequalityassurance(QA)phaseintranslation,preparingthetext
contentalsohastofollowstandardsthatguaranteeitsqualityand,consequently,
the success of its translation. In this case, it is not only a question of producing
a grammatically correct translation, but also maintaining the client’s language
standard.
The actions required to control the quality of the source language content are
usually as listed in Table 4.
It is important to pay attention to aspects of the text that are designed to meet
with the approval of particular readerships. Inclusive language, for example, can
help to avoid reader rejection of both the source and translated texts. As is the
case with post-editing (see O’Brien 2022: §2 [this volume]), pre-editing attempts
to avoid expressions which could be interpreted as offensive or rude. Guidelines
for text content are set out by the author or publisher of the text, so for exam-
ple, the pre-editing guidelines of a given company may touch upon or mandate
96