Juan Antonio Pérez-Ortiz, Mikel L. Forcada & Felipe Sánchez-Martínez
withsimilarnumbersisapreconditionforgeneralisationinneurallanguagepro-
cessing.
The next section will delve into how we can end up with a convenient list of
neuralrepresentationsforthewordsinasentencethatbenefitsfromthesmooth-
ness of neural networks so that, after training, the system is able to generalise
properly to sentences it has not seen before.
4 Word embeddings as vector representation of words
In the previous section we noted that neurons are usually arranged in layers in
such a way that the output of the neurons of one layer becomes the input to the
neurons of the following one. Interestingly, the output of the set of neurons in a
given layer constitutes a representation of the information they are processing
at that stage.
In the field of natural language processing, and as indicated above, the infor-
mation processed by neural networks is made up of words, and their represen-
tations within the network are usually referred to as embeddings (Mikolov et al.
2013). What makes these embeddings really useful is that those words with simi-
larmeaningsorthatusuallyco-occurinthesamecontextsenduphavingsimilar
embeddings. In order to better understand this, take a piece of paper and draw
a square with sides of about 10 centimetres. Now, take the words in the follow-
ing list and put them all on the square by following a criterion that places words
whicharecloserinmeaningnearereachotherthanwordswithlessrelatedmean-
ings.Ifthisconceptofmeaningclosenessseemsimprecisetoyou,youmayplace
the words based on their frequency of co-occurrence in sentences or paragraphs.
The words are: restaurant ,red,garden,fountain ,flower,tomato,balloon,waiters,
knife,flowers,menu,cooked,chromosome andconsistently . Do this before reading
on.
The restriction imposed by means of the criterion of word meaning proxim-
ity implies that you have not been able to freely distribute the words on the
square. Probably, you have decided to group words such as restaurant ,menuand
waiters, on the one hand, and words such as garden,flowerandfountain , on the
other hand. There are, however, some doubtful cases: redis clearly a neighbour
oftomato, but it should be close to floweras well; a compromise solution would
be to put it somewhere in between, a little bit closer to tomatothan to flowerif
we acknowledge that redis not as essential to flowers as it is to tomatoes.
Youmayhavenoticedsomeclustersinyourdesign:anislandrepresentingthe
semantic field of restaurants and related things, and another island around the
150