Joss Moorkens
Translation software developers are also important stakeholders in the use
of MT in workflows, and the values and related design decisions mentioned for
technology developers in § 1 also apply to them. A translation tool in use can re-
shape activities and their meaning. Interaction with MT may be via interactive
MT, where MT is used for autosuggest and edited dynamically, or post-edited,
appearingasanextratranslationsuggestionorautomaticallypropagatedwithin
the target text window. A tool can focus on usability, for example incorporating
familiar keyboard shortcuts, providing an uncluttered interface, and maximiz-
ing customizability. Translation activity data (see §2.3), if collected, can be made
transparent to users so that they can see what is being collected and use it them-
selvesiftheywish.Alternatively,translatorscouldworkwithinadisempowering
platform, accepting jobs as soon as they appear, with no visibility of data gather-
ing and a very limited user interface, and have their performance rated with no
option for feedback or discussion.
Translatorshavetheoptiontoacceptornotacceptworkofferedtothembased
on the text domain and working conditions. For those who are not aware of the
variable ways that MT may be used within professional workflows, the decision
to accept or not accept work may be difficult, particularly if the agency has not
been transparent. It is also important that translators are transparent in their
use of tools, particularly MT, so that agreed confidentiality arrangements are
notbreached,andriskisnotintroducedforotherstakeholders(orthemselves,as
maybeseenin§3.2)withouttheirknowledge.Fortranslators,theuseofa codeof
ethics,asetofrulestoguideethicalbehaviour,fallsundertherubricofdeontolog-
ical ethics. While such codes are associated with a narrow interpretation of the
roleofethicsintranslation,theyarenonethelessusefulfordecision-making.5As
with many other professional organizations, translators’ associations often pro-
vide such a code to encourage professional conduct, impartiality, honesty, and
respect for confidential material. These codes also promote trust on the part of
current and potential clients. At the time of writing, a review of many of these
codes found no explicit mention of MT, even though (as we have just seen) the
decision as to whether or not to make use of MT in a translation project may
be an ethical one. Chesterman (2001), who has written widely about ethics and
trustintranslation,suggestsageneralethicsofservice,focusingonloyaltytothe
terms and quality requirements of the client, to the source text and its author(s),
and to the target text reader.
The use of MT in translation production does not necessarily entail a loss of
quality, and the cost and effort of human translation is not appropriate for all
5Lambert (2018) and others propose that the assumption of neutrality in translation, central to
many Codes of Ethics, is just as flawed as it is for technology.
130