3 How to choose a suitable neural machine translation solution
Source text: Battery pack is attached to the transceiver.
Candidate A (eTranslation): Lebloc-batterieestfixéàl’émetteur-récepteur.
Candidate B (Google Translate): Labatterieestfixéeàl’émetteur-récepteur.
Candidate D (DeepL): Lebloc-pilesestfixéàl’émetteur-récepteur.
Reference: La batterie est installée sur
l’émetteur-récepteur.
Figure 6: Source text, reference translation, candidate translation
2.5.1.3 𝐹-measure
Thestudentinourexampleabovecouldchoosetoprioritizeprecisionoverrecall
andthusrefusetogiveanymoreanswersafter“Monday,Tuesday”,becausethey
do not want to risk giving a wrong answer. Alternatively, they might choose
to prioritize recall by blurting out tens of answers in the hope that enough of
them are actually correct. They thus might reply “Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday,
Thursday, Friday, Saturday, Sunday, January, February, March, April, May, June,
July,August,September,October,November,December”.Theirrecallwouldnow
shoot up to 100% as they would have given seven out of seven correct answers
(for the days of the week), but their precision will plummet to under 37% as only
seven out of the nineteen answers in their reply are correct. From the teacher’s
point of view, neither strategy is ideal. What the teacher wants is for the student
to optimize both precision and recall as the same time. They need a score that
combines both. This is where the F-measure comes in.
In mathematical terms, the F-measure is the harmonic mean of precision and
recall. It is computed as follows:
𝐹 = 2 ⋅precision ⋅recall
precision +recall(3)
which can also be reformulated as:
𝐹 = 2 ⋅no. of correct words in 𝐶
no. of words in 𝐶 +no. of words in 𝑅(4)
where 𝐶is the candidate translation, and 𝑅the reference translation.
Let us compute the F-measure of our three candidate translations in Table 4.
System A’s output gets an F-measure of 59%, while system B’s output gets an
F-measure of 75% and system D’s output an F-measure of 47%. According to this
metric, system B’s output is still better than system A’s or D’s.
65