4 Selecting and preparing texts for machine translation
seem ill-advised. The substantial improvement in the fluency and adequacy of
translations obtained through NMT might also suggest that steps taken to im-
prove output are an unnecessary luxury. In the context of NMT, it might seem,
in other words, that pre-editing is, a priori, redundant. Improvements in MT do
not diminish the benefits of all types of pre-editing, however. While some tradi-
tional pre-editing approaches may no longer be relevant, as will be discussed be-
low,othersbecomeessential,especiallyifpre-editingisincludedinatranslation
pipelineinwhichthereisnopost-editingorinwhich“goodenough”post-editing
(see O’Brien 2022: §2 [this volume]) is performed. What is more, while improve-
ments in quality certainly mean that the translation problems which used to
characterize MT have been reduced to a great extent, errors have not been com-
pletely eliminated, as we will see below, and new errors are emerging for which
MT has not been evaluated so far. These are linked to the nature of the trans-
lation commission (see below), the function of the source text and the assumed
intention of its author, and it is in these cases that pre-editing continues to play
a role in optimizing the use and increasing the effectiveness of MT.
The rest of this chapter starts out by discussing the background and uses of
pre-editing in the more recent past and in current uses of NMT. The chapter
goes on to describe the strategies involved in selecting texts for use with MT,
and with the influence of English as a source language on machine translated
texts. It then presents the case for writing for a global audience to start with.
The chapter concludes by presenting common pre-editing guidelines, as well as
the resources and tools used in this task.
2 Pre-editing and NMT
Inthepast,whenrule-basedsystemsproducedobvious,andoftensystematic,er-
rors in adequacy and fluency (see Rossi & Carré 2022 [this volume]), pre-editing
was often necessary to get the best out of MT. Even after the transition to sta-
tistical MT (SMT), researchers still found pre-editing to be useful. Seretan et al.
(2014), for example, working with the language pairs English-French, English-
German and French-English, found that appropriate pre-editing led to quality
improvements in the MT of user-generated content in both the technical and
health domains. In a related study, also using SMT, Gerlach (2015) found that
pre-editing English source texts resulted in faster post-editing of machine trans-
lations into French, although the overall impact on productivity in the extended
workflow was less clear. Likewise, Miyata & Fujita (2017) found that pre-editing
Japanese texts resulted in better translations into English, Chinese and Korean,
83