Pilar Sánchez-Gijón & Dorothy Kenny
6 Pre-editing guidelines
6.1 Opening remarks
Pre-editing is based on applying a series of specific strategies to improve MT
results when preparing content for a global audience or in controlled domains.
Pre-editing helps to ensure clear communication in controlled domains target-
ing global audiences. In this context, the predominant textual type is informa-
tional, where there is no creative or aesthetic use of language but a literal and
unambiguous use with the intention of either informing or instructing the text’s
recipient. The following are the most common guidelines used in communica-
tion for a global audience, and are the basis for pre-editing strategies. The aim
of most of these guidelines is to increase MT effectiveness in producing gram-
matically correct translations that reproduce the source text “message” and also
to obtain translations that are appropriate to the communicative situation of the
receiver according to the text function and the context in which it is used. These
guidelines can be grouped into three different categories:
1. Lexical choice
2. Structure and style
3. Referential elements
Whatever the case, the success of pre-editing will be determined by two con-
siderations. First, the function of the (source and target) text: the greater the
predominance of the informative or instructive function over the phatic or aes-
thetic functions, the more sense it makes to pre-edit the original text. Second,
thekindoferrorsintherawMToutputthatthechosenMTsystemprovidesand
that should be avoided or minimized by pre-editing the source text.
Pre-editing has two objectives: to prepare the original text so that the most
error-free possible raw MT output can be obtained, and also to prepare the orig-
inal text so that its translation through MT is suitable for a global audience. The
pre-editing guidelines presented in this section respond to these two objectives.
6.2 Lexical guidelines
As will be seen in Pérez-Ortiz et al. (2022 [this volume]), the way each word or
unit of meaning is processed in NMT is determined by its context and vice versa.
A lexical choice in a text is linked to the range of texts and contexts in which
the same choice is used. Let’s take the case of a source text to be translated by
MTand,consequently,tobepublishedinseveraltargetlanguagesintheshortest
90