A. Carré, D. Kenny, C. Rossi, P. Sánchez Gijón & O. Torres-Hostench
• Dictionary entries are based on a single word, while you can get an NMT
output for as much text as you like. NMT engines are far less useful than
dictionaries because their output for an isolated word is often unreliable.9
• Dictionaries provide you with definitions, which may be the only reliable
way to make sure you have understood the meaning of a word.
• Dictionary entries are based on human intuition and (most of the time)
they are designed and/or checked by lexicographers.
• NMT outputs are based on corpora, but they are not exact quotes from the
corpora that have been used for training (as explained in Pérez-Ortiz et
al. 2022 [this volume]). The next section addresses this difference in more
detail.
5.2 MT vs online corpora
At least two definitions are needed before we start explaining the differences
between MT and online corpora.
First, a parallel corpus is a collection of source texts aligned with their transla-
tions.Thisparallelismoralignmentmeansthateachsegment(usuallyasentence)
appears next to its translation.
A concordancer is the tool that is used to look for data in corpora and to dis-
play results. Table 2 contains an example from the Hansard corpus, a parallel
corpus (English and French) of debates in the House and Senate of the Canadian
Parliament.
Notefirstthattheconcordancesaredisplayedasafunctionofthesearch:here
we have looked for a French phrase, with a translation into English, so French
appears first (that is, on the left), even though the source text for this part of
the corpus is English (information that is not always displayed when using on-
line corpora). It is also worth saying that bilingual concordancers usually high-
light the exact search query (in bold in Table 2) in the source segment. Many
also attempt to highlight the part of the target segment that corresponds to the
searchquery,buttheidentificationofsuchcorrespondencesisbasedonakindof
probabilistic “guesswork”, and is often not completely reliable. We have, in fact,
“cleaned up” the target side of Table 2, to make the “equivalent” (see Kenny 2022:
§1[thisvolume])partsoftheconcordancelinesclearer.Inshort,alignmentmight
9We say this in the knowledge that language learners and university students in general do, in
fact, use FOMT engines very frequently to find translations of single words (see, for example,
Jolley & Maimone 2022; Dorst et al. 2022).
200