Dorothy Kenny
OtherproblemshavelesstodowiththetranslationsthatNMTsystemsoutput
and more to do with wider environmental and societal concerns: NMT systems
take much longer and much more computing power to train than their predeces-
sors and use up vast quantities of energy in the process. They usually require
dedicated, expensive hardware in the form of graphical processing units. They
also need massive quantities of training data, which are not available for every
language pair.
Improvements in the technology have also led some people to question the
wisdom of learning foreign languages: if a machine can translate anything any-
oneelsesaysorwritesinaforeignlanguageintoyourlanguage,whygotoallthe
trouble of learning their language? Such arguments are based on a very limited
understanding of the benefits of second or foreign language learning, however,
and ignore the fact that machine translation is viable for only a small number
of the world’s languages. They also tend to see machine translation as being in
competitionwithlanguagelearning,ratherthanpossiblybeinganaidinthepro-
cess.Chapters1,6and9ofthisbookhavemoretosayonthebroaderethicaland
societal issues raised by the use of machine translation in language learning and
other aspects of our lives.
8 Systems, engines and custom NMT
In this chapter so far, we have attempted to explain in a very general way what
translation is, what machine translation is and how different types of machine
translation work. We draw the chapter to a close with some brief comments
on particular machine translation systems and the related concept of a machine
translation engine.
Incommonusage,amachinetranslation systemoftenreferstoamachinetrans-
lationproductorservicemadeavailablebyasinglesupplierordeveloper.Google
Translate is thus understood as Google’s machine translation system; while Mi-
crosoft has a system called Microsoft Translator. These systems are accessible as
servicesacrossvariousplatforms.AusermightinstallGoogleTranslateasanapp
on their mobile phone, for example, or simply use Google Translate on the web,
having accessed it using their web browser. They might also access it through
anAPI(for “application programming interface”) in a third party’s software.20
20We use Google Translate here simply because it is probably the most familiar machine trans-
lation service. All Big Tech companies offer machine translation “solutions” of one kind or
another, as do a whole host of specialist machine translation providers.
44