Pilar Sánchez-Gijón & Dorothy Kenny
or the use of pronouns like itprobably still have some potential for appli-
cation, while rules of a syntactic nature may be unnecessary.
The straightforward nature of technical specifications contrasts with mar-
keting and legal materials associated with the same product, which might
needadaptationtomakethemmoreacceptabletopotentialbuyers,orcom-
pliant with the target legal framework. Indeed, legal translation provides
one of the best examples of a domain where it is sometimes necessary to
“rethink” a text completely in translation, so that it can be accommodated
by a new conceptual system.
For more on the domain- and genre-specific nature of translation, see Olo-
han (2015) and Šarcevic (1997).
Low-risk internal documentation: These are texts which have very low visibility
and where the consequences of less-than-optimal translation are not seri-
ous (see Canfora & Ottmann 2020 and Moorkens (2022 [this volume]) for
more detailed discussions of risk in MT use.) They may even be limited to
use within the user’s or client’s company. A priori, considerations such as
naturalness or fluency in the target language are less relevant than would
otherwise be the case (although NMT generally produces quite fluent out-
put anyway), but companies may still wish to control lexical selection and
lexical variability.
Low-risk external documentation: This refers to texts that are consulted only oc-
casionally or sporadically, or texts that are used as a help database or simi-
lar, and that are often not produced by the client, but by the community of
users of its service or product. In many such cases, the MT provider may
explicitly deny liability for any losses caused by faulty translations.
MT is not usually recommended for texts of a more visible nature whose
purpose is not just to inform or give instructions but also to be “appella-
tive”, that is, to arouse a particular interest in the reader, for example, in
a certain brand, or to elicit a certain behaviour. In other words, the more
informative a text is, the more it limits itself to the literalness of its mes-
sage, the less implicit information it contains and the less it appeals to
references linked to the reader’s culture or social reality, the greater the
expected success of MT.
86