Introduction
Dorothy Kenny
Dublin City University
In this Introduction I set out the rationale for this book and suggest ways in which
readers might approach the material it contains.
1 Why this book?
Multilingualism is a foundational value of the European Union. In practice, it de-
pends on multiple pillars, including language learning and translation. In recent
years, both of these pillars have been profoundly affected by the continued de-
velopment of machine translation. Machine translation, if used wisely, can serve
to support language learning efforts. It can provide access to more texts, origi-
nally written in more languages, to more users than ever before. And it can help
professional human translators to work more productively, given the right cir-
cumstances. There is a danger, however, that uncritical use of the technology
could set back individual efforts to learn languages. It could also be used in ways
thatglossoverpotentialproblemswiththeoutputitproduces,sothatconsumers
don’t realize when texts they are reading contain machine-translation induced
inaccuracies or biases. And if excessively hyped, it could discourage new blood
from entering the translation profession.
In order to harness the benefits of machine translation without jeopardizing
other valuable pillars of multilingualism, we take the view, following Bowker &
Ciro (2019), that good multilingual citizenship and professional translation must
beunderpinnedby machinetranslationliteracy .Differentlevelsofmachinetrans-
lation literacy will be appropriate for different people. Bowker & Ciro (2019) are
concerned with the international research community, for example. Here we tar-
get two main constituencies: more “occasional” users of machine translation –
thosewhousethetechnologyfor adhocinformationgatheringpurposes,oreven
unwittingly when they consume machine translated text without realizing it, or
DorothyKenny. 2022. Introduction. InDorothyKenny(ed.), Machinetransla-
tion for everyone: Empowering users in the age of artificial intelligence , v–viii.
Berlin: Language Science Press. DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.6759972