Pilar Sánchez-Gijón & Dorothy Kenny
Table 3: Aspects related to pre-editing verb forms
Guideline Explanation
Use the active voice. Where possible and appropriate, use
the active voice.
Use simple verb tense forms;
preferably the present or past simple.Depending on your language pair
and the MT engine, you may wish to
avoid using compound verb forms.
Although the same compound form
may exist in both languages, it may
not be used in the same way and
may lead to different interpretations.
Avoid concatenated verbs. Avoid unnecessary concatenations
of verbs that make it difficult to
understand and translate the text.
6.4 Referential elements
Referential elements are all those which substitute for or make reference to an-
other element, whether in the same text, in the case of intratextual references,
or outside of the text, in the case of extratextual references. The most illustrative
example of this is pronouns,like I,he,she,him,her, etc., and the related category
of possessive determiners, such as my,his,her, etc.
Pronouns with the referent in the same sentence are not usually problematic
from an NMT point of view. When they are within the same sentence, there are
usually no gender or number agreement problems between possessive determin-
ers and nouns (see Bentivogli et al. (2016) for an early discussion of how the
treatment of agreement phenomena in MT improved with the advent of NMT.)
Thisisalsotheusuallycasewhensuccessivepronounsthroughoutthetextmain-
tain the same referent (e.g., in the case of the same subject in consecutive sen-
tences). In other cases, however, pronouns may be translated according to the
way in which the training corpus treats them most frequently. This issue is par-
ticularly sensitive when the text alternates between different referents. In these
cases, even though the human reading of the text leaves no doubt as to who or
what is the referent of each pronominal form, MT systems are usually unable to
maintain this consistency and tend to homogenize the pronominal forms, using
those that are most common.
94