8 Custom machine translation
Trainingforlinguistsandengineersinthemoretechnicalorlinguisticaspects
of MT is becoming more and more usual in educational environments, but it is
still predominant in professional contexts, where needs arise in a more dynamic
way.
Beforeconcludingthissection,itisworthmentioninganothergroupofpeople,
whoareincreasinglycontributingtoMTcustomization,butwhomayormaynot
be covered by the term linguists used above, namely translators . In this chapter I
mainly cover custom MT as an off-line activity which requires human interven-
tionandwhichhappensonlyfromtimetotime.However,itisworthnotingthat
in some current settings, namely those involving so-called “adaptive” MT (see
O’Brien 2022 [this volume]), customization may also happen in real-time (or at
least much faster and more frequently than in other settings). In such scenarios,
translators and their translations are becoming the cornerstone for custom MT
wherecustomizationactuallymeansreal-timeusermimicking.Newtranslations
are integrated automatically into already proficient systems as the translator de-
liversnewparallelsentences(source-targetpairs),andpreferredtranslationsare
made available to translators as they work.
3 How to customize a machine translation engine
3.1 An allegory
Imagine that you land on a new planet – no life found, but there is an extraor-
dinary library with plenty of written texts in what seem to be a number of dif-
ferent languages: some texts are in one language (L1), some in another language
(L2), some appear to be bilingual texts (L1-L2). But there is no grammar book, no
orthography book, no organized linguistic knowledge; no clue as to how these
languages work at all. Just texts with plenty of sentences, pairs of sentences and
more sentences.
By chance, you also find lists of L1-L2 word correspondences. Also, while in-
specting the texts, you observe that some of them are marked with a particular
stamp, others are marked with a different stamp, and yet others do not have any
stamp at all.2You feel lucky: all these texts are probably the only knowledge
about the lost life on this newly discovered planet.
But no! Wait! As you leave the library, you discover that there is still life on
this planet: two of its inhabitants are staring at you in a hostile way but you also
2For the purposes of this analogy, each different stamp represents a different domain, and texts
with no stamp can be considered as non-domain specific.
171