5 How to deal with errors in machine translation: Post-editing
4 Measuring post-editing effort
When technology advances, it moves from the lab to the public domain, where
it is tested for usefulness. Initially, this can act as a disruptor – processes used
and accepted for years are disturbed, which, in turn, understandably leads to
questions,worry,orirritation.Whenweareusedtodoingataskoneway,wefind
it difficult to quickly embrace a new way of doing it. Moreover, if the technology
creates new problems for us, we are not likely to embrace it fully. This is the
case with MT and post-editing for professional purposes. Consequently, there
hasbeenmuchinterestinmeasuringtheeffortinvolvedinpost-editingtoverify,
or debunk, the claim that it is “faster” than translating without such automation.
A vast amount of research has been produced in the past fifteen years or so to
investigatethisquestion(Koponen2016).Therearetoomanystudiestomention
individually here. However, one of the seminal texts on the topic deserves men-
tion because it set the standard for measuring post-editing effort. That text was
written in German by Hans-Peter Krings, with the English translation appear-
ing in 2001 (Krings 2001). Krings investigated the effort involved in post-editing
compared with translation. He did so at a time when MT produced much lower
quality output than it does nowadays and his experimental set-up was necessar-
ily naïve, given the era in which it was conducted: the tasks were done on paper
andheusedacameratorecordtheprocess.WhatismostimportantaboutKrings’
study is not his set up nor his findings, but that he argued for the measurement
of effort across three dimensions – temporal, technical and cognitive.
All too often, measurement of PE effort focuses only on the temporal dimen-
sion, i.e. how long does the task take in comparison with another task. Time is,
of course, one of the most important aspects, especially in a commercial envi-
ronment. Time is relatively easy to measure too, so it tends to be the main focus
when commercial organisations wish to measure PE effort.
Krings’work,however,demonstratesthattheothertwodimensionsalsoneed
tobeconsidered.Technicaleffortmeasureskeyboardandmouseactions,i.e.how
manywordsorpartsofwordsaredeleted,added,howmanyphrasesareselected,
cut and pasted to another location in the text, etc. Translog, mentioned above, is
one tool that enables keyboard logging. As PE istextual revision, understanding
the effort involved in the mechanical changes implemented is important. Not
only that, but this kind of revision – which involves deletion, re-typing, copying
and pasting – requires a lot of keyboard and mouse usage, which is physically
tiringandcanevenleadtostraininthehandsandwrists.Ontheotherhand,ifthe
MT output is relatively good, MT can reduce the amount of typing a translator
has to do.
115