Juan Antonio Pérez-Ortiz, Mikel L. Forcada & Felipe Sánchez-Martínez
cooked in it. A single attention vector would have to mix both flavours in a sin-
gleembeddingcontainingtoomuchheterogeneousinformationthatcouldaffect
negatively the search for a translation for the word represented by the embed-
ding. For this reason, some NMT systems obtain different attentions for each
word in each layer and use them to compute a number of different embeddings
for each word. Each of these embeddings is said to be computed by a different
head. T-NLG has 28attention heads in each layer. Therefore, its last layer pro-
duces 28 different 4,256-dimensional embeddings for each word.
5.3 Contextual word embeddings in natural language processing
Embeddings are the cornerstone of NMT but they have also proved to be useful
inmanyothernaturallanguageprocessingapplicationssuchassentimentanaly-
sis and automatic summarisation. As an illustration, systems that automatically
classify as positive or negative the sentences in a text containing a product re-
view may work by first computing a collection of deep contextual embeddings
for each word in the sentence and then feeding these embeddings to a much
simpler neural network that will compute a number between 0 and 1 indicating
the degree of positiveness of the sentence (for example, 0.95will indicate a de-
cidedly positive sentence, 0.2a negative sentence, and 0.51a neutral sentence).
These systems are usually trained with a corpus of sentences manually tagged
by humans. The part of the model that computes the embeddings is not neces-
sarily trained for a particular corpus as pre-trained models already trained with
millions of sentences are freely available for many languages.
6 Neural machine translation, at last
At this point, you are hopefully in a good position to understand how NMT
works, even if we describe its fundamentals in only a few sentences as we do
next. We will focus on two architectures: those of so-called transformer and re-
current neural networks.
6.1 Transformer: Attention-based encoder–decoder
Put simply, a transformer NMT system is composed of a module that computes
contextual word embeddings for each word in the source input sentence and a
secondmodulewhichsuccessivelypredictseachwordinthetargetsentence.The
former module is called an encoder and the latter module is known as a decoder.
For predicting the words in the target language, the decoder pays attention to
156