1 Europe, multilingualism and machine translation
89.9% (almost 14 million) of secondary level pupils studied more than one for-
eign language in 2019 (Eurostat 2022). Among them, more than 7 million (48.1%)
studied two or more foreign languages.
Inshort,ofthe600languagesspokenaroundEuropebymorethan700million
speakers (EU and non-EU) (World Bank 2020), the majority of EU students are
learning one or two out of the following four as their first or subsequent foreign
language: English, French, German or Spanish.
2.6 Levels of attainment
The European Survey on Language Competences (European Commission 2019)
tested 54,000 secondary pupils (aged 14-15) in 16 educational systems, and cov-
ered the two most widely taught foreign languages in all concerned education
systems. The survey tested writing, reading and listening comprehension. It did
nottestoralexpression.Thekeyfindingofthesurveywasthatonly42%oftested
students reached the level of independent user (B1 and B2 in the Common Eu-
ropean Framework of Reference for Languages) in their first foreign language,
and only 25% reached this level in their second foreign language. Moreover, a
large number of pupils did not even achieve the level of a basic user: 14% failed
to achieve this level for their first foreign language and 20% failed to achieve it
for their second foreign language (European Commission 2019).
In the same report, there are data from a 2018 flash Eurobarometer survey
among 15-30 year-olds, where 85% of respondents stated that they wished to im-
prove their proficiency in a language they had already learned (mainly English):
This indicates that the survey respondents were not satisfied with the level
they achieved at the end of compulsory education or they did not have a
chancetomaintaintheirlevel.OnethirdofsurveyedyoungEuropeanssaid
they were unable to study in a language other than the one they used in
school (i.e. often the mother tongue). (European Commission 2019: 102)
2.7 Is there a role for machine translation in language learning?
We have already seen that language-learning efforts in the EU tend to be con-
centrated on a small number of large languages, and that learners do not always
reach desired levels of competence in their chosen foreign languages. These cir-
cumstances suggest that further support for language learning is needed, and it
behoves us to investigate whether such support could come in the form of ma-
chine translation. As neural machine translation learns faster than any foreign
11