7 How neural machine translation works
idea of gardens and orchards. There are some outliers on the list, especially the
wordconsistently , which seems in principle disconnected from the rest of words,
forcing us to put it as far as possible from all of them. Chromosome is another
isolatedword,butasflowersandwaitersusechromosomestocarrytheirgenetic
information, it may be put somewhere in the middle of the line between these
words but at the same time not very close to red. See Figure 4 for a possible
solution that may not match yours exactly.3
In order to assign mathematical codes to the words in our list, let’s assign
coordinates to each word to reflect its position on the square. As we are in a
two-dimensional space, we need two coordinates for each word: the first coor-
dinate is a number that represents the distance to the left vertical side of the
square; the second coordinate is a number that represents the distance to the
bottom horizontal side of the square. The word restaurant could be assigned, for
example, the two numbers 0.25and1.1, and the word menuthe numbers 0.6and
1.3, close to restaurant as seen in Figure 4. These coordinate values can be rep-
resented using vector notation , which simply consists of writing the numbers as
a comma-separated list of values between brackets. The vectors corresponding
torestaurant andmenuwould therefore be [0.25, 1.1] and [0.6, 1.3] , respectively.
Eachofthesevectorsrepresentsapossiblewordembeddingforthesetwowords.
Althoughitmaynotbecompletelyobvious,consideringembeddingsmadeup
of two numbers instead of a single number boosts the possibilities of solving the
problemofplacingwordscloserorfartherapartaswehavemorefreedomtosat-
isfy all the restrictions. In fact, moving from two dimensions to a higher number
of dimensions increases these possibilities even more. A five-dimensional repre-
sentation of a word could be, for example, [2.34, 1.67, 4.81, 3.01, 5.61] . NMT sys-
tems consider embeddings with hundreds of dimensions, and the input sentence
to be translated is represented by a collection of these vast word embeddings.
Wordembeddingsarelearnedusingtheverysamealgorithmusedtolearnthe
weights of the neural network presented in Section 3.5. In fact, both the weights
and the embeddings arelearned at the same time. Bearing in mind that the input
layer of a neural network involved in NMT usually consists of the embeddings
of the words in the input sentence, there is no need to limit ourselves to fixed
vectors. Instead, their values can be repeatedly updated during training in such
a way that the value of the error function is minimised.
3We have deliberately placed Figure 4 a few pages on, so that you do not see it before you
attempt the exercise.
151