A. Carré, D. Kenny, C. Rossi, P. Sánchez Gijón & O. Torres-Hostench
based (as explained in Chapters 2 and 7), they will produce poorer results when
too little data is available to train the system. In the examples given in this Sec-
tion,weuse the FR<>EN language pair (lookingat translations fromFrenchinto
English as well as from English into French), for which current MT solutions
often produce good enough results, but we certainly encourage readers to find
examples in their language pairs and compare them with ours.
Genre also makes a difference. You may find for instance that FOMT is better
attranslatingessaysthanitisattranslatingpoemsorthelyricsofyourfavourite
song.ThismaybebecausethedatausedtotraintheMTsystemaremoresimilar
totheformer,andtranslatedsongsandpoetryareprobablyquiterareinthetrain-
ing data. Poem and song translation are also particularly demanding: translated
poems and songs may have to be recitable or singable. They may require partic-
ularrhymingschemesormetres.Althoughmachinescanbetrainedtowriteand
evento translate poetry (Van de Cruys 2018; 2019; 2020), general-purpose FOMT
mightnotbeuptothetask.Itisstillaninterestingexercisetotryitout,however:
take a popular song, poem or nursery rhyme in either your L1 or L2. Find a good
human translation of it,5one that tries to create pleasing rhymes and rhythm in
the target language. Now run the original through a FOMT engine and compare
the MT with the human translation. The results are likely to encourage you to
reflect on what MT does well, and what human translators do wonderfully.
4.3 Ask a linguist
Second,youneedtoconsideryourexpectationsandthoseofyourteacherand/or
interlocutor. It’s always a good idea to ask them whether MT is an acceptable so-
lution, and whether it might interfere with your learning in ways that could be
inappropriate. There might be cases in which the material used by your teacher
cannot be put into a FOMT engine, because it contains personal or confidential
data (as explained in Moorkens 2022 [this volume]). A language teacher could
also tell you that MT will prevent you from learning grammar rules as it partly
deprives you of the possibility of actively finding the right structure and phras-
ing. And if proficient use of grammar is needed to fix MT outputs, you won’t
necessarily become more proficient as you interact with MT. Quite the opposite:
exposure to mistakes or approximations that might go unnoticed by learners
could be detrimental. Learning about a foreign language based on repeated ex-
posure to fluent MT outputs might occur, however, in at least some cases: in a
recent study, Resende & Way (2021) evidenced implicit learning about syntax
5You may be able to find published human translations of poems, songs and nursery rhymes
online.
196