Chapter 6
Ethics and machine translation
Joss Moorkens
Dublin City University
Neural machine translation (MT) can facilitate communication in a way that sur-
passes previous MT paradigms, but there are also consequences of its use. As with
the development of any technology, MT is not ethically neutral, but rather reflects
the values of those behind its development. In this chapter, we consider the eth-
ical issues around MT, beginning with data gathering and reuse and looking at
how MT fits with the values and codes of the translator. If machines and systems
reflectvaluesystems,cantheybeexplicitly“good”andremovebiasfromtheirout-
put? What is the contribution of MT to discussions of sustainability and diversity?
Ratherthanpromotinganapproachthatinvolvesfollowingasetofinstructionsto
implement a technology unthinkingly, this chapter highlights the importance of a
conscious decision-making process when designing a data-driven MT workflow.
1 What do we mean by ethics?
The field of Ethics examines morality, good and evil, right and wrong, and ad-
dressesquestionsabouthowbesttolive.Theearliestsurvivingtextsonthistopic
originated in Egypt, Babylonia, and India. Greek philosophers such as Socrates
introduced the notion of the “good life”, one that is worthy and admirable. Aris-
totle made this a little more concrete by identifying a set of virtues that, when
practised, would allow human beings to flourish. These virtues are still abstract,
and are not always helpful when deciding whether an action is right or wrong.
Subsequently, philosophers and ethicists have suggested ways to decide on a
right or moral course of action, based, for example, on the probability of provid-
ing the best result for the majority, or by only acting on good or pure motives.
A problem is that what is well-motivated or produces the happiest result for
one group may not necessarily produce an equally positive result for another.
Joss Moorkens. 2022. Ethics and machine translation. In Dorothy Kenny
(ed.),Machinetranslationforeveryone: Empoweringusersintheageofartificial
intelligence , 121–140. Berlin: Language Science Press. DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.
6759984