2 Human and machine translation
to be what its writer or speaker wanted to say, but often we cannot be sure what
they intended. Or we can associate meaning with our own interpretation of a
text, but then we have to concede that other people might interpret the same
text in a different way. A further issue that arises in the context of translation is
thataperfectlyvalidtargettextmaysaymoreorlessthanitssourcetext,simply
because the language it is written in requires it to do so.
Anexamplemighthelphere.Theopeninglineofafairlyrecentmemoir(Tam-
met 2006) is reproduced in example (1):
(1) I was born on 31 January 1979 – a Wednesday.
Its translation into French (Tammet 2009) appears in example (2):
(2) Je suis né le 31 janvier 1979. Un Mercredi.
Despitealmosttotalword-for-wordalignmentbetweenthetwosentences,the
French sentence actually says more than the English. It tells the reader that the
writer,the IinEnglish,ismale,becauseifthewriterwasfemale,thenthecorrect
forminexample(2)wouldbe néeandnot né.Givencertaintenseforms,involving
certainverbs,writtenFrenchisobligedtosignalthesexofthepersoninquestion.
But how does the translator into French know that the person saying “I” is
male? This is, after all, the opening line of the book. Well, the book is a memoir,
andtheconventionsofthegenrerequiretheenunciatingsubjecttobetheauthor
ofthememoir,andthetranslatorknowswhosebookheistranslating.Itsaysitin
the contract and on the cover of the book. The fact that French needs to specify
the sex of a person in certain situations where this can be left vague in English
does not cause the translator any headaches. It is a non-problem; but this very
simple example shows two important things: the first – already mentioned – is
that sometimes translations can mean more than their source texts. The second
is that sometimes information that is required to translate a sentence cannot be
found in that sentence. Rather one has to look into (1) the wider text – the front
cover,forexample–whichissometimesalsocalledthe co-text,thetextthatgoes
with a given fragment of text, or (2) the context, understood here as the wider
situation that is relevant to the text, to find out how to proceed.
In other cases, a translation might say more than its source text not because
the target language requires it, but because the genre does. In a study involving
user interfaces for computer-aided design tools, Moorkens (2012) found that the
single-wordheading Selecting inEnglishwascommonlytranslatedinawaythat
madeexplicitwhatwastobeselected,yieldingavarietyofdifferenttranslations,
a sample of which is presented below, back-translated into English:
25