Pilar Sánchez-Gijón & Dorothy Kenny
another language. Thus, the post-editing phase can be minimized, although in
no case should it be omitted.
Pre-editing as part of the provision of translation services makes sense
whether the content is written solely to generate a translation or if it is also to
be published in the source language. In both cases, pre-editing makes it possible
to guarantee the quality of the original and to optimize the use of NMT.
9 Concluding remarks
The main objective of MT as a resource in translation projects is to increase pro-
ductivity and, consequently, reduce the time needed to generate a good quality
translation.Inthissense,pre-editingmanagestooptimizethesourcetextcontent
soastominimizeerrorsinthetranslatedtext(whenMTisusedforassimilation)
and the editing needed to guarantee the expected quality (when MT is followed
by post-editing or used as a resource for human translation).
When NMT is capable of producing translations with virtually no fluency or
adequacy errors in informative or instructive texts, then the challenges for MT
go beyond these text types. However, translating texts with different commu-
nicative functions, such as for games or texts of a more appellative nature, is not
only a matter of avoiding errors. It is necessary to produce a translation that is
inlinewiththeintentionofthesourcetextandwithwhichthetargetreadercan
identify in the same way as the source text reader. In this case, pre-editing takes
on an added value: the preparation of a text suitable for publishing multilingual
content.
As a strategy, pre-editing may play a certain role in foreign language learn-
ing. But its main environment is in multilingual content publishing. Although it
wasoriginallypartoftranslationworkflowsfortechnicaldocumentationandthe
like, the expansion of NMT could lead to pre-editing being applied to texts of a
more complex nature, or even to translators eventually putting their skills at the
service of the source text, instead of focusing on the target text, as has happened
throughout centuries of translation history.
References
Aixelá,Franco.2011.Anoverviewofinterferenceinscientificandtechnicaltrans-
lation.The Journal of Specialised Translation 11. 75–88. https://www.jostrans.
org/issue11/art_aixela.pdf.
100