6 Ethics and machine translation
There has been no survey of the diversity of MT research teams. A search of
papers will find a reasonable amount of research published on MT using Simpli-
fiedChinese,Bengali,andHindi–languageswithhugenumbersofspeakers,but
ones that are non-European and, in the cases of Bengali and Hindi, historically
under-resourced. It is probably less likely that a great deal of diversity will be
found among the leaders of these research teams and those who set the research
agenda. In discussions of bias outside of MT, such a lack of diversity has been
highlighted as a problem that has contributed to a number of well-publicized
errors and blind spots in systems that use machine learning, such as facial recog-
nitiontoolsintendedtoidentifylikelycriminalsthatpickoutdisproportionately
high numbers of ethnic minorities.
In their article on the societal impact of MT, Vieira et al. (2020: 13) find that
inappropriate use of MT can cause harm to vulnerable people in medical and
legal use cases reviewed. They find that it can exacerbate inequality, given the
“disproportionate availability of data and resources for a relatively small num-
ber of the world’s languages”, combined with a lack of MT literacy among those
deploying MT. On the other hand, there is also a benefit in democratizing com-
munication, as more and more under-resourced languages are being catered for
in free online MT systems. At the time of writing, Google Translate covers 109
languages, including such under-resourced examples as Chichewa, Scots Gaelic,
Uyghur, and Tatar.
5.2 As reflected in MT outputs
In 2016, Jones calculated that, of over 6,000 non-endangered languages, only 1%
werecateredforbyanysortofMT.Thissituationhasimprovedalittleduetothe
research efforts mentioned in §5.1, and as evinced by the growing number of lan-
guagescoveredbyBaiduandGoogle.However,thistakesplaceinaworldwhere
informationtendstoflowfromwell-topoorly-resourcedlanguages.BecauseMT
has been shown to exert source language interference to a greater degree than
humantranslation(seeToral2019),theworryisthatpoorly-resourcedlanguages
will be impoverished in the long run.
This could be the case for all machine-translated languages, especially if a
shortage of new human-translated data means that MT systems struggle to keep
up with contemporary language. Vanmassenhove et al. (2019) illustrate how lex-
ical diversity is lost when NMT engines are trained up to the point of so-called
convergence,8suggesting that if training was stopped at an earlier juncture, the
NMT output produced would be less standardized and more lexically diverse.
8The point at which iterative NMT system training is stopped, as automatic evaluation scores
show no improvement in output quality. See §7.2.
135