Caroline Rossi & Alice Carré
2.1 Privacy and confidentiality
How does an MT system handle your data? Even though this question is a vital
one for you and your commissioner or client, most MT solutions do not provide
you with a clear answer or any kind of warning at first sight. Instead, you will
havetoreadprivacystatementscarefullyandmakesureyouhavemadetheright
choice before you start.
For instance, this warning is found in the privacy statement of eTranslation,
the EU’s NMT system: “Users should exercise their judgement when submitting
potentially sensitive documents to any online service, including eTranslation”.
Such warnings are valid even for solutions in which the data is not kept on the
provider’s servers, and privacy issues may indeed arise from simple situations
in which data has been transferred only to be deleted a few moments later. Con-
cerns about confidentiality mean that the use of even internal MT systems like
eTranslation has been forbidden in hearings at the Court of Justice of the Euro-
pean Union. This is because no MT system could possibly conform to the strict
confidentiality requirements for such hearings1(C. Lenglet, personal communi-
cation).
Of course, the risk that privacy issues will arise with free online MT is con-
siderably higher, because data is kept and reused constantly. Thus, some of the
confidential segments of a text inadvertently fed to a free MT system could be
leaked in unexpected ways (for more information on how to handle your data
ethically and safely, see Moorkens 2022 [this volume]).
2.2 Comparing MT outputs
You may wish to test several MT tools with the same source text and compare
the outputs in order to identify the best tool for your needs.
There are several ways to compare outputs depending on the question you
seek to answer. The scores used for comparison may, for example, be based on
humanassessment,automaticevaluationandorthemeasurementofpost-editing
(hereafter PE) effort. The measurement of PE effort is covered in more detail in
O’Brien (2022 [this volume]). It suffices to say here that an MT output that re-
quireslittleornoPEisconsidered“better”thanonethatrequiresalotofPE,and
thatPEeffortisusedtomeasurequalityincaseswherethereisarealisticassump-
tion that machine translated texts will be used for dissemination purposes. (See
Kenny (2022 [this volume]) on the distinction between MT for assimilation and
MTfordissemination.)Intherestofthischapter,wefocusonhumanassessment
and automatic evaluation of MT outputs.
1As described and explained here: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/en/TXT/PDF/?uri=
CELEX:32013D0488
56