2 Human and machine translation
perceived opacity, however, and in the areas known as explainable AI (XAI) and
interpretable AI , efforts are now being made to open up the “black box” of deep
learning, so that its inner workings can be more easily understood by users, ex-
planations can be provided for particular outputs and systems can be improved
(see, for example, Vashishth et al. (2019)).
7 The advantages and disadvantages of neural machine
translation
NMT is generally considered the best performing type of machine translation
invented so far. It performs better than SMT, for example, because it can build
up very rich representations of words as they appear in a given source text, tak-
ing the full source sentence into account, rather than mere 𝑛-grams. When it
produces translations, an NMT system considers both these rich representations
and the emerging target sentence at the same time. Because NMT handles full
sentences,itisbetteratdealingwithtrickylinguisticfeatureslikediscontinuous
dependencies and it handles all sorts of agreement phenomena better than SMT.
But while contemporary NMT systems certainly handle full sentences, until
recently, they did not look beyond the current sentence. This meant that they
couldnotuseinformationfromaprevioussentencetoworkoutwhatapronoun
like “it” refers to in the current sentence, or that the understood subject of a
Spanish verb is feminine (in cases of pro-drop in Spanish). This restriction to
sentence-level processing can cause lots of other problems that only become ap-
parentwhenuserstranslatefulltextsratherthanisolatedsentences.Theproblem
is currently being tackled by researchers working in the area of document-level
machine translation , however (see, for example, Bao et al. (2021)). NMT can also
output words that don’t actually exist in the target language. Far more seriously,
NMT output can be fluent but inaccurate. And when a translation looks and
sounds good, one might neglect to check that it is compatible with the source
text. Like other technologies trained on large quantities of existing text, it can
also amplify biases encountered in the training data. A well documented form of
the amplification of bias is the way in which many systems over-use male forms.
Given a Spanish sentence that does not have a subject pronoun, like in example
(8) above, many NMT systems will output a male subject pronoun in English by
default. NMT developers are seeking solutions to this problem. Some systems
now output both male and female pronouns and let users choose the one they
prefer. Other steps that users can take to get the best out of a given NMT system
are addressed in Chaptes 4 and 5 of this book.
43