7 How neural machine translation works
some attention too ( 10%), which may be explained by the fact that it helps to
labelseasonas a noun. The contribution of the verb ( 8%) to the contextual em-
beddingmayalsobedescribedintermsofitscontributiontomarkingthenumber
ofseasonas singular. Note that the percentages always add up to 100%.
Determining how the attention vector is used in order to obtain a new em-
bedding that combines the original non-contextual embeddings to get a new em-
bedding is beyond the scope of this chapter. Suffice to say that the procedure
involves a specific sequence of mathematical operations and that the resulting
embedding will be located somewhere in between the original embeddings.
Following our running example, nine different attention vectors will be com-
puted for this sentence (one for each word) and then applied to the original non-
contextual embeddings in order to obtain a collection of nine new embeddings,
each one corresponding to a different word in the sentence. These new embed-
dings may be considered as contextual embeddings as they are influenced to
different degrees by the rest of the words in the sentence.
5.1 Many attention layers, better than one
Previously, in Section 3.3 of this chapter, we discussed the benefits of succes-
sively refining neural computations by exploiting models with different layers.
Consequently, it will come as no great surprise that in order to obtain more pre-
cise representations, the contextual embeddings just obtained may be combined
with new attention vectors to obtain yet another new embedding for each word.
As a real-life example, Turing Natural Language Generation (T-NLG), another
of the largest language models published in 2020, has 78attention layers that
successivelypolishembeddingsof4,256dimensions.4Recallthattheserepresen-
tations, which are learned by applying many consecutive layers, are known as
deeprepresentations.
5.2 Many heads, better than one
Thereisnoreasontorestrictourselvestoasingleattentionvectorforeachword
in each layer. For example, given the sentence “My grandpa baked bread in his
oven daily”, it could be interesting to have an embedding for ovenwhich has
the flavour of grandpa to reflect that this oven belongs to an older person, and a
different embedding for ovenwith the flavour of breadto reflect what has been
4“Turing-NLG: A 17-billion-parameter language model by Microsoft”, 2020. Retrieved
from https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/blog/turing-nlg-a-17-billion-parameter-
language-model-by-microsoft/
155