6 Ethics and machine translation
whereby, given certain languages, for every male-gendered output, an almost
identical female-gendered output (and vice versa) is created. The user can then
evaluate the different options and choose which one to use. This, of course, as-
sumes a binary view of gender, but has improved the quality of Google’s gender-
specific translations overall (Johnson 2020).
The future may see computers act as explicit ethical agents, with the ability
to process information about each situation and to autonomously determine the
best or most ethical course of action. Technology has not yet reached that level
ofsophistication,whichisonereasonwhymachinecreationscannotclaimcopy-
right and machines cannot be held liable for loss or injury. Even if or when this
happens, we cannot assume that a computer will act ethically. We have estab-
lished that technology is not benign. While its use can bring great personal and
societal benefits, there are risks and consequences that may not have been con-
sidered before the technology was deployed.
There is no doubt that the availability of free online MT has aided communi-
cation for many, but the seamless interfaces and improving output may lead end
users to assume that its use is harmless (and it usually will be). The professional
translationworkflowstakeholdersintheusecasesin§2.1canbeassumedtohave
expertise in language technology, but this is not true of the general public, who
might expect the same level of coherence and comprehensibility in a machine
translation that they would find in a (good) human translation. They may not
even be aware that they are reading a machine translated text, and even if the
output were to be labelled as MT-generated, they are unlikely to be aware of the
risks of mistranslation.
7 Summary
As MT quality improves, the technology facilitates more communication either
directly or as part of a translation workflow. However, there are ethical con-
cerns to be considered by MT developers, translation buyers, translation agen-
cies, translators, and consumers of translation. As with all technologies, neither
MT development nor MT output should be considered neutral, but rather as pro-
mulgating the perspective of the developers or the translators who created the
training data, in the tools for interaction with MT and in the output text. Uncrit-
ical reporting of positive MT evaluation results minimizes public awareness of
riskandbiasinMToutputwhilepotentiallydevaluingtheworkofhumantrans-
lators. Readers may find it useful to consider the issues raised in this chapter
when working with and using MT, and reflecting on how the related processes
fit with their own values, purposes, and principles.
137