7 How neural machine translation works
is observed in a different development set , which has been reserved or ”held out”
for this purpose (see Section 7.2). The technical details of the training algorithm
are beyond the scope of this chapter; let us just say that it is usually based on
computing how much the error function varies when each weight is varied by a
fixed but very small amount (the gradient of the error function), and then vary-
ingeachweightabitinthedirectioninwhichitreducestheerrorfunction.2This
type of training is called gradient descent ; it is not guaranteed to find the very
best weights, but it is likely that good candidates will be found. The intensity of
these weight variations is regulated by a parameter called the learning rate ; this
learning rate is usually higher in the first steps of the training algorithm, but its
magnitude is made progressively smaller as the weights get closer to their final
values. Note that training neural networks is quite laborious: many examples
are necessary and they need to be presented many times to learn. This is often
due to limitations of the training algorithms, however, rather than to the lack of
capacity of a specific neural network to represent the solution to a problem.
Once the weights are determined, training stops (see Section 7.2) and the neu-
ral network can be used to obtain the outputs for new inputs which are not in-
cluded among the examples used during training.
3.6 Generalisation in neural networks
Generalisation is a fundamental cognitive process for humans and animals. It
allows us to use what we learned in the past in new situations which can be
regarded as similar but not identical to the situation in which learning originally
took place. A person does not need to relearn how to drive when entering a new
street or driving a new car. Similarly, generalisation happens when an organism
which already responds to a certain stimulus in a particular way responds to
similar stimuli in similar ways. Generalisation is also key to language learning:
young children soon learn to say sentences they have never heard before.
Neural networks may ideally generalise in the context of machine translation
by producing similar outputs when fed with similar inputs, independently of
whether they were included in the training set or not. One feature of neural
networksisthe smoothness ofthecomputations,meaningthatiftheinputvalues
are slightly changed, the result of the formulas will not vary significantly.
In a broad sense, in order to achieve generalisation, similar sentences should
get similar representations, and as sentence representations will be obtained
from word representations, we may conclude that representing similar words
2Some of you may recognise here the mathematical concept of derivative of a function .
149