Sharon O’Brien
a result, the prefix “post” seems irrelevant. “Interactive MT” is a more accurate
term. As happens in many domains, the term “post-editing” is now well estab-
lished so it may not disappear soon, but it will probably become defunct as time
goes by. The task itself – interacting with and fixing MT output – is less likely
to become defunct in the near future.
3.2 Research interfaces
Above I described the different mainstream interfaces used for post-editing, as
well as the modes of interaction. There are many other interfaces one can use,
but the features are essentially the same. As post-editing is a relatively new task
for professional translators, there has been a significant amount of interest in it
from a research perspective. Research has focused on the types of edits that are
typicallyimplemented,onmeasuringwhetherthetasktakeslesstimethantrans-
lation, the quality produced, and, not least, on the cognitive processes involved.
To capture data on these topics, researchers have developed their own inter-
faces for post-editing. The main motivations for doing so are that commercial
tools can be too expensive for research projects, their features are relatively so-
phisticated, sometimes actually acting as a hindrance to the research objectives,
or they cannot be controlled enough for experimental research conditions. Ex-
amples of two research tools developed for post-editing experiments are Cas-
macat and Translog. Casmacat was developed as part of an EU-funded research
project.3The aim of this project was to build the next generation translator’s
workbenchusinginteractiveandadaptivemachinetranslationandtobuildmod-
els of the cognitive processes involved in interactive MT. Translog was initially
developed for research into translation processes by the Copenhagen Business
School. Translog II is a more recent version of the tool that enables research into
translation and post-editing.4Both of these tools can be integrated with tech-
nologies that are very useful for research purposes, e.g. key logging, where the
keyboard activity is recorded, and eye tracking, which records eye movements
andcognitiveloadduringthetranslationorpost-editingprocess.Theuseofthese
tools has helped us better understand post-editing as a task. Nonetheless, while
theyarereallyusefulforresearchpurposes,theyareconsiderablypareddownin
terms of features compared with standard commercial TM tools, and so can pro-
vide only limited understanding of the task as it is performed in real production
environments.
3Co-funded by the European Union under the Seventh Framework Programme Project 287576
(ICT-2011.4.2) - http://www.casmacat.eu
4https://sites.google.com/site/centretranslationinnovation/translog-ii?authuser=0
114