2 Human and machine translation
But even experienced translators will sometimes admit to difficulty in trans-
lating texts that are highly technical and for which they lack sufficient train-
ing. Whereas a translator with an educational or professional background in le-
gal studies or practice might relish working on the translation of legislation, a
specialist in automotive engineering will run (or drive) a mile from such work.
It can also happen that, even within their own domain, translators can come
across source texts that are badly written, or incomplete, or written in a way
that makes them extremely difficult to understand. Or they may have no prob-
lem understanding the original, but face serious challenges in tracking down
suitableterminologyinthetargetlanguagetolabelspecializedconceptsencoun-
tered in the sourcetext. An unreasonabledeadline, or a malfunctioning software
program,areotherfactorslikelytocauseprofessionaltranslatorsheadaches.But
you rarely hear a professional translator complain about linguistic ambiguity,
non-isomorphism, discontinuous dependencies or non-compositionality.
The reason these phenomena appear so frequently in discussions of machine
translation is, of course, that – in certain circumstances – they can cause prob-
lems for machines.
3 How do translators normally solve translation
problems?
The above discussion mentioned a few real-world problems professional transla-
torssometimesface.Herewelookatasampleofproblemsthatarerelatedtothe
words on the page or, more probably, the screen. When a professional translator
does not understand something in the source text, or cannot recall a specialized
term in the target language, or is struggling to come up with a way of formu-
lating an idea in the target language, she will usually divert her attention from
the text at hand, and do some research. A translator grappling with the niceties
of wastewater treatment, for example, may go to the website of various local
authorities to see how they explain the technology involved. She might access
one of the many publicly available termbanks to find an equivalent for a given
term. She might consult other documentation produced by her client’s company
or speak to engineers at the company. She could consult with her colleagues, if
she has any, or post a query to a translator’s forum. The main thing is that most
professional translators will realise when they have a gap in their knowledge, or
need inspiration, and they will conduct conscientious research to address that
gap, solve the translation problem and move on.
29