Joss Moorkens
when and where to reuse the data based on the translator, the project, or the
creation date. Translator activity data, including more detailed timings, editing
actions, and records of individual keystrokes may also be recorded, particularly
whenaproprietaryweb-basedplatformisused,asinTranslatorA’sproject.Such
data can be useful for monitoring translators’ work, but is commonly removed
for MT training so that only parallel sentence pairs are used. Once any possible
identifying metadata (data about data) are removed, preferences for future use
or reuse cannot be recorded and individual contributions cannot be measured,
even if there is a retrospective change to agreements that means that contribu-
tions should earn a royalty. On the other hand, this will improve anonymization
of translation data, which is important if the data are to be shared or exchanged.
2.4 Data distribution
Intheearlydaysoftranslationmemorysharing,Topping(2000)wrotethat,ofin-
dividualtranslators,localizationagenciesandlocalizationcustomers,onlytrans-
lators felt that it was ethical to share memories. This view seems quaint when
we have companies in 2021 whose business model is shaped around amassing
and reselling data for MT and other machine learning purposes.2This business
model works, as the amount of training data and the level of care in curation of
this data will make an impact on both the quality and value of an NMT system.
As mentioned in §2.2, certain datasets can be made freely available and dis-
tributed through projects such as Opus, the open parallel corpus (http://opus.
nlpl.eu, Tiedemann 2012), due to their licensing agreements or because they are
coveredbytheEuropeanUnion(EU)directive(2003/98/EC)onthere-useofpub-
lic sector information. This does not necessarily mean that translators have ex-
pressly given permission for all possible forms of reuse, but they are aware that
the data will be shared with the general public.
Data may otherwise be distributed on the basis of agreements between com-
panies, or due to one company being acquired by another, which is common
within the language service industry (Moorkens 2020). It may be bought and
sold or donated for research or philanthropic purposes, all without the neces-
sity for approval from the data creator. This is perfectly legal as long as the data
cannot be classed as personal data, in which case restrictions apply.
2Please see the introduction to this volume for more on machine learning. For the purposes
of this chapter, we understand machine learning as a use of computers to achieve an end by
inference from big data rather than from input of an explicit command.
126