Caroline Rossi & Alice Carré
precision of 𝐶 =no. of correct words in 𝐶
no. of words in 𝐶(1)
where 𝐶is the candidate translation.
Let us consider our example. In Figure 5, the candidates are compared against
thereference,and“correct”words,i.e.wordsthatalsooccurinthereference,are
underlined,while“incorrect”words,i.e.wordsthatdonotoccurinthereference,
are crossed out.
Source text: Battery pack is attached to the transceiver.
Candidate A (eTranslation): Lebloc-batterieestfixéàl’émetteur-récepteur.
Candidate B (Google Translate): Labatterieestfixéeàl’émetteur-récepteur.
Candidate D (DeepL): Lebloc-pilesestfixéàl’émetteur-récepteur.
Reference: La batterie est installée sur
l’émetteur-récepteur.
Figure 5: source text, reference translation, candidate translation
Let us now work out the precision of each candidate. System A’s output has
fivecorrectwordsoutofatotalofnine,whichgivesaprecisionof0.56,or56%.12
SystemB’soutputhassixcorrectwordsoutofeight,soitsprecisionscoreis0.75,
or75%.Finally,systemD’soutputhasfourcorrectwordsoutofnine,whichgives
a precision of 0.44, or 44%. According to this metric, system B’s output is better
than that of system A or system D.
Recall, in the same context, computes the ratio of correct words in the candi-
date to the total number of words in the reference :
recall of 𝐶 =no. of correct words in 𝐶
no. of words in 𝑅(2)
where 𝐶is the candidate translation, and 𝑅the reference translation.
In other words, recall takes into account not just what the candidate transla-
tion said, but what it should have said.
Let us go back to our example (Figure 6).
The reference translation comprises eight words. System A’s output has five
correctwordsoutofatotalofeightinthereferencetranslation,andthusarecall
ratio of 0.63, or 63%. System B’s output has a total of six correct words, which
makes for a recall of 0.75, or 75%, while system D’s output has a total of four
correct words, which makes for a recall of 0.5, or 50%. According to this metric,
system B’s output is again better than system A’s or D’s.
12In this section, all results will be rounded to the nearest hundredth when dealing with score
ranges comprised between 0 and 1, and to the nearest unit when dealing with percentages.
64