4 Selecting and preparing texts for machine translation
tone,genreconventions,andanyotherissuesrelevantforthetranslationtofulfil
its communicative function).
In the case of textual genres that formally follow very rigorous conventions
and essentially have an informative or instructive communicative function (for
example,technicaldocumentation,orsimilar),MTproducedbyaqualitytransla-
tion engine can give good or very good results, depending on the language pair
andotherfactors.Inthesecases,“pre-editing”canbelimitedtospellcheckingthe
source text, since these genres do not usually involve stylistic or referential fea-
tures (see below) that take them outside the realm of standard and non-complex
source text use.
However,genreswhichhaveamixtureofmorethanonecommunicativefunc-
tion, for example the recently popular “unboxing” videos for technical gadgets,
which are often both instructive (informative) and entertaining (appellative and
expressive), are not so simple to deal with using MT.
Texts belonging to yet other genres may contain references to the social, eco-
nomic or cultural life of their source communities that allow source text readers
to identify with the text, but may not have the same effect on the target text
language reader (see § 6.4 on referential elements). Other possible obstacles for
some MT engines include rhetorical and stylistic devices (contractions, abbrevi-
ations, neologisms, incomplete sentences, etc.), that shape the source text, and
with which the source text readers can identify.
NMTallowsuserstoobtaintranslationswithfewerandfewererrorsoffluency
or adequacy. It enables translations to be completed very quickly. Moreover, it
seems to achieve excellent results when translating many different text genres.
But a text written grammatically in the target language and without translation
errors may still not be an appropriate translation. Pre-editing makes it possible
to ensure the appropriateness of the translation with a global audience in mind.
Currently,thisphaseisseldomusedinthetranslationindustry.Inthepast,some
global companies using SMT or RBMT pre-edited their original texts to avoid
recurringtranslationerrorsusingtheirownsystems.WithNMT,pre-editingmay
become widespread in the industry as part of a strategy that not only avoids
translationerrorsbutalsocontributestomakingtherawMToutputappropriate
to the contexts of use of the target translation.
89