6 Ethics and machine translation
types of texts, particularly those with a short shelf-life that present little risk.
However, for critical texts in which a mistranslation introduces risk, the use of
MT must be considered carefully and subject to review. There is some evidence
that certain project managers do not want to know or prefer to turn a blind eye
when their translators use MT (Sakamoto 2019), but there may be good reasons
fortranslationclientstobeawareofMTuseandtostipulateincontractswhether
or not it may be used.
3.2 Risk and liability
Translationcontractsmayattributeownershipoftranslationdataorgivepermis-
sionforretentionofatranslationmemorytothetranslatororclient,asdescribed
in §2.2., Canfora & Ottmann (2020) introduce two other contractual areas rele-
vant to the use of MT: liability and confidentiality.
Translators may be found to be in breach of contract due to negligence or
failingintheirdutyofcaretoaclient.Liabilitycanonlyrefertohumanbehaviour,
which means that a person must bear responsibility for an injury or loss related
toanerrorintroducedbyMTinatranslationprocess.Liabilityaside,thefactthat
MT might introduce a risk to end users is an ethical problem. Raw MT should
never be used for safety-critical content. Current translation and post-editing
standards do not mention liability or risks to end users.
TheISOtranslationstandarddoes,however,stresstheimportanceof“safeand
confidential handling […] of all relevant data and documents” (ISO 2015, 3.2.a).
Users of free online MT systems grant service providers the right to use the data
entered for online translation, and there have been instances where confidential
and sensitive material has been made available through unthinking use of free
online MT. This cybersecurity risk introduced by such MT systems is why Can-
fora & Ottmann (2020) feel that subscription MT services that do not retain data
are a better option, and ideally recommend that companies use closed platforms
whereserverarchitecturesarenotopentothepublic–orchoosenottooutsource
translation work at all in order to protect confidentiality. Freelance translators,
for their part, might object to the loss of control over translation data and trans-
lator activity data that a closed platform entails, as discussed in Sections 2 and
3.1.
The ISO standard for MT post-editing (ISO 2017) makes no mention of confi-
dentialityorriskstodatasecurity,whichisrathersurprisingconsideringthatthe
process necessarily entails the use of MT, introducing the associated risks. Trust
is a key part of risk reduction, as standards, guidelines, and contracts are only of
131