1 Europe, multilingualism and machine translation
2.5 Multilingualism and language learning in the EU
According to the Council of Europe’s Language Policy Portal:7
language learners/users lie at the heart of the work of the Language Pol-
icy Programme. Whatever their status, all languages are covered: foreign
languages, major languages of schooling, languages spoken in the family
and minority or regional languages, as well as a specific programme on the
linguistic integration of migrants and refugees.
Initiativestofostermultilingualismaremanyandvaried,butlanguagelearning
deserves closer attention, especially given the EU’s above-mentioned “mother
tongue plus two” policy.
Some of the EU’s recent initiatives to improve language skills include the Eu-
ropean Centre for Modern Languages (www.ecml.at; the Eurydice Report (Eury-
dice 2019), which provides information on policy efforts in Europe that support
the teaching of regional or minority languages in schools; the Online Linguistic
Support (OLS) platform;8the Common European Framework of Reference for
Languages (CEFR); and Erasmus+ mobility programmes.
European projects funded to improve language learning deserve special atten-
tion. Methodologies, languages and countries involved vary enormously from
one project to another. Table 2 lists some interesting examples.
Eurostat, the website for European Statistics,9provides statistics on the sec-
ond and foreign languages studied by pupils at different education levels in the
EU. According to Eurostat data from 2019, English was by far the most popular
languageatlowersecondarylevel,studiedbynearly86.8%ofpupils,followedby
French (19.4%), German (18.3%) and Spanish (17.5%) (Eurostat 2022).
Discussion topic
InsecondlanguagelearninginEurope,is“multilingual”aeuphemismfor
“English-speaking”?
Another interesting question is how many students learn two or more foreign
languages, as recommended by the European Council (2002): it is known that
7https://www.coe.int/en/web/language-policy/home
8https://erasmusplusols.eu/en/about-ols/
9https://appsso.eurostat.ec.europa.eu
9