5 How to deal with errors in machine translation: Post-editing
b. In addition, it says re-instating modern languages to the primary
school curriculum would be a timely move .1
Sentence (a) is rather unclear and so significant editing is required to make it
at least semantically correct. Fundamentally, the level of editing depends on the
starting point (the quality of each sentence proposed by the MT system) and the
targeted quality. The post-editor will pivot between quick edits and more signif-
icant edits depending on each sentence and the ultimate quality objective. What
is most important here is that the final text has a coherent quality, regardless of
what the starting point is for each sentence, and that the quality meets with the
translation commissioner’s and end users’ expectations.
One final issue with the concepts of light and full post-editing is that profes-
sionaltranslatorsgenerallydonotwanttoagreetoproduce“merelycomprehen-
sible” quality, and no commissioner of translation is really willing to admit that
they opted onlyfor a light edit.
Itisimportanttoknowabouttheseconceptsandtheguidelinesthatcomewith
them. However, as is hopefully evident, they are not without their challenges.
3 Post-editing interfaces
Atabasiclevel,post-editingcanbedoneinanytexteditorwherethesourcetext
is visible and the “raw” MT output can be revised. This could even be a spread-
sheet, with the source text in one column and the MT output in an adjacent one.
These days, however, professional translation is typically done using computer-
aidedtranslation(CAT)environments,especiallytranslationmemory(TM)tools.
AsindicatedbyKenny(2022:§4[thisvolume]),translationmemoryisadatabase
that stores segments of texts that have been previously translated. A TM tool is
the software application that is used to access, edit and update the text in this
database. MT, as is evident from the other chapters in this book, is a different
type of technology, though the two are inevitably linked because contemporary
data-driven MT systems typically use the data stored in TMs as an important in-
putformachinelearning.Additionally,seeingasTMtoolsaresocommonlyused
by translators in their daily work, MT technology is now linked to, if not com-
pletely embedded in, TM tools such as Trados Studio, MQM, MateCat, to name
butafew.Fromapracticalperspective,thismeansthatpost-editingisfrequently
carried out in a TM editing environment.
1https://www.irishtimes.com/news/education/foreign-languages-could-be-taught-in-
preschool-and-primary-department-1.4270886
111