Representations for Reinforcement Learning
gle these task-irrelevant details before it makes any progress
on the true task objective. A common approach to han-
dle these high dimensionality and multi-modality issues
is to learn representations that distil information into low
dimensional features and use them as inputs to the policy.
While such ideas have found reasonable success (Qin et al.,
2019; Manuelli et al., 2019a), designing such representa-
tions in a supervised manner requires a deep understanding
of the problem and domain expertise. An alternative ap-
proach is to leverage unsupervised representation learning
to autonomously acquire representations based on either
reconstruction (Higgins et al., 2016; Zhu et al., 2020; Yarats
et al., 2020) or contrastive (Srinivas et al., 2020; Stooke
et al., 2020) objective. These methods are quite brittle as the
representations are acquired from narrow task-speciﬁc dis-
tributions (Stone et al., 2021), and hence, do not generalize
well across different tasks Table 1. Additionally, they ac-
quire task-speciﬁc representations, often needing additional
samples from the environment leading to poor sample efﬁ-
ciency or domains speciﬁc data-augmentations for training
representations.
The key idea behind our method stems from an intuitive ob-
servation over the desiderata of a good representation i.e. (a)
it should be low dimensional for a compact representation.
(b) it should be able to capture silent features encapsulating
the diversity and the variability present in a real-world task
for better generalization performance. (c) it should be robust
to irrelevant information like noise, lighting, viewpoints, etc
so that it is resilient to the changes in surroundings. (d) it
should provide effective representation in the entire distri-
bution that a policy can induce for effective learning. These
requirements are quite harsh needing extreme domain ex-
pertise to manually design and an abundance of samples to
automatically acquire. Can we acquire this representation
without any additional effort? Our work takes a very small
step in this direction.
The key insight behind our method (Figure 1) is embarrass-
ingly simple – representations do not necessarily have to
be trained on the exact task distribution; a representation
trained on a sufﬁciently wide distribution of real-world sce-
narios, will remain effective on any distribution a policy
optimizing a task in the real world might induce. While
training over such wide distribution is demanding, this is
precisely what the success of large image classiﬁcation mod-
els (He et al., 2015; Simonyan & Zisserman, 2015; Tan &
Le, 2020; Szegedy et al., 2015) in Computer Vision delivers
– representations learned over a large family of real-world
scenarios.
Our Contributions : We list the major contributions
1.We present a surprisingly simple method (RRL) at
the intersection of representation learning, imitation
learning (IL) and reinforcement learning (RL) that uses
Features for ImageNet categories Features for our tasks 
Figure 2. Visualization of Layer 4 of Resnet model of the top 1
class using Grad-CAM (Selvaraju et al., 2019)[Top] and Guided
Backpropogation (Springenberg et al., 2015)[Bottom]. This indi-
cates that Resnet is indeed looking for the right features in our task
images (right) in spite of such high distributional shift.
features from pre-trained image classiﬁcation models
(Resnet34) as representations in standard RL pipeline.
Our method is quite general and can be incorporated
with minimal changes to most state based RL/IL algo-
rithms.
2.Task-speciﬁc representations learned by supervised as
well as unsupervised methods are usually brittle and
suffer from distribution mismatch. We demonstrate
that features learned by image classiﬁcation models
are general towards different task (Figure 2), robust to
visual distractors, and when used in conjunction with
standard IL and RL pipelines can efﬁciently acquire
policies directly from proprioceptive inputs.
3.While competing methods have restricted results pri-
marily to planar tasks devoid of depth perspectives, on
a rich collection of simulated high dimensional dexter-
ous manipulation tasks, where state-of-the-art methods
struggle, we demonstrate that RRL can learn rich be-
haviors directly from visual inputs with performance
& sample efﬁciency approaching state-based methods.
4.Additionally, we underline the performance gap be-
tween the SOTA approaches and RRL on simple low
dimensional tasks as well as high dimensional more
realistic tasks. Furthermore, we experimentally estab-
lish that the commonly used environments for studying
image based continuous control methods are not a true
representative of real-world scenario.
2. Related Work
RRL rests on recent developments from the ﬁelds of Repre-
sentation Learning, Imitation Learning and Reinforcement
Learning. In this section, we outline related works lever-
aging representation learning for visual reinforcement and
imitation learning.