Representations for Reinforcement Learning
2.1. Learning without explicit representation
A common approach is to learn behaviors in an end to end
fashion – from pixels to actions – without explicit distinction
between feature representation and policy representations.
Success stories in this categories range from seminal work
(Mnih et al., 2013) mastering Atari 2600 computer games
using only raw pixels as input, to (Levine et al., 2016) which
learns trajectory-centric local policies using Guided Policy
Search (Levine & Koltun, 2013) for diverse continuous con-
trol manipulation tasks in the real world learned directly
from camera inputs. More recently, Haarnoja et al. has
demonstrated success in acquiring multi-ﬁnger dexterous
manipulation (Zhu et al., 2018) and agile locomotion behav-
iors using off-policy action critic methods (Haarnoja et al.,
2018). While learning directly from pixels has found reason-
able success, it requires training large networks with high
input dimensionality. Agents require a prohibitively large
number of samples to untangle task-relevant information
in order to acquire behaviors, limiting their application to
simulations or constrained lab settings. RRL maintains an
explicit representation network to extract low dimensional
features. Decoupling representation learning from policy
learning delivers results with large gains in efﬁciency. Next,
we outline related works that use explicit representations.
2.2. Learning with supervised representations
Another approach is to ﬁrst acquire representations using
expert supervision, and use features extracted from repre-
sentation as inputs in standard policy learning pipelines. A
predominant idea is to learn representative keypoints encap-
sulating task details from the input images and using the
extracted keypoints as a replacement of the state information
(Kulkarni et al., 2019). Using these techniques, (Qin et al.,
2019; Manuelli et al., 2019b) demonstrated tool manipu-
lation behaviors in rich scenes ﬂushed with task-irrelevant
details. (Nagabandi et al., 2019) demonstrated simultaneous
manipulation of multiple objects in the task of Baoding ball
tasks on a high dimensional dexterous manipulation hand.
Along with the inbuilt proprioceptive sensing at each joint,
they use an RGB stereo image pair that is fed into a separate
pre-trained tracker to produce 3D position estimates (You
et al., 2020) for the two Baoding balls. These methods,
while powerful, learn task-speciﬁc features and requires ex-
pert supervision, making it harder to (a) translate to variation
in tasks/environments, and (b) scale with increasing task
diversity. RRL, on the other hand, uses single task-agnostic
representations with better generalization capability making
it easy to scale.
2.3. Learning with unsupervised representations
With the ambition of being scalable, this group of meth-
ods intends to acquire representation via unsupervised tech-niques. (Sermanet et al., 2018) uses contrastive learning to
time-align visual features across different embodiment to
demonstrate behavior transfer from human to a Fetch robot.
(Burgess et al., 2018), (Finn et al.; Zhu et al., 2020) use
variational inference (Kingma & Welling, 2014; Burgess
et al., 2018) to learn compressed latent representations and
use it as input to standard RL pipeline to demonstrate rich
manipulation behaviors. (Hafner et al., 2020) additionally
learns dynamics models directly in the latent space and use
model-based RL to acquire behaviors on simulated tasks.
On similar tasks, (Hafner et al., 2019) uses multi-step varia-
tional inference to learn world dynamic as well as rewards
models for off-policy RL. (Srinivas et al., 2020) use image
augmentation with variational inference to construct features
to be used in standard RL pipeline and demonstrate perfor-
mance at par with learning directly from the state. (Laskin
et al., 2020; Kostrikov et al., 2020) demonstrate compara-
ble results by assimilating updates over features acquired
only via image augmentation. Similar to supervised meth-
ods, unsupervised methods often learns task-speciﬁc brittle
representations as they break when subjected to small varia-
tions in the surroundings and often suffers challenges from
non-stationarity arising from the mismatch between the dis-
tribution representations are learned on and the distribution
policy induces. To induce stability, RRL uses pre-trained
stationary representations trained on distribution with wider
support than what policy can induce. Additionally, repre-
sentations learned over a wide distribution of real-world
samples are robust to noise and irrelevant information like
lighting, illumination, etc.
2.4. Learning with representations and demonstrations
Learning from demonstrations has a rich history. We fo-
cus our discussion on DAPG (Rajeswaran et al., 2017), a
state-based method which optimizes for the natural gradient
(Kakade, 2001a) of a joint loss with imitation as well as
reinforcement objective. DAPG has been demonstrated to
outperform competing methods (Gupta et al., 2017; Hester
et al., 2017) on the high dimensional ADROIT dexterous ma-
nipulation task suite we test on. RRL extends DAPG to solve
the task suite directly from proprioceptive signals with per-
formance and sample efﬁciency comparable to state-DAPG.
Unlike DAPG which is on-policy, FERM (Zhan et al., 2020)
is a closely related off-policy actor-critic methods combin-
ing learning from demonstrations with RL. FERM builds
on RAD (Laskin et al., 2020) and inherits its challenges
like learning task-speciﬁc representations. We demonstrate
via experiments that RRL is more stable, more robust to
various distractors, and convincingly outperforms FERM
since RRL uses a ﬁxed feature extractor pre-trained over
wide variety of real world images and avoids learning task
speciﬁc representations.