Representations for Reinforcement Learning
5. Experimental Evaluations
Our experimental evaluations aims to address the following
questions: (1) Does pre-tained representations acquired via
large real world image dataset allow RRL to learn complex
tasks directly from proprioceptive signals (camera inputs
and joint encoders)? (2) How does RRL’s performance and
efﬁciency compare against other state-of-the-art methods?
(3) How various representational choices inﬂuence the gen-
erality and versatility of the resulting behaviors? (5) What
are the effects of various design decisions on RRL? (6)
Are commonly used benchmarks for studying image based
continuous control methods effective?
5.1. Tasks
Applicability of prior proprioception based RL methods
(Laskin et al., 2020; Kostrikov et al., 2020; Hafner et al.,
2020) have been limited to simple low dimensional tasks
like Cartpole, Cheetah, Reacher, Finger spin, Walker, Ball
in cup, etc. Moving beyond these simple domains, we in-
vestigate RRL on Adroit manipulation suite (Rajeswaran
et al., 2017) which consists of contact-rich high-dimensional
dexterous manipulation tasks (Figure 3) that have found to
be challenging ever for state ( st) based methods. Further-
more, unlike prior task sets, which are fundamentally planar
and devoid of depth perspective, the Adroit manipulation
suite consists of visually-rich physically-realistic tasks that
demand representations untangling complex depth informa-
tion.
5.2. Implementation Details
We use standard Resnet-34 model as RRL’s feature extrac-
tor. The model is pre-trained on the ImageNet dataset which
consists of 1000 classes. It is trained on 1.28 million images
on the classiﬁcation task of ImageNet. The last layer of
the model is removed to recover a 512dimensional feature
space and all the parameters are frozen throughout the train-
ing of the RL agent. During inference, the observations
obtained from the environment are of size 256256, a
center crop of size 224224is fed into the model. We also
evaluate our model using different Resnet sizes (Figure 7).
All the hyperparameters used for training are summarized
in Appendix(Table 2). We report an average performance
over three random seeds for all the experiments.
5.3. Results
In Figure 4, we contrast the performance of RRL against
the state of the art baselines. We begin by observing that
NPG (Kakade, 2001b) struggles to solve the suite even with
full state information, which establishes the difﬁculty of
our task suite. DAPG(State) (Rajeswaran et al., 2017) uses
privileged state information and a few demonstrations from
Figure 3. ADROIT manipulation suite consisting of complex dex-
terous manipulation tasks involving object relocation, in hand
manipulation (pen repositioning), tool use (hammering a nail), and
interacting with human centric environments (opening a door).
the environment to solve the tasks and pose as the best case
oracle. RRL demonstrates good performance on all the
tasks, relocate being the hardest, and often approaches per-
formance comparable to our strongest oracle-DAPG(State).
A competing baseline FERM1(Zhan et al., 2020) is quite
unstable in these tasks. It starts strong for hammer and door
tasks but saturates in performance. It makes slow progress
in pen, and completely fails for relocate. In Figure 5 [Left]
we compare the computational footprint of FERM (along
with other methods, discussed in later sections) with RRL.
We note that our method not only outperforms FERM but
also is approximately ﬁve times more compute-efﬁcient.
5.4. Effects of Visual Distractors
In Figure 5 [Center, Right] we probe the robustness of the ﬁ-
nal policies by injecting visual distractors in the environment
during inference. We note that the resilience of the resnet
features induces robustness to RRL’s policies. On the other
hand, task-speciﬁc features learned by FERM are brittle
leading to larger degradation in performance. In addition
to improved sample and time complexity resulting from the
use of pre-trained features, the resilience, robustness, and
versatility of Resnet features lead to policies that are also
robust to visual distractors, clutter in the scene. More details
about the experiment setting is provided in Section 7.8 in
Appendix.
1Reporting best performance amongst over 30 conﬁgurations
per task we tried in consultation with the FERM authors.