RRL: Resnet as representation for Reinforcement Learning
Rutav Shah* 1Vikash Kumar* 2 3
Abstract
The ability to autonomously learn behaviors via
direct interactions in uninstrumented environ-
ments can lead to generalist robots capable of en-
hancing productivity or providing care in unstruc-
tured settings like homes. Such uninstrumented
settings warrant operations only using the robot’s
proprioceptive sensor such as onboard cameras,
joint encoders, etc which can be challenging for
policy learning owing to the high dimensionality
and partial observability issues. We propose RRL:
Resnet as representation for Reinforcement Learn-
ing – a straightforward yet effective approach that
can learn complex behaviors directly from pro-
prioceptive inputs. RRL fuses features extracted
from pre-trained Resnet into the standard rein-
forcement learning pipeline and delivers results
comparable to learning directly from the state. In
a simulated dexterous manipulation benchmark,
where the state of the art methods fails to make
signiﬁcant progress, RRL delivers contact rich
behaviors. The appeal of RRL lies in its simplic-
ity in bringing together progress from the ﬁelds
of Representation Learning, Imitation Learning,
and Reinforcement Learning. Its effectiveness
in learning behaviors directly from visual inputs
with performance and sample efﬁciency matching
learning directly from the state, even in complex
high dimensional domains, is far from obvious.
1. Introduction
Recently, Reinforcement learning (RL) has seen tremen-
dous momentum and progress (Mnih et al., 2015; Silver
et al., 2017; Jaderberg et al., 2019; Espeholt et al., 2018)
in learning complex behaviors from states (Schulman et al.,
*Equal contribution1Department of Computer Science and
Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, In-
dia2Department of Computer Science, University of Washing-
ton, Seattle, USA3Facebook AI Research, USA. Correspon-
dence to: Rutav Shah <rutavms@gmail.com >, Vikash Kumar
<vikash@cs.washington.edu >.
Proceedings of the 38thInternational Conference on Machine
Learning , PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).
Supervised  Learning
Reinforcement
Learning
Figure 1. RRL Resnet as representation for Reinforcement Learn-
ing takes a small step in bridging the gap between Representation
learning and Reinforcement learning. RRL pre-trains an encoder
on a wide variety of real world classes like ImageNet dataset using
a simple supervised classiﬁcation objective. Since the encoder is
exposed to a much wider distribution of images while pretrain-
ing, it remains effective whatever distribution the policy might
induce during the training of the agent. This allows us to freeze
the encoder after pretraining without any additional efforts.
2017; Haarnoja et al., 2018; Rajeswaran et al., 2017). Most
success stories, however, are limited to simulations or instru-
mented laboratory conditions as real world doesn’t provide
direct access to its internal state. Not only learning with
state-space, but visual observation spaces have also found
reasonable success (Kalashnikov et al., 2018; OpenAI et al.,
2019). However the sample complexity for methods that can
learn directly with visual inputs is far too extreme for direct
real-world training (Duan et al., 2016; Kaiser et al., 2020).
In order to deliver the promise presented by data-driven
techniques, we need efﬁcient techniques that can learn unob-
trusively without the need of environment instrumentation.
Learning without environment instrumentation, especially
in unstructured settings like homes, can be quite challeng-
ing (Zhu et al., 2020; Dulac-Arnold et al., 2019; Ahn et al.,
2020). Challenges include – (a) Decision making with in-
complete information owing to partial observability as the
agents must rely only on proprioceptive on-board sensors
(vision, touch, joint position encoders, etc) to perceive and
act. (b) The inﬂux of sensory information makes the input
space quite high dimensional. (c) Information contamina-
tion due to sensory noise and task-irrelevant conditions like
lightning, shadows, etc. (d) Most importantly, the scene
being ﬂushed with information irrelevant to the task (back-
ground, clutter, etc). Agents learning under these constraints
is forced to take a large number of samples simply to untan-arXiv:2107.03380v3  [cs.RO]  11 Nov 2021