Vol.:(0123456789)1 3International Journal of Social Robotics (2021) 13:833–849 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12369-020-00666-5
SURVEY
A Taxonomy to Structure and Analyze Human–Robot Interaction
Linda Onnasch1  · Eileen Roesler2 
Accepted: 5 June 2020 / Published online: 29 June 2020 
© The Author(s) 2020
Abstract
Robotic systems are one of the core technologies that will shape our future. Robots already change our private and profes-
sional life by working together with humans in various domains. Evoked by this increasing trend, great variability exists in 
terms of robots and interaction scenarios. This has boosted research regarding shaping factors of human–robot interaction 
(HRI). Nevertheless, this variety hinders the comparability and the generalizability of insights. What is needed for efficient 
research is a structured approach that allows the analysis of superordinate attributes, making previous HRI research compa-
rable, revealing research gaps and thus guiding future research activities. Based on the review of previous HRI frameworks 
we developed a new HRI taxonomy that (1) takes into account the human, the robot, the interaction and the context of the 
HRI, (2) is applicable to various HRI scenarios and (3) provides predefined categories to enable structured comparisons of 
different HRI scenarios. A graphical representation of the taxonomy, including all possible classifications, eases the applica-
tion to specific HRI scenarios. To demonstrate the use and value of this taxonomy, it is applied to different studies in HRI in 
order to identify possible reasons for contrasting results. The exemplified applications of the taxonomy underline its value 
as a basis for reviews and meta-analyses. Moreover, the taxonomy offers a framework for future HRI research as it offers 
guidance for systematic variations of distinctive variables in HRI.
Keywords Human–robot interaction · Taxonomy · Collaborative robots · HRI framework · Robot morphology · 
Collaboration
1 Introduction
The idea of interacting with animated (humanoid) 
machines that free mankind from labor has been fascinat-
ing ever since, starting with Leonardo da Vinci’s visions 
of mechanical machines [1 ] and becoming concrete (and 
frightening) in the play “Rossum’s universal robots” by 
Karel Capek [2 ]. Science fiction has been thrilled by those 
machines and has introduced world-famous (fictional) 
robots, such as the Terminator, R2-D2 and C-3PO (Star 
Wars), or Lieutenant Commander Data in the TV series 
Star Trek: The Next Generation. However, robots have 
not remained fictional. In 1962, the first real industrial 
robots were introduced in the Ford factory in Canton [3 ]. Since then, the implementation of robots into various work 
domains has become an increasing technology-driven 
trend [4 –7]. The first generations of robots, however, had 
nothing to do with their fictional counterparts—look -
ing rather technical than humanoid and working behind 
fences, because of safety and efficiency reasons. Com-
pared to these earlier generations, today’s collaborative 
robots directly interact with the human in terms of time 
and space. This is facilitated by technological advances, 
especially regarding sensor technology, enabling more 
complex and adaptive robotic behavior while interacting 
with humans. This also implies new forms of interaction, 
and has resulted in a variety of robotic applications, like 
military search and rescue (S&R) missions, healthcare 
support, service assistance, therapeutic implementation 
to substitute animals, or the human–robot collaboration 
in the manufacturing domain. This widespread use of 
robots has come along with a plethora of robotic appear -
ances and interaction concepts, which is also mirrored in 
HRI research. However, a great variety entails a challenge 
for creating replicable and generalizable results. Many  * Linda Onnasch 
 linda.onnasch@hu-berlin.de
1 Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Rudower Chaussee 18, 
12489 Berlin, Germany
2 Technische Universität Berlin, Marchstr. 12, 10587 Berlin, 
Germany