836 International Journal of Social Robotics (2021) 13:833–849
1 3
being able to replicate and confirm or refute other research-
ers’ findings, results will remain on the level of case stud -
ies” [17, p 700]. To ease the knowledge accumulation, a 
good blueprint is needed, i.e. a taxonomy with a certain level 
of abstraction to allow the classification of different HRI 
scenarios and enable a meta-interpretation of single-study 
results.
2  Existing HRI‑Frameworks
Up to date, there are several frameworks regarding the clas-
sification of HRI. Granda, Kirkpatrick, Julien and Peterson 
proposed a standard for stages of HRI already in 1990 [18]. 
They propose five stages to categorize a robot’s functional 
capabilities in interaction with humans. In the first stage, 
the bounded autonomy (1), robots are able to function 
with little human intervention. Teleoperation (2) describes 
a human–robot system in which the human is an integral 
and full-time component in the control loop. When oper -
ating with supervised autonomy (3), the robot can handle 
certain (sub-) tasks autonomously allowing the human to 
perform other tasks, or even control other robots. Based on 
Sheridan’s supervisory control concept [ 19], in this third 
stage, the human is responsible for task planning, teaching 
the robot, monitoring robot activities, intervening in robotic 
tasks when necessary, and learning to improve all of these 
activities. With adaptive autonomy (4), the robot performs 
most of the tasks independently, whereas the human acts as 
an information manager, organizing the structure of expert 
systems and databases. In the final stage, the virtual symbio-
sis (5), the human and the robot exchange information based 
on shared knowledge. However, even with this symbiotic 
interaction, the ultimate responsibility is still on part of the 
human. A strength of this approach is that the stages can 
not only describe different levels of robot autonomy in a 
human–robot team, but also have predicted future directions 
of the development of HRI. The application of this model 
to actual scenarios, however, is not very straightforward as 
the stages are not mutually exclusive and often overlap with 
characteristics of one stage blurring into the next [18]. In 
particular, the supervised and adaptive autonomy merge 
smoothly into each other, as supervised control is already 
characterized by a variable span of autonomous control. It 
remains unclear which degree of autonomy represents the 
cut-off, differentiating the two categories. Additionally, the 
human role is described as an operator on all stages, even 
though the machine is characterized as a “co-worker” in the 
virtual symbiosis.
Twelve years later, Scholtz proposed a framework for 
differing human roles in interaction with robots regarding 
models of human–computer interaction [20]. According to 
Scholtz, the human may act as the supervisor of the robot, a role originally described in interaction with automated sys-
tems by Sheridan and Verplank [21]. In this passive role, 
the human is taken out-of-the-loop, i.e., monitoring the task 
performance from a superordinate position and only inter -
vening if malfunctions or deviations occur. Further roles 
describe the human as an operator, directly giving control 
inputs to the robot, or as a mechanic or team partner—the 
latter implying equivalence between human–human and 
human–robot interactions. Scholtz [20] uses this team con-
cept as a metaphor to underline the importance of a recip -
rocal adjustment between actions of the human and of the 
robot for task accomplishment. Moreover, she defines a non-
interacting role, namely, the human as a bystander. In this 
context, human and robot share only the same space. Thus, 
a mental representation of the robot and its actions is nec -
essary to avoid non-intended interactions (i.e. collisions). 
This role is especially important for the implementation of 
autonomous robots in close proximity of humans (without 
safety fences). The framework represents a sound basis for a 
detailed differentiation of varying human roles in interaction 
with robots. However, while the author states the importance 
of generalizing the roles between different domains, it is not 
considered that different roles are predominantly represented 
in specific domains (e.g. operator in space expedition, peer 
in edutainment). Furthermore, the human roles provide no 
particular information about the interaction itself.
This issue is addressed in the classification of Schmidtler 
and collegues [22], who define human–robot interaction 
types based on working time, workspace, aim and contact. 
Hence, they deduce three different forms of human–robot 
interactions with increasing proximity and dependency. 
Coexistence is characterized by overlapping working time 
and workspace of the human and the robot. Cooperation is 
additionally characterized by the same aim, whereas collabo-
ration describes the most dependent form of interaction, with 
an actual contact between the human and the robot while 
they work together. Even though the interaction types focus 
on the comprehensive interaction of human and robot, a 
drawback is that they exclusively focus on HRI in the indus-
trial environment and that the three interaction types might 
not be sufficient to describe HRI in detail (e.g. What about 
the robot’s autonomy?).
Other frameworks of HRI broaden the perspective as they 
do not only focus on the human and the interaction, but also 
on characteristics of the robot (e.g. information regarding 
the communication between human and robot). Yanco and 
Drury [23, 24], for instance, adopt Scholtz’ interaction roles 
[20] and further describe ten categories related to interaction 
and robot characteristics. However, the categorical speci-
fications vary in detail. While some of these are very well 
described with predefined categorical levels and are easy to 
apply (robot morphology), other categories, like task type, 
are not further detailed and therefore hard to apply to actual