841 International Journal of Social Robotics (2021) 13:833–849 
1 3
is based on a well-established framework by Parasuraman, 
Sheridan and Wickens [25] for stages and levels of automa-
tion (equivalent to autonomy in this case, see Fig.  2). Based 
on this original work [25], the categorization is made on a 
10-point scale with higher scores representing higher auton-
omy of the technology over human action. Due to practical 
reasons of a synoptic taxonomy with intuitive applicability, 
we suggest a threefold division into low, medium and high 
autonomy.
In sum, the three variables of robot task specification, 
robot morphology and degree of robot autonomy enable the 
systematic comparison of different robots and their effective-
ness. These variables form a basis for design guidelines for 
beneficial HRI.
3.3  The Team Classification
Applying variables of team classification to HRI scenarios 
characterizes the structure of interaction, aspects of compo-
sition and teamwork that are addressed with four variables: 
human role, team composition, communication channel and 
proximity (physical and temporal).
The human role is based on Scholtz’ role descriptions 
[20], except the role as a mechanic. This role does not rep-
resent an actual interaction of human and robot, but rather 
an action of the human on the robot in terms of repair and 
maintenance work on a functional level (hardware and soft-
ware). Instead, based on Schmidtler et al. [22], the peer role 
is further differentiated in cooperator and collaborator to 
depict different levels of interaction on the same hierarchi-
cal level as the robot. According to this, five distinct human 
roles are defined: the supervisor monitors the robot and 
gives instructions on how to perform the task. The opera-
tor controls the robot. This role is an extension of Scholtz’ 
definition, as the operator not only “is called upon to modify 
internal software or models when the robot behavior is not 
acceptable” [20, p 10–11], but explicitly is on a higher hier -
archical level as the robot can be directly controlled by the 
human. For example, operating a bomb disposal robot can be described as this role: human and robot explicitly work 
together. Both parties pursue the same overall goal as well 
as the same sub goals (“approach bomb, fire a high-pressure 
jet of water at the wires, …). This operation is characterized 
by synergy effects. Neither the human nor the robot could 
do the task alone, as it is too dangerous for the human and 
too complex for the robot (up to now). Other examples for a 
human operator are the interaction with the surgical daVinci 
robot, which is directly operated by the surgeon but at the 
same time controls for the surgeon’s tremor, or exoskele-
tons worn by humans. In these scenarios, the human role is 
always higher in hierarchy compared to the robot (which is 
controlled).
The collaborator has the same sub- and overall goals as 
the robot, but is dependent on the robot’s actions; they work 
together for a joint task completion. As a collaborator the 
human has no managerial responsibility. This role can be 
thought of as a teammate on the same hierarchical level. An 
example is an industrial robot which is holding and rotating 
heavy workpieces to support the simultaneous and continu-
ous work of the human. In this team composition there is no 
hierarchical difference between the team partners.
The cooperator also works with the robot to fulfil a 
shared overall goal. However, both partners do not directly 
depend on each other, because of a strict task allocation 
between human and robot. However, task completion from 
both parties is still needed to fulfil a shared overall goal. The 
application of pick and place robots in manufacturing often 
represents an example for this human role. Robot and human 
are co-workers, they work together (but on their own) at an 
assembly line pursuing a shared goal—the production of a 
specific product.
In the role of a bystander, the human does not interact 
with the robot but shares the same space. Therefore, even 
this human role requires a mental representation of the robot 
and its actions to avoid collisions. The aim of the human 
role is avoidance. An example of a human as a bystander is 
the interaction of visitors and a transport robot in a hospital 
setting. Both parties do not pursue the same goal, the robot’s 
Fig. 2  Stages and Levels of 
automation [18]. Two auto-
mated systems are depicted, 
system A representing higher 
levels of automation and system 
B lower automation