834 International Journal of Social Robotics (2021) 13:833–849
1 3
experimental HRI studies revealed notable findings, but 
whether these results remain valid in case the context, the 
robot, or anything else changes, is questionable. To illus-
trate this lack of comparability and generalizability, dif-
ferent studies from research on an extensively investigated 
phenomenon in HRI—anthropomorphism—are presented 
below.
The term anthropomorphism is often loosely used for 
the tendency to attribute human characteristics to inanimate 
objects or animals, in order to rationalize their actions. More 
precisely, it goes beyond attributing life to nonliving objects, 
as it includes “attributing capacities that people tend to think 
of as distinctly human to nonhuman agents, in particular 
human-like mental capacities (e.g. intentionality, emotion, 
cognition)” [8 , p 220]. Anthropomorphism is applied mainly 
(but not exclusively) in social robotics to support meaningful 
social interactions and human acceptance of the robot [9 ]. 
As depicted by the following examples, this phenomenon 
can be induced by characteristics of a robot’s appearance, 
behavior and communication, as well as by framing the 
robot anthropomorphically via names or stories [10].
To answer the question whether lifelike movements and 
an anthropomorphic framing might affect people’s empa-
thy for a robot, Darling, Nandy and Breazeal [11] examined 
how humans respond to a simple robotic object when asked 
to strike it. As dependent variables they measured people’s 
hesitation to strike the robot and evaluated its relationship 
with their trait empathy. Results revealed that an anthropo-
morphic framing of robots (e.g. giving names and presenting 
character descriptions) affected people’s empathy and com-
mitment towards the robot.
Most recently, Nijssen, Müller, Baaren and Paulus [15] 
conducted an online-experiment in which participants had 
to decide whether they would sacrifice an agent in moral 
dilemmas. The to-be-sacrificed agent was either a human, a 
human-like robot, or a machine-like robot. Results showed 
that machine-like robots were sacrificed more often com-
pared to human-like robots and humans. These results are in 
line with those of Darling et al. [11] regarding the impact of 
anthropomorphism on the willingness to immolate robots. 
However, both experiments used experimental setups that 
differed substantially from real HRI applications. First, nei-
ther study included a de facto interaction between human and 
robot, as participants either just observed a real robot [11] or 
saw pictures of robots [15]. Second, the required decision in 
both experiments to destroy or sacrifice the robot represents 
a situation probably not appropriate in HRI, as most often a 
fruitful relationship is the overall aim of social HRI. Third, 
robots in both experiments represented extremes in terms of 
their morphology. While Darling and colleagues used Hex-
bug Nanos [11 ], bug-like crawling toys, Nijssen et al. [ 15] 
showed pictures of the robotic counterpart of Hiroshi Ishig-
uro, which represents an extremely anthropomorphic design.In the attempt to bring the experimental setup closer to 
real applications, Onnasch and Roesler [16] conducted a 
laboratory study including a collaborative interaction with 
an embodied robot. Participants received either an anthropo-
morphic or a technical description of a humanoid NAO robot 
prior to a collaborative task. Afterwards, the willingness to 
“save” the robot from malfunctioning was assessed via dona-
tion behavior (for a pretended robot repair). In contrast to the 
aforementioned studies, results revealed a negative effect of 
anthropomorphism on the willingness to “save” the robot, as 
long as the robot’s functional value for the task fulfillment 
was not additionally mentioned. These studies already illus-
trate that experiments seemingly comparable at first glance 
might not lead to compatible results, because of different 
robots, contexts and interactions.
A more real-world and application-orientated implemen-
tation of anthropomorphism was examined by Kuz, Mayer, 
Müller and Schlick [12] and Mayer, Kuz and Schlick [13]. 
They investigated the impact of robot movement on HRI 
and revealed that anthropomorphic trajectories and speed 
profiles ease the prospective identification of robot actions. 
In contrast, Riek and colleagues [14] reported that action 
identification is faster with machine-like trajectories com-
pared to smooth, human-like movement patterns. These 
studies, again with contrasting results, differed with respect 
to the robots applied in the experiments. While Kuz and 
colleagues [ 12, 13] used a (simulated) industrial assembly 
robot for their experimental setting, Riek et al. [14] applied 
a humanoid robot torso.
As the exemplified studies show, a distinct overall inter -
pretation of experimental findings regarding the impact of 
anthropomorphism is not easy to draw. Although all of the 
discussed studies deal with anthropomorphism, the concept 
is operationalized on different dimensions (appearance, 
movement and framing), and robots are hardly compara-
ble (see Table  1). Moreover, while attempting to compare 
the studies, it becomes obvious that the actual interac-
tion between human and robot, as well as the definition of 
human’s role are often insufficiently described or receive 
not enough attention in the experimental setups. These 
variations and the lack of definitions complicate the com-
parison of results and the identification of relevant impact 
factors (e.g. What operationalization of anthropomorphism 
is most effective?). Consequently, insights remain on the 
level of single use cases. Therefore, the great variability of 
robots and their application scenarios are a main challenge 
for structured research, which is mandatory for knowledge 
accumulation and scientific progress in the HRI domain. To 
advance our understanding of HRI and allow experiments to 
be replicated, there is a need for more basic theories, tools 
and methodologies. In 2007, Dautenhahn has already called 
for an increase in effort to make research in HRI more com-
parable and she stated that “without a scientific culture of