843 International Journal of Social Robotics (2021) 13:833–849 
1 3
4  Applying the Taxonomy
4.1  Is interacting with R2‑D2 comparable 
to interacting with C‑3PO?
To exemplify the use and the benefits of the proposed 
taxonomy, we first apply the taxonomy to two very popu-
lar robots: R2-D2 and C-3PO. Even though both robots 
are fictional, we chose them to present a comprehensible 
example that most people can relate to and that is easy 
to understand. Kahn [63] conducted interviews regarding 
attitudes towards intelligent service robots and revealed 
that most people would prefer interacting with R2-D2 
because this robot seems to be more likeable than C-3PO. 
To answer the question of why people prefer R2-D2 over 
C-3PO, we categorize both robots using the canvas tem -
plate (see Figs.  3, chosen specifications per variable are 
written in italic bold).
R2-D2 is an astromech droid developed for naviga-
tional and maintenance tasks. The R2-class of robots is 
common in the Star Wars universe and they are part of 
many starships. R2-D2 is able to resume the astronaviga-
tion of a starship. Moreover, it executes diverse tasks as a 
mechanic. The field of application is therefore service, as 
these robots support their pilots in a professional environ-
ment in the aforementioned tasks. The exposure of the 
human to the robot is embodied and takes place in the field.
The robot’s tasks are defined as precision and manipula-
tion. Navigating the spaceship requires precise inputs and 
interventions for the most efficient and safe route. Even now -
adays, the navigation and flying of commercial aircrafts is 
mainly supported or resumed by automated systems as these 
outperform human pilots. Moreover, as a mechanic, R2-D2 
directly manipulates its environment. Regarding R2-D2’s 
morphology, a differentiated perspective is needed. R2-D2’s 
appearance and movement are clearly technical. The com-
munication was designed in a technical style in the first place 
because R2-D2 communicates with other robots. However, 
in communication with humans, it recalls zoomorphic asso-
ciations as information is not only explicated, but also what 
might be interpreted as mood or feelings through chang-
ing pitch. Based on context information on how people talk 
about R2-D2 and what information is shared about it (e.g. 
what adventures it has been part of), the robot context is 
classified as anthropomorphic. It is seen as a real teammate, 
it attends mission briefings and is seen as a valuable part-
ner because of its experience and character. As the earlier 
description of R2-D2’s task shows, its autonomy is high on 
every level: information acquisition and analysis, action 
selection and action implementation.
The human role is that of a supervisor who monitors 
the robot and gives instructions, and the team composition typically consists of a pilot and R2-D2, therefore NH = NR. 
R2-D2 receives information from the human using mainly 
the acoustic channel  (e.g. speech input), and output can 
be perceived by the human through the acoustic (e.g. 
beeps) and visual channel (e.g. projections). The physical 
proximity is defined as passing or none. R2-D2’s and the 
human’s workspace partly or completely overlap, e.g. dur -
ing maintenance work. When navigating, R2-D2 is physi-
cally separated from the pilot, they are not sharing the 
same working environment. Temporal proximity can be 
either synchronous or asynchronous.
C-3PO is a protocol droid. The 3PO units are specialized 
on language, translation and diplomacy and can be found on 
nearly every planet and every starship in the galaxy. They 
work for kings and queens, senators or business profession-
als. They not only translate between different languages but 
also act as robot-human interpreters. The field of applica-
tion is service and the interaction represents an embodied  
exposure in the field. Acting as an interpreter, C-3PO’s task 
is categorized as information exchange. Like R2-D2, C-3PO 
is highly autonomous on all levels of autonomy but var -
ies significantly regarding the robot’s morphology, which is 
anthropomorphic in appearance, communication, movement 
and context.
The human role is categorized as a collaborator because 
the human is dependent on C-3PO’s actions, they work 
together for a joint task completion: the human having a 
conversation and creating content, the robot translating what 
is said between the two parties. The team composition is 
NH < NR or NH > NR, as the HRI scenario typically includes 
either two humans and C-3PO, or one human, one robot and 
C-3PO. Regarding the hierarchical level, one could argue 
that the human is on a higher level (i.e. an operator). How -
ever, the relation between the two agents can be seen as the 
relation between a human interpreter and his/her customer. 
C-3PO can do the translation or refuse to do so. Moreover, 
the robot decides what and how to translate. For example, 
bad language is not translated by C-3PO which then tries to 
rephrase into acceptable terms or just refuses to translate. 
Information can be passed from human to C-3PO using an 
acoustic (e.g. speech) or an optical channel (e.g. written 
text), and output is given by the robot using acoustic and 
visual communication (gestures). The physical proximity 
can be described as approaching, as C-3PO and the human 
for which it is interpreting share the same space, working 
closely together but with no physical contact. Most of the 
time, the temporal proximity is synchronous but as it is 
possible to send C-3PO to deliver messages, the proximity 
might be asynchronous as well, which again illustrates the 
dependency on the specific task for categorizing robots.
By applying the taxonomy to both robots, we can now 
try to find variables of HRI that might cause the perception 
that R2-D2 is more likeable than C-3PO (although this is a