845 International Journal of Social Robotics (2021) 13:833–849 
1 3
post hoc explanation that has to be handled with caution). 
The comparison of the two canvas representations reveals 
the similarities and differences of both HRI scenarios. While 
the field of application, exposure, robot autonomy, commu-
nication channel and temporal proximity are comparable, 
there are also remarkable differences. First of all, the robots 
differ regarding the task for which they were developed. 
Moreover, the human role is different. In interaction with 
C-3PO, the human is a collaborator and dependent on the 
robot’s actions. For the human, this might also imply a (per -
ceived) shared responsibility entailing higher expectations 
of the robot’s ability. Working with R2-D2, the human is 
not directly involved in the task fulfillment but has to super -
vise the robot, i.e., the action implementation is completely 
resumed by the robot, whereas responsibility remains with 
the human. Together with R2-D2’s morphology combining 
functional, zoomorphic and humanoid aspects, this might 
foster the caregiver effect [64, 65]. When we interact with 
a machine that presents itself as dependent, e.g. has to be 
supervised and recalls associations with a pet, we have the 
tendency to nurture this machine, which in turn creates sig-
nificant social attachments. This might explain why most 
people would be more willing to interact with R2-D2. As 
R2-D2 is highly autonomous and often meets bystanders 
when navigating to its workplace as a mechanic, the chosen 
morphology might help to enhance its acceptance: it does 
not look dangerous or scary, is smaller than a human adult 
and with its technical appearance it does not look very com -
plex. In contrast, C-3PO was designed as a humanoid robot 
on all levels: appearance, communication, movement and 
context. This design supports notions of seriousness, exper -
tise and trustworthiness, especially as C-3PO looks like an 
adult, is tall and has no scheme of childlike characteristics. 
Therefore, the chosen morphology is fitting for the human 
role, C-3PO’s ability and task (interpreting in a business or 
political context).
In summary, applying the taxonomy explicates that inter -
acting with R2-D2 is fundamentally different from interact -
ing with C-3PO. Based on the detailed categorization and 
a post hoc analysis of both robots, a hypothesis can be pro-
posed on the reasons why people think R2-D2 is more like-
able: the likability of a robot is dependent on its morphology 
and the accompanying expectations, as well as the human 
role in interaction with the robot.
4.2  Anthropomorphism in HRI: Different Results 
or Different Scenarios?
The application to fictional HRI aimed to demonstrate how 
to apply the taxonomy by using examples most people are 
familiar with. In a second application, we refer to the set 
of studies on anthropomorphic movement discussed in the Introduction. While Kuz et al. [12] have demonstrated that 
anthropomorphic trajectories and speed profiles ease the 
prospective identification of robot actions, Riek’s research 
group [14] reports that action identification is faster with 
machine-like trajectories compared to smooth, human-
like movement patterns. To disentangle possible reasons 
for these different results, the taxonomy is applied to both 
experimental setups (see Fig.  4).
Kuz and colleagues [ 12, 13] used a virtual simulation 
environment with a single-arm assembly robot and its work -
place. The robot’s task was to place an object to certain 
fields on a black and white grid. The experimental setup 
and the simulated robot represent a scenario of an indus-
trial application, and participants were exposed to a depicted  
robot in a laboratory setting. The robot’s task of placing 
objects is classified as a manipulation. The morphology 
regarding appearance is described as technical, and there 
was no communication. The movement, however, was the 
independent variable of the experiment and implemented as 
either technical or anthropomorphic . No additional informa -
tion was given regarding the context. The overall degree of 
robot autonomy for the experimental setup can be described 
as high because from the participants’ perspective the robot 
was performing completely autonomously without any exter -
nal impact. During experimental trials, participants had to 
observe the robot and predict the robot arm’s end position, 
i.e. where the robot was going to place the object. Conse-
quently, the human role was that of a bystander with no 
control or supervisory task. The team (if this term is appro-
priate at all for the experimental scenario) consisted of one 
human and one robot, therefore NH= NR. The communication 
channels for input might be electronic (not specified in the 
experimental description), and the output was visual. The 
temporal proximity was synchronous , but there was no phys -
ical proximity as participants were just passively observing 
a simulated robot at its workplace.
The application of the taxonomy to the HRI study of 
Riek et al. [14] reveals the very artificial character of the 
chosen interaction scenario. Because of the abstraction 
level, the field of application cannot be specified and is 
therefore categorized as none. Participants were exposed 
to a depicted robot (videos) within a laboratory setting. 
The robot’s only task in the experiment is described as ges -
turing, i.e. an explicit non-verbal communication and thus 
can be categorized as information exchange. The robot’s 
morphology regarding its appearance and communication 
style (explicit non-verbal communication) was anthropo-
morphic. No context information was provided to partici-
pants. Again, the robot’s movement was the independent 
variable and implemented as either technical or anthropo -
morphic. Comparable to Kuz et al. [12], the overall degree 
of robot autonomy can be described as high because the 
robot seemed to perform completely autonomously from