840 International Journal of Social Robotics (2021) 13:833–849
1 3
bal or nonverbal communication. This task is often found 
in social HRI implemented in an educational setting like 
schools or kindergartens.
Emotional stimulation the robot aims at stimulating emo-
tional expressions and reactions in an interaction. Exam-
ples for this kind of robot are the robot seal Paro or other 
pet-like robots.
Physical stimulation robots for physical stimulation are 
often used in a rehabilitation context. The hirob from 
KUKA Medical Robotics, for instance, automates the 
conventional hippotherapy by imitating the exact move-
ments that a horse’s back does, while the horse is walk -
ing. Thereby, the robot enables an intensive therapeutic 
exercise to regain torso control and stability for patients 
with neurological deficits.
The robot morphology serves as another classification 
parameter for HRI, also proposed by Fong and colleagues 
[30] and Yanco and Drury [23]. From a psychological per -
spective, the morphology is of special interest as it shapes 
a user’s expectations of the robot’s functioning, as well as 
communication style and modalities. Therefore, to create 
an intuitive interaction with a robot, its design can be used 
to activate associations with already known objects [55]. 
Humanoid robots represent a typical example of this. The 
more human-like a robot appears, the more a user will expect 
an intuitive communication via natural speech. Moreover, 
human likeness could raise expectations regarding the robot 
competence, knowledge and autonomy [56].
Therefore, the differentiation of robot morphology 
(anthropomorphic, zoomorphic, technical) represents a fun-
damental determinant for HRI, especially for first-contact 
interactions with robots. In line with Yanco and Dury [ 23] 
and in contrast to Fong and colleagues [30], this taxonomy 
elides a cartoon-like or caricaturized category, as it is not 
distinctly adaptable and based on either of the other catego-
ries. Taking a closer look at the robots in Table  1, this prob-
lem becomes obvious, as for instance the Hexbug Nano used 
by Darling and colleagues [11] is a caricaturized cockroach 
and therefore coincidentally zoomorphic. The NAO robot 
used by Onnasch and Roesler [ 16] is a small caricaturized 
human and therefore anthropomorphic.
However, this categorization of morphology goes beyond 
appearance, and therefore deviates from existing classifica-
tions [23, 30], as it further subdivides robot morphology 
into four dimensions: appearance (How does it look like?), 
communication (e.g. communication by speech, written 
input/output, signals, non-verbal communication, gestures; 
implicit or explicit communication), movement (e.g. joint/
smooth, functional movement) or context information (e.g. 
framing). On each dimension, robot morphology can be clas-
sified as anthropomorphic, zoomorphic or technical. To per -
ceive a robot as being humanoid (anthropomorphic design), not every detail has to be human-like, i.e. it might be already 
sufficient if the robot has a human-like body and a head, 
even though legs and feet are missing, or if the communi-
cation style and context is anthropomorphic. However, the 
appearance might be more task driven and therefore techni-
cal. Same accounts for a zoomorphic design, where a typical 
pet name like “Kitty” or “Buster” and certain sounds might 
lead to a zoomorphic perception of the robot even though 
the appearance might be more like a “box”. With a technical 
robotic appearance, framing, movement and communication 
can fundamentally change the way it is perceived. As men-
tioned before, the manifestations of all three classifications 
on the four dimensions can be assigned without the total 
transfer of every detail of anthropomorphic or zoomorphic 
characteristics or even as stated beforehand in a caricaturized 
manner. As the manifestations of the technical, zoomorphic 
and anthropomorphic categories are gradual, we advise a 
differentiated classification of each aspect (appearance, com-
munication style, movement, and context). However, cur -
rent frequently used questionnaires like the GOODSPEED 
[57] and the revised GODSPEED [58] questionnaire are not 
appropriate for this purpose, as they mainly focus on the 
development of uncanny valley indices. Furthermore, the 
semantic differentials distinguish between unlively techni-
cal aspects and natural human aspects, like consciousness or 
being alive. Even though robotic design utilizes the human 
tendency to anthropomorphize robots [59], it is not assumed 
that humans perceive clearly non-living objects as holding 
uniquely human characteristics and as being actually alive. 
In addition, the animal-likeness (zoomorphism), which is 
especially important for social HRI, cannot be measured 
with these instruments. For these reasons, we cannot sug-
gest an existing questionnaire to rate the robots’ morphology. 
Future research should develop a questionnaire that can reli-
ably measure the degree to which a robot’s morphology is 
technical, zoomorphic and anthropomorphic.
The degree of robot autonomy represents another classi-
fication variable which defines the need for human interven-
tion during interaction. In this context, Beer and colleagues 
[27] define the level of autonomy with regard to perception, 
action planning and action implementation. However, they 
do not consider information analysis and aggregation as a 
separate task that could be performed by either human or 
robot. Thus, we propose to classify robot autonomy accord-
ing to models applied in human-automation interaction, 
referring to Wickens, Hollands, Banbury and Parasuraman 
[60]. Accordingly, the degree of robot autonomy is subdi-
vided into four stages: information acquisition, informa-
tion analysis, action selection and action implementation. 
For each stage, the level of robot autonomy can vary from 
low/none to high/complete, therefore implying the level of 
human intervention and which parts of a task concern the 
human at the same time. This way of classifying autonomy