847 International Journal of Social Robotics (2021) 13:833–849 
1 3
a participant’s perspective. The human role was that of a 
bystander as human and robot were not working together, 
nor had a shared goal, but the scenario implied some basic 
communication affordances. With an interaction of one 
robot and one participant at a time, the team composition 
is defined as NH= NR. Based on the given information in 
the experimental description, the communication input 
channel might be electronic. However, as participants had 
to interpret the robot’s gestures, it might also be possible 
that they assumed a reciprocity in this kind of communi-
cation, i.e. an optical input. This is not discussed in the 
original paper. The robot communicated with participants 
using gestures which resembles a visual communication 
output. The proximity is classified as being synchronous in 
time and none regarding the physical proximity (because 
of using video material).
The application of the taxonomy reveals similarities and 
differences between the two studies. The interaction context 
and exposure setting are categorized similarly and there are 
no differences within the taxonomy part of team character -
istics. The categorization of degree of robot autonomy is 
also comparable in both studies. However, there are also 
at least three aspects in which the studies differ essentially: 
the field of application, the robot task specification and the 
morphology. These differences are important when inter -
preting results. Both studies compare a robot’s movement 
being anthropomorphic or technical. However, while in Kuz 
et al.’s [12] experiment the robot’s movement is a means to 
an end, i.e. the movement is needed in order to fulfill the 
task of manipulation, the robot movement in the study of 
Riek et al. [14] is the central variable, as this actually is the 
robot’s task: information exchange via gestures. Moreover, 
the robots differ greatly regarding their appearance (techni-
cal vs. anthropomorphic design). These differences might 
explain the contradicting results as they show that even 
though both focused on a robot’s movement, they, in fact, 
did research on completely different HRI scenarios which 
cannot be assessed as equal, since movement had dissimilar 
functions.
So, to answer the question: “Different results or different 
HRI scenarios?”, the taxonomy illustrates that a comparison 
of the two study results would resemble a comparison of 
apples and oranges because, in fact, these are completely 
different scenarios.
5  Outlook
The exemplified application of the taxonomy to both fic-
tional and real examples shows its strength by enabling a 
structured comparison of very different HRIs revealing simi-
larities and differences. Hence, the taxonomy has a broad 
practical applicability to top-down classifications of existing HRI scenarios which can be the basis for precise interven -
tions in order to optimize HRI. Moreover, the taxonomy 
serves as a basis to decide whether studies are comparable 
and if an overall interpretation is valid. Additionally, the 
taxonomy enables the identification of dimensions on which 
HRI studies differ. This is the foundation for more general-
ized insights, as such structured comparisons and categori-
zations allow meta-analyses. There already exists a rich and 
rising research body. However, the interaction context, the 
robot and the team characteristics of the individual studies 
differ considerably. Are implications of results obtained in 
studies with a therapeutic zoomorphic robot still valid for 
studies utilizing a single-arm industrial robot in a manufac-
turing domain? The generalizability of insights from single 
studies is always problematic. The proposed descriptive HRI 
taxonomy facilitates HRI research, as it illustrates similari-
ties and highlights differences of actual scenarios. Further -
more, the taxonomy offers a framework for experimental 
study setups, as the predefined categories propose a struc-
tured graduation on each HRI-dimension. By following such 
structured research actions, it will be possible to tell which 
detailed aspects of HRI might have a beneficial impact to 
enable a safe and efficient teamwork between humans and 
robots.
Acknowledgements Open Access funding provided by Projekt DEAL. 
This article is based on an earlier published short essay in baua:Fokus, 
an online publication platform of the Federal Institute for Occupational 
Safety and Health (Germany) [66]. The HRI taxonomy was developed 
as part of the project “Mensch-Roboter-Teams (F2369)”, funded by 
the Federal Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (BAuA), and 
together with HFC Human-Factors-Consult GmbH.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attri-
bution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adapta-
tion, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long 
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, 
provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes 
were made. The images or other third party material in this article are 
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated 
otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in 
the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not 
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will 
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a 
copy of this licence, visit http://creat iveco mmons .org/licen ses/by/4.0/.
References
 1. Rosheim M (2006) Leonardo’s lost robots. Springer, Berlin
 2. Čapek K (1920) Rossum’s universal robots. Prague, London, p 1
 3. Miller RK (1989) Robots in industry. Industrial robot handbook. 
VNR Competitive Manufacturing Series. Springer, Boston, pp 1–9
 4. Hinds PJ, Roberts TL, Jones H (2004) Whose job is it anyway? A 
study of human robot interaction in a collaborative task. Human-
Comput Inter 19(1):151–181. https ://doi.org/10.1080/07370  
024.2004.96673 43