842 International Journal of Social Robotics (2021) 13:833–849
1 3
goal might be to transport laundry from one place to another, 
the visitors’ goal is to visit someone in the hospital. They 
still have to short-term coordinate their actions to avoid a 
possible collision.
Another variable, which received little attention in 
previous classification approaches, is team composition. 
Essentially, there are three possible options: equal number 
of humans and robots (NH = NR), more humans than robots 
(NH > NR) and more robots than humans (NH < NR). In order 
to ensure comparability between different HRI scenarios, 
it might be reasonable to further specify the concrete num-
ber of humans and robots when applying the taxonomy. For 
instance, an interaction scenario consisting of one human 
and two robots is very different compared to a scenario with 
one human and 100 robots like it is the case when control-
ling robot swarms.
The communication channel is further subdivided into 
input and output to highlight the interactional component 
of human–robot teamwork. Input describes how information 
from the human is “perceived” by the robot, i.e. how humans 
can provide information to the robot. This can be done either 
using an electronic (e.g. remote control via control device), a 
mechanical (e.g. the kinematic movement of the robot arm), 
an acoustical (e.g. verbal commands) or an optical channel 
(e.g. gesture control). The robot’s output can be perceived 
by the human senses through a tactile communication chan-
nel (e.g. haptic using vibrations), an acoustical (e.g. animal 
sounds) and a visual channel (e.g. artificial eye movements), 
respectively.
This communication takes place in the dimensions of 
spatial and temporal proximity. The physical proximity  
describes the distance between the human’s and the robot’s 
work area. Huttenrauch and Eklundh [61] propose five cat-
egories that are extended with the category “none” by Yanco 
and Drury [23], which is also applied in this taxonomy. The 
category “none” is especially important for a remotely con-
trolled HRI (e.g. the Mars rover Curiosity) which is repre-
sented in our taxonomy through the combination of human 
role = supervisor, and physical proximity = none. The cat-
egories are defined as follows.
Following human and robot have stable physical contact 
over a prolonged time. This is realized with specific inter -
faces at the robot (e.g. joystick, force/torque sensors) or 
using/manipulating the objects held by the robot.
Touching human and robot share the same workspace. 
They directly interact in close proximity. Human and 
robot have physical contact.
Approaching human and robot work in the same space. 
There is no physical contact but both parties work closely 
together.
Passing  the human’s and robot’s workspaces partly or 
completely overlap. However, contact is prevented.Avoiding  human and robot do not work in striking distance 
and avoid direct contact. The human tries to stay out of the 
robot’s operating distance.
None human and robot are not in the same working envi-
ronment.
Adjacent to the physical proximity, we further describe 
the temporal proximity  between human and robot, which is 
either synchronous or asynchronous. Synchronous implies that 
human and robot are working at the same time. In an asyn -
chronous interaction, human and robot are working at different 
times, like in the case of shift working.
3.4  Graphical Support for Classifying HRI Scenarios 
in Practice
To ease the application of the HRI taxonomy to actual sce-
narios, we offer a compact canvas-representation including all 
variables with according categories (see Fig.  1). The idea of 
this kind of graphical representation stems from the business 
and management domain and was first introduced as the Busi-
ness Model Canvas by Osterwalder [ 62]. In its original use, 
the canvas representation is a template for developing new or 
documenting existing business models. The canvas lists and 
combines all elements describing a company’s or a product’s 
value proposition, infrastructure, customers and finances, and 
therefore provides a very condensed and scalable overview of 
complex circumstances.
When applied in the context of HRI, at least one category 
should be selected per variable. Whereas it might be appro-
priate to select more than one category for some variables 
there are also categories that are mutually exclusive. These 
are exposure to (interaction context classification), morphol-
ogy, autonomy (robot classification), and human role (team 
classification). The graphical support depicts the hierarchical 
structure of the taxonomy. In the upper right, the two variables 
defining the interaction classification are depicted in dark grey. 
The variables concerning the robot are organized in middle 
grey, and the team classification variables are grouped in light 
grey in the lower part of the canvas template. The left part of 
the canvas is a placeholder for a description of the specific HRI 
categorized using the canvas. Information should be provided 
about the robot, the robot’s task, as well as the specific HRI. 
To further ease the application of the taxonomy we provide 
an interactive canvas pdf that can be downloaded at: https ://
hu.berli n/ingps y