839 International Journal of Social Robotics (2021) 13:833–849 
1 3
Accordingly, a robot can be applied as an assistant in a 
therapeutic setting. The robotic seal Paro is a well-known 
example for such an application. Paro is an advanced inter -
active robot that is an alternative for pet therapy in environ-
ments such as hospitals and extended care facilities, where 
pets are not allowed. Studies indicate the potential benefit 
of this robotic system for older adults and dementia patients 
[e.g. 44, 45].
Robots are also increasingly used in educational settings  
and research. For instance, Saerbeck et al. [46] introduced 
iCat, a robotic research platform, to support school children 
(aged 10–11 years) in remembering vocabulary when learn -
ing a language. Another example is provided by Hashimoto 
and colleagues [47], who implemented an android robot that 
collaboratively solved exercises with students in a Tokyo 
elementary school.
Moreover, there is the growing field of entertainment  
robots, such as robotic dogs or other robotic toys like Cozmo, 
which are also often used in research [e.g. 48, 49]. Regard-
ing the use of robots in research, it is important to note that 
the categorization of the field of application depends on the 
actual use of the robot, not what the robot was originally 
designed for. Cozmo, for example, is originally thought of 
as an entertaining robotic toy for children. When this toy is 
used in research as an interaction partner for children with 
autistic spectrum disorder, Cozmo would have to be catego -
rized as a therapeutic companion [48].
Additionally, there are a lot of studies that do not have 
such context information, e.g. pure perceptional studies. To 
cover those studies as well, the last category level is none.
The particular field of application often sets general con-
ditions of specific characteristics of the human users (e.g. 
the homogeneity of manufacturing workers interacting with 
industrial robots), as well as properties of the interaction 
scenario (e.g. the unstructured interaction environment of a 
socially assistive robot).
Besides the field of application, the taxonomy further 
defines the kind of exposure to the robot. There is a grow -
ing body of research indicating that physically embodied 
robots are perceived differently than virtual two-dimensional 
agents and have different effects [e.g. 50– 52]. Therefore, the 
taxonomy differentiates between an exposure to embodied  
versus depicted robots. Examples for the latter are virtual 
two-dimensional agents (on a computer screen), but also 
real robots that are only exposed to participants by showing 
them video clips or images of the robots. The core aspect 
that is addressed by these category levels is the embodiment 
of the robot, i.e. if the exposure enables an experience of 
corporality and a direct tactile interaction [51]. Moreover, 
this category also differentiates the setting, i.e. whether the 
exposure to a robot is realized in the wild (field) or in a 
controlled (and more artificial) laboratory setting, which 
could impact the perception and behavior towards a robot. A laboratory setting also includes online studies. Differ -
ent settings can lead to different outcomes, e.g. Salter et al. 
[53] found that children enjoyed playing and were actively 
engaged with a robot under laboratory conditions, whereas 
a field experiment [54] with the same robot revealed that 
most children became successively bored by interacting with 
the robot. This surprising result was partially explained by 
a disappearing novelty effect and by the repeated exposure. 
Nonetheless, the unstructured environment additionally led 
to former unknown robotic problems like getting “stuck” 
without being able to free itself.
3.2  The Robot Classification
Besides the interaction itself, the previous mentioned con-
tradicting results of Kuz et al. [12, 13] and Riek and col-
leagues [14] illustrate that the robot’s design and function 
have strong impact on the interaction of human and robot. 
Therefore, the next part of the taxonomy focuses on the 
robot’s work context and design with the three variables of 
robot task specification, degree of robot autonomy, and robot 
morphology.
The robot task specification describes eight abstract task 
types to allow a classification and standardized comparison 
of diverse tasks in various application domains. Based on 
the predominant human–robot interactions, we define the 
tasks as follows.
Information exchange this task describes the robot’s 
acquisition and analysis of information from the environ -
ment and the information transfer to the human. This task 
is often implemented when operating in hostile environ-
ments like the Mars mission or S&R missions.
Precision the robot performs tasks that require particu-
larly filigree capabilities and are hard to perform for 
humans (e.g. robots for micro-invasive surgery like the 
daVinci system that suppresses the surgeon’s tremor).
Physical load reduction the robot resumes tasks to reduce 
the human’s physical workload (e.g. lifting, carrying or 
fixing actions). Representative for this kind of task allo-
cation between robot and human is the use of powered 
exoskeletons that support the human to carry heavy loads 
during long missions or that allow paraplegic wearers to 
walk upright with little physical exertion.
Transport the robot is implemented to transport objects 
from one place to another (e.g. robots that carry parcels 
to different shelves in a warehouse, or robots carrying 
linen in hospitals from the patient rooms to the laundry).
Manipulation  the robot physically modifies its environ -
ment (e.g. robots that perform welding actions on an 
object or pick&place robots).
Cognitive stimulation the robot’s aim is to engage the 
human on a cognitive level in the interaction through ver -