Model-based ofﬂine RL, on the other hand, ﬁrst builds an environment model based on the ofﬂine dataset and then
trains the policy based on the model (and the data). The key advantage of building the environment model in ofﬂine RL
is to leverage the model’s generalization ability to perform a certain level of exploration and also to generate additional
training data to improve the policy performance.
Nevertheless, since the ofﬂine data is often quite limited, the learned model is considered untrustable most methods take
a conservative strategy. MORel [Kidambi et al., 2020] constructs a pessimistic MDP (P-MDP) using the ofﬂine dataset,
where the state transition model is additionally trained and used for detecting whether the current state-action pair is
OOD. If OOD is detected, the model will transit to a terminal state and outputs a negative reward. As such, the agent
in the P-MDP tends to learn to avoid OOD situations and thus reduce the extrapolation error in the learning process.
MOPO [Yu et al., 2020] derives a policy value lower bound based on a learned model and incorporates a penalty term
into the reward function based on the model uncertainty so as to discourage the agent from entering the OOD region.
To bypass the error caused by regarding uncertainty estimated via the deep neural networks as the guidance of avoiding
OOD problems, COMBO [Yu et al., 2021] trains a value function based on both the ofﬂine data and the rollout data
generated by the learned model. Moreover, the value function is regularized on the OOD data generated via model
rollout.
Other than the conservative strategies that avoid entering into OOD regions, it is possible to generalize. MAPLE [Chen
et al., 2021b] was the ﬁrst to borrow the generalization ability of meta RL for ofﬂine RL. It derives an adaptable policy
through a meta RL method to make adaptive decisions directly in OOD regions, which provided an alternative way to
deal with OOD data.
4.2 Goal-conditioned RL
Goal-conditioned reinforcement learning (GCRL), also named as goal-oriented RL [Liu et al., 2022], deals with the
tasks where agents are expected to achieve different goals [Pitis et al., 2020] in an environment or complete a complex
task via achieving a series of goals. In GCRL, the observation (or the state) of the agent is usually augmented with a
goal, which is normally represented as a mapped vector g2G from a target state, i.e., g=(starget). The mapping
function:S7!G can be designed based on speciﬁc tasks or just the identity function. The resulted goal can be
regarded as being sampled from a distribution pg. Then, the reward function is deﬁned based on the (state, action, goal)
tuple asr:SAG7! R. In such a setting, the agent policy :SG7! 
(A)is trained to maximize the expected
goal-conditioned return as
max
J() =Ep;pg;hX
t
tr(st;at;g)i
: (25)
To efﬁciently train the agent to achieve various goals, goal relabeling techniques are widely used. In hindsight,
experience replay (HER) [Andrychowicz et al., 2017], the goal is relabeled from the trajectories where the original goal
may not be achieved, which is motivated by learning from failure cases. Speciﬁcally, in HER, the relabeled goals are
built via mapping a randomly picked state in a trajectory of the replay buffer. Other following works seek different ways
to generate the goal, including using GANs to generate goals with different difﬁculty scores [Florensa et al., 2018],
planning the goals with search techniques based on experience data [Lai et al., 2020b, Eysenbach et al., 2019], etc.
To further enhance the diversity of the generated goals, thus the robustness and effectiveness of the trained goal-
conditioned policy, recent attempts have been made for goal planning via model-based methods [Nair and Finn,
2020] studied visual prediction models to build environment dynamics based on visual observations to enable subgoal
generation and planning for robot manipulation tasks, which demonstrates substantial performance gain over the
baseline model-free RL methods and planning methods without subgoals. Zhu et al. [2021] proposed foresight goal
inference (FGI) method to plan goals based on a learned environment dynamics model, then the simulated trajectories
are generated based on the goal, goal-conditional policy, and the dynamics model. With model-based RL methods, the
training scheme achieves superior sample efﬁciency than model-free GCRL baselines.
With the high-ﬁdelity environment dynamics model, it is promising to leverage various techniques such as graph
search, model inference, and heuristics created by human domain knowledge to generate highly useful goals to train the
goal-conditioned policy and guide the policy’s decision-making at the inference stage.
4.3 Multi-agent RL
Multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) studies the sequential interaction strategies among a set of agents i=
1;2;:::;n in the environment, where each agent iis self-interested and aims to maximize its own payoff in terms of
15