predicted. In such a way, proper actions can be chosen to take from imagination and are thus with low trial-and-error
costs. The phrase model in MBRL is the environment model that is expected to play the same role as the imagination.
In MBRL, the environment model (or simply the model) refers to the abstraction of the environment dynamics with
which the learning agent interacts. The dynamics environment in RL is typically formulated as a Markov decision
process (MDP), denoted with a tuple hS;A;M;R;
i, whereS,Aand
denote the state space, action space and the
discount factor for future rewards, respectively, while M:SA7!Sdenotes the state transition dynamics and
R:SA7!Rdenotes the reward function. Normally, given the state and action spaces and the discount factor, the
key components of the environment model are the state transition dynamics and the reward function. Thus, learning the
model corresponds to recovering the state transition dynamics Mand the reward function R. In many cases, the reward
function is also explicitly deﬁned, thus the major task of the model learning is to learn the state transition dynamics
[Luo et al., 2018, Janner et al., 2019].
With an environment model, the agent can have the imagination ability. It can interact with the model in order to
sample the interaction data, which is also called simulation data . Ideally, if the model is sufﬁciently accurate, a good
policy can be learned in the model. Compared with the model-free reinforcement learning (MFRL) methods, where the
agent can only use the data sampled from the interaction with the real environment, called experienced data , MBRL
enables the agent to fully leverage the experienced data in the learned model. It should be noticed that, besides MBRL,
there are other approaches trying to better utilize the experienced data, such as the off-policy algorithms that employ a
replay buffer to record the old data and the actor-critic algorithms that can be viewed as learning a critic to facilitate the
policy updates. Figure 1 depicts different types of RL structures. Figure 1(a) is the simplest on-policy RL, where the
agent uses the latest data to update the policy. In the off-policy, as Figure 1(b), the agent collects historical data in the
replay buffer, in which the policy is learned. In actor-critic RL, as shown in 1(c) the agent learns a critic, which is the
value function of the long-term return, and then learns the policy (actor) assisted by the critic. MBRL, as shown in
Figure 1(d), explicitly learns a model. Compared with off-policy RL, MBRL reconstructs the state transition dynamics,
while off-policy RL simply uses the replay buffer to estimate the value more robustly. Although calculating the value
function, or the critic, involves the information of the transition dynamics, the learned model in MBRL is decoupled
with the policy and thus can be used to evaluate other policies, while the value function is bound to the sampling policy.
Also, note that off-policy, actor-critic, and model-based are three structures in parallel, Figure 1(e) shows a possible
combination of them.
With a sufﬁciently accurate model, it is intuitive that MBRL yields higher sample efﬁciency than MFRL, as shown in
recent studies from both theoretical [Sun et al., 2019] and empirical [Janner et al., 2019, Wang et al., 2019] perspectives.
However, in a wide range of DRL tasks with relatively complex environments, it is not straightforward to learn an ideal
model. Therefore, we need to carefully consider approaches to model learning and model usage.
In this survey, we take a comprehensive review of the model-based reinforcement learning methods. Firstly, we focus
on how models are learned and used in the basic setting, as in Sec.3 for model learning and Sec.4 for model usage. For
model learning , we start from the classic tabular represented models, then for approximation models such as using
PolicyRun in the environmentAgentinteraction dataevaluation
(a) on-policy RL
PolicyAgentReplayRun in the environmentinteraction dataevaluation (b) off-policy RL
Policy/actorCriticAgentRun in the environmentinteraction dataevaluation (c) actor-critic RL
PolicyModelAgentRun in the environmentinteraction dataevaluation
(d) model-based RL
PolicyModelAgentReplayRun in the environmentinteraction dataevaluationCritic (e) off-policy actor-critic RL
Figure 1: Architectures of RL algorithms. The ﬁgures show a training iteration of the RL, focusing on how the
interaction data is utilized.
2