easily derive a state-action distribution different from that of the collected data. The off-policy evaluation aims
to evaluate a policy using historical non-identical distributed datasets. However, current off-policy evaluation
methods have not shown reasonable effectiveness in benchmarks [Qin et al., 2021]. While a recent study starts
to combine off-policy evaluation and model-based policy evaluation [Jin et al., 2022], running a policy in a
simulator/model might be the most straightforward way to assess the performance.
•Decision explanation. Running a policy in a simulator/model can not only assess the performance of the
policy but also allow us to see the speciﬁc decisions at states. These decisions themselves are also very
useful for the decision-maker to evaluate the conﬁdence of the policy in subjective ways. When the decisions
show good rationality or even better ideas, the policy can gain more trust from the decision-maker, which is
important in practice.
6 Conclusions and Future Directions
In this survey, we took a review on model-based reinforcement learning, which was a classic tabular RL method in
the 1990s and has just got a renaissance for deep RL in recent years. Sample efﬁciency has always been the target
to optimize in RL, particularly in the deep learning era. Model-based methods play an important role in achieving
state-of-the-art sample efﬁciency in deep RL. From our survey, we have noticed some occurring developments of
MBRL. We summarize the directions below:
•Learning generalizable models. As a playground, models should be tolerant of the running of arbitrary
policy. The generalization ability is the key to the success of MBRL. Recent progress includes introducing
causal learning into model learning. A correct causal structure, [Zhu et al., 2022a] as well as better modeling
causal effect, [Chen et al., 2022] can help build good models. Causal model learning shows a way toward
strong model generalization.
•Learning abstract models. State abstraction [Dietterich, 1999] and temporal abstraction [Sutton et al., 1999]
can map the original MDP to a low dimensional and compact MDP where the reinforcement learning task can
be much simpliﬁed. Leveraging state and temporal abstraction, model-learning can happen in low dimensional
space and thus becomes an easy task. We have observed some possibilities of learning abstract models [Jiang
et al., 2015, Zhu et al., 2022b], while much more need to be done. Abstractions naturally lead to hierarchical
reinforcement learning, which we ﬁnd is almost an untouched topic.
•Training generalizable policies. Meta reinforcement learning, as discussed above, relies on model random-
ization and produces a meta-policy that can generalize to similar environments. The generalization ability of
the meta-policy is rooted in model variations. However, the question of how to generate models such that the
trained meta-policy adapts to the target environment is largely overlooked.
•Model-based multi-agent RL. Planning in various multi-agent scenarios with the multi-agent environment
model is just in its infancy. By observing the recently emerging works, it is of high potential to incorpo-
rate model-based methods to improve the coordination among the team agents and increase the sample
efﬁciency of training. More investigation shall be dedicated to multi-agent environment learning, planning,
and communication mechanism design with the model.
•Foundation models. In the general machine learning community, learning foundation models is a recent
emerging learning paradigm [Bommasani et al., 2021] that shows strong performance in a large range of vision
and natural language processing tasks. This paradigm is also shifting in decision-making tasks by learning a
single policy model [Reed et al., 2022]. Other than foundation policy models, foundation environment models
is a large region to be explored.
Other possible directions include improving value discrepancy bounds, automatic scheduling in MBRL, adaptive
model usage, life-long model learning [Wu et al., 2020], etc. It is reasonable to expect that there will be a series of
breakthroughs towards more efﬁcient and applicable RL techniques along the direction of model-based RL in the near
future.
Acknowledgement
This work is supported by National Key Research and Development Program of China (2020AAA0107200) and
National Natural Science Foundation of China (61876077,62076161).
19