environment [Sutton and Barto, 2018, Moerland et al., 2020a,b]. We will list the MBRL approaches that integrate
planning into their methods or frameworks. We will categorize these approaches according to the planning methods
they adopt.
Model predictive control (MPC). MPC [Camacho and Alba, 2013] is a kind of model-based control method that plans
an optimized sequence of actions in the model. Classical MPC approach requires to design a parametric model and
policy, such as in the linear quadratic form, to ﬁt the optimizer such as a quadratic optimization solver. Learning-based
MPC [Hewing et al., 2020] has a tight connection with MBRL, particularly for nonlinear and black-box models. In
general, at each time step, MPC obtains an optimal action sequence by sampling multiple sequences and applying the
ﬁrst action of the sequence to the environment. Formally, at time step t, an MPC agent will seek an action sequence
at:t+by optimizing:
max
at:t+Est0+1p(st0+1jst0;at0)"t+X
t0=tr(st0;at0)#
; (13)
wheredenotes the planning horizon. Then the agent will choose the ﬁrst action atfrom the action sequence and apply
it to the environment.
Black-box MPC regards Eq.(13) as a black-box optimization problem and adopts some zero-order optimization methods
to solve it. MB-MF [Nagabandi et al., 2018b] adopts a basic optimization method, i.e., the Monte Carlo (MC) method
(also known as “random shooting”), which samples a number of action sequences at:t+from the space of action
sequence uniformly and randomly. By applying the action sequences in the model, the current state stcan be transited
tost+following the transition distribution. The returns accumulated during the transition process are used to evaluate
the action sequences. The action sequence with the highest evaluation will be preserved as the solution of Eq.(13).
The MC method is simple to implement and does not require many computational resources. However, because of
the low efﬁciency of the random sampling process, it also suffers from high variance and could fail to sample a high
reward action sequence when the action space is large. Recent advances in MPC methods focus on altering the sampling
strategies [Chua et al., 2018, Hafner et al., 2019b] and the sampling space [Wang and Ba, 2020].
Replacing the MC method with CEM [Botev et al., 2013], PETS [Chua et al., 2018], and PlaNet [Hafner et al., 2019b]
improves the optimization efﬁciency. Instead of sampling randomly and uniformly, CEM samples the action sequences
from a multivariate normal distribution, which will be adjusted according to the evaluation of the sampled sequences
such that the high-reward sequences can be sampled with a higher probability. This principle resembles many other
derivative-free optimization methods [Hansen, 2016, Yu et al., 2016, Hu et al., 2017]. As a result, other derivative-free
optimization methods can also be used to solve Eq.(13) and integrated into the MPC framework. In addition to altering
the optimization method, POPLIN-A [Wang and Ba, 2020] further improves the optimization efﬁciency by altering the
sampling space to a space of action bias. Speciﬁcally, POPLIN-A seeks a sequence of action residual to adjust an action
sequence proposed by a policy. For example, POPLIN-A-Replan, a variant of POPLIN-A, alters Eq.(13) to Eq (14) by
introducing a policy function (s):
max
t:t+Est0+1p(st0+1jst0;(st0)+t0)"t+X
t0=tr(st0;(st0) +t0)#
: (14)
The policy learns to imitate the MPC results. As a result, at the state the policy has met, it can propose a nearly optimal
action sequence as an initial solution. Thus, POPLIN-A largely simpliﬁes the optimization problem and improves
planning efﬁciency.
With an imperfect model, the result of MPC could not be reliable. However, we can still make use of the planning result
by integrating it into a model-free RL framework. I2A [Racanière et al., 2017] integrates Monte Carlo planning results
into model-free RL framework as the auxiliary information. Instead of applying the ﬁrst action of the sequence with
the highest return, I2A encodes several rollouts from the model to rollout embeddings. The embeddings will then be
aggregated and used to augment the input of the model-free RL agent. As I2A does not rely on the planning results, it
can successfully use imperfect models.
Monte Carlo tree search (MCTS). MCTS [Browne et al., 2012, Chaslot et al., 2008a, Silver et al., 2016, 2017b] is an
extension of Monte Carlo sampling methods. MCTS also aims at solving Eq.(13). Unlike the MC methods mentioned
in the MPC part, MCTS adopts a tree-search method. At each time step, MCTS incrementally extends a search tree
from the current environment state [Browne et al., 2012, Chaslot et al., 2008a]. Each node in the tree corresponds to a
state, which will be evaluated by some approximated value functions or the return obtained after rollouts in the model
with a random policy [Chaslot et al., 2008a] or a neural network policy [Silver et al., 2016, 2017a,b]. Finally, action
will be chosen such that the agent can be more likely transited to a state which has a higher evaluated value. In MCTS,
models are generally used to generate the search tree and evaluate the state.
9