In the future, it is tempting to build more realistic hybrid models combining analytical simulators and neural networks,
which can seamlessly take advantage of innovations in both ﬁelds.
4.5 Automated Methods on Model Learning and Usage
Compared to MFRL, the design and tuning of MBRL methods tend to require more human effort due to their complex
algorithm procedure and sensitivity to different hyperparameters. Take Dyna-style methods as an example. Besides
designing the model-free counterpart, Dyna-style methods should also consider alternate optimization of model and
policy, model planning steps, and the ratio of simulated data to real data [Lai et al., 2021]. To this end, automated
MBRL methods have been investigated to automate the MBRL pipeline and search for better hyperparameters. For
example, The reinforcement on reinforcement (RoR) framework proposed in Dong et al. [2020] additionally trained a
high-level controller through DQN [Mnih et al., 2013] to control the sampling and training process of a Dyna-style
MBRL method. Zhang et al. [2021a] utilized population-based training (PBT) to optimize the hyperparameters of the
PETS algorithm [Chua et al., 2018] during the training process.
In recent work, Lai et al. [2021] theoretically analyzed the role of automated hyperparameter scheduling in Dyna-style
MBRL, which reveals that a dynamic schedule of data ratio can be more effective than the ﬁxed one. Motivated by
such an analysis, they proposed the AutoMBPO framework to automatically schedule the key hyperparameters of the
MBPO [Janner et al., 2019] algorithm. Empirical results show that MBRL methods with automatic hyperparameter
optimization can achieve higher sample efﬁciency compared with those tuned manually [Zhang et al., 2021a, Lai et al.,
2021]. How to better incorporate advanced techniques of AutoML [Hutter et al., 2019] into MBRL is a promising
direction to investigate further.
5 Applications of Model-based RL
MBRL is of particular interest because of its potential to be applied in the real world, where a common feature is
the intolerance of errors. This feature contradicts the fundamental mechanism, i.e., trial-and-error, of reinforcement
learning methods. Therefore, between real-world applications and reinforcement learning, there must be a playground
for training policies. The playground must have high ﬁdelity to the real world and a high error tolerance for freely
training reinforcement learning.
Building hand-crafted simulators has been a widely adopted approach in cost-sensitive scenarios, such as autonomous
driving [Zhou et al., 2021], industrial control [Hein et al., 2017], decision optimization trafﬁc control [Zhang et al.,
2019a], electricity allocation [Vázquez-Canteli et al., 2019] in smart cities, ﬁnancial trading [Liu et al., 2020], control
of tokamak plasma [Degrave et al., 2022], etc. A hand-crafted simulator can resemble the overall functionality of the
real-world task, but it is hard to achieve high ﬁdelity. The policy trained in a hand-crafted simulator may not be able
to apply to the real-world task directly. This reality-gap can be overcome by the meta-RL methods introduced above,
where a meta-policy can be trained to adapt to the task on-the-ﬂy. A single unrealistic simulator can also be used to
facilitate policy training using some data collected in real-world task [Jiang et al., 2020]. Simulators are also useful for
generating speciﬁc situations that are a rarity in real-world environments for learning robust policies [Zhou et al., 2021,
Chou et al., 2018, Sun et al., 2021].
Hand-crafted simulators are still expensive to build, costing huge expert time. Learning environment models from
data can be a more efﬁcient and lower-cost alternative to hand-crafted simulators. Shi et al. [2019] were the ﬁrst to
learn an environment model, Virtual-Taobao, for recommender systems. The environment model consists of detailed
customer behaviors, i.e., click, buy, turn next page, and leave after reading the recommended items, which is believed to
be extremely difﬁcult to learn. It was shown in [Shi et al., 2019] that the customer behavior can be well modeled by
the proposed adversarial model learning method MAIL, which was later proved to have smaller compounding error as
introduced in Sec. 2.3.2. Shang et al. [2021] extended the MAIL method to model hidden factors, leading to a better
model learning ability. Both the two studies show that the policies trained in the learned models can be deployed in the
real-world tasks while maintaining similar performance as in the learned models, validated by real-world A/B tests.
From the above real-world applications, we also observe practical advantages of model-based methods:
•Full release of reinforcement learning power. A simulator or a learned model allows any reinforcement
learning algorithm to use sufﬁcient explorations to train a good policy. Even if the model can be unrealistic, it is
possible to constrain the exploration (e.g., [Shi et al., 2019, Degrave et al., 2022]) to maintain the effectiveness
of the learned policies.
•Pre-deployment assessment. It is crucial that a policy has been fully assessed before it can be deployed.
However, assessing an improved policy is extremely difﬁcult. Unlike supervised learning scenarios that
commonly employ an identically distributed dataset to validate prediction models, an improved policy can
18