A S URVEY ON MODEL -BASED REINFORCEMENT LEARNING
Fan-Ming Luo1,3,Tian Xu1,Hang Lai2,Xiong-Hui Chen1,3,Weinan Zhang†2, and Yang Yu†1,3
1National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
2Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
3Polixir.ai
{luofm,xut,chenxh,yuy}@lamda.nju.edu.cn,laihang@apex.sjtu.edu.cn,wnzhang@sjtu.edu.cn
ABSTRACT
Reinforcement learning (RL) solves sequential decision-making problems via a trial-and-error process
interacting with the environment. While RL achieves outstanding success in playing complex video
games that allow huge trial-and-error, making errors is always undesired in the real world. To improve
the sample efﬁciency and thus reduce the errors, model-based reinforcement learning (MBRL) is
believed to be a promising direction, which builds environment models in which the trial-and-errors
can take place without real costs. In this survey, we take a review of MBRL with a focus on the
recent progress in deep RL. For non-tabular environments, there is always a generalization error
between the learned environment model and the real environment. As such, it is of great importance
to analyze the discrepancy between policy training in the environment model and that in the real
environment, which in turn guides the algorithm design for better model learning, model usage, and
policy training. Besides, we also discuss the recent advances of model-based techniques in other
forms of RL, including ofﬂine RL, goal-conditioned RL, multi-agent RL, and meta-RL. Moreover,
we discuss the applicability and advantages of MBRL in real-world tasks. Finally, we end this survey
by discussing the promising prospects for the future development of MBRL. We think that MBRL
has great potential and advantages in real-world applications that were overlooked, and we hope this
survey could attract more research on MBRL.
1 Overview of Model-based RL
Reinforcement learning (RL) studies the methodologies of improving the performance of sequential decision-making
for autonomous agents [Sutton and Barto, 2018]. Since the success of deep RL in playing the game of Go and video
games shows the beyond-human ability of decision-making, it is of great interest to extend its application horizon to
include real-world tasks.
Typically, deep RL algorithms require tremendous training samples, resulting in much high sample complexity. In
general RL tasks, the sample complexity of a particular algorithm refers to the amount of samples required for learning
an approximately optimal policy. Particularly, unlike the supervised learning paradigm that learns from historical
labeled data, typical RL algorithms require the interaction data by running the latest policy in the environment. Once
the policy updates, the underlying data distribution (formally the occupancy measure [Syed et al., 2008]) changes, and
the data has to be collected again by running the policy. As such, RL algorithms with high sample complexity are hard
to be directly applied in real-world tasks, where trial-and-errors can be highly costly.
Therefore, a major focus of the recent research on deep reinforcement learning (DRL) is on improving sample efﬁciency
[Yu, 2018]. Among different branches of research, model-based reinforcement learning (MBRL) is one of the most
important directions that is widely believed to have the great potential to make RL algorithms signiﬁcantly more sample
efﬁcient [Wang et al., 2019]. This belief is intuitively from an analogy with human intelligence. Human beings are
capable of having an imagined world in mind, in which how things could happen following different actions can be
†: Corresponding authors.arXiv:2206.09328v1  [cs.LG]  19 Jun 2022