1593 Cognitive Computation (2024) 16:1589–1601 
1 3
from another. Moreover, the current articles in the state-
of-the-art only addressed three-way classification. In this 
article, we present four-way classification (three types of 
pneumonia and normal CXR images). We also compare each 
type with another which is also missing in the majority of 
the literature.
Contribution
Accordingly, our contributions have been summed up as 
follows.
• We suggested the use of Pretrained (transfer learning) 
AlexNet model to detect COVID-19 pneumonia non-
COVID-19 viral pneumonia, bacterial pneumonia and 
normal/healthy patients using CXR image.
• We trained the models separately to discriminate 
between: 
• COVID-19 pneumonia vs normal/healthy patients
• Non-COVID-19 Viral pneumonia vs normal/healthy 
patients
• Bacterial pneumonia vs normal/healthy patients
• COVID-19 pneumonia vs non-COVID-19 viral 
pneumonia patients
• COVID-19 pneumonia vs bacterial pneumonia vs 
normal/healthy patients
• COVID-19 pneumonia vs non-COVID-19 viral 
pneumonia, bacterial pneumonia, and normal/
healthy patients
• We assessed the performance of the network based on 
accuracy, sensitivity and specificity.
Related Work
The last decade has seen an exponential rise in the applica-
tion of DL in the healthcare system. Different studies have 
shown that DL models can be used for classification of 
pathological cancer images, diabetic retinopathy, CT scans 
of pneumonia, and tuberculosis as well as microbial slide 
images. In the field of pathology, pathologist, computer sci -
entist, and radiologist have been working together to detect 
diseases such as cancer, pneumonia, and tuberculosis using 
computer-aided diagnosis [35– 37].
In terms of application of DL models for detection of 
pneumonia using CT scan and X-ray images, we presented 
a literature review based on studies that:
1. Classified/distinguished between COVID-19, non-
COVID-19 viral pneumonia, and healthy CXR images or 
between COVID-19, bacterial pneumonia, and healthy 
images (i.e., four-way and three-way classifications).2. Classified/distinguished between COVID-19 and non-
COVID-19 viral pneumonia, COVID-19 and healthy 
CXR images, non-COVID-19 viral pneumonia, and 
healthy CXR images, bacterial pneumonia, and healthy 
CXR images (i.e., binary classification).
Chest scans based on chest X-ray or CT scan are an 
approach radiologist used to distinguish between patient 
suffering from pneumonia and healthy person. The differ -
ence is based on the presence of white hazy patches known 
as “Ground-glass opacity” in infected patient which is absent 
in healthy persons. However, as a result of scarcity of test 
for diagnosing COVID-19 as well as the high cost (120–130 
USD), time consuming, low sensitivity, laborious of RT-
PCR method, scientist turns to chest scan such as CT scans 
and X-rays as an alternative approach for diagnosis of severe 
pneumonia caused by SAR-CoV-2 and bacterial pneumonia 
[38]. Moreover, this approach has its own challenges such 
as shortage of expert (i.e., radiologist) that can interpret 
the result and the tediousness of interpreting thousands of 
CT scan and CXR images. These challenges are addressed 
by AI-driven models which have shown high efficiency in 
assisting medical expert in classification and prediction of 
disease [39, 40].
Many studies have reported the use of CXR and CT scans 
along with DL models in order to achieve automated detec-
tion of COVID-19 pneumonia and other types of pneumonia 
such as non-COVID-19 viral pneumonia and bacterial pneu-
monia. Moreover, many studies have shown the viability of 
using TL models which are deep networks pretrained on 
the ImageNet database for classification of pneumonia from 
healthy CT scans [41– 43].
Classification of Multiclass Pneumonia Using AI‑Driven 
Models
The approach of TL in DL is utilized by Chowdhury 
et al. [17] to differentiate between COVID-19 and viral 
pneumonia based on a dataset acquired from a public 
database. The models were trained using 423 COVID-
19, 1458 viral pneumonia, and 1579 normal chest X-ray 
images based on (i) augmentation and (ii) without aug-
mentation. The models achieved higher accuracies, sen-
sitivities, and specificities. A multi-dilation CNN is uti-
lized by Mahmud et al. [44] to classify COVID-19 and 
other types of pneumonia. The study utilized a deep CNN 
as COVXNet with modifications based on varying dila-
tion rates for feature extraction, optimization, stacking 
algorithms, and gradient-based discriminative localiza-
tion to train dataset containing 1493 non-COVID-19 viral 
pneumonia, 305 COVID-19 pneumonia, and 2780 bac-
terial pneumonia. The model achieved 97.4% accuracy