1592 Cognitive Computation (2024) 16:1589–1601
1 3
that works similar to the biology of human brains by taking 
data and processing the data through neural networks. Many 
biomedical health issues such as cancer (brain tumor and 
breast cancer) detections are using computer-aided diagnosis 
based on AI models. Precisely, DL models can detect hid-
den features in images which are not apparent or cannot be 
detected by medical experts. In terms of DL, convolutional 
neural network (CNN) is the leading DL tool that is popu-
larly used in different sub-field of healthcare system due 
to their ability to extract features and learn to distinguish 
between different classes (i.e., positive and negative, infected 
and healthy, cancer and non-cancer, etc.). Transfer learning 
(TL) has provided easier approach to quickly retrain neural 
networks on selected datasets with high accuracy [28, 29].
AlexNet
AlexNet model is a DL model proposed by Alex Krizhevsky 
which utilize rectified linear unit (ReLu) in place of Sigmoid 
function which is used in traditional neural networks [58]. 
The model achieved 84% accuracy in 2012 ImageNet Large 
Scale Visual Recognition Challenge (ILSVRC). It contains 
five convolution (CONV) blocks or layer with convolutional 
filter size 3 × 3 without padding and 2 × 2 window size of 
max pooling operation. The last three layers are two fully 
connected layers (FCL) and the output layer as shown in 
Fig.  1. Other terms include batch normalization (BN) and 
feature map (FM). SoftMax activation function is utilized in 
the output layer for classification [30, 31].
The standard input size for AlexNet model is 
227 × 227 × 3. The model consists of overall eight layers, 
five are convolutional layers, and three fully connected lay -
ers. The first two convolutional layers are made of three 
operations, which include convolution, pooling, and nor -
malization. AlexNet uses ReLU as an activation function, 
unlike Tanh and sigmoid functions that are used in tradi-
tional machine learning. ReLU converts negative numbers 
to zeros and helps models learn non-linear functions [30].Max pooling is the most common pooling methods in 
which its main function is to down sample or to reduce 
image size by pooling most important feature or by pool-
ing out the number with a highest pixel value. The next two 
layers are mainly convolution layers without pooling and 
normalization and the final convolution layer consists of 
only convolution and pooling without normalization. The 
first two fully connected layers are dropout layers in which 
its main function is to reduce overfitting by reducing the 
number of neurons. The final fully connected layer is known 
as classification layer [32].
Challenges
As the number of COVID-19 patients grows exponentially, 
there is a high need for massive detection, which is critical 
for prevention and control. Medical practitioners all over the 
world require a sophisticated system to accurately diagnose 
COVID-19 disease. Different approaches are currently in 
use for detection of different types of pneumonia. However, 
detection of different strains of pathogens using molecular 
testing is still not up to standard of point of care diagnostics. 
Instead, specimens are collected from site of infections and 
transfer to a fully equipped or specialized laboratories for 
diagnosis using RT-PCR sequencing approach which is the 
current gold standard [33]. This method is deemed expen-
sive and often lead to false results. Moreover, underdevel-
oped countries and remote areas with limited testing kit and 
unequipped hospitals with few or zero number of ventilators 
have become the epicenter of the disease. Thus, there is a 
high need for developing an alternative approach which is 
fast, cheap, simple, and reliable. The use of X-ray has proven 
to be an alternative; however, this method is sometimes tedi-
ous for qualified radiologist [34]. These challenges can be 
addressed by computer-aided detection method using the DL 
approach, which is accurate, fast, and precise.
The majority of research in the literature only classified 
two classes (such as COVID-19 vs normal). However, few 
researches addressed multi classes and classified each class 
Fig. 1  AlexNet architecture