1591 Cognitive Computation (2024) 16:1589–1601 
1 3
reported in Wuhan, Hubei province of mainland China on 
the 31st December 2019. The virus spread from city to city 
and from one country to another leading to a global health 
crisis. However, it was not until March 11, 2020 that WHO 
declared it as pandemic [8 –10].
COVID-19 can be transmitted through respiratory drop-
lets that are exhaled or secreted by infected persons. Coro-
naviruses invade the lung’s alveoli (an organ responsible for 
exchange of  O2 and  CO2), thereby causing pneumonia. The 
symptoms of COVID-19 include dry cough, fatigue, fever, 
septic shock, organ failure, anorexia, dyspnea, myalgias, 
sputum secretion severe pneumonia, acute respiratory dis-
tress syndrome (ARDS), etc. [11– 14]. The pandemic caused 
by SAR-CoV-2 is alarming due to the fact that there is no 
approved drug or vaccine [15].
In order to curb further spread of the virus, governments 
of various countries and states impose city lockdowns [56, 
57], flight cancellations, border restrictions, closure of work -
places, restaurants, postponement of sport, religious, cul-
tural, and entertainment event and activities, wearing of face 
mask, social distancing of 1–2 m, and creating awareness 
on hygiene. Many countries are facing challenges regarding 
the number of reported cases of COVID-19 as a result of 
the lack of RT-PCR test kit and delay in the test kit. This 
delay is detrimental as it leads to more cases due to interac-
tion between the infected patients waiting for result with a 
healthy population [16, 17].
SARS‑CoV1 and MERS‑CoV
The first pandemic of the coronavirus family started in 
China’s South Eastern part and Hong Kong in the year 
2002 due to the discovery of pathogenic virus known as 
SARS-CoV-1. The disease spread globally due to air travel 
of patients from one country to another leading to SARS 
pandemic. According to WHO 2004, more than 8000 con-
firmed cases of SARS-CoV and 774 associated deaths were 
recorded globally. The outbreak has caused both public and 
economic burdens with estimated losses of billions of dol-
lars [18]. The second pandemic of coronavirus is caused by 
β-CoVs in 2012 in Saudi Arabia; unlike SARS-CoV, MERS 
is caused by MERS-CoV which was firstly identified in a 
patient sputum sample of a 60-year-old Saudi Arabian man. 
According to WHO reports, there were more than 1850 con-
firmed cases of MERS-CoV with 30% mortality rate [ 19]. 
And up until November 2019, there are closed to 2500 cases 
of MERS-CoV resulting in 858 deaths.
Identification of Drugs, Development of Vaccines, 
and Prediction of COVID‑19 using AI‑Driven Models
Currently, there is no exact cure for COVID-19 disease. 
However, scientists are sprinting to develop a vaccine which is the most effective way to contain and prevent the spread 
of the virus. There are multiple technologies which are 
under evaluation such as inactivated virus, protein subunit, 
nucleic acid, and replicating and non-replicating viral vector. 
To speed up the process, scientist must overcome so many 
challenges which include developing a viable immunogen, 
development of successful animal model, clinical trials, viral 
mutations, time constraints, and funding [20, 21]. Recently, 
Russia has approved a vaccine based on adenovirus vector 
developed by the Gamaleya National Center of Epidemiol-
ogy and Microbiology Moscow. However, scientists around 
the world have criticized the efficiency of the vaccine, the 
phases it undergoes, and the lack of published results related 
to the earlier trial stages [22].
Apart from vaccines, there is ongoing research by differ -
ent companies and laboratories on repurposing existing anti-
viral drugs such as remdesivir, ritonavir, and lopinavir. To 
generate potential drugs against COVID-19, scientist turned 
to artificial intelligence and machine learning approach for 
efficient identification of potent drugs. A study carried out 
by Beck et al. [23] using pretrained deep learning model 
identified “Atazanavir” an antiretroviral drug that is used 
for the prevention of HIV as the potential potent COVID-19 
drug among all the commercially available antiviral drugs. 
On the other hand, Li et al. [24] identified Nelfinavir, Bict-
egravir, Tegobuv, and Prulifloxacin as potential drugs for 
COVID-19 after screening 8000 approved and experimental 
molecules and compounds obtained from Drugbank.
Medical experts (e.g., epidemiologists) are facing chal-
lenges such as the need for accurate data collection, analy -
sis and precise estimation, and forecasting of the number 
of cases related to pandemics and epidemics. Recently, 
AI-driven models have proven to be valuable in terms of 
prediction and classification of medical data. Since the out-
break of COVID-19, data analyst and medical practitioners 
adopted the use of AI models for prediction and forecasting 
of COVID-19 cases [25]. The first company to report the use 
AI for prediction of COVID-19 and sent warning alerts to its 
customers prior to 2020 is the BlueDot AI-based company. 
However, other scientists have reported the use of AI models 
such as the use of model-free methods by Zeng et al. [26] for 
the prediction of inter-provincial transmissions of COVID-
19 in mainland China. Hu et al. [27] utilized AI-driven meth-
ods for real-time forecasting of COVID-19 outbreak within 
China based on lengths, size estimations, and ending time of 
the outbreak based on data obtained from WHO (collected 
between 19 January 2020 and 16 February 2020).
Deep Learning and Transfer Learning
Deep learning (DL) is a branch of machine learning (ML), 
a subset of artificial intelligence (AI) inspired by the make-
up of the human brain. It is termed as a sub-field of ML