1590 Cognitive Computation (2024) 16:1589–1601
1 3
Abbreviations
AI  Artificial Intelligence
ARDS  Acute respiratory distress syndrome
BN  Batch normalization
CAP  Community-acquired pneumonia
CNN  Convolutional neural network
CO2  Carbon dioxide
CONV  Convolution
CT  Computerized tomography
CXR  Chest X-ray
DL  Deep learning
FCL  Fully connected layers
FM  Feature map
GPU  Graphical processing unit
HIV/Aids  Human immunodeficiency virus/
acquired immune deficiency 
syndrome
ILSVRC  ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recog-
nition Challenge
MERS  Middle East Respiratory Syndrome
ML  Machine learning
O2  Oxygen
RAM  Random access
ReLu  Rectified linear unit (ReLu)
RSV  Respiratory syncytial virus
RT-PCR  Reverse-transcription polymerase 
chain reaction
SAR-CoV-1 and 2  Severe acute respiratory syndrome 
coronavirus 1 and 2
TL  Transfer learning
WHO  World Health Organization
Introduction
Pneumonia is a common disease caused by different micro-
bial species such as bacteria, virus, and fungi. The word 
“Pneumonia” comes from the Greek word “Pneumon” 
which translates to the lungs. Thus, the word pneumonia is 
associated with lung disease. In medical terms, pneumonia 
is a disease that causes inflammation of either one or both 
lung parenchyma [1 ]. However, other causes of pneumonia 
include food aspiration and exposure to chemicals. Based 
on infection, pneumonia occurs as a result of inflammation 
caused by pathogens which lead the lung’s alveoli to fill up 
with fluid or pus and thereby leading to decrease of carbon 
dioxide  (CO2) and oxygen  (O2) exchange between blood and 
the lungs, making it hard for infected persons to breathe. 
Some of the symptoms of pneumonia include the shortness of 
breath, fever, cough, chest pain, etc. Moreover, the people at 
risk of pneumonia are elderly people (above 65 years), chil-
dren (below the age of 5 years), and people with other com-
plications such as HIV/AIDS, diabetes, chronic respiratory diseases, cardiovascular diseases, cancer, hepatic disease, 
etc. [2 –5]. Table  1 presents a classification of pathogens that 
causes pneumonia.
Diagnosis and Treatment of Pneumonia
There are different approaches for the diagnosis of pneu-
monia, some of these approaches include chest X-rays and 
CT scan (which form the basis of our contribution), sputum 
test, pulse oximetry, thoracentesis, blood gas analysis, bron-
choscopy, pleural fluid culture, complete blood count, etc. 
Mostly, pneumonia infection is treated based on the causa-
tive pathogen. For bacterial pneumonia, antibiotics are used; 
for viral pneumonia such as influenzas, SARS and MERS, 
antiviral drugs are used while antifungal drugs are used for 
fungal pneumonia [6 –8].
COVID‑19 and Pneumonia
COVID-19 is an extremely contagious disease caused by 
severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SAR-
CoV-2) which is the recent disease that is caused by one of 
the family members of Coronaviridae family. In the past, two 
members of this family known as SARS-CoV-1 and Middle 
East Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus (MERS-CoV) have 
caused a global epidemic. The first case of COVID-19 was 
Table 1  Classification of pneumonia based on pathogens
Pathogen Specie
Bacterial Streptococcus pneumoniae
Legionella pneumophila
Mycoplasma pneumoniae
Chlamydophila pneumoniae
Viruses Influenza virus
Severe acute respiratory syn-
drome coronavirus (SAR-CoV-1 
and 2)
Middle East Respiratory Syn-
drome (MERS) Coronavirus
Respiratory Syncytial virus (RSV)
Adenovirus
Hantavirus
Rhinovirus
Varicella-zoster virus
Human metapneumovirus
Enteroviruses
Fungi Pneumocystis jirovecii
Aspergillus spp.
Mucoromycetes
Histoplasmosis
Coccidioidomycosis
Cryptococcus