GraphACT: A ccelerating GC N Training on CPU-FPGA
Heterogeneous Platforms
Hanqing Zeng
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, California
zengh@usc.eduViktor Prasanna
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, California
prasanna@usc.edu
ABSTRACT
Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs) have emerged as the state-
of-the-art deep learning model for representation learning on graphs.
It is challenging to accelerate training of GCNs, due to (1) substantial
and irregular data communication to propagate information within
the graph, and (2) intensive computation to propagate information
along the neural network layers. To address these challenges, we
design a novel accelerator for training GCNs on CPU-FPGA hetero-
geneous systems, by incorporating multiple algorithm-architecture
co-optimizations. We first analyze the computation and commu-
nication characteristics of various GCN training algorithms, and
select a subgraph-based algorithm that is well suited for hardware
execution. To optimize the feature propagation within subgraphs,
we propose a light-weight pre-processing step based on a graph
theoretic approach. Such pre-processing performed on the CPU
significantly reduces the memory access requirements and the com-
putation to be performed on the FPGA. To accelerate the weight
update in GCN layers, we propose a systolic array based design for
efficient parallelization. We integrate the above optimizations into
a complete hardware pipeline, and analyze its load-balance and
resource utilization by accurate performance modeling. We evalu-
ate our design on a Xilinx Alveo U200 board hosted by a 40-core
Xeon server. On three large graphs, we achieve an order of mag-
nitude training speedup with negligible accuracy loss, compared
with state-of-the-art implementation on a multi-core platform.
ACM Reference Format:
Hanqing Zeng and Viktor Prasanna. 2020. GraphACT :Accelerating G CN
Training on CPU-FPGA Heterogeneous Platforms. In Proceedings of the 2020
ACM/SIGDA International Symposium on Field-Programmable Gate Arrays
(FPGA ’20), February 23–25, 2020, Seaside, CA, USA. ACM, New York, NY,
USA, 11 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3373087.3375312
1 INTRODUCTION
Recently, representation learning on graphs has attracted much
attention. By extracting structured, low dimensional features from
the unstructured, high dimensional graph, many downstream tasks
such as node classification [ 14,18], link prediction [ 38], graph clas-
sification [ 32] and clustering [ 29] can be performed easily and
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
FPGA ’20, February 23–25, 2020, Seaside, CA, USA
©2020 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-7099-8/20/02. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3373087.3375312effectively. Among the numerous representation learning methods,
Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs) [ 18] are capable of learn-
ing significantly better features than traditional methods [ 12,24].
GCNs have been used to facilitate user recommendation for social
networks [ 31], to identify protein functionality from interaction
graphs [14] and to help circuit testability analysis for EDA [20].
Despite the popularity of GCNs, training is still expensive in
terms of time and computation resources. To scale GCNs to larger
graphs and to enable fast re-training on dynamic graphs, it is critical
to develop accelerators. Existing works [ 14,34] parallelize training
on GPU and multi-core platform. How to accelerate training by
exploiting the FPGA hardware is currently not well studied.
Similar to Convolutional Neural Network (CNNs), GCNs are built
by iteratively stacking multiple layers. Operations of a graph convo-
lutional layer are decomposed into two major steps, to (1) propagate
information within the graph and (2) propagate information along
the neural network layers. Correspondingly, FPGA accelerators
need to address the below challenges to improve performance:
Memory access. The feature propagation (step 1) in a large and
sparse graph incurs high volume of irregular memory accesses, both
on-chip and off-chip. The memory challenge is unique to the GCN
training problem. While CNN accelerators [ 19,25,30,33,35,37,39]
achieve high data reuse and regular accesses by tiling and sliding
windows on input tensors, such tensor operations do not generalize
to sparse graphs. In addition, while graph processing accelerators
[7,8,16,36,41] optimize data flow and layout for propagation of
node labels, such optimizations hardly lead to performance gain
when the labels are replaced with long feature vectors.
Computation. The propagation along GCN layers (step 2) in-
volves computationally intensive dense tensor operations on the
model weights and graph node features. Fast computation of this
step require high consumption of hardware resources.
Load-balance. Degree-imbalance of graph nodes can significantly
degrade the performance of feature propagation. Consequently, the
overall layer computation (steps 1 and 2) can be load-imbalanced. It
is challenging to design on-chip computation modules and the cor-
responding scheduler to ensure load-balance for arbitrary graphs.
We propose GraphACT , a framework to accelerate G CNtraining
by addressing the three challenges. The main contributions are:
•We propose GraphACT with the following optimizations:
– Algorithm selection : By analyzing various GCN train-
ing algorithms, we select a subgraph-based minibatch algo-
rithm to significantly reduce CPU-FPGA communication.
– Redundancy reduction : For each subgraph as a mini-
batch, we identify and eliminate the recurring aggregation
Session: Deep Learning II
 
FPGA ’20, February 23–25, 2020, Seaside, CA, USA
255