2 Xiang Zhang et.al
hyper-parameter values and selects random combinations to train the algorithm
[2]. Random search method oversteps some disadvantages of grid search such
as time-consuming but meanwhile brings a major disadvantage which cannot
converge to the global optimum [1]. The randomly selected hyper-parameter
combinations cannot guarantee a steady and competitive result. Apart from the
manually tuning methods, automated tuning methods being more popular in
recent years [10]. Bayesian Optimization, a most widely-used automated hyper-
parameter tunning approach, attempts to nd the global optimum in a minimum
number of steps. Nevertheless, the results of Bayesian optimization are sensitive
to parameters of the surrogate model and the performance is highly depending
on the quality of the learning model [3].
To address the aforementioned issue, we propose the Orthogonal Array Tun-
ing Method (OATM) which can achieve a trade-o of the less tuning time and
competitive performance. In detail, the OATM manner is proposed based on
Taguchi Approach [12]. The OATM is a highly fractional orthogonal design
method that is based on a design matrix and allows the user to consider a selected
subset of combinations of multiple factors at multiple levels. Additionally, the
OATM is balanced to ensure that all possible values of all hyper-parameters are
considered equally. Moreover, OATM has been commonly used as an experimen-
tal design method in a wide variety of domains like mechanical engineering [9]
and electrical engineering [8]. To our best knowledge, our work is the rst batch
of work adopting orthogonal array into parameter tuning in deep learning.
The proposed OATM adopts the orthogonal array to extract the most repre-
sentative and balanced combinations from the whole set of possible combinations.
The proposed OATM will be explained in detail in the context of two popular
deep learning structures (Section 5). In addition, the OATM is evaluated over
three datasets, which demonstrate the universality and adaptability. We notice
that source codes performing grid search, random search, and especially Bayesian
Optimization on deep learning are hard to online acquire. Thus, we provide the
reusable source codes and datasets for reproduction1.
2 Related Work
Currently, there are several widely used tuning methods such as grid search op-
timization, random search optimization, and Bayesian optimization. Grid search
and random search require all possible values for each parameter whereas Bayesian
optimization needs the range for each parameter. [4] proposed automated ma-
chine learning method based on the eciency of Bayesian optimization and [11]
applied multi-task Gaussian processes to Bayesian optimization to enhance the
performance of Bayesian Optimization. However, these methods fail in deep
learning architectures for which have larger amount of hyper-parameters and
the performance highly rely on the conguration.
Apart from the aforementioned methods, the orthogonal array based hyper-
parameter tuning already used in a range of research areas such as mechanical
1The link will be available after the paper is accepted