Deep Neural Network Hyperparameter
Optimization with Orthogonal Array Tuning
Xiang Zhang, Xiaocong Chen, Lina Yao, Chang Ge, Manqing Dong
University of New South Wales, Australia
xiang.zhang3@student.unsw.edu.au
Abstract. Deep learning algorithms have achieved excellent performance
lately in a wide range of elds (e.g., computer version). However, a se-
vere challenge faced by deep learning is the high dependency on hyper-
parameters. The algorithm results may 
uctuate dramatically under the
dierent conguration of hyper-parameters. Addressing the above is-
sue, this paper presents an ecient Orthogonal Array Tuning Method
(OATM) for deep learning hyper-parameter tuning. We describe the
OATM approach in ve detailed steps and elaborate on it using two
widely used deep neural network structures (Recurrent Neural Networks
and Convolutional Neural Networks). The proposed method is com-
pared to the state-of-the-art hyper-parameter tuning methods including
manually (e.g., grid search and random search) and automatically (e.g.,
Bayesian Optimization) ones. The experiment results state that OATM
can signicantly save the tuning time compared to the state-of-the-art
methods while preserving the satisfying performance.
Keywords: orthogonal array, hyper-parameter, deep learning
1 Introduction
Deep learning has been recently attracting much attention in both academia
and industry, due to its excellent performance on various research areas such
as computer vision, speech recognition, natural language processing, and brain-
computer interface [15]. Nevertheless, deep learning faces an important chal-
lenge that the performance of the algorithm highly depends on the selection
of hyper-parameters. Compared with traditional machine learning algorithms,
deep learning requires hyper-parameter tuning more urgently because deep neu-
ral networks: 1) have more hyper-parameters to be tunned; 2) have higher de-
pendency on the conguration of hyper-parameters. [14] reports the deep learn-
ing classication accuracy dramatically 
uctuates from 32.2% to 92.6% due to
the dierent selection of hyper-parameters. Therefore, an eective and ecient
hyper-parameter tuning method is necessary.
However, most of the existing hyper-parameter tuning methods have some
drawbacks. In particular, grid search traverses all the possible combinations of
dierent hyper-parameters, which is a time-consuming and ad-hoc process [2].
Random Search, which is developed based on grid research, set up a grid ofarXiv:1907.13359v2  [cs.LG]  28 Feb 2020