8 Xiang Zhang et.al
the codes are open-sourced, please check the code for the training details which
are not presented here due to page limitation,
5.1 Overall Comparison
In this section, we compare the proposed OATM with the most competitive state-
of-the-art hyper-parameter tuning approaches including two manually methods
(grid search and random search) and an automated one (Bayesian Optimization).
It's easy to compute that there are 81 = 34exhausted combinations in grid
search since we have four factors with three levels of the hyper-parameters. Thus,
grid search requires 81 runnings to get the optimal hyper-parameters. On the
other hand, our method requires only 9 runnings described in the corresponding
orthogonal array table (detailed in Section 5.2). Due to the numbers of runnings
in random search and Bayesian Optimization are manually set, they are set as 9
runnings which is same with our method in order to keep fair comparison. The
baselines are introduced here:
{Grid search simply goes through all the possible combinations according to
the values provided which is exhaustive [2].
{Random search randomly picks combinations from all possible ones. It may
not nd a decent combination but is widely adopted in industry for the
high-eciency [1].
{Bayesian optimization uses a Gaussian process to minimize the loss function
in order to maximize performance [10].
The hyper-parameter levels are selected based on empirical values. For grid
search, random search, and our OATM, the empirical values are discrete as
listed in Table 3 (take eegmmidb as an example). For Bayesian Optimization,
the hyper-parameter ranges from the maximum and minimum of each factor. For
instance, the lrranges from [0 :005;0:015]. All the experiments are implemented
in NVIDIA Titian X (Pascal) GPU and each reported value is the average of
ve runnings under the same setting.
The comparison results are shown in Table 2. It can be observed that:
{under the same running numbers (9 runnings), our method outperforms the
random search and Bayesian Optimization over all the datasets and deep
learning architectures;
{our method performs slightly lower than grid search but still competitive,
however, take EEG dataset with RNN as an example, our approach saves
88% tuning time which is indicated from that the OATM only requires 9
runnings and costs 821.9s while grid search requires 81 runnings and 6853.6s;
{the optimal factors selected by our method approximate to the global optimal
factors selected by grid search.
5.2 Case Study in RNN and CNN
In this section, we take EEG classication as an example to present the detailed
procedure of OATM in RNN and CNN architecture. The overall paradigm can
be divided into ve steps.