6 Xiang Zhang et.al
IMU-based Activity Recognition. This dataset is collected by 9 participants
[5], which contains 1200000 samples. 8 ADLs are selected as a subset of our paper.
The activity is measured by 3 IMUs and each IMU collects sensor signal with
14 dimensions including two 3-axis accelerometers, one 3-axis gyroscopes, one
3-axis magnetometers, and one thermometer.
RFID-based Activity Recognition. We collect the signals from passive
RFID tags [13] and have 3100 samples in total. 21 activities, including 18 ADLs
(Activity of Daily Living) and 3 abnormal falls, are performed by 6 subjects.
Each sample has 12 dimensions corresponding to 12 RFID tags. RSSI measures
the power present in a received radio signal, which is a convenient environmental
measurement in ubiquitous computing.
4.2 Deep Learning Structures
In this section, we brie
y describe RNN and CNN structures and then introduce
the key hyper-parameters that will be tuned in the experiments.
RNN Structure The RNN [7], one of the most widely-used deep neural net-
works, is generally employed to explore the feature dependencies over time di-
mension through an internal state of the network. Unlike feed-forward neural
networks, RNNs can use their internal memory to process arbitrary sequences
of inputs and exhibit dynamic temporal behavior. Such characteristic ensures
RNNs achieve excellent performance in time-series tasks such as speech recogni-
tion and natural language processing.
The RNN structure used in this paper is shown in Figure 2. In the hidden
layer, to implement the recurrent function, two LSTM (Long Short-Term Mem-
ory) layer is concentrated. LSTM is a simple cell structure which can be used
to build a recurrent neural network. Dierent from other fully connected layers,
LSTM layer is composed of cells (shown as rectangles) instead of neural nodes
(shown as circles).
In this RNN structure, based on the deep learning hyper-parameters tun-
ing experience, the learning rate, the regularization, and the number of nodes
in each hidden layer are key factors aecting the algorithm performance. The
loss is calculated by cross-entropy function, and the regularization method is `2
norm with the coecient , The loss is nally optimized by the AdamOptimizer
algorithm. In summary, we choose four factors as to-be-tuned hyper-parameters:
the learning rate lr, the regularization coecient , the number of hidden layers
nl, and the number of nodes8in each hidden layer nn.
CNN Structure The CNN is another popular deep neural network, which
shows strong ability to capture the latent spatial relevance of the input data
8Assume all the hidden layers have the same xed number of nodes.