Deep Neural Network Hyperparameter Optimization 3
engineering and electrical engineering. J.A Ghani et al. [9] applied orthogonal
array based approach to optimize the cutting parameters in the end milling.
S.S. Mahapatra et al. [8] optimized wire electrical discharge machining (WEDM)
process parameters by orthogonal array method.
Summary. The traditional methods are not suited for deep learning algorithms
while the eectiveness of OATM has been demonstrated in many research topics.
Intuitively, we adopt OATM for deep learning hyper-parameter tuning. To our
best knowledge, our work is the rst batch of studies in this area.
3 Orthogonal Array Tuning
In this section, we rst provide the background knowledge of orthogonal array,
namely, the denition, the compose principles, and the terminology. Then, we
report the working procedure of OATM.
3.1 Background of Orthogonal Array
An Orthogonal Array is a table/array whose entries come from a xed nite
set of elements (typically, 1 ;2;:::;n ), arranged in a specic way that for every
selection of two dierent columns of the table, all ordered 2-tuples of the elements
appear for the same number of times. For example, Table 1 shows an Orthogonal
Array whose entries come from a xed nite set 1 ;2;3. In the Orthogonal Array,
the column is called factor and each element in the nite set (or the element in
each column) is called level.
The Orthogonal Array holds two basic composition principles:
{First, in the same column (factor), dierent levels have the same appearing
times. For example, in the rst column of Table 1, each level (level 1, level 2,
and level 3) appears for 3 times. Similarly, in the second and third columns,
each level appears for 3 times.
{Second, in two randomly selected columns (factors), dierent level combina-
tions are complete and balanced. The number of Orthogonal Array rows is
determined by this principle. For example, in the rst and second columns
of Table 1, each column has 3 levels and there are totally 9 dierent ordered
combinations: (1,2), (1,3), (1,3), (2,1), (2,2), (2,3), (3,1), (3,2), and (3,3). All
the combinations are complete (every combination appears ) and balanced
(every combination appears once).
The essence of Orthogonal Array is a representative subset of the exhausting
full set of the elements. We denote the exhausting combination of all the factors
and all the levels(3 factors and 3 levels for the above example) as S. Apparently,
Card (S) = 33= 27. As shown in Table 1, the Orthogonal Array only has 9
rows. Let's say Card (O) = 9, where Odenotes the set of the combinations in the
OATM. Easy to know, Ois a representative subset of S, orOS. Intuitively,
we can draw both sets out in a cube. In Figure 1, A1;A2;A3represent 3 levels of
factorA, while factors B;C are with the same tokens (factors are supposed to