Page 10 of 14 Zhu  Journal of Cloud Computing          (2024) 13:119 
where w is the weight that control the flow of data within 
network, i is number of ` for training network. The struc -
ture will be as Fig. 8.
In this regard weight derived from structure achieve 
three cases distinguished as: first, |w|<1 represents by 
the output signal of yk(n) as exponentially which mean 
the system is stable; second, |w|=1 represent the linear 
behavior while the third case when |w|>1 , represent as 
negative exponential.
Now, for power N, the factor |w| will be small enough to 
achieve neglecting case as wN , for practical purpose the 
situation produce the finite sum of yk.
That’s mean the suggested weight will be:
Then derived weight (w) will store in vector for next 
classification. Thus in deep neural network the weight 
will changed according the behavior of the system will 
increase or decrease for each iteration, our contribution 
is to classify this weight parameter in additional to other 
parameters to get the best prediction in the deep learning 
system.
– The flow of the system is the second parameter that 
considered in proposed system due to effects directly 
to the result of next stage. There are many cases in 
the data flow such as when one input to the node pro -
duce one input, or two inputs from different nodes 
then produce one output of the node, and many 
cases for different iteration in the system. If input will 
classify into Boolean number such accepted or not in 
certain stage, and weight w consider the bias or con -
trol to the system in one stage and in one node.(3) yk(n)≈/summationdisplay N−1
l=0wl+1xj(n−1)
(4)
yk(n)=wxj(n)+w2xj(n−1)+w3xj(n−2)+···+ wNxj(n−N+1)This step will estimate the neurons in the next step 
based on output function and bias that control the weight 
at each stage.
Figure  9 illustrate the behavior on neural updating mul -
tiple layers’ in deep neural system whither forwarding or 
feedback data. XOR operation implemented during itera -
tions and in several ways. Direction of data flow comes 
from inherent node or not, sometime from recurrent 
flow, all these give the factor for node to direct the new 
flow to appropriate node.
The last pattern must give achieve if(wn+wn+1)>0thenx n+2=
1andif/parenleftbig
xn⊕xr(n+2)/parenrightbig
=1thennewnodcreated  , two patterns at 
the same layer cannot achieve the same result function 
due to data flow always updated and controlled by pre -
dicted bias.
All transaction flow will store in certain vector to clas -
sify later for better prediction as a deep learning system.
– Recurrent network is the third parameter can be 
used for deep neural network as increase the accu -
racy. Recurrent network can be defined that the flow 
distinguishes from other feedforward neural layers 
and represented as at least one feedback loop.
Results
Overall, the Memory Impairment Classification Sys -
tem (MICS) is a vital tool for diagnosing and classifying 
memory impairment in individuals. It offers healthcare 
professionals a comprehensive assessment to accurately 
diagnose memory impairment and assign individuals to 
one of four different classifications. The most important 
parameters illustrated in Table 1.
Fig. 8 a Signal flow graph of one stage in neural system. b Flow graph with recurrent data flow of corresponding weight