Page 2 of 14 Zhu  Journal of Cloud Computing          (2024) 13:119 
drugs and narcotic substances that negatively affect the 
human brain has spread. This phenomenon is not lim -
ited to a specific age or gender, but has taken its toll on 
society in general. From this point of view, it has become 
important to study a specific system for diagnosing mem -
ory impairment in people who abuse narcotic and psy -
choactive substances, which are common in our time [3].
The effect of these substances is examined through 
their effect on the brain and the side effects they cause 
from actions during temporary and permanent memory 
loss. The tomography of the brain gives an accurate visu -
alization of the changes in the brain cells that the brain is 
going through. Artificial intelligence algorithms are used 
to diagnose diseases of the brain that come from medi -
cal images. One of the most famous artificial intelligence 
algorithms is the deep learning algorithm, which depends 
on extracting features from the medical image and then 
classifying those features to find results in a very accurate 
manner.
Computational intelligence techniques have emerged 
as a promising approach to the diagnosis of various med -
ical conditions, including memory impairment. With 
the increasing abuse of psychoactive drugs presenting a 
global public health burden, there is an urgent need for 
effective methods to diagnose and treat memory impair -
ment in substance users [4].
Repeated exposure to psychoactive substances can 
cause neurodegeneration, premature aging, and nega -
tively affect memory impairment. Although the basis for 
these neurotoxic effects has not been fully elucidated, 
compelling evidence has shown that dysregulation of 
neurotransmission, disruption of mitochondrial function 
and dynamics, impairment of neuroimmunomodulation, 
and epigenetic changes result from many psychoactive 
substances, such as alcohol, cannabis, opiates, ampheta -
mines, and cocaine [5].
In this study, we propose the use of AI techniques to 
classify brain images from MRI or CT scans and show 
the effectiveness of dose ratio on health with time of 
treatment, in the diagnosis of memory impairment in 
psychoactive substance users. The aim of this research is 
to improve risk assessment and treatment of substance 
use disorders by understanding the neurotoxic profiles 
of psychoactive substances and the underlying pathways. 
Memory impairment arises from diverse factors such as 
aging, trauma, disease, and genetics. Yet, pinpointing its 
exact cause remains tricky due to variable and overlap -
ping symptoms. Present diagnostic approaches com -
bine medical history, physical exams, and neurological 
tests [6], but subjectivity and time constraints limit their 
effectiveness, missing subtle brain function changes. The 
absence of a uniform diagnostic process further com -
plicates matters, with varying criteria across healthcare professionals causing inconsistent diagnoses and treat -
ments [7]. Moreover, the lag between symptom onset and 
diagnosis leads to delayed management. computational 
intelligence-based systems can analyze data in real-time, 
providing more immediate diagnosis and treatment 
options [8]. Most of the systems uses advanced algo -
rithms and artificial intelligence to identify patterns and 
trends in data, allowing healthcare professionals to make 
more accurate and personalized diagnoses [9]. computa -
tional intelligence-based classification systems can detect 
subtle changes in brain function that may be missed by 
traditional diagnostic methods [10, 11]. By using a stand -
ardized algorithm to analyze data, healthcare profession -
als can ensure that patients are diagnosed consistently 
and accurately, leading to more effective treatment and 
management of the condition [12]. researchers have 
developed algorithms that can accurately diagnose Alz -
heimer’s disease based on data from brain imaging and 
cognitive tests [13]. There are concerns about the ethi -
cal implications of using artificial intelligence in medical 
diagnosis [14, 15]. For example, there is a risk that algo -
rithms may perpetuate biases or discriminate against cer -
tain patient groups.
To achieve this, we analyzed brain diagrams and their 
effects on drug-induced cellular and molecular mecha -
nisms. Our research indicates that computational intel -
ligence techniques can be used to classify the brain, 
leading to early detection of memory impairment and 
potentially saving human lives. Objectives in this study 
comes from answering the following questions in detail:
• How can memory impairment be diagnosed using 
artificial intelligence technology?
• What is the effect of the duration of abuse of psycho -
active substances on the accurate diagnosis?
• What is the benefit of deep learning technique in 
diagnosing memory impairment?
Related work
Memory impairment is a known consequence of sub -
stance abuse, affecting both short-term and long-term 
memory. In recent years, developments in artificial intel -
ligence (AI) have provided new opportunities to explore 
the nature and extent of these cognitive deficits [16]. 
Using AI, researchers can analyze large datasets to iden -
tify patterns and trends in the relationship between sub -
stance use and memory impairment [17]. Such AI-related 
work has successfully identified specific substances that 
are more likely to cause memory impairment, as well as 
the dosage levels and frequency of use that lead to more 
severe cognitive deficits. Moreover, AI has proven use -
ful in predicting which individuals are more likely to