Page 6 of 14 Zhu  Journal of Cloud Computing          (2024) 13:119 
• California Verbal Learning Test (CVLT): The CVLT 
appraises verbal memory by presenting a list of 
words to the examinee. It gauges a range of memory 
aspects, including learning, short and long-term 
retrieval, and recognition of the presented words.
• Rey Complex Figure Test (RCFT): This test scruti -
nizes visual memory and organizational capabilities. 
Participants replicate a complex figure and later rec -
ollect it after a pause, shedding light on their aptitude 
to remember intricate visual information.
The proposed method consists of several stages starting 
with segmentation and data extraction, in the absence of 
noise in the image. This study relied on high-quality, noise-
free images that were collected from a standard database, 
and in order for the system to be standard and optimal, 
a phase of noise removal from the image must be added. 
After extracting the features, they are stored in a special 
vector in order to be used in the next stage, which is clas -
sification. One of the most important methods of artifi -
cial intelligence is used here, which is the deep learning 
algorithm, which depends on multiple and variable layers 
according to the input and data returned from the previ -
ous and subsequent stages. After that, the stage of evaluat -
ing the resulting data takes place in order for the system to 
function in an integrated manner. As shown in Fig. 2 .
Extracting good features is the basis for building a deep 
neural network system, which takes information from 
vectors that contain the extracted features, and thus is 
based on the data. The deep neural network depends on 
updating the layers and nodes that are the basis for the 
correct conclusion in the system and thus predicting the 
most accurate results. The deep neural network differs 
from the traditional neural network in terms of re-feed -
back and deducing features automatically, according to 
the requirements of the desired result, as in the Fig. 3.
Good features come from good segmentation, which 
is effective in some images and less effective in others. 
Among the most important features that have been taken 
into consideration are the area of color change in parts 
of the image, the color contrast in the segmented image 
areas, the extent of proximity or distance of the subtrac -
tive areas from the medical image, and other important 
features, as shown in the Fig. 4.
The incidence of the disease is proportional to the 
period of time in which sedatives or drugs that affect 
the psychological state were taken. Among these statis -
tics, which reflected the development of the disease over 
a period of time and a sample, and its reflection on the 
CT images of the brain, which clearly shows the effect of 
these medications, analgesics, and sedatives on the mem -
ory centers in the brain. This is reflected in the Fig.  5, 
which shows the development in the case of injury.Once the brain has been segmented, various features 
can be extracted from each segment to analyze and 
understand different aspects of brain structure and func -
tion. Here are some commonly extracted features from 
segmented brain images used in this study:
Volume: The volume of each segmented brain region 
provides information about the size and relative 
importance of that particular structure.
Surface Area: The surface area of segmented regions 
can be calculated, which gives insights into the extent 
of cortical folding and complexity issue.
Thickness: The thickness of the cortical regions 
measured, providing information about the integrity 
and health of the brain.
Shape Descriptors: Various geometric features like 
curvature, gyrification index, or fractal dimensions 
extracted for describing the shape features of seg -
mented brain regions.
Intensity Statistics: Statistical measures of the inten -
sity values within each segmented region, such as 
mean, standard deviation, or histogram-based fea -
tures, which based on pixel intensity and gray value.
Through work, the study also showed that the effect of 
drugs on the brain is not only the only influencing fac -
tor, but age also has an effect on the incidence of memory 
loss. Age has a negative effect on memory loss in certain 
proportions, and this percentage increases in the case of 
taking drugs and according to the ratios. In the case of 
taking these drugs for the same period at younger ages, 
the effect will be much greater than on more advanced 
ages. This is due to the fact that the brain tissues in the 
initial stages are ready to build through nutritional 
metabolism, so any symptom that limits this construc -
tion has a significant impact on poor construction and 
thus the long loss of memory. This is what is diagnosed in 
our proposed system, as shown in the Fig. 6.
Which consists of several stages in the formation of the 
hidden layers of the neural network and the feedback pro -
cess that allows reprogramming each of the hidden lay -
ers according to the infectiousness of each iteration. The 
well-known standard neural network components are the 
main parts such as the input layer, the hidden layer, and 
the output layer. Deep learning contributes and interferes 
with the components of the hidden layer depending on the 
input layer, which here is the main interest of the work. 
Several parameters control the deep neural network, some 
of them are variables that can be changed according to the 
desired result this will reflected in RIW (Region Iteration 
Weight) rule, and some are fixed parameters that can only 
be changed by changing the structure of the certain layer 
in the neural network. These parameters will illustrate in