arXiv:1909.06576v1  [cs.LG]  14 Sep 2019Torchmeta: A Meta-Learning library for PyTorch
Tristan Deleu1Tobias Würﬂ2Mandana Samiei3
Joseph Paul Cohen1Yoshua Bengio1, 4, 5
Mila – Montreal, Canada
Abstract
The constant introduction of standardized benchmarks in th e literature has helped
accelerating the recent advances in meta-learning researc h. They offer a way
to get a fair comparison between different algorithms, and t he wide range of
datasets available allows full control over the complexity of this evaluation.
However, for a large majority of code available online, the d ata pipeline is of-
ten speciﬁc to one dataset, and testing on another dataset re quires signiﬁcant
rework. We introduce Torchmeta, a library built on top of PyT orch that en-
ables seamless and consistent evaluation of meta-learning algorithms on mul-
tiple datasets, by providing data-loaders for most of the st andard benchmarks
in few-shot classiﬁcation and regression, with a new meta-d ataset abstraction.
It also features some extensions for PyTorch to simplify the development of
models compatible with meta-learning algorithms. The code is available here:
https://github.com/tristandeleu/pytorch-meta .
1 Introduction
Like for any subﬁeld of machine learning, the existence of st andardized benchmarks has played a
crucial role in the progress we have observed over the past fe w years in meta-learning research. They
make the evaluation of existing methods easier and fair, whi ch in turn serves as a reference point for
the development of new meta-learning algorithms; this crea tes a virtuous circle, rooted into these
well-deﬁned suites of tasks. Unlike existing datasets in su pervised learning though, such as MNIST
(LeCun et al., 1998) or ImageNet (Russakovsky et al., 2015), the benchmarks in meta-learning con-
sist in datasets of datasets. This adds a layer of complexity to the data pipeline, to the extent that a
majority of meta-learning projects implement their own spe ciﬁc data-loading component adapted to
their method. The lack of a standard at the input level create s variance in the mechanisms surround-
ing each meta-learning algorithm, which makes a fair compar ison more challenging.
Although the implementation might be different from one pro ject to another, the process by which
these datasets of datasets are created is generally the same across tasks. In this paper we intro-
duce Torchmeta, a meta-learning library built on top of the P yTorch deep learning framework
(Paszke et al., 2017), providing data-loaders for most of th e standard datasets for few-shot classi-
ﬁcation and regression. Torchmeta uses the same interface f or all the available benchmarks, making
the transition between different datasets as seamless as po ssible. Inspired by previous efforts to
design a uniﬁed interface between tasks, such as OpenAI Gym ( Brockman et al., 2016) in reinforce-
ment learning, the goal of Torchmeta is to create a framework around which researchers can build
their own meta-learning algorithms, rather than adapting t he data pipeline to their methods. This
new abstraction promotes code reuse, by decoupling meta-da tasets from the algorithm itself.
In addition to these data-loaders, Torchmeta also includes extensions of PyTorch to simplify the
creation of models compatible with classic meta-learning a lgorithms that sometimes require higher-
1Université de Montréal,2Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg,3Concordia University,
4CIFAR Senior Fellow,5Canada CIFAR AI Chair. Correspondance: tristan.deleu@gmail.com .
Preprint. Under review.