order differentiation (Finn et al., 2017; Finn, 2018; Rusu e t al., 2018; Grant et al., 2018). This paper
gives an overall overview of the features currently availab le in Torchmeta, and is organized as fol-
lows: Section 2 gives a general presentation of the data-loa ders available in the library; in Section 3,
we focus on an extension of PyTorch’s modules called “meta-m odules” designed speciﬁcally for
meta-learning, and we conclude by a discussion in Section 4.
2 Data-loaders for few-shot learning
The library provides a collection of datasets correspondin g to classic few-shot classiﬁcation and
regression problems from the meta-learning literature. Th e interface was created to support modu-
larity between datasets, for both classiﬁcation and regres sion, to simplify the process of evaluation
on a full suite of benchmarks; we will detail this interface i n the following sections. Moreover, the
data-loaders from Torchmeta are fully compatible with stan dard data components of PyTorch, such
asDataset andDataLoader . Before going into the details of the library, we ﬁrst brieﬂy recall the
problem setting.
To balance the lack of data inherent in few-shot learning, me ta-learning algorithms acquire some
prior knowledge from a collection of datasets Dmeta={D1,...,Dn}, called the meta-training set .
In the context of few-shot learning, each element Dicontains only a few inputs/output pairs (x,y),
whereydepends on the nature of the problem. For instance, these dat asets can contain examples of
different tasks performed in the past. Torchmeta offers a so lution to automate the creation of each
datasetDi, with a minimal amount of problem-speciﬁc components.
2.1 Few-shot regression
A majority of the few-shot regression problems in the litera ture are simple regression problems
between inputs and outputs through different functions, wh ere each function corresponds to a task.
These functions are parametrized to allow variability betw een tasks, while preserving a constant
“theme” across tasks. For example, these functions can be si ne waves of the form fi(x) =aisin(x+
bi), withaandbvarying in some range (Finn et al., 2017). In Torchmeta, the m eta-training set
inherits from an object called MetaDataset , and each dataset Di(i= 1,...,n , withndeﬁned
by the user) corresponds to a speciﬁc choice of parameters fo r the function, with all the parameters
sampled once at the creation of the meta-training set. Once t he parameters of the function are known,
we can create the dataset by sampling inputs in a given range, and feeding them to the function.
The library currently contains 3 toy problems: sine waves (F inn et al., 2017), harmonic function (i.e.
sum of two sine waves, Lacoste et al., 2018), and sinusoid and lines (Finn et al., 2018). Below is an
example of how to instantiate the meta-training set for the s ine waves problem:
torchmeta.toy.Sinusoid(num_samples_per_task= 10, num_tasks= 1_000_000 , noise_std= None)
2.2 Few-shot classiﬁcation
For few-shot classiﬁcation problems, the creation of the da tasetsDiusually follows two steps: ﬁrst
Nclasses are sampled from a large collection of candidates (c orresponding to Nin “N-way clas-
siﬁcation”), and then kexamples are chosen per class (corresponding to kin “k-shot learning”).
This two-step process is automated as part of an object calle dCombinationMetaDataset , inher-
ited from MetaDataset , provided that the user speciﬁes the large collection of cla ss candidates,
which is problem-speciﬁc. Moreover, to encourage reproduc ibility in meta-learning, every task is
associated to a unique identiﬁer (the N-tuple of class identiﬁers). Once the task has been chosen,
the object returns a dataset Diwith all the examples from the corresponding set of classes. In
Section 2.3, we will describe how Dican then be further split into training and test datasets, as is
common in meta-learning.
The library currently contains 5 few-shot classiﬁcation pr oblems: Omniglot (Lake et al.,
2015, 2019), Mini-ImageNet (Vinyals et al., 2016; Ravi and L arochelle, 2017), Tiered-ImageNet
(Ren et al., 2018), CIFAR-FS (Bertinetto et al., 2018), and F ewshot-CIFAR100 (Oreshkin et al.,
2018). Below is an example of how to instantiate the meta-tra ining set for 5-way Mini-ImageNet:
torchmeta.datasets.MiniImagenet( "data", num_classes_per_task= 5, meta_train= True,
download= True)
2