Continuous-Time Model-Based Reinforcement Learning
Figure 3: Comparison of different discretization choices
from (Brockman et al., 2016; Gal et al., 2016; Tassa et al.,
2018) on CartPole swing-up task vs. the true ODE solution.
Discretization timesteps are given inside the parenthesis.
in Figure 2b, DT models compute the value estimates using
a ﬁnite collection of states st:t+h, and thus are inaccurate.
5. Experiments
We experimentally evaluate our model on three CTRL
benchmark environments: Pendulum, CartPole and Acrobot.
In all tasks, the initial state is “hanging down” and the goal
is to swing up and stabilise the pole at the target position
where the pole stays in an upright position (also at the origin
in CartPole task). We deﬁne the differentiable reward func-
tions as the exponential of the distance to target state, while
also penalizing the magnitude of the velocity and action.
The actions are assumed to be continuous and bounded. The
experiments aim to answer the following questions:
• Do existing RL frameworks simulate CT dynamics?
•Do DTRL methods fail with irregularly sampled data?
•Is our ENODE approximation sensitive to the imagina-
tion horizon and the number of ensemble members?
• How does our model perform in standard RL tasks?
•How does the model performance change with (i)noisy
data, (ii)irregular sampling, and (iii)various t?
Compared models We consider three different varia-
tional approximations for our model: Ensemble neural ODE
(ENODE), batch ensemble neural ODE (BENODE) and
implicit Bayesian neural ODE (IBNODE). ENODE main-
tains a separate MLP for each ensemble member (Laksh-
minarayanan et al., 2017) while BENODE learns shared
weight parameters as well as member-speciﬁc rank-1 multi-
pliers (Wen et al., 2020). IBNODE considers a mixture of
Gaussians variational posterior on layer-wise multiplicative
factors (Trinh et al., 2020). In addition, we include two
DT transition models, namely, modiﬁed PETS and deep
PILCO (Gal et al., 2016). Policy learning using DT tran-
sition models is performed by discretizing the integrals in
(13,14).
Observation spacing In standard RL frameworks such as
OpenAI Gym, the observations arrive at constant intervals
t=(Brockman et al., 2016). In addition to this baseline,
Figure 4: Comparison of the vanilla and modiﬁed versions
of PETS dynamics on regularly and irregularly sampled
data. Vanilla PETS cannot handle irregularly sampled data
while model performances match on the former case.
we consider two irregular sampling scenarios in which obser-
vations (i)arrive uniformly within a range tU(0;2],
or(ii)follow an exponential distribution Exp()withbe-
ing the scale parameter. Note that all distributions have the
same mean time increments .
Additional details We refer to each iteration of the while
loop in Algorithm 1 as a round . Following Deisenroth and
Rasmussen (2011), the model performance is measured
at the end of each round by executing the inferred policy
in the real world for H= 30 seconds. Our main result
Figures 5-6-7 illustrate mean rewards and 90/10 percent
quantiles, computed over 20 experiments. Each method is
given the same amount of computational budget; therefore,
the number of completed rounds differ among methods. We
implement our method in PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2019) and
use adaptive checkpoint adjoint method to backpropagate
through the ODE solver (Zhuang et al., 2020). Please refer
to supplementary Section S2 for more details.
5.1. A New CTRL Framework
The test environments are already implemented in standard
RL frameworks such as OpenAI Gym (Brockman et al.,
2016) and DeepMind Control Suite (Tassa et al., 2018). Ex-
isting implementations either perform discrete transitions
or inaccurate numerical integration routines, e.g., ﬁxed-step
ODE solvers with too big step sizes. Furthermore, as illus-
trated in Figure 1, the actions in our CT framework smoothly
change over time whereas DT approximations implicitly
assume piece-wise constant control signals. Figure 3 illus-
trates how different discretization choices result in distinct
state trajectories on CartPole problem: While the policy is
able to swing-up and balance the pole in the upright position
when integrated with the correct solver, crude Euler and
RK4 approximations bifurcate near the position where the
pole hangs up.
To deal with above-mentioned inaccuracies, we implement a
new CTRL framework which takes as input a deterministic
policy function ()and observation time points, performs
forward integration in a numerically-stable way, and returns
the state trajectory at corresponding time points. Empirical