Continuous-Time Model-Based Reinforcement Learning
Figure 7: A comparison of ENODE and MPETS on three noisy environments ( = 0:025) with three different observation
spacings and varying mean time differences (note that all three spacings have the same mean time increments ). We
observe that MPETS’ performance deteriorates with reduced twhile our method is more robust to these changes.
5.5. Noisy and Temporally Irregular Data Experiments
To contrast the robustness of discrete and continuous-
time techniques, we evaluate MPETS and ENODE on
more realistic datasets of irregularly sampled and noisy
data sequences, where the observations are perturbed by
Gaussian noise with standard deviation = 0:025. We
also vary the mean observation time differences 2
[0:025;0:05;0:1;0:2]for all three observation spacings.
Figure 7 exhibits mean value curves on three tasks of our
interest. The most striking observation is that small time
differences lead to the breakdown of MPETS whereas our
model is more tolerant. We believe MPETS’ performance
drop is inevitable since noise corrupts both the inputs and
outputs of the transition function. On the other hand, our
method infers the underlying process and thus noise can be
handled by the observation noise model without corrupting
the dynamics inference. Furthermore, the performances of
both models stay roughly unaffected with stochastic time
increments. We conclude by highlighting the fact that both
models solve the tasks in fewer rounds when the dataset is
noise-free and the models perform comparably well.
6. Discussion
We have presented a novel continuous-time MBRL frame-
work that resolves the time discretization approximation ofexisting techniques. Our dynamics learning method relies
on the neural ODE framework, and thus can learn arbi-
trarily complicated controlled ODE systems. We propose
several original strategies to handle epistemic uncertainty
in NODE. Furthermore, we develop a new actor-critic al-
gorithm that operates in continuous time and space. We
experimentally demonstrate that our method is robust to
environment changes such as observation noise, temporal
sparsity and irregularity.
References
Michael Athans and Peter Falb. Optimal control: an intro-
duction to the theory and its applications . Dover Publica-
tions, 2013.
Leemon Baird. Advantage updating. Technical report,
Wright Lab, 1993.
Leemon Baird. Reinforcement learning in continuous time:
Advantage updating. In IEEE International Conference
on Neural Networks , volume 4, pages 2448–2453, 1994.
Richard Bellman. Dynamic programming. Science , 153
(3731):34–37, 1966.
Dimitri P Bertsekas, Dimitri P Bertsekas, Dimitri P Bert-
sekas, and Dimitri P Bertsekas. Dynamic programming