Continuous-Time Model-Based Reinforcement Learning
Ça˘gatay Yıldız1Markus Heinonen1Harri Lähdesmäki1
Abstract
Model-based reinforcement learning (MBRL) ap-
proaches rely on discrete-time state transition
models whereas physical systems and the vast ma-
jority of control tasks operate in continuous-time.
To avoid time-discretization approximation of the
underlying process, we propose a continuous-time
MBRL framework based on a novel actor-critic
method. Our approach also infers the unknown
state evolution differentials with Bayesian neu-
ral ordinary differential equations (ODE) to ac-
count for epistemic uncertainty. We implement
and test our method on a new ODE-RL suite that
explicitly solves continuous-time control systems.
Our experiments illustrate that the model is ro-
bust against irregular and noisy data, is sample-
efﬁcient, and can solve control problems which
pose challenges to discrete-time MBRL methods.
1. Introduction
The majority of model-based reinforcement learning
(MBRL) methods are based on auto-regressive, discrete-
time transition functions that take the current state and ac-
tion as input and output a new state (or a distribution over
it). Since the error incurred by the transition function can
be detrimental to learning controls, RL methods have been
designed to take epistemic uncertainty into account. Two
standard ways of doing so have been utilizing ensembles
(Kurutach et al., 2018; Chua et al., 2018; Janner et al., 2019;
Pan et al., 2020) and parametric uncertainty (Depeweg et al.,
2017; Gal et al., 2016).
The most notable deep MBRL breakthroughs have been
showcased on discrete-time (DT) problems such as games
(Hafner et al., 2021), whereas most of the physical and bi-
ological systems in science and engineering are inherently
continuous in time and follow differential equation dynam-
ics. Despite this fundamental misalignment, discrete-time
MBRL has been often applied to continuous-time prob-
1Department of Computer Science, Aalto University, Finland.
Correspondence to: Ça ˘gatay Yıldız <cagatay.yildiz@aalto.ﬁ>.
Proceedings of the 38thInternational Conference on Machine
Learning , PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).
Figure 1: A comparison of true solution of the CartPole
system against discrete and continuous-time trajectories.
While continuous-time solution almost perfectly matches
the true solution, discrete trajectory diverges from it.
lems (such as CartPole) by assuming discretized timesteps
(Brockman et al., 2016; Tassa et al., 2018). Indeed, ap-
proximating ordinary differential equations (ODE) with the
simplest Euler solver where the time increment equals the
time difference between measurements matches DT-MBRL
and resulting discretized system converges to the true ODE
as the discretized time increment approaches zero. Neverthe-
less, accurate approximations come at the cost of increased
computational load, a trade-off that is often overlooked.
Also, there is no consensus among practitioners on how
to choose the correct discretization stepsizes, or how to
account for irregular observation times.
Aside from discretization issue, adopting continuous-time
reinforcement learning setting (Bradtke and Duff, 1994;
Doya, 2000; Frémaux et al., 2013) presents both conceptual
and algorithmic challenges. First, Q-functions are known
to vanish in continuous-time systems (Baird, 1994; Tallec
et al., 2019), which prevents even simple conventional actor-
critic or policy learning methods (Sutton and Barto, 2018) in
such a setting. Second, the auto-regressive one-step ahead
state transitions need to be replaced with time derivatives.
This has been demonstrated in physics-informed domains
such as Lagrangian (Lutter et al., 2019) or Hamiltonian
mechanics (Zhong et al., 2020), or in non-RL domains such
the pioneering work of neural ODE (NODE) (Chen et al.,
2018). Inference of general-purpose dynamics using ODEs
in control settings is still an open question.