Continuous-Time Model-Based Reinforcement Learning
PENDULUM
 CARTPOLE
 ACROBOT
Figure 5: A comparison of three variants of our model and two other dynamics approximations (Gal et al., 2016; Chua
et al., 2018) on a dataset of noise-free and regularly spaced observations with t= 0:1. Top row illustrates the mean
reward curves (computed for H= 30 seconds) and 90/10 quantiles over rounds and the predictive mean squared error of the
dynamics on a test set is visualized over rounds on the bottom row. We observe that all models perform similarly despite the
discrepancy in the dynamics accuracy.
evidence for the need of integration as well as a comparison
of different ODE solvers are presented in supplementary
Section S3.
5.2. Vanilla vs. Modiﬁed PETS
In this experiment, we investigate whether vanilla PETS can
accurately infer the dynamics when the data sequences are
temporally irregular. For this, both versions of PETS are
trained on two CartPole datasets with observations arriving
at ﬁxed ( t= 0:1) or uniformly sampled ( tU(0;0:2])
increments. The train and test one-step ahead prediction
errors are illustrated in Figure 4. Both models successfully
learn the transitions when they arrive at ﬁxed increments.
Modiﬁed PETS achieves near-zero error on temporally ir-
regular dataset as well whereas the vanilla version cannot
perfectly ﬁt the training data as conjectured in Section 3.
We proceed with modiﬁed PETS (MPETS) in our irregular
sampling experiments.
5.3. ENODE Hyperparameter Sensitivity
As an ablation study, we check how the imagination hori-
zonHand the number of ensemble members nensim-
pact the model performance. We consider a noise-free
Figure 6: Ablation studies showing our ENODE approxi-
mation’s sensitivity to the imagination horizon Hand the
number of ensemble members nens.CartPole environment with ﬁxed observation time incre-
ments ( t= 0:1), and disjointly vary H2[1:0;4:0]
andnens2f1;3;5;10;15g. The mean reward values over
rounds are plotted in Figure 6. We observe that our ENODE
approximation is somewhat robust to nens. As expected, too
short or long horizons deteriorate the performance. In the
remainder of this paper, we ﬁx H= 2:0andnens= 10 .
5.4. Comparisons on Standard Setup
We ﬁrst compare our model variants, Deep PILCO and
PETS on Pendulum, CartPole and Acrobot environments
with noise-free and regularly sampled observations ( t=
0:1). The top tow in Figure 5 illustrates the mean values
obtained by executing policies in the real world. We observe
that all our model variants as well as PETS perform compa-
rably while Deep PILCO requires more rounds to solve the
problems.
Next, we examine how the model performance is related
to the dynamics accuracy. For this, we take a snapshot of
all models after each round, and also collect a separate test
dataset by executing the policies that solve the problems
in the real world. The bottom panels in Figure 5 show
how the dynamics errors evolve as Algorithm 1 proceeds.
Speciﬁcally, we plot two-second ahead prediction error,
which also equals to the imagination horizon in our Actor-
Critic algorithm. Since PETS errors explode in early rounds,
we clip it to 100 for visualization purposes. Our method
attains high accuracy only after a few rounds whereas the
policy converges to optimality much later. We conjecture
that dynamics accuracy does not solely predict the overall
performance. Additional results demonstrating shorter term
predictions can be found in supplementary Figure S2.