EmoBERTa: Speaker-Aware Emotion Recognition in Conversation with
RoBERTa
Taewoon Kim and Piek Vossen
Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam
{t.kim,p.t.j.m.vossen}@vu.nl
Abstract
We present EmoBERTa: Speaker-Aware
Emotion Recognition in Conversation with
RoBERTa , a simple yet expressive scheme of
solving the ERC (emotion recognition in con-
versation) task. By simply prepending speaker
names to utterances and inserting separation
tokens between the utterances in a dialogue,
EmoBERTa can learn intra- and inter- speaker
states and context to predict the emotion of a
current speaker, in an end-to-end manner. Our
experiments show that we reach a new state
of the art on the two popular ERC datasets
using a basic and straight-forward approach.
We’ve open sourced our code and models at
https://github.com/tae898/erc .
1 Introduction
The scope of emotion recognition is very wide,
ranging from stills of face images, audio data to the
actual utterances or text as in tweets. In this paper,
we focus on emotion recognition in conversation
(ERC), which is a subﬁeld of emotion recognition.
More speciﬁcally, the task is to predict the emotion
of a current speaker who’s engaging in a conversa-
tion with one person or more. Recognizing emotion
is important to areas such as affective computing
and human-robot communication, in which it can
be an important feedback mechanism.
As humans use multiple sensory inputs to have a
conversation (e.g., vision, voice, etc.) the ERC task
can also include multiple modalities (e.g., visual,
audio, text, etc.). Here, we report on our ﬁrst exper-
iments on the text modality, leaving using multiple
modalities within our framework to future work.
Since the introduction of the Transformer
(Vaswani et al., 2017), transformer-based deep neu-
ral network models have become the dominating
neural network model in sequence modeling. Es-
pecially, pretrained encoder-only models such as
BERT (Devlin et al., 2019) and RoBERTa (Liu
et al., 2019) have shown that they can be success-fully ﬁne-tuned for downstream tasks, such as sen-
tence classiﬁcation and question answering. ERC
can be seen as a special case of sequence modeling,
since emotions are expected to be triggered by a
preceding event in any modality.
Our approach to ERC enriches such transformer
models by including the speaker identity in the
sequence information spanning multiple utterances.
By adapting the RoBERTa sequence representation,
we improve the SOTA on two popular benchmark
datasets.
2 Related Work
Most of the existing works on ERC combine dif-
ferent kinds of neural network architectures (e.g.,
CNNs, RNNs, Transformers, GNNs, etc.) (Li et al.,
2020b), (Li et al., 2020c), (Ishiwatari et al., 2020),
(Wang et al., 2020), (Hazarika et al., 2021), (Sheng
et al., 2020), (Ghosal et al., 2020), (Ghosal et al.,
2019). The biggest downside of such approaches
is that each part of the model is responsible for
extracting their own features. These extracted fea-
tures might not be ideal for the other parts of the
model. Also, since these models are combinations
of sub-models, it is hard to understand what each
sub-model is contributing and how to improve the
overall model. Some of the approaches try to take
advantage of external knowledge bases (Ghosal
et al., 2020), (Zhong et al., 2019a), which adds
even more complexity to the model.
A substantial number of approaches are heav-
ily based on RNNs (e.g., GRU) to model the se-
quence (Jiao et al., 2019), (Lu et al., 2020). The
biggest problem with this is that it inherently de-
couples the word embedding extraction and the
sequence modeling, whereas BERT-like models
tackle them at once, often leading to a better perfor-
mance. Also, they have to rely on external decon-
textualized word embedding extractors (e.g., GloVe
(Pennington et al., 2014) or word2vec (Mikolov
et al., 2013)). Furthermore, training an RNN isarXiv:2108.12009v1  [cs.CL]  26 Aug 2021