(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications,  
Vol. 10, No.  5, 201 9 
99 | P a g e  
www.ijacsa.thesai.org  can be light or heavy, i.e. tractors. Modern farm 
machinery is seen as the important driver for increased 
agricultural sustainability, efficiency and 
competitiveness. Smart technologies can reduce the 
impact of farming practices within global agricultu re. 
The current development of agricultural machinery 
addresses environmental challenges, while increasing 
productivity and bringing economic benefits. These 
smart agricultural machines should be: (a) fast, 
accurate, versatile and intelligent; (b) produce less CO2 
emissions and (c) make use of bioenergy.  
 Field s: This refers to an area of land used for 
agricultural purposes, i.e. crops, cultivation or for 
livestock. Many fields have borders composed of a strip 
of bushes used to provide both food and cover, i n order 
to ensure the survival of wildlife. Monitoring field 
activities using IoT devices can have a significantly 
positive impact on controlling objects within the field.  
B. Proposed IOT/AI SSA Platform as a Solution  
This platform would prove a valuable medi um to facilitate 
data flow and sharing among SSA domains. Many researchers 
have developed IoT architectures, but their efforts have tended 
to target specific areas of IoT/AI, i.e. sensors or weather 
monitoring systems [58, 60, 61] . This current paper is 
proposing a holistic IoT/AI platform to cover all areas within a 
SSA environment, performing the following tasks: (a) manage 
and govern data flow between SSA domains; (b) facilitate the 
integration of the d ifferent components of SSA architecture; 
(c) tackle interoperability issues caused by the utilization of 
different tools and software; (d) provide easy -to-use interfaces 
for interaction; (e) provide an ability to generate reports based 
on real -time data an d keep it updated; (f) store generated data 
in sustainable storage place (i.e. the Cloud), to enable it to 
permanently recorded for future reuse; (g) isolate different 
layers to improve the development process in the future; and 
(h) the platform should con sist of several nodes, so that, in the 
case of any failure, other nodes can keep the system up and 
running. Fig . 3 shows how the SSA -IoT/AI platform would be 
used at the center  of the SSA domain to facilitate business 
process and data flow and to share wit hin a smart, sustainable 
agricultural environment.  
 
Fig. 3.  Proposed SSA -IoT/AI Platform . C. Proposed IoT/AI Technical Architecture for SSA Platform  
Fig. 4 shows the overall AI/IoT technical architectu re for 
SSA. It consists of two main components: (a) the first 
component: SSA Layers and AI/IoT technologies; and (b) the 
second component: data lifecycle within SSA architecture and 
data process location. In order to provide additional detail 
concerning th e framework, the following description gives 
further details about each component:  
1) The First component: Smart Sustainable Agriculture 
(SSA) layers and (SSA) AI/IoT technologies  
The first component of smart, sustainable agriculture 
(SSA), AI/IOT framework, consists of the following layers: 
(a) Physical Hardware and Storage layer; (b) AI and Data 
Management layer, and Governance layer; (c) Network layer; 
(d) Security layer; (e) Application layer; (f) IoT and sensing 
layer; and (g) SSA domain layer. Fig . 4 demonstrates the 
following description of each layer, highlighting its primary 
role: 
 Physical hardware and Storage layer : This layer 
consists of powerful hardware to host virtualized 
machines, as well as dedicated traditional storage 
medium, cloud storage solutions or hybrid storage 
solutions. It contains the supporting hardware for IoT 
devices that exist in Internet of Thi ns and Sensing layer.  
 Artificial Intelligence and Data Management Layer : 
This layer is responsible for managing processes and 
controlling the business logic, focussing on three main 
activities: (i) data analysis and processing, using data 
mining and intell igence statistical analysis on generated 
data; (ii) data classification and transformation, using 
ontologies, and machine learning to classify and 
transform analysed data; and (iii) data interpretation, 
representing the transformed data into knowledge to 
make machines smarter.  
 Network Layer:  This layer contains all the different 
types of network connections exist, with this cloud 
consisting of wired or wireless network 
connections/devices. It is important that this layer uses 
the latest networking technolog ies to keep up with the 
most recent developments in other sectors. Its main job 
is to facilitate the transaction of all data to and from 
different layers within the architecture. The 
technologies of IoT in this layer include Internet, WIFI 
and GSM/CMDA. It  is responsible for data accessibility 
and availability throughout other layers. Further, it 
manages data and its flow within between all layers.  
 Security Layer:  This layer is responsible for data 
security transferred among different layers and should 
be the means of addressing any security concerns and 
vulnerabilities within all other IoT/SSA layers, i.e. 
malware, spyware and viruses. It should employ up -to-
date security solutions and AI algorithms to block and 
quarantine any threat to the platform.  
 Applic ations Layers:  This layer gathers different 
applications related to smart sustainable agriculture. It 
is built based on AI and data management layers. Many 
Fig. 4 Overall AI/IoT platform technical architecture for SSA