(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications,  
Vol. 10, No.  5, 201 9 
100 | P a g e  
www.ijacsa.thesai.org  smart, sustainable agricultural applications could be 
developed and integrated into this layer, i.e.  crop 
monitoring applications and drone -controlled 
applications. This layer focuses on the supervision 
aspect of the data flow and migration between all layers  
and can provide an authorized institution with full or 
partial governance on data migration, tra nsactions and 
access.  
 Internet of Things (IoT) and Sensing Layer:  This 
forms the first interaction layer with SSA domains. It 
uses and hosts various types of IoT devices (e.g. 
sensors), capable of collecting data from real -world 
objects, sharing it to prov ide real -time data. Many 
sensors in the Cloud are hosted and integrated within 
this layer, i.e. humidity sensors, moisture sensors and 
weather monitoring systems. Furthermore, this layer is 
responsible for operating robotic and drone actuators to 
assist in  the mobility of intelligent machines within the 
agricultural area. It thus allows intelligent machines to 
move between locations, in order to cover a wide area.  
 SSA Domain Layer:  This layer hosts various different 
Smart Sustainable Architectural domains a nd forms the 
main source for data generated from various 
agricultural domains, including: fields; machines; 
human resources; and crops. It forms the basis for 
IOT/AI SSA platforms, as it contains various raw data 
formats without interference.  2) The Second co mponent: data lifecycle within SSA 
Architecture and its process location:  
Fig. 5 demonstrates that data lifecycle remains in line with 
SSA Architecture layers. This commences with the original 
data source, i.e. SSA domain layers. The acquisition and 
captur ing of data is undertaken at the layer containing sensors 
and actuators. These captured data are then passed to the 
application layer for business logic and control, following 
which, the data must be checked for security issues before 
moving to data analys is and processing. This is followed by 
data classification and transformation of the analyzed  and 
processed data before it moves to data interpretation and the 
resulting building decisions. The final stage is to store the data 
for future retrieval.  
There a re two locations for sharing and processing of 
generated data. Firstly, on -site. Here, the generated data is 
more likely to be shared and processed within the location of 
the agricultural field, covering the four architecture layers: 
(1) SSA; (2) the domai n layer; (3) the IoT layer; and (4) the 
application layer. Secondly, off -site: here the sharing and 
processing of the generated data must be outsourced to the 
physical location „data centre‟, in which data is processed and 
analyzed away from the field. It can cover the four architecture 
layers: (1) network; (2) AI and data management; (3) physical; 
and (4) storage. It is also important to highlight that the 
Security layer forms a common layer between on -site and off -
site processing locations.  
 
Fig. 4.  Overall AI/IoT Platform Technical Architecture for SSA . 
 
Fig. 5.  IoT/AI Data Lifecycle .