(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications,  
Vol. 10, No.  5, 201 9 
97 | P a g e  
www.ijacsa.thesai.org  TABLE II.  IOT/AI  RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT IN SMART SUSTAINABLE AGRICULTURE  
Researcher/s  Year  Summary  
Ray [57]  2017  The researchers undertook a review of various potentia l IoT applications, including the specific issues and challenges associated 
with IoT deployment to improve farming. They comprehensively analyzed  the specific requirements the devices and wireless 
communication technologies associated with agricultural IoT  applications. They presented different case studies to explore existing 
IoT based solutions operated by various organizations and individuals, followed by categorizing them based on their deploymen t 
parameters. Furthermore, they identified a number of fac tors for the improvement and future road map of work using IoT.  
Mekala and 
Viswanathan [58]  2017  The researchers surveyed a number of conventional applications of Agricultural Io T Sensor Monitoring Network technologies 
utilizing  CC. Their study aimed at understanding the diverse technologies to build smart, sustainable agriculture. They addressed a 
simple IoT agriculture model with a wireless network.  
Kamilaris, et al. 
[59] 2017  The researchers reviewed work in agriculture employing the practice of big data analysis to solve var ious different problems. 
Their review emphasized the opportunities provided by big data analysis for the development of smarter agriculture, the avail ability of 
hardware and software, as well as the techniques and methods for big data analysis.  
Rajeswari, et al. 
[29] 2017  The researchers investigated a number of different features, i.e. humidity, temperature sensing, server -based remote monitoring 
system detection and soil moisture sensing. They used sensor networks to measure temperature, moisture and humidity in place of 
manual checking. They deployed several sensors in different locations within farms, using a single controller. Their major ob jectiv e 
was to collect real -time data of the agriculture production environment to establish an easy access agricultural advice, in order to 
identify weather or crops patterns.  
Antonacci, et al. 
[5] 2018  The researchers attempted to provide nanotechnology -based (bio) sensors to support farmers in delivering an analysis that is 
accurate, fast, cost -effective, and useful in the field to identify water and soil nutrients/pesticides, soil humidity, and plant pathogens.  
Cadavid, et al. 
[60] 2018  The researchers proposed an extension to a popular open -source IoT platform, known as „Thingsb oard‟. This formed the core of a 
Cloud -based Smart Farming platform and deliberate sensors, a decision support system, and a configuration of remotely autonomous 
and controlled machines (e.g. water dispensers, rovers or drones).  
Soto-Romero, et 
al. [61]  2019  The researchers designed an easily insertable cylindrical sensor with internal electron ics to offer a low power electronic 
architecture to measure and communicate wirelessly with a LoRa, Sigfox network or mobile phones.  
Nóbrega, et al. 
[62] 2019  The researchers reviewed the proposed stack and details of the recent developments within smart agriculture, focusing on 
IoT/Machin e-2-Machine interaction. They described the design and deployment of a gateway addressing the requirements of the 
SheepIT service, evaluating this gateway using real scenarios in terms of performance, thus demonstrating its feasibility and  
scalability.  
III. METHODOLOGY  
As well as undertaking the literature review, the current 
researcher enhanced this study by informally interviewing 
experienced farmers. The study aims to establish an IoT /AI 
SSA architecture, as well as exploring the potential of the use 
of IoT and AI as a backbone to establish an SSA platform. A 
review was employed to identify, analyze  and study key books, 
journals, reports, and white papers, in order to achieve the 
above -noted aim. The lack of existing studies in this area 
ensures that this current research also contributes to the body of 
knowledge by establishing an IoT/AI framework for the 
adoption of smart technologies, in order to establish smart 
sustainable agricultu ral practices. Fig . 1 shows the 
methodology adopted for this study.  
IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION  
Based on the research aim outlined in the Methodology, 
this section is divided into ( A) Domains of Smart Sustainable 
agricultural model ; (B) B. Proposed IOT/AI SSA p latform as a 
solution ; and ( C) Proposed IoT/AI technical architecture for 
SSA platform . A. Domains of Smart Sustainable Agricultural Model 
The results from the literature review revealed that several 
domains need to be considered when adopting the smart 
agric ultural model. Fig . 2 demonstrates the interrelation and 
complexity of data flow between different Smart, Sustainable 
Agriculture domains.  
 
Fig. 1.  IoT/SSA Research  Methodology .