(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications,  
Vol. 10, No.  5, 201 9 
94 | P a g e  
www.ijacsa.thesai.org  by an in -depth discussion of Smart Agriculture  and IoT/AI 
SSA technical architecture, along with  the most significant 
outcomes from this study. The paper finishes with concluding 
remarks and plans for future work.  
II. BACKGROUND  
Due to the lack of literature concerning the development of 
IoT frameworks for SSA, this study focuses on: (a) the history 
of smart agriculture, its potential and challenges; (b) smart and 
advanced computing technologies; and (c) existing smart, 
sustainable agricultural frameworks.  
A. Smart  Sustainable Agriculture  
There has recently been considerable research into SSA, 
employing vari ous different terms, including Precision 
Farming, Smart Irrigation and Smart Greenhouse. This paper 
commences with an examination of these concepts to 
determine the definition of SSA used in this study.  
Precision Farming refers to a method of managing farm s 
and conserving resources through the use of IoT and 
Information and Communication Technologies (ICT). It 
obtains real -time data concerning the condition of farm 
elements, (i.e. crops, soil and air) to protect the environment 
while ensuring profits and su stainability [15]. Smart Irrigation 
is a method of improving the efficiency of irrigation processes 
and reducing water losses, while conserving existing water 
resources using IoT -based smart irrigation systems [16]. 
Drones are employed in many agricultural  applications, 
including monitoring field crops and livestock, and scanning 
large areas, while sensors on the ground collect a huge range of 
information [13]. Smart greenhouses promote the cultivation of 
crops with the least degree of human intervention po ssible, 
through use of continuously monitored climatic conditions (i.e. 
humidity, temperature, luminosity and soil moisture), 
triggering automated actions based on the evaluated changes 
and implementing corrective action to maintain the most 
benefic ial con ditions for growth [17].  
Farm Management Systems (FMS) can assist farmers with 
a variety of collected information, by managing and controlling 
various tracking devices and sensors. The collected 
information is analysed for the undertaking of complex 
decisi on-making tasks before being placed in a storage 
medium. This enables the use of the most effective agricultural 
data analysis practices [18]. Soil Monitoring Systems help to 
track and improve the quality of soil through the monitoring of 
its physical, che mical, and biological properties. Livestock 
monitoring systems provide real -time assessment of the 
productivity, health and welfare of livestock, to promote the 
health of animals [19]. The IoT/AI SSA platform Cloud offers 
real-time information to farmers t o facilitate decision -making 
and reduce operational costs, while at the same time enhancing 
productivity. Following a review of a considerable amount of 
research, we define SSA as the utilization process of IoT/AI 
technologies to establish, monitor, manage , process and 
analyse data generated from various agricultural resources, 
such as field, crops, livestock and others  to ensure the 
sustainability and quality of agricultural products and further 
enrich decision -making taken by stakeholders.  B. Smart and Advan ced Computing Technologies  
This section provides an overview of appropriate 
technologies underpinning the development of smart, 
sustainable agriculture platforms, including: IoT; Big Data 
Analytics (BDA); Cloud Computing (CC); Mobile Computing 
(MC); and Ar tificial Intelligence (AI):  
1) Internet of Things (IoT) : IoT is a technology aimed at 
connecting all intelligent objects within a single network, i.e. 
the Internet. It involves all kinds of computer technologies, 
both (a) hardware (i.e. intelligent boards and  sensors) and 
(b) software (i.e. advanced operating systems and AI 
algorithms). Its primary target is the establishment of 
applications for devices, in order to enable the monitoring and 
control of a specific domain. It has been widely adopted in 
many area s, i.e. industrial business processes; home machines; 
health applications; and smart homes and cities. IoT 
connectivity encompasses people, machines, tools and 
locations, aiming to achieve different intelligent functions from 
data sharing and information e xchange [17]. However, it is 
primarily used in agriculture for management of agricultural 
products within gathered real -time data, alongside: 
(1) searching ; (2) tracking; (3) monitoring; (4) control; (5) 
managing; (6) evaluating; and (7) operations within a supply 
chain [1, 9] . 
2) Big Data Analytics (BDA) : BDA refers to the large 
volume of data gathered from different datasets sources over a 
long period of time, i.e. sensor, Internet and business data. The 
datasets used in this technology surpass the comput ational and 
analytical capabilities of typical software applications and 
standard database infrastructure. Its primary task is to capture, 
store, analyze  and search for data, as well as seeking to identify 
concealed patterns in the gathered data. Thus, BDA  involved 
the utilization  of: (a) tools, (i.e. classification and clustering); 
(b) techniques, (i.e. data mining, machine learning and 
statistical analysis); and (c) technologies (i.e. Hadoop and 
spark). These go beyond traditional data analytical approach es, 
being employed to extract beneficial knowledge from a 
considerable amount of data, in order to facilitate timely and 
accurate decision –making [17]. How ever, the use of BDA in 
agriculture focusses on management of the supply chain of 
agricultural products, in order to enhance decision -making and 
minimize the cost of production cost. It is also employed for 
the analysis of the properties of different types  of soil for 
classification and further enhancement. Furthermore, it is 
useful for the improved prediction and production of crops.  
3) Cloud Computing (CC) : CC has is a recent and rapidly 
growing phenomenon within IT [18]. The Cloud is not 
restricted to a particular busine ss domain, but has been 
implemented to underpin and support various software 
applications and platforms [19]. It offers easy access to the 
Cloud provider‟s high -performance and storage infrastructure 
over the Internet, with one of its main benefits being to conceal 
from users the complexity of IT infrastructure management 
[20] [21]. NIST [22] defined CC as “a model for enabling 
convenient, on -demand network access to a shared pool of