(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications,  
Vol. 10, No.  5, 201 9 
93 | P a g e  
www.ijacsa.thesai.org  Smart Sustainable Agriculture (SSA) Solution 
Underpinned by Internet of Things (IoT) a nd 
Artificial Intelligence (AI)  
Eissa Alreshidi1 
Assistant Professor at College of Computer Science  & Engineering , University of Hail, Ha il, P.O. Box 2440, Saudi Arabia  
 
 
Abstract—The Internet of Things (IoT) and Artificial 
Intelligence (AI) have been employed in agriculture over a long 
period of time, alongside other advanced computing technologies. 
However, increased attention is currently being paid to the use of 
such sm art technologies. Agriculture has provided an important 
source of food for human beings over many thousands of years, 
including the development of appropriate farming methods for 
different types of crops. The emergence of new advance d IoT 
technologies has the potential to monitor the agricultural 
environment to ensure high -quality products. However, there 
remains a lack of research and development in relation to Smart 
Sustainable Agriculture (SSA), accompanied by complex 
obstacles arising from the fragmenta tion of agricultural 
processes, i.e. the control and operation of IoT/AI machines; data 
sharing and management; interoperability; and large amounts of 
data analysis and storage. This study  firstly, explores existing 
IoT/AI technologies adopted for SSA and secondly, identifies  
IoT/AI technical architecture capable of  underpinning  the 
development of SSA platforms. As well as contributing to the 
current body of knowledge, this research reviews research and 
development within SSA and provides an IoT/AI architec ture to 
establish a Smart, Sustainable Agriculture platform  as a solution . 
Keywords —Smart Agriculture ; Internet of Things ; IoT; 
Artificial Intelligence ; AI; Fragmentation ; Smart Sustainable 
Agriculture solutions  
I. INTRODUCTION  
Agriculture forms a critical activity vital to the survival of 
humanity for approximately many  thousand s of years [1].This 
relationship has resulted in the advancement of agricultural 
activities, initially through the time -consuming methods of 
traditional agriculture [2]. The current recent rapid increase in 
in the global population (predicted to rise to 8.9 billion by 
2050) has now led to an urgent need to balance demand and 
supply through the use of new technologies [3] to increase food 
production [4, 5] . This development places pressure on natural 
resources, with agriculture  now consuming 70% of the world‟s 
fresh water supply for the purposes of irrigation. Limited 
resources and the impact of climate change will therefore lead 
to considerable challenges in producing sufficient high quality 
food to support the population [6]. Smart Agricultural is a 
global initiative to preserve resources and maintain  sustainable 
agriculture [7]. Recently, researchers have adopted the In ternet 
of Things (IoT) [8, 9] , with a number of studies emphasizing 
the adoption and implementation of IoT in agriculture, 
farming, and i rrigation [10]. Around the globe, many pri vate 
companies and organizations are now focusing  on investigating new technologies to create a smarter agriculture environment. 
These include mechanical and economic aspects, engineering, 
food retailers and computing. However, agricultural processes 
are fragmented, resulting in a number of issues, i.e. difficulties 
in operating and managing smart machines, data sharing and 
management, data analysis and storage [11, 12] . It is therefore 
important to facilitate cooperation when developing standards 
for smart agriculture, while also enhancing interoperability 
among different stakeholders, systems and technologies [13]. 
The use of IoT and AI technologies has the potential to 
result in a positive transformation of traditional agriculture [3], 
including: (a) improved use of data collected from smar t 
agriculture sensors; (b) managing and governing the internal 
processes within the smart agriculture environment (including 
the management of the harvesting and storage of crops); (c) 
waste reduction and cost saving; (d) increasing business 
efficiency by means of automating traditional processes; and 
(e) improving the quality and volume of products [14]. A major 
challenge is to provide farmers with the required information in 
a rapid manner [15]. AI therefore has significant  potential to 
address the urgent challenges faced by traditional agriculture. 
There has, over previous decades, been considerable research 
and application of AI, including in: (a) smart agriculture; (b) 
robotics; (c) agricultural optimization management; ( d) 
automation; (e) agricultural expert systems; (f) agricultural 
knowledge -based systems; and (g) decision support systems 
[16]. 
There remains a lack of research and development in 
relation to Smart Sustainable Agriculture (SSA), a ccompanied 
by complex obstacles arising from the fragmentation of 
agricultural processes, i.e. the control and operation of IoT/AI 
machines; data sharing and management; interoperability; and 
large amounts of generated data analysis and storage.  
Therefore,  this study firstly, explores existing IoT/AI 
technologies adopted for SSA and secondly, establishes an 
IoT/AI technical architecture to underpin SSA platforms, in 
order to tackle fragmentation in traditional agriculture 
processes and enrich the research a nd development of future 
smart agriculture worldwide  via establish ment of  a Smart, 
Sustainable Agriculture platform  as a solution . 
There now follows an outline of the methodology 
underpinning this research, supported by related work 
highlighting the histor y of smart agriculture, smart and 
advanced computing technologies and examples of IoT/AI 
technologies in current agricultural practices. This is supported