(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications,  
Vol. 10, No.  5, 201 9 
95 | P a g e  
www.ijacsa.thesai.org  configurable computing resources (e.g. networks, servers, 
storage, applications and services) that can be rapidly 
provisioned and released with minimal management effort or 
service provider interaction”. The Cloud can be seen as high 
virtualization method for datacenter  infrastructure distributed 
over a wide geographical area , linked by means of high 
bandwidth network cables providing a variety of virtualized 
services . These inc lude entire infrastructures, as well as small 
software applications and different types of services, i.e. high -
performance computing and large scalable storage services 
based on a pay -per-use model. CC can be divided into four 
main layers: (1) hardware; (2 ) infrastructure; (3) platform; and 
(4) application [23]. The delivery of Cloud services can 
generally be divided into three different models: (1) 
Infrastructure -as-a-Service (IaaS); (2) Platform -as-a-Service 
(PaaS); and (3) Software -as-a-Service (SaaS) [24, 25] . CC is 
considered the most effective method of storing agricultural 
data, along with IoT [1]. 
4) Mobile Computing (MC) : MC refers to infrastructure in 
which data processing and data storage take place externally to 
the mobile device [26]. MC applications transfer computing 
power, processing and data storage from mobile devices in the 
Cloud [27, 28] . MC has had a considerable impact on modern 
daily life, due to the availability and low cost of purchasing and 
communication. It is now widely used in every field, including 
the agricultural sector [29], in which MC systems collect and 
send daily data to farmers, informing them of both the 
production status and weather conditions [29]. It is crucial to 
use automatic Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) efficient 
traceability systems to store and access data on electronic data 
chips in a more rapid and accurate manner. It has been 
primarily applied to the logistics of industrial products, for the 
purposes of identification and to check delivery processes [30]. 
5) Artificial Intelligence (AI) : AI has been employed in 
smart systems over a long period of time [31], being the science 
of creating intelligent machines to facilitate everyday life [32]. 
AI covers many areas, including computer vision, data mining, 
deep learning, image processing and neural networks [16, 33] . 
AI technologies are now emerging to assist and improve 
efficiency and tackle many of the challenges facing the 
agricultural industry, incl uding soil health, crop yield and 
herbicide -resistance. According to Sennaar [34] , agricultural 
AI Cloud applications fall into three main catego ries, as 
discussed below.  
a) Robots:  these are developed and programmed to 
handle fundamental agricultural tasks (i.e. harvesting crops) 
more rapidly and with a higher capacity than human workers. 
Examples of robotic applications include: (a) See and Spray 
(i.e. a weed control robot) and (b) Harvest CROO (i.e. a crop 
harvesting robot). Agricultural robots have the potential to 
become valuable AI app lications, i.e. milking robots.  
b) Monitoring Crop and Soil:  this employs computer 
vision and deep -learning algorith ms for processing captured 
data by sensors monitoring crop and soil health, i.e. the PEAT 
machine for diagnosing pests and soil defects, based on deep learning application known as Plantix that identifies potential 
defects and nutrient deficiencies in the soil. A further example 
is Trace Genomics, a machine learning based service for 
diagnosing soil defects and providing soil analysis services to 
farmers. This uses machine learning to provide farmers with a 
sense of both the strengths and weaknesses of thei r soil, with 
the emphasis being on the prevention of poor crops and 
optimizing the potential for healthy crop production. A 
SkySquirrel technology is  an example of the use of drones and 
computer vision for crop analysis.  
c) Predictive Analytics:  This analysis  captured data, 
based on machine learning models capable of tracking and 
predicting various environmental impacts on crop harvest, i.e. 
changes in weather. Examples of such AI technologies include 
(a) aWhere (i.e. prediction of weather and crop sustainabil ity) 
and (b) Farmshots (i.e. monitoring of crop health and 
sustainability). Crop and soil monitoring technologies are 
important applications for addressing issues related to climate 
change. IoT/AI technologies (such as drone and satellite) that 
generate a large amount of data on a daily basis have the 
potential to enable agricultural production to forecast changes 
and detect opportunities. It is predicted that, over the coming 
years, IoT and AI applications will attract a considerable 
degree of interest fro m large industrial agricultural enterprises 
[34]. 
The benefits and advantages of the agricultural use of IoT 
are as follows: (a) efficiency of input; (b) cost reduction ; 
(c) profitability; (d) sustainability; (e) food safety and 
environmental protection [35]. However, Ferrández -Pastor, et 
al. [36]  considered SSA to contain a number of barriers 
potentially hindering its adoption: (a) initial expectations and 
advanta ges remaining unfulfilled; (b) complexity of technology 
and incompatibility of components; (c) a lack of products; and 
(d) the high cost involved in the establishment and 
maintenance of such facilities. To ensure the adoption and 
improvement of smart techn ologies in the agriculture sector, it 
is vital for farmers to be trained and given up -to-date 
knowledge of IoT/AI technologies. Furthermore, it is crucial to 
test and validate IoT/AI applications, due to the high risk 
involved in the adoption of these tech nologies in a critical 
sector, along with the influence of environmental factors.  
C. Examples of IoT/AI Technologies in Current Agriculture 
Practices  
There are many types of IoT and AI sensors and 
applications in current agricultural st udies and development. 
Table 1 provides an overview of the most commonly employed 
IoT/AI platforms/technologies found in smart agriculture . 
D. Examples of an Existing AI/IoT Research in Smart 
Agriculture  
There are a number of specific challenges that need to be 
considered before in vesting in smart agriculture, primarily 
those falling into the following categories: (1) hardware; 
(2) data analysis; (3) maintenance; (4) mobility; and 
(5) infrastructure [56]. Nonetheless, there are many research 
efforts in the field of IoT/AI to support the creation and 
establishment of SSA, as shown in Table 2 .