(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications,  
Vol. 10, No.  5, 201 9 
96 | P a g e  
www.ijacsa.thesai.org  TABLE I.  EXAMPLE OF IOT/AI APPLICATION S IN SMART AGRICULTURE  
Category  Tool/Company  Description  
Climate 
conditions 
Monitoring  allMETEO [37] A po rtal to manage IoT micro weather stations, to gather real -time data access and create a weather map. It also 
provides an API for easy real -time data transfer into developed or existing infrastructure.  
Smart Elements 
[38] A collection of products that improve efficiency by eliminating manual checking. They work by deploying a wide 
range of sensors generating a report back to an online dashboa rd, allowing rapid and informed decisions based on real -
time conditions.  
Pycno [39] A software and sensor allowing continuous data collection and flow from the f arm to smartphone. It also contains a 
dashboard to apply the latest phenological and disease models to monitor trends and assess risk to agricultural products.  
Greenhou
se automation  Farmapp [40] A process of monitoring pests and diseases, generating reports for mobile applications. It records the data quickly 
and more efficiently than traditional methods (i.e. paper), allowing a smooth implementation. The sto red data is 
synchronized with the server, enabling the following metrics to be immediately observed: (1) a satellite map with 
recorded points; (2) the current sanitary status of the farm; (3) comparative heatmaps to easily compare previous 
measures with th e current situation; and (4) charts and reports concerning pests and diseases.  
Growlink [41] A platform that tightly integrates hardware and software p roducts, enabling smarter working, including providing 
wireless automation and control, data collection, optimization, and monitoring and visualization.  
GreenIQ [42] A system to control irrigation and lighting from all locations and to connect IoT devices to automation platforms.  
Crop 
management  Arable [43] A device that combines weather and plant measurements, sending data to the Cloud for instant retrieval from all 
locations. It offers continuous indicators of stress, pests and disease.  
Semios [44] A platform focused  on yield improvement. It enables farmers to assess and respond to insects, disease and the health 
of crops using real -time data, forming on -site sensing, big data and predictive analytics solutions for sustained 
agricultural products.  
livestock 
monitoring 
and 
management  SCR/Allflex [45] An advanced animal monitoring system, aimed at the collection and analysis of critical data, includin g for individual 
animals. It delivers, when needed, the heat, health and nutrition insights required by farmers for effective decision 
making.  
Cowlar [46] A smart  neck collar for monitoring dairy animals to gather information on temperature, rumination, activity and 
other behavior . The intelligence algorithm in the system allows for the detection of health disorders before the 
appearance of visual symptoms. It can monitor body movement patterns and gait to provide accurate oestrus detection 
alerts. It uses a solar power base unit, along with a waterproof and non -invasive monitoring system, both comfortable for 
the animal and requiring minimum maintenance.  
End-to-
end farm 
management 
systems  FarmLogs [47] This system monitors field conditions, facilitating the planning and managing of crop production. It also m arkets 
agricultural products.  
Cropio [48] A decision -making t ool used to optimize fertilization and irrigation to control the amount of fertilizer and reduce the 
use of water. It combines weather information and satellite data to monitor crops and field forecasts.  
Predictive 
Analytics  Farmshots [49] A system analyzing  satellite and drone images of farms fields to map potential sign of diseases, pests and poor 
nutrition. It turns images into a prescription map t o optimize farm production and view analytics on farm performance. 
Generated data in the Cloud can be exportable into nearly all agricultural software for prescription creation.  
aWhere [50] A platform employed for weather prediction and information on crop sustainability. Its goal is to deliver complete 
information and insight for real -time agricultural decisions on a daily basis and at a global level.  
Crop and  
Soil Health 
Monitoring  Plantix [51] A machine learning based tool to control and manage the agriculture process, disease control, and the cultivation of 
high-quality crops.  
Trace Genomics 
[52] A soil monitoring system performing complex test s (i.e. DNA) on soil samples. It uses a machine learning process 
known as „genome sequencing‟ that generates a health report for a soil sample by reading its DNA and comparing it to a 
large soil DNA database.  
Agricultu
re machines  
/drones  SkySquirrel [53] A drone system aimed at helping users to improve their crop yield and reduce costs. Users pre -program a drone‟s 
route, and, o nce deployed, the device will leverage computer vision to record images to be used for analysis. Once the 
drone completes its route, users can transfer the data to a computer and upload it to a Cloud drive. It uses algorithms to 
integrate and analyze  the c aptured images and data to provide a detailed report on the health and condition of crops.  
See & Spray [54] A robot  designed to control weeds and protect crops. It leverages computer vision to monitor and precisely spray 
weeds and infected plants.  
CROO [55] A robot that  assists in the picking and packing of crops. The manufacturer claimed  that this robot can harvest eight 
acres in a single day and replace the work of thirty human laborers .