(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications,  
Vol. 10, No.  5, 201 9 
98 | P a g e  
www.ijacsa.thesai.org   
Fig. 2.  Chaotic Data Flow and Interrelation of SSA Domains . 
These domains are discussed individually, as follows:  
 Human resources:  This refers to people, policies and 
practices within the agricultural environment, which are 
as important as in any other domain, as are weather and 
technology. Human resources receive careful attention, 
due to th eir significant impact on production, as well as 
financial and marketing  decisions. Whatever its size, an 
agricultural concern requires effective human resources 
management and planning, including hiring and 
keeping employees who are engaged, high -performi ng 
and effective communicators. Providing up -to-date 
knowledge potentially opens the means to adopt smart 
technologies in an agricultural environment.  
 Crops : This refers to a plant that can be grown and 
harvested extensively for subsistence or profit: (1) food 
crops (i.e. for human consumption); (2) feed crops (i.e. 
for livestock consumption); (3) fibre crops (i.e. for 
cordage and textiles); and (4) oil crops (i.e. for 
consumption or industrial uses).  
 Weather:  This plays a major role in determining the 
success of agricultural processes. Most field crops and 
livestock are solely dependent on climactic conditions 
to provide life -sustaining water and energy. Adverse 
weather can cause losses in agricultural products, 
particularly during critical stages of growth . The 
elements of weather (solar radiation, temperature, 
precipitation, humidity and wind) influence the 
physiology and production of agricultural plants and 
animals. Severe weather (i.e. tornadoes, drought, 
flooding, hail and wind storms) can cause consid erable 
damage and destruction to fields and livestock.  
 Soil:  This forms a critical aspect of successful 
agriculture, being the source of nutrients used to grow 
crops, which are subsequently passed into plants and 
then to humans and animals. Healthy soils p roduce 
healthy and rich food supplies;  however the health of 
soil tends to decline over time, forcing farmers to move 
to new fields. Soil health depends on regional conditions and climates, with soil nutrients more likely 
to deteriorate in dry climates, pa rticularly if irrigated, 
which, if not managed carefully, can result in 
salinization, i.e. a build -up in the level of salts and 
chemicals contained in water. Healthy and rich soil can 
be achieved through the use of IoT sensors to monitor 
its chemical statu s, using specific sensors (e.g. moisture 
sensors), whose data readings are transferred to the data 
management and analysis layer for analysis, assisting 
decisions concerning the need for fertilizer.  
 Pests:  These consist of any living creature that is 
invas ive, or damaging to crops, livestock or human 
structures. Pests often occur in high quantities, to the 
detriment of agricultural products. It is vital to control 
and monitor these creatures by means of IoT/AI 
technologies, to avoid serious diseases, includ ing 
plague and malaria, as well as plant and livestock 
diseases.  
 Fertilization:  Soils naturally contain many nutrients, 
i.e. nitrogen, phosphorous, calcium and potassium. 
Crops are unable to function effectively and produce 
high quality food when their nut rient level is low. The 
natural levels of nutrients in the soil need to be 
enhanced by the addition of nutrients once crops have 
been harvested. Fertilizers have been used since the 
beginning of agriculture, but it is now recognized that 
their extensive us e can, if not correctly controlled, harm 
the environment. Therefore, farmers use IoT sensors to 
read and test soil samples for baseline testing to enable 
them to add fertilizers using correct and appropriate 
measurements. Fertilization is an important meth od of 
maintaining  sustainable agricultural production 
systems.  
 Agricultural Products:  These are derived from 
cultivating crops or livestock to sustain or enhance 
human life. Human beings also use a wide collection of 
agricultural products on a daily basis,  i.e. food and 
clothing. Agricultural products fall into the following 
groups: (a) grains; (b) foods; (c) fuels; (d) fibres; 
(e) livestock; and (f) raw materials. Food is the most 
extensively produced agricultural product.  
 Irrigation/Water:  Water demand in  agriculture is now 
rising globally and particularly in Mediterranean 
countries, increasing the pressure to preserve available 
freshwater resources. Smart, sustainable agriculture 
processes should therefore focus on new and efficient 
techniques to improve agricultural productivity, which 
promote considerable savings in terms of food 
consumption and wasted water.  
 Livestock:  These are animals raised in a domesticated 
agricultural environment, for the purposes of labour and 
to produce commodities such as eggs,  meat, milk, fur, 
wool and leather. Animal husbandry is a component of 
current agriculture and refers to the breeding, 
maintenance and slaughter of livestock.  
 Machines:  Agricultural equipment is any kind of 
machinery used to assist with farming. Such machi nes