Huetal. BMCMedicalImaging           (2020) 20:17 Page5of10
volume. The final multi-class voxel-wise prediction is
computed on the 128-dimensional features at each voxel
location of the 3D feature maps. In our model, we adopt
1×1×1 kernels for all adaptive layers for simplicity, but
moreadvancedconfigurations,suchasanon-localopera-
tion,adilatedconvolution,oraninceptionarchitecture,is
readily applicable, and may have the potential to improve
the performance. Our goal here is to present a baseline
frameworkforthe3Drefinementmodule.
Finally, the 3D refinement module generates high-
resolution3Dsemanticmaps,whichenrichfeaturerepre-
sentation in the convolutional layers. It can be integrated
seamlessly into our 3D segmentation network, resulting
in an end-to-end trainable network that improves the
performance.
Training3DSegmentationNetworkwithCurriculum
An efficient training approach is critically important to
exploringthefullpotentialofour3Dsegmentationmodel,
particularlybyusingaverylimitednumberofbrainMRIs
for training. We present a new training strategy for end-
to-endlearningof3Dbrainsegmentationnetwork,which
incorporateswithcurriculumlearning[ 18],Focalloss[ 20]
and data augmentation. We emphasize that high perfor-
mance of our 3D model not only depends on its archi-
tecture design, but also due to the new training strategy
proposed.
As mentioned, a segmentation task can be considered
as a dense classification problem, where a training loss
is computed denselyover all 3D volume locations of a
MRI scanning. This rises a number of significant issues
during training. First, dense 3D training often generates
a large number of training samples, which are signifi-
cantly redundant when the model learns from neighbor-
ingsampleswithina3Dvolume.Thesesamplesareclosely
relevant with small diversity, and thus are less informa-
tive. Second, training is inefficient when dominated by a
largeamountof“easy"samples,whichoftencontributeto
the learning process with less useful signal or informa-
tion. This happens in dense 2D image detection [ 20], and
becomesmoresignificantindense3Dsegmentationtask.
Our training approach is developed to cope with these
criticalissues,andisexplainedbelow.
FocalLoss
Asstatedin[ 20],usingautomatically-selectedmeaningful
samples is critical to learn a high-capability model for a
denseestimationtask.Focallosswasoriginallyintroduced
in [20] for general object detection. It encourages the
model to learn from a sparse set of hard samples, which
naturally alleviates negative impact from the vast amount
of easy samples, leading to performance boost. Formally,
Focallosswasdefinedbyintroducingamodulatingfactor
(γ)toacrossentropyloss[ 20]:FL(pt)=−(1−pt)γlog(pt) (1)
wherept=pify=1, and otherwise pt=1−p.
y∈{ −1,+1}is the ground-truth class, and p∈[0,1]is
the estimated probability for the class of y=1.γis a
focusingparameter.Focallossisequaltotheoriginalcross
entropylosswhen γ=0,andthetrainingwouldfocuson
hardsampleswhen γ>0.Itdown-weights“easy"samples
smoothly. An “easy" sample has a large value of pt, indi-
cating a high estimated probability for a correct class. A
largervalueof γmeansstrongercontributionfromahard
sampletothetrainingprocess.Inthiswork,wecastFocal
loss into our 3D segmentation framework by replacing
theoriginalsoft-maxloss,providingasimpleformulation
thatallowsthemodeltoautomaticallyselectasparesetof
meaningfulsamplesforlearning.
DataAugmentation
The input of our model is 3D volumetric MRIs, and the
numberoftrainingsamplesisoftenlimited.Dataaugmen-
tation provides a straightforward approach for increasing
the amount of training samples, allowing us to gener-
ate massive scale training data with increasing diversity.
In our experiments, data augmentation is produced as
follows. First, a simple slice-level augmentation is imple-
mented by randomly amplifying voxel intensities with an
amplification factor selected randomly from 0.8-1.2. Sec-
ond, we produce 3D volume-level augmentation where
exact same operations are implemented through all slices
within a 3D volume: (i) all slices are rotated with a same
orientation, which is randomly selected from {0, 90, 180,
270} degrees; (ii) all slices are re-scaled by using a same
ratio randomly computed from [0:5; 1:2]; (iii) horizon-
tal and vertical flippings are implemented sequentially;
(iv) random cropping: a same spatial cropping is fur-
ther implemented on each slice, and each cropped region
shouldincludeawholeregionofinterest(e.g.,braintumor
or stroke region), if it is presented in the slice. Data aug-
mentation and Focal loss are incorporated and form a
learningcurriculumforournewtrainingstrategy.
LearningwithCurriculum
Both Focal loss and data augmentation encourage the
model to learn from data with larger diversity and
more complexity. However, as shown in our experiments,
directly applying these technologies to our 3D segmenta-
tion model does not directly yield obvious performance
gains, and hence an efficient learning scheme is critical.
Ourtrainingschemeisinspiredfromtheintuitionofcur-
riculum learning [ 18], which encourages the learning to
s t a r tf r o ma ne a s i e rt a s k ,a n dt h e nt a k e sm o r ec o m p l e x
tasks gradually during the training process. We propose
a three-stage learning curriculum where data complexity
is increased gradually. This allows for an efficient imple-
mentationofcurriculumlearningspecificallydesignedfor