Huetal. BMCMedicalImaging           (2020) 20:17 Page6of10
our task of brain segmentation. Full process is described
asfollows.
– First,our3Dsegmentationmodelistrainedonthe
originaldatawithoutdataaugmentationandFocal
loss.Thiscanbeconsideredasaneasytask,andthe
modeloftenconvergesfast,duetothesmallamount
oftrainingdatawhichisoftendominatedbyeasy
samples.
– Thenweincreasedatacomplexitybyrandomly
applyingdataaugmentation(describedabove)to50%
oftheoriginal3DMRIs,whichgeneratestraining
sampleswithlargediversity.Wecontinuethe
trainingprocessbyusingthegenerateddata,which
naturallyincreasesthedifficultyofthelearningtask.
– Finally,inthelaststageoftheproposedlearning
curriculum,weapplyFocallosswhichencouragesthe
modeltolearnfromhardersamples.Inaddition,we
furtherincreasedatacomplexitybyimplementing
dataaugmentationto75%oftrainingdata.Both
operationsfurtherincreasethelearningdifficultyby
usingmoremeaningfulanddiscriminativesamples,
whichareofgreatimportancetoimprovingmodel
capability.
Theproposedthree-stagecurriculumallowsourmodels
to learn more efficiently from a limited amount of train-
ingsamples,byincreasingdatacomplexitygradually.This
leadstostrongerdiscriminativepowerofthetrainedmod-
els with better generalization capability, resulting in clear
performanceimprovements.
Discussions
Our Brain SegNet is related to 3D U-Net [ 24]o rV - N e t
[25], but has clear distinctions. It is designed for brain
lesion segmentation from multi-modality MRIs, where
finedetailedinformationin3Dvolumedomainisofgreat
importance, while 3D U-Net or V-Net was developed for
a different task, leading to the major difference in model
design. (1) Our 3D segmentation network is more com-
pactindesign,withlessconvolutionallayersinthedecod-
ing branch. This results in a large reduction in model
parameters. For example, the parameters of our model is
12M, compared to 19M of the 3D U-Net, and to the 60M
V-Net. With less parameters, our model can be trained
more efficiently by using a decreasing number of training
samples. Furthermore, this allows our model to run sig-
nificantlyfaster-atabout0.5sperMRI,whichisoverx50
faster than related approaches described in [ 2]a n d[1],
bothofwhicharestate-of-the-artapproachesforthistask.
(2)Our3Dmodelonlyimplementsdown-samplepooling
inspatialdomain,andkeepitsthirddimensionunchanged
inallconvolutionallayers.Thisallowsittopreservestrong
3D detailed information, tailored it towards brain lesionsegmentation, where 3D volume information from mul-
tiple modalities is critical to distinguish various brain
tissues in fine details. Furthermore, our 3D segmentation
network is trained with a new proposed training strat-
egy,andthewholedesignpipelineisuniqueandefficient,
leadingtonewstate-of-the-artperformance.
Ourworkisalsorelatedtothatof[ 2,6],where3DCNNs
weredevelopedforvoxel-levelsegmentation.In[ 6],Chen
et. al.developed a voxel-wise residual network (VoxRes-
Net) for segmentation of key brain tissues. VoxResNet
extends deep residual architecture [ 14]b yr e p l a c i n g2 D
convolutionswith3Dconvolutions,andintegratesthefea-
tures learned from multiple MRI modalities. Kamnitsas
et. al.[2] proposed a dual pathway 3D CNN for aggregat-
ing multi-level features, and a CRF was applied to refine
the results. We develop a 3D refinement module, setting
itapartfromthatof[ 2,6].Importantly,oursegmentation
model learns multi-modality information and aggregates
multi-level 3D convolutional features with a single CNN
model that produces inference in one pass. This pro-
videsamorecompactyetaccuratemodelthatworksmore
efficientlyandfaster.
ImplementationDetails
The proposed 3D Brain SegNet was implemented in
Pytorch. In the training stage, we generate a number of
fixed-size3Dvolumes(whichareusedasachannelfor4D
inputs)fromeach3DMRIsmodality.Forbraintumorseg-
m e n t a t i o no nt h eB R A T Sd a t a b a s e[ 16], each MIR scan-
ning has a fixed-number of 155 slides, and we set the size
ofeach3Dvolumeto12x128x128,where12isthenumber
of slides, and 128x128 is the spatial resolution. Each MRI
sequenceissampledequallywithnon-overlapinthethird
dimension,andthespatialregionisobtainedbyusingran-
dom cropping, which is similar to the random cropping
method described in data augmentation. Therefore, each
155-slide MRI scanning from the BRATS database gener-
ates 13 cropped 3D volumes as model inputs. For stroke
lesion outcome prediction from the ISLES 2017 database
[17],thesizeof3Dvolumeissetto7x96x96,andthenum-
ber of slides for each MRI scanning is about 20, which
generates3cropped3Dvolumes.
Our 3D models were trained on 4 Titan Xp GPUs with
1500 epochs, by using a batch size of 40, which takes
about8GmemoryforeachGPUused.WeadoptedAdam
optimization, and set a learning rate to 1e-4. For the pro-
posed three-stage training strategy, we simply trained a
modelwith500epochsineachlearningstage,whilekeep-
ing other settings fixed. Therefore, training time is varied
over different databases or tasks, due to various scales of
the databases.Forexample, the training takesabout eight
hours on the BRATS 2015database,while the training on
the ISLES 2017 database just uses about one hour, due to
thesmallnumberoftrainingsamples.