Huetal. BMCMedicalImaging           (2020) 20:17 Page4of10
(ReLU) [ 21] and Batch Normalization (BN) [ 22]o p e r -
ations which are applied empirically by following [ 14].
DetailsofthefourblocksarepresentedinFig. 3a.Specifi-
cally, all convolutional feature maps within each convolu-
tion block have an identical 4D shape (a same number of
channelswithanidentical3Dshapeforallchannels).The
numberofchannelsisincreasedfromBlock#1toBlock#4
as{32,64,128,256}.Ineachblock,a3 ×3×3convolution
is used to down-sample the 3D maps to half in all dimen-
sions, resulting in down-sample factors of/braceleftbig
1,1
2,1
4,1
8/bracerightbig
in
fourblocks.Weexploreconvolutionoperationsfordown-
sampling the convolutional maps, which are different
from the original ResNet [ 14] using max pooling opera-
tions for extracting high-level semantic context features
forimageclassification.Theconvolutionoperationscapa-
ble of preserving richer local details, which is important
todensesegmentationtask.OurmodelcontainstwoRes-
BlocksintheBlock#2,#3,#4,andeachResBlockhastwo
convolutional layers with residual connections designed
by following ResNet [ 14]. This results in 17 3D convolu-
tionallayersintotalforoursegmentationmodel,whichis
a compact design, compared to the original ResNet [ 14],
resulting in fast running speeds. At the same time, this
also allows our model for requiring a smaller amount of
training data, while attaining better levels of generaliza-
tion than models requiring more parameters, and hence,
largertrainingdatasets.
3DRefinementModule
For dense 3D segmentation, a key step is to align the
spatial shape of convolutional maps to the input vol-
ume. A straightforward approach is to use up-sampleoperations.However,theup-sampleoperationcommonly
suffersfromasignificantissueofdown-scalingofthefea-
ture maps, leading to information loss of fine structures
and local details [ 23]. Both fine structures and high-level
context information are important to many segmentation
tasks. To effectively encode both of them in the convolu-
tionalfeatures,weproposeanovel3Drefinementmodule,
with the goal of aggregating local details and multi-level
high-levelcontextinformationin3Dvolumedomain.
As shown in Fig. 2, the proposed 3D refinement mod-
ule is applied to each convolutional block. It recursively
encodes the high-level context information from the
higherlayerstotheloweronesin3Dvolumedomain.Our
3Drefinementmodelworksasfollows.First,wedesignan
adaptive layer which is connected to the output of each
convolutional block. The adaptive layer reshapes the 4D
convolutional maps by changing the number of 3D chan-
nelstoaconstantnumber-inourexperiment,128,while
keeping the 3D shape of convolutional features in each
channel. Second, a refine unit is designed and applied to
fuse multi-level convolutional features recursively from
the top convolutional block to the bottom one. As shown
inFig.3b,weintroduce1 ×1×1and3 ×3×3convolutional
layers to refine the 3D convolutional features before and
after the combination operation, where an element-wise
summation is applied, with an ×2 up-sample operation
implemented on the lower-resolution maps. This makes
it different from the skip connection introduced in [ 23]
wheredirectelement-wisesummationwasapplied.
This results in 128-channel 3D convolutional maps in
the last refined convolutional layer, and each 3D convo-
lutional maps have the same shape with the input 3D
Fig.3aLayersoftheproposed3Dmodelinfourconvolutionalblocks. bDetailsoftheproposedrefineunit