done in perfect-information games (in which the equilibrium value of a state is substituted at a leaf
node), then there would not be enough information for player 1 to arrive at this optimal policy.
This illustrates a critical challenge of imperfect-information games: unlike perfect-information
games and single-agent settings, the value of an action may depend on the probability it is chosen.
Thus, a state deﬁned only by the sequence of actions and observations does not have a unique
value and therefore existing RL+Search algorithms such as AlphaZero are not sound in imperfect-
information games. Recent AI breakthroughs in imperfect-information games have highlighted the
importance of search at test time [ 40,12,14,37], but combining RL and search during training in
imperfect-information games has been an open problem.
This paper introduces ReBeL (Recursive Belief-based Learning), a general RL+Search framework
that converges to a Nash equilibrium in two-player zero-sum games. ReBeL builds on prior work in
which the notion of “state” is expanded to include the probabilistic belief distribution of all agents
about what state they may be in, based on common knowledge observations and policies for all
agents. Our algorithm trains a value network and a policy network for these expanded states through
self-play reinforcement learning. Additionally, the algorithm uses the value and policy network for
search during self play.
ReBeL provably converges to a Nash equilibrium in all two-player zero-sum games. In perfect-
information games, ReBeL simpliﬁes to an algorithm similar to AlphaZero, with the major difference
being in the type of search algorithm used. Experimental results show that ReBeL is effective in
large-scale games and defeats a top human professional with statistical signiﬁcance in the benchmark
game of heads-up no-limit Texas hold’em poker while using far less expert domain knowledge than
any previous poker AI. We also show that ReBeL approximates a Nash equilibrium in Liar’s Dice,
another benchmark imperfect-information game, and open source our implementation of it.2
2 Related Work
At a high level, ReBeL resembles past RL+Search algorithms used in perfect-information games [ 59,
56,1,55,50]. These algorithms train a value network through self play. During training, a search
algorithm is used in which the values of leaf nodes are determined via the value function. Additionally,
a policy network may be used to guide search. These forms of RL+Search have been critical to
achieving superhuman performance in benchmark perfect-information games. For example, so far no
AI agent has achieved superhuman performance in Go without using search at both training and test
time. However, these RL+Search algorithms are not theoretically sound in imperfect-information
games and have not been shown to be successful in such settings.
A critical element of our imperfect-information RL+Search framework is to use an expanded notion of
“state”, which we refer to as a public belief state (PBS) . PBSs are deﬁned by a common-knowledge
belief distribution over states, determined by the public observations shared by all agents and the
policies of all agents. PBSs can be viewed as a multi-agent generalization of belief states used in
partially observable Markov decision processes (POMDPs) [ 31]. The concept of PBSs originated
in work on decentralized multi-agent POMDPs [ 43,45,19] and has been widely used since then in
imperfect-information games more broadly [40, 20, 53, 29].
ReBeL builds upon the idea of using a PBS value function during search, which was previously
used in the poker AI DeepStack [ 40]. However, DeepStack’s value function was trained not through
self-play RL, but rather by generating random PBSs, including random probability distributions, and
estimating their values using search. This would be like learning a value function for Go by randomly
placing stones on the board. This is not an efﬁcient way of learning a value function because the vast
majority of randomly generated situations would not be relevant in actual play. DeepStack coped with
this by using handcrafted features to reduce the dimensionality of the public belief state space, by
sampling PBSs from a distribution based on expert domain knowledge, and by using domain-speciﬁc
abstractions to circumvent the need for a value network when close to the end of the game.
An alternative approach for depth-limited search in imperfect-information games that does not use
a value function for PBSs was used in the Pluribus poker AI to defeat elite humans in multiplayer
poker [ 15,14]. This approach trains a population of “blueprint” policies without using search. At
test time, the approach conducts depth-limited search by allowing each agent to choose a blueprint
policy from the population at leaf nodes. The value of the leaf node is the expected value of each
2https://github.com/facebookresearch/rebel
2