exploration, one agent samples random actions with probabilility  >0.10In CFR-D0
r=t
z,
while in CFR-A VG and FP 0
r=t
z.
Theorem 2 states that, with perfect function approximation, running Algorithm 1 will produce a
value network whose error is bounded by O(1p
T)for any PBS that could be encountered during play,
whereTis the number of CFR iterations being run in subgames.
Theorem 2. Consider an idealized value approximator that returns the most recent sample of the
value for sampled PBSs, and 0 otherwise. Running Algorithm 1 with Titerations of CFR in each
subgame will produce a value approximator that has error of at mostCp
Tfor any PBS that could be
encountered during play, where Cis a game-dependent constant.
ReBeL as described so far trains the value network through bootstrapping. One could alternatively
train the value network using rewards actually received over the course of the game when the agents do
not go off-policy. There is a trade-off between bias and variance between these two approaches [ 51].
5.3 Adding a policy network
Algorithm 1 will result in ^vconverging correctly even if a policy network is not used. However,
initializing the subgame policy via a policy network may reduce the number of iterations needed
to closely approximate a Nash equilibrium. Additionally, it may improve the accuracy of the value
network by allowing the value network to focus on predicting PBS values over a more narrow domain.
Algorithm 1 can train a policy network ^ :!(A)jS1j+jS2jby adding T()for each PBS in
the subgame to a training dataset each time a subgame is solved (i.e., Titerations of CFR have been
run in the subgame). Appendix J describes a technique, based on [ 10], for warm starting equilibrium
ﬁnding given the initial policy from the policy network.
6 Playing According to an Equilibrium at Test Time
This section proves that running Algorithm 1 at test time with an accurately trained PBS value
network will result in playing a Nash equilibrium policy in expectation even if we do not know the
opponent’s policy. During self play training we assumed, as stated in Section 3, that both players’
policies are common knowledge. This allows us to exactly compute the PBS we are in. However, at
test time we do not know our opponent’s entire policy, and therefore we do not know the PBS. This is
a problem for conducting search, because search is always rooted at a PBS. For example, consider
again the game of modiﬁed Rock-Paper-Scissors illustrated in Figure 1a. For simplicity, assume that
^vis perfect. Suppose that we are player 2 and player 1 has just acted. In order to now conduct search
as player 2, our algorithm requires a root PBS. What should this PBS be?
An intuitive choice, referred to as unsafe search [ 25,22], is to ﬁrst run CFR for Titerations for
player 1’s ﬁrst move (for some large T), which results in a player 1 policy such as (R= 0:4001;P=
0:3999;S= 0:2). Unsafe search passes down the beliefs resulting from that policy, and then
computes our optimal policy as player 2. This would result in a policy of (R= 0;P= 1;S= 0) for
player 2. Clearly, this is not a Nash equilibrium. Moreover, if our opponent knew we would end up
playing this policy (which we assume they would know since we assume they know the algorithm we
run to generate the policy), then they could exploit us by playing (R= 0;P= 0;S= 1) .
This problem demonstrates the need for safe search, which is a search algorithm that ensures we
play a Nash equilibrium policy in expectation. Importantly, it is notnecessary for the policy that the
algorithm outputs to always be a Nash equilibrium. It is only necessary that the algorithm outputs a
Nash equilibrium policy in expectation . For example, in modiﬁed Rock-Paper-Scissors it is ﬁne for
an algorithm to output a policy of 100% Rock, so long as the probability it outputs that policy is 40%.
All past safe search approaches introduce additional constraints to the search algorithm [ 16,41,11,
57]. Those additional constraints hurt performance in practice compared to unsafe search [ 16,11]
and greatly complicate search, so they were never fully used in any competitive agent. Instead,
all previous search-based imperfect-information game agents used unsafe search either partially or
entirely [ 40,12,15,14,53]. Moreover, using prior safe search techniques at test time may result in
the agent encountering PBSs that were not encountered during self-play training and therefore may
result in poor approximations from the value and policy network.
10The algorithm is still correct if all agents sample random actions with probability , but that is less efﬁcient
because the value of a leaf node that can only be reached if both agents go off policy is irrelevant.
7