Combining Deep Reinforcement Learning and Search
for Imperfect-Information Games
Noam BrownAnton BakhtinAdam Lerer Qucheng Gong
Facebook AI Research
{noambrown,yolo,alerer,qucheng}@fb.com
Abstract
The combination of deep reinforcement learning and search at both training and test
time is a powerful paradigm that has led to a number of successes in single-agent
settings and perfect-information games, best exempliﬁed by AlphaZero. However,
prior algorithms of this form cannot cope with imperfect-information games. This
paper presents ReBeL, a general framework for self-play reinforcement learning
and search that provably converges to a Nash equilibrium in any two-player zero-
sum game. In the simpler setting of perfect-information games, ReBeL reduces to
an algorithm similar to AlphaZero. Results in two different imperfect-information
games show ReBeL converges to an approximate Nash equilibrium. We also show
ReBeL achieves superhuman performance in heads-up no-limit Texas hold’em
poker, while using far less domain knowledge than any prior poker AI.
1 Introduction
Combining reinforcement learning with search at both training and test time (RL+Search) has led to
a number of major successes in AI in recent years. For example, the AlphaZero algorithm achieves
state-of-the-art performance in the perfect-information games of Go, chess, and shogi [55].
However, prior RL+Search algorithms do not work in imperfect-information games because they
make a number of assumptions that no longer hold in these settings. An example of this is illustrated
in Figure 1a, which shows a modiﬁed form of Rock-Paper-Scissors in which the winner receives two
points (and the loser loses two points) when either player chooses Scissors [ 15]. The ﬁgure shows the
game in a sequential form in which player 2 acts after player 1 but does not observe player 1’s action.
𝑷𝟏 
𝑷𝟐 
 𝑷𝟐 
 𝑷𝟐 
Paper  𝑃=0.4 𝑃=0.2 𝑃=0.4 
Paper  
0,0 -1,1 2,-2 Paper  
1,-1 0,0 -2,2 Paper  
-2,2 2,-2 0,0 
(1a) Variant of Rock-Paper-Scissors in which the opti-
mal player 1 policy is (R=0.4, P=0.4, S=0.2). Terminal
values are color-coded. The dotted lines mean player 2
does not know which node they are in.
𝑷𝟏 Paper  
0 0 0 (1b) The player 1 subgame when using perfect-
information one-ply search. Leaf values are deter-
mined by the full-game equilibrium. There is insufﬁ-
cient information for ﬁnding (R=0.4, P=0.4, S=0.2).
The optimal policy for both players in this modiﬁed version of the game is to choose Rock and Paper
with 40% probability, and Scissors with 20%. In that case, each action results in an expected value of
zero. However, as shown in Figure 1b, if player 1 were to conduct one-ply lookahead search as is
Equal contribution
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.