2. Related Work
2.1. Semantic Segmentation
Deep learning has helped semantic segmentation make
remarkable leap-forwards. FCN [18] is the ﬁrst full convo-
lutional network for semantic segmentation. It is trained in
an end-to-end and pixel-to-pixel way. Besides, images with
arbitrary size can be segmented by FCN. Following the de-
sign of FCN, various methods have been proposed in later.
Segnet [1] applies the indices of max-pooling operation in
encoder to upsampling operation in decoder. Therefore, the
information in decoder is reused and the decoder produces
reﬁned features. PSPNet [29] proposes the pyramid pooling
module to aggregate local and global information, which is
effective for segmentation accuracy. Besides, recent seman-
tic segmentation methods [11,17] utilize the transformer ar-
chitecture to achieve better accuracy.
2.2. Real-time Semantic Segmentation
To fulﬁll the real-time demands of semantic segmenta-
tion, lots of methods have been proposed, e.g lightweight
module design [8, 21], dual-branch architecture [26, 27],
early-downsampling strategy [23], multiscale image cas-
cade network [28]. ENet [23] uses an early-downsampling
strategy to reduce the computation cost of processing large
images and feature maps. For efﬁciency, ICNet [28] de-
signs a multi-resolution image cascade network. Based on
bilateral segmentation network, Bisenet [26] extracts the
detail features and semantic features separately. The bi-
lateral network is lightweight, so the inference speed is
fast. STDCSeg [8] proposes the channel-reduced recep-
tive ﬁeld-enlarged STDC module and designs an efﬁcient
backbone, which can strengthen the feature representations
with low computation cost. To eliminate the redundancy
in two-branch network, STDCSeg guides the features with
detailed ground truth, so the efﬁciency is further improved.
Espnetv2 [21] uses group point-wise and depth-wise dilated
separable convolutions to learn features from an enlarged
receptive ﬁeld in a computation friendly manner.
2.3. Feature Fusion Module
The feature fusion module is commonly used in seman-
tic segmentation to strengthen feature representations. In
addition to the element-wise summation and concatenation
methods, researchers propose several methods as follows.
In BiSeNet [26], the BGA module employs element-wise
mul method to fuse the features from the spatial and con-
textual branches. To enhance the features with high-level
context, DFANet [14] fuses features in a stage-wise and
subnet-wise way. To tackle the problem of misalignment,
SFNet [15] and AlignSeg [12] ﬁrst learn the transforma-
tion offsets through a CNN module, and then apply the
transformation offsets to grid sample operation to gener-
Figure 3. (a) The conventional encoder-decoder, in which the de-
coder keeps the features channels the same. (b) The encoder and
proposed Flexible and Lightweight Decoder (FLD). FLD gradu-
ally reduces the channels for the features from high level to low
level. Moreover, the volume of FLD is adjusted to conform to the
encoder.
ate the reﬁned feature. In detail, SFNet designs the ﬂow
alignment module. AlignSeg designs aligned feature ag-
gregation module and the aligned context modeling mod-
ule. FaPN [11] solves the feature misalignment problem by
applying the transformation offsets to deformable convolu-
tion.
3. Proposed Method
In this section, we ﬁrst introduce Flexible and
Lightweight Decoder (FLD), Uniﬁed Attention Fusion
Module (UAFM) and Simple Pyramid Pooling Module
(SPPM), respectively. Then, we present the architecture of
PP-LiteSeg for real-time semantic segmentation.
3.1. Flexible and Lightweight Decoder
Encoder-decoder architecture has been proved to be ef-
fective for semantic segmentation. In general, the encoder
utilizes a series of layers grouped into several stages to ex-
tract hierarchical features. For the features from low level
to high level, the number of channels gradually increases
and the spatial size of the features decreases. This design
balances the computation cost of each stage, which ensures
the efﬁciency of the encoder. The decoder also has sev-
eral stages, which are responsible for fusing and upsam-
pling features. Although the spatial size of features in-
creases from high level to low level, the decoder in re-
cent lightweight models keeps the feature channels the same
in all levels. Therefore, the computation cost of shallow
stage is much larger than that of the deep stage, which
leads to the computation redundancy in shallow stage. To
improve the efﬁciency of decoder, we present a Flexible
and Lightweight Decoder (FLD). As illustrated in Figure 3,
FLD gradually decreases the channels of the features from
3