Figure 2. The architecture overview. PP-LiteSeg consists of three modules: encoder, aggregation and decoder. A lightweight network is
used as encoder to extract the features from different levels. The Simple Pyramid Pooling Module (SPPM) is responsible for aggregating
the global context. The Flexible and Lightweight Decoder (FLD) fuses the detail and semantic features from high level to low level and
outputs the result. Remarkably, FLD uses the Uniﬁed Attention Fusion Module (UAFM) to strengthen feature representations.
work named PP-LiteSeg. As illustrated in Figure 2, PP-
LiteSeg adopts the encode-decoder architecture and con-
sists of three novel modules: Flexible and Lightweight De-
coder (FLD), Uniﬁed Attention Fusion Module (UAFM)
and Simple Pyramid Pooling Module (SPPM). The motiva-
tions and details of these modules are introduced as follows.
The encoder in semantic segmentation models extracts
hierarchical features, and the decoder fuses and unsamples
features. For the features from low level to high level in
encoder, the number of channels increases and the spatial
size decreases, which is an efﬁcient design. For the fea-
tures from high level to low level in decoder, the spatial
size increases, while the number of channels are the same
in recent models [8, 15]. Therefore, we present a Flexible
and Lightweight Decoder (FLD), which gradually reduces
the channels and increases the spatial size for the features.
Besides, the volume of proposed decoder can be easily ad-
justed according to the encoder. The ﬂexible design bal-
ances the computation complexity of encoder and decoder,
which makes the overall model more efﬁcient.
Strengthening feature representations is a crucial way to
improve segmentation accuracy [11, 15, 25]. It is usually
achieved through fusing the low-level and high-level fea-
tures in a decoder. However, the fusion modules in exist-
ing methods usually suffer from high computation cost. In
this work, we propose a Uniﬁed Attention Fusion Module
(UAFM) to strengthen feature representations efﬁciently.
As shown in Figure 4, UAFM ﬁrst takes advantage of the
attention module to produce weight , and then fuses the
input features with . In UAFM, there are two kinds of at-
tention modules, i.e. spatial and channel attention modules,
which exploit inter-spatial and inter-channel relationships
of the input features.
Contextual aggregation is another key to promote seg-mentation accuracy, but previous aggregation modules are
time-consuming for real-time networks. Based on the
framework of PPM [29], we design a Simple Pyramid Pool-
ing Module (SPPM), which reduces the intermediate and
output channels, removes the short-cut, and replaces the
concatenate operation with an add operation. Experimental
results show SPPM contributes to the segmentation accu-
racy with low computation cost.
We evaluate the proposed PP-LiteSeg through extensive
experiments on Cityscapes and CamVid dataset. As illus-
trated in Figure 1, PP-LiteSeg achieves a superior trade-
off between segmentation accuracy and inference speed.
Speciﬁcally, PP-LiteSeg achieves 72.0% mIoU/273.6 FPS
and 77.5% mIoU/102.6 FPS on the Cityscapes test set.
Our main contributions are summarized as follows:
• We propose a Flexible and Lightweight Decoder
(FLD), which mitigates the redundancy of the decoder
and balances the computation cost of the encoder and
decoder.
• We present a Uniﬁed Attention Fusion Module
(UAFM) that utilizes channel and spatial attention to
strengthen the feature representations.
• We propose a Simple Pyramid Pooling Module
(SPPM) to aggregate global context. SPPM promotes
the segmentation accuracy with minor extra inference
time.
• Based on the above modules, we propose PP-LiteSeg,
a real-time semantic segmentation model. Extensive
experiments demonstrate our SOTA performance in
terms of accuracy and speed.
2