Vehicles 2021 ,3 449
algorithms exist with varied applicability determined by the system’s kinematics, the
environment’s dynamics, robotic computation capabilities, and sensor- and other-sourced
information availability. Algorithm performance and complexity trade-offs also depend on
the use case.
For a novice practitioner, selecting just one approach is daunting—particularly for
those individuals without a background in controls. Yet, as AVs become increasingly
widespread, engineers are forced into such roles without adequate training. This document
aims to provide a summary of commonly used foundational techniques for path planning
suitable for individuals with limited expertise in controls and seeking to identify areas of
exploration in support of new AV functionality.
We consider the applicability of algorithms in static and dynamic environmental
contexts and review common path planning algorithms used in autonomous vehicles and
robotics to serve as a primer for novice practitioners in the fast-evolving ﬁeld of autonomy.
Representative algorithms are explored, though the coverage is not exhausted and not
intended to reﬂect the state-of-the-art in AV path planning.
1. Path Planning
Path planning is a non-deterministic polynomial-time (“NP”) hard problem [ 5] with
the task of ﬁnding a continuous path connecting a system from an initial to a ﬁnal goal
conﬁguration. The complexity of the problem increases with an increase in degrees of
freedom of the system. The path to follow (the optimal path) will be decided based on a
constraints and conditions, for example, considering the shortest path between end points
or the minimum time to travel without any collisions. Sometimes constraints and goals are
mixed, for example seeking to minimize energy consumption without causing the travel
time to exceed some threshold value.
Path planning has attracted attention since the 1970s, and, in the years since, it has
been used to solve problems across ﬁelds from simple spatial route planning to the selection
of an appropriate action sequence that is required to reach a certain goal. Path planning can
be used in fully known or partially known environments, as well as in entirely unknown
environments where information is received from system-mounted sensors and update
environmental maps to inform the desired motion of the robot/AV .
Path planning algorithms are differentiated based upon available environmental
knowledge. Often, the environment is only partially known to the robot/AV . Path planning
may be either local or global. Global path planning seeks an optimal path given largely com-
plete environmental information and is best performed when the environment is static and
perfectly known to the robot. In this case, the path planning algorithm produces a complete
path from the start point to the ﬁnal end point before the robot starts following the planned
trajectory [6]. Global motion planning is the high level control for environment traversal.
By contrast, local path planning is most typically performed in unknown or dynamic
environments. Local path planning is performed while the robot is moving, taking data
from local sensors. In this case, the robot/AV has the ability to generate a new path in
response to the changes within the environment. Obstacles, if any exist, may be static
(when its position and orientation relative to a known ﬁxed coordinate frame is invariant
in time), or dynamic (when the position, orientation, or both change relative to the ﬁxed
coordinate frame) [6].
An effective path planning algorithm needs to satisfy four criteria. First, the motion
planning technique must be capable of always ﬁnding the optimal path in realistic static
environments. Second, it must be expandable to dynamic environments. Third, it must
remain compatible with and enhance the chosen self-referencing approach. Fourth, it must
minimize the complexity, data storage, and computation time [ 7]. In this paper, we present
an overview of the most frequently used path planning algorithms applicable to robots/AVs
and discuss which algorithm is the best suited for a static/dynamic environment.