Vehicles 2021 ,3 459
where giis the smallest distance from the ith segment to all the obstacles, and tis the
desired clearance distance.
Genetic operators are used to evolve plausible paths for selected parents. The selection
operator chooses the ﬁttest individuals and lets them pass their genes to the next generation.
The crossover operator selects crossover point chosen at random from the genes for each
pair of parents to be mated. The mutation operator performs the ﬂipping of some bits in
the bit string to maintain diversity. The GA produces the optimal path and takes advantage
of the GA’s optimization ability [ 66]. Al-Taharwa et al. [ 67] described how to employ the
GA approach in solving the path planning problem in a non-dynamic environment.
Their results showed that the hired method was efﬁcient in handling the path planning
problem in different static ﬁelds. The important characteristic that made GA suitable for
solving these kinds of problem is that GA is an inherently parallel search method and has
the capability to search for the optimal path in a given environment [ 66,68]. These are
useful for path planning in complex environments containing U-shaped obstacles [69].
2.6. Ant Colony Algorithm
Computer Scientists and biologists have been inspired from nature for the design of
path planning optimization algorithms. The ant colony optimization (ACO) algorithm,
which is based on a heuristic approach inspired by the collective behavior of trail-laying
ants to ﬁnd the shortest and collision-free path, is one such derivative algorithm. This
algorithm was ﬁrst proposed by Marco Dorigo in his doctoral thesis “Ant system: by colony
of cooperating agents” in 1992 [ 70] to simulate the ant foraging for food in Ant System
(AS) theory.
According to the different characteristics of the problem, a variety of algorithms have
been derived, which are probabilistic heuristic algorithms to ﬁnd the shortest path. When
ants forage for foods, they release a substance along the road, called pheromones, which
are chemical substances. The following ants will then choose a suitable route according to
the pheromone concentration left by the previous ants, and the probability of any ant to
select the path is the same. When the concentration of existing pheromone is higher, the
probability of ants to choose the path becomes higher as well.
However, the pheromone concentration becomes lower by evaporation. When the
number of searches for paths increases, the shorter path will have a higher pheromone
concentration because more ants have visited this path, while the other paths’ concentration
will be lowered because less ants visit and there is a natural evaporation of the pheromones,
which means that ants can search according to the pheromone information to move toward
a path with shorter distances [71].
However, the ACO algorithm has a simple modeling process attributed to collective
outcomes corresponding to many actions. The striking features of ACO algorithm are
positive feedback helping in discovering a goal rapidly, distributed computation avoiding
premature convergence, and greedy heuristics aiding in ﬁnding a goal in the early stages.
The algorithm [ 70] is based on pheromone deposits, which determine the probability of an
artiﬁcial ant to go from one node to another node in the path. The transition probability
from node itojis given by:
pk
ij=8
><
>:(tk
ij)a(hk
ij)b
ål2Nk
i(tk
il)a(hk
il)bifj2Nk
i
0 if j/2Nk
i(7)
where tk
ijis the pheromone level indicating the number of ants choosing the same edge as
previously, hk
ijis a heuristic indicating the closeness of the goal position, and aand bare
weights determining the importance of the pheromones and heuristics.
Based on the application, the values of a,b, and hare chosen to determine which
neighboring nodes will be selected in the path to the goal. The more pheromone is present
on a path, higher the probability for an ant to take that path. The ACO algorithm is used for