Vehicles 2021 ,3 462
Figure 5. Variants of Fireﬂy algorithm usage, adapted from [87].
The Modiﬁed Fireﬂy Algorithm (MFA) is appropriate for global path planning and
has yielded better results [ 88] as Modiﬁed Fireﬂy uses a Gaussian random walk to replace
the ﬁxed-size step of the Standard Fireﬂy Algorithm (SFA). Multiple checking methods
enhance the success of the Fireﬂy movement during the iteration process. The Modiﬁed
Fireﬂy algorithm overcomes one of the weaknesses of the conventional Fireﬂy algorithm,
which is slow convergence.
The number of iterations that are required is based on the distance between two
ﬁreﬂies and the intensity of the next brightest Fireﬂy, enabling faster convergence during
the ﬁnal stages of the search. The complexity of three-dimensional (3D) path planning
for Autonomous Underwater Vehicles (AUVs) requires optimization algorithms. The
required optimization algorithm must have a fast convergence speed. The modiﬁed Fireﬂy
algorithm overcomes the convergence slowness of the basic Fireﬂy algorithm. This is
helpful in 3D underwater planning as we can achieve faster optimization [87].
The Adaptive Fireﬂy Algorithm (AFA) was proposed [ 89] by utilizing the composite
beneﬁt of Fireﬂy Algorithm (FA) for global exploration and Temporal Difference Q-Learning
(TDQL) for local tuning of the absorption coefﬁcient. A relative comparison AFA technique
with classical FA and Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) demonstrated that the AFA
algorithm outperformed all its competitors with respect to accuracy and the run-time
required for convergence [89].
The Developed Fireﬂy Algorithm (DFA) provides a shorter path length and path
smoothness in multi-objective path planning [ 90]. In SFA, the attraction of the ﬁreﬂies is
depended by the Euclidean distance. However in DFA, the Pareto-based method (here, the
objective function is no longer a scalar value, but rather a vector) is used to estimate the
brightness of the ﬁreﬂies. By using this approach it helps to balance the optimized solution,
yielding a smooth passable path as the result.
The Fireﬂy algorithm is often used where large data sets exist and is suitable for
dynamic environments. As discussed above, the Fireﬂy algorithm is very popular in
AUVs [ 89] where a 3D optimal path is found from the start point to the destination with the
shortest path length and with collision free navigation with any obstacles in the working
space. Please see classiﬁcation in Table 7 for Fireﬂy and its variants.