Vehicles 2021 ,3 461
of tubes with varying diameters evolving with changing environmental conditions. The
advantage of SLIMO path planning is that only a partial re-growth followed by short tube
dynamics needs to be conducted to ﬁnd the optimal path automatically in response to a
dynamic environment. The application ranges from evacuation planning in uncertain or
hazardous environments to path planning for real-world infrastructure networks—e.g., the
Tokyo rail system [84].
ACO algorithm and its variants are types of parallel optimization algorithms, and
thus they have good convergence and global optimization performance. The adaptive ant
colony algorithm has a good global optimization ability, and it exhibits better optimization
performance compared to other variants of the ACO algorithm. Please see classiﬁcation in
Table 6 for ACO and its variants.
Table 6. Classiﬁcation of the ant colony algorithm and its variants based on static and dynamic
constraints.
Algorithm Static Constraints Dynamic Constraints
Ant Colony Optimization x
Slime mold based optimization x x
Improved ant colony optimization x
Adaptive ant colony x
Enhanced Ant Colony Algorithm x
Bidirectional ant colony x
2.7. Fireﬂy Algorithm
The Fireﬂy algorithm is a meta-heuristic algorithm based on Fireﬂy mating behavior.
It is a promising swarm-intelligence-based algorithm inspired by the collective behavior of
insects or animals who cooperate in order to solve complex problems. Colonies of insects
act as decentralized, self-organized systems that prevent a single insect from acting. The
algorithm is used for solving continuous and discrete optimization problems [ 85]. In order
to tackle optimization problems efﬁciently, many variants of the Fireﬂy algorithm have
been developed, see Figure 5.
The Fireﬂy algorithm works on huge data sets and can be applied on path planning.
Path planning can widely be divided into two branches: Global Path Planning [ 86] and
Local Path Planning. Global planning is done on a larger set, and calculation of the shortest
path is done from the start node to the goal node. The Local Planner begins when an
obstacle is found to move around, and this is done on previous nodes and near nodes,
which are available in the global set.