Vehicles 2021 ,3 457
Since RRT algorithms are able to cope with non-holonomic constraints, they can be
applied to almost any wheeled system. Depending on the user’s needs, they can select a
variant of RRTs [59].
RRT Connect or bi-directional RRTs combine two RRTs, one at the starting position
and a second at the goal position, connecting them using a heuristic. This approach is
suitable for problems not involving differential constraints. During each iteration, one tree
is extended, and the new vertex is connected to the nearest vertex of the other tree. Then,
each tree’s role is reversed with both the trees exploring the free conﬁguration space. This
algorithm is suitable to plan motions for a robotic arm with high degrees of freedom [60].
In Sensor-based Random Trees (SRTs), a road map of the explored area is created
with an associated Safe Region (SR) [ 61,62]. The Local Safe Area(LSR) is detected by the
sensors. Each node of the SRT consists of a free conﬁguration with associated Local Safe
Region. The safe region consists of all local safe regions. It is an estimate of the free space
surrounding the robot at a given conﬁguration. The shape of the LSR depends on the
sensor characteristics (e.g., the angular resolution) of the robot. The LSR shape can be a
ball or a star.
The tree is expanded towards randomly-selected directions such that the new conﬁgu-
ration and the path reaching towards the test robot are contained in the local safe region
of the node. During each iteration, sensor data is collected and analyzed to generate a
plausible region estimating the free space surrounding the robot at the current conﬁgu-
ration. Then, a new node containing the current conﬁguration and LSR is added to the
tree. Depending on the robot’s sensors, different perception techniques can be used. The
star-shaped LSR exploration strategy is more accurate as proven experimentally [61].
RRT* extends RRT to ﬁnd the optimal path from a start to a goal node using triangle
equality (see Figure 4). As the number of nodes increases, lower-cost (more optimal) paths
are discovered. RRT-connect is particularly useful for robotic arms, like Programmable
Universal Machine for Assembly (PUMA) robots [ 60]. The connect heuristic works most
effectively when one can expect relatively open spaces for a majority of planning queries.
The connect heuristic was originally developed with this kind of problem in mind [ 63].
Please see classiﬁcation in Table 5 for RRT and its variants.
Figure 4. Exploration of RRT*, which improves on the existing tree by rewiring the tree to form the
shortest paths [58].