Vehicles 2021 ,3 463
Table 7. Classiﬁcation of the Fireﬂy algorithm and its variants based on static and dynamic con-
straints.
Algorithm Static Constraints Dynamic Constraints
Fireﬂy x
Adaptive Fireﬂy x
Developed Fireﬂy x
Modiﬁed Fireﬂy x
3. Conclusions
Recent years have seen the rapid growth of artiﬁcial intelligence in driverless vehicles
and other automated mobile systems. As a result, the amount of research into path planning
has increased dramatically. In the last decade, many new methods of path planning have
been developed; however, it is difﬁcult to ﬁnd a comprehensive survey on the most popular
path planning algorithms suitable for the novice practitioner.
In this paper, we presented several widely used path planning algorithms and their
variants, categorized based primarily upon whether the environment in which the robot
operates is static or dynamic. In each section, we covered the methodology of all the
algorithms as well as their advantages and disadvantages, creating a comparative table
in each section for where each algorithm was suited best based on a static or dynamic
environment. The advances in computing and perception hardware have enabled us to use
complex algorithms for path planning.
As both D* Lite and Enhanced D* Lite are based on A* it could be concluded that the
added complexity tends to cost computational time [ 91]. Field D* is one such algorithm
that stands out as one of the best algorithms suited for a dynamic environment as this
is shown to decrease the computational time signiﬁcantly. This helps in the presence
of dynamic obstacles where the reaction time is very important, particularly with faster
moving dynamic obstacles.
We conclude that, for a given map the algorithm A* is a strong-performing option
for static environments because of the low memory usage, computational speed, less
implementation complexity, and efﬁciency making it suitable also for use in embedded
system deployment. One of the main limitations of bio-inspired algorithms is that they do
not have excellent results in real-time path planning as they have a possibility of becoming
stuck in local minima.
It is our hope that the reader, having witnessed a brief survey of the path planning
landscape for AVs and other mobile robotic systems, will gain an awareness of the vocabu-
lary needed and design considerations to take into account in designing, comparing, and
implementing a path planning system with particular goals and constraints.
Though not exhaustive, this coverage provides a simpliﬁed summary for these tech-
niques and their use cases and trade-offs to help readers become up-to-speed quickly such
that a system might be implemented rapidly and safely and be optimized over time. The
ﬁeld of path planning continues to grow, and we encourage readers to seek out the latest
and greatest algorithms suitable for their respective domains after reading this primer text.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, K.K., N.S. and C.D.; methodology, K.K., N.S., C.D. and
J.E.S.; investigation, K.K., N.S. and C.D.; writing—original draft preparation, K.K., N.S. and C.D.;
writing—review and editing, K.K., N.S., C.D. and J.E.S.; visualization, K.K.; supervision, J.E.S.;
project administration, J.E.S. and K.K. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of
the manuscript.
Funding: There was no external funding provided for this research.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: Not applicable.