Vehicles 2021 ,3 450
2. Path Planning Algorithms
The paper begins with Dijkstra algorithm [8]and its variants, which are commonly
used in applications, such as Google Maps [ 9] and other trafﬁc routing systems. To
overcome Dijkstra’s computational-intensity doing blind searches, A* [10] and its variants
are presented as state of the art algorithms for use within static environments.
However, A* and A* re-planner are used for shortest path evaluation based on the
information regarding the obstacles present in the environment, and the shortest path evalu-
ation for the known static environment is a two-level problem, which comprises a selection
of feasible node pairs and shortest path evaluation based on the obtained feasible node
pairs [ 11]. Both of the above mentioned criteria are not available in a dynamic environment,
which makes the algorithm inefﬁcient and impractical in dynamic environments.
To support path planning in dynamic environments, D* [12] and its variants are
discussed as efﬁcient tools for quick re-planning in cluttered environments. As D* and its
variants do not guarantee solution quality in large dynamic environments, we also explore
Rapidly-exploring Random Trees (RRTs) [13] and a hybrid approach combining Relaxed
A* ( RA*) [14] and one meta-heuristic algorithm. The hybrid approach comprises two
phases: the initialization of the algorithm using RA* and a post-optimization phase using
one heuristic method that improves the quality of solution found in the previous phase.
Three meta-heuristic algorithms are also discussed: namely, the Genetic, Ant colony, and
Fireﬂy algorithms. These are aimed at providing effective features in pursuit of a hybrid
approach to path planning.
We chose these algorithms because they represent the foundational algorithms used
within contemporary real time path planning solutions. Novel research builds on these
algorithms to ﬁnd additional performance and efﬁciency. The list of covered algorithms
is, therefore, not exhaustive, but provides coverage of several common algorithms used
in the context of path planning for autonomous vehicles and robotic systems. Other path
planning algorithms are discussed in [15].
2.1. Dijkstra Algorithm
The Dijkstra algorithm works by solving sub-problems computing the shortest path
from the source to vertices among the closest vertices to the source [ 8]. It ﬁnds the next
closest vertex by maintaining the new vertices in a priority-min queue and stores only one
intermediate node so that only one shortest path can be found.
Dijkstra ﬁnds the shortest path in an acyclic environment and can calculate the shortest
path from starting point to every point. We ﬁnd many versions of Improved Dijkstra’s
algorithm, this is based on speciﬁc applications we ﬁnd around us. Every Improved
Dijkstra’s algorithm is different, to reﬂect the diversity of use cases and applications for the
same. Variants of the improved Dijkstra’s algorithm are discussed in this article.
The traditional Dijkstra algorithm relies upon a greedy strategy for path planning. It
is used to ﬁnd the shortest path in a graph. It is concerned with the shortest path solution
without formal attention to the pragmatism of the solution. The modiﬁed Dijkstra’s
algorithm aims to ﬁnd alternate routes in situations where the costs of generating plausible
shortest paths are signiﬁcant. This modiﬁed algorithm introduces another component to
the classical algorithm in the form of probabilities that deﬁne the status of freedom along
each edge of the graph [ 16]. This technique helps to overcome computational shortcomings
in the reference algorithm, supporting its use in novel applications.
Another improved Dijkstra algorithm reserves all nodes with the same distance from
the source node as intermediate nodes, and then searches again from all the intermediate
nodes until traversing successfully through to the goal node, see Figure 1. Through iteration,
all possible shortest paths are found [17] and may then be evaluated.