and variance, maintaining in particular a constant vari-
ance due to training set sampling with both network width
and depth [ 31]. For end-to-end driving, the choice of ar-
chitecture has been mostly limited to small networks so
far [8,12,37] to avoid overﬁtting on limited datasets. In
contrast, we notice that bigger models have better general-
ization performance on learning reactions to dynamic ob-
jects and trafﬁc lights in complex urban environments.
Speed Prediction Regularization. To cope with the
inertia problem without an explicit mapping of potential
causes or on-policy interventions, we jointly train a senso-
rimotor controller with a network that predicts the ego ve-
hicle’s speed. Both neural networks share the same repre-
sentation via our ResNet perception backbone. Intuitively,
what happens is that this joint optimization enforces the
perception module to have speed related features into the
learned representation. This reduces the dependency on in-
put speed as the only way to get dynamics of the scene,
leveraging instead visual cues that are predictive of the car’s
velocity (e.g., free space, curves, trafﬁc light states, etc).
Other changes. We use L1 as loss function ℓinstead
of the mean squared error (MSE), as it is more correlated
to driving performance [ 11]. As our NoCrash benchmark
consists of complex realistic driving conditions in the pres-
ence of dynamic agents, we collect demonstrations from an
expert game AI using privileged information to drive cor-
rectly (i.e. always respecting rules of the road and not crash-
ing into any obstacle). Robustness to heavy noise in the
demonstrations is beyond the scope of our work, as we aim
to explore limitations of behavior cloning methods in spite
ofgood demonstrations. Finally, we pre-trained our percep-
tion backbone on ImageNet to reduce initialization variance
and beneﬁt from generic transfer learning, a standard prac-
tice in deep learning seldom explored for behavior cloning.
4. Evaluation
In this section we discuss the simulated environment we
use, CARLA, and review the original CARLA benchmark.
Due to its limitations, we propose a new benchmark, called
NoCrash , that tries to better evaluate driving controllers re-
action to dynamic objects. This new benchmark, thanks to
its complexity, allows further analysis on limitations of be-
havior cloning and other policy learning methods.
4.1. Simulated Environment
We use the CARLA simulator [ 14] version 0.8.4. The
CARLA environment is divided in two different towns.
Town 01 contains 2.9 km of drivable roads in a suburban
environment. Town 02 is approximately 1.4 km of drivable
roads, also in a suburban environment.
The CARLA environment may contain dynamic obsta-
cles that interact with the ego car. Pedestrians, for instance,might cross the road on random occasions without any ap-
parent previous notice. This action forces the ego car to
promptly react. The CARLA environment also contains a
diversity of car brands that cruise at different speeds. Over-
all it provides a diverse, photo-realistic, and dynamic envi-
ronment with challenging driving conditions (cf. Figure 1).
The original CARLA benchmark [ 14] evaluates driving
controllers on several goal directed tasks of increasing dif-
ﬁculty. Three of the tasks consist of navigation in an empty
town and one of them in a town with a small number of
dynamic objects. Each task is tested in four different condi-
tions increasingly different from the training environment.
The conditions are: same as training, new weather condi-
tions that are derivatives from those seen during training,
and a new town that has different buildings and different
shadow patterns. Note that the biggest generalization test is
the combination of new weather and new town.
The goal directed tasks are evaluated based on success
rate. If the agent reaches the goal regardless of what hap-
pened during the episode, this episode is considered a suc-
cess. The collisions and other infractions are considered
and the average number of kilometers between infractions
is measured. This evaluation induces the benchmark to be
mainly focused on problems of a static nature. These prob-
lems consider the environmental conditions and the static
objects of the world like buildings and trees. Thus, the orig-
inal CARLA benchmark mostly evaluates skills such as lane
keeping and performing 90 degrees turns.
4.2. NoCrash Benchmark
We propose a new larger scale CARLA driving bench-
mark, called NoCrash , designed to test the ability of ego
vehicles to handle complex events caused by changing traf-
ﬁc conditions (e.g., trafﬁc lights) and dynamic agents in the
scene. For this benchmark, we propose different tasks and
metrics than the original CARLA benchmark [ 14] to pre-
cisely measure speciﬁc reaction patterns that we know good
drivers must master in urban conditions.
We propose three different tasks, each one corresponding
to 25 goal directed episodes. In each episode, the agent
starts at a random position and is directed by a high-level
planner into reaching some goal position. The three tasks
have the same set of start and end positions, as well as an
increasing level of difﬁculty as follows:
1. Empty Town: no dynamic objects.
2. Regular Trafﬁc: moderate number of cars and pedes-
trians.
3. Dense Trafﬁc: large number of pedestrians and heavy
trafﬁc (dense urban scenario).
Similar to the CARLA Benchmark, NoCrash has six dif-
ferent weather conditions, where four were seen in train-
9332