andai=π∗(xi)are the resulting vehicle actions (low-level
controls). Observations oi={i,vm}contain a single im-
ageiand the ego car speed vm[12] added for the system to
properly react to dynamic objects on the road. Without the
speed context, the model cannot learn if and when it should
accelerate or brake to reach a desired speed or stop.
We want to learn a policy πparametrized by θto produce
similar actions to π∗based only on observations oand high-
level commands c. The best parameters θ∗are obtained by
minimizing an imitation cost ℓ:
θ∗= argmin
θ/summationdisplay
iℓ/parenleftbig
π(oi,ci;θ),ai/parenrightbig
. (1)
In order to evaluate the performance of the learned policy
π(oi,ci;θ)on-line at test time, we assume access to a score
function giving a numeric value expressing the performance
of the policy πon a given benchmark (cf. section 4).
3.2. Limitations
In addition to the distributional shift problem [ 35], be-
havior cloning presents some key limitations.
Bias in Naturalistic Driving Datasets. The appeal of
behavior cloning lies in its simplicity and theoretical scal-
ability, as it can indeed learn by imitation from large off-
line collected demonstrations (e.g., using driving logs from
manually driven production vehicles). It is, however, sus-
ceptible to dataset biases like all learning methods. This
is exacerbated in the case of imitation learning of driving
policies, as most of real-world driving consists in either a
few simple behaviors or a heavy tail of complex reactions
to rare events. Consequently, this can result in performance
degrading as more data is collected, because the diversity of
the dataset does not grow fast enough compared to the main
mode of demonstrations. This phenomenon was not clearly
measured before. Using our new NoCrash benchmark (sec-
tion4), we conﬁrm it may happen in practice.
Causal Confusion. Related to dataset bias, end-to-end
behavior cloning can suffer from causal confusion [ 16]:
spurious correlations cannot be distinguished from true
causes in observed training demonstration patterns unless
an explicit causal model or on-policy demonstrations are
used. Our new NoCrash benchmark conﬁrms the theoretical
observation and toy experiments of [ 16] in realistic driving
conditions. In particular, we identify a typical failure mode
due to a subtle dataset bias: the inertia problem . When the
ego vehicle is stopped (e.g., at a red trafﬁc light), the prob-
ability it stays static is indeed overwhelming in the training
data. This creates a spurious correlation between low speed
and no acceleration, inducing excessive stopping and difﬁ-
cult restarting in the imitative policy. Although mediated
perception approaches that explicitly model causal signals
like trafﬁc lights do not suffer from this theoretical limi-
tation, they still under-perform end-to-end learning in un-
Figure 2. Our proposed network architecture, called CILRS, for
end-to-end urban driving based on CIL [ 12]. A ResNet perception
module processes an input image to a latent space followed by two
prediction heads: one for controls and one for speed.
constrained environments, because not all causes might be
modeled (e.g., some potential obstacles) and errors at the
perception layer (e.g., missed detections) are irrecoverable.
High variance. With a ﬁxed off-policy training dataset,
one would expect CIL to always learn the same policy in
different runs of the training phase. However, the cost func-
tion is optimized via Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD),
which assumes the data is independent and identically dis-
tributed [ 9]. When training a reactive policy on snapshots of
longer human demonstrations included in the training data,
the i.i.d. assumption does not hold. Consequently, we might
observe a high sensitivity to the initialization and the order
in which the samples are seen during training. We conﬁrm
this in our experiments, ﬁnding an overall high variance due
to both initialization and sampling order, following the de-
composition in [ 31]:
Var(π) =ED/bracketleftbig
VarI(π|D)/bracketrightbig
+VarD/parenleftbig
EI[π|D]/parenrightbig
,(2)
whereIdenotes the randomness in initialization. Because
the policy πis evaluated on-line in simulated environments,
we evaluate in practice the variance of the score on the test
benchmark, and report results when freezing the initializa-
tion and/or varying the sampling order for different training
datasetsD(including of varying sizes).
3.3. Model
In order to explore the aforementioned limitations of be-
havior cloning, we propose a robustiﬁed CIL model de-
signed to improve on [ 12] while remaining strictly off-
policy. Our network architecture, called CILRS, is shown
in Figure 2. We describe our enhancements below.
Deeper Residual Architecture. We use a ResNet34
architecture [ 17] for the perception backbone P(i). In
the presence of large amounts of data, using deeper ar-
chitectures can be an effective strategy to improve per-
formance [ 17]. In particular, it can reduce both bias
9331