Figure 3. Due to biases in the data, the results may get either saturated or worse with increasing amounts of training data.
lem. Figure 5shows the percentage of successes for the
New Weather & Town conditions on different tasks with
and without speed prediction. We observe that the speed
prediction branch can substantially improve the success rate
thanks to its regularization effect. It is, however, not a ﬁnal
solution to this problem, as we still observe instances of the
inertia problem after using this approach.
High Variance. Repeatability of the training process is
crucial for enhancing trust in end-to-end models. Unfortu-
nately, we can still see drastic changes in the learned pol-
icy performance due to the variance caused by initialization
and data sampling (cf. Section 3.2). Figure 6compares the
cause of episode termination for two models where the only
difference is the random seed during training. The Model
S1 has a much higher chance of ending episodes due to ve-
hicle collisions. Qualitatively, it seemed to have learned a
less general braking policy and was more prone to rear-end
collisions with other vehicles. On the other hand, Model S2
is able to complete more episodes and is less likely to fail
due to vehicle crashes. However, we can see that it times
out more, showing a tendency to stop a lot, even in non
threatening situations. This can be seen by analyzing the
histograms of the throttle applied by both models during the
benchmark, as shown in Figure 7. We can see a tendency
for throttles of higher magnitude on Model S1.
As off-policy imitation learning uses a static dataset for
training, this randomness comes from the order in which
training data is sampled and the initialization of the random
weights. This can possibly deﬁne which minima the mod-
els converge to. Table 3quantiﬁes the effect of initialization
on the success rate of driving tasks by computing the vari-
ance expressed in Equation 2. The expected policy score
was computed by averaging twelve different training runs.
We also consider the variance with and without ImageNet
initialization. We can see that the success rate can change
by up to 42% for tasks with dynamic objects. ImageNet
initialization tends to reduce the training variability, mainly
due to smaller randomness on initialization but also due to
a more stable learned policy.Task Variance
CILRSEmpty 23%
Regular 26%
Dense 42%
CILRS (ImageNet)Empty 4%
Regular 12%
Dense 38%
Table 3. Estimated variance of the success rate of CILRS on
NoCrash computed by training 12 times the same model with dif-
ferent random seeds. The variance is reduced by ﬁxing part of the
initial weights with ImageNet pre-training.
6. Conclusion
Our new driving dataset (CARLA100), benchmark
(NoCrash ), and end-to-end sensorimotor architecture
(CILRS) indicate that behavior cloning on large scale off-
policy demonstration datasets can vastly improve over the
state of the art in terms of generalization performance,
including when comparing to mediated perception ap-
proaches with additional supervision. This is thanks to us-
ing a deeper residual architecture with an additional speed
prediction target and good regularization.
Nonetheless, our extensive experimental analysis has
shown that some big challenges remain open. First of all,
the amount of dynamic objects in the scene directly hurts
all policy learning methods, as multi-agent dynamics are
not directly captured. Second, the self-supervised nature
of behavior cloning enables it to scale to large datasets of
demonstrations, but with diminishing returns (or worse) due
to driving-speciﬁc dataset biases that require explicit treat-
ment, in particular biases that create causal confusion (e.g.,
the inertia problem). Existing mitigation strategies cur-
rently need more informative intermediate representations,
either learned [ 3] or using strong domain knowledge [ 5].
Third, the large variance resulting from initialization and
sampling order indicates that multiple runs on the same off-
9335