ing and two reserved for testing. It also has two differ-
ent towns, one that is seen during training, and the other
reserved for testing. For more details about the bench-
mark conﬁguration, please refer to the supplementary ma-
terial. As mentioned above, the measure of success of an
episode should be more representative of the agent capa-
bilities to react to dynamic objects. The original CARLA
benchmark [ 14] has a goal conditioned success rate met-
ric that is computed separately from a kilometers between
infractions metric. The latter metric was proposed to be
analogous to the one commonly used by real-world driv-
ing evaluations where the number of human interventions
per kilometer is counted [ 20]. These interventions usually
happen when the safety driver notices some inconsistent be-
havior that would lead the vehicle to a possibly dangerous
state. On a potentially inconsistent behavior, the human in-
tervention will put the vehicle back to a safe state. However,
in the CARLA benchmark analysis, when an infraction is
made, the episode continues after the infraction, leading to
some inaccuracy in infraction counting. An example of in-
accuracy includes whether a crash after leaving the road be
counted as one or two infractions.
InNoCrash , instead of counting the number of infrac-
tions per kilometer, we end the episode as failing when any
collision bigger than a ﬁxed magnitude happens. With this
limitation, we are setting a lower bound and have a guaran-
tee of acceptable behaviors based on the measured percent-
age of success. Furthermore, this makes the evaluation even
more similar to the km/interventions evaluation used in real
world, since a new episode always sends the agent back to
a safe starting state. In summary, we consider an episode
to be successful if the agent reaches a certain goal under a
time limit without colliding with any object. We also care
about the ability of the agent to obey trafﬁc rules. In par-
ticular, we measure and report the percentage of trafﬁc light
violations in Supplementary material. Note that an episode
is not terminated when a trafﬁc light violation occurs unless
they are followed by a collision.
5. Experiments
In this section we detail our protocol for model training
and brieﬂy show that it is competitive with the state of the
art. We also explore several corner cases to explore the lim-
itations of the behavior cloning approach.
5.1. Training Details
First, we collected more than 400 hours of realistic sim-
ulated driving data from a single town of the CARLA en-
vironment using more than 200 GPU-days. We used an ex-
pert driving AI agent that leverages privileged information
about the scene to drive naturally and well in complex con-
ditions. After automatically ﬁltering the data for simulation
failures, duplicates, and edge cases using simple rules, webuilt a dataset of 100 hours of driving, called CARLA100.
To enable running a wide range of experiments, we train
all methods using a subset of 10 hours of expert demon-
strations by default. We also report larger scale training
experiments and scalability analyses in Section 5.3and in
supplementary material. One of the major differences of
the training dataset, when compared to CIL, is that stopping
for red trafﬁc lights is considered on the demonstrator data.
More details about the dataset are given in the supplemen-
tary material.
Training controllers on this dataset, we found that aug-
mentation was not as crucial as reported by previous works
[12,26]. The only regularization we found important for
performance was using a 50% dropout rate [ 41] after the
last convolutional layer. Any larger dropout led us to under-
ﬁtting models. All models were trained using Adam [ 21]
with minibatches of 120samples and an initial learning rate
of0.0002 . At each iteration, a minibatch is sampled ran-
domly from the entire dataset and presented to the network
for training. If we detect that the training error has not de-
creased for over 1,000iterations we divide the learning rate
by 10. We used a 2 hours validation dataset to discover
when to stop the training process. We validate every 20k
iterations and if the validation error increases for three iter-
ations we stop the training process and use this checkpoint
to test on the benchmarks, both CARLA and NoCrash . We
build a validation dataset as described in [ 11].
5.2. Comparison with the state of the art
We compare our results using both the original CARLA
benchmark from [ 14] and our proposed NoCrash bench-
mark. We compare two versions of our method: “CILRS”
(our CIL extension with a ResNet architecture and speed
prediction, as described in section 3), and a version without
the speed prediction branch noted “CILR”. We compare our
method with the original CIL from [ 12] and three state-of-
the-art approaches: CAL [ 37], MT [ 26], and CIRL [ 27]. In
contrast to end-to-end behavior cloning, these methods en-
force some modularization that require extra information at
training time, such as affordances (CAL), semantic segmen-
tation (MT), or extra on-policy interaction with the environ-
ment (CIRL). Our approach only requires a ﬁxed off-policy
dataset of demonstrations.
We show results on the original CARLA benchmark [ 14]
in Table 1and results on our proposed NoCrash benchmark
in Table 2. While most methods perform well in most con-
ditions on the original CARLA benchmark, they all perform
signiﬁcantly worse on NoCrash , especially when trying to
generalize to new conditions. This conﬁrms the usefulness
ofNoCrash in terms of exploring the limitations of driving
policy learning due to its more challenging nature.
In addition, our proposed CILRS model signiﬁcantly im-
proves over the state of the art, e.g., +9% and+26% on
9333