AAMAS’20, May 2020, Auckland, New Zealand Chris Nota and Philip S. Thomas
Figure 2: An example where the fixed point of ∇J?(θ)is op-
timal with respect to the discounted objective but pessimal
with respect to the undiscounted objective. The agent starts
in state s1, and can achieve a reward of +1by transitioning
from s1tos2, and a reward of +2by transitioning from s6to
s7, regardless of the action taken. In order to maximize the
undiscounted return, the agent should choose a2. However,
the discounted return is higher from choosing a1. Only the
return in s1will affect the policy gradient as the advantage is
zero in every other state. Thus, algorithms following ∇J?(θ)
methods will eventually choose a1. If the researcher is con-
cerned with the undiscounted objective, as is often the case,
this result is problematic. Choosing a larger value of γtriv-
ially fixes the problem in this particular example, but for
any value of γ<1, similar problems will arise given a suffi-
ciently long horizon, and thus the problem is not truly elim-
inated. Nevertheless, this is well-understood as the trade-off
of discounting.
Figure 3: An example where the fixed point of ∇J?(θ)is pes-
simal with respect to both the discounted and undiscounted
objectives. In this formulation, there is a single policy pa-
rameter,θ, so the agent must execute the same policy in ev-
ery state. It is difficult to justify any solution other than to
always choose a1. If the agent is completely myopic, then
a1gives the superior immediate reward of +1in the start-
ing state. If the agent is somewhat farther-sighted, then al-
ways choosing a1will eventually result in the +100reward.
Choosing a2provides no benefit with respect to either view.
Following∇J?(θ), however, will result in a policy that al-
ways chooses a2. This results from the fact that the advan-
tage of a2in state s2is greater than the advantage of a1in
state s1, while the advantages in states s3ands5are zero. Be-
cause∇J?(θ)ignores the change in the state distribution, the
net update always increases the probability of choosing a2.
Again, while we chose γ=0for simplicity, similar examples
can be produced in long-horizon problems with “reasonable”
settings of γ, such as 0.99or higher. One may ask if the shar-
ing of a policy between states is contrived, but such a situ-
ation occurs reliably under partial observability or when a
function approximator is used.algorithms and their associated papers. We show that the majority
of them include erroneous or misleading statements directly relat-
ing to arguments made in this paper. We emphasize that we do not
pose this as a criticism of the authors, but rather a symptom of the
ambiguity in the literature that we hope to address with this paper.
6.1 Methodology
Rather than manually selecting which papers to review, which may
have introduced an unacceptable degree of bias, we chose to review
the papers associated with every policy gradient algorithm included
instable-baselines [9], a fork of the popular OpenAI baselines
[5] library. We chose this particular subset of algorithms because
inclusion in the library generally indicates that the algorithms have
achieved a certain level of popularity and relevance. The papers
corresponding to these algorithms have received hundreds or thou-
sands of citations each, and, with the exception of PPO [ 18], were
published at top machine learning conferences. It therefore seems
reasonable to claim that the papers were impactful in the field and
are representative of high-quality research. While we acknowledge
that this sampling of algorithms is heavily biased towards the sub-
field of “deep” RL, we argue that this is not unreasonable given the
immense popularity of this area and its impact on the broader field.
For each algorithm, we examined the psuedocode for the algo-
rithm itself, the background and theoretical sections of the associ-
ated paper, and several publicly available implementations, includ-
ing the implementation created by the authors where available. We
tried to answer the following three questions for each algorithm:
(1)Does the algorithm use ∇J?(θ)rather than an unbiased esti-
mator?
(2)If so, did the authors note that ∇J?(θ)is not an unbiased
estimator of the policy gradient?
(3)Did the paper include any erroneous or misleading claims
about∇J?(θ)?
For questions (2) and (3), we support our evaluation of the papers
with quotations from the text in cases where there were errors or
ambiguities. While this approach is verbose, we felt that paraphras-
ing the original papers would not allow the readers understand
the errors in their appropriate context. For 5 out of 8 of the algo-
rithms,2the original authors or organizations provided code, allow-
ing us to directly answer (1). For all eight papers, we examined the
stable-baselines [9] implementation as well as several other im-
plementations including tf-agents [20],garage [7],spinning-up
[1], and the autonomous-learning-library [14]. Finally, for each
paper we note the conference, year, and citation count estimated
by Google Scholar on February 23, 2020.
6.2 Results
Eight policy gradient algorithms are included in stable-baselines .
Our high-level results to each question are as follows:
(1)All eight of the algorithms use ∇J?(θ)instead of an unbiased
estimator, both in their psuedocode and implementations.
(2)Only oneout of the eight papers calls attention to the fact
that∇J?(θ)is a biased estimator.
2ACKTR, PPO, TD3, TRPO, and SAC