Is the Policy Gradient a Gradient?
Chris Nota
College of Information and Computer Sciences
University of Massachusetts Amherst
cnota@cs.umass.eduPhilip S. Thomas
College of Information and Computer Sciences
University of Massachusetts Amherst
pthomas@cs.umass.edu
ABSTRACT
The policy gradient theorem describes the gradient of the expected
discounted return with respect to an agent’s policy parameters.
However, most policy gradient methods drop the discount factor
from the state distribution and therefore do not optimize the dis-
counted objective. What do they optimize instead? This has been an
open question for several years, and this lack of theoretical clarity
has lead to an abundance of misstatements in the literature. We
answer this question by proving that the update direction approxi-
mated by most methods is not the gradient of any function. Further,
we argue that algorithms that follow this direction are not guar-
anteed to converge to a “reasonable” fixed point by constructing a
counterexample wherein the fixed point is globally pessimal with
respect to both the discounted and undiscounted objectives. We
motivate this work by surveying the literature and showing that
there remains a widespread misunderstanding regarding discounted
policy gradient methods, with errors present even in highly-cited
papers published at top conferences.
1 INTRODUCTION
Reinforcement learning (RL) is a subfield of machine learning in
which computational agents learn to maximize a numerical reward
signal through interaction with their environment. Policy gradient
methods encode an agent’s behavior as a parameterized stochastic
policy and update the policy parameters according to an estimate
of the gradient of the expected sum of rewards (the expected re-
turn) with respect to those parameters. In practice, estimating the
effect of a particular action on rewards received far in the future
can be difficult, so almost all state-of-the-art implementations in-
stead consider an exponentially discounted sum of rewards (the
discounted return), which shortens the effective horizon considered
when selecting actions. The policy gradient theorem [25] describes
the appropriate update direction for this discounted setting. How-
ever, almost all modern policy gradient algorithms deviate from
the original theorem by dropping one of the two instances of the
discount factor that appears in the theorem. It has been an open
question for several years as to whether these algorithms are un-
biased with respect to a different, related objective [ 26]. In this
paper, we answer this question and prove that most policy gradient
algorithms, including state-of-the-art algorithms, do not follow the
gradient of anyfunction. Further, we show that for some tasks, the
fixed point of the update direction followed by these algorithms
Proc. of the 19th International Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems
(AAMAS 2020), B. An, N. Yorke-Smith, A. El Fallah Seghrouchni, G. Sukthankar (eds.),
May 2020, Auckland, New Zealand
©2020 International Foundation for Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems
(www.ifaamas.org). All rights reserved.is pessimal, regardless of whether the discounted or undiscounted
objective is considered.
The analysis in this paper applies to nearly all state-of-the-art
policy gradient methods. In Section 6, we review all of the policy
gradient algorithms included in the popular stable-baselines
repository [ 9] and their associated papers, including A2C/A3C [ 13],
ACER [ 28], ACKTR [ 30], DDPG [ 11], PPO [ 18], TD3 [ 6], TRPO [ 16],
and SAC [ 8]. We motivate this choice in Section 6, but we note
that all of these papers were published at top conferences1and
have received hundreds or thousands of citations. We found that
all of the implementations of the algorithms used the “incorrect”
policy gradient that we discuss in this paper. While this is a valid
algorithmic choice if properly acknowledged, we found that only
oneof the eight papers acknowledged this choice, while three of
the papers made erroneous claims regarding the discounted policy
gradient and others made claims that were misleading. The purpose
of identifying these errors is not to criticize the authors or the algo-
rithms, but to draw attention to the fact that confusion regarding
the behavior of policy gradient algorithm exists at the very core of
the RL community and has gone largely unnoticed by reviewers.
This has led to a proliferation of errors in the literature. We hope
that by providing definitive answers to the questions associated
with these errors we are able to improve the technical precision
of the literature and contribute to the development of a better the-
oretical understanding of the behavior of reinforcement learning
algorithms.
2 NOTATION
RL agents learn through interactions with an environment. An
environment is expressed mathematically as a Markov decision
process (MDP). An MDP is a tuple, (S,A,P,R,d0,γ), whereSis
the set of possible states of the environment, Ais the set of actions
available to the agent, P:S×A×S → [ 0,1]is a transition
function that determines the probability of transitioning between
states given an action, R:S×A→[− Rmax,Rmax]is the expected
reward from taking an action in a particular state, bounded by
some Rmax∈R,d0:S→[ 0,1]is the initial state distribution ,
andγ∈[0,1]is the discount factor which decreases the utility of
rewards received in the future. In the episodic setting , interactions
with the environment are broken into independent episodes . Each
episode is further broken into individual timesteps . At each timestep,
t, the agent observes a state, St, takes an action, At, transitions to
a new state, St+1, and receives a reward, Rt. Each episode begins
with t=0and ends when the agent enters a special state called
theterminal absorbing state ,s∞. Once s∞is entered, the agent can
never leave and receives a reward of 0 forever. We assume that
1ICML, NeurIPS, or ICLR, with the exception of PPO, which appears to have been
published only on arXiv.arXiv:1906.07073v2  [cs.LG]  27 Feb 2020