Is the Policy Gradient a Gradient? AAMAS’20, May 2020, Auckland, New Zealand
(3)Three out of the eight papers included claims that are clearly
erroneous. Two additional papers made misleading claims in
that they presented the discounted policy gradient ( ∇Jγ(θ)),
and then proposed an algorithm that uses ∇J?(θ), without
making note of this discrepancy. A sixth paper included
claims that we argue are misleading, but not strictly false.
We reproduce the three explicitly erroneous claims below in order
to give the reader a sense of common misunderstandings. Notice
that the quotations sometimes use slightly different notation than
this paper. We try to supply the appropriate context such that the
meaning intended by the authors can be understood. Additional
analysis can be found in the appendix.
A3C (ICML 2016, 2859 citations)
Asynchronous Advantage Actor-Critic (A3C) [ 13] is an actor-critic
method that generates sample batches by running multiple actors
in parallel. The original version of the algorithm achieved state-of-
the-art performance on many Atari games when it was published.
The background section of the main paper includes the text:
The return Rt=Í∞
k=0γkrt+kis the total accumu-
lated return from time step twith discount factor
γ∈(0,1]. The goal of the agent is to maximize the
expected return from each state st.
[. . . ]
In contrast to value-based methods, policy based meth-
ods directly parameterize the policy π(a|s;θ)and up-
date the parameters θby performing, typically approx-
imate, gradient ascent on E[Rt]. One example of such
a method is the REINFORCE family of algorithms due
to Williams [29]. Standard REINFORCE updates the
policy parameters θin the direction∇θlogπ(at|st;θ)Rt,
which is an unbiased estimate of ∇θE[Rt]. It is possi-
ble to reduce the variance of this estimate while keep-
ing unbiased by subtracting a learned function of the
state bt(st), known as a baseline [ 29], from the return.
The resulting gradient is ∇θlog(at|st;θ)(Rt−bt(st)).
It is falsely claimed that ∇θπ(at|st;θ)Rt(which is an unbiased
sample estimate of ∇J?(θ)) is an unbiased estimate of ∇θE[Rt],
where Rtis the discounted return at timestep trather than the
individual reward. We showed that this is not the case.
ACKTR (ICLR 2017, 235 citations)
Actor Critic using Kronecker-Factored Trust Region (ACKTR) [ 30]
is a variation of A3C that attempts to efficiently estimate the natural
policy gradient, which uses an alternate notion of the direction
of steepest ascent. The resulting algorithm is considerably more
sample efficient than A3C. The background section contains:
The goal of the agent is to maximize the expected
γ-discounted cumulative return J(θ)=Eπ[Rt]=
Eπ[Í∞
i≥0γir(st+i,at+i)]with respect to the policy
parameters θ. Policy gradient methods directly pa-
rameterize a policy πθ(a|st)and update parameter θ
so as to maximize the objective J(θ). In its general
form [17], the policy gradient is defined as:∇θJ(θ)=Eπ"∞Õ
t=0Ψt∇θlogπθ(at|st)#
,
where Ψtis often chosen to be the advantage function
Aπ(st,at), which provides a relative measure of value
of each action atat a given state st.
The authors assert that the gradient, ∇θJ(θ), is equal to the given
expression, which is false for the proposed choice of Aπ(st,at).
They did not note that above expression is an approximation or
otherwise clarify. Therefore, the definition of the policy gradient
presented above is erroneous.
SAC (ICML 2018, 446 citations)
Soft Actor-Critic (SAC) [ 8] is an algorithm in the deterministic pol-
icy gradient family [ 21]. The deterministic policy gradient gives an
expression for updating the parameters of a deterministic policy and
is derived from the conventional policy gradient theorem, meaning
that the arguments presented in this paper apply. SAC is considered
state-of-the-art on continuous control tasks. The appendix states:
The exact definition of the discounted maximum en-
tropy objective is complicated by the fact that, when
using a discount factor for policy gradient methods,
we typically do not discount the state distribution,
only the rewards. In that sense, discounted policy gra-
dients typically do not optimize the true discounted
objective. Instead, they optimize average reward, with
the discount serving to reduce variance, as discussed
by Thomas [26].
The relationship between the average reward objective and ∇J?(θ)
was discussed by Kakade [10]and elaborated on by Thomas [26].
However, the claim that ∇J?(θ)optimizes the average reward ob-
jective is erroneous by Theorem 4.4.
6.3 Discussion
The three erroneous claims all involved misinterpreting ∇J?(θ)
as the gradient of some function. Two of the remaining papers
failed to acknowledge the difference between the gradient of the
discounted objective, ∇Jγ(θ), and the gradient direction followed
by the presented algorithm, typically an estimate of ∇J?(θ). Even
among the papers where we did not find explicit errors, errors were
avoided largely through the use of hedged language and ambiguity,
rather than technical precision. For examples of this, we encourage
the reader to refer to the appendix. While for the purposes of this
review we only sampled a small subset of the literature on policy
gradients, we found the results sufficient to support our claim that
there exists a widespread misunderstanding regarding ∇J?(θ).
7 CONCLUSIONS
We conclude by emphasizing the while ∇J?(θ)is not a gradient
(Section 4), can in some cases result in pessimal behavior (Section
5), and is commonly misrepresented in the literature (Section 6), it
has remained the most popular estimator of the policy gradient due
to its effectiveness when applied to practical problems. The pre-
cise reason for this effectiveness, especially in the episodic setting,
remains an open question.