Is the Policy Gradient a Gradient? AAMAS’20, May 2020, Auckland, New Zealand
Then:
∇J?(θ)=Õ
s∈Sdθ
γ(s)∂
∂θVθ
γ(s).
Proof. See appendix. □
In this form, we begin to see the root of the issue: In the above
expression, dθγ(s)is not differentiated, meaning that ∇J?(θ)does
not consider the effect updates to θhave on the state distribution.
We will show that this is in fact the source of the asymmetry in
∇2J?(θ). With this in mind, we present our main theorem.
Theorem 4.4. LetMbe the set of all MDPs with rewards bounded
by[−Rmax,Rmax]satisfying ∀π:Í∞
t=0Pr(St,s∞)<∞. Then, for
allγ<1:
¬∃J?:∀M∈M :∇J?(θ)=E"∞Õ
t=0ψθ(St,At)Qθ
γ(St,At)θ#
.
Proof. Theorem 4.1 states that if J?is a twice continuously
differentiable function, then its second derivative is symmetric. It
is easy to show that this is not true informally using Lemma 4.3:
∂2J?(θ)
∂θi∂θj=∂
∂θi Õ
s∈Sdθ
γ(s)∂
∂θjVθ
γ(s)!
=Õ
s∈Sdθ
γ(s)∂2
∂θi∂θjVθ
γ(s)
|                       {z                       }
symmetric+Õ
s∈S∂
∂θidθ
γ(s)∂
∂θjVθ
γ(s)
|                        {z                        }
asymmetric.
Therefore, we have by Corollary 4.2 that so long as ∇2J?(θ)is
continuous, J?does not exist. In order to rigorously complete the
proof, we must provide as a counterexample an MDP for which the
above asymmetry is present. We provide such a counterexample in
Figure 1. While we defer the full proof to the appendix, we describe
the intuition behind the counterexample below.
Assume that for the example given in Figure 1, J?exists and
∇J?(θ)is its gradient. Consider in particular the case where γ=0.
In this case,∇2J?(θ)is asymmetric because θ1affects the value
function andthe state distribution, whereas θ2affects the value
function but not the state distribution. Therefore, the second term
in∂2J?(θ)/∂θi∂θj(labeled “asymmetric” in the above equation) is
non-zero when i=1andj=2, and zero when i=2andj=1. In
the appendix, we show that the above expression is symmetric if
and only if γ=1. Therefore, for γ<1, Corollary 4.2 applies and we
may conclude that J?either does not exist oris not continuously
twice differentiable. In this example, the ∇2J?(θ)is continuous
everywhere. Therefore, we conclude that J?does not exist. This
completes the counterexample.
□
5 THE FIXED POINT OF ∇J?(θ)IS SOMETIMES
PESSIMAL
Having established that ∇J?(θ)is not the gradient of any function
for choices of γ<1, we move on to the question of whether or
not∇J?(θ)converges to some reasonable policy in the general case.
For instance, consider the case of temporal difference (TD) methods.
Figure 1: A counterexample wherein the derivative of ∇J?(θ)
is asymmetric for all γ<1, necessary for the proof of Theo-
rem 4.4. The agent begins in s1, and may choose between ac-
tions a1anda2, each of which produces deterministic transi-
tions. The rewards are 0 everywhere except when the agent
chooses a2in state s2, which produces a reward of +1. The
policy is assumed to be tabular over states and actions, with
one parameter, θ1, determining the policy in s1, and a sec-
ond parameter, θ2, determining the policy in s2(e.g., the pol-
icy may be determined by the standard logistic function,
σ(x)=1
1+e−x, such that π(s1,a1)=σ(θ1)).
While the expected update of TD is not a gradient update [ 22],
in the on-policy setting with a linear function approximator, TD
has been shown to converge to a unique point close to the global
optimum of the mean-squared projected Bellman error (MSPBE) [ 23,
24,27], which is called the “TD fixed point.” Through the geometric
interpretation of the MSPBE, it may be said that the TD fixed point
is “reasonable” in that it is close to the best possible estimate of
the mean squared Bellman error (MSBE) under a particular linear
parameterization of the value function.
We ask the question of whether or not a similar reasonable fixed
point exists in the case of the update given by ∇J?(θ). While it is
not clear in what sense the fixed point should be “reasonable,” we
propose a very minimal criterion: any reasonable policy fixed point
should at least surpass the worst possible (pessimal) policy under
either the discounted or undiscounted objective. That is, if the fixed
point is pessimal under both objectives, this suggests that it will be
difficult to come up with a satisfactory justification. Surprisingly, it
can be shown that ∇J?(θ)fails to pass even this low bar.
To demonstrate this, we contrast two examples, given in Figures
2 and 3. In the former example, ∇J?(θ)behaves in a way that is
(perhaps) expected: it converges to the optimal policy under the
discounted objective, while failing to optimize the undiscounted
objective. This is a well understood trade-off of discounting that can
be explained as “short-sightedness” by the agent. The latter example,
however, shows a case where an agent following ∇J?(θ)behaves
in a manner that is apparently irrational: it achieves the smallest
possible discounted return andundiscounted return, despite the
fact that it is possible to maximize either within the given policy
parameterization. We therefore suggest that for at least some MDPs,
∇J?(θ)may not be a reasonable choice.
6 LITERATURE REVIEW
We previously claimed that ∇J?(θ)is the direction followed by state-
of-the-art policy gradient methods and that the lack of theoretical
clarity on the behavior of algorithms following ∇J?(θ)has resulted
in a multiplicity of errors in the literature. In this section, we sub-
stantiate this point by surveying a subset of popular policy gradient