AAMAS’20, May 2020, Auckland, New Zealand Chris Nota and Philip S. Thomas
∂
∂θ1∂J?(θ)
∂θ1
=∂
∂θ1
γσ(θ2)∂σ(θ1)
∂θ1
=γσ(θ2)∂2σ(θ1)
∂θ2
1
∂
∂θ2∂J?(θ)
∂θ2
=∂
∂θ2
σ(θ1)∂σ(θ2)
∂θ2
=σ(θ1)∂2σ(θ2)
∂θ2
2.
Thus, we have constructed all of the second order partial deriva-
tives. As the sigmoid function, σ, is itself continuously twice differ-
entiable, we see that ∀θ∈R2,i,j:∂2J?(θ)/∂θi∂θjis continuous.
Therefore, if J?exists, it is continuously twice differentiable. How-
ever, we showed using the Clairaut-Schwarz theorem [ 19] thatJ?is
not continuously twice differentiable. Therefore, we have derived a
contradiction.
Additional Literature Review
Here we include our analysis of the papers associated with al-
gorithms from stable-baselines which did not include clearly
erroneous claims regarding ∇J?(θ). However, several of the papers
included claims that we argue are nevertheless misleading, some
more so than others. Due to space limitations, we are forced to omit
our analysis of DDPG and TRPO.
ACER (ICLR 2017) (299 Citations)
ACER [ 30] combines experience replay with actor-critic methods,
improving sample efficiency. The background section contains the
following text:
The parameters θof the differentiable policy πθ(at|xt)
can be updated using the discounted approximation
to the policy gradient [ 25], which borrowing notation
from Schulman et al. [17], is defined as:
д=Ex0:∞,a0:∞"Õ
t≥0Aπ(xt,at)∇θlogπθ(at|xt)#
.
Following Proposition 1 of Schulman et al . [17] , we
can replace Aπ(xt,at)in the above expression with
the state-action value Qπ(xt,at), the discounted re-
turn Rt, or the temporal difference residual
rt+γVπ(xt+1)−Vπ(xt), without introducing bias.
We note that дis exactly∇J?(θ). The authors claim that any of the
given choices may be used “without introducing bias.” We would
argue that a naive reader is likely to assume that this means that
дis unbiased with respect to some objective. The authors were
actually making the subtler point that the given choices do not
introduce bias relative to the choice of Aπ, which is itself biased.
This claim is not erroneous, but at the same time, information is
left out that is important for a clear understanding. The correctness
hinges on ambiguity rather than precision, and a reader is likely to
come away with the opposite impression. For this reason, we argue
that this section is still misleading.PPO (arXiv 2017, 1769 citations)
Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) [ 18] is arguably the most pop-
ular deep actor-critic algorithm at this time due to its speed and
sample efficiency. The paper contains the text:
Policy gradient methods work by computing an es-
timator of the policy gradient and plugging it into a
stochastic gradient ascent algorithm. The most com-
monly used gradient estimator has the form
ˆд=ˆE[∇θlogπθ(at|st)ˆAt]
whereπθis a stochastic policy and ˆAtis an estima-
tor of the advantage function at timestep t. Here the
expectation ˆE[. . .]indicates the empirical average
over a finite batch of samples, in an algorithm that
alternates between sampling and optimization.
In this case, the authors considered a very specific setup where an
algorithm “alternates between sampling and optimization.” They
construct an objective that operates on a given batch of data and
is used only for a single optimization step. They do not relate this
objective to a global objective. The final algorithm does follow
a direction resembling ˆд, with a number of optimization tricks.
For this reason, we did not consider the claims above made to be
misleading. However, we note again that the issues with ∇J?(θ)
were sidestepped rather than addressed directly.
TD3 (ICML 2018, 247 citations)
Twin Delayed Deep Deterministic policy gradient (TD3) Fujimoto
et al. [6] is another paper in the DDPG family. The paper was pub-
lished concurrently with SAC and contains similar enhancements.
It contains the text:
The return is defined as the discounted sum of rewards
Rt=ÍT
i=tγi−tr(si,ai), whereγis a discount factor
determining the priority of short-term rewards. In
reinforcement learning, the objective is to find the op-
timal policy πϕ, with parameters π, which maximizes
the expected return J(π)=Esi∼pπ,ai∼π[R0]. For con-
tinuous control, parameterized policies πϕcan be up-
dated by taking the gradient of the expected return
∇ϕJ(π). In actor-critic methods, the policy, known as
the actor, can be updated through the deterministic
policy gradient algorithm:
∇ϕJ(ϕ)=Es∼pπ[∇aQπ(s,a)|a=π(s)∇ϕπϕ(s)].
Qπ(s,a)=Esi∼pπ,ai∼π[Rt|s,a], the expected return
when performing action ain state sand following π
after, is known as the critic or the value function.
The authors did not define pπ, leaving the above expression
ambiguous. In the original DDQN paper, it was defined as the dis-
counted state distribution. It is misused here in the definitions of J
andQ, in that its not clear what role the discounted state distribution
plays in the definition of Qin either case. The algorithm eventually
computes the sample gradient by averaging over samples drawn
from a replay buffer: ∇ϕJ(ϕ)=N−1Σ∇aQθ1(s,a)|a=πϕ(s)∇ϕπϕ(s),
the deterministic policy gradient form of ∇J?(θ).