Sensors 2023 ,23, 5206 8 of 36
areas such as governance, economy, healthcare, and others must be evaluated within the
context of the smart city application.
The environment of a smart city is characterized by advanced communication tech-
nologies and an IoT infrastructure, which requires speciﬁc communication technologies
and systems architecture to enable all the applications and advantages of smart cities.
The architecture of IoT-enabled smart cities typically requires an ICT infrastructure that
facilitates information exchange among the various stakeholders within the urban envi-
ronment, regardless of the speciﬁc application or service being used. Communication is
essential to transmit data generated from various sensors in different applications between
devices and information sinks in both directions. To accomplish this, three commonly used
communication patterns are utilized: (i) utilizing Cellular Mobile Networks for communi-
cation, (ii) using IoT-Dedicated Cellular Networks for communication, and (iii) employing
Multi-Tier Networks for communication. Figure 5 illustrates the main layout for the three
different architectures. Therefore, to achieve a proper architectural ground for smart cities,
classiﬁcation based on the type of application is necessary, as the smartness of entities such
as governance, economy, healthcare, etc., must be measured in the smart city application.
Sensors 2023 , 23, x FOR PEER REVIEW 9 of 38 
 
  
Figure 5. Architectures for supporting the M2 M communications in smart cities. 
4.1. Architectural Components 
The literature has discussed ﬁve or three components of IoT [32,66–68]. However, 
four major components, such as data sensing/actuating, networking and communication components, vital components, and cloud/ fog computing for various services and 
applications, can be summarized and discussed in the following sections. 
4.2. Perception or Sensing Layers  Components 
The components referred to here are the physical objects of electronic devices such 
as sensors and actuators. These devices interact with the physical world by sending and receiving data, utilizing wireless networks [6–8,69,70]. Various smart city applications 
include sensors, actuators, and smart device technologies in this context
. There is a vast 
array of commercial devices available that can measure di ﬀerent physical quantities and 
external variables, i.e., sensors for measuring humidity [71,72], temperature [73], 
environment monitoring [74], water nutrient mo nitoring [75], etc. Actuators are used for 
controlling/moving other objects or systems through physical interaction or virtual 
control [76]. They are usually categorized into pneumatic, electrical, and hydraulic 
categories [77]. Several software applications and solutions can be used for deploying low -
level IoT applications [78]. 
  
Figure 5. Architectures for supporting the M2M communications in smart cities.
The following sections consist of the architectural components with the leading com-
munication technologies available in all three architectural classes in a smart city scenario.
4.1. Architectural Components
The literature has discussed ﬁve or three components of IoT [ 32,66–68]. However, four
major components, such as data sensing/actuating, networking and communication com-