Sensors 2023 ,23, 5206 9 of 36
ponents, vital components, and cloud/fog computing for various services and applications,
can be summarized and discussed in the following sections.
4.2. Perception or Sensing Layers Components
The components referred to here are the physical objects of electronic devices such
as sensors and actuators. These devices interact with the physical world by sending and
receiving data, utilizing wireless networks [ 6–8,69,70]. Various smart city applications in-
clude sensors, actuators, and smart device technologies in this context. There is a vast array
of commercial devices available that can measure different physical quantities and external
variables, i.e., sensors for measuring humidity [ 71,72], temperature [ 73], environment mon-
itoring [ 74], water nutrient monitoring [ 75], etc. Actuators are used for controlling/moving
other objects or systems through physical interaction or virtual control [76]. They are usu-
ally categorized into pneumatic, electrical, and hydraulic categories [ 77]. Several software
applications and solutions can be used for deploying low-level IoT applications [78].
4.3. Networking and Communication
In the context of smart cities, various communication protocols are available to connect
different devices and components of the infrastructure. These protocols have additional
features and speciﬁcations that make them suitable for speciﬁc applications. For example,
some protocols such as Wi-Fi, ZigBee, and Z-Wave are ideal for short distances where
devices and their coverage areas are limited, while other protocols such as LoRaWAN, NB-
IoT, Sigfox, and Long-Term Evolution (LTE) are more suitable for long-range applications.
Each of these protocols has unique features that enable them to support various smart
city applications. For instance, ZigBee is commonly used for low-power applications
with a low data rate, offering a secure network and longer battery life. It also provides
network topologies suitable for various applications, such as mesh, star, and tree. On
the other hand, LoRaWAN, Narrowband-Internet of Things (NB-IoT), Sigfox, and LTE
require devices to be connected through a central gateway to collect information and
sink the data, and they operate on licensed and unlicensed spectrums, depending on the
applications. Therefore, it is essential to choose the appropriate communication protocol
based on the speciﬁc requirements of each application and the range of coverage needed.
Understanding the features and capabilities of different protocols can help smart city
planners and developers choose the most suitable protocol for their speciﬁc use case and
integrate various IoT-enabled devices and artiﬁcial intelligence algorithms to create a more
efﬁcient, sustainable, and livable city. The subsequent sections are going to discuss some of
the signiﬁcant protocols.
4.3.1. Evolutions of GSM and LTE
The cellular network working groups handle the functions of administration of
GSM/GPRS and Edge Radio Access Networks (GERAN). Their efforts are focused on
introducing alternative methods to enhance the efﬁciency of GSM/GPRS for M2M commu-
nication. Various methods are available to improve M2M (machine-to-machine) communi-
cation efﬁciency. These approaches comprise upgrading the uplink capacity, extending the
coverage for control and data channels, and reducing the power consumption and com-
plexity of M2M devices [ 79]. Extended Coverage GSM (EC-GSM) is another progressive
technique that utilizes Frequency Division Multiple Access (FDMA) in conjunction with
Code Division Multiple Access (CDMA) on the uplink to accommodate a more signiﬁcant
number of IoT devices transmitting on the same frequency band. Bind repetition is achieved
for all transport channels and extended the coverage regions. It is a technique where the
transmitter repeats the same data block several times to achieve higher receiving gains.
Different devices are used for different repetition levels in the blind repetition technique.
Another approach is to support the narrowband GSM spectrum with channelization of
200 kHz. Narrowband Cellular IoT (NB-IoT) accommodates narrow asymmetric bands in
downlink and uplink, where 200 kHz is divided into 48 narrowband channels are downlink