Sensors 2023 ,23, 5206 10 of 36
channels, and 36 narrowband channels are divided into uplink channels. The Orthogo-
nal Frequency Domain Multiple Access (OFDMA) is employed for the downlink, while
the uplink uses Frequency Division Multiple Access (FDMA) to comply with the speciﬁc
requirements of each device.
One of the evolutions of LTE is LTE Rel-11 [ 80], which has focused on improving the
overload functionalities of RAN for handling the access of many IoT devices with reduced
capabilities. The complexity and the cost are reduced by reducing the radio transceiver
and limiting the transport block sizes by allowing half-duplex FDD during the operation
mode. Moreover, device power saving was also introduced, a signiﬁcant advantage for IoT
applications. Another substantial evolution is the LTE Rel-13 [ 80] which is improved at the
physical layer by including the characteristics of narrowband transmission and provides
a better response for M2M requirements. EC-GSM enables the use of cost-effective and
low-power hardware while simultaneously enhancing coverage areas. Additionally, Rel-12
has undergone further enhancements and now features an Enhanced Power Saving mode
(EPS) and Extended Discontinuous Reception (DRX) functionality.
Cimmino et al. have reported a framework for various applications from the percep-
tion of different communication technologies in a smart city scenario [ 81]. LTE technology
has concentrated on leveraging small-cell technology to augment bandwidth within this
framework. Small cell technology allows for inexpensive and low-power intelligent devices
for various applications. LTE service can be deployed over a larger geographical area and
can fulﬁl all communication necessities, including interoperability, low power consumption,
resilient communication, and multi-modal access, which can enhance the overall quality
of user experience. Thus, LTE service can be utilized for many applications and may be a
superior option for smart cities.
4.3.2. Cellular Mobile Networks
Cellular mobile networks play a signiﬁcant role in facilitating various services in
smart cities. These networks are primarily designed to enable communication between
human-to-human and human-to-machine interactions, such as telephony, texting services,
multimedia downloading, and streaming [ 81]. The devices ecosystem also encompasses
environment monitoring devices that gather data and require data exchange capabilities
with the backend to receive feedback on the monitored data.
The Radio Access Network (RAN) operates on a licensed network, while the Core Net-
work (CN) includes various entities, such as user mobility and registration. For instance,
the CN of the LTE system consists of several components, including the Serving Gate-
way (SGW), the Mobility Management Entity (MME), the Packet Data Network Gateway
(PGW), the Home Subscriber Server (HSS), and the Policy and Charging Rules Function
(PCRF) server [ 82]. In smart cities, the Internet of Things (IoT) has ushered in a new
communication paradigm known as Machine-to-Machine (M2M) or Machine-Type Com-
munications (MTCs). This paradigm relies on minimal or no human interaction, enabling
devices to communicate directly with each other and exchange information without human
intervention [83,84].
The characterization of M2M communications are featured distinctively concerning the
“legacy” of human-to-human communications, and the end-user human is often replaced
by a more signiﬁcant number of devices, accessing the network periodically or irregu-
larly [ 85–87]. Although 2G/3G (GSM, GPRS) cellular technologies are used for most M2M
communications, the RAN and CN of mobile cellular networks face challenges due to the
massive M2M data trafﬁc [ 88]. Hence, extensive research is being conducted to effectively
enhance cellular architectures to address the obstacles in M2M communications [87].
As per the guidelines set by the Third Generation Partnership Project (3GPP) [ 89], the
main distinctive features of M2M concerning human-based communication include the
following [80]: