Sensors 2023 ,23, 5206 15 of 36
increased from 150 kbps to 8 Mbps by using the OFDM waveform scheme in conjunction
with Binary Phase Shift Keying (BPSK), Quadrature Phase-Shift Keying (QPSK), and
Quadrature Amplitude Modulation (QAM) modulation. It is also possible to add more
devices by using the MAC layer. It is a better protocol for various applications because it has
a power conservation mode, a data optimization method, and an extended sleeping state.
Khorov et al. [ 104] have reported a work that is based on Wi-Fi technology (IEEE
802.11 [ 105]). They found that Wi-Fi technology [ 106] has been extensively exploited in
applications for smart cities. Due to the abundance of gadgets connecting, there is a severe
interference issue. An anti-interference mechanism is essential to reduce the interference
effect, and Wi-Fi can be more useful in IoT-based smart cities [ 107]. Duarte et al. [ 108] have
reported a mechanism to measure Wi-Fi signal strength and developed smart medical health
care for smart city applications. Every patient in a medical hospital carries a smartphone
with Wi-Fi connectivity. The number of patients waiting in the waiting area, where they
are located, and their real-time movements are all determined by the signal strength data
gathered from their cell phones. The system’s main beneﬁt is that it can be implemented in
the current infrastructure without any new infrastructure. The information gathered can be
used to spot future medical problems, which is helpful for doctors.
5. AI on Smart City Technologies
Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) can revolutionize the technology used in smart cities by
facilitating instant analysis of vast amounts of data received from various sources, including
sensors, cameras, and IoT devices. AI optimizes and streams various city systems and
processes, including transportation, energy, public safety, health care, education, and
more [ 109]. No speciﬁc number of AI algorithms can be used in a smart city. The choice of
algorithms would depend on the smart city’s speciﬁc use cases and requirements. Several
commonly used artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) algorithms exist in smart cities [ 110]. Some of
the most important ones are explained in the subsequent sections.
5.1. AI Algorithms in Smart Cities
Various AI algorithms can be used in smart cities to improve efﬁciency, sustainabil-
ity, and quality of life. Some of the primarily used AI algorithms are discussed in the
subsequent sections.
5.1.1. Machine Learning (ML)
The utilization of ML algorithm [ 111,112] involves mathematical guidelines that fa-
cilitate machines to learn from data and enhance their performance in a particular task
without being explicitly programmed. This type of AI empowers machines to identify
patterns and make predictions using input data. The ML algorithms comprise supervised
learning, unsupervised learning, reinforcement learning, and deep learning, each with
advantages and disadvantages, and can be applied to diverse domains, including image
and speech recognition, as well as predictive analytics [ 113,114]. ML algorithms can be
utilized in smart cities to examine data and create projections based on patterns and trends
humans can discern [ 115]. These algorithms can optimize resource allocation, improve
urban planning, and enhance public safety, among other things. These algorithms can also
predict trafﬁc ﬂow, analyze energy consumption patterns, and predict crime hotspots. ML
can be used for various applications in smart cities, such as trafﬁc management, energy
optimization, and waste management.
5.1.2. Deep Learning (DL)
DL refers to a category of ML that employs artiﬁcial neural networks to address
intricate problems by acquiring knowledge from data. DL models have multiple layers
of interconnected nodes that process speciﬁc aspects of the input data and pass it on to
the next layer [ 116,117]. This enables them to acquire a hierarchical understanding of the
data, detecting intricate patterns and characteristics. Widely used DL structures comprise