Sensors 2023 ,23, 5206 25 of 36
and analysis. Therefore, a gigantic IoT connection is essential for successfully implement-
ing a smart city. Implementing a 5G-based [ 216] IoT network is a potential solution for
managing a massive network in a smart city scenario. This network [ 217,218], based on
the wireless software-deﬁned networking (WSDN) paradigm, offers a ﬂexible and rapid
network infrastructure to facilitate the deployment of IoT-based smart city networks [ 219].
It has increased speed and bandwidth where the data transfer rate reaches up to 20 Gbps.
The 5G network can manage the enormous volume of data IoT devices generate. Its higher
bandwidth can accommodate more connected devices, enabling various new applications
for enhancing urban life in smart cities.
Additionally, 5G networks offer low latency and improved reliability, making them
desirable for powering IoT-based smart city networks. With latency as low as 1 ms,
5G technology can enable the development of more real-time applications. The reduced
latency ensures minimal delay between IoT devices, leading to faster and more efﬁcient
communication. This feature is crucial for developing applications such as smart drone
transport, autonomous vehicles, real-time remote surgery, or patient monitoring for smart
healthcare in a smart city. Devices with lower latency can send and receive data much
more quickly, enabling a range of innovative and time-sensitive use cases. Compared
to previous generations (i.e., 2G, 3G, or 4G), 5G networks are considered more reliable,
offering features such as network slicing and multi-access edge computing (MEC). These
features ensure consistent and uninterrupted connectivity for IoT devices in congested areas
of a smart city. As the development of smart cities continues, 5G networks are expected
to be increasingly used due to their ability to provide enhanced security features, such as
secure boot, network slicing, and secure element, which can help prevent cyber-attacks and
data breaches, ensuring the security of IoT devices and the massive data they generate (as
depicted in Figure 8).
The impact of 5G on connecting billions of devices in a single communication technol-
ogy is signiﬁcant, especially in creating a massive IoT-enabled smart city. To achieve this,
smart devices must be able to interact with each other and share data without the need
for human intervention [ 220]. It is also vital for these smart devices to support real-time,
demand-based events that can be coordinated between end-to-end devices. Additionally,
they should be equipped with automatic and intelligent algorithms that can operate seam-
lessly during each phase of the smart city development, from planning to deployment
and maintenance. This is going to ensure that the smart city infrastructure is efﬁcient,
scalable, and can adapt to the changing needs and demands of the citizens [ 221]. IoT-
enabled 5G architectures are designed to provide a common platform that can fulﬁl the
following requirements:
 5G networks should be adaptable and independent based on the speciﬁc needs of
the applications.
 Cloud-based Radio Access Network (CloudRAN) should be used to support massive
connections of devices for various applications (as shown in Figure 6).
 The core network architecture should be easy to implement and provide on-demand
functions for network conﬁgurations.
In the future, smart cities are going to rely heavily on 5G communications and ad-
vanced IoT technologies, which involve storing and uploading massive amounts of data
to an IoT cloud server to extract useful information using data analysis methods. These
smart cities are going to incorporate various aspects such as smart trafﬁc, smart homes,
smart agriculture, smart grids, and smart management. 5G-enabled IoT networks are going
to provide multiple features, including direct device-to-device communication, typical
architecture, advanced spectrum sharing, and interference management, which are going
to be vital in building a complete smart city. Integrating AI with 5G networks is going
to be integral to the future smart city. AI is going to handle massive amounts of data
from IoT-based applications, such as public transportation, trafﬁc lights, and citizens’ daily
activities, for more accurate and precise decision-making. This is going to enable ﬁnding
insights into data patterns that can be used to boost the efﬁciency and productivity of