Figure 2: Meta-augmentation: We introduce the notion of CE-preserving andCE-increasing
augmentations to explain why meta augmentation differs from standard data augmentation. Given
random variables X;Y and an external source of random bits , we augment with a mapping
f(;X;Y ) = (X0;Y0).Left: An augmentation is CE-preserving if it preserves conditional entropy
betweenx;y.Center: ACE-increasing augmentation increases H(Y0jX0).Right: Invertible CE-
increasing augmentations can be used to combat memorization overﬁtting: the model must rely on
the base learner to implicitly recover fromx0
s;y0
sin order to restore predictiveness between the
input and label.
same random key , in a way such that the base learner can only recover by associating xs!y0
s,
and doing so is necessary to associate xq!y0
q. See Figure 1d and Figure 2 for a diagram.
Although CE-increasing augmentations may use any f, within our experiments we only consider
CE-increasing augmentations where f(;x;y ) = (x;g(;y))andg:;Y!Yis invertible given y.
We do this because our aim is to increase task diversity. Given a single task T, such CE-increasing
augmentations create a distribution of tasks fTgindexed by, and assuming a ﬁxed noise source
, said distribution is widest when gis invertible. CE-increasing augmentations of this form raise
H(Y0
qjXq)byH(). We state this more formally below.
Theorem 1. Letbe a noise variable independent from X;Y , andg:;Y!Ybe the augmentation
function. Let y0=g(;y), and assume that (;x;y )7!(x;y0)is a one-to-one function. Then
H(Y0jX) =H(YjX) +H().
A proof is in Appendix A. In order to lower H(Y0
qjXq)to a level where the task can be solved, the
learner must extract at least H()bits from (xs;y0
s). This reduces memorization overﬁtting, since it
guarantees (xs;y0
s)has some information required to predict y0
q, even given the model and xq.
CE-increasing augmentations move the task setting from non-mutually-exclusive to mutually-
exclusive, as once the data is augmented, no single model can solve all tasks at once. In MAML, with
CE-increasing augmentation, the learned initialization can no longer memorize all the training tasks,
as for a given input xthere could be different correct outputs yin the training data. In CNPs, the
learned latent zcannot be ignored by the ﬁnal conditional decoder, again because each xcan have
several correct outputs ydepending on the task. In both cases, the model is forced to depend on the
support set (xs;y0
s)of each task every time during training to ﬁgure out the correct y0
qforxq, thereby
making the method less prone to memorization overﬁtting.
By adding new and different varieties of tasks to the meta-train set, CE-increasing augmentations
also help avoid learner overﬁtting and help the base learner generalize to test set tasks. This effect is
similar to the effect that data augmentation has in classical machine learning to avoid overﬁtting.
Few shot classiﬁcation benchmarks such as Mini-ImageNet [ 36] have meta-augmentation in them
by default. New tasks created by shufﬂing the class index yof previous tasks are added to the
training set. Here, y0=g(;y), whereis a permutation sampled uniformly from all permutations
SN. Thecan be viewed as an encryption key, which gapplies toyto gety0. This augmentation
is CE-increasing, since given any initial label distribution Y, augmenting with Y0=g(;Y)gives
a uniformY0jX. The uniform distribution has maximal conditional entropy, so CE must increase
unlessYjXwas already uniform. The information required to describe Y0jXhas now increased,
due to the unknown . Therefore, this makes the task setting mutually-exclusive, thereby reducing
memorization overﬁtting. This is accompanied by creation of new tasks through combining classes
from different tasks, adding more variation to the meta-train set. These added tasks help avoid learner
overﬁtting, and in Section 5.1 we analyze the size of this effect.
4