Table 2: Pascal3D pose prediction error (MSE) means and standard deviations. Removing weight
decay (WD) improves the MAML baseline and augmentation improves the MAML, MR-MAML,
CNP, MR-CNP results. Bracketed numbers copied from Yin et al. [37].
Method MAML
(WD=1e-3)MAML
(WD=0)MR-MAML
(=0.001)MR-MAML
(=0)CNP MR-CNP
No Aug [5:391:31] 3:74:64 2:41:04 2:8:73 [8:48:12] [2:89:18]
Aug 4:991:22 2 :34:66 1 :71:16 1 :61:06 2 :51:17 2 :51:20
By a similar analogy, learner overﬁtting corresponds to correct function approximation on input
examples ((xs;ys);xq)from the training set, and a systematic failure to generalize from those to
the test set. Although we have demonstrated that meta-augmentation is helpful, it is important to
emphasize it has its limitations. Distribution mismatch between train-time tasks and test-time tasks
can be lessened through augmentation, but augmentation may not entirely remove it.
One crucial distinction between data-augmentation in classical machine learning and meta-
augmentation in meta-learning is the importance of CE-increasing augmentations. For data-
augmentation in classical machine learning, the aim is to generate more varied examples , within a
single task. Meta-augmentation has the exact opposite aim: we wish to generate more varied tasks ,
for a single example , to force the learner to quickly learn a new task from feedback. Our experiments
exclusively focused on changing outputs ywithout changing inputs x, as these augmentations were
simpler and easier to study. However, given the usefulness of CE-preserving augmentations in
classical setups, it is likely that a combination of CE-preserving noise on xand CE-increasing noise
onywill do best. We leave this for future work.
Broader Impact
Our work discusses methods of improving meta-learning through meta-augmentation at the task level,
and does not target any speciﬁc application of meta-learning. The learning algorithms meta-learning
generates are ones learned from the data in train-time tasks. It is possible these approaches inject bias
into not only how models perform after training, but also inject bias into the training procedure itself .
Biased learners can result in biased model outcomes even when the support set presented at test time
is unbiased, and this may not be straightforward to detect because the behavior of the learner occurs
upstream of actual model predictions. We believe our work is a positive step towards mitigating bias
in meta-learning algorithms, by helping avoid overﬁtting to certain parts of the inputs.
Acknowledgments and Disclosure of Funding
We thank Mingzhang Yin and George Tucker for discussion and help in reproducing experimental
results for pose regression experiments. We thank Chelsea Finn and Honglak Lee for early stage
project discussion, Erin Grant for help on the meta-dataset codebase, and Luke Metz, Jonathan
Tompson, Chelsea Finn, and Vincent Vanhoucke for reviewing publication drafts of the work.
During his internship at Google, Jana devised, implemented and ran MAML experiments for Om-
niglot, mini-Imagenet and Sinusoid regression. Along with Alex, he collected the ROBEL classi-
ﬁcation datasets. Alex advised Jana’s internship and re-ran Jana’s code post-internship to include
validation with early stopping. Eric advised Jana’s internship and ran experiments on pose prediction
and meta-dataset. All three authors interpreted results and contributed to paper writing.
References
[1]Michael Ahn, Henry Zhu, Kristian Hartikainen, Hugo Ponte, Abhishek Gupta, Sergey Levine,
and Vikash Kumar. ROBEL: RObotics BEnchmarks for Learning with low-cost robots. In
Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL) , 2019.
[2]Alex Alemi, Ian Fischer, Josh Dillon, and Kevin Murphy. Deep variational information
bottleneck. In ICLR , 2017. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1612.00410 .
9