xs,y s xqyq
Learner Meta-Train Meta-Test Meta-Train Meta-Test 
εMemorization Overﬁtting Base Learner Overﬁtting Meta-Data Augmentation 
Model Learner Model Learner Model Learner Model Learner Model 
xs,y s xqyq
xs,y s xqyq
xs,y s xqyq
xs,y s xqyqy’ q
xs,y’ s Xqyq
Learner Model 
zqxs,y sεInformation Bottleneck (a) (b) (c) (d) Figure 1: Meta-learning problems provide support inputs (xs;ys)to abase learner , which applies
an update to a model . Once applied, the model is given query input xq, and must learn to predict
query target yq.(a)Memorization overﬁtting occurs when the base learner and (xs;ys)does not
impact the model’s prediction of yq.(b)Learner overﬁtting occurs when the model and base learner
leverage both (xs;ys)andxqto predictyq, but fails to generalize to the meta-test set. (c)Yin et al.
[37] propose an information bottleneck constraint on the model capacity to reduce memorization
overﬁtting. (d)To tackle both forms of overﬁtting, we view meta-data augmentation as widening the
task distribution, by encoding additional random bits in(xs;ys)that must be decoded by the base
learner and model in order to predict a transformed y0
q.
2 Background and deﬁnitions
A standard supervised machine learning problem considers a set of training data (xi;yi)indexed
byiand sampled from a task T, where the goal is to learn a function x7!^y. In meta-learning,
we have a set of tasks fTig, where each taskTiis made of a support set(xs;ys), and a query set
(xq;yq). The grouped support and query sets are referred to as an episode . The training and test
sets of examples are replaced by meta-training andmeta-test sets of tasks, each of which consist of
episodes. The goal is to learn a base learner that ﬁrst observes support data (xs;ys)for a new task,
then outputs a model which yields correct predictions ^yqforxq. When applied to classiﬁcation, this is
commonly described as k-shot,N-way classiﬁcation, indicating kexamples in the support set, with
class labelsys;yq21;:::;N . Following Triantaﬁllou et al. [34], we rely mostly on meta-learning
centric nomenclature but borrow the terms “support”, “query”, and “episode” from the few-shot
learning literature.
Meta-learning has two levels of optimization: an inner-loop optimization and an outer-loop optimiza-
tion. The inner-loop optimization (the base learner) updates a model using (xs;ys). In the outer-loop ,
the updated model is used to predict ^yqfromxq. The outer-loop optimization updates the base learner
in order to improve how the inner-loop update is carried out. While many meta-learning benchmarks
design the support set (xs;ys)to have the same data type as the query set (xq;yq), the support need
not match the data type of the query and can be any arbitrary data. Some meta-learners utilize an
inner-loop objective that bears no resemblance to the objective computed on the query set [ 10,24].
Contextual meta-learners replace explicit inner-loop optimization with information extraction using
a neural network, which is then learnt jointly in the outer-loop optimization [ 11,29]. As shown in
Figure 1, meta-learners can be treated as black-box functions mapping two inputs to one output,
f: ((xs;ys);xq)!^yq. We denote our support and query sets as (xs;ys)and(xq;yq), as all of our
tasks have matching inner and outer-loop data types.
Overﬁtting in the classical machine learning sense occurs when the model has memorized the speciﬁc
instances of the training set at the expense of generalizing to new instances of the test set. In meta-
learning, there are two types of overﬁtting that can happen: 1) memorization overﬁtting and 2) learner
overﬁtting. We ﬁrst discuss memorization overﬁtting.
A set of tasks are said to be mutually-exclusive if a single model cannot solve them all at once.
For example, if task T1is “output 0 if the image is a dog, and 1 if it is a cat”, and task T2is
“output 0 if the image is a cat, and 1 if it is a dog”, then fT1;T2gare mutually-exclusive. A set
of tasks is non-mutually-exclusive if the opposite is true: one model can solve all tasks at once.
Yin et al. [37] identify the memorization problem in meta-learning that can happen when the set of
tasks are non-mutually-exclusive. A non-mutually-exclusive setting potentially leads to complete
meta-learning memorization , where the model memorizes the support set and predicts ^yqusing
onlyxq, without relying on the base learner (shown in Figure 1a). This is acceptable for training
2