Mini-ImageNet Mini-ImageNet [ 36] is a more complex few-shot dataset, based on the ILSVRC
object classiﬁcation dataset [ 6]. There are 100 classes in total, with 600 samples each. We train
1-shot, 5-way classiﬁcation models using MAML. We ran experiments in three variations, shown
in Figure 3. In non-mutually-exclusive , classes are partitioned into ordered tasks that keep the class
index consistent across epochs. In intershufﬂe , tasks are formed by sampling classes randomly, where
previously used classes can be resampled in later tasks. This is the default protocol for Mini-ImageNet.
Doing so ensures that over the course of training, a given image xqwill be assigned multiple different
class indices yq, making the task setting mutually-exclusive. This also creates more diverse groups of
classes / tasks compared to the previous partitioning method. To ablate whether diversity or mutual
exclusivity is more important, we devise the intrashufﬂe scheme, which shufﬂes class label order
within the partitions from the non-mutually-exclusive setup. This uses identical classes within each
task to non-mutually-exclusive, and the only difference is varying class order within those tasks. This
again gives a mutually-exclusive setting, but with less variety compared to intershufﬂe.
Table 1 (Mini-ImageNet (MAML)) shows that non-mutually-exclusive does worst, followed by
intrashufﬂe, then intershufﬂe. There is an increase in accuracy from 30% to 43% between non-
mutually-exclusive and intrashufﬂe, and only 43% to 46% between intrashufﬂe and intershufﬂe,
which indicates shufﬂed task order is the more important factor. The gap between intrashufﬂe and
intershufﬂe also indicates that fully randomizing the batches of tasks performs slightly better, as
each class is compared to more diverse sets of negative classes. We emphasize that if shufﬂing
is applicable to the problem, intershufﬂe is the recommended approach. Interestingly, Figure 4
shows that although all non-mutually-exclusive runs overﬁt at training time, whether they exhibit
memorization overﬁtting or learner overﬁtting depends on random seed. Both forms of overﬁtting are
avoided by meta-augmentation through intershufﬂe.
Figure 3: Non-mutually-exclusive, intrashufﬂe, and intershufﬂe. In this example, the dataset has
4 classes, and the model is a 2-way classiﬁer. In non-mutually-exclusive, the model always sees one
of 2 tasks. In intrashufﬂe, the model sees permutations of the classes in the non-mutually-exclusive
tasks, which changes class order. In intershufﬂe, the model sees 43 = 12 tasks.
0 10000 20000 30000 40000 50000
Training iterations0.00.20.40.60.81.0AccuracyNon-Mutually-Exclusive
Memorization Overfitting
Train pre-update
Train post-update
Val pre-update
Val post-update
0 10000 20000 30000 40000 50000
Training iterations0.00.20.40.60.81.0AccuracyNon-Mutually-Exclusive
Learner Overfitting
Train pre-update
Train post-update
Val pre-update
Val post-update
0 10000 20000 30000 40000 50000
Training iterations0.00.20.40.60.81.0AccuracyMutually-Exclusive
Through Intershuffle Augmentation
Train pre-update
Train post-update
Val pre-update
Val post-update
Figure 4: Mini-ImageNet results with MAML. Left: In a non-mutually-exclusive setting, this model
exhibits memorization overﬁtting. Train-time performance is high, even before the base learner
updates the model based on (xs;ys), indicating the model pays little attention to (xs;ys). The model
fails to generalize to the held-out validation set. Center: This model exhibits learner overﬁtting. The
gap between train pre-update and train post-update indicates the model does pay attention to (xs;ys),
but the entire system overﬁts and does poorly on the validation set. The only difference between the
left and center plots is the random seed. Right: With intershufﬂe augmentation, the gap between
train pre-update and train post-update indicates the model pays attention to (xs;ys), and higher train
time performance lines up with better validation set performance, indicating less overﬁtting.
D’Claw dataset So far, we have only examined CE-increasing augmentations in existing datasets.
To verify the phenomenon applies to a newly generated dataset, we collected a small robotics-inspired
image classiﬁcation dataset using hardware designs from ROBEL [ 1]. Figure 5 shows a D’Claw
mounted inside a D’Lantern. An object is placed between the ﬁngers of the claw, and the task is to
6