ten used for interpreting the CNN. The highlight location
in an attention map for visual explanation is considered an
attention location in image recognition. To use response-
based visual explanation that can visualize an attention map
during a forward pass, we extended a response-based visual
explanation model to an attention mechanism. By using the
attention map for visual explanation as an attention mech-
anism, our network is trained while focusing on the impor-
tant location in image recognition. The attention mecha-
nism with a response-based visual explanation model can
simultaneously interpret the decision making of CNN and
improve their performance.
Inspired by response-based visual explanation and at-
tention mechanisms, we propose Attention Branch
Network (ABN), which extends a response-based visual
explanation model by introducing a branch structure with an
attention mechanism, as shown in Fig 1(b). ABN consists of
three components: feature extractor, attention branch, and
perception branch. The feature extractor contains multiple
convolution layers for extracting feature maps. The atten-
tion branch is designed to apply an attention mechanism
by introducing a response-based visual explanation model.
This component is important in ABN because it generates
an attention map for the attention mechanism and visual ex-
planation. The perception branch outputs the probabilities
of class by using the feature and attention maps to the con-
volution layers. ABN has a simple structure and is train-
able in an end-to-end manner using training losses at both
branches. Moreover, by introducing the attention branch to
various baseline model such as ResNet [9], ResNeXt [34],
and multi-task learning [27], ABN can be applied to several
networks and image recognition tasks.
Our contributions are as follows:
•ABN is designed to extend a response-based visual ex-
planation model by introducing a branch structure with
an attention mechanism. ABN is the ﬁrst attempt to
improve the performance of CNN by including a vi-
sual explanation.
•ABN is applicable to various baseline models such as
VGGNet [14], ResNet [9], and multi-task learning [27]
by dividing a baseline model and introducing an atten-
tion branch for generalizing an attention map.
•By extending the attention map for visual explana-
tion to attention mechanism, ABN simultaneously im-
proves the performance of CNN and visualizes an at-
tention map during forward propagation.
2. Related work
2.1. Interpreting CNN
Several visual explanation, which highlight the attention
location in the inference process, have been proposed [30,39, 41, 26, 13, 4, 24, 3, 22]. There two types of visual expla-
nation: gradient-based visual explanation, which uses a gra-
dient and feed forward response to obtain an attention map,
and response-based visual explanation, which only uses the
response of a feed forward propagation. With gradient-
based visual explanation, SmoothGrad [24] obtains sensi-
tivity maps by adding noise to the input image iteratively
and takes the average of these sensitivity maps. Guided
backpropagation [13] and gradient-weighted class activa-
tion mapping (Grad-CAM) [4, 3], which are gradient-based
visual explanation, have been proposed. Guided backpropa-
gation and Grad-CAM visualize an attention map using pos-
itive gradients at a speciﬁc class in backpropagation. Grad-
CAM and guided backpropagation have been widely used
because they can interpret various pre-trained models using
the attention map of a speciﬁc class.
Response-based visual explanation visualizes an atten-
tion map using the feed forward response value from a
convolution or deconvolution layer. While such models
require re-training and modifying a network model, they
can directly visualize an attention map during forward pass.
CAM [41] can visualize an attention maps for each class us-
ing the response of a convolution layer and the weight at the
last fully-connected layer. CAM performs well on weakly
supervised object localization but not as well in image clas-
siﬁcation due to replacing fully-connected layers with con-
volution layers and passing through GAP.
We constract ABN by extending the CAM, which can vi-
sualize an attention map for visual explanation in feed for-
ward propagation, to an attention mechanism. CAM is eas-
ily compatibles with an attention mechanism that directly
weights the feature map. In contrast, gradient-based visual
explanation is not compatible with ABN because it requires
the back propagation process to obtain the gradients. There-
fore, we use CAM as the attention mechanism for ABN.
2.2. Attention mechanism
Attention mechanisms have been used in computer vi-
sion and natural language processing [19, 15, 32, 12]. They
have been widely used in sequential models [15, 36, 37,
2, 31] with recurrent neural networks and long short term
memory (LSTM) [10]. A typical attention model on se-
quential data has been proposed by Xu et al. [15]. The
attention mechanism of their model is based on two types
of attention mechanisms: soft and hard. The soft attention
mechanism of Xu etal. model is used as the gate of LSTM,
and image captioning and visual question answering have
been used [36, 37]. Additionally, the non-local neural net-
work [33], which uses the self-attention approach, and the
recurrent attention model [21], which controls the attention
location by reinforcement learning, have been proposed.
The recent attention mechanism is also applied to single
image recognition tasks [32, 12, 6]. Typical attention mod-
110706