ℒbwdℒe2e
ℒfwdℒrec
𝜽pho𝜽dur𝜽bpp
𝝓𝜽decFigure 3: Gradient ﬂows.Note that there are some special explanations of the above loss func-
tions: 1) Since the frame-level prior distribution p(z0jy;pri)cannot
well align with the ground-truth speech frames due to the intrinsically
inaccurate duration prediction in durator, we leverage a soft dynamic
time warping (DTW) version of KL loss for LbwdandLfwd. See Ap-
pendix D for the detailed formulation of the soft-DTW loss. 2) We
write the waveform loss in LrecandLe2eas negative log-likelihood
loss for simplicity. Actually following [ 17],Lrecconsists of GAN loss,
feature mapping loss and mel-spectrogram loss, while Le2econsists of
only GAN loss. We do not use soft-DTW in Le2esince we found GAN
loss can still perform well with mismatched lengths. See Appendix E
for the details of the waveform loss.
There are several different gradient ﬂows in training the model, as
shown in Figure 3: 1) Lrec!dec!; 2)Lbwd!dur!pho;
3)Lbwd!bpp!; 4)Lfwd!bpp!dur!pho; 5)Lfwd!; 6)Le2e!dec!bpp!
dur!pho. After training, we discard the posterior encoder and only use pho;bpp;duranddec
for inference. The training and inference pipeline is summarized in Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1 Training and inference of NaturalSpeech
1:Training:
2: Pre-train the phoneme encoder pho.
3: Train the whole model [; pho;dur;bpp;dec]using lossLdeﬁned in Equation 5.
4:Inference:
5: Sample prior z0p(z0jy;pho;dur).
6: Get enhanced prior z=f(z0;bpp).
7: Generate waveform sample xp(xjAttention (z;M;M );dec).
3.7 Advantages of NaturalSpeech
We explain how the designs in our NaturalSpeech system can close the quality gap to recordings.
•Reduce training-inference mismatch . We directly generate waveform from text and leverage a
differentiable durator to ensure a fully end-to-end optimization, which can reduce the training-
inference mismatch in the cascaded acoustic model/vocoder [13, 18, 14, 42] and explicit duration
prediction [ 15,13,18]. Note that although V AE and ﬂow can have training-inference mismatch
inherently (waveform is reconstructed from the posterior in training while predicted from the prior
in inference for V AE, and ﬂow is trained in backward direction and infered in forward direction),
we design the backward/forward loss in Equation 1 and 2 and the end-to-end loss in Equation 4 to
alleviate this problem.
•Alleviate one-to-many mapping problem . Compared to previous methods using reference en-
coder [ 44,45,46,11] or pitch/energy extraction [ 18] for variation information modeling, our
posterior encoder in V AE acts like a reference encoder that can extract all the necessary variance
information in posterior distribution q(zjx;). We do not predict pitch explicitly since it can be
learned implicitly in the posterior encoder and the memory bank of V AE. To ensure the prior and
posterior can match with each other, on the one hand, we simplify the posterior with memory
V AE and backward mapping in the bidirectional prior/posterior module, and on the other hand, we
enhance the prior with phoneme pre-training, differentiable durator, and forward mapping in the
bidirectional prior/posterior module. Thus, we can alleviate the one-to-mapping problem to a large
extent.
•Increase representation capacity . We leverage large-scale phoneme pre-training to extract better
representation from the phoneme sequence, and leverage the advanced generative models (ﬂow,
V AE, GAN) to capture the speech data distributions better, which can enhance the representation
capacity of the TTS models for better voice quality.
We further list the difference between our NaturalSpeech and previous TTS systems as follows:
1) Compared to previous autoregressive TTS models such as Tacotron 1/2 [ 4,3], WaveNet [ 2],
TransformerTTS [ 9], and Wave-Tacotron [ 47], our NaturalSpeech is non-autoregressive in nature
7