fgene-10-00049 February 8, 2019 Time: 19:38 # 4
Suwinski et al. Exome Big-Data Analytics in Medicine
(100,8 GB) every5 min (Illumina, 2018). This
empowers users to high-throughput sequence up to 48
human genomes or close to 500 exomes per run in less
than 45 h.
(iii) Variety –the diﬀerent attributes of WES data. One
aspect of this can be in terms of the ﬁve Ws and
one H: what (WES), who (gender/age/ethnicity), why
(diseased versus healthy), where (organ/tissue/cell), when
(day/month/year), and how (accuracy/coverage)? For
example, a 100(how?) WES dataset (what?) can be
generated from a centenarian (who?) with tumor (why?)
in the neck and bladder (where?) that is in the late
stage (when?).
(iv) Veracity – conﬁdence or trustability in WES data. Various
sources of errors and confounding factors can aﬀect the
conﬁdence or trustability of the sequencing data. For
example, because of mismapped shortreads, mosaicism,
and sequencing errors, variant callers can end up predicting
close to sevenfold more than the 3 million variants
in an individual human genotype (Robasky et al., 2014).
It is challenging to diﬀerentiate small mutations from
random errors generated during sequencing (Hofmann
et al., 2017). Additionally, a major shortcoming of WES
is the uneven coverage of sequence reads over the exome
targets, contributing to many low coverage regions, which
aﬀect the downstream analysis, and thus, hinder accurate
variant calling (Wang Q. et al., 2017). For example, some
regions are still poorly captured (coverage as low as 10 )
in a sample with a high average read depth ( >75),
which can cause potentially out-turn in missed variant
calls (Hoischen et al., 2014).
(v) Variability – inconsistencies and multitude of
dimensions in WES data. Inconsistencies can include
anomalies and outliers, which can be picked up using
analytical methods; it can also include inconsistent speed
at which data is loaded into the repository. A patient could
have a totally or partially rearranged genome as seen in
those with autism in one extreme of anomaly (Tabet et al.,
2015). Multiple data dimensions can result from disparate
data types and sources.
(vi) Validity –WES data accuracy and readiness for
analysis. In 2017, the accuracy of various variants calling
pipelines was investigated for exome sequencing by the
PrecisionFDA Hidden Treasures – Warm Up challenge, a
contest run by the FDA to promote more accurate genetic
screening (PrecisionFDA, 2017). Edico DRAGEN received
the highest overall score and Saphetor was the second.
Besides a choice in computational pipeline, sequencing
artifact can also aﬀect the search for reliable results in
the exome sequencing data, particularly in identifying the
properties that distinguish false positive variants from true
variants. To overcome this, a trio design strategy (father,
mother and child) had been used to ﬁlter out (removing
sequencing artifacts) and retain true mutations (Patel
et al., 2014). As for readiness from raw data to analysis,
for example, DeepVariant, using Google Cloud, can take
70 min (time estimate does not include mapping) fora whole genome at 30 coverage, and25 min for an
exome (DeepVariant, 2016).
(vii) Vulnerability –WES data security and data breach.
Human genomic data has the potential to reveal sensitive
information and is potentially re-identiﬁable, as such
privacy and security are often at risk. Several studies
have reported vulnerability of the human genomic data,
which enables re-identiﬁcation of patients from an
‘anonymous database’ (Homer et al., 2008; Gymrek et al.,
2013; Harmanci and Gerstein, 2016). Shringarpure and
Bustamante (2015) demonstrated that an individual can
be re-identiﬁed by repeatedly querying the genome data
sets via an open-access Beacon for alleles associated
with an individual’s genome. Moreover, there are also
concerns surrounding the policy and practice of returning
genome sequences back to research participants (Wright
et al., 2017), whereby substantial resources are required to
ensure the safety return of that whole data to individual
participants (Kaye et al., 2014).
(viii) Volatility –how long before the WES data is considered
obsolete or irrelevant. Currently, the driving factor behind
WES is the favorable cost, when compared to WGS. WGS
is more powerful than WES for the detection of potential
disease-causing mutation within WES regions, especially
in those regions due to single nucleotide variants (SNVs)
(Belkadi et al., 2015). Additionally, WGS is also more
comprehensive than WES, and thus more useful when the
disease causing variant is not in the exome, as in the case of
limb malformation due to mutation in the limb enhancer
of sonic hedgehog gene (SHH) (Visel et al., 2009). Thus, in
the future, when the cost for WGS reduces to the point of
being equivalent or lower than the current cost of WES,
then the relevance of WES data becomes questionable.
Thus, one may consider that the attractiveness of WES
for clinical use is of a limited shelf-life, subject to WGS
becoming aﬀordable to the masses. It is estimated that by
2020 or later, the cost for WGS may be as low as USD
100 (Herper, 2017).
(ix) Visualization –how challenging it is to visualize WES
data . Visualization of sequence data is an important
tool for researchers and clinicians, especially those
without extensive IT skills. Exome data is currently
visualized through various popular browsers ( Table 1 ) that
provide a gene- and transcript-centric display of variation
(Karczewski et al., 2017), with extensive functionality
for comparative analysis, as well aggregation of available
knowledge. However, plotting graphical representation
of NGS data in real-time comes with a cost: higher
computational requirements (computing power, memory,
and storage) and faster Internet. Additionally, many
of the genome Internet viewer use older annotation
databases than those installed locally, which might
be a signiﬁcant restriction. For example, viewers only
accepting sequences aligned to GRCh37/hg19 assembly
(current version GRCh38), support dbSNP version 141
(current version is 151), and Ensembl VEP 85 (current
version 94). Increasing complexity of viewing data adds
Frontiers in Genetics | www.frontiersin.org 4 February 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 49