fgene-10-00049 February 8, 2019 Time: 19:38 # 1
REVIEW
published: 12 February 2019
doi: 10.3389/fgene.2019.00049
Edited by:
Prashanth N. Suravajhala,
Birla Institute of Scientiﬁc Research,
India
Reviewed by:
Vincenza Colonna,
Italian National Research Council
(CNR), Italy
Sandeep Kumar Dhanda,
La Jolla Institute for Allergy
and Immunology (LJI), United States
Rahul Kumar,
Columbia University Irving Medical
Center, United States
*Correspondence:
Asif M. Khan
asif@perdanauniversity.edu.my
Hui San Ong
huisan.ong@perdanauniversity.edu.my
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Bioinformatics and Computational
Biology,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Genetics
Received: 03 September 2018
Accepted: 21 January 2019
Published: 12 February 2019
Citation:
Suwinski P , Ong C, Ling MHT,
Poh YM, Khan AM and Ong HS
(2019) Advancing Personalized
Medicine Through the Application
of Whole Exome Sequencing and Big
Data Analytics. Front. Genet. 10:49.
doi: 10.3389/fgene.2019.00049
Advancing Personalized Medicine
Through the Application of Whole
Exome Sequencing and Big Data
Analytics
Pawel Suwinski1, ChuangKee Ong2,3, Maurice H. T. Ling2, Yang Ming Poh2,
Asif M. Khan2,4*and Hui San Ong2*
1Malaysian Genomics Resource Centre Berhad, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia,2Centre for Bioinformatics, School of Data
Sciences, Perdana University, Serdang, Malaysia,3Centre of Genomics Research, Precision Medicine and Genomics,
AstraZeneca UK Limited, London, United Kingdom,4Graduate School of Medicine, Perdana University, Serdang, Malaysia
There is a growing attention toward personalized medicine. This is led by a fundamental
shift from the ‘one size ﬁts all’ paradigm for treatment of patients with conditions or
predisposition to diseases, to one that embraces novel approaches, such as tailored
target therapies, to achieve the best possible outcomes. Driven by these, several
national and international genome projects have been initiated to reap the beneﬁts of
personalized medicine. Exome and targeted sequencing provide a balance between
cost and beneﬁt, in contrast to whole genome sequencing (WGS). Whole exome
sequencing (WES) targets approximately 3% of the whole genome, which is the
basis for protein-coding genes. Nonetheless, it has the characteristics of big data
in large deployment. Herein, the application of WES and its relevance in advancing
personalized medicine is reviewed. WES is mapped to Big Data “10 Vs” and the resulting
challenges discussed. Application of existing biological databases and bioinformatics
tools to address the bottleneck in data processing and analysis are presented, including
the need for new generation big data analytics for the multi-omics challenges of
personalized medicine. This includes the incorporation of artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) in the
clinical utility landscape of genomic information, and future consideration to create a
new frontier toward advancing the ﬁeld of personalized medicine.
Keywords: big data, exome, personalized medicine, sequencing, precision, analytics
INTRODUCTION
Advances in next generation sequencing (NGS) technologies have resulted in an unprecedented
proliferation and deluge of genomic sequence data. Harnessing the information encoded in a
person’s genome is far-reaching and has been instrumental in assessing the substantial portion of
person-to-person variability in response to diagnosis, treatment, and prevention strategies (Seripa
et al., 2010). This is done by comparing an individual’s genomic information to the DNA sequence
of another “reference, ” leading to a variability map of the population when done at a broader
scale. The notion of individual variability dates back to Garrod, who in 1902 coined the term
“chemical individuality” (Garrod, 1996). The deﬁnition has since become more precise; however,
Frontiers in Genetics | www.frontiersin.org 1 February 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 49