fgene-10-00049 February 8, 2019 Time: 19:38 # 9
Suwinski et al. Exome Big-Data Analytics in Medicine
allowing multi-omics analysis, is showing promising results.
There are already reports about polygenic risk score for complex
medical conditions attaining similar predictive power as genetic
risk assessment for monogenic diseases (Khera et al., 2018).
THE RISE OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
AI-Driven Genomics
High costs and limitations in terms of technologies have
remained the main barriers for the greater omics-based
implementation of personalized medicine. AI-driven machines,
are being deployed to cut costs, especially in overcoming
the enormous volume of collected patient data. For instance,
Congenica’s Sapientia uses the Exomiser tool to accelerate the
annotation and prioritization of variants from whole-exome
sequencing in the diagnosis of rare diseases (Smedley et al., 2015).
Sapientia empowers clinical decision-making by organizing the
data into an easily comprehensible fashion, which helps to cut
diagnosis times down from 5 years to 5 days (Congenica, 2018).
AI-driven machines are even predicted to perform better than
humans, from driving a truck (as autonomous vehicles) by 2027,
writing a bestselling book by 2049, to performing a surgery by
2053 (Grace et al., 2018).
Meanwhile, tech giants, such as Google and its competitors
are furiously adding machine-learning features to their cloud
platforms in an eﬀort to attract people to tap into the latest AI
techniques (Knight, 2017). For instance, Deep Genomics uses
deep learning to tease out genetic causes of diseases and potential
drug therapies, and Wuxi’s Nextcode, which invested heavily in
machine learning methods, are among the companies behind
such eﬀorts.
The Google Brain team, a group that focuses on developing
an AI application and Verily, another Alphabet subsidiary that
focuses on life sciences, released a tool known as DeepVariant that
uses the latest AI techniques to construct a more accurate picture
of a person’s genome from their sequencing data (Knight, 2017).
It automatically identiﬁes insertion, deletion and single-base-
pair mutation in sequencing data. Millions of high-throughput
reads and genomes from the Genome in a Bottle (BIAB) project,
No Author (2015), were collected to feed the data to the
deep-learning system and the parameters of the model was
painstakingly tweaked until it learned to interpret the sequences
data with a high level of accuracy (Knight, 2017). In 2016,
DeepVariant won the ﬁrst place in the PrecisionFDA Truth
Challenge, in the best SNP performance category, and thus
highly accurate. DeepVariant is also extensively fast, robust, cost
eﬃcient, ﬂexible, easy to use, and where you need it by using
Google Cloud Platform (DeepVariant, 2016).
Omics Analytics Powered by AI
Technologies
AI can improve statistical computation, but it needs more data
to do the guess-work (Lopes et al., 2012; Topol, 2014; Carter
and He, 2016; Camacho et al., 2018). Although the size of
NGS data is signiﬁcantly dropping, thanks to the introduction
of single-molecule sequencing (Oxford Nanopore) (Rabbaniet al., 2014; Halvaei et al., 2018), the downstream AI analysis
requires exponential volumes of longitudinal data for making the
genotype–phenotype connection as accurate as possible. While
the quest for more robust causal algorithms is underway, a
number of bioinformatics tools have been developed aiming to
link sequence variants with biological metadata and phenotype.
These new generation tools provide in silico assessment of omics
data, derived from WGS or WES, and analytical capacity (often
deploying AI) for variants prioritization/phenotype scoring
(Shihab et al., 2013; Liu et al., 2016b). This approach has
already proven to generate suﬃcient predictive power that can
be compared to the prediction of Mendelian diseases (Khera
et al., 2018). The next step entails the translation of scientiﬁc
ﬁndings into easily understood medical standards, similarly to
how pathology test results are reported, and there are already
available templates developed for reporting WES ﬁndings.
Still, it might take a decade before the new technologies
will enter mainstream medicine. The main reason for the slow
adoption of genomic information, besides regulatory barriers,
is the clinicians’ readiness and acceptance of incorporating the
NGS ﬁndings into their routine case management (Metcalfe et al.,
2009; Vassy et al., 2015a). Having clinician-friendly reporting
will deﬁnitely speed-up the uptake process (Vassy et al., 2015b;
Manolio, 2017).
In recent years, some companies have made inroads into
NGS clinical reporting using omics analytics powered by AI
technologies. In the industry sector of integrated WGS/WES
clinical reporting, there are at least four commercial entities that
oﬀer clinician-friendly analytics and reporting:
Qiagen (Ingenuity Variant Analysis and Ingenuity Pathway
Analysis) (QIAGEN, 2018b)
Golden Helix (VarSeq, VSCkinical) (Golden Helix, 2017)
Advaita (iVariant/iPatway/iBio Guides) (ADV AITA, 2018)
Lifemap Sciences (TGexTM, 2018)
All four solutions are available through a Web-based interface
and oﬀer clinical prioritization (using as input Variant Calling
File – VCF) that deploys some aspect of AI. Qiagen applications
(Annovar is part of the suite) are the clear leaders, as traditionally
most genomic laboratory companies use their oﬀerings (Krämer
et al., 2014). In terms of innovation, the sheer depth of knowledge
and the ease of generating clinical reports makes Lifemap
Sciences and its clinical exome analysis suite (TGex) the top
scorer (Ben-Ari Fuchs et al., 2016; Stelzer et al., 2016a,b). It
is by far the most clinician-friendly WES analysis pipeline and
reporting. It is also one of the most aﬀordable on the market.
It compiles over 110 diﬀerent biological databases, ranging from
gene ontology (GO) and biological pathways, through network
interdependencies, transcriptional expression, and ending at
phenotype essentialities. Because of its coverage of omics data
(width and depth), many bioinformatics analytical tools utilize
their resources including the companies mentioned above.
AI is most commonly deployed at two levels within clinical
bioinformatics: in silico gene damage scoring (mostly Markov
Hidden Model) (Liu et al., 2016b; McLaren et al., 2016; Feng,
2017) and prioritization and phenotype scoring, where various
Frontiers in Genetics | www.frontiersin.org 9 February 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 49