fgene-10-00049 February 8, 2019 Time: 19:38 # 11
Suwinski et al. Exome Big-Data Analytics in Medicine
text mining algorithms are adopted. Other than that, AI is still
a research tool until large longitudinal data, and more robust
informatics frameworks are available. It is worth mentioning that
one of the main strengths of AI in clinical practice is the area of
image recognition (Alyass et al., 2015; He et al., 2017; Lytras and
Papadopoulou, 2018). Many research studies are incorporating
AI image processing with pathology and clinical imaging to
improve diagnostic decision-making.
Artiﬁcial intelligence tools incorporating omics data are still a
nascent development; they are a valuable addition to the existing
bioinformatics application arsenal and a valuable connection
between medical molecular geneticists and frontline clinicians.
FUTURE CONSIDERATIONS
The advancement of personalized medicine in many ways is being
driven by the intersection of big data analytics and WES. Figure 2
illustrates the changing paradigms of personalized medicine.
Notable timelines in Genomics and Personalized Medicine are
showcased, including the data storage size of the four big data
domains by 2025, with genomics either on par or the most
demanding of the domains (Stephens et al., 2015). However,
there are many barriers still for WES to have a wider use
in mainstream medical practice. The major challenges include
results reproducibility, reporting standards, and aﬀordability.
Results Reproducibility
A recent study conducted by the American College of
Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG) showed signiﬁcant
variability in results reproducibility between diﬀerent genetic
laboratories. As a result, the Association together with
industry players have developed the standards for genetic
tests assessment. Although it is still voluntary, laboratories are
encouraged to validate their products against industry standards
(Amendola et al., 2016).
Reporting Standards
Standards for reporting results of genetic tests have also been
developed by ACMG; however, they only address pathogenic
variants detected in ACMG recommended 59 genes. The Harvard
School of Medicine, in collaboration with Healthcare Partners,
designed a more comprehensive template for reporting results
related to genetic diseases, polygenic/multifactorial diseases, and
pharmacogenetics (Vassy et al., 2015b). It has to be noted that
the polygenic risk score is based on odds ratios reported in the
GWAS database ( Table 1 ). Conditions with variants without
odds ratios or P-value score cannot be assessed. The main
objective of the reporting template was to present genomic testsresults in a clinician-friendly manner so that it can be even
used at all levels of health care services, including primary
care physicians (Metcalfe et al., 2009; Harvard Medical School,
2015; Manolio, 2017).
For omics based genomic analysis, no standard template exists
and each laboratory reports use their own standards. As the
goal of multi-omics prioritization is to detect variants, functional
eﬀect on genes and possible genes’ phenotypic essentiality, the
practical way of reporting would be to focus on the Loss of
Function/Partial Loss of Function (LOF/PLOF) and phenotype
essentiality scoring.
Affordability
Generally, genetic tests are expensive (Topol, 2014; Kong et al.,
2015; Bomba et al., 2017; He et al., 2017). The tests can be divided
into two technological groups: genotyping and sequencing.
Genotyping tests are less costly (USD 100–400), but analyze
a limited number of variants, genes (regions). Since scientiﬁc
progress produces new information on a daily basis, genotyping
tests need to be repeated when current ﬁndings are included.
Sequencing, on the other hand, is much more expensive ( >USD
400) but detects variants at any location within the queried
region. Also, the clinical utility of sequencing is higher, and
there is no need for repeated tests. The cost of WGS is still
prohibitive ( >USD 1000) for routine application in medical
practice. It also produces a large amount of unusable data. A more
practical approach is the sequencing of all coding and ﬂanking
regions (WES), which covers between 3 and 6% of the genome,
and the cost for commercial use can be as low as USD 400
(Macrogen Korea, 2017). The aﬀordability, actionable data, no
repeated tests required, and lower junk data makes WES a genetic
test of choice (Vissers et al., 2017). Unfortunately, the total
cost of WES clinical interpretation is still high ( >USD 1000),
which makes it more of a premium service rather than ﬁrst
line modality. The aﬀordability of WGS and WES sequencing
tests can be dramatically increased provided health insurance
companies agree to reimburse the cost.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
PS, CKO, MHTL, YMP , AMK, and HSO contributed in the
writing of the manuscript.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank Ms. Nur Atiqah Azhar for her
assistance in the artwork of Figures 1 ,2herein.
REFERENCES
Abdullah Said, M., Verweij, N., and Van Der Harst, P. (2018). Associations of
combined genetic and lifestyle risks with incident cardiovascular disease and
diabetes in the UK biobank study. JAMA Cardiol. 3, 693–702. doi: 10.1001/
jamacardio.2018.1717ADV AITA (2018). ADVAITA [Online] . Available at: https://apps.advaitabio.com/
oauth-provider (accessed December 22, 2018).
Ahn, D. H., Ozer, H. G., Hancioglu, B., Lesinski, G. B., Timmers, C., and
Bekaii-Saab, T. (2016). Whole-exome tumor sequencing study in biliary cancer
patients with a response to MEK inhibitors. Oncotarget 7, 5306–5312. doi:
10.18632/oncotarget.6632
Frontiers in Genetics | www.frontiersin.org 11 February 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 49