fgene-10-00049 February 8, 2019 Time: 19:38 # 3
Suwinski et al. Exome Big-Data Analytics in Medicine
Knowing the sequence data was simply not enough to
understand the etiological and pathogenic processes in complex
diseases – the genomic data had a low predictive power
and penetrance.
The sequencing of the human genome was more of a
technological achievement rather than scientiﬁc. Knowing the
exact position of all nucleic acids within the DNA molecule
(99.9%) did not automatically mean we understand the functional
implications of the sequence (Galas, 2001). To this end,
several new initiatives were created to uncover the biological
message behind the linear combination of the four nucleotides.
One year before the full human genome was published, the
HapMap project was launched to document the variations in
the genome (Eichler et al., 2007). In 2005, the ﬁrst GWAS was
conducted to annotate medically documented genetic variants
(Ikegawa, 2012). Soon, hundreds of studies were underway
rapidly generating a clinical context for genomic data. The scope
of GWAS was wide-ranging, but for most cases, focused on
the risk factors and metabolic pathways related to multifactorial
diseases. The GWAS contribution was crucial in uncovering
strong polygenic-phenotype associations. Based on the GWAS
discoveries, it was possible to identify essential metabolic
pathways in many traits and medical conditions, paving the
way for the ﬁrst predictive and prognostic genetic test related
to multifactorial diseases, and drug metabolism and response
(pharmacogenetics).
In parallel, fast progress was made in researching for somatic
variants from cancer cells. Neoplasms can be deﬁned as acquired
genetic diseases (70% of all cancers), where the etiological
genetic component is brought about by environmental factors
(Malhotra et al., 2014). The cancerous transformation of cells is
closely linked to genetic alterations in speciﬁc genes, e.g., proto-
oncogenes, tumor suppressor genes, and DNA repair genes. It is
possible to characterize the histological type of cancer cells based
on the patterns of somatic mutations. This knowledge has been
successfully explored to develop a range of cancer genetic tests:
Predictive (e.g., testing BRCA1/2 genes for the genetic
risk of developing Hereditary Breast and Ovarian Cancer)
(McCartan and Chatterjee, 2018)
Prognostic (metastatic potential and conventional
treatment response) (Maman and Witz, 2018)
Targeted treatments (small molecule therapeutics
targeting speciﬁc gene mutations, e.g., imatinib for
c-KIT gene mutation in Chronic Myeloid Leukemia and
Gastrointestinal Stromal Tumors) (Druker et al., 2006;
Grandori and Kemp, 2018)
Cancer genomics is a well-established ﬁeld of medical practice
and research. It is supported by strong clinical evidence and
knowledge through many high-proﬁle projects and initiatives
such as:
COSMIC (Catalogue of Somatic Mutations in Cancer)
(Forbes et al., 2017)
TCGA (The Cancer Genome Atlas) (Weinstein et al., 2013)
ICGC (International Cancer Genome Consortium) (Zhang
et al., 2011)However, it took another 10 years, after the ﬁrst GWAS was
published, for research activities to elucidate the mechanisms
underlying the genotype–phenotype association in multifactorial
diseases. Since the environment is an essential modiﬁer of the
genetic eﬀect, the inclusion of environmental and genetic factors
as well as their combined eﬀect on the downstream biological
process in the assessment process is necessary to increase the
predictive power of genetic alterations. In this approach, genes
rather than single variants are assessed for their functional eﬀect.
It is a departure from the main GWAS assessment methodology,
where the statistical association between the genetic variant
and phenotype is measured without often accounting for the
underlying biological process. It was a new concept that needed
to be tested. In order to validate the clinical utility of functional
genomic analysis, two sets of tools were required: (i) data from
every layer of the molecular network involved in the translation
of genetic eﬀect to observed phenotype, and (ii) powerful
computational tools capable of processing large volumes of data
and making associations. It was to this end that numerous
projects were launched, either to generate the data or to provide
integrated bioinformatics tools for the clinical, functional analysis
of the data.
BIG DATA CHARACTERISTICS OF
WHOLE EXOME SEQUENCING
In 2025, genomics is expected to surpass the three biggest
players in big data domains: Twitter, Astronomy, and YouTube
(Stephens et al., 2015). Stephen’s team had mapped the key
technologies that are needed to support big data genomics, in
terms of data acquisition, storage, distribution and analysis. Data
in genomics had also been mapped to the ﬁve Vs, characteristic of
big data (He et al., 2017): volume, velocity, variety, veracity, and
value. Below, we present the mapping of WES to not just the ﬁve,
but the expanded 10 Vs of big data (Firican, 2017):
(i)Volume –WES data size, which can vary by coverage
and number of samples. For the same sample at about
100coverage, WES will generate 5–6 GB of data.
Although this is substantially lesser than 90 GB for
WGS (AllSeq, 2018) at the same coverage, the data size
can grow substantially for a large number of subjects.
Variant calling on exome sequence data in ExAC v0.3.1
from 60,706 individuals spanned 540 GB (Karczewski et al.,
2017). Nowadays, many research studies involving tens of
thousands of samples use WES for cost eﬀectiveness, but it
is clear that data generation is not the main issue, instead
the bottleneck lies in data processing and analysis.
(ii) Velocity –speed at which WES data per sample is
generated and accumulated. For example, a sequencing
facility in 2013, equipped with 50 or so Illumina HiSeq
2000s and 2500s sequenced four exomes for every whole
genome and had a capacity of some 2,000 exomes per
week (Perkel, 2013). By 2018, the latest Illumina NovaSeq
6000 System is able to sequence a human genome (30 ,
>120 GB) at a pace of every 55 min, and an exome
Frontiers in Genetics | www.frontiersin.org 3 February 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 49