fgene-10-00049 February 8, 2019 Time: 19:38 # 8
Suwinski et al. Exome Big-Data Analytics in Medicine
processing to reduce processing time and achieve 93.8% overlaps
in variant identiﬁcation.
Besides SNP calls, tools for detecting structural variations are
also developed. For example, CNNdel (Wang J. et al., 2017)
uses convolutional neural network on the output from various
feature analysis tools to identify structural variations. GT-WGS
(Wang et al., 2018a) takes advantage of Amazon Web Services
to process NGS data and achieves 99.9% consistency with GATK
best practice in SNP and indel calls. CNVs and larger structural
changes still can be identiﬁed as long as they are limited to
exonic regions. This is possible through the application of
bioinformatic algorithms capable of accurately measuring read’s
depth and allelic imbalances in the aligned sequence (BAM ﬁle).
EXCAV ATOR2 and KaryoScan are examples of such methods
with the former being able to detect CNVs and the latter
large chromosomal aberrations and changes to chromosome
numbers (D’Aurizio et al., 2016; Maxwell et al., 2017). WES is
not recommended to be used for translocations and repetitions
(e.g., tandem repeats), because of their tendency of having break-
points or extending beyond genic space (Belkadi et al., 2015).
New Generation Analytics for
Multi-Omics Big Data
Although data generation is not an issue with the advent of NGS
and there are bioinformatics tools and databases to handle the
resulting big data, the upcoming long read, single DNA molecule
sequencing, such as the Oxford Nanopore, can oﬀset the volume
of data generation from the second generation NGS. However,
while the sequencing data can be decreased, the omics data
needed for personalized medicine presents higher complexity
and is more voluminous than second-generation sequencing
data, and would require continuous evolution or new generation
of bioinformatics tools and data-warehousing approaches. For
example, in April 2016, AstraZeneca announced an integrative
genomics initiative to transform drug discovery and development
by delivering novel insights into the biology of diseases,
identifying new drug targets, supporting patients’ selection for
clinical trials and matching patients to the therapies most likely
to beneﬁt them, a.k.a personalized medicine (Gameiro, 2016).
The initiative included collaborations with Human Longevity,
The Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, United Kingdom, and The
Institute for Molecular Medicine, Finland. In order to deliver
the bold initiative, AstraZeneca established an in-house Centre
for Genomics Research, which will sequence and analyze up
to two million genome sequences (WGS and WES), including
500,000 samples from their clinical trials by 2026. Working in
collaboration with DNAnexus (Business Wire, 2017), the use
of a secure cloud-based translational informatics platform was
adopted (Business Wire, 2017) to allow for warehousing and
analyses of unprecedented massive volume of raw sequencing
data rapidly and economically. This was aimed at enabling the
processing of samples from thousands of patients per week and
the sharing of data easily and safely with collaborators around the
world. The platform also provides a secure environment where
genetic data can be combined with de-identiﬁed clinical data,
paving the way for novel scientiﬁc insights.THE CLINICAL UTILITY LANDSCAPE OF
GENOMIC INFORMATION
Pharmacogenetics
Personalized medicine, as the tailoring of clinical interventions,
is mostly pharmacological, based on a person’s ability to respond
favorably; for pharmacological agents this entails metabolic
capability to process them. The CYP450 family of enzymes
are responsible for phase one of xenobiotics metabolism, and
their activity can be altered by genetic variants located in their
respective genes. Identifying such genetic variants can help
in predicting drugs’ pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics,
which can then assist clinicians in selection of interventions that
will achieve desirable therapeutic eﬀect without toxicity (Evans
and Relling, 2004; Feero et al., 2008; Whirl-Carrillo et al., 2012;
Carr et al., 2014). For drugs with a narrow therapeutic range, such
as blood-thinning agents, a small functional activity change can
result in either a too low or a too high physiological eﬀect that can
lead to health complications. Adverse drug reactions (ADRs) are
reported to be one of the major causes of morbidity and mortality
that can easily be avoided. In the United States, 3% of registered
drugs carry FDA recommendation for genetic tests (FDA, 2018).
Cancer Therapeutics
Besides predicting the response to common drugs, genetic
information is also used in matching targeted cancer therapeutics
(Johannessen and Boehm, 2017). While pharmacogenetics
for common drugs detects germline variants, cancer
pharmacogenetics is for selecting small molecule inhibitors
and analyzing somatic variants from tumor cells. As cancer
is predominantly a genetic disease, tumor DNA analysis is
routinely deployed for molecular characterization of the cancer
cells, as well as treatment prognostics and monitoring. Obtaining
tumor samples for genetic analysis can be a challenge if the
growth is small or inaccessible. In recent years, liquid biopsy
has been successfully applied to obtain a tumor circulating free
DNA. It is now possible to use liquid biopsy for early cancer
detection, prognostics, and treatment selection and monitoring.
Unfortunately, the cost of cancer genetic tests and targeted
treatments are still very high, making them inaccessible in less
developed countries.
Reproductive Health
Reproductive health is another area that has beneﬁted from WGS
and WES. Shallow WGS (3X) is performed for preimplantation
assessment of embryos. It is also used for gender selection.
Non-Invasive Prenatal Test (NIPT) is a combination of liquid
biopsy and WGS for the detection of trisomies or other large
chromosomal rearrangements in the fetus cells. It is possible to
replace WGS with a higher coverage WES for both tests, which
could make the tests more aﬀordable (Pray, 2008).
Multifactorial Diseases
The clinical utility of genomic information for multifactorial
diseases still lacks enough predictive power and strong scientiﬁc
evidence. However, the advances in bioinformatics technologies,
Frontiers in Genetics | www.frontiersin.org 8 February 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 49