fgene-10-00049 February 8, 2019 Time: 19:38 # 7
Suwinski et al. Exome Big-Data Analytics in Medicine
molecule (or one cell DNA) using physical properties of DNA.
Oxford Nanopore is one of the industry leading companies that
commercialized the technology, which uses electrical impedance
to detect the nucleotide passing through a membrane. Some
sources distinguish 4th generation of sequencing technology
for real-time single molecule sequencing (SMaRT). Although
they accuracy is still below the second generation sequencing
machines, they are the perfect tools for point-of-care (Laver et al.,
2015; Lee et al., 2016).
When performing WES, a key consideration factor is the
selection of the exome capture kit, more than the choice
of platform. Various commercials kits are available, such as
Agilent SureSelect XT, Agilent SureSelect QXT, NimbleGen
SeqCap EZ and Illumina Nextera Rapid Capture Exome. They
use biotinylated DNA or RNA baits, which are hybridized to
genomic fragment libraries. Yet they diﬀer in target region
selection, bait length, bait density, molecule used for capture and
genomic fragmentation method. If the aim is to detect SNVs
and indels in untranslated regions (UTRs), then NimbleGen
platform stands-out, while both Agilent XT and Illumina
perform similarly for SNV and indel detection in coding
regions (Shigemizu et al., 2015).
NGS Data Analysis
Medical conditions that are genetically determined or have
a strong genetic component arise from a variety of DNA
alterations. These molecular events include SNV [referred to
as single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP)] if they occur to
some appreciable degree ( >1%) in a population) and structural
DNA changes, such as copy number variation (CNV), short
insertions and deletions (indels), repetitions, large insertions and
deletions, translocations (can result in fusion genes), inversions,
aneuploidy, and ploidy (Ye et al., 2016). WES is primarily used for
the detection of SNV/SNPs and indels within the coding regions
of a genome.
Massive parallel sequencing of short reads through NGS
generate big data, which has to be aligned (mapped to a reference
genome or generate de novo genome sequence) for analysis.
When a reference genome is available, the ﬁrst step in data
analysis is mapping the reads onto the reference genome (Shang
et al., 2014). The intention is to “stack” each reads on the reference
genome “ﬂoorplan.” If the template molecules are mRNA (thus,
known as RNA-seq), the “height” of each stack corresponds to the
abundance of mRNA for the speciﬁc genomic locus (Conesa et al.,
2016; Zhao et al., 2018), at the resolution of each nucleotide. In
the case where the template molecules are DNA (thus, known as
DNA-seq), the “height” of the stack corresponds to the multiple
of copy number and number of haploids. In this case, SNPs is
rendered as mismatches on the stack (Kumar et al., 2012). In an
event where a reference genome is not available, de novo assembly
or genome annotation can be used. De novo assembly is based on
the premise that each read may be overlapping and can be used to
generate a contig assembly (Cho et al., 2015; Deng et al., 2015; de
Sá et al., 2018), much like an assembly from shotgun sequencing
(Staden, 1979; Hung et al., 2013). Once a contig is rendered, it can
be used as a proxy to a reference genome. Genome annotation
(Nagasaki et al., 2013; Menon et al., 2016), on the other hand, isdirect analysis of the reads by two steps. In the ﬁrst step, each
read is annotated using tools such as BLAST (Altschul et al.,
1990), functional annotations using tools such as InterProScan
(Jones et al., 2014), or pathways by sequence similarities to known
enzymes. This is sometimes known as read annotation. This is
followed by the second step during which reads are mapped
onto a scaﬀold; such as, a genome or a pathway map. When
mapped by BLAST to another genome; for example, BLAST of
Bacillus subtilis NGS data to Escherichia coli genome; then E. coli
genome can be used as a reference genome. As such, there are
commonalities between all these methods (mapping to reference
genome, de novo sequencing, and genome annotation) of data
analysis as the end result requires the mapping of reads onto some
form of scaﬀolding substrate. When NGS data is functionally
annotated to known proteins or pathways, the set of proteins or
pathways will be used as a reference and transcript abundance or
SNP calls can be made.
The Broad Institute had developed a set of tools, the Genome
Analysis Toolkit or GATK (DePristo et al., 2011), for analysis
of reads with the ability to combine various tools within GATK
into a workﬂow for better documentation and reproducibility.
GATK can be accessed at https://software.broadinstitute.org/gatk
and various example workﬂows are also publicly available at
https://software.broadinstitute.org/gatk. As more tools are added
to do GATK, the possibility of workﬂows is virtually endless. For
example, do Valle et al. (2016) had combined GATK and MuTect
(Cibulskis et al., 2013), another tool by the Broad Institute and
had been included into GATK, for more accurate SNP calls.
Hence, it is foreseeable that combinations of existing tools may
yield better results than individual tools, which also demonstrates
the advantage of workﬂows. A volume of recent studies (Ahn
et al., 2016; Engelhardt et al., 2017; Kim et al., 2017; Coudray
et al., 2018; Han et al., 2018) had used GATK for mutation/SNP
analysis using WES data. For example, Artomov et al. (2017)
performed WES on more than 10,000 patients and analyzed
the data using GATK to identify rare variants in hereditary
melanoma. From this study, a mutational landscape of cutaneous
and ocular melanoma, and implicated Early B Cell Factor 3
(EBF3) as a potential cutaneous melanoma pre-deposition gene.
Table 1 provides a list of biological databases and bioinformatics
tools relevant for data-warehousing, alignment, processing or
analysis of sequence reads.
Since GATK and MuTect, several other tools had been
published, including a number that utilize GATK. For example,
OTG-snpcaller (Zhu et al., 2014) combined Ion Torrent’s
Mapping Alignment Program (TMAP) and GATK for SNP
calls. This had been used in WES analyses, leading to the
identiﬁcation of a missense mutation in sodium voltage-gated
channel alpha subunit 8 (SCN8A) in a clinical presentation of
early infantile epileptic encephalopathy type 13 (Malcolmson
et al., 2016). ASEQ (Romanel et al., 2015) is designed to perform
gene-level allele-speciﬁc expression analysis from genomic and
transcriptomic NGS data to identify allele speciﬁc features,
and had been used to analyze chemotherapy-resistant urothelial
carcinoma for insight that can be used to develop new treatment
modalities (Faltas et al., 2016). Halvade-RNA (Decap et al., 2017)
re-implements GATK workﬂow to take advantage of parallel
Frontiers in Genetics | www.frontiersin.org 7 February 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 49