IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. XX, NO. X, OCTOBER 2019 3
"Cat"   0.9Neuron Layer
"Dog"  0.1
Figure 1: A four-layer DNN for image classiﬁcation
the inference processing through the early-exit mechanism ,
but the total computation workload is still dominated by the
original DNN model architecture and thus it is hard to ﬁnish
the inference before the application deadline.
Therefore, we propose to integrate these two approaches to
expand the design space. The integration of model partition ing
and model right-sizing is not a one-step effort, and we need t o
carefully design the decision optimization algorithms to f ully
explore the selection of the partition point and the exiting
point and thus to strike a good balance between accuracy and
latency in an on-demanded manner. Through these efforts, we
can achieve the design target such that given the predeﬁned
latency constraint, the DNN inference accuracy is maximize d
without violating the latency requirement. Last but not lea st,
we specialize the design of Edgent for both static and dynamic
network environments while existing efforts (e.g., [38]) m ainly
focus on the scenario with stable network. Considering the
diverse application scenarios and deployment environment s
in practice, we specialize the design of the conﬁgurator and
the runtime optimizer for the static and dynamic network
environments, by which Edgent can generate proper decisions
on the exit point and partition point tailored to the network
conditions.
III. B ACKGROUND AND MOTIVATION
In this section, we ﬁrst give a brief introduction on DNN.
Then we analyze the limitation of edge- and device-only
methods, motivated by which we explore the way to utilize
DNN partitioning and right-sizing to accelerate DNN infere nce
with device-edge synergy.
A. A Brief Introduction on DNN
With the proliferation of data and computation capability,
DNN has served as the core technology for a wide range
of intelligent applications across Computer Vision (CV) [2 ]
and Natural Language Processing (NLP) [4]. Fig. 1 shows
a toy DNN for image recognition that recognizes a cat. As
we can see, a typical DNN model can be represented as a
directed graph, which consists of a series of connected laye rs
where neurons are connected with each other. During the DNN
computation (i.e., DNN training or DNN inference), each
neuron accepts weighted inputs from its neighborhood and
generates outputs after some activation operations. A typi cal
DNN may have dozens of layers and hundreds of nodes per
layer and the total number of parameters can easily reach toFigure 2: Execution runtime of edge-only (Edge) and device- only (De-
vice) approaches of AlexNet under different bandwidths
the millions level, thus a typical DNN inference demands a
large amount of computation. In this paper, we focus on DNN
inference rather than DNN training since the training proce ss
is generally delay-tolerant and often done ofﬂine on powerf ul
cloud datacenters.
B. Insufﬁciency of Device- or Edge-Only DNN Inference
Traditional mobile DNN computation is either solely per-
formed on mobile devices or wholly ofﬂoaded to cloud/edge
servers. Unfortunately, both approaches may lead to poor
performance (i.e., high end-to-end latency), making it dif ﬁcult
to meet real-time applications latency requirements [10]. For
illustration, we employ a Raspberry Pi and a desktop PC
to emulate the mobile device and edge server respectively,
and perform image recognition task over cifar-10 dataset
with the classical AlexNet model [42]. Fig. 2 depicts the
end-to-end latency subdivision of different methods under
different bandwidths on the edge server and the mobile devic e
(simpliﬁed as Edge and Device in Fig. 2). As shown in Fig. 2,
it takes more than 2s to ﬁnish the inference task on a resource -
constrained mobile device. As a contrast, the edge server
only spends 0.123s for inference under a 1Mbps bandwidth.
However, as the bandwidth drops, the execution latency of
the edge-only method climbs rapidly (the latency climbs to
2.317s when the bandwidth drops to 50kbps). This indicates
that the performance of the edge-only method is dominated by
the data transmission latency (the computation time at serv er
side remains at∼10ms) and is therefore highly sensitive to
the available bandwidth. Considering the scarcity of netwo rk
bandwidth resources in practice (e.g., due to network resou rce
contention between users and applications) and the limitat ion
of computation resources on mobile devices, device- and edg e-
only methods are insufﬁcient to support emerging mobile
applications in stringent real-time requirements.
C. DNN Partitioning and Right-Sizing towards Edge Intelli-
gence
DNN Partitioning: To better understand the performance
bottleneck of DNN inference, in Fig. 3 we reﬁne the layer-
wise execution latency (on Raspberry Pi) and the intermedia te
output data size per layer. Seen from Fig. 3, the latency
and output data size of each layer show great heterogeneity,
implying that a layer with a higher latency may not output
larger data size. Based on this observation, an intuitive id ea
is DNN partitioning, i.e., dividing DNN into two parts and