IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. XX, NO. X, OCTOBER 2019 6
Algorithm 1 Runtime Optimizer for Static Environment
Input:
M: the number of exit points in the DNN model
{Ni|i=1,···,M}: the number of layers in the branch of exit pint i
{Lj|j=1,···,Ni}: the layers in the branch of exit point i
{Dj|j=1,···,Ni}: layer-wise output data size in the branch of exit point i
f(Lj): the prediction model that returns the j-thlayer’s latency
B: current available bandwidth
Input : input data size
Latency : latency requirement
Output:
Selection of exit point and partition point
1:Procedure
2:fori=M,···,1do
3: Select the branch of i-thexit point
4: forj=1,···,Nido
5: ESj←fedge(Lj)
6: EDj←fdevice(Lj)
7: end for
8:Ai,p=argmin
p=1,···,Ni(/summationtext.1p−1
j=1ESj+/summationtext.1Ni
k=pEDj+Input/B+Dp−1/B)
9: ifAi,p≤Latency then
10: return Exit point iand partition point p
11: end if
12: end for
13: return NULL ⊲can not meet the latency requirement
Dynamic Conﬁguration Dynamic Conﬁgurator
CONVCONVCONV
FC FC 
Exit Point 2Exit Point 1
Employed DNNConﬁguration
Map Constructors1: <exit point, partition point>
s2: <exit point, partition point>
s3: <exit point, partition point>
...      ...
...      ...Bandwidth TracesLatency
Requirement
Bandwidth States
Figure 7: The dynamic conﬁgurator of Edgent
there is an edge server in proximity that is available to be
employed to accelerate DNN inference through computation
ofﬂoading. The other assumption is that the regression mode ls
for performance prediction are trained based on the situati on
that the computation resources for the DNN model execution
on the mobile device and the edge server are ﬁxed and
allocated beforehand. Nevertheless, these assumptions ca n be
further relaxed, since we can train more advanced performan ce
prediction models (e.g., using deep learning models) by tak ing
different resource levels into account.
C.Edgent for Dynamic Environment
The key idea of Edgent for the dynamic environment is to
exploit the historical bandwidth traces and employ Conﬁgu-
ration Map Constructor to generate the optimal co-inference
plans for versatile bandwidth states in advance. Speciﬁcal ly,
under the dynamic environment Edgnet generates the dynamic
conﬁguration (i.e., a conﬁguration map that records the opt imal
selections for different bandwidth states) at the ofﬂine st age,
and at the online stage Edgent searches for the optimal parti-
tion plan according to the conﬁguration map. The conﬁgurato r
specialized for the dynamic bandwidth environment is shown
in Fig. 7.At the ofﬂine conﬁguration stage , the dynamic conﬁgurator
performs following initialization: (1) sketch the bandwid th
states (noted as s1,s2,···) from the historical bandwidth traces
and (2) pass the bandwidth states, latency requirement and t he
employed DNN to the static Edgent to acquire the optimal exit
point and partition point for the current input. The represe nta-
tion of the bandwidth states is motivated by the existing stu dy
of adaptive video streaming [43], where the throughput of TC P
connection can be modeled as a piece-wise stationary proces s
where the connection consists of multiple non-overlapping
stationary segments. In the dynamic conﬁgurator, it deﬁnes a
bandwidth state sas the mean of the throughput on the client
side in a segment of the underlying TCP connection. With each
bandwidth state, we acquire the optimal co-inference plan b y
calling the Conﬁguration Map Constructor and record that in
a map as the dynamic conﬁguration.
The conﬁguration map construction algorithm run in Con-
ﬁguration Map Constructor is presented in Algorithm 2 . The
key idea of Algorithm 2 is to utilize the reward function to
evaluate the selection of the exit point and partition point .
Since our design goal is to maximize the inference accuracy
while promising the application latency requirement, it is nec-
essary to measure whether the searched co-inference strate gy
can meet the latency requirement and whether the inference
accuracy has been maximized. Therefore, we deﬁne a reward
to evaluate the performance of each search step as follow:
rewardstep=/braceleftbiggexp(acc)+throughput, tstep≤treq,
0, else,
(1)
where tstep is the average execution latency in the current
search step (i.e., the selected exit point and partition poi nt in
the current search step), which equals to1
throughput. The con-
ditions of Equation (1) prioritizes that the latency requir ement
treqshould be satisﬁed, otherwise the reward will be set as 0
directly. Whenever the latency requirement is met, the rewa rd
of the current step will be calculated as exp(acc)+throughput ,
where accis the accuracy of current inference. If the latency
requirement is satisﬁed, the search emphasizes on improvin g
the accuracy and when multiple options have the similar
accuracy, the one with the higher throughput will be selecte d.
InAlgorithm 2 ,sirepresents a bandwidth state extracted from
the bandwidth traces and Cjis a co-inference strategy (i.e.,
a combination of exit point and partition point ) indexed by
j.R(Cj)denotes the reward of the co-inference strategy Cj,
which can be obtained by calculating Equation (1) according
to the accuracy and the throughput of Cj.
At the online tuning stage , the Runtime Optimizer com-
ponent selects the optimal co-inference plan according to t he
dynamic conﬁguration and real-time bandwidth measurement s.
Algorithm 3 depicts the whole process in Runtime Optimizer .
Note that Algorithm 3 calls the change point detection function
D(B1,···,t)[44] to detect the distributional state change of the
underlying bandwidth dynamics. Particularly, when the sam -
pling distribution of the bandwidth measurement has change d
signiﬁcantly, the change point detection function records a
change point and logs a bandwidth state transition. Then
with f ind(state)function, the Runtime Optimizer captures the