IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. XX, NO. X, OCTOBER 2019 2
right-sizing, which accelerates DNN inference by early exi ting
inference at an intermediate DNN layer. Essentially, the ea rly-
exit mechanism involves a latency-accuracy tradeoff. To st rike
a balance on the tradeoff with the existing resources, Edgent
makes a joint optimization on both DNN partitioning and
DNN right-sizing in an on-demand manner. Speciﬁcally, for
mission-critical applications that are typically with a pr e-
deﬁned latency requirement, Edgent maximizes the accuracy
while promising the latency requirement.
Considering the versatile network condition in practical
deployment, Edgent further develops a tailored conﬁguration
mechanism so that Edgent can pursue better performance in
both static network environment and dynamic network envi-
ronment. Speciﬁcally, in a static network environment (e.g .,
local area network with ﬁber or mmWave connection), we
regard the bandwidth as stable and ﬁgure out a collaboration
strategy through execution latency estimation based on the
current bandwidth. In this case, Edgent trains regression mod-
els to predict the layer-wise inference latency and accordi ngly
derives the optimal conﬁgurations for DNN partitioning and
DNN right-sizing. In a dynamic network environment (e.g., 5 G
cellular network, vehicular network), to alleviate the imp act
of network ﬂuctuation, we build a look-up table by proﬁling
and recording the optimal selection of each bandwidth state
and specialize the runtime optimizer to detect the bandwidt h
state transition and map the optimal selection accordingly .
Through our specialized design for different network envi-
ronment, Edgent is able to maximize the inference accuracy
without violating the application responsiveness require ment.
The prototype implementation and extensive evaluations ba sed
on the Raspberry Pi and the desktop PC demonstrate Edgent ’s
effectiveness in enabling on-demand low-latency edge inte lli-
gence.
To summarize, we present the contribution of this paper as
follows:
•We propose Edgent , a framework for on-demand DNN
collaborative inference through device-edge synergy, in
which we jointly optimize DNN partitioning and DNN
right-sizing to maximize the inference accuracy while
promising application latency requirement.
•Considering the versatile network environments (i.e.,
static network environment and dynamic network envi-
ronment), we specialize the workﬂow design for Edgent
to achieve better performance.
•We implement and experiment Edgent prototype with
a Raspberry Pi and a desktop PC. The evaluation results
based on the real-world network trace dataset demonstrate
the effectiveness of the proposed Edgent framework.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. First, we re-
view the related literature in Sec. II and present the backgr ound
and motivation in Sec. III. Then we propose the design of
Edgent in Sec. IV. The results of the performance evaluation
are shown in Sec. V to demonstrate the effectiveness of
Edgent . Finally, we conclude in Sec. VI.
II. R ELATED WORK
Discussions on the topic of mobile DNN computation have
recently obtained growing attention. By hosting artiﬁcial intel-ligence on mobile devices, mobile DNN computation deploys
DNN models close to users in order to achieve more ﬂexible
execution as well as more secure interaction [15]. However, it
is challenging to directly execute the computation-intens ive
DNNs on mobile devices due to the limited computation
resource. On this issue, existing efforts dedicate to optim ize
the DNN computation on edge devices.
Towards low-latency and energy-efﬁcient mobile DNN com-
putation, there are mainly three ways in the literature: run time
management, model architecture optimization and hardware
acceleration. Runtime management is to ofﬂoad computation
from mobile devices to the cloud or the edge server, which
utilizes external computation resource to obtain better pe rfor-
mance. Model architecture optimization attempts to develo p
novel DNN structure so as to achieve desirable accuracy with
moderate computation [17]–[21]. For example, aiming at re-
ducing resource consumption during DNN computation, DNN
models are compressed by model pruning [22]–[24]. Recent
advance in such kind of optimization has turned to Network
Architecture Search (NAS) [25]–[27]. Hardware accelerati on
generally embraces basic DNN computation operations in
hardware level design [28]–[30] while some works aim at
optimizing the utilization of the existing hardware resour ces
[31]–[33].
As one of the runtime optimization methods, DNN parti-
tioning technology segments speciﬁc DNN model into some
successive parts and deploys each part on multiple partici-
pated devices. Speciﬁcally, some frameworks [34]–[36] tak e
advantage of DNN partitioning to optimize the computation
ofﬂoading between the mobile devices and the cloud, while
some framework target to distribute computation workload
among mobile devices [37]–[39]. Regardless of how many
devices are involved, DNN partitioning dedicates to maximi ze
the utilization of external computation resources so as to
accelerate the mobile computation. As for DNN right-sizing ,
it focuses on adjusting the model size under the limitation
of the existing environment. On this objective, DNN right-
sizing appeals to specialized training technique to genera te the
deuterogenic branchy DNN model from the original standard
DNN model. In this paper, we implement the branchy model
with the assist of the open-source BranchyNet [40] framewor k
and Chainer [41] framework.
Compared with the existing work, the novelty of our frame-
work is summarized in the following three aspects. First of a ll,
given the pre-deﬁned application latency requirement, Edgent
maximizes the inference accuracy according to the availabl e
computation resources, which is signiﬁcantly different fr om
the existing studies. This feature is essential for practic al
deployment since different DNN-based applications may re-
quire different execution deadlines under different scena r-
ios. Secondly, Edgent integrates both DNN partitioning and
DNN right-sizing to maximize the inference accuracy while
promising application execution deadline. It is worth noti ng
that neither the model partitioning nor the model right-siz ing
can well address the timing requirement challenge solely.
For model partitioning, it does reduce the execution latenc y,
whereas the total processing time is still restricted by the part
on the mobile device. For model right-sizing, it accelerate s