arXiv:1910.05316v1  [cs.NI]  4 Oct 2019IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. XX, NO. X, OCTOBER 2019 1
Edge AI: On-Demand Accelerating Deep Neural
Network Inference via Edge Computing
En Li, Liekang Zeng, Zhi Zhou, Member, IEEE and Xu Chen, Member, IEEE
Abstract —As a key technology of enabling Artiﬁcial Intel-
ligence (AI) applications in 5G era, Deep Neural Networks
(DNNs) have quickly attracted widespread attention. Howev er,
it is challenging to run computation-intensive DNN-based t asks
on mobile devices due to the limited computation resources.
What’s worse, traditional cloud-assisted DNN inference is heavily
hindered by the signiﬁcant wide-area network latency, lead -
ing to poor real-time performance as well as low quality of
user experience. To address these challenges, in this paper , we
propose Edgent , a framework that leverages edge computing
for DNN collaborative inference through device-edge syner gy.
Edgent exploits two design knobs: (1) DNN partitioning that
adaptively partitions computation between device and edge for
purpose of coordinating the powerful cloud resource and the
proximal edge resource for real-time DNN inference; (2) DNN
right-sizing that further reduces computing latency via ea rly
exiting inference at an appropriate intermediate DNN layer . In
addition, considering the potential network ﬂuctuation in real-
world deployment, Edgent is properly design to specialize for
both static and dynamic network environment. Speciﬁcally, in a
static environment where the bandwidth changes slowly, Edgent
derives the best conﬁgurations with the assist of regressio n-
based prediction models, while in a dynamic environment whe re
the bandwidth varies dramatically, Edgent generates the best
execution plan through the online change point detection al go-
rithm that maps the current bandwidth state to the optimal
conﬁguration. We implement Edgent prototype based on the
Raspberry Pi and the desktop PC and the extensive experiment al
evaluations demonstrate Edgent ’s effectiveness in enabling on-
demand low-latency edge intelligence.
Index Terms —Edge intelligence, edge computing, deep learn-
ing, computation ofﬂoading.
I. I NTRODUCTION
AS the backbone technology supporting modern intelligent
mobile applications, Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) rep-
resent the most commonly adopted machine learning techniqu e
and have become increasingly popular. Beneﬁted by the supe-
rior performance in feature extraction, DNN have witnessed
widespread success in domains from computer vision [2],
speech recognition [3] to natural language processing [4] a nd
big data analysis [5]. Unfortunately, today’s mobile devic es
generally fail to well support these DNN-based application s
due to the tremendous amount of computation required by
DNN-based applications.
Manuscript received March 25, 2019; revised July 19, 2019; a ccepted
September 25, 2019.
Part of the results of this journal version paper was present ed at 2018 ACM
SIGCOMM MECOMM [1].
The authors are with School of Data and Computer Science,
Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510006, China (e-mail: { lien5,
zenglk3}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn; {zhouzhi9, chenxu35}@mail .sysu.edu.cn). ( En
Li and Liekang Zeng contribute equally to this work. Corresp onding author:
Xu Chen. )In response to the excessive resource demand of DNNs,
traditional wisdom resorts to the powerful cloud datacente r
for intensive DNN computation. In this case, the input data
generated from mobile devices are sent to the remote cloud
datacenter, and the devices receive the execution result as
the computation ﬁnishes. However, with such cloud-centric
approaches, a large amount of data (e.g., images and videos)
will be transferred between the end devices and the remote
cloud datacenter backwards and forwards via a long wide-are a
network, which may potentially result in intolerable laten cy
and extravagant energy. To alleviate this problem, we explo it
the emerging edge computing paradigm. The principal idea
of edge computing [6]–[8] is to sink the cloud computing
capability from the network core to the network edges (e.g.,
base stations and WLAN) in close proximity to end devices
[9]–[14]. This novel feature enables computation-intensi ve and
latency-critical DNN-based applications to be executed in a
real-time responsive manner (i.e., edge intelligence) [15 ]. By
leveraging edge computing, we can design an on-demand low-
latency DNNs inference framework for supporting real-time
edge AI applications.
While recognizing the beneﬁts of edge intelligence, our em-
pirical study reveals that the performance of edge-based DN N
inference is still highly sensitive to the available bandwi dth
between the edge server and the mobile device. Speciﬁcally,
as the bandwidth drops from 1Mbps to 50kbps, the edge-
based DNN inference latency increases from 0.123s to 2.317s
(detailed in Sec. III-B). Considering the vulnerable and vo latile
network environment in practical deployment, a natural que s-
tion is whether we can further optimize the DNN inference
under the versatile network environment, especially for so me
mission-critical DNN-based applications such as intellig ent
security and industrial robotics [16].
On this issue, in this paper, we exploit the edge computing
paradigm and propose Edgent , a low-latency co-inference
framework via device-edge synergy. Towards low-latency ed ge
intelligence1,Edgent pursues two design knobs. The ﬁrst is
DNN partitioning, which adaptively partitions DNN compu-
tation between mobile devices and the edge server according
to the available bandwidth so as to utilize the computation
capability of the edge server. However, it is insufﬁcient to meet
the stringent responsiveness requirement of some mission-
critical applications since the execution performance is s till
restrained by the rest of the model running on mobile devices .
Therefore, Edgent further integrate the second knob, DNN
1As an initial study, in this work, we focus on the problem of ex ecution
latency optimization. Energy efﬁciency will be considered in future studies.