IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. XX, NO. X, OCTOBER 2019 7
Algorithm 2 Conﬁguration Map Construction
Input:
{si|i=1,···,N}: the bandwidth states
{Cj|j=1,···,M}: the co-inference strategy
R(Cj): the reward of co-inference strategy Cj
Output:
Conﬁguration Map
1:Procedure
2:fori=1,···,Ndo
3: Select the bandwidth state si
4:reward max=0,Coptimal=0
5: forj=1,···,Mdo
6: reward cj←R(Cj)
7: ifreward max≤reward cjthen
8: reward max=reward cj,Coptimal=Cj
9: end if
10: end for
11: Get the corresponding exit point andpartitionpoint ofCoptimal
12: AddSi:<exit point ,partitionpoint >to the Conﬁguration Map
13: end for
14: return Conﬁguration Map
corresponding co-inference strategy to the current bandwi dth
state (or the closest state) in the dynamic conﬁguration and
accordingly guides the collaborative inference process at the
co-inference stage.
V. P ERFORMANCE EVALUATION
In this section, we present our implementation of Edgent
and the evaluation results.
A. Experimental Setup
We implement a prototype based on the Raspberry Pi and
the desktop PC to demonstrate the feasibility and efﬁciency of
Edgent . Equipped with a quad-core 3.40 GHz Intel processor
and 8 GB RAM, a desktop PC is served as the edge server.
Equipped with a quad-core 1.2 GHz ARM processor and 1
GB RAM, a Raspberry Pi 3 is used to act as a mobile device.
To set up a static bandwidth environment, we use the
WonderShaper tool [45] to control the available bandwidth.
As for the dynamic bandwidth environment setting, we use
the dataset of Belgium 4G/LTE bandwidth logs [46] to emulate
the online dynamic bandwidth environment. To generate the
conﬁguration map, we use the synthetic bandwidth traces
provided by Oboe [43] to generate 428 bandwidth states range
from 0Mbps to 6Mbps.
To obtain the branchy DNN, we employ BranchyNet [40]
framework and Chainer [41] framework, which can well
support multi-branchy DNN training. In our experiments we
take the standard AlexNet [42] as the toy model and train the
AlexNet model with ﬁve exit points for image classiﬁcation
over the cifar-10 dataset [47]. As shown in Fig. 4, the
trained branchy AlexNet has ﬁve exit points, with each point
corresponds to a branch of the standard AlexNet. From the
longest branch to the shortest branch, the number of layers i n
each exit point is 22, 20, 19, 16 and 12, respectively.
B. Experiments in Static Bandwidth Environment
In the static conﬁgurator, the prediction model for layer-
wise prediction is trained based on the independent variabl es
presented in Table. I. The branchy AlexNet is deployed onAlgorithm 3 Runtime Optimizer for Dynamic Environment
Input:
{B1,···,t}: the accumulated bandwidth measurements until the current momentt
{Cj|j=1,···,t}: the co-inference strategy
{si|i=1,···,t}: the bandwidth states
D(B1,···,t): the bandwidth state detection function that returns the cu rrent bandwidth
state
find(s): ﬁnd the co-inference strategy corresponds to the given sta tes
Output:
Co-inference strategy
1:Procedure
2:Ct=Ct−1
3:st=D(Bi,···,t)
4:ifst/nequalst−1then
5:Ct←find(st)
6:end if
7:st−1=st
8:Ct−1=Ct
9:returnCt
both the edge server and the mobile device for performance
evaluation. Speciﬁcally, due to the high-impact character istics
of the latency requirement and the available bandwidth duri ng
the optimization procedure, the performance of Edgent is
measured under different pre-deﬁned latency requirements and
varying available bandwidth settings.
We ﬁrst explore the impact of the bandwidth by ﬁxing
the latency requirement at 1000ms and setting the bandwidth
from 50kbps to 1.5Mbps. Fig. 8(a) shows the optimal co-
inference plan (i.e., the selection of partition point and e xit
point) generated by Edgent under various bandwidth settings.
Shown in Fig. 8(a), as bandwidth increases, the optimal
exit point becomes larger, indicating that a better network
environment leads to a longer branch of the employed DNN
and thus higher accuracy. Fig. 8(b) shows the inference late ncy
change trend where the latency ﬁrst descends sharply and the n
climbs abruptly as the bandwidth increases. This ﬂuctuatio n
makes sense since the bottleneck of the system changes as the
bandwidth becomes higher. When the bandwidth is smaller
than 250kbps, the optimization of Edgent is restricted by
the poor communication condition and prefers to trade the
high inference accuracy for low execution latency, for whic h
the exit point is set as 3 rather than 5. As the bandwidth
rises, the execution latency is no longer the bottleneck so
that the exit point climbs to 5, implying a model with larger
size and thus higher accuracy. There is another interesting
result that the curve of predicted latency and the measured
latency is nearly overlapping, which shows the effectivene ss
of our regression-based prediction. Next, we set the availa ble
bandwidth at 500kbps and vary the latency requirement from
1000ms to 100ms for further exploration. Fig. 8(c) shows
the optimal partition point and exit point under different
latency requirements. As illustrated in Fig. 8(c), both the
optimal exit point and partition point climb higher as the
latency requirement relaxes, which means that a later execu tion
deadline will provide more room for accuracy improvement.
Fig. 9 shows the model inference accuracy of different
methods under different latency requirement settings (the
bandwidth is ﬁxed as 400kbps). The accuracy is described
in negative when the method cannot satisfy the latency re-
quirement. As Fig. 9 shows, given a tightly restrict latency
requirement (e.g., 100ms), all the four methods fail to meet