IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. XX, NO. X, OCTOBER 2019 8
(a) Selection under different bandwidths (b) Model runtime under different bandwidths (c) Selection under different latency requirements
Figure 8: The results under different bandwidths and differ ent latency requirements
Figure 9: The accuracy comparison under various latency req uirement
the requirement, for which all the four squares lay below the
standard line. However, as the latency requirement relaxes ,
Edgent works earlier than the other three methods (at the
requirements of 200ms and 300ms) with the moderate loss
of accuracy. When the latency requirement is set longer
than 400ms, all the methods except for device-only inferenc e
successfully ﬁnish execution in time.
C. Experiments in Dynamic Bandwidth Environment
For the conﬁguration map generation, we use the bandwidth
traces provided in Oboe [43]. Each bandwidth trace in the
dataset consists of 49 pairs of data tuple about download
chunks, including start time, end time and the average band-
width. We calculate the mean value of all the average band-
width in the same bandwidth trace to represent the bandwidth
state ﬂuctuation, from which we obtain 428 bandwidth states
range from 0Mbps to 6Mbps. According to the Algorithm
2, through the exhaustive search, we ﬁgure out the optimal
selection of each bandwidth state. The latency requirement in
this experiment is also set to 1000ms.
For online change point detection, we use the existing
implementation [48] and integrate it with the Runtime Op-
timizer . We use the Belgium 4G/LTE bandwidth logs dataset
[46] to perform online bandwidth measurement, which record s
the bandwidth traces that are measured on several types of
transportation: on foot, bicycle, bus, train or car. Additi onally,
Since that most of the bandwidth logs are over 6Mbps and in
some cases even up to 95Mbps, to adjust the edge computing
scenario, in our experiment, we scale down the bandwidth of
the logs and limit it in a range from 0Mbps to 10Mbps.In this experiment Edgent runs in a dynamic bandwidth
environment emulated by the adjusted Belgium 4G/LTE band-
width logs. Fig. 10(a) shows an example bandwidth trace
on the dataset that is recorded on a running bus. Fig. 10(b)
shows the DNN model inference throughput results under
the bandwidth environment showed in Fig. 10(a). The cor-
responding optimal selection of the exit point and partitio n
point is presented in Fig. 10(c). Seen from Fig. 10(c), the
optimal selection of model inference strategy varies with t he
bandwidth changes but the selected exit point stays at 5,
which means that the network environment is good enough
forEdgent to satisfy the latency requirement though the
bandwidth ﬂuctuates. In addition, since the exit point rema ins
invariable, the inference accuracy also keeps stable. Domi nated
by our reward function design, the selection of partition po ints
approximately follows the traces of the throughput result. The
experimental results show the effectiveness of Edgent under
the dynamic bandwidth environment.
We further compare the static conﬁgurator and the dynamic
conﬁgurator under the dynamic bandwidth environment in Fig .
11. We set the latency requirement as 1000ms and record
the throughput and the reward for the two conﬁgurators,
base on which we calculate the Cumulative Distribution
Function (CDF). Seen from Fig. 11(a), under the same CDF
level, Edgent with the dynamic conﬁgurator achieves higher
throughput, demonstrating that under the dynamic network
environment the dynamic conﬁgurator performs co-inferenc e
with higher efﬁciency. For example, set CDF as 0.6, the
dynamic conﬁgurator makes 27 FPS throughput while the
static conﬁgurator makes 17 FPS. In addition, the CDF curve
of dynamic conﬁgurator rises with 11 FPS throughput while
the static conﬁgurator begins with 1 FPS, which indicates th at
the dynamic conﬁgurator works more efﬁciently than the stat ic
conﬁgurator at the beginning.
Fig. 11(b) presents the CDF results of reward. Similarly,
under the same CDF level, the dynamic conﬁgurator acquires
higher reward than the static conﬁgurator and the CDF curve
of the dynamic conﬁgurator rises latter again. However, in
Fig. 11(b) the two curves is closer than in Fig. 11(a), which
means that the two conﬁgurators achieve nearly the same good
performance from the perspective of reward. This is because
the two conﬁgurators make similar choices in the selection o f
exit point (i.e., in most cases both of them select exit point 5
as part of the co-inference strategy). Therefore the differ ence