IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. XX, NO. X, OCTOBER 2019 4
Figure 3: AlexNet layer-wise runtime and output data size on Raspberry
Pi
ofﬂoading the computation-intensive part to the server at a low
transmission cost and thus reducing total end-to-end execu tion
latency. As an illustration, we select the second local resp onse
normalization layer (i.e., lrn_2 ) in Fig. 3 as the partition
point and the layers before the point are ofﬂoaded to the serv er
side while the rest remains on the device. Through model
partitioning between device and edge, hybrid computation
resources in proximity can be in comprehensive utilization
towards low-latency DNN inference.
DNN Right-Sizing: Although DNN partitioning can sig-
niﬁcantly reduce the latency, it should be noted that with
the optimal DNN partitioning, the inference latency is stil l
constrained by the remaining computation on the mobile
device. To further reduce the execution latency, the DNN rig ht-
sizing method is employed in conjunction with DNN partition -
ing. DNN right-sizing accelerates DNN inference through th e
early-exit mechanism. For example, by training DNN models
with multiple exit points, a standard AlexNet model can be
derived as a branchy AlexNet as Fig. 4 shows, where a shorter
branch (e.g., the branch ended with the exit point 1) implies
a smaller model size and thus a shorter runtime. Note that in
Fig. 4 only the convolutional layers (CONV) and the fully-
connected layers (FC) are drawn for the ease of illustration .
This novel branchy structure demands novel training method s.
In this paper, we implement the branchy model training with
the assist of the open-source BranchyNet [40] framework.
Problem Deﬁnition: Clearly, DNN right-sizing leads to a
latency-accuracy tradeoff, i.e., while the early-exit mec hanism
reduces the total inference latency, it hurts the inference
accuracy. Considering the fact that some latency-sensitiv e
applications have strict deadlines but can tolerate modera te
precision losses, we can strike a good balance between laten cy
and accuracy in an on-demand manner. In particular, given
the pre-deﬁned latency requirement, our framework should
maximize accuracy within the deadline. More precisely, the
problem addressed in this paper can be summarized as how
to make a joint optimization on DNN partitioning and DNN
right-sizing in order to maximize the inference accuracy wi th-
out violating the pre-deﬁned latency requirement.
IV. F RAMEWORK AND DESIGN
In this section, we present the design of Edgent , which
generates the optimal collaborative DNN inference plan tha t
maximizes the accuracy while meeting the latency requireme nt
in both the static and dynamic bandwidth environment.
CONV 
CONV 
CONV 
CONV 
CONV 
CONV
CONVCONV
CONVCONV
CONVCONV
FC 
FC 
FC 
FC FC FC FC 
FC 
Exit Point 1Exit Point 5
Exit Point 4 Exit Point 3 Exit Point 2
Figure 4: A branchy AlexNet model with ﬁve exit points
A. Framework Overview
Edgent aims to pursue a better DNN inference performance
across a wide range of network conditions. As shown in Fig.
5,Edgent works in three stages: ofﬂine conﬁguration stage,
online tuning stage and co-inference stage.
At the ofﬂine conﬁguration stage ,Edgent inputs the em-
ployed DNN to the Static/Dynamic Conﬁgurator component
and obtains the corresponding conﬁguration for online tuni ng.
To be speciﬁc, composed of trained regression models and
branchy DNN model, the static conﬁguration will be employed
where the bandwidth keeps stable during the DNN inference
(which will be detailed in Sec. IV-B), while composed of the
trained branchy DNN and the optimal selection for different
bandwidth states, the dynamic conﬁguration will be used
adaptive to the state dynamics (which will be detailed in Sec .
IV-C).
At the online tuning stage ,Edgent measures the current
bandwidth state and makes a joint optimization on DNN
partitioning and DNN right-sizing based on the given latenc y
requirement and the conﬁguration obtained ofﬂine, aiming a t
maximizing the inference accuracy under the given latency
requirement.
At the co-inference stage , based on the co-inference plan
(i.e., the selected exit point and partition point) generat ed at
the online tuning stage, the layers before the partition poi nt
will be executed on the edge server with the rest remaining
on the device.
During DNN inference, the bandwidth between the mobile
device and the edge server may be relatively stable or fre-
quently changing. Though Edgent runs on the same workﬂow
in both static and dynamic network environments, the functi on
ofConﬁgurator component and Runtime Optimizer component
differ. Speciﬁcally, under a static bandwidth environment ,
the conﬁgurator trains regression models to predict infere nce
latency and the branchy DNN to enable early-exit mechanism.
The static conﬁguration generated ofﬂine includes the trai ned
regression models and the trained branchy DNN, based on
which the Runtime Optimizer will ﬁgure out the optimal
co-inference plan. Under a dynamic bandwidth environment,
the dynamic conﬁgurator creates a conﬁguration map that
records the optimal selection for different bandwidth stat e
via the change point detector, which will then be input to
theRuntime Optimizer to generate the optimal co-inference
plan. In the following, we will discuss the specialized desi gn
of the conﬁgurator and optimizer for the static and dynamic
environments, respectively.