IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. XX, NO. X, OCTOBER 2019 5
Runtime
Optimizer
Latency
RequirementCo-inference
Plan
Mobile
DeviceEdge
Server
Current
Bandwidth State
Static / Dynamic
ConﬁguratorConﬁguration
Ofﬂine Conﬁguration Stage Online Tuning Stage Co-Inference StageCONVCONVCONV
FC FC 
Exit Point 2Exit Point 1
Employed DNNCONVCONVCONV
FC 
Figure 5: Edgent framework overview
Static Conﬁgurator
Prediction
Model
Branchy 
DNN CONV RELU
POOL FC 
CONVCONVCONV
FC FC 
Exit Point 2Exit Point 1
Employed DNNStatic
Conﬁguration
BranchyNet
Framework
Figure 6: The static conﬁgurator of Edgent
B.Edgent for Static Environment
As a starting point, we ﬁrst consider our framework design
in the case of the static network environment. The key idea of
the static conﬁgurator is to train regression models to pred ict
the layer-wise inference latency and train the branchy mode l
to enable early-exit mechanism. The conﬁgurator specializ ed
for the static bandwidth environment is shown in Fig. 6.
At the ofﬂine conﬁguration stage , to generate static
conﬁguration, the static conﬁgurator initiates two tasks: (1)
proﬁle layer-wise inference latency on the mobile device an d
the edge server respectively and accordingly train regress ion
models for different kind of DNN layer (e.g., Convolution ,
Fully-Connected , etc.), (2) train the DNN model with
multiple exit points via BranchyNet framework to obtain
branchy DNN. The proﬁling process is to record the inference
latency of each type of layers rather than that of the entire
model. Base on the proﬁling results, we establish the predic -
tion model for each type of layers by performing a series of
regression models with independent variables shown in Tabl e.
I. Since there are limited types of layers in a typical DNN,
the proﬁling cost is moderate. Since the layer-wise inferen ce
latency is infrastructure-dependent and the DNN training i s
application-related, for a speciﬁc DNN inference Edgent only
needs to initialize the above two tasks for once.
At the online tuning stage , using the static conﬁguration
(i.e., the prediction model and the branchy DNN), the Runtime
Optimizer component searches the optimal exit point and
partition point to maximize the accuracy while ensuring the
execution deadline with three inputs: (1) the static conﬁgu ra-
tion, (2) the measured bandwidth between the edge server andTable I: The independent variables of prediction models
Type of DNN Layer Independent Variable(s)
Convolutional# of input feature maps,
(ﬁlter size/stride)2×(# of ﬁlters)
Relu input data size
Pooling input data size, output data size
Local Response Normalization input data size
Dropout input data size
Fully-Connected input data size, output data size
the end device and (3) the latency requirement. The search
process of joint optimization on the selection of partition
point and exit point is described in Algorithm 1 . For a DNN
model with Mexit points, we denote that the branch of
i-thexit point has Nilayers and Dpis the output of the
p-thlayer. We use the abvoe-mentioned regression models
to predict the latency EDjof the j-thlayer running on the
device and the latency ESjof the j-thlayer running on the
server. Under a certain bandwidth B, fed with the input data
Input , we can calculate the total latency Ai,pby summing up
the computation latency on each side and the communication
latency for transferring input data and intermediate execu tion
result. We denote p-thlayer as the partition point of the branch
with the i-thexit point. Therefore, p=1indicates that the total
inference process will only be executed on the device side
(i.e., ESp=0,Dp−1/B=0,Input/B=0) whereas p=Ni
means the total computation is only done on the server side
(i.e., EDp=0,Dp−1/B=0). Through the exhaustive search
on points, we can ﬁgure out the optimal partition point with
the minimum latency of the i-thexit point. Since the model
partitioning does not affect the inference accuracy, we can
successively test the DNN inference with different exit lay ers
(i.e., with different precision) and ﬁnd the model with the
maximum accuracy while satisfying the latency requirement at
the same time. As the regression models for layer-wise laten cy
prediction have been trained in advance, Algorithm 1 mainly
involves linear search operations and can be completed very
quickly (no more than 1ms in our experiment).
There are two basic assumptions for our design. One is
that we assume the existing DNN inference on mobile de-
vices cannot satisfy the application latency requirement a nd