Computers in Human Behavior 146 (2023) 107798
2AI can bring to education (Chounta et al., 2022 ). Their inadequate AI 
readiness may partially contribute to the gap between rapid advances in 
AI technologies and comparatively slow and unsatisfactory adoption of 
them in education (Luan et al., 2020 ; Luckin et al., 2022 ). 
According to prior research on AI readiness (e.g., Holmstr om, 2022 ; 
Karaca et al., 2021 ; Luckin et al., 2022 ) while considering this study ’s 
context, AI readiness is defined as the state of preparedness among 
teachers in terms of their cognition, ability, vision, and ethical consid -
erations with respect to the use of AI in education. Theoretically, 
teachers with high levels of AI readiness may have the knowledge and 
competence necessary for innovating their work by experimenting with 
and adapting to opportunities promised by AI (Johnk et al., 2021 ; Luckin 
et al., 2022 ). The innovative attempts may in turn improve their work 
experience, fostering high job satisfaction (Bhargava et al., 2021 ). 
Conversely, those with low levels of AI readiness may feel threatened, 
worrying about possible disruptions caused by AI to their work and 
subsequently alienating themselves from AI technologies (Chounta 
et al., 2022 ; Luckin et al., 2022 ). 
Though a decent level of AI readiness is considered crucial for suc-
cessful integration of AI into teaching (Celik et al., 2022 ), there is limited 
empirical knowledge regarding how AI readiness affects teachers ’ work. 
Even less is known regarding whether and how AI readiness may differ 
among teachers from distinct demographic backgrounds, particularly 
genders and socioeconomic backgrounds which have often been re-
ported to cause disparities in the use of conventional technologies 
(Beaunoyer et al., 2020 ; Park et al., 2019 ). In addition, given that the 
ethical use of AI has been a concern attracting substantial attention 
(Hagendorff, 2020 ; Smakman et al., 2021 ), it would be useful to gain 
insights into how ethics are related to other components of AI readiness. 
Considering the increasing use of AI in education for innovating teach -
ing and enhancing educators ’ work experience (Celik et al., 2022 ; 
Luckin et al., 2022 ), this study sets out to bridge these gaps by 
addressing the following research questions: 
RQ1.How are ethics related to other components of teachers ’ AI 
readiness? 
RQ2.How are teachers ’ AI readiness associated with their perceived 
threats from AI, AI-enhanced innovation, and job satisfaction? 
RQ3.How do teachers from different demographic backgrounds vary 
in AI readiness, perceived threats from AI, AI-enhanced innovation, and 
job satisfaction? 
2.Literature review and hypotheses development 
2.1. Prior research on AI readiness 
The concept of AI readiness is relatively new, as highlighted in recent 
studies (Johnk et al., 2021 ; Luckin et al., 2022 ). Most of the research on 
AI readiness has been conducted in the business field, where AI has been 
adopted more widely than in education (Luckin et al., 2022 ). However, 
the components of AI readiness are still developing and may differ 
depending on the specific fields of application. 
In the early days of technological readiness research, Parasuraman 
(2000) proposed a concept of technological readiness and defined it as 
individuals ’ inclination to adopt and use new technologies for 
completing tasks at home and work. Technology readiness was related to 
mental enablers and inhibitors that determined people ’s purchase de-
cisions about new technologies. According to Parasuraman (2000) , in-
dividuals ’ tendency to use new technologies was caused by the interplay 
between readiness enablers, including optimism toward technologies 
and innovativeness for their work, and readiness inhibitors, including 
discomfort and insecurity resulting from distrust of technologies. How-
ever, the technology readiness concept was developed for the service 
industry to improve customer satisfaction by identifying factors that 
decrease customers ’ frustration when interacting with new technologies and encourage their purchase intention. Compared with customers ’ 
readiness of using new technologies, educators ’ readiness of using AI is 
related to not only themselves but also their students. In addition, AI is 
different from conventional technologies in that it simulates some de-
gree of human reasoning and learning while conventional technologies 
acquiesced full control to human beings (Damerji & Salimi, 2021 ). 
Therefore, the concept of AI readiness has to be reconsidered and 
redefined, particularly for educators. 
Johnk et al. (2021) conceptualized organizational AI readiness based 
on interviews with 25 AI experts. It comprised 18 factors along five 
categories, including strategic alignment (aligning organizational needs 
with AI’s potential), resources (finances, personnel, and IT infrastruc -
ture allocated for AI implementation), knowledge (AI awareness, skills, 
and ethics), culture (innovativeness, collaboration, and change man-
agement), and data (availability and quality of data for building valid AI 
models). Nonetheless, the AI readiness framework was developed for the 
industry sector and mainly reflected the views of the management staff. 
The 18 factors within five categories were obtained through qualitative 
analysis of experts ’ views and were not validated empirically through 
quantitative studies, thus leading to doubtful generalization to a broad 
population and other fields. 
In education, Luckin et al. (2022) gave a more comprehensive 
introduction of AI readiness and highlighted contextualization when 
applying AI readiness to the educational sector. They proposed an AI 
readiness training framework comprising seven steps, involving 
engaging with the idea of AI readiness, pinpointing challenges in edu-
cation to be solved, identifying and collecting data to address the 
challenges, applying AI techniques for data analysis, learning from the 
AI results, and iterating the framework if needed. However, Luckin 
et al.’s (2022) AI readiness framework was developed based on 
Cross-Industry Standard Process for Data Mining in the business sector, 
focusing on AI-supported data mining, instead of AI-enhanced teaching 
practice. In addition, applying the a priori framework from the business 
sector directly to the field of education may not well address educational 
challenges facing students and educators. 
To prepare medical students for new roles and tasks in AI-enhanced 
healthcare, Karaca et al. (2021) developed an AI readiness scale for 
them, which comprised four components, including cognition (cognitive 
readiness regarding students ’ basic knowledge of AI), ability (students ’ 
competence in using AI for learning), vision (students ’ critical under -
standing of AI), and ethics (legal and ethical norms for responsible use of 
AI). However, Karaca et al. (2021) ’s AI readiness scale was developed 
for specific healthcare student population and the empirical relation -
ships between AI readiness and factors related to AI-enhanced learning 
were not reported. Despite these, among the prior studies examining AI 
readiness, Karaca et al. (2021) ’s scale is particularly relevant to the 
research on AI readiness for educators, as their conceptualization of AI 
readiness is comprehensive and empirically validated. 
In short, prior studies (e.g., Holmstr om, 2022 ; Luckin et al., 2022 ) 
have generally agreed on the importance of AI readiness for individual 
and organizational use of AI. Nevertheless, the studies on AI readiness 
are mostly conceptual, theorizing on its definition and factors 
comprising it. Though AI is gradually becoming a part of education 
(Brouillette, 2019 ), limited attention has been given to teachers who 
normally oversee the design and implementation of AI-enhanced edu-
cation (Felix, 2020 ). Few studies have been conducted to empirically 
examine or validate the concept of AI readiness and its implications for 
teachers ’ work (Bhargava et al., 2021 ; Luckin et al., 2022 ). 
2.2. Hypotheses development 
Drawing on Karaca et al. (2021) , teachers ’ AI readiness consists of 
four components: cognition, ability, vision, and ethics. Aligned with the 
current research context, the component of cognition refers to teachers ’ 
cognitive readiness, involving knowledge about the functions of AI, 
importance of AI for education, and relationships between AI and X. Wang et al.