Computers in Human Behavior 146 (2023) 107798
10Third, this study for the first time empirically tested the variance and 
invariance of AI readiness across different demographic factors, 
including genders and socio-economical situations. Compared with 
previously often-reported disparities of individuals with different gen-
ders and socioeconomic statuses in the proficiency of using information 
technologies (Wang & Wong, 2019 ; Park et al., 2019 ), the invariance of 
AI readiness in these factors implies that increased accessibility and 
enhanced ease of use of AI technologies (Gardner et al., 2021 ; Luan 
et al., 2020 ) may bridge the gap between individuals from distinct de-
mographic backgrounds. 
The present study could have the following implications for AI- 
enhanced education. First, current AI education is more focused on 
teaching people to learn AI in technical terms by programming and 
developing AI applications (Luckin et al., 2022 ). As AI is a rapidly 
growing area where new algorithms are developed frequently, it is 
neither practical nor necessary for human teachers to be programmers. 
Instead, they have to be savvy consumers who can select appropriate AI 
applications and algorithms to support them in innovating their work 
and increasing their job satisfaction. As such, it is critical for human 
teachers to be equipped with adequate knowledge, skills, and vision as 
well as ethics, that is, AI readiness, so as to make informed decisions 
about what AI to use and how to use AI appropriately. 
Second, the relationships between ethics and cognition, ability, and 
vision in the use of AI can inspire the development of strategies aiming 
to improve individuals ’ ethical decision-making. Though stipulating 
ethical guidelines and policies is necessary, albeit limited in effective -
ness, for guiding the responsible use of AI (Hagendorff, 2020 ), 
increasing people ’s knowledge of AI and how it functions for education 
and enhancing their competence and skills may be more important. 
Particularly, given that the vision of the educational use of AI makes up 
the biggest predictor of ethics, it may be highly rewarding to deepen 
teachers ’ insights into what AI can or cannot do for education and what 
is needed from humans to effectively harness AI’s capabilities while 
mitigating potential risks. 
Third, educators should have a proper vision of AI for education. 
While there may be concerns about AI encroaching on the job market for 
educators, their job cannot be entirely replaced. Instead, the evolution of 
AI technologies requires more from teachers in terms of their humanity 
and social and emotional care (Felix, 2020 ). Undoubtedly, there are 
many issues that need to be addressed when applying AI in education. 
However, it is essential for educators to initially focus on understanding 
what and how AI can offer them and how they can adapt to AI-enhanced 
education to enhance their innovation at work and improve their 
teaching efficiency (Hrastinski et al., 2019 ). 
And fourth, given the insignificant differences between educators 
from distinct demographic backgrounds in AI readiness, strategies about 
the implementation of AI in education can take less consideration of 
possible disparities caused by demographical factors and focus more on 
how to probe into educators ’ actual needs and concerns about AI so as to 
improve their AI readiness and increase the success rate of AI-enhanced 
education. 
7.Limitations and future research 
First, the study participants were limited to primary school teachers 
with similar socio-cultural backgrounds. As a result, it is unclear if the 
research findings can be applied to wider and more diverse teacher 
groups. Future studies are suggested to validate the research findings by 
including teachers with varying levels of experience in using AI for ed-
ucation and from different school levels and countries. Second, as the 
research on AI readiness is still in its early stage, researchers have not 
achieved a consensus on its conceptualization across different fields. 
More efforts and attention are needed to further theorize and validate 
the concept of AI readiness to better facilitate the implementation of AI 
in education. Third, while AI readiness is crucial for successfully 
implementing AI-enhanced education, this study only examined its relationship with few factors relevant to teachers ’ work. Consequently, 
our understanding of the impact of AI readiness on teachers ’ work re-
mains limited. To fill this gap, future studies are advised to investigate 
the relationship between AI readiness and additional factors related to 
teachers ’ work, such as work stress, turnover intention, and work per-
formance resulting from the use of AI. Fourth, the research findings of 
this study relied on survey data, which may be susceptible to response 
biases. As such, researchers are suggested to draw on more data sources 
such as interviews with teachers and their yearly work appraisals to 
triangulate with survey data so as to strengthen the arguments related to 
AI readiness and its importance for AI-enhanced education. 
Credit author statement 
Xinghua Wang : Conceptualization, Investigation, Methodology, 
Software, Formal analysis, Writing-original draft; Linlin Li: Data cura-
tion, Writing-review & editing; Seng Chee Tan: Conceptualization, 
Writing-review & editing Lu Yang : Resources, Data curation, Method -
ology; Jun Lei: Conceptualization, Methodology, Writing-review & 
editing. 
Declaration of competing interest 
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper. The data that support the findings of this 
study are available on request from the corresponding author. The data 
are not publicly available due to privacy or ethical restrictions. 
Data availability 
Data will be made available on request. 
Appendix A.Supplementary data 
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.chb.2023.107798 . 
References 
Albacete, P., Jordan, P., Katz, S., Chounta, I. A., & McLaren, B. M. (2019). The impact of 
student model updates on contingent scaffolding in a natural-language tutoring 
system. In S. Isotani, E. Mill˘an, A. Ogan, P. Hastings, B. M. McLaren, & R. Luckin 
(Eds.), Proceedings of the 20th international conference on artificial intelligence in 
education (pp. 37–47). Springer .  
Beaunoyer, E., Dup˘er˘e, S., & Guitton, M. J. (2020). COVID-19 and digital inequalities: 
Reciprocal impacts and mitigation strategies. Computers in Human Behavior, 111, 
Article 106424 . 
Belpaeme, T., Kennedy, J., Ramachandran, A., Scassellati, B., & Tanaka, F. (2018). Social 
robots for education: A review. Science Robotics, 3(21), eaat5954 . 
Benassi, M., Garofalo, S., Ambrosini, F., Sant ’Angelo, R. P., Raggini, R., De Paoli, G., … 
Piraccini, G. (2020). Using two-step cluster analysis and latent class cluster analysis 
to classify the cognitive heterogeneity of cross-diagnostic psychiatric inpatients. 
Frontiers in Psychology, 11, 1085 . 
Bhargava, A., Bester, M., & Bolton, L. (2021). Employees ’ perceptions of the 
implementation of robotics, artificial intelligence, and automation (RAIA) on job 
satisfaction, job security, and employability. Journal of Technology in Behavioral 
Science, 6(1), 106–113. 
Boddington, P. (2017). Towards a code of ethics for artificial intelligence . Springer .  
Brougham, D., & Haar, J. (2018). Smart technology, artificial intelligence, robotics, and 
algorithms (STARA): Employees ’ perceptions of our future workplace. Journal of 
Management and Organization, 24(2), 239–257. 
Brouillette, M. (2019). AI added to the curriculum for doctors-to-be. Nature Medicine, 25 
(12), 1808 –1809 . 
Celik, I., Dindar, M., Muukkonen, H., & Jarvel a, S. (2022). The promises and challenges 
of artificial intelligence for teachers: A systematic review of research. TechTrends, 66, 
616–630. 
Chen, H.-L., Vicki Widarso, G., & Sutrisno, H. (2020). A chatbot for learning Chinese: 
Learning achievement and technology acceptance. Journal of Educational Computing 
Research, 58(6), 1161 –1189 . 
Chin, W. W. (1998). The partial least squares approach to structural equation modeling. 
Modern Methods for Business Research, 295(2), 295–336. 
Chounta, I.-A., Bardone, E., Raudsep, A., & Pedaste, M. (2022). Exploring teachers ’ 
perceptions of Artificial Intelligence as a tool to support their practice in Estonian K- X. Wang et al.