6 B. Lebichot et al.
This strategy allows to express both domains in an extended feature space,
imputing missing values. The augmented source data therefore contains only
general and source-specic versions while the augmented target data contains
both general and target-specic versions . Finally, tis used to obtain the
test set from the original target data. As the number of features tripled
compared to BDNN/NDNN, we set nh= 165.
{AugDNN : this is an original technique whose rationale is to use informa-
tion from the source domain (e.g. conditional distribution, marginal input
distribution) as additional features of the classier (for both training set
and test set). This strategy allows the classier to learn from data how the
relatedness [5] between source and target samples is associated to the classi-
cation output. The main diculty is that such information is not explicitly
available but can only be estimated. This is the reason why we t both a
classier and a dimensionality reduction to extract from the source domain
information about the conditional distribution and the input distribution
(see Figure 1(a) for an illustration). Other variants were studied (Gaussian
mixture models,...) but we select the more informative subset of features. As
a result we add three new features (denoted Aug1 toAug3 ) to the original
feature set (therefore nh= 60) obtained as follows:
We train a regular DNN source classier. The rst feature ( Aug1 ) is then
the predicted activation value (i.e. estimated conditional probability) of
the output neuron for each F2F sample. [13] used a similar idea but used
the binary predicted value instead.
We build a principal component analysis (e.g. PCA [19]) on the source
training set. The projections of the F2F transactions on the rst two
PCs (nPC= 2) return Aug2 and Aug3 .
The aim of adding such features is to encode in the training set the related-
ness between the source and target distributions, both from a marginal and
conditionally dependent perspective.
{AdvDNN : this is an adaptation of Ganin et al. [16] approach to the fraud de-
tection setting. The rationale is that the prediction model must use features
that cannot discriminate between the source and target domains. The origi-
nal approach was used for image recognition and combines a labeled source
domain and unlabeled target domain while here both source and target are
labeled. The method learns domain invariant features by jointly optimizing
the feature layer from the label predictor (here genuine versus fraudulent)
and the domain label (here F2F versus EC) predictor. The domain classier
uses a gradient reversal layer (GRL) and a few fully connected layers [16].
The eect of the GRL is to multiply all domain-related gradients by a neg-
ative constant during back-propagation.
During the training, the feature layer is optimized to both minimize the label
classier loss and to maximize (due to GRL) the domain classier loss. This
approach promotes the emergence of features that are discriminative for the
main learning task on the source domain and non-discriminative with respect
to the domain tag [16]. A network illustration can be found on Figure 1(b).