Deep-learning domain adaptation techniques for credit cards fraud detection 3
of the paper is the extensive assessment procedure carried out on a ve-months
real-life dataset obtained from the major credit card issuer in Belgium.
The rest of this paper is structured as follows: Section 2 introduces back-
ground and notation. Section 3 reviews related work. Section 4 details the
methodological contributions of the paper. Experimental comparisons are pre-
sented and analyzed in Section 5 and Section 6 discusses the results. Section 7
concludes this paper.
2 Background and Notation
Transfer learning (TL) is a crucial aspect of real-world learning: for instance,
learning to recognize apples might help to recognize pears, or knowing to play
piano might help learning electric organ [23]. Suppose also that you trained a
learning machine to label a website on the basis of existing websites. Transfer
learning could help to adapt the learner to deal with brand new websites [25].
The rationale of transfer learning is to ll the gap between two learning tasks
and to reuse as much as possible what was learned from the rst task to better
solve the second one. More precisely, given a source domain Dsand learning task
Ts, a target domain Dtand learning task Tt, transfer learning aims to improve
the learning of the target predictive function ft() inDtusing knowledge in Ds
andTswhereDs6=DtorTs6=Tt. Transfer learning requires at least a change
in domains or in tasks [26, 23]:
{AdomainDis dened as a tuple ( X;PX()), where Xdenotes the multi-
variate input and PX() its marginal probability distribution.
{Given a specic domain, a taskTis dened as a tuple ( Y;f()) where Yis
the label space and f() summarizes the conditional dependency (either the
regression function or conditional distribution).
Domain adaptation (DA) is a sub-eld of transfer learning: there is a change
in the domain Ds6=Dtbut the task remains the same Ts=Tt. In this paper, the
task is the same, fraud detection, but there is a change of domain. In this context,
bysource (with subscript s) we denote the original domain (e-commerce) while
target (with subscript t) refers to the new domain (face-to-face).
The transaction dataset is a collection of nvectors xiof sizemwheremis
the number of features (or attributes). The features are identical in the source
and the target domain but the marginal distribution changes between them.
Finally we dene yas the column vector containing the class labels (fraudulent
or genuine) of the ntransactions.
3 Related Work
Transfer learning and domain adaptation have been widely studied in the last
20 years but none, to our knowledge, were devoted to FDS. There are four main
classes of DA techniques in literature [24, 23, 25] which are described below.