Deep-learning domain adaptation techniques for credit cards fraud detection 5
Table 1. This table summarizes the ve considered methods of this paper. More details
about the strategy and parameters can be found in Section 4.
Acronym Strategy Train set Test set Selected parameter
BDNN Baseline F2F F2F -
NDNN Naive EC F2F -
FEDADNN Imputation EC + F2F F2F -
AugDNN Add EC-related features extended F2F extended F2F = 10
AdvDNN Adversarial EC + F2F F2F nPC= 2
domains. Finally, Ganin and al. used DNN in an adversarial way (we will discuss
more extensively this approach in Section 4) to tackle domain adaptation [16].
4 Transfer learning strategies for fraud detection
As discussed in the previous section, several approaches may be taken into ac-
count to transfer information related to a source task to a target one. Though in
a realistic situation none or very few labeled training samples could be available
in the target domain, for the sake of assessment, we consider here an exper-
imental setting where training samples are available for both the source and
the target tasks. The target dataset is splitted in a training and test portion.
The test portion makes possible a sound paired assessment of all the considered
strategies while the training portion enables us to assess how much improvement
may derive from integrating the source dataset with (part of) the target dataset.
Table 1 lists the alternative strategies which dierentiate in terms of training
set (dierent combinations of source and target) and transfer methodology. To
avoid biases related to the learning machine, all strategies share the same DNN
topology composed of two fully connected hidden layers and implemented on
Keras [6]. Based of preliminary results (not reported here), we set the number of
neurons in the hidden layers nhto 1.5 times the number of features (here, 37).
The ve considered methods are (code on https://github.com/B-Lebichot):
{BDNN : this is our baseline DNN classier ( nh= 55). The train and test data
are composed of target (F2F) samples: no transfer learning in this baseline.
{NDNN : this is the naive strategy which simply consists in training the
same DNN ( nh= 55) as BDNN on the source (EC) dataset and test it on
the target (F2F) testset. This approach is also often considered in literature
as a baseline [13] to assess the added value of a transfer learning strategy.
{FEDADNN : this is a basic feature representation method (Section 3) which
uses three versions of the original feature set: a general version, a source-
specic version and a target-specic version [13].
Each source column-feature xsis simply replaced by s(xs) =hxs;xs;0iand
each target column-feature xtis replaced by t(xt) =hxt;0;xti. where 0is
a vector full of zeros. Where s(xs) is the source mapping and s(xt) is the
target mapping (roughly this is hgeneral;source-specic ;target-specici).