2 B. Lebichot et al.
peared as an essential component of any detection approach dealing automati-
cally with massive amounts of transactions [12]. The existing work showed how-
ever that a detection strategy needs to take into account some peculiarities of the
fraud phenomenon [10, 11]: unbalancedness (frauds are less than 1% of all trans-
actions), concept drift (typically due to seasonal aspects and fraudster strategies)
and the big data and streaming nature [4]. Disregarding those aspects might lead
to high false alert rate, low detection accuracy or slow detection (see [1] for more
details). As a result the design of an accurate Fraud Detection System (FDS)
goes beyond the integration of some conventional o-the-shelf learning libraries
and requires a deep understanding of the fraud phenomenon. This means that
the reuse of existing FDS in new settings, like a new market (e.g. with a dierent
fraud ratio) or a new payment system, is neither immediate nor straightforward.
This paper depicts transfer learning strategies [23] in the adaptation of exist-
ing and eective models to new domains. In particular we focus on the heteroge-
neous nature of the credit-card transactions, related to the physical presence of
the card holder, which distinguishes between face-to-face (F2F) and e-commerce
(EC) settings. Face-to-face transactions occur when the buyer and merchant have
to physically meet in order to complete a purchase. In e-commerce (e.g. exchange
of goods or services through a computer network, like internet) transactions can
take place when the card holder is not physically with the merchant.
E-commerce fraud detection settings have been more studied in literature
[15, 3, 29, 12, 22] than face-to-face ones [21]. Though F2F frauds are typically
less frequent because personal identication number (PIN) is often required,
their impact is not negligible and worthy of consideration. Well-known examples
of F2F frauds are due to skimming i.e. the criminal action retrieving the card
holder information from the card magnetic strip.
The dierences between the EC and F2F setting, notably in terms of dier-
ent ratios of genuine vs. fraudulent transactions and dierent attitudes of the
fraudsters, are re
ected in dierent statistical properties of the two detection
tasks. At the same time much of the detection process is similar, for instance
in terms of feature representation of the transactions. It is therefore important
for card issuer companies to understand how much of the modelling and design
eort done in setting up an accurate detection system for EC (source domain)
can be reused and transferred to F2F (target domain).
We rst review the topic of transfer learning and presents some state-of-the
artdomain adaptation methods which can be used to transfer the knowledge
learned during EC fraud detection to enhance the detection of F2F frauds. Then,
it presents two original contributions: (i) the proposal of an original transfer
strategy relying on the creation of ad-hoc features (related to the marginal and
the conditional distribution) to improve the transfer from the source to the target
domain, (ii) the customization of an existing adversarial deep-learning strategy
(typically used in image recognition task) to the specic task of credit card fraud
detection (e.g. taking into account issues of unbalancedness and concept drift).
To the best of our knowledge this is the rst paper assessing the quality of
transfer learning techniques for credit card fraud detection. Another specicity