4 B. Lebichot et al.
Instance weighting for covariate shift : the covariate shift scenario refers to
a non-stationary environment, that is a setting where the input distribution
changes while the conditional distribution remains the same [27]). This scenario
may occur when the training data has been biased toward one region of the input
space or is selected in a non-I.I.D. manner. Instance weighting methods aim to
weight samples in the source domain to match the target domain. For example
the paper [23] proposes to estimate weights of the source domain, trying to make
the weighted distributions of both domains as similar as possible.
Self-labeling methods : they include unlabeled target domain samples in the
training process, initialize their labels and then iteratively rene them. This
is often done using Expectation-Maximization (EM) algorithms (for example
TrAdaBoost [9]). Hard versions add samples with specic labels while others [28]
assign label condences when tting the model. While ecient, the EM proce-
dure can be really computationally intensive, especially with large datasets.
Feature representation methods : they aim to nd a new feature representation
for the data and belong to two categories. Distribution similarity approaches aim
explicitly to make the source and target domain sample distributions similar,
either by penalizing or removing features whose statistics vary between domains
or by learning a feature space projection in which a distribution divergence
statistic is minimized [17, 16]. On the other hand, latent feature approaches
aim to construct new features using (often unlabeled) source and target domain
data or, more widely, to nd an abstracted representation for domain-specic
features [13, 17]. We discuss an easy way [13] to do so in Section 4.
Cluster-based learning methods : these methods construct a graph where the
labeled and unlabeled samples are nodes. Edge weights, between samples, are
based on their similarity. Labels are then propagated according to the graphs
(e.g. by means of graph-based classication). The main assumption is that sam-
ples connected by high-density paths are likely to have the same label if there
is a high density path between them [17]. Also those methods may be highly
computationally intensive, especially when working with large graphs.
Furthermore, deep neural networks methods (DNN) have been widely used
for TL and DA: their multi-layer nature can capture the intricate non-linear rep-
resentations of data, and provide useful level features for transfer learning [23].
Multitask learning [2] can be easily implemented by DNN, by training two or
more related tasks with a network sharing inputs and hidden layers but having
separate output layers. As far as domain adaptation is concerned, hidden layers
trained by the source task can be reused on a dierent target task. For the target
task model, only the last classication layer needs to be retrained, though any
layer of the new model could be ne-tuned if needed [23]. In other congura-
tions, the hidden parameters related to the source task can be used to initialize
the target model [8]. Autoencoders can also be used to gradually changing the
training distribution: In [7], a sequence of deep autoencoders are trained layer-
by-layer, while gradually replacing source-domain samples with target-domain
samples. In [18] the authors simply trains a single deep autoencoder for both