uniﬁed form algorithm. The authors have used fuzzy
c-means and k-means clustering techniques to obtain high-
quality clusters and handled the drawback (slow and poor
performance on large datasets) of these algorithms bysplitting the dataset into optimal smaller sections called
partitions. Taking inspiration from the concept of parallel
processing and horizontal scalability, the authors havepartitioned, mapped, and reduced the dataset into chunks,
which are individually trained. This technique, therefore,
makes the fuzzy c-means and k-means algorithm render a
high accuracy on large datasets.
Furthermore, recently, an exponential increase in the
count of active cases of Covid-19 and a growing need to
use CT scans and chest X-Rays, for a swift diagnosis of the
presence of virus in the lungs, inspired the authors Varela-Santos and Melin ( 2021 ) developed a feed-forward neural
network and CNN to automate the diagnosis scans which
would, in turn, decrease the cases diagnosed by thehealthcare system, and therefore promote the optimal uti-
lization of the test kits available. Taking the aid of the
open-source dataset by Cohen, the authors extracted fea-tures by localizing and quantifying pixels of similar
intensity values.
3 The proposed model: DenseNet-II
The proposed DenseNet-II model ﬁnds its basis on somedeep learning models like DenseNet (Sun et al. 2020 ),
VGG-16 (Mateen et al. 2019 ), InceptionV3 (Albatayneh
et al. 2020 ) and ResNet (Khan et al. 2019 ). It extracts the
main features from every algorithm and amalgamates them
together to form a robust classiﬁer. The entire process ofmelanoma detection using various developed models can
be further classiﬁed into some sub-phases. These are pri-
marily enlisted as statistical analysis of the dataset, datapre-processing, splitting the dataset to retrieve training and
testing sets, creating models and training the dataset on the
same, and ﬁnally evaluating the performance of our modelson the test data.
The summary of the layers used to construct the Den-
seNet-II model is as follows:
I.Conv2d Layer : Using an appropriate ﬁlter of varying
kernel sizes, this layer produces a tensor output byconvoluting the layers on which it is applied.
II.Conv Maxpool 2d Layer : The main objective of this
layer is to condense the characteristics recognizedfrom the feature map, by taking the maximum value
from the feature matrix.
III. Flatten Layer : This layer compresses the features
and projects them into a column format to aid in
further processing.IV. Dense Layer : This is the most rudimentary layer
where an activation function is applied to a multitudeof stacked interconnected neural networks to produce
a nonlinear output.
The densenet function is an amalgamation of convolu-
tion and normalization along with ReLU functions
[Eq. ( 1)]. Normalization is done in batches by transferring
inputs having zero mean value and unit variance. There-after, ReLU function converts the negative values to zero.
Densenet FðÞ ¼ D
lF;f1;f2... ;fl/C01 ½/C138ðÞ ð 1Þ
Having been equipped with a brief of the layers con-
sidered while architecting the proposed architecture, wecan now summarise the proposed model architecture as
shown in Fig. 1a.
The model can be broadly visualized as a network of 3
chunks of layers which can further be subdivided into two
2D convolutional layers convoluted with a 3*3 convolution
matrix. These layers are ﬁnally reduced using a maxpool
ﬁlter after being mapped using a rectiﬁed linear unit. The
output of these layers acts as an input to a network of 4dense layers activated by a rectiﬁed linear unit (ReLU).
Finally, a softmax function is applied in the ﬁnal layer to
produce a multi-label classiﬁcation. The layer conﬁgura-tion of the proposed model is presented in Fig. 1b. Using
the ReduceLROnPlateau() function, the learning rate
hyperparameter is automatically increased or decreasedand the model is judged using ‘sparse categorical cross
entropy loss’ with ‘adam’ as the optimizer. The model’s
accuracy is also visualized for 10, 15, and 20 epochs.
The TDS (total dermoscopy) score can thus be analyzed
by Eq. ( 2):
A
score/C21:3 ðÞ þ Bscore/C20:1 ðÞ þ Cscore/C20:5 ðÞ
þDscore/C20:5 ðÞ ð 2Þ
where the ABCD method stands for asymmetry, border,
color, and diameter (Faujdar et al. 2021 ). Thereafter the
obtained value can be used for the identiﬁcation of the
lesion type.
4 Training and testing
The dataset has been segmented into training and testingsets, where the images have been randomly sampled in theratio of 80% training and 20% testing data, respectively.
After dividing the data, both the chunks are augmented
using Keras.
Before elaborating the steps of the proposed model, the
pre-processing step to make the dataset well suitable for the
model is mentioned as below:DenseNet-II: an improved deep convolutional neural network for melanoma cancer detection 13289
123