4.1 Data pre-processing
Data pre-processing is one of the most important steps to
ensure that the data becomes suitable for any of the deep
learning convolutional neural network architectures we aimto implement to test the performance of the same. The ﬁrstchallenge faced while the implementation of the proposed
model is that the images of the moles had no direct relation
to the lesion type in the dataset but were indirectly con-
nected by mapping each lesion type to a particular imageid. Therefore, the original data frame was augmented by
adding three additional columns to reduce this redundancy,
i.e., the cell type, the cell type index (an index that is usedto classify a particular cell type), and the path of the image
corresponding to that particular cell which solves this
problem. Since the models implemented are on the com-
mon notion that each image should correspond to a unique
type of lesion, the next task is to ﬁlter out and remove allthe lesions id’s which correspond to two or more duplicate
images in the dataset. We were able to achieve the same
through simple data frame manipulation. The data is thennormalized by taking the mean and standard deviation of
all the red, green and blue matrices extracted from the
image to reduce the complexity of the matrix, i.e., to makethe pixel’s cell value from a range of 0–255 to a value of 0–
1 and make the compilation smoother (Soille 2013 ). Fig-
ure2shows the mean of red, green, blue, and grey colors,
corresponding to each lesion type. On further careful
analysis, we observed a high imbalance in the dataset. The
‘Actinic Keratosis’ labeled class was observed to havemuch more samples than other lesion types. Since multi-
label classiﬁcation works on the assumption that each class
has nearly the same number of samples, such an imbalancewould result in an abruptly high value of F
1score for the
majority class and a much lower value for the remaining
classes. To solve the above-stated challenge, the followingmentioned steps were taken into consideration:
Step 1: First, we augment the dataset initially via the
‘‘ImageDataGenerator()’’ function present in the Keraslibrary. The aim is to rebalance the classes.
ImageDataGenerator() augments the number of training
images to balance the relative sum of images of eachlesion, to obtain this we have generated multiple copies of
lesion samples.
Step 2: Next, the generated data is then disseminated to
the required classes. This is done by implementing equal-
ization sampling.
Step 3: Finally, we implemented focal loss which is an
advanced version of cross-entropy loss, and penalized the
majority class causing an imbalance with a lower weight.
On observation of the visualized dataset, we can thus
conclude that the data is suitable to be applied to any
machine learning or deep learning-based model (Fig. 3).
 Fig. 1 aDenseNet-II model architecture, bDenseNet-II model
architecture13290 N. Girdhar et al.
123