researchers and are being applied in almost every ﬁeld in
today’s research (Ahn et al. 2018 ). Generous research has
been put into melanoma detection, which ﬁnds its basis in
various DL methods (Brinker et al. 2018c ; Chakraborty and
Mali 2020 ; Kassani and Kassani 2019 ). Having complex
networks and profuse learning nodes which they are
comprised of, deep learning techniques are noted to per-form much better than standard ML methods and have
emulated them to a large extent (Brinker et al.
2019a ,b,c,d; Maron et al. 2019 ).
The above-mentioned strengths of Deep learning models
are further veriﬁed when Cruz and Wishart ( 2006 ) used
these models to predict the chance of recurrence, where
features like patient’s age, tumor, size, and other prognostic
variables were taken along with clinical data and fed to anartiﬁcial neural network-based model, keeping the sample
to feature ratio to a suggested minimum of 5. The data was
further divided into training, monitoring, and testing sec-tions, and the model was also tested against the data of
patients from other institutions to assess the model’s
generality.
Guo et al. ( 2020 ) have proposed a 3D CNN and further
enhanced it using multiple attributes arranged in a pyra-
midal structure. The authors claim that CNN not onlyreduces the prolonged, error-prone, and arduous process of
manually marking the boundaries of the tumor, and also
automatically comprehends the features, and learns pat-terns to adapt to the optimal path required to achieve the
prediction. The pyramidal representation of the attributes
allows the CNN architecture to gain contextual insights byrunning simulations on hierarchical semantics. This study
further validates the credibility of CNN architectures in
such scenarios.
Similarly, Poma et al. ( 2020 ) proposed an optimization
over the conventional CNN to amplify its application in
image recognition and pattern classiﬁcation by reducingthe number of parameters to be trained.
Neethu et al. ( 2020 ) proposed an architecture based on a
convolutional neural network to recognize hand signs andgestures. The authors have extrapolated their work by
comparing their CNN model with other baseline models
like naı ¨ve bayes, support vector machine, markov model
and KNN, etc. This was also expected as these models
suffer from drawbacks such as dependency on a large
number of training samples and their highly complex nat-ure (Chakraborty and Mali 2020 ). Segmentation of the
region of Interest (area of the frame where the hand is
captured) and the ﬁngers leads the CNN model to boast thehighest accuracy of 96.2%.
Ka¨mmer et al. ( 2017 ) leveraged the information avail-
able from the periodic clinical records, to propose astreamlined approach to pre-treatment prognostication by
claiming deep learning convolutional neural networks(DCNN) to have the ability to identify and correlate
complex patterns to immune therapy (Hekler et al. 2019a ).
The authors have developed two DCNN classiﬁers namely
(1)segmentation classiﬁer and (2) responsive classiﬁer
which are used to classify whole slide images of the
metastatic melanoma tissue. The models are ﬁnally amal-
gamated with clinical demographic reports of the patient toproduce a more robust paradigm to increase accuracy.
The primary motivation to propose an enhanced version
of DenseNet termed DenseNet-II highly corresponds with
the work of Albu et al. ( 2019 ) where the authors have
elucidated upon the various applications and hurdles, arti-ﬁcial intelligence must conquer in the ﬁeld of medicine. A
high inclination to use artiﬁcial neural networks (ANNs) is
based on the following insights.
1. ANNs have excellence in modeling medical processes
reaping umpteen beneﬁts to the patient.
2. The inability of humans to detect all major/minor
medical conditions, as opposed to which ANN systems
provide highly accurate alarms and suggestions prepar-
ing the surgeon and patient accordingly.
3. Reduces time and burden on medical personnel to carry
out minute medical routines.
The authors have further mentioned the extensive
application of these networks in treatment, e.g., skin dis-
ease diagnosis, hepatitis-B prediction, stroke risk predic-tion, etc. With the development of DenseNet-II, we have
established another application of artiﬁcial neural networks
in a decision-based medical situation. Various technicaladvantages of neural networks (multi-threaded computa-
tion, noise handling, associative and functional learning,
etc.) mentioned by the authors in their work further justifyour motivation to develop a medical decision-making
model powered by artiﬁcial neural networks.
Owing to their potential to categorize and recognize
highly variable inputs, deep convolutional neural networks
(DCNNs) ﬁnd an extensive application in the process of
predicting and classifying the type of cancer from a largenumber of images of skin lesions which show high vari-
ability in the amount of grained texture visible (Tschandl
et al. 2019b ). This is further validated by the works of
Esteva et al. ( 2017 ), which overcomes the hurdle of
insufﬁcient data by a data-driven approach and considers adataset of 1,29,450 dermatological images, organized as a
tree-like taxonomy of 2032 diseases. The tree has three
root nodes where each node classiﬁes a lesion as benign,malignant, or non-neoplastic. Leaf nodes of the data rep-
resent the individual diseases and partitioning them into
ﬁne-grained classes takes advantage of the photographicvariability to make the model more robust.
Borlea et al. ( 2021 ) have attempted to solve the chal-
lenges of processing a large dataset, by optimizing the13288 N. Girdhar et al.
123