possibility of any future errors or the presence of negative
factors such as data bias.
The objective of classifying the dataset into benign and
malign cases can be achieved by considering the parame-ters or features of the dataset as described in Table 2.
5.3 Evaluation metrics
Taking inspiration from most of the work which has
already been done in the past, the model’s performance is
evaluated using a confusion matrix, which is most suit-
able for classiﬁcation and accuracy computations. The lossof training and validation of the data while training is also
visualized for different epoch values to get a better overall
picture of how the model has performed. A heatmap of theconfusion matrix is further plotted to justify the perfor-
mance of the model in the testing phase.
Following are the evaluation metrics we have incorpo-
rated to validate the proposed model:
•Accuracy: Accuracy is deﬁned as the total number of
predictions that are correctly classiﬁed/predicted to the
total number of the input sample. Accuracy works well
in cases when we have a balanced distribution amongthe classes/labels which have to be classiﬁed.
Accuracy ¼
TP
TPþFPþTNþFNð3Þ
•Precision: Precision refers to the ratio of those data
points which are predicted as positive to those data
points which turned out to be positive. Precision is
indirectly proportional to the false positive rate.Precision ¼TP
TPþFPð4Þ
•Recall: Also known as Sensitivity, recall is the capa-
bility of the classiﬁcation model, to give a positiveprediction for those data points which have a positive
value.
Recall ¼TP
TPþFNð5Þ
•where TP denotes true positives that refer to those
values of the predicted set, which have been classiﬁedas positive by the model trained and have a positive
value. TN denotes true negatives that refer to those
values of the predicted set, which have been classiﬁedas negative by the model trained and have a negative
value. FP denotes false positive, also known as the
Type-1 Error, that refers to those values of the predictedset which have been classiﬁed as positive by the model
trained but have a negative value. FN denotes false
negative, also known as the Type-2 Error, that refers tothose values of the predicted set which have been
classiﬁed as negative by the model trained, but have a
positive value.
•F1-score: The F1-score allows us to capture and
consider the nature of both precision and recall of our
classiﬁcation model, by taking the harmonic mean ofthe two. Since the precision and recall metrics are
combined in the F1-score, the increase or decrease in
this metric is always uncertain as to which internalmetric out of precision and recall is being maximized/
minimized. Hence, it works best in combination with
Fig. 3 Post-processing plot
indicating the substantialdecrease in data bias and
increase in the balance of dataDenseNet-II: an improved deep convolutional neural network for melanoma cancer detection 13293
123