rather than only the layer before it. This ensures that the
layers share common knowledge and instead of addingthe residuals, the feature maps are concatenated to
enhance learning rates. Each transition layer is boosted
with normalization, convolution, and pooling. Themodel is augmented by using a bottleneck architecture
in convolution and compression.
•ResNet (Khan et al. 2019 ) To tackle the problem of
vanishing gradients with architectures containing many
dense layers, ResNet architecture was proposed (Khan
et al. 2019 ), which instead of learning the features from
all the stacked layers above it, divides the entire
architecture into micro units of CNN networks where
pooling, convolution, and activation are applied, andthese micro units amalgamate to form the macro unit
which ﬁnally produces the output. The main purpose of
the ResNet architecture is to formalize the residualfunction which determines the residual weight/value
that should be added to the output of the previous
layers, fed as the input of the following layers. Toachieve this residual function, the network uses an
identity mapping method to make the value of the
residual minimum, which in turn would suggest opti-mally mapped features by the layers in the architecture.
•Inception V3 (Albatayneh et al. 2020 ) architecture
bases its performance and popularity on computing 1*1,3*3, and 5*5 convolution in the micro-network and acts
as a multi-level feature extractor, which is then fed as
input to the proceeding layers. Many symmetric andasymmetric networks powered by max pooling, convo-
lution, dropouts, concats are further strengthened by
batch normalization and the loss is calculated using thesoftmax function. The smaller size of this architecture
(96 MB) as compared to ResNet (Khan et al. 2019 ) and
VGG (Mateen et al. 2019 ) gives this architecture an
added advantage.
5.5 Experimental results
Our analysis of the work done so far in determining skincancer highly suggested that deep learning conventional
neural networks performed much better and provided much
more promising values of the performance metrics used.We base our research mainly on the implementation of
various types of pre-trained deep learning convolutional
neural networks which have been already trained to clas-sify images on 1000 different categories. We have trained
and tested the HAM10000 dataset on ResNet (Khan et al.
2019 ), DenseNet (Sun et al. 2020 ), InceptionV3 (Alba-
tayneh et al. 2020 ), VGG-16 (Mateen et al. 2019 ), and a
standard CNN model, to compare the performance of the
dataset on different robust CNN architectures. 2Dconvolutional layers have been used in one of the imple-
mented models and are the most basic implementation of
CNNs used in our work, where data has been ﬁltered by 16,
32, and 64 ﬁlters, respectively, in the layers. Differentkernels are used for pooling and convolution and the result
is wrapped with a softmax function.
All the convolutional models implemented were able to
yield better accuracy as compared to normal machine
learning algorithms implemented in research to date.
Through our implementation, we found that for the given
HAM10000 dataset, the DenseNet-II model outperformed
all other models with an accuracy of 96.272%. Figure 7
shows predicted versus actual values in the grid for a set of
nine images. Table 3shows the comparative analysis of
different models based on their accuracy. The accuracyobtained concerning the models, clearly indicates that
while the DenseNet-II model has performed the best, the
combined model of ResNet and DenseNet has also per-formed well with an accuracy of 92%. While ResNet (Khan
et al. 2019 ), DenseNet (Sun et al. 2020 ) and VGG-16
(Mateen et al. 2019 ) yielded an accuracy of 86.90%,
87.30% and 75.27%, respectively. It is noteworthy that our
model is trained on 20 epochs as there was no signiﬁcant
improvement in the value of accuracy.
When trained on 15 epochs, the DenseNet yielded
87.30% accuracy, while Resnet yielded an accuracy of
86.9%. It was observed that the accuracy of the proposedDenseNet-II model also varied slightly with the number of
epochs. Figure 8shows the accuracy and loss of the
training and validation phase of the model. The model gavean accuracy of 92.704% when trained with 10 epochs.
The confusion matrix obtained while analyzing the
results clearly indicates how well the proposed DenseNet-IImodel has performed on the dataset. Figure 9brieﬂy
summarizes the performance of the proposed model.
Figure 10shows the precision of various comparative
and proposed model Dense-II on 10 and 15 epochs,
respectively. The results evidently indicate that the Den-
seNet-II model outperforms all other models, giving thehighest accuracy (96%) while the VGG-16 gives the lowest
(75.09%).
Figure 11presents the recall measure exhibits a high
correlation with the precision values obtained on 15
epochs. DenseNet-II model shows the highest recall (96%)
performing better in comparison with all other models,while VGG-16 provides the least recall (73.5%). Moreover,
the results obtained by DenseNet-II on 10 epochs also,
show the highest recall value with 93.7% and the VGG-16shows the lowest value of 73.5%.
The F1-score, taken as the harmonic mean between the
precision and recall, and therefore should mathematicallyprove to express the same trend as highlighted by previous
metric results. This is justiﬁed by DenseNet-II indicating13296 N. Girdhar et al.
123