•Extensive evaluation and validation of the proposed
model with deep learning-based state-of-the-art algo-rithms like ResNet (Khan et al. 2019 ; Szegedy et al.
2017 ), DenseNet (Li et al. 2020 ; Sun et al. 2020 ), VGG-
16 (Dutta et al. 2016 ; Mateen et al. 2019 ).
•The comprehensive dataset chosen also allows the
proposed model to be further tested on other available
datasets to validate its efﬁcacy in prediction and henceﬁnds its application in a broader domain of medical
treatment and prevention, which constructively resolves
the hindrances in integrity in the works of Cruz andWishart ( 2006 ) and Esteva et al. ( 2017 ).
•In coherence to the contribution made by Upadhyay and
Nagpal ( 2020 ), our work streamlines and simpliﬁes the
course of treatment which ought to be provided to an
individual suffering from melanoma.
The organization of this article is as follows: Sect. 2
briefs about the related work done in the ﬁeld, and Sect. 3
outlines the proposed model. Further, Sect. 4describes the
experimental setup and analysis of results. Section 5con-
cludes the work with some future research directions.
2 Related work
A plethora of work has already been done in cancerdetection using artiﬁcial intelligence with a considerable
amount of progress being by implementing both machine
learning and deep learning methodologies (Brinker et al.
2017a ,2018a ; Rajpurkar et al. 2017 ). However, there is
lesser literature available on melanoma detection. Previousresearch in this ﬁeld has provided abundant prudent
insights into the commonly adopted strategies while pro-
cessing data and constructing machine learning architec-tures (Karunakaran 2020 ). Most of the techniques can
broadly be categorized into (1) machine learning-based
models and (2) deep learning-based models.
2.1 Machine learning based state-of-the-art
Machine learning-based techniques comprise the most
rudimentary methods to classify a particular set of classes
associated with melanoma. Having a structured mathe-matical foundation amalgamated with statistical interpre-
tation, these methodologies are easier to implement and
comprehend and yet provide robust and promising results(Brinker et al. 2017b ,2018d ; Murphy 2012 ).
Early works based on ML-based cancer prediction
include the work of Cruz and Wishart ( 2006 ) who in their
work have conducted a detailed survey and were able to
identify the trends, the training data, susceptibility of pre-
dictive analysis, and the overall performance and relevanceof the various machine learning models which were being
developed at the time. The authors have broken down their
work into three case studies which correspond to the three
fundamental foci of cancer prognosis, i.e., (1) predictedcancer susceptibility, (2) survivability, and (3) recurrence,
which are based on the likelihood of developing a type of
cancer, the likelihood of redeveloping it and predicting theaverage life expectancy, rate of survival and the quality of
life, etc., respectively.
Ontiveros-Robles et al. ( 2021 ) have used a mixture of
techniques and concepts (Type-1 member functions, sta-
tistical quartiles, nature-inspired optimizations, etc.) togenerate a supervised fuzzy classiﬁer (Borlea et al. 2021 ).
The main advantage of this classiﬁer is the ease with which
it handles data uncertainties. Methods like random sam-pling, followed by estimating the core of uncertainty and
further determining the membership functions all, have
been used to cater to the noise and outliers, which have arelevant impact on the performance of the systems.
Vijayalakshmi ( 2019 ) proposed an automated system to
classify malignant and benign skin cancer/melanoma usinglesion images aiding in early diagnosis. The author’s work
is broadly architecture using three phases which included
augmentation of the collected images, designing the model,and ﬁnal classiﬁcation. The author has also addressed the
unclear/blur images fed as the dataset to the model by
removing hairs, shades, and glare from the image usingMATLAB ﬁlters as a part of pre-processing the dataset.
Another noteworthy application of artiﬁcial intelligence
in decision-based clinical studies is established by the workof Upadhyay and Nagpal ( 2020 ), where the authors have
used algorithms like support vector machines, etc., to
classify the state of sleep (awake, slow wave sleep, rapideye movement) of an individual. The effect of various
external parameters which induce heat stress is assessed
from the variation in values of wavelet frequency andpower. Through their research, the authors have simpliﬁed
the choice of drugs, that a patient suffering from chronic
stress disorder may prescribe.
To overcome the absence of well-structured data,
Richter and Khoshgoftaar ( 2019 ) proposed a distributed,
cloud-based big-data solution that enabled a structuredcollection of data points collected over various regions
which are used in a non-distributed machine learning
algorithm to develop a melanoma risk prediction model(Szegedy et al. 2017 ).
2.2 Deep learning based state-of-the-art
Owing to a reputation for being highly accurate and efﬁ-
cient in capturing the trends and the pattern of dataamounting to terabytes, deep learning (DL)-based models
have attracted a signiﬁcant amount of attention fromDenseNet-II: an improved deep convolutional neural network for melanoma cancer detection 13287
123