many other skin ailments in terms of appearance (Guo et al.
2020 ). It thus becomes hard for someone to tell in advance
whether it is melanoma or not. Besides, the disease not
always develops suddenly; in many cases, it slowly growswith a backdrop of long family history or other major–
minor genetic reasons. In either of the cases, one is una-
ware of the possible risks in near future.
Machine learning (ML) is a remarkable ﬁeld in health-
care, its contribution to various ﬁelds of diagnosis and
detection holds high importance. Methods like decision
trees and artiﬁcial neural networks in cancer prediction
have been widely used for years (Kurvers et al.2015 ,2016 ); however, melanoma prediction is a relatively
younger ﬁeld of study. The family history and genetic
characteristics are two major factors that if used efﬁcientlycan lead to close predictions or detection of the disease.
These factors have been utilized for predicting cancer in
many research studies (Brinker et al. 2018b ). However,
melanoma holds one unique trait, which is its appearance.
Unlike other ailments like breast cancer, wherein the vis-
ible changes may not appear for a while; melanoma in thevery beginning shows visible changes such as a newly
appeared mole or spot, generally with irregular border
lines. In other cases, the skin color of a selected area maydrastically change, many such visible changes have been
recorded in melanoma patients at early stages itself. Hence,
images of possible cancerous moles can be processed toremove unwanted elements; it will thus serve as the
potential dataset for the problem statement (Tschandl et al.
2018 ).
Early research work in this ﬁeld lacks the ability to
handle variable dataset quality, that is the images used are
mostly professional, taken at correct angles and lighting;however, the same machine learning models when
deployed do not receive the same quality of dataset from
the users (Faujdar et al. 2021 ). The photos input in the
model are often taken by the user at insufﬁciently lit places,
with an inappropriate zoom and angle of inclination. The
problem can, however, be avoided by adopting data-drivenapproaches which mainly refer to the usage of abundant
training and testing data, hence making the model immune
to any changes in terms of quality of image (Ka ¨mmer et al.
2017 ; Kurvers et al. 2016 ; Mendonc ¸a et al. 2013 ; Richter
and Khoshgoftaar 2019 ). This shall not only ensure an
improved performance but also enhance the potential of themodel to get accepted at a relatively larger scale.
To overcome the aforesaid limitations of previous lit-
erature on melanoma detection and improve the detectionprocess, we have adopted the convolutional neural net-
works (CNN’s) which are known for their asset to greatly
reduce the dimensionality of a model (Maron et al. 2019 ).
Moreover, time-taken to tune the hyper-parameters, with-
out compromising on the overall quality, hence rendersthem highly efﬁcient in image-based prediction. In addition
to this, the efﬁcacy, power, and robust nature of the CNN’s
to predict and classify data from a huge dataset has further
garnered the attention of many researchers to choose andincorporate them in their studies that deal with classiﬁca-
tion based on image datasets. Sulthana et al. ( 2020 ) have
proposed a CNN-based optimization to improve the per-formance of image-based recommendation systems. The
authors stated that the most signiﬁcant advances in the ﬁeld
of image processing are owed to the rigorous application of
CNNs. The authors have justiﬁed the same by comparing
their model with other popular methods utilized to reducethe dimensionality such as principal component analysis
(PCA) and locality sensitive hashing and the CNNs provide
a strikingly better performance as compared to others.
These studies have further proven the superiority of
CNN’s in terms of performance based on various metrics
(such as accuracy, precision, recall, F1_score, and the areaunder a curve) in comparison with other state-of-the-art
supervised and unsupervised machine learning models like
k-nearest neighbors (KNN), support vector machine(SVM), etc. (Esteva et al. 2017 ; Haenssle et al. 2018 ;
Hekler et al. 2019b ;K a¨mmer et al. 2017 ). All the above-
stated reasons and coherence of our work with pastresearch literature show that CNN is the best choice and
thus supports our approach to selecting the CNN model.
Melanoma as per records has caused more deaths than
any other skin ailments. It is thus important to reiterate the
fact that most of these deaths are caused due to delays in
detection and subsequent diagnosis of the disease. Keeping
all the aforementioned factors in mind, our work aims to
propose a deep learning-based model to improve the
accuracy prediction of melanoma disease (Wolf et al.2015 ).
The main motivation of this work is to develop Dense-
Net-II to make the process of diagnosis of melanomaquicker and more efﬁcient which further reduces the
application of CT scans, X-Rays, and other medical pro-
cedures involved for the procedure, optimizing theresources required to cure and treat the number of patients
diagnosed (Tschandl et al. 2019a ). The study aims to save
the additional overheads of healthcare equipment andmethodologies by ﬁltering out the false positives earlier.
The key contribution of this work is summarized as
follows:
•The investigation of melanoma in this work speciﬁcally
includes a real-world benchmarked HAM10000 dataset
which offers exhaustive and varied types of images
based on their color and resolution.
•Development of an enhanced deep learning CNN model
based on DenseNet, with an ability to classify 7
different lesions.13286 N. Girdhar et al.
123