2. Emotion and Cognition
2.1. Emotion-Cognition Interactions
Cognition and emotion appear to be separate from each other, but actually, they are two sides of the same coin,
as shown in Figure 1. In fact, for a long historical time dating back to the time of Plato, emotion and cognition have
been considered as separate and independent processes [9, 10]. In recent years, however, more and more studies tend
to  consider  emotion  and  cognition  as  interrelated  and  integrated  [11].  Numerous  psychological  studies  have  found
that the processing of salient emotional stimuli and the experience of affective states can have an impact on behav-
ioral and cognitive processing, while in turn cognition can influence and regulate emotion [12, 13]. From a neurobio-
logical perspective, in the human brain, although previous studies have tended to suggest that emotion is responsible
for the subcortical processing such as the primitive limbic system, while cognitive-related processes are mostly pro-
cessed by the cortex areas like the prefrontal cortex, substantial studies in recent years have shown that emotional and
cognitive  processes  are  interrelated  with  each  other  and  shared  a  large  number  of  overlapping  regions  [14, 15],  for
reviews, please see [12, 16]. Therefore, the study of the interaction between emotion and cognition can help us create
more trustworthy and human-like AI and enhance human-computer interactions.
  
 
Figure 1.  Emotion and cognition. 
2.2. Emotion AI
Emotion plays an essential role in human communication and cognition. With emotions, humans can express
their various feelings or react accordingly to internal and external stimuli. While not all AI or intelligent software sys-
tems need to be emotional or have exactly all human-like emotions such as depression and anxiety, using AI to fur-
ther understand emotions and develop corresponding systems would certainly make AI more user-friendly and more
convenient for our daily lives [17].
For this purpose, emotion AI is developed and dedicated to uncovering human emotions and enabling comput-
ers to have human-like capabilities to understand, interpret, and even express emotions [18]. Emotion AI can be used
in a wide range of areas where emotions play an important role [17]. For instance, in mental health care, AI may help
psychologists to detect symptoms or disorders that are hidden or unaware of by patients. In the education field, an AI
teacher who can understand students’ emotional states and respond appropriately would enhance the learning process,
and thus is utilized in remote or hybrid learning scenarios. Furthermore, emotion AI is coming into use in many other
fields such as entertainment, communication, and intelligent agents [17]. To date, the novel methodology developed
in  affective  computing  and  Emotion  AI  has  significantly  contributed  to  our  lives  in  many  areas  such  as  emotional
well-being, E-teaching, home care, and security.
Currently, there are three mainstreams in artificial emotional intelligence, namely emotion recognition, emotion
synthesis,  and  emotion  augmentation  [19].  Emotion  recognition  refers  to  applying  computer  systems  to  recognize
human  emotions  in  affective  computing,  and  is  one  of  the  most  traditional  approaches  that  has  been  employed  in
emotion  AI  research  [20]. Emotion  recognition  has  been  widely  used  in  different  modalities  such  as  facial  expres-
sions  [21−23],  body  gestures  [24, 25],  acoustic  or  written  linguistic  content  [26, 27],  physiological  signals  [28, 29],
and the fusion of multiple modalities [30–32]. While most previous research has focused on facial expression recog-
nition, given the multi-modal nature of emotions, more and more researchers are tending to refer to other modalities
as well.
With these multi-modal cues, AI can better recognize genuine and spontaneous emotions and build more reli-
able  systems  accordingly.  Besides  recognizing  human  emotions,  AI  often  needs  to  analyze  and  process  human
behaviors and interact with humans, so it is important to equip AI with emotion synthesis capability [33] to improve
the human-computer interactive experience. The main development of emotion synthesis is in speech, facial expres-
sion, and body behavior synthesis, which can even date back to three decades ago [19]. Exploring emotion synthesis,
undoubtedly, can enhance the AI’s affective and social realism, thus improving the reliability of AI and making theirIJNDI , 2022, 1(1): 65−72.  https://doi.org/10.53941/ijndi0101006 
 66