ther study.
3.2. Regulation
In social cognitive theory, human behavior is motivated and regulated through constant self-influence. The self-
regulative mechanism has a strong impact on affect, thought, motivation, and human action [52]. Regulation involves
the ability to make adaptive changes in terms of cognition, motivation, and emotions in challenging situations [53].
Emotion changes could be the reason for the regulation, while they also could be the result of regulation [54].
In Bandura’s theory [55], the regulation process contains self-observation, judgment, and self-response. The self-
observation is how humans look at themselves and their behaviors. Judgment refers to using a standard to compare
what humans see. Self-response is performing different behaviors according to whether meeting the standard or not.
Through these steps, humans are able to control their behavior [52]. However, until now, it is almost impossible to
evidence  the  "invisible  mental"  shared  regulation  due  to  methodological  limitations  [56].  Moreover,  it  is  not  clear
how humans regulate their internal states in response to internal and external stressors [52]. In the future, the self- and
shared-regulative mechanisms should be further investigated and integrated into the AI systems to make AI learn by
itself like humans.
3.3. Decision Making
Decision making is regarded as the cognitive process referring to problem-solving activities yielding a solution
deemed to be optimal among many alternatives [57]. The decision making process can be based on explicit or tacit
knowledge and beliefs. It can be rational or irrational.
Decision making happens every now and then in human’s daily life. A wise decision may make life and the
world better. However, human’s decisions may be influenced by multiple factors, especially emotion. Human choices
can be influenced by the human’s mood at the time of decision making [58, 59]. For instance, happy people are more
likely  to  be  optimistic  about  the  current  situation  and  choose  to  maintain  the  current  state,  whereas  sad  people  are
more inclined to be pessimistic about the current situation and choose to change the current state. Fearful people tend
to hold pessimistic judgments about future events, while angry people tend to keep optimistic judgments about future
events. It is important to study how to model the connections between emotion and decision making and understand
the deep process of decision making in human brains.
3.4. Discovery
As a high-level and advanced scope of cognitive AI, discovery refers to finding insights and connections in the
vast  amount  of  information  and  developing  skills  to  extract  new  knowledge  [60].  With  the  increasing  volumes  of
data, it becomes possible to train models with AI technologies to efficiently discover useful information from mas-
sive  data.  At  the  same  time,  the  massive  complex  data  increases  the  difficulty  of  manually  processing  by  humans.
Therefore, AI systems are needed to help exploit information more effectively than humans could do on their own.
In  recent  years,  some  systems  with  discovery  capabilities  have  already  emerged.  The  cognitive  information
management shell at Louisiana State University is a cognitive solution and has been applied in preventing future oil
spills [61]. More specifically, this system built a complex event processing system that can detect problems in mis-
sion-critical and generate intelligent decisions to modulate the system environment. The system contains distributed
intelligent agents to collect multiple streaming data to build interactive sensing, inspection, and visualization systems.
It is able to achieve real-time monitoring and analysis. Through archiving past events and cross-referencing them with
current events, the system can discover deeply hidden patterns and then make decisions upon them. Specifically, cog-
nitive information management not only sends alerts but also dynamically re-configures to isolate critical events and
repair failures. Currently, the study of system with discovery capabilities are still in the early stages. The value propo-
sitions for the future are very compelling. In the future, we should consider more about how to design cognitive sys-
tems with discovery ability effectively and efficiently so as to solve different tasks in complex real-life situations.
In general, engagement, self-regulation, decision making, and discovery are considered to be complementary in
cognitive AI systems, as shown in Figure 2. Engagement refers to the way how humans and systems interact with
each other. Through enhancing the engagement, more effort would be contributed to achieving the final goal. In this
process,  adaptions  referring  to  regulation  are  ongoing  which  further  simulates  the  engagement  [62].  Furthermore,
engagement and regulation can influence the ability to explore the underlying complex relationships and solve prob-
lems that are related to discovery and decision-making, relatively [63]. In turn, just like us human beings, discovery
and decision-making can also impact engagement and regulation. To develop a successful cognitive AI system, all of
the above four aspects should be considered and well-designed. IJNDI , 2022, 1(1): 65−72.  https://doi.org/10.53941/ijndi0101006 
 68