Engagement
Effortful commitment to goals
Decision-making
Problem-solving activity yielding
a solution deemed to be optimal
among many alternativesRegulation
Motivated and regulated
through constant self-influence
Discovery
Finding insights and connections
in the vast amount of
information
 
Figure 2.  Four aspects of cognitive AI are complementary to each other. 
4. The Future of Cognitive AI
Towards  cognitive  AI,  data  and  knowledge  mining,  multi-modal  AI  explainability,  and  hybrid  AI  should  be
explored, and the potential new ethical issues should also be kept in mind.
4.1. Data and Knowledge Mining
Fueled by advances in AI and the boosting of digital data, the cognitive process could be increasingly delegated
to automated processes based on data analysis and knowledge mining [64], which intends to dig hidden patterns and
knowledge from vast amounts of information through AI technology [65]. The new AI systems should support ana-
lytical engagement, regulations, decision making, and discovery approaches, which involve big data of greater vari-
ety, higher volumes and more velocity with the technology development [66]. Most of the current machine learning
techniques based on big data are usually based on the vector space and work for specific scenarios [67–69]. It is dif-
ficult to store, analyze, and visualize big and complex cognitive data for further processes or results with traditional
statistical models.  A  promising  future  research  focus  is  to  learn  from  dynamic  data  of  complicated  cognitive  pro-
cesses in both Euclidean space and non-Euclidean space with uncertainties for generic scenarios and scenarios with
equivocality  [70]. Another  research  direction  would  be  the  life-long  learning  and  self-supervised  learning  that  dis-
cover new knowledge through digging into the relationships among the data with complex structures and uncertain-
ties.  For  example,  in  the  field  of  cybersecurity  where  dynamic  threats  and  cyber-attacks  appear  all  the  time  [71],
cybersecurity is required to build fast self-reliant cognitive computing systems that can make wiser security decisions
based on self-learned knowledge and complex surrounding factors.
4.2. Multi-Modal AI Explainability
Cognitive systems are dedicated to developing advanced human-like AIs. However, as AI becomes more intel-
ligent  and  impacts  our  lives  in  many  ways,  an  insurmountable  problem  is  how  we  trace  back  and  understand  the
results of AI algorithms.
Explainable  artificial  intelligence  (XAI)  refers  to  a  type  of  explainable  AI  that  generate  details  and  reasoning
processing to help users understand its functions [72]. In terms of cognitive AI, it is often necessary to collect infor-
mation from different modalities. For example, in building emotion and cognitive AI engines, behavioral information
such as facial expressions and body gestures, language and voice information, as well as physiological signals are all
important data sources for understanding human emotion and cognition functions, and are collected simultaneously
across modalities. However, once we feed all data into the computer, the whole calculation process is seems to be a
“black box”, and even the researchers or engineers who develop the algorithms themselves cannot know what hap-
pens inside the “box” [72, 73]. Therefore, developing cognitive XAI to help us interpret the results, reveal the rea-
soning processing, and find causality among multi-modal data variables would be a fruitful area for further work. The
study of multi-modal AI explainability could have various applications, especially in health care. On one hand, the
cognitive XAI could help doctors better analyze diseases and reduce the rate of misdiagnosis [42, 74]. On the other
hand, the patient can better understand their health status which leads to increased trust in treatment options.
4.3. Hybrid AI
Hybrid  AI  is  the  future  direction,  which  represents  joint  intelligence  from  human  beings  and  algorithms.  To
date, hybrid AI has gained much more attention and started to be applied to some realistic applications, such as man-
agement [75]. However, most of them are simple combinations of human and AI decisions. The way to better take
advantage of humans and algorithms should be explored. Moreover, in daily life, efficient interactions and collabora-
tions  along  with  optimal  decisions  require  contributions  from  multiple  people/systems  who/which  have  variousIJNDI , 2022, 1(1): 65−72.  https://doi.org/10.53941/ijndi0101006 
 69