Survey/review study
From Emotion AI to Cognitive AI
Guoying Zhao*, Yante Li, and Qianru Xu
University of Oulu, Pentti Kaiteran Katu 1, Linnanmaa 90570, Finland
* Correspondence: guoying.zhao@oulu.fi
Received: 22 September 2022
Accepted: 28 November 2022
Published: 22 December 2022
Abstract: Cognitive computing is recognized as the next era of computing. In order to make hardware
and software systems more human-like, emotion artificial intelligence (AI) and cognitive AI which simu-
late  human  intelligence  are  the  core  of  real  AI.  The  current  boom  of  sentiment  analysis  and  affective
computing in computer science gives rise to the rapid development of emotion AI. However, the research
of cognitive AI has just started in the past few years. In this visionary paper, we briefly review the cur-
rent  development  in  emotion  AI,  introduce  the  concept  of  cognitive  AI,  and  propose  the  envisioned
future of cognitive AI, which intends to let computers think, reason, and make decisions in similar ways
that humans do. The important aspect of cognitive AI in terms of engagement, regulation, decision mak-
ing, and discovery are further discussed. Finally, we propose important directions for constructing future
cognitive  AI,  including  data  and  knowledge  mining,  multi-modal  AI  explainability,  hybrid  AI,  and
potential ethical challenges.
Keywords: emotion; cognition; human intelligence; artificial intelligence
 
1. Introduction
Intelligence is what makes us human [1]. Human intelligence is a mental attribute that consists of the ability to
learn from experience, adapt to new conditions, manage complex abstract concepts, and interact with and change the
environment using knowledge. It is the human intelligence that makes Humans different from other creatures.
Emotional and cognitive functions are inseparable from the human brain and they jointly form human intelli-
gence [2, 3]. Emotions are biological states associated with the nervous system. They are brought on by neurophysi-
ological  changes  associated  with  thoughts,  feelings,  behavioral  responses,  and  pleasure  or  displeasure.  Humans
express their feelings or react to external and internal stimuli through emotion. Thus, emotion plays an important role
in everyday life. In recent years, research on emotion has increased significantly in different fields such as psychol-
ogy,  neuroscience,  and  computer  science,  where  the  so-called  emotion  artificial  intelligence  (AI)  is  committed  to
developing systems to recognize, process, interpret and simulate human emotion, leading to various potential applica-
tions in human lives including E-teaching, home care, security, and so on.
Cognition  refers  to  the  mental  action  or  process  related  to  acquiring  knowledge  and  understanding  through
thought,  experience,  and  sense  [4– 7].  Through  cognitive  processing,  we  make  decisions  and  produce  appropriate
responses. Research shows that cognition evolved hand-in-hand with emotion [2, 3]. In other words, the emotion and
cognition are two sides of the same system, and separating them leads to anomalous behaviors. However, given the
importance  of  cognition  to  human  intelligence,  research  on  cognitive  AI  is  still  very  limited.  To  better  understand
human needs and advance the development of AI, it is crucial to build computational models with cognition func-
tions to understand human thoughts and behaviors and import the cognition capability to machines for better interac-
tion, communication,  and  cooperation  in  human-computer  interactions  or  computer-assisted  human-human  interac-
tions. In the future, modeling human cognition and reconstructing it with emotion in real-world application systems
are the new objectives of AI [8].
By their nature, as both emotion AI and cognitive AI are inspired and built to imitate human intelligence, they
share a lot in common and require the combined efforts of multiple disciplines. In this sense, the focus of this paper is
to  discuss  the  future  cognitive  AI,  which  makes  computers  capable  of  analyzing,  reasoning,  and  making  decisions
like human users. We firstly introduce the relationship between the emotion and cognition. Then, the emotion AI and
cognitive AI are introduced. The important aspects of cognitive AI are specifically discussed including engagement,
regulation, decision making, and discovery. Finally, we share the opinions of research focus for future cognitive AI.International Journal of Network Dynamics and Intelligence 
 
 https://www.sciltp.com/journals/ijndi