interaction with users more natural [34]. However, it is important to note the emotion synthesis we raise here is far
from  an  artificially  emotional  machine,  as  emotion  synthesis  is  more  about  external  emotional  expressions,  i.  e.,
equipping AI with some human-like emotional reactions. There is still a long way to go to let AI generate inner emo-
tions, which involves a lot of ethical issues that cannot be ignored.
In addition, emotion augmentation denotes embedding the principle of emotion in AI and using it in planning,
reasoning, or more general goal achievement [19, 35]. In other words, emotion augmentation requires applying emo-
tion concepts to achieve broader goals in AIs. For instance, by introducing two emotional parameters, namely anxi-
ety  and  confidence,  the  emotional  backpropagation  (BP)  learning  algorithm  can  reach  an  outstanding  performance
compared to the conventional BP-based neural network in the facial recognition task [36]. Apart from that, emotion
augmentation can be also used in a wider range of scenarios, such as designing models, computational reinforcement
learning, or other cognitive-related tasks [35]. Although still far away, the booming development of studies in senti-
ment analysis and affective computing (in computer science and other interdisciplinary disciplines) makes the goal of
translating emotions into AI less far-fetched than one might think.
2.3. Cognitive AI
Human thinking is beyond imagination. What human think about every day involves: how to act in a dynamic
and  evolving  world;  how  to  juggle  multiple  goals  and  preferences;  how  to  face  opportunities  and  threats,  etc.  Is  it
possible that a computer develops the ability to think and reason without human intervention? An overarching goal
for future AI is to simulate human thought processes in a computerized model. The result is cognitive AI.
Cognitive AI is derived from AI and cognitive science [37]. It develops computer systems simulating human
brain functions [38]. The aim of cognitive AI is to mimic human behaviors and solve complex problems. It encom-
passes the main brain behaviors of human intelligence, including perception, attention, thought, memory, knowledge
formation, judgment and evaluation, problem-solving and decision making, etc [39]. Moreover, cognitive processes
utilize existing knowledge to discover new knowledge.
By its nature, cognitive AI needs to employ methods from multiple disciplines such as cognitive science, psy-
chology, linguistics, physics, information theory, and mathematics [40, 41]. Based on the knowledge from different
disciplines,  cognitive  AI  uses  computer  theory  and  techniques  to  simulate  human  cognitive  tasks  in  order  to  make
computers think like the human brain [41]. Cognitive AI is fundamentally different from traditional AI. Traditional
AI, or traditional computer techniques, are mainly based on the fed data and processed accordingly under human pre-
programming [42]. On the contrary, cognitive AI should be able to continuously adapt itself to the context and envi-
ronment so as to evolve and grow over time. For example, IBM Watson, a typical representative of Cognitive AI,
defeated the human champion in the Jeopardy game in 2011 [43]. Unlike its forerunner Deep Blue (known as the first
computer that defeated a human chess player), which required an exhaustive search and performed merely quantita-
tive analysis, Watson relies on offline stored information and uses natural language processing combined with appro-
priate contextual information to perform adaptive reasoning and learning to produce answers [41, 43].
In this sense, the benefits of cognitive AI outweigh traditional AI, as traditional AI prefers to execute optimal
algorithms to solve problems, while cognitive AI goes a big step further to replicate human wisdom and intelligence
through multifaceted analysis including understanding and modeling human engagement, regulation (self-regulation
and shared regulation in interactions), decision making, discovery, etc. Notice that cognitive AI requires complex data
learning, knowledge mining, multi-model explainability, and hybrid AI to learn and analyze the patterns and to ensure
that the reasoning results are reliable and consistent [44].
3. Important Aspects in Cognitive AI
In  this  section,  we  specifically  discuss  the  important  aspects  of  developing  a  successful  cognitive  AI  system,
including engagement, regulation, decision making, and discovery.
3.1. Engagement
Engagement describes the effortful commitment to goals [45]. Cognition, emotion, and motivation are incorpo-
rated into the engagement. Multiple studies show that positive emotion and motivation can improve the engagement
of humans [46]. These findings have been successfully utilized in various fields, such as education, business dealing
and human-computer interaction (HCI) to improve the engagement of users [47–49].
In recent years, besides emotion and motivation, researchers start to study the contribution of cognitive AI to
engagement. IBM developed Watson taking advantage of cognitive AI for customer engagement to better identify the
wants and needs of the customers [50]. In healthcare, cognitive computing systems collect individual health data from
a variety of sources to enhance patient engagement and help professionals treat patients in a customized manner [51].
However, the technology is still at an early stage. How to find what really matters in engaging humans requires fur-IJNDI , 2022, 1(1): 65−72.  https://doi.org/10.53941/ijndi0101006 
 67