Automated Algorithm Selection: Survey and Perspectives
timisation problems, the best solution achieved by any of the component algorithms
at any given time is returned as the solution of the entire portfolio. Parallel algorithm
portfolios are conceptually similar to ensemble methods in machine learning (see, e.g.,
Dietterich, 2000; Rokach, 2010). The key difference is that ensemble methods aggregate
the results from the various component algorithms, e.g., by weighted or unweighted
averaging.
When run on parallel hardware, algorithm portfolios typically achieve perfor-
mance very close to that of the VBS in terms of wall-clock time, at the price of par-
allelism of degree equal to the number nof algorithms in A. Of course, parallel portfo-
lios can be run at lower actual degrees of parallelism, and even fully sequentially, using
task-switching, as provided, e.g., by the operating system; in that case, the wall-clock
time is typically close to that of ntimes the performance of the VBS in terms of the
time required to solve a given instance of a decision problem, or to achieve a certain
solution quality in case of an optimisation problem. Most of this overhead, which for
large sets of algorithms can be very substantial, can be avoided by using per-instance
algorithm selectors instead of parallel portfolios. Nevertheless, especially in the area of
evolutionary computation, the concept of parallel algorithm portfolios has given rise
to a growing body of research, in which the basic concept is often combined with ad-
ditional techniques to achieve improved performance (see, e.g., Tang et al., 2014; Yuen
and Zhang, 2015).
Although the term algorithm portfolio is sometimes used in the literature to refer to
per-instance algorithm selectors and other techniques that leverage performance com-
plementarity within a set of algorithms, we discourage this broad use as it easily leads
to confusion between conceptually very different approaches. This potential confusion
is easily avoided by restricting the term algorithm portfolio to parallel algorithm portfo-
lios, consistent with the seminal work by Huberman et al. (1997). Recently, the concepts
of per-instance algorithm selection and parallel portfolios have been combined, by se-
lecting, on a per-instance basis, several algorithms to be run in parallel (Lindauer et al.,
2015a). While this would not make sense in the context of a perfect algorithm selector,
it can limit the impact of the poor selection decisions sometimes made in practice.
Algorithm schedules provide another way of exploiting performance complemen-
tarity (see, e.g., Lindauer, 2014; Lindauer et al., 2016). The key idea is to run a sequence
of algorithms from a given set A, one after the other, each for a given (maximum) time.
Those cut-off times can differ between the stages of the schedule, and some algorithms
may not be run at all. Static algorithm schedules, i.e., schedules that have been deter-
mined in a per-set fashion and are applied uniformly to any given problem instance
i, can be quite effective and are typically much easier to implement than per-instance
algorithm selectors (see, e.g., Roussel, 2012). They are also used in state-of-the-art al-
gorithm selection systems during a so-called pre-solving phase, in order to solve easy
problem instances quickly and without the need for computing the instance features
required for per-instance selection (see, e.g., Xu et al., 2012; Lindauer et al., 2015b). Un-
less stated explicitly otherwise, we will in the following, when discussing per-instance
algorithm selectors, always refer to the pure per-instance algorithm selection problem,
as deﬁned above, without pre-solving schedules and other extensions found in cutting-
edge algorithm selection systems.
Finally, the problem of predicting the performance of an algorithm Aon a given
problem instance iis closely related to per-instance algorithm selection. If computa-
tionally cheap and accurate performance prediction were possible, evidently, we could
use performance predictors for our given algorithms A1; : : : ; A nand simply select the
Evolutionary Computation Volume x, Number x 7