P . Kerschke, H. H. Hoos, F. Neumann, H. Trautmann
sentially capture statistics over estimates for the probability for variables to be true ,
false orunconstrained in every satisfying assignment. Finally, Hutter et al. (2014b)
proposed to use the actual feature costs, in terms of the running time required for com-
puting each of the 11 feature sets; they noted that the diameter and survey propagation
features tend to be expensive to compute and may thus be of limited usefulness in the
context of per-instance algorithm selection.
A well-known generalisation of SAT is the problem of answer set programming (ASP;
see, e.g., Baral, 2003), which deals with determining so-called “answer sets”, i.e., stable
models for logic programs. Many combinatorial problems can be presented in ASP in
a rather straightforward way and solved, at least in principle, using general-purpose
ASP solvers. Because of the close relationship between ASP and SAT, many features for
ASP instances are closely related to the SAT features outlined above. One of the most
widely used collection of ASP features has been proposed by Maratea et al. (2012); it
is comprised of 52 features, which can be grouped into four sets. Three of these fea-
ture sets closely correspond to well-known SAT features (Nudelman et al., 2004b) and
contain eight problem size , three balance and two proximity to Horn features. In addition,
Maratea et al. (2012) proposed 39 ASP-speciﬁc features, such as the numbers of true and
disjunctive facts, the fraction of normal rules and constraints, and several combinations
of the latter.
AI planning. Automated planning (also known as AI planning ) is one of the most
prominent challenges in artiﬁcial intelligence (see, e.g., Ghallab et al., 2004). While
there are many variants of AI planning problems, the basic setting (also known as clas-
sical planning) involves a set of actions with associated pre-conditions, deterministic
effects and sometimes costs, an initial state and one or more goal states. The objective
in satisﬁcing planning is to ﬁnd a valid plan, i.e., a sequence or partially ordered set of
actions that, when applied to the initial state, reach a goal state, or to determine that no
valid plan exists. In the optimisation variants of planning problems, the objective is to
ﬁnd plans of minimal length or cost. Most variants of AI planning are at least NP-hard,
and satisﬁcing classical planning is known to be PSPACE-complete. AI planning al-
gorithms have important applications, e.g., in robotics, gaming, logistics and software
test case generation; they are also used for the operation and management of trafﬁc,
energy grids and ﬂeets of shared vehicles.
In classical planning, there is an important distinction between a problem instance
and a so-called planning domain . This distinction arises from the fact that states and ac-
tions are speciﬁed in an abstract way, using so-called predicates and operators that can be
instantiated to yield speciﬁc properties of states and speciﬁc actions , respectively (see,
e.g., Ghallab et al., 2004). For example, in a planning problem that involves moving
goods using a ﬂeet of trucks, there might be a predicate stating that a speciﬁc truck is
in a given location, and an operator that moves the truck from one location to another.
A planning domain is a class of a planning instances with the same set of speciﬁc pred-
icates and operators. Planning domains and instances can be concisely described in a
widely used, uniform language called PDDL (Planning Domain Deﬁnition Language;
see, e.g., Gerevini and Long, 2005).
Howe et al. (1999) were among the ﬁrst to characterise AI planning instances by
simple features, namely, the number of actions, predicates, objects, goals, as well as
the number of predicates used to specify the initial state. A decade later, Roberts et al.
(2008) introduced a substantially extended set of 41 features, which includes summary
statistics of the domain and instance ﬁles (16 and three features, respectively), but also
captures 13 high-level features of the given planning instance in terms of its PDDL
10 Evolutionary Computation Volume x, Number x