P . Kerschke, H. H. Hoos, F. Neumann, H. Trautmann
ofﬂine construction of the per-instance conﬁgurator is necessarily sparse. In particular,
for typical conﬁguration scenarios, the training data would necessarily cover only a
very small number of conﬁgurations, which makes it challenging to learn a mapping
from instance features to conﬁgurations.
We consider PIAC to be a largely open problem, with signiﬁcant potential for fu-
ture work. There is some evidence in the literature that it may have signiﬁcant beneﬁts
compared to the more established per-set conﬁguration techniques. Notably, Kadioglu
et al. (2010) proposed a PIAC approach based on a combination of clustering and a
standard, per-set algorithm conﬁgurator and reported promising results on several set
covering, mixed integer programming and propositional satisﬁability algorithms.
Further challenges. Due to the steady stream of work in algorithm selection and
related areas, it is important to keep track of promising developments. Of course,
domain-related research networks such as COSEAL5might relieve this challenging task
to some degree, yet they will not be able to keep up with all developments within this
fast-growing and productive community. Instead, comparisons against state-of-the-art
methods, which are of special signiﬁcance in this context, are facilitated by benchmark-
ing platforms and libraries, such as ASL IB(Bischl et al., 2016a), ACL IB(Hutter et al.,
2014a) and HPO LIB(Eggensperger et al., 2013) for algorithm selection, conﬁguration
and hyperparameter optimisation, respectively. At the same time, it is important (a) to
promote and establish as best practice the use of these libraries, especially in the context
of newly proposed methods for algorithm selection and related problems, and (b) to
maintain and expand these libraries, in order to ensure their continued relevance, e.g.,
by integrating scenarios for multi-objective and additional real-world problems.
The latter not only applies to the previously mentioned libraries, but also to
broader benchmark collections for the underlying speciﬁc problems. For example, re-
cent studies have analysed the ‘footprints’ of different continuous optimisation algo-
rithms on common benchmarks; while Mu ˜noz Acosta and Smith-Miles (2017) focused
on BBOB (arguably the most prominent benchmark in continuous black-box optimisa-
tion), Mu ˜noz Acosta et al. (2018) applied a similar analysis to machine learning prob-
lems from the UCI repository (Dheeru and Karra Taniskidou, 2017) and OpenML (van
Rijn et al., 2013). Their visual analyses indicate that (a) different “comfort zones” for
the various algorithms in question exist across the respective instance spaces, in line
with what might be expected based on a liberal interpretation of the NFL theorems by
Wolpert and Macready (1997), and (b) the instances from common benchmarks’ prob-
lems in continuous optimisation are not very diverse, but cover only relatively small
areas of the overall problem instance space.
Another important direction for future work is the improvement of problem-
speciﬁc features in general. Aside from the directions outlined previously (monitoring
features as well as features for mixed and multi-objective problems), more informative
and cheaper features are always desirable and likely to pave the way towards more
effective applications of algorithm selection and related techniques.
An interesting open question regards the trade-off between the performance
achieved by algorithm selection approaches, e.g., in relation to a hypothetical per-
fect selector (VBS), and their complexity, including the complexity of the feature sets
they operate on. There is recent evidence from an application of algorithm selection
to solvers for quantiﬁed Boolean formulae (QBF) that suggests that sometimes, a small
number of simple features is sufﬁcient for achieving excellent performance (Hoos et al.,
5https://www.coseal.net/
28 Evolutionary Computation Volume x, Number x