Automated Algorithm Selection: Survey and Perspectives
2018). However, it is presently unclear to which extent this situation arises in other
application scenarios, and to which degree it is contingent on the use of highly sophis-
ticated algorithm selection techniques.
Finally, an intriguing direction for future work is the development of algorithm se-
lection techniques for automated algorithm conﬁgurators and selectors. Intuitively, it is
clear that different algorithm conﬁguration scenarios would be handled most efﬁciently
using rather different conﬁguration procedures (depending, e.g., on the prevalence of
numerical vs. categorical parameters). Likewise, it has been observed in the recent
Open Algorithm Selection Competition (Lindauer et al., 2018) that different AS techniques
work best on different AS scenarios – suggesting that meta-algorithm selection (i.e.,
AS applied to AS strategies) might be useful for quickly identifying the selection strat-
egy to be used in a particular application context. In both cases, conﬁgurator selection
and meta-selection, the limited amount of training data is likely to give rise to speciﬁc
challenges, which may well require the development of new AS techniques.
Acknowledgements
Pascal Kerschke, Heike Trautmann and Holger H. Hoos acknowledge support from the
European Research Center for Information Systems (ERCIS) . The former two also acknowl-
edge support from the DAAD PPP project No. 57314626. Frank Neumann acknowl-
edges the support of the Australian Research Council through grant DP160102401. The
authors gratefully acknowledge useful inputs from Lars Kotthoff and Jakob Bossek.
References
Abell, T., Malitsky, Y., and Tierney, K. (2013). Features for Exploiting Black-Box Opti-
mization Problem Structure. In Nicosia, G. and Pardalos, P ., editors, Proceedings of
the 7th International Conference on Learning and Intelligent Optimization (LION) , volume
7997 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science (LNCS) , pages 30 – 36. Springer.
Amini, A., Wah, T. Y., and Saboohi, H. (2014). On Density-Based Data Streams Clus-
tering Algorithms: A Survey. Journal of Computer Science and Technology (JCST) ,
29(1):116 – 141.
Angel, E. and Zissimopoulos, V . (2002). On the Hardness of the Quadratic Assignment
Problem with Metaheuristics. Journal of Heuristics , 8(4):399 – 414.
Ans ´otegui, C., Malitsky, Y., Samulowitz, H., Sellmann, M., and Tierney, K. (2015).
Model-Based Genetic Algorithms for Algorithm Conﬁguration. Proceedings of the
Twenty-Fourth International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI) , pages 733 –
739.
Applegate, D. L., Bixby, R. E., Chv ´atal, V ., and Cook, W. J. (2007). The Traveling Salesman
Problem: A Computational Study . Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, USA.
Arik, S., Huang, T., Lai, W. K., and Liu, Q., editors (2015). Proceedings Part III of the
22nd International Conference on Neural Information Processing (ICONIP) , volume 9491
ofLecture Notes in Computer Science (LNCS) . Springer.
Armstrong, W., Christen, P ., McCreath, E., and Rendell, A. P . (2006). Dynamic Algo-
rithm Selection Using Reinforcement Learning. In International Workshop on Integrat-
ing AI and Data Mining (AIDM) , pages 18 – 25. IEEE.
Evolutionary Computation Volume x, Number x 29