Automated Algorithm Selection: Survey and Perspectives
Several surveys on algorithm selection have been published over the last decade.
In the ﬁrst extensive survey in this area, Smith-Miles (2009) summarised develop-
ments in the meta-learning, artiﬁcial intelligence and operations research communi-
ties. Adopting a cross-disciplinary perspective, she combined contributions from these
areas under the umbrella of a “(meta-)learning” framework, which permitted her to
identify parallel and closely related developments within these rather well-separated
communities. However, this survey was published a decade ago and therefore does not
cover recent developments and improvements to the state of the art in this fast-moving
research area.
A more recent overview on algorithm selection was published by Kotthoff (2014).
His survey presents an extensive, valuable guide to the automated algorithm selec-
tion literature up to 2014 and provides answers to several important questions, such
as (i) what are the differences between static and dynamic portfolios, (ii) what should
be selected (single solver, schedule, different candidate portfolios), (iii) what are the
differences between online and ofﬂine selection, (iv) how should the costs for using al-
gorithm portfolios be considered, (v) which prediction type (classiﬁcation, regression,
etc.) is most promising when training an algorithm selector, and (vi) what are differ-
ences between static and dynamic, as well as low-level and high-level features. Un-
fortunately, Kotthoff’s survey is restricted to algorithm selection for discrete problems
and does not cover in any detail problem instance features, which provide the basis for
per-instance algorithm selection.
Those two limitations where – at least partially – addressed by Mu ˜noz Acosta et al.
(2013). Although the title (“The Algorithm Selection Problem on the Continuous Op-
timization Domain”) appears to suggest otherwise, their survey mostly addresses the
paucity of work on algorithm selection for continuous optimisation problems and the
challenges arising in this context. Rather than providing an overview of algorithm
selection approaches in this area, Mu ˜noz Acosta et al. (2013) summarise promising re-
sults on discrete problems and hint at the possibility of achieving similar results in
continuous optimisation. In their follow-up survey, Mu ˜noz Acosta et al. (2015b) pro-
vide further insights into the existing ingredients for algorithm selection in the domain
of continuous optimisation: benchmarks, algorithms, performance metrics, and prob-
lem characteristics obtained by exploratory landscape analysis. Still, they do not cover
any work describing automated algorithm selection in this domain.
Our goal here is to not only update, but also to complement and extend these pre-
vious surveys. Firstly, we cover work on algorithm selection for discrete andcontinuous
problems; as a result, we can compare the difﬁculties, challenges and solutions found
in those domains. Secondly, one of the most important ingredients for successful al-
gorithm selection approaches are informative (problem-speciﬁc) features. We therefore
provide an overview of several promising feature sets and discuss characteristics that
have been demonstrated to provide a strong basis for algorithm selection. Thirdly, we
discuss several problems closely related to (and sometimes confused with) algorithm
selection, such as automated algorithm conﬁguration, algorithm schedules and parallel
portfolios, pointing out differences, similarities and synergies. Of course, in light of the
considerable and fast-growing body of literature on and related to algorithm selection,
we cannot provide comprehensive coverage; instead, we selected contributions based
on their impact, promise and conceptual contributions to the area.
The remainder of this survey article is structured as follows. In Section 2, we for-
mally deﬁne the per-instance algorithm selection problem and situate it in the context
of related problems, such as automated algorithm conﬁguration. Next, Section 3 pro-
Evolutionary Computation Volume x, Number x 3