Automated Algorithm Selection: Survey and Perspectives
intensely studied combinatorial decision problems and has important applications in
hard- and software veriﬁcation (see, e.g., Biere et al., 2009). Given the ties to other com-
binatorial problems, improvements in SAT often also impact widely studied related
problems, such as maximum satisﬁability (MaxSAT) problem , in which the objective is to
ﬁnd a variable assignment that maximises the number of satisﬁed CNF clauses.
The ﬁrst large collection of features for SAT (and thus also MaxSAT) instances was
provided by Nudelman et al. (2004b). Despite the rather simple structure of SAT in-
stances, the authors devised nine different feature sets and a total of 91 features, which
characterise a given CNF formula from a multitude of perspectives. Eleven problem
size features describe SAT instances based on summary statistics of their numbers of
clauses and variables. A set of variable-clause graph (VCG) features comprises ten node
degree statistics based on a bipartite graph over the variables and clauses of a given
instance. Interactions between the variables are captured by four variable graph (VG)
features ; these are the minimum, maximum, mean and coefﬁcient of variation of the
node degrees for a graph of variables, in which edges connect pairs of variables that
jointly occur in at least one clause. Similarly, the set of clause graph (CG) features con-
tains seven node degree statistics of a graph whose edges connect clauses that have at
least one variable in common, as well as three features based on weighted clustering
coefﬁcients for the clause graph. Thirteen balance features capture the balance between
negated and unnegated variables per clause, their overall occurrences across all clauses,
as well as fractions of unary, binary and ternary clauses, whereas six further features
quantify the degree to which the given Fresembles a Horn formula (a restricted type
of CNF formula, for which SAT can be decided efﬁciently). The solution of a linear pro-
gram representing the given SAT instance provides the basis for six LP-based features .
Finally, there are two sets of so-called probing features , which are based on performance
statistics over short runs of several well-known SAT algorithms (based on DPLL and
stochastic local search, two prominent approaches to solving SAT) and capture the de-
gree to which these make early progress on the given instance.
Some of the feature sets – speciﬁcally, the CG, VG and LP-based features, as well
as some of the VCG, balance and DPLL-probing features – are computationally quite
expensive (see, e.g., Xu et al., 2008; Hutter et al., 2014b) and consequently not always
useful in the context of practical algorithm selection approaches. Similarly, the algo-
rithm runs for probing features are limited to a very small part of the overall time
budget for solving a given instance, to make sure that sufﬁcient time remains available
for running the selected SAT solver.
A decade later, Hutter et al. (2014b) – building on the work by Nudelman et al.
(2004b) – introduced a set of 138 SAT features. While they removed some features
from the earlier sets, much of the set remained the same. The most signiﬁcant changes
were an extension of the CG and VG feature sets by ﬁve new features each, as well
as three new feature sets accounting for an additional 48 features. The VG feature set
was extended by so-called diameter features, which capture statistics based on the set
of longest shortest paths from one variable to any other one in the graph. Also, in-
stead of the weighted clustering coefﬁcients based on the CG (as done by Nudelman
et al., 2004b), Hutter et al. (2014b) used a set of clustering coefﬁcients that measure the
CG’s “local cliqueness”. Furthermore, they introduced 18 novel clause learning features,
which summarise information gathered during short runs of a prominent SAT solver,
ZCHAFF RAND , that learns conﬂict clauses during its search for a satisfying assignment
(Mahajan et al., 2004). Another 18 features are derived from estimates of variable bias
obtained from the SAT solver VARSAT (Hsu and McIlraith, 2009); these features es-
Evolutionary Computation Volume x, Number x 9