P . Kerschke, H. H. Hoos, F. Neumann, H. Trautmann
that dominates all others on all problem instances. Instead, different algorithms per-
form best on different types of problem instances – a phenomenon also known as perfor-
mance complementarity , which is often incorrectly attributed to an interesting theoretical
result known as the no-free-lunch (NFL) theorem (Wolpert and Macready, 1995, 1997). In
the context of search problems, the NFL theorem strictly only applies if arbitrary search
landscapes are considered, while the instances of basically any search problem of inter-
est have compact descriptions and therefore cannot give rise to arbitrary search land-
scapes (Culberson, 1998). Performance complementarity has been observed for prac-
tically all NP-hard decision and optimisation problems; these include propositional
satisﬁability, constraint satisfaction, a wide range of planning and scheduling prob-
lems, mixed integer programming and the travelling salesperson problem, as well as a
broad range of continuous optimisation, machine learning and important polynomial-
time-solvable problems (e.g., sorting and shortest path ﬁnding). For these and many
other problems, theoretical results stating which algorithmic strategies work best are
restricted to very limited classes of problem instances, so that it is generally unknown
a priori which of several algorithms should be used to solve a given instance.
This gives rise to the increasingly prominent per-instance algorithm selection problem :
given a computational problem, a set of algorithms for solving this problem, and a
speciﬁc instance that needs to be solved, determine which of the algorithms can be
expected to perform best on that instance. This problem has already been considered
in the seminal work by Rice (1976), but it took several decades before practical per-
instance algorithm selection methods became available (see, e.g., Cook and Varnell,
1997; Leyton-Brown et al., 2003; Xu et al., 2008). Since then, the problem and algorithms
for solving it have steadily gained prominence, and by now have given rise to a large
body of literature. Indeed, per-instance algorithm selection techniques have produced
substantial improvements in the state of the art in solving a large range of prominent
computational problems, including propositional satisﬁability (SAT) and the travelling
salesperson problems (TSP) (Xu et al., 2008, 2012; Kerschke et al., 2017).
It is important to note that there are several concepts that are quite closely related
to that of per-instance algorithm selection, notably, per-set algorithm selection, algo-
rithm conﬁguration, algorithm schedules and parallel algorithm portfolios, which are
all discussed in further detail in Section 2. Unfortunately, there is some potential for
confusion, especially between per-instance algorithm selection and parallel algorithm
portfolios, since in the literature, the term portfolio is sometimes used to refer to algo-
rithm selectors. Furthermore, some of the most prominent and successful algorithm
selection approaches from the literature, such as SAT ZILLA (Xu et al., 2008) and A UTO -
FOLIO (Lindauer et al., 2015b), implement combinations of algorithm scheduling and
per-instance selection. While we will brieﬂy discuss these more complex systems, along
with approaches that select more than one algorithm to be run on a given problem in-
stance, the focus of this survey is on pure per-instance algorithm selection, as outlined
above and deﬁned formally in Section 2.
We note that per-instance algorithm selection can be applied to optimisation prob-
lems, where the goal is to ﬁnd an optimal (or best possible) solution according to a given
objective function, as well as to decision problems, where one wants to determine, as
quickly as possible, whether a solution satisfying certain conditions exists. Further-
more, it is useful to distinguish between continuous problems, where the components
of a possible solution are real numbers (possibly constrained to a given interval), and
discrete problems, where candidate solutions are discrete objects, such as graphs, per-
mutations or vectors of integers.
2 Evolutionary Computation Volume x, Number x