P . Kerschke, H. H. Hoos, F. Neumann, H. Trautmann
Figure 3: Overview of connections between “high-level” properties (grey rectangles)
and “low-level” features (white ellipses), taken from Mersmann et al. (2011).
Pitzer and Affenzeller (2012) combined these approaches under the term ﬁtness
landscape analysis (FLA) . However, as the majority of those characteristics was proposed
for white-box settings, they are not useful for automated algorithm selection. With the
introduction of Exploratory Landscape Analysis (ELA) , Mersmann et al. (2011) were the
ﬁrst to explicitly develop landscape features for use in black-box optimisation (BBO) –
and hence for algorithm selection in continuous optimisation. As shown in Figure 3,
they introduced six feature sets ( curvature ,convexity ,levelset ,local search ,meta models
andy-distribution ), combining a total of 50 features, and used these to predict eight
different problem characteristics, such as the global structure (none, weak, strong, de-
ceptive) and the degree of multimodality (none, low, mediocre, high). We note that
the attributes of the latter “high-level” properties can only be assigned by someone
with knowledge of the entire problem, whereas the former “low-level” features can be
automatically computed based on a small, but representative sample of points – the
so-called initial design .
Following the idea of automatically computable numerical features, some of the
earlier white-box landscape characteristics have been adapted to the black-box context.
For instance, Mu ˜noz Acosta et al. (2012, 2015a) reﬁned the information content features
and extended them by basin of attraction features . Similarly, Abell et al. (2013) proposed
hill climbing and random point features , whose general idea stems from the local search
and ﬁtness distance correlation methods, respectively, and enhanced them by problem
deﬁnition measures .
In addition, several new feature sets have been introduced in recent years: Ker-
schke et al. (2014) discretised the continuous search space into a grid of cells and used
a Markov-chain-inspired cell-mapping approach to obtain features, which measure –
amongst others – the sizes of the basins of attraction. However, due to the curse of
dimensionality, those features are only practically applicable to low-dimensional prob-
lems. A much more scalable measure for the basins of attraction and the global struc-
ture of a landscape are the nearest better clustering features (Kerschke et al., 2015), which
provide the means to distinguish funnel-shaped from rather random global structures.
14 Evolutionary Computation Volume x, Number x