Automated Algorithm Selection: Survey and Perspectives
The main difference between SAT ZILLA 2003 and SAT ZILLA 2007 lies in the re-
gression models used for the main algorithm selection phase: While the former used
empirical hardness models (Leyton-Brown et al., 2002) based on ridge regression (see, e.g.,
Bishop, 2006), the latter employed hierarchical hardness models (Xu et al., 2007), more pre-
cisely sparse multinomial logistic regression (SMLR, see, e.g., Krishnapuram et al., 2005).
The latter version of SAT ZILLA sequentially runs up to two manually selected pre-
solvers; if these fail to solve the given instance within a user-speciﬁed running time
budget, instance features are computed and used to predict (and sequentially run) the
best solver(s) from the given set A. The system either terminates once the given SAT
instance has been solved, or when a user-speciﬁed cutoff time is reached.
Xu et al. (2008) compared different versions of SAT ZILLA 2007 on 2 300 random
(RAND), 1 490 crafted/handmade (HAND) and 1 021 application/industrial (INDU)
instances, using the same setup as the 2007 SAT Competition. For this purpose, they
used a total of 48 features and identiﬁed between one and two pre-solvers, one backup
solver, as well as three to ﬁve main solvers from a given set A(which differed be-
tween RAND, HAND and INDU). Notably, their pre-solvers solved between 32 and
62% of the instances – despite running for only seven CPU seconds at most. Ultimately,
SAT ZILLA 2007 ranked ﬁrst (inter alia) in the SAT & UNSAT (RAND and HAND) cat-
egories of the competition, as well as in UNSAT (HAND).
3S. Kadioglu et al. (2011) proposed a hybrid approach, denoted semi-static solver sched-
ules (3S), which combines algorithm selection with solver scheduling. Since it can be
very expensive to determine schedules over all solvers from a given set, Kadioglu et al.
(2011) devised a different approach, in which they partitioned the (normalised) instance
feature space for a given training set by means of g-means (Hamerly and Elkan, 2003).
Then, the best value of kto be used by the k-nearest neighbour algorithm (Hastie et al.,
2009) was identiﬁed for each cluster and directly used for training semi-static solver
schedules. 3S was demonstrated to perform very well; e.g., it reduced the gap between
the (back then) state-of-the-art selector on RAND instances, SAT ZILLA 2009 RAND ,
and the VBS by 57%. Additionally, this general-purpose selector performed very well at
the 2011 SAT Competition, winning seven medals (including two gold) without train-
ing separate selectors for different competition tracks (as had been done for previous
versions of SAT ZILLA ).
SATzilla2012. Building on the success of earlier versions of SAT ZILLA , Xu et al. (2012)
developed SAT ZILLA 2012, which showed outstanding performance in multiple SAT
competitions. SAT ZILLA 2012 uses cost-sensitive pairwise classiﬁcation as the basis for
per-instance algorithm selection; these penalise incorrect predictions according to the
loss in performance caused by them. More precisely, one cost-sensitive decision tree
(Ting, 2002) is used for every pair of solvers in the given set Ato predict which of
the two solvers will perform better on the given instance. Simple voting over these
pairwise predictions is used to determine the solver to be run. Like earlier versions
of SAT ZILLA , SAT ZILLA 2012 uses pre- and backup-solvers in addition to the main
algorithm selection stage. Additionally, a decision forest (Hastie et al., 2009) based
on the number of clauses and variables in the given SAT instance is used to predict
whether the computation of further instance features is sufﬁciently cheap to proceed
to the main selection stage (otherwise, a statically chosen backup solver is run). In the
2012 SAT Competition, SAT ZILLA 2012 used a total of 31 SAT solvers and 138 features
and ended up winning multiple prizes.
Evolutionary Computation Volume x, Number x 17