Automated Algorithm Selection: Survey and Perspectives
The most recently published features based on aggregated information of neighbour-
ing points are the bag of local landscape features by Shirakawa and Nagao (2016). Fur-
thermore, the length scale features of Morgan and Gallagher (2015) measure the variable
scaling based on the ratio between the change in objective space and distance in deci-
sion space for pairs of distinct observations from the initial design.
We note that work in this area is not restricted to the development of features or
problem characteristics. For instance, Malan et al. (2015) and Bagheri et al. (2017) in-
vestigated constrained optimisation problems, whereas Kerschke et al. (2016a) showed
that landscape features already possess sufﬁcient information if they are computed
based on rather small samples of 50dobservations (where dis the dimensionality
of the given optimisation problem).
Until recently, the simultaneous use of feature sets from different research groups
has been cumbersome and hence rarely practiced. However, with the development
offlacco (Kerschke, 2017b,c), an R-package that provides source code for most of
the previously listed ELA features, this obstacle has been overcome. Since then, the
complementarity of the various features and their potential usefulness as a basis for
algorithm selection has been demonstrated in several studies. We provide a detailed
overview of this work later (see Section 5). Note that by using a platform-independent
web-application of the flacco package1(Hanster and Kerschke, 2017), researchers
and practitioners, who are unfamiliar with R, can also beneﬁt from this extensive col-
lection of more than 300 landscape features. Belkhir et al. (2016, 2017) were among
the ﬁrst to leverage the ELA features provided by flacco for per-instance algorithm
conﬁguration.
Multi-objective continuous problems. While the characterisation of single-objective
continuous optimisation problems has been studied for over two decades, only prelim-
inary studies have been conducted w.r.t. informative features of multi-objective prob-
lems. For instance, Kerschke and Trautmann (2016) used features that have been de-
veloped for single-objective problems and used them to cluster some well-known and
frequently used multi-objective benchmark problems. However, those features do not
capture characteristics that are especially important to multi-objective problems, such
as interaction effects between the objectives. Eventually, techniques that were origi-
nally aimed at measuring variable interactions (see, e.g., Reshef et al., 2011; Sun et al.,
2017) could help to overcome these limitations.
Kerschke et al. (2016b, 2018b) investigated locally efﬁcient sets and the correspond-
ing locally optimal fronts (i.e., the multi-objective equivalents of local optima) and pro-
posed measures – on the basis of those sets and fronts – which enable the distinction
of multi-objective problems according to their degree of multimodality. Interestingly,
those studies revealed that even in the case of rather simple multi-objective problems,
strong interaction effects between the objectives exist. Thus, in order to improve the
understanding of multi-objective problems, Kerschke and Grimme (2017) introduced
new techniques for visualising them. Their approach, dubbed gradient ﬁeld heatmaps
(see, e.g., Figure 4), is based on visualising the decision space, but nevertheless clearly
reveals interactions between the objectives – in the form of rugged landscapes with
several basins of attractions. Unexpected ﬁndings of this kind (see, e.g., Grimme et al.,
2018) indicate that research in this area is still at an early stage, leaving many open
challenges for future work (see Section 6 for further details).
1https://flacco.shinyapps.io/flacco/
Evolutionary Computation Volume x, Number x 15