P . Kerschke, H. H. Hoos, F. Neumann, H. Trautmann
1/90 of the overall time budget for solving the given instance i. Training instances
solved during the pre-solving stage are not considered for constructing the per-instance
selector, nor for selecting the backup solver. Per-instance algorithm selection makes
use of a comprehensive set of 311 features that includes a broad range of properties of
instance i, as well as features derived from encoding iinto propositional satisﬁability.
Based on this set of features, P LANZILLA uses cost-sensitive classiﬁcation forests for
each pair of component planners in combination with a voting procedure to determine
the planner to be run for the remainder of the given time budget. Before computing the
complete feature set, which can be somewhat costly, P LANZILLA uses a simple model
to predict whether feature computation can be completed within the remaining time,
t0; if not, feature computation and per-instance algorithm selection are skipped, and a
backup solver is run instead. This backup solver is also run if the component planner
selected in stage 3 terminates early without producing a valid plan; it is determined as
the solver with the best performance for running time t0on the set of problem instances
used to train P LANZILLA (excluding any instances solved during pre-solving).
Using all planners that participated in the optimal track of the 2014 International
Planning Competition (IPC-14), P LANZILLA was found to substantially outperform
these individual planners and achieve performance close to that of the VBS (Rizzini
et al., 2015, 2017). However, when evaluated on a set of testing instances dissimi-
lar from those used for training, it was found that dynamic algorithm scheduling ap-
proaches performed better than P LANZILLA ; these approaches dynamically construct
an algorithm schedule by performing multiple stages of per-instance algorithm selec-
tion, using not only features of the planning instance ito be solved, but also taking
into account which component planners have already been run on i, without success,
in earlier stages of the schedule.
Travelling salesperson problem. The potential for per-instance algorithm selection
for the TSP differs markedly between exact TSP solvers , which are guaranteed to ﬁnd
provably optimal solutions for given TSP instances, and inexact solvers , which may ﬁnd
optimal solutions, but cannot produce a proof of optimality. In exact TSP solving, there
is a single algorithm, C ONCORDE (Applegate et al., 2007), that has deﬁned state-of-the-
art performance for more than a decade. In contrast, for inexact TSP solving, there
is no single algorithm that clearly dominates all others (across all types of instances).
In fact, several studies (Pihera and Musliu, 2014; Kotthoff et al., 2015; Kerschke et al.,
2017) have shown that at least three TSP solvers, EAX (Nagata and Kobayashi, 1997,
2013), LKH (Helsgaun, 2000, 2009) and MAOS (Xie and Liu, 2009), deﬁne state-of-the-
art performance on different kinds of TSP instances. In addition, two enhanced ver-
sions of EAX and LKH (denoted EAX+ RESTART and LKH+ RESTART ), which employ
additional restart mechanisms to overcome stagnation in the underlying search pro-
cess, often (but not always) outperform EAX and LKH, respectively (Dubois-Lacoste
et al., 2015). Further modiﬁcations of these algorithms – e.g., based on the alternative
crossover operator proposed by Sanches et al. (2017a,b), which recently was integrated
into LKH (Tin ´os et al., 2018) – might achieve even better performance; however, to
this date, we are not aware of conclusive evidence to this effect. Instead, using auto-
mated algorithm selection techniques, the performance complementarity between ex-
isting solvers has been leveraged, leading to very substantial performance improve-
ments over the single best solver (Kotthoff et al., 2015; Kerschke et al., 2017).
Kotthoff et al. (2015) compared EAX, LKH and their respective restart variants
across four well-known sets of TSP instances: random uniform Euclidean (RUE) in-
stances, problems from the TSP library (TSPLIB), as well as national and VLSI in-
20 Evolutionary Computation Volume x, Number x