P . Kerschke, H. H. Hoos, F. Neumann, H. Trautmann
multi-objective approach leads to an instance set that provides a better basis for algo-
rithm selection than sets obtained by maximising performance differences.
Multi-objective optimisation problems. So far, there are no systematic studies of au-
tomated algorithm selection for multi-objective continuous optimisation problems, as
feature design is already extremely challenging and the suitability of existing bench-
mark sets is questionable. However, initial approaches regarding multi-objective fea-
tures, landscape analysis and multimodality exist and offer promising perspectives for
future research (see Section 6).
6 Perspectives and Open Problems
In the previous sections, we have given an overview of the state-of-the-art in algorithm
selection for discrete and continuous problems. We have summarised the general ap-
proach of per-instance algorithm selection and discussed a number of related problems,
including per-set algorithm selection, automated algorithm conﬁguration, algorithm
schedules and parallel algorithm portfolios. An important aspect for any per-instance
algorithm selection approach is the design of informative and cheaply computable fea-
tures that are able to characterise and differentiate problem instances w.r.t. a given set
of algorithms. We have given an overview of feature sets for several prominent discrete
problems, as well as features used in continuous black-box optimisation. Based on this,
we have summarised prominent algorithm selection approaches for discrete and con-
tinuous problems. In the following, we will discuss perspectives and challenges for
future research in the area of automated algorithm selection.
Performance measures. A crucial part of any empirical performance evaluation –
which provides the basis for constructing algorithm selectors – is the underlying per-
formance measure. While penalised average running time (notably, PAR10, Bischl et al.,
2016a) and expected running time (ERT, Hansen et al., 2009) are commonly used in this
context, some of its parameters can substantially affect performance measurements.
For example, in the case of PAR10, the penalty factor is set to 10 and an arithmetic
mean is used to aggregate over multiple runs or problem instances. Both choices can,
in principle, be varied (e.g., by replacing the arithmetic mean by different quantiles),
with signiﬁcant effects on the robustness of solvers selected based on them.
Recently, Kerschke et al. (2018a) presented a structured approach on how to assess
the sensitivity of an empirical performance evaluation w.r.t. altered requirements re-
garding solver robustness across runs, focusing on PAR10 and ERT. As demonstrated
within this study, by adjusting the parameters of the performance measures, users are
able to adapt the ranking of a given set of algorithms, and the performance character-
istics of the algorithm selectors constructed based on that set, according to their pref-
erences – trading off, for example, running time vs. robustness. In an alternative ap-
proach, van Rijn et al. (2017) utilise the advantages of two popular performance mea-
sures – ERT and ﬁxed cost error (FCE, see, e.g. B ¨ack et al., 2013) – by combining and
standardising them within a joint performance measure. Moreover, a multi-objective
perspective on performance measurement shows promise, e.g., by enabling direct in-
vestigations of the trade-off between the number of failed runs and the average running
time of successful runs of a given solver (Bossek and Trautmann, 2018). Concepts such
as Pareto-optimality and related multi-objective quality indicators (Coello Coello et al.,
2007) could then be used in the context of constructing and assessing the performance
of algorithm selectors and related meta-algorithmic techniques.
24 Evolutionary Computation Volume x, Number x