Automated Algorithm Selection: Survey and Perspectives
requirements. They also considered nine features based on the so-called causal graph
(CG) (i.e., a graph capturing causal dependencies between states), such as the number
of vertices in the CG and their average degree, as well as various metrics computed
from the edges of the CG.
Also based on the idea of using graph properties, Cenamor et al. (2013) proposed
a total of 47 features, which capture the information contained in causal and domain
transition graphs . The latter represent the permissible transitions between states. The
causal graph features of Cenamor et al. (2013) can be categorised into four different
sets: (i) four general graph properties, (ii) four features based on various ratios of graph
properties, (iii) 12 statistical aggregations over the entire graph, and (iv) six additional,
high-level statistics for states with deﬁned values in the goal speciﬁcations. The re-
maining 21 domain transition graph features include (i) three general graph properties
(number of edges and states, sum of edge weights) and (ii) 18 statistical features similar
to those of the causal graph.
The most recent and extensive collection of AI planning instance features was pre-
pared by Fawcett et al. (2014). It contains 12 sets with 311 features in total, covering
most of the features from earlier work, as well as a broad range of new ones. The ﬁrst
three sets extend the 16 domain, three problem and 13 language requirement features
from Roberts et al. (2008) by two, four and 11 new features, respectively. Four further
feature sets are based on a translation of the given PDDL instance into a ﬁnite domain
representation (FDR), by means of a well-known AI planning system, F AST DOWNWARD
(Helmert, 2006). This FDR representation, as well as information collected during the
translation and preprocessing, gives rise to sets of 19, 19 and eight features, respectively.
Building on the work of Cenamor et al. (2013), Fawcett et al. (2014) also provide a set
of 41 causal and domain transition graph features. Six features are computed from in-
formation gathered during the preprocessing phases of LPG- TD(Gerevini et al., 2003),
another well-known planning system, while 10 further features capture information
produced by the T ORCHLIGHT local search analysis tool (Hoffmann, 2011); another 16
features are determined based on the trajectories of one-second probing runs of F AST
DOWNWARD . Furthermore, the 115 SAT features from Xu et al. (2012) are included,
based on a SAT representation of the given planning instance (in form of a CNF with a
planning horizon of 10). The ﬁnal feature set introduced by Fawcett et al. (2014) con-
tains information on whether the previously outlined sets were computed successfully
and additionally captures the respective computation times.
Travelling salesperson problem. The travelling salesperson problem (TSP) is one of the
most intensely studied combinatorial optimisation problems. For decades, it has been
the subject of a large body of work and continues to be highly relevant for theoretical
analyses, design of algorithms and practical applications ranging from logistics to man-
ufacturing (see, e.g., Applegate et al., 2007). In the TSP , given an edge-weighted graph,
whose vertices are often called cities and whose edges represent the cost of travelling
from one city to another, the objective is to ﬁnd a Hamiltonian cycle with minimum to-
tal weight, i.e., a minimum-cost trip that passes through every city exactly once. Most
work on the TSP focusses on the special case of the two-dimensional Euclidean TSP ,
where cities are locations in the Euclidean plane, and costs correspond to the Euclidean
distances between cities.
The development of features for TSP instances has been initiated by Smith-Miles
and van Hemert (2011), who proposed the following features for characterising a given
TSP instance: (1) coordinates of the instance’s centroid, (2) average distance from all
cities to the centroid, (3 & 4) standard deviation of distances, as well as fraction of
Evolutionary Computation Volume x, Number x 11