Automated Algorithm Selection: Survey and Perspectives
3.2 Continuous problems
We now turn our attention to the optimisation of continuous ﬁtness landscapes (Wright,
1932; Kauffman, 1993). In contrast to discrete optimisation problems, which differ very
substantially from each other (consider, for example, SAT vs. TSP) and require problem-
speciﬁc features for characterising instances, the general idea of continuous optimisa-
tion problems can be expressed uniformly, in a rather straightforward way: (w.l.o.g.)
ﬁnd the global minimum of an objective or ﬁtness function f:X!Y , which maps vec-
tors of variables, x= (x1; : : : ; x d), from a d-dimensional decision space XRd(whose
values may be subject to additional constraints) to p-dimensional objective or ﬁtness
values y= (y1; : : : ; y p) :=f(x)2Y Rp(Jones, 1995; Stadler, 2002). Unfortunately, in
most real-world scenarios, the exact mathematical representation of the ﬁtness function
fis unknown. Thus, its optimisation often has to be handled as a black-box problem,
and consequently becomes difﬁcult and expensive. In light of this, it is especially useful
to characterise a speciﬁc problem by means of (informative) features, based on which
it is possible to select a suitable optimisation algorithm.
As there only exist preliminary studies on the characterisation of multi-objective
(p2) problems (see, e.g., Kerschke et al., 2016b) – which we will discuss later – we
will in the following mainly focus on the manifold of characterisation approaches for
single-objective ( p= 1) continuous optimisation problems.
Single-objective continuous problems. Overviews on the early works related to this
problem class can be found in Pitzer and Affenzeller (2012), Malan and Engelbrecht
(2013), Sun et al. (2014) and Mu ˜noz Acosta et al. (2015b). However, in contrast to re-
cent studies, the majority of the studies covered by those surveys proposed measures
for characterising white-box problems – i.e., problems, whose landscapes are entirely
known upfront – rather than cheap, informative and automatically computable land-
scape features as needed for black-box problems. Obviously, only the latter are beneﬁ-
cial for automated algorithm selection (or related problems). Nevertheless, we brieﬂy
discuss some noteworthy contributions to the characterisation of white-box problems,
as they form the basis for recent developments.
In the 1990s, landscapes were classiﬁed into easy and hard problems – from an op-
timisation algorithm’s point of view. While Jones and Forrest (1995) (and later M ¨uller
and Sbalzarini, 2011) proposed ﬁtness distance correlation as a key characteristic, Ros ´e
et al. (1996) suggested the density of states for solving the binary classiﬁcation task. Fur-
thermore, so-called epistasis measures (Naudts et al., 1997; Rochet et al., 1997) quantify
the inﬂuence of single variables (or bits, in case of a bit-representation of x) on the
problem’s ﬁtness, which in turn can be used to rank the landscapes according to their
difﬁculty. The information content measures from Vassilev et al. (2000) provide another
basis for quantifying hardness.
In the following decade, attention shifted from characterising problem difﬁculty
toruggedness . Depending on ﬁtness evolvability portraits (Smith et al., 2002), autocorrela-
tion coefﬁcients , number and distribution of optima (Brooks and Durfee, 2003), or entropy
(Malan and Engelbrecht, 2009), landscapes were categorised into rugged, neutral and
smooth problems. During that time, researchers also focused on problem multimodal-
ity (Preuss, 2015), i.e., the analysis of the problems’ landscapes w.r.t. multiple local
and/or global optima. For instance, the barrier trees of Flamm et al. (2002) provided
means for identifying basins of attractions, local optima and saddle points within the
landscapes, and the dispersion metrics from Lunacek and Whitley (2006) enabled an
approximate estimation of the degree of multimodality of a given landscape.
Evolutionary Computation Volume x, Number x 13