P . Kerschke, H. H. Hoos, F. Neumann, H. Trautmann
distinct distances within distance matrix, (5) size of the rectangle enclosing the in-
stance’s cities, (6 & 7) standard deviation, as well as coefﬁcient of variation of the
normalised nearest neighbour distances, (8) ratio of number of clusters found by GDB-
SCAN (Sander et al., 1998) to the number of all cities, (9) variance of number of cities
per cluster, (10) ratio between number of outliers and all cities, and (11) the number
of cities. Furthermore, Kanda et al. (2011) and Kov ´arik and M ´alek (2012) proposed
features derived from the distance matrix of a given TSP instance.
Nearly all features from these earlier studies were combined by Mersmann et al.
(2013) and further extended, leading to a collection of six TSP feature sets with a total
of 68 features, many of which are derived from the distance matrix and from the spatial
distribution of the cities in the Euclidean plane. More precisely, the distance matrix
is condensed into distance and mode features , and the distribution of cities is captured
by a set of cluster features , based on multiple runs of GDBSCAN, as well as convex hull
features , which quantify the spread of the cities in the Euclidean plane. The closeness of
neighbouring cities is measured by various nearest neighbour statistics , and a ﬁnal set of
features is comprised of the depth and edge costs of the minimum spanning tree for the
given TSP instance.
Hutter et al. (2014b) developed a set of 64 TSP features that includes some of the
previously outlined instance characteristics as well as new probing features . The latter
are based on 20 short runs of a well-known local search solver (LK; Lin and Kernighan,
1973), as well as single short runs of the state-of-the-art exact TSP solver, Concorde (Ap-
plegate et al., 2007). Probing features were also used by Kotthoff et al. (2015).
The most comprehensive collection of TSP features was provided by Pihera and
Musliu (2014). Their set of 287 features builds on the earlier work by Hutter et al.
(2014b), but additionally includes instance characteristics derived from the distances
of the cities to the convex hull, the number of intersections of locally optimal tours,
and statistics of disjoint tour segments. The largest group of new features is based on
strongly and weakly connected components of so-called k-nearest neighbour graphs , for
many values of k.
Finally, we see signiﬁcant potential for new features based on recent work on
funnel-structures in the search landscapes associated with TSP instances (Ochoa et al.,
2015; Ochoa and Veerapen, 2016). Considering that highly related aspects of global
search space structure have shown to play an important role in algorithm selection for
continuous optimisation problems (Bischl et al., 2012; Kerschke and Trautmann, 2018),
features of this nature may also prove to be useful for discrete optimisation problems,
such as the TSP .
Other combinatorial problems. There is a sizeable body of work on instance charac-
teristics for other combinatorial problems, including the epistasis measures by Davi-
dor (1991) and Fonlupt et al. (1998), indicators for the hardness of quadratic assign-
ment (QAP , Angel and Zissimopoulos, 2002) or constraint satisfaction problems (CSP ,
Boukeas et al., 2004), features for so-called orienteering problems, which generalise the
TSP by distinguishing between static and dynamic locations (Bossek et al., 2018), and
variable interaction measures for combinatorial optimisation problems (Seo and Moon,
2007). A detailed discussion of these problems and the respective instance features
(some of which are quite generic and can be applied to a range of discrete combinato-
rial problems) is beyond the scope of this survey; however, we note that these features,
like the problem-speciﬁc features described earlier in this section, provide a good basis
for per-instance algorithm selection and related tasks.
12 Evolutionary Computation Volume x, Number x