Automated Algorithm Selection:
Survey and Perspectives
Pascal Kerschke kerschke@uni-muenster.de
Information Systems and Statistics, University of M ¨unster, 48149 M ¨unster, Germany
Holger H. Hoos hh@liacs.nl
Leiden Institute of Advanced Computer Science, Leiden University, 2333 CA Leiden,
The Netherlands
Frank Neumann frank.neumann@adelaide.edu.au
Optimisation and Logistics, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, SA 5005, Australia
Heike Trautmann trautmann@uni-muenster.de
Information Systems and Statistics, University of M ¨unster, 48149 M ¨unster, Germany
Abstract
It has long been observed that for practically any computational problem that has been
intensely studied, different instances are best solved using different algorithms. This is
particularly pronounced for computationally hard problems, where in most cases, no
single algorithm deﬁnes the state of the art; instead, there is a set of algorithms with
complementary strengths. This performance complementarity can be exploited in var-
ious ways, one of which is based on the idea of selecting, from a set of given algorithms,
for each problem instance to be solved the one expected to perform best. The task of
automatically selecting an algorithm from a given set is known as the per-instance al-
gorithm selection problem and has been intensely studied over the past 15 years, leading
to major improvements in the state of the art in solving a growing number of discrete
combinatorial problems, including propositional satisﬁability and AI planning. Per-
instance algorithm selection also shows much promise for boosting performance in
solving continuous and mixed discrete/continuous optimisation problems.
This survey provides an overview of research in automated algorithm selection, rang-
ing from early and seminal works to recent and promising application areas. Differ-
ent from earlier work, it covers applications to discrete and continuous problems,
and discusses algorithm selection in context with conceptually related approaches,
such as algorithm conﬁguration, scheduling or portfolio selection. Since informative
and cheaply computable problem instance features provide the basis for effective per-
instance algorithm selection systems, we also provide an overview of such features for
discrete and continuous problems. Finally, we provide perspectives on future work in
the area and discuss a number of open research challenges.
Keywords
Automated algorithm selection, automated algorithm conﬁguration, combinatorial op-
timisation, continuous optimisation, machine learning, meta-learning, feature-based
approaches, exploratory landscape analysis, data streams
1 Introduction
It has long been observed that for well-studied computational problems for which sev-
eral high-performance algorithms are available, there is typically no single algorithm
c
201X by the Massachusetts Institute of Technology Evolutionary Computation x(x): xxx-xxxarXiv:1811.11597v1  [cs.LG]  28 Nov 2018