Automated Algorithm Selection: Survey and Perspectives
In order to construct a powerful and complementary portfolio of multi-objective
optimisers ( a priori ), as well as for analysing the strengths and weaknesses of the result-
ing algorithm selector ( a posteriori ), visual approaches such as the empirical attainment
function (EAF) plots (da Fonseca et al., 2005; da Fonseca and da Fonseca, 2010; L ´opez-
Ib´a˜nez et al., 2010) provide valuable feedback on location, spread and inter-point de-
pendence structure of the considered optimisers’ Pareto set approximations.
Algorithm selection on streaming data. The importance of automated algorithm se-
lection and related approaches in the context of learning on streaming data should not
be neglected. Streaming data (Bifet et al., 2018) pose considerable challenges for the
respective algorithms, as (a) data points arrive as a constant stream, (b) the size of the
stream is large and potentially unbounded, (c) the order of data points cannot be in-
ﬂuenced, (d) data points can typically only be evaluated once and are discarded after-
wards, and (e) the underlying distribution of the data points in the stream can change
over time (non-stationarity or concept drift).
Few concepts for automated algorithm selection on streaming data exist so far,
both for supervised (see, e.g., van Rijn et al., 2014, 2018) and unsupervised learning
algorithms. In unsupervised learning, stream clustering is a very active research ﬁeld.
Although several stream clustering approaches exist (see surveys of Amini et al., 2014;
Carnein and Trautmann, 2018; Mansalis et al., 2018), these have many parameters that
affect their performance, yet clear guidelines on how to set and adjust them over time
are lacking. Moreover, different kinds of algorithms are required in the so-called online
phase (maintaining an informative aggregated data stream representation, in terms of
microclusters) and ofﬂine phase (standard clustering algorithm, such as k-means ap-
plied to the microclusters), which leads to a huge space of parameter and algorithm
combinations. An initial approach on conﬁguring and benchmarking stream clustering
approaches based on irace (L´opez-Ib ´a˜nez et al., 2016) has been presented by Carnein
et al. (2017). Building on this work, especially in light of remark (e) above, we expect
that algorithm selection will play an important role for robust learning on streaming
data – especially when keeping the efﬁciency regarding real-time capability in mind.
This will require informative feature sets, ensemble techniques, as well as a much wider
range of suitable benchmarks. Of course, ideally a combination of algorithm selection
and (online) conﬁguration is desired and a very promising line of research.
Per-instance algorithm conﬁguration. As previously explained, automatic algorithm
conﬁguration involves the determination of parameter settings of a given target algo-
rithm to optimise its performance on a given set of problem instances. Per-instance
algorithm conﬁguration (PIAC) is a variant of this problem in which parameter settings
are determined for a given problem instance to be solved. It can be seen as a generali-
sation of per-instance algorithm selection, in which the set of algorithms that form the
basis for selection comprises all (valid) conﬁgurations of a single, parameterised algo-
rithm. Analogous to per-instance algorithm selection, PIAC involves two phases: an
ofﬂine phase, during which a per-instance conﬁgurator is trained, and an online phase,
in which this conﬁgurator is run on given problem instances. During the latter, a con-
ﬁguration is determined based on features of the problem instance to be solved. Stan-
dard, per-set algorithm conﬁguration, in contrast, is an ofﬂine process that results in a
single conﬁguration that is subsequently used to solve problem instances presumed to
resemble those used during training. PIAC is challenging, because the spaces of (valid)
conﬁgurations to select from is typically very large (see, e.g., Hutter et al., 2014a), and
compared to the size of these conﬁguration spaces, any training data used during the
Evolutionary Computation Volume x, Number x 27