Automated Algorithm Selection: Survey and Perspectives
Per-domain selection approaches. Because per-domain selection of AI planners has
been prominently studied in the literature, we brieﬂy discuss some well-known ap-
proaches. The P BP planning system and its successor, P BP2, are based on the idea of
statistically analysing the performance of several domain-independent planning algo-
rithms on a set of training instances from a given planning domain in order to select a
set of planners and associated running times (Gerevini et al., 2009, 2011). When solving
new instances from the same domain, these planners are run one after the other, us-
ing round-robin scheduling with the pre-determined running times for each planner.
PBP and P BP2 also make use of macro-actions, sequences of actions whose judicious
use can considerably improve planner performance. P BP was the overall winner of the
learning track of the 6th International Planning Competition, and P BP2 brought further
improvement through the integration of automated algorithm conﬁguration to better
exploit the performance potential of parameterised planners.
The ASAP planning system is based on similar ideas (Vallati et al., 2013, 2014). In
addition to macro-actions, ASAP also exploits so-called entanglements, which reﬂect
causal relationships that are characteristic for a given domain of planning problems.
Different from P BP and P BP2, ASAP selects only a single representation (set of macro-
actions and entanglements) and planner for a given domain. On standard benchmarks,
ASAP has been demonstrated to outperform P BP2 (as well as all the component plan-
ners it uses) in terms of the quality or cost of the plans found (Vallati et al., 2014).
IBaCoP2. To the best of our knowledge, the ﬁrst successful application of per-instance
algorithm selection to AI planning was demonstrated by IB ACOP2 (Cenamor et al.,
2014). IB ACOP2 uses 12 component planners, which were selected based on their per-
formance on a large and diverse set of problem instances from past international plan-
ning competitions, applying Pareto efﬁciency analysis to the solution quality of the
best plan found by a given planner, and the time required to ﬁnd the ﬁrst valid plan.
A random forest model (see, e.g., Hastie et al., 2009), learned from performance data
of the component planners on a set of training instances using WEKA (Witten et al.,
2016), forms the core of the algorithm selection strategy. This model is used to pre-
dict whether a component planner will solve a given problem instance within a ﬁxed
time limit, based on a set of 35 cheaply computable, domain-speciﬁc features, some
of which are derived from heuristics used in state-of-the-art planning algorithms. To
hedge against the consequences of poor predictions, IB ACOP2 selects the ﬁve compo-
nent planners with the highest estimated probability pfor solving the given instance i
and runs these, in the order of decreasing values of p, one after the other, each for one
ﬁfth of the overall time given to the selector for solving i. We note that, because of this
latter strategy, IB ACOP2 is not a pure per-instance algorithm selector, but rather com-
bines per-instance algorithm selection with a simple algorithm scheduling approach ( cf.
Section 2). IB ACOP and IB ACOP2 showed strong performance in the 8th International
Planning Competition, with IB ACOP2 winning the sequential satisﬁcing track (Vallati
et al., 2015).
Planzilla. A second per-instance algorithm selection approach for AI planning has
been considered by Rizzini et al. (2015, 2017). Their P LANZILLA system can be seen
as an application of the previously outlinedZILLA approach (Cameron et al., 2017) to
AI planning. Based on the default conﬁguration ofZILLA , PLANZILLA is comprised
of four sequential stages: (1) a static pre-solving schedule, (2) feature computation, (3)
per-instance algorithm selection and (4) a backup solver. The pre-solving schedule is
obtained by greedy selection from the given set of component planners and allocated
Evolutionary Computation Volume x, Number x 19