Automated Algorithm Selection: Survey and Perspectives
stances2. They used the feature sets proposed by Mersmann et al. (2013) and Hutter
et al. (2014b) (see Section 3.1) for constructing multiple algorithm selectors. Their best
selector, based on multivariate adaptive regression splines (MARS; see, e.g., Friedman,
1991), was trained on a pre-deﬁned subset of features by Hutter et al. (2014b) and closed
the gap between the single best solver from their set (EAX+ RESTART ) to the VBS by
10%.
In an extended version of this earlier study, Kerschke et al. (2017) considered ad-
ditional types of TSP instances, feature sets and solvers, and furthermore employed
more sophisticated machine learning techniques, including various feature selection
strategies, for constructing algorithm selectors. Speciﬁcally, the set of TSP instances
was extended by clustered and morphed instances (Gent et al., 1999; Mersmann et al.,
2012; Meisel et al., 2015), i.e., linear combinations of clustered and RUE instances3. Fur-
thermore, the basis for algorithm selection was expanded with the feature set of Pihera
and Musliu (2014) and the MAOS solver by Xie and Liu (2009). The best algorithm
selector under this extended setup was found to be a support vector machine (Karat-
zoglou et al., 2004), which was constructed on a cheap, yet informative, subset of 16
nearest-neighbour features (Pihera and Musliu, 2014). This particular selector achieved
– despite its non-negligible feature computation costs – a PAR10 score of 16.75s and
thereby closed the gap between the single best solver (EAX+ RESTART ; 36.30s) and the
virtual best solver (10.73s) by more than 75%.
Further discrete combinatorial problems. Throughout the previous paragraphs, we
gave an overview of algorithm selection approaches for some of the most prominent
and widely studied discrete combinatorial problems. Of course, per-instance algorithm
selection has shown to be effective on several other discrete problems – such as the
travelling thief problem (TTP) , where Wagner et al. (2017) recently presented the ﬁrst
study of algorithm selection, along with a comprehensive collection of performance
and feature data.
In some cases, successful applications of algorithm selection techniques have been
described using different terminology. For instance, Smith-Miles (2008) presented her
algorithm selector for the quadratic assignment problem (QAP) under the umbrella of a
“meta-learning inspired framework”. Similarly, Pulina and Tacchella (2009) demon-
strated the successful application of algorithm selection to the problem of solving quan-
tiﬁed Boolean formulae (QBF) , an important generalisation of SAT; yet, they describe their
selector as a self-adaptive multi-engine solver, which “selects among its reasoning en-
gines the one which is more likely to yield optimal results”.
Considering the size of the literature on per-instance algorithm selection for dis-
crete combinatorial problems, a comprehensive overview would be far beyond the
scope of this survey and produce little additional insight. Instead, we will now shift
our attention to continuous problems, which present different challenges and opportu-
nities for algorithm selection.
5 Algorithm Selection for Continuous Problems
As previously mentioned, the efﬁcacy of algorithm selection methods strongly depends
on the performance data used for training them: The more representative the training
set is regarding the entire range of possible problem instances, the better performance
we can expect on previously unseen instances. For continuous optimisation problems,
2http://www.math.uwaterloo.ca/tsp/index.html
3generated using the R-package NETGEN (Bossek, 2015)
Evolutionary Computation Volume x, Number x 21