Automated Algorithm Selection: Survey and Perspectives
Evolving / generating problem instances. Naturally, an algorithm selector only gen-
eralises to problems which are similar enough to the instances contained in the bench-
mark set that was used to construct it. Usually, common benchmark sets are considered,
which are deemed to be representative of a speciﬁc use context. However, one could
argue that benchmark sets should be designed speciﬁcally w.r.t. the given set of candi-
date solvers, such that they exhibit maximum diversity regarding the challenges posed
by the instances for the speciﬁc solvers. The idea of evolving instances utilising an
evolutionary algorithm dates back to van Hemert (2006) and Smith-Miles et al. (2010),
who constructed instances that are extremely hard or easy for speciﬁc TSP solvers; these
works were followed by more sophisticated approaches of Mersmann et al. (2012, 2013)
and Nallaperuma et al. (2013). Bossek and Trautmann (2016a,b) further explored this
idea by evolving TSP instances that maximise the performance difference between two
given solvers, i.e., instances that are extremely hard to solve for one solver, but very
easy for the other. This can, in principle, provide insights into links between perfor-
mance differences and instance characteristics – a topic that is highly relevant for auto-
mated algorithm selection.
Recent studies build upon these concepts by explicitly focusing on the diversity of
evolved instances (Gao et al., 2015; Neumann et al., 2018), paving the way for a sys-
tematic approach to construct most informative and relevant benchmarks speciﬁcally
tailored to a given set of solvers. The next promising step in this direction will be the
complementation of state-of-the-art benchmarks with those speciﬁcally designed in-
stances in order to provide most informative benchmark sets tailored to given sets of
solvers. Such sets are likely to provide a basis for constructing per-instance algorithm
selectors whose performance generalises better to problem instances that differ from
those used during their construction. Improvements, conﬁguration and enhancements
of the underlying evolutionary algorithm offer extremely promising research perspec-
tives. Interestingly, the overall approach also provides a way for systematically detect-
ing advantages and shortcomings of speciﬁc solvers, and thus produce beneﬁts for the
analysis and design of algorithms beyond algorithm selection and related approaches.
Online algorithm selection. The work covered in this survey is mainly related to
(static) ofﬂine algorithm selection, where algorithm selectors are constructed based on
using a set of training instances prior to applying them to new problem instances. Yet,
according to Armstrong et al. (2006), Gagliolo and Schmidhuber (2010) and Degroote
et al. (2016), in principle, it might be possible to obtain even better results using (dy-
namic) online algorithm selection methods, which adapt an algorithm selector while it
is being used to solve a series of problem instances. Although this involves a certain
overhead, it can enable better performance and increased robustness, as the selector
can react better to changes in the stream of problem instances it is tasked to solve.
In order to more easily amortise the overhead involved in online algorithm selection,
building on earlier work on probing features (Hutter et al., 2014b; Kotthoff et al., 2015),
the development of cheap and informative monitoring features – i.e., features that ex-
tract sufﬁcient instance-speciﬁc information without signiﬁcantly reducing solver or
selector performance – is likely to be of key importance.
Another approach for online algorithm selection and the selection of an appro-
priate algorithm for a given problem instance is provided by so-called hyper-heuristics ;
these are algorithms for selecting or generating solvers for a given problem from a set
of given heuristic components (Burke et al., 2013). In many cases, they employ heuris-
tic, rule-based mechanisms and make use of rather simple components, such as greedy
construction algorithms for the given problem.
Evolutionary Computation Volume x, Number x 25