P . Kerschke, H. H. Hoos, F. Neumann, H. Trautmann
Figure 4: Exemplary visualisations of the gradient ﬁeld heatmaps proposed by Kerschke
and Grimme (2017). The images show the decision spaces of continuous optimisation
problems with two (left) and three objectives (right), respectively. As a result of the
interactions between the local optima of the different objectives (indicated by circles,
squares and triangles), the landscapes show multiple basins of attraction.
4 Algorithm Selection for Discrete Problems
Over the years, algorithm selection techniques have achieved remarkable results in
several research areas – especially for discrete combinatorial problems (see, e.g., Smith-
Miles, 2009; Kotthoff, 2014). However, due to the signiﬁcant differences between vari-
ous problems, not only the respective instance features, but also solvers and algorithm
selectors vary considerably. Therefore, it is impossible to cover all work in this area;
instead, in the following, we focus on a small number of particularly well-known prob-
lems: propositional satisﬁability (SAT) and related problems, AI planning and the travelling
salesperson problem (TSP) .
Propositional satisﬁability and related problems. Historically, some of the ﬁrst and
most widely known successes of per-instance algorithm selection have been achieved
in the context of solving the propositional satisﬁability problem (SAT) . We note that several
approaches described in the following can be applied to closely related problems (such
as MaxSAT) in a rather straightforward way.
SATzilla2003 and SATzilla2007. Within the highly contested area of SAT, the ﬁrst AS
system to outperform stand-alone SAT solvers was SAT ZILLA . While its ﬁrst version,
denoted SAT ZILLA 2003 (Nudelman et al., 2004a), still showed (minor) weaknesses – it
“only” ranked second (twice) and third in the 2003 SAT Competitions – its (enhanced)
successor, SAT ZILLA 2007 (Xu et al., 2008), won multiple prizes (3x ﬁrst, 2x second
and 2x third) in the 2007 SAT Competition. Despite the differences w.r.t. their success,
the general working principles underlying both systems are quite similar. During the
actual construction phase, pre- and backup solvers are identiﬁed, based on the perfor-
mances of the given solvers on training data. All instances that have not been solved
by the respective pre-solvers are then used for training separate regression models per
solver, which in turn are used for selecting a promising subset of “main solvers”.
16 Evolutionary Computation Volume x, Number x