P . Kerschke, H. H. Hoos, F. Neumann, H. Trautmann
Life-long learning hyper-heuristics are applied in a setting where a series of prob-
lem instances is solved. Based on the performance of previously chosen component
solvers, a solver for a new problem instance is chosen that is deemed most likely to
perform best. Life-long learning hyper-heuristics have achieved good results for well-
known decision problems, such as constraint satisfaction (Ortiz-Bayliss et al., 2015) and
bin packing (Sim et al., 2015).
Features for mixed (discrete + continuous) problems. Developing good features for
a given problem is a challenging task that provides a crucial basis for effective algo-
rithm selection techniques. As discussed previously, rich sets of features have been
introduced for well-studied discrete and continuous problems, but many combinato-
rial problems of practical importance involve discrete and continuous decision vari-
ables. Perhaps the best example for this is mixed integer programming (MIP) , a problem
of great importance in the context of a broad range of challenging real-world optimisa-
tion tasks. Hutter et al. (2014b) introduced 95 features for MIP , including problem type
and size, variable-constraint graph, linear constraint matrix, objective function and LP-
based features. For the travelling thief problem (TTP) , which can be seen as a combination
of the TSP and knapsack problem (KP) , algorithm selection has been studied by Wagner
et al. (2017). They used 48 TSP and four KP features, plus three parameters of the TTP
that connect the TSP and KP parts of the problem. Features for the KP that characterise
the correlation of weights and proﬁts have so far not been taken into account, although
they seem to provide a further improvement in the characterisation of TTP instances.
Algorithm selection for multi-objective optimisation problems. While we have cov-
ered numerous studies on algorithm selection in this survey, none of them has dealt
with multi-objective optimisation problems. From a practitioner’s point of view, this
is a signiﬁcant limitation, as multiple competing objectives arise in many, perhaps
most, real-world problems4. However, for convenience, these problems are often han-
dled as single-objective problems – e.g., by focusing on the most important objective
or by applying scalarisation functions. Many prominent benchmarks for continuous
multi-objective optimisation algorithms, such as bi-objective BBOB (Tu ˇsar et al., 2016),
DTLZ (Deb et al., 2005), ED (Emmerich and Deutz, 2007), MOP (van Veldhuizen, 1999),
UF (Zhang et al., 2008), WFG (Huband et al., 2006) and ZDT (Zitzler et al., 2000), are
entirely artiﬁcial, and it is unclear to which degree they resemble real-world problems.
In addition, there is a dearth of research on the characterisation of those optimi-
sation problems – in particular by means of automatically computable features. Of
course, one could compute variants of existing features for each of the objectives sepa-
rately (see, e.g., Kerschke and Trautmann, 2016), but this completely ignores interaction
effects between the objectives, which in turn have a strong impact on the landscapes
(even for rather simple problems, see, e.g., Kerschke and Grimme, 2017). Hence, there
is a signiﬁcant need and opportunity for research on visualising multi-objective land-
scapes (see, e.g., da Fonseca, 1995; Tu ˇsar, 2014; Tu ˇsar and Filipi ˇc, 2015; Kerschke and
Grimme, 2017), as well as characterising them (numerically) – along the lines of Ulrich
et al. (2010), Kerschke et al. (2016b, 2018b) or Grimme et al. (2018) – as this will (a) im-
prove the understanding of multi-objective problems and their speciﬁc properties, and
(b) provide a basis for automated feature computation. We expect the latter to be of key
importance for the development of new algorithms and effective per-instance selectors
in the area of multi-objective optimisation.
4Consider, for example, the trade-off between the performance improvement and the accompanying costs
for ﬁnding such an improved solution.
26 Evolutionary Computation Volume x, Number x