P . Kerschke, H. H. Hoos, F. Neumann, H. Trautmann
Set of Problem Instances {Instance1,  …,  Instancen}
Set of Algorithms {Algorithm1,  …,  Algorithmm}Features
Performance DataExecution of AlgorithmsSet of Feature Sets {Feature Set1,  …,  Feature Setp}Feature (Set) Computation
Machine Learning Strategy {Classiﬁcation, Regression, …}Machine Learning TaskSet of Machine Learning Algorithms {ML-Algorithm1,  …,  ML-Algorithmk}Algorithm Selector
Performance Measure(s) {PAR10, ERT, …}Performance of Algorithm SelectorFeature Selection
(Hyper-)Parameter Tuning
Performance EvaluationTrainingValidation Strategy {Holdout, CV, …}Problem CharacterizationMachine Learning for Algorithm Selection
Benchmarking & Performance Data CollectionConstruction of Algorithm Selector
Performance Evaluation
Figure 1: Schematic overview of interplay between problem instance features (top left),
algorithm performance data (bottom left), selector construction (center) and the assess-
ment of selector performance (bottom right).
vides an overview of instance features for discrete and continuous optimisation prob-
lems that provide the basis for automated algorithm selection. Successful applications
of algorithm selection in discrete and continuous optimisation are discussed in Sec-
tions 4 and 5, respectively. Finally, Section 6 provides additional perspectives on algo-
rithm conﬁguration and outlines several open challenges.
2 Algorithm Selection and Related Problems
We consider the selection of algorithms for a given decision or optimisation problem P.
Speciﬁcally, the per-instance algorithm selection problem can be formulated as follows
(see also Rice, 1976): Given a set Iof instances of a problem P, a set A=fA1; : : : A ng
of algorithms for Pand a metric m:AI!Rthat measures the performance of
any algorithm Aj2Aon instance set I, construct a selector Sthat maps any problem
instance i2Ito an algorithm S(i)2Asuch that the overall performance of SonIis
optimal according to metric m.
Of course, in general, we cannot hope to efﬁciently ﬁnd perfect solutions to the
per-instance algorithm selection problem, and instead, we strive to ﬁnd selectors whose
performance is as close as possible to that of a perfect selector on instance set I. This
is typically achieved by making use of informative and cheaply computable features
f(i) = ( f1(i); : : : ; f k(i))of the given problem instance i. A general overview on the
interplay of instance features, algorithm performance data, and algorithm selection is
shown in Figure 1. The features are of key importance, and we will discuss them in
more detail in the following section of this article.
We note that the performance of a (hypothetical) perfect per-instance algorithm
4 Evolutionary Computation Volume x, Number x