P . Kerschke, H. H. Hoos, F. Neumann, H. Trautmann
instances deemed to be representative for those to be solved later. The connection be-
tween per-instance algorithm selection and related problems is shown in Figure 2. In
many ways, algorithm competitions, such as the international SAT and planning com-
petitions (see, e.g., J ¨arvisalo et al., 2012; Vallati et al., 2015), can be seen as identifying
solutions to per-set algorithm selection problems for broad sets of interesting instances,
and competition winners are often seen as the single best algorithm for the respective
problem. Sometimes, to reduce the computational cost for per-set algorithm selection,
racing methods are used. These run candidate algorithms on an increasing number of
instances, eliminating those from consideration whose performance is signiﬁcantly be-
low that of others, based on a statistical test (see, e.g., Maron and Moore, 1994; Birattari
et al., 2002).
Per-set algorithm conﬁguration can be seen as a special case of algorithm conﬁgu-
ration , a practically very important problem that can be described as follows: Given
an algorithm Awhose performance (but not semantics) is affected by the settings of
parameters p= (p1; : : : ; p k), a set Cof possible values for p(called conﬁgurations ofA),
a set of problem instances Iand a performance metric m, ﬁnd a conﬁguration c2C
ofAthat achieves optimal performance on Iaccording to m. Note that the set Cof
conﬁgurations can be seen as corresponding to a set of algorithms, of which we wish
to select the one that performs best. The key difference to algorithm selection is that
this set can be very large, since it arises from combinatorial combinations of values of
the individual parameters pl, which, in some cases, can take continuous values, lead-
ing to (potentially) uncountably inﬁnite sets of algorithm conﬁgurations over which we
have to optimise. Realistic algorithm conﬁguration scenarios typically involve tens to
hundreds of parameters (see, e.g., Hutter et al., 2009, 2011; L ´opez-Ib ´a˜nez et al., 2016;
Ans ´otegui et al., 2015; Thornton et al., 2013; Kotthoff et al., 2017). Therefore, per-set
algorithm selection techniques are typically not directly applicable to algorithm con-
ﬁguration, although racing techniques can be extended to work well in this case (see,
e.g., L ´opez-Ib ´a˜nez et al., 2016; P ´erez C ´aceres et al., 2017). Per-set algorithm conﬁgura-
tion is closely related to hyperparameter optimisation in machine learning; the main
difference is that in algorithm conﬁguration, performance is to be optimised on a pos-
sibly diverse set of problem instances, which often requires trading off performance on
some instance against that achieved on others. In a sense, the typical hyperparameter
optimisation problem encountered in machine learning is analogous to conﬁguring a
parameterised algorithm for performance on a single problem instance.
Since typical procedures used for building per-instance algorithm selectors have
design choices that can be exposed as parameters, algorithm conﬁguration techniques
can be applied to optimise their performance on speciﬁc (sets of) selection scenarios.
This has been done, with considerable success, in the recent A UTO FOLIO selection sys-
tem by Lindauer et al. (2015b), which we will discuss in further detail in Section 4.
The per-instance variant of the algorithm conﬁguration problem, which can be
seen as a generalisation of per-instance algorithm selection, largely remains an open
challenge (see, e.g., Hutter et al., 2006; Belkhir et al., 2016, 2017), and we brieﬂy discuss
it further in Section 6.
Performance complementarity within a set of algorithms can be leveraged in ways
that differ from per-instance algorithm conﬁguration. One prominent approach is that
of a parallel algorithm portfolio , where each algorithm from a given set Ais run in paral-
lel on a given problem instance i(see, e.g., Huberman et al., 1997; Gomes and Selman,
2001; Fukunaga, 2000). When applied to a decision problem, all runs are terminated
as soon as one of the component algorithms has solved the given instance i; for op-
6 Evolutionary Computation Volume x, Number x