P . Kerschke, H. H. Hoos, F. Neumann, H. Trautmann
one predicted to perform best on i. In practice, sufﬁcient accuracy can be achieved for
many problems using state-of-the-art regression techniques from machine learning, at
moderate computational cost (Hutter et al., 2014b), and performance predictors form
the basis for one of the main approaches to per-instance algorithm selection. At the
same time, other approaches, such as cost-based classiﬁcation, exist and also ﬁnd use
in state-of-the-art algorithm selection systems, as explained in the following sections.
3 Features for Discrete and Continuous Problems
Linking algorithm performance on an instance ito instance characteristics forms a cen-
tral part of automated algorithm selection and several related problems. For this pur-
pose, automatically computable features f(i) = ( f1(i); : : : ; f k(i))are required, ideally
with the following properties: Firstly, features should be informative , in that they allow
for a sufﬁcient distinction between different instances; they should also be interpretable ,
so that feature values enable an expert to gain maximum insight into instance proper-
ties. Furthermore, features should be cheaply computable , so that the advantages gained
by selecting an algorithm based on them is not outweighed by the cost of feature com-
putation. Features should also be generally applicable , i.e., they should be effectively
and efﬁciently computable for a broad range of problem instances, rather than being
restricted, e.g., to small instance sizes. Finally, the features fjshould be complemen-
tary, in that redundant sets of features are not only computationally wasteful, but can
also cause problems when used by certain machine learning algorithms as a basis for
algorithm selection and related problems.
In the following, we provide an overview of commonly used instance features for
several prominent discrete and continuous problems – not only to illustrate what kind
of features are useful in the context of per-instance algorithm selection, but also to draw
attention to an important and somewhat underrated research topic of signiﬁcant impor-
tance to tasks beyond algorithm selection. In particular, informative instance features
can provide important insights into strengths and weaknesses of a given algorithm, and
hence play a crucial role in devising improvements. We generally distinguish between
problem-speciﬁc features that are closely based on particular aspects of the problem
to be solved, such as the number of clauses in instances of propositional satisﬁability
problems, and generic features that are more broadly applicable, such as high-level
statistics over information gleaned from short ’probing’ runs of a solver for the given
problem.
3.1 Discrete problems
To give concrete examples, and in light of the importance of problem-speciﬁc features,
we will focus on three of the most prominent and well-studied discrete combinatorial
problems: propositional satisﬁability (and related problems), AI planning and the trav-
elling salesperson problem (TSP).
Propositional satisﬁability and related problems. The propositional satisﬁability prob-
lem (SAT) is to determine whether for a given formula Fin propositional logic, contain-
ing Boolean variables X1; : : : ; X N2ftrue; falseg, there exists an assignment of logical
values to the variables such that Fevaluates to true ; such a variable assignment is said
to satisfy F. Typically, the problem is restricted to formulae Finconjunctive normal form
(CNF) , i.e.,Fconsists of conjunctions ( ^) of so-called clauses, which are disjunctions ( _)
of Boolean variables Xjand their negations :Xj. A CNF-formula Fevaluates to true ,
if each of its clauses is satisﬁed simultaneously. SAT is one of the most prominent and
8 Evolutionary Computation Volume x, Number x