UNSW-NB15, and show that the perturbations created by these techniques are able to fool
eleven dierent machine learning models, plus an ensemble model. For our baseline adversarial
example generation method, we use a Monte Carlo (MC) simulation for random generation of
perturbations.
The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we give an overview of the eld of machine
learning. We set the notation and establish the state of the art taxonomy therein. In Section
3, we review the most relevant and up to date literature that deals with adversarial machine
learning. Section 4 describes the methodology used to generate adversarial examples. We
explain the intuition as well as the technical details of our chosen perturbation methods. In
Section 5, we apply our evolutionary computation and deep learning methods to the two data
sets mentioned above, and we record the results while contrasting them with the baseline per-
turbation method. We also discuss our ndings and distinguish between the machine learning
models that are highly sensitive and the ones that show some type of robustness. We conclude
our work in Section 6 and pose some open questions and future research directions.
2 Prerequisites
Machine learning encompasses a vast eld of techniques that extract patterns from data, as
well as the theory and analysis relating to these algorithms. A computer program is said to
learn from experience Ewith respect to some class of tasks Tand performance measure P, if
its performance at tasks in T, as measured by P, improves with experience E[28].
In this section, we review the basic concepts of machine learning, broadly divided into three
major areas: supervised learning, unsupervised learning, and reinforcement learning. We then
introduce the notion of adversarial machine learning and categorize the types of attacks along
three dimensions: timing, information, and goals. We adopt a simplistic approach for the sake
of exposition, the reader interested in the technical denitions and details is referred to the
books [21, 47, 28].
2.1 Supervised Learning
Consider a data set D=f(xi;yi) :i= 1;:::;ngwhich lies in a product space Z=XY,
wheredenotes the cartesian product. We call Xthe input space or feature space and Y
the label space or the output space. In general, Dis assumed to be drawn from an unknown
distribution.
For a model class Fof functions mapping the input space Xto the output space Y, the
ultimate goal is to nd a model f2Fwhich is a good approximation of the labels actually
observed in the data. Given a labeled training data set Dand a cost function l, the process
goes as follows: the cost function assigns a numerical value to each combination of data point,
true label, and classier label. The classier then tries to \learn" the function that minimizes
the cost incurred in predicting the label yiof a new data point ( xi;yi) when only the predictor
variablexiis revealed to the classier.
In simple terms, if there is some \true function hwe are trying to learn, the goal is to nd a
functionf2Fwhich is as \close" to has possible, given the constraints that the model class
imposes on us. When the labels are real numbers ( Y=R), the paradigm is called regression
learning, and when Yis a nite set of labels it is called classication learning.
In regression learning, since the label values are real numbers, a loss function is used to
penalize predictions that are made far from the observed labels. An appropriate set of functions
3