(a) Initial Chromosome transfor-
mation into operable (mutable)
and xed (immutable) parts. Cells
marked with an F are immutable
and those with an M are mutable.
(b) Example cross-over operation
on two parent operable chromo-
somes and the resulting child op-
erable chromosomes.
(c) Example mutation operation
performed on an operable chromo-
some.
Figure 1: Genetic Algorithm Operators.
chromosome is classied as benign by a machine learning classier. To evaluate the chro-
mosome, the operable chromosome must be recombined with the immutable part to form a
valid chromosome. The best chromosome for each generation is maintained in subsequent
generations. The chromosomes in the next generation, limited by the chosen population size
variable, are selected using a roulette wheel technique. The process of selection, cross-over,
and mutation is repeated until a chosen number of iterations is reached or the improvement in
the best tness is below a chosen threshold. A pseudo-code for the GA is shown in Algorithm
1.
4.2.2 Particle Swarm Optimization
Particle swarm optimization is a bio-inspired heuristic based on behaviors of animals that 
ock
or swarm [8]. The idea is that each member or particle of the swarm explores the search space
with a calculated velocity. The velocity is updated based upon the particles best solution
and the swarms optimal solution. The probability that the velocity is in
uenced by the best
solutions is determined by selected weighting coecients. We used the PySwarms code base
[20] to develop the heuristic used in our work. Figure 2a illustrates how the PSO algorithm
works.
The heuristic begins with the creation of the swarm. The swarm is seeded with a row
from the evaluated data set. The remaining particles are then randomly created using the
seed particle as a baseline. Each particle is then randomly assigned an initial velocity. Similar
to the GA, the particle is composed of mutable and immutable cells. An example particle is
shown in Figure 2b.
In each iteration of the PSO algorithm, the particles tness function is evaluated using the
same metric as the GA. The values of the particles best location and the global best location
are updated as required. Next, the distances between each particles location and the particles
best location and the global best location is determined. These values are then used to update
the particles velocity and location. The heuristic is repeated until either a selected number of
iterations is reached or the global best tness improvement is below a chosen threshold. Upon
completion, the global best tness location is the desired output. The PSO pseudo-code is
10