1 Introduction
It is becoming evident each and every day that machine learning algorithms are achieving
impressive results in domains in which it is hard to specify a set of rules for their procedures.
Examples of this phenomenon include industries like nance [49, 5], transportation [37], educa-
tion [42, 22], health care [23] and tasks like image recognition [41, 16, 17], machine translation
[43, 7], and speech recognition [46, 24, 53, 50].
Motivated by the ease of adoption and the increased availability of aordable computational
power (especially cloud computing services), machine learning algorithms are being explored
in almost every commercial application and are oering great promise for the future of au-
tomation. Facing such a vast adoption across multiple disciplines, some of their weaknesses
are exposed and sometimes exploited by malicious actors. For example, a common challenge
to these algorithms is \generalization" or \robustness", which is the ability of the algorithm to
maintain performance whenever dealing with data coming from a dierent distribution with
which it was trained.
For a long period of time, the sole focus of machine learning researchers was improving
the performance of machine learning systems (true positive rate, accuracy, etc.). Nowadays,
the robustness of these systems can no longer be ignored; many of them have been shown
to be highly vulnerable to intentional adversarial attacks. This fact renders them inadequate
for real-world applications, especially mission-critical ones. Adversarial machine learning is
classied by that National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) into four categories
of attacks: evasion, extraction, poisoning, and inference. In this work, we examine adversarial
examples, which is a type of evasion attacks.
An adversarial example is an input to a machine learning model that an attacker has
intentionally designed to cause the model to make a mistake. In general, the attacker may
have no access to the architecture of the machine learning system being attacked, which is
known as a black-box attack. Attackers can approximate a white-box attack by using the
notion of \transferability", which means that an input designed to confuse a certain machine
learning model is able to trigger a similar behavior within a dierent model. In this work, we
model a white-box attack by evaluating our examples against a variety of machine learning
models, thus showing performance over a wide range of possible systems.
Network Intrusion Detection Systems (NIDS) monitor network trac to detect abnormal
activities, such as attacks against hosts or servers. Machine learning algorithms oer the benet
of detecting novel dierences in network trac through training on normal and attack trac.
The traditional approach to designing a NIDS relies on an expert human analyst codifying rules
that dene normal behavior and intrusions. Due to the frequent failures of this approach to
detect novel intrusions and the desire to lower the analyst's workload, machine learning models
are incorporated into NIDS with the goal of automating the process and supplementing the
human eort.
On the other hand, the adoption of machine learning algorithms in the network intrusion
detection setting has raised a major security issue, namely the introduction of adversarial
machine learning. In this work, we study adversarial machine learning through the lens of
NIDS to show the sensitivity of machine learning models when faced with adversarial attacks
generated by perturbation techniques based upon evolutionary computation, deep learning,
and Monte Carlo methods.
In precise terms, we use three dierent perturbation methods to generate adversarial exam-
ples: particle swarm optimization (PSO), a genetic algorithm (GA), and a generative adver-
sarial network (GAN). We apply these algorithms to two well-known data sets, NSL-KDD and
2