of the data at under 25 percent of the total. This data set was also purposely constructed to
more closely match the content of the training set and test set as highlighted in [32]. The data
has entries with 49 elds of which some are generated by network 
ow analyzers and intrusion
detection tools. Engineering these elds results in 196 features of which we identied 23 as
mutable. Similar to the NSL-KDD data set, some elds are constrained as binary, increasing
in value only, or have a linear relationship. However, some elds in this set can have decreasing
values such as sttl(e.g. the time to live can arbitrarily be set by the sender), and sload (e.g.
the source can increase/decrease packet sizes and transmission rates).
4.2 Adversarial Example Generation
Adversarial examples have been extensively used to evade machine learning systems. The
methods of generation for these adversarial examples include mostly heuristic techniques [15,
40, 52] and GANs [12, 25, 18]. In this work, we introduce two novel techniques for adversarial
example generation that use evolutionary computation, PSO and GA, along with a GAN that
uniquely considers constrained feature sets to avoid the failure of the resulting trac. Finally,
we implement a MC simulation generator for baseline comparison.
4.2.1 Genetic Algorithm
Genetic algorithms are commonly used to nd near-optimal solutions to NP-hard problems
[48]. In the NIDS setting, searching the space with over 90 dimensions for a solution that
best fools a machine learning classier can benet from this type of search heuristic. Figure 1
illustrates a simplistic view of how a genetic algorithm works in general.
Genetic algorithms typically operate on data structures known as chromosomes; a chro-
mosome is a representation of the problems data. For this work, a chromosome is comprised
of a data feature from the source data sets. The GA operates on each row entry in the data
set creating a population of chromosomes. This initial population contains a seed chromo-
some based on the original rows values and randomly generated chromosomes based upon the
seed. Each chromosome contains both mutable and immutable elements. As a result, prior
to performing the algorithms standard operations (cross-over and mutation), the chromosome
is separated into two parts, the xed and operable elements as shown in Figure 1a. Of note,
each chromosome in the population has a common, xed element. Once the chromosomes
are sub-divided, the heuristic operations can be performed on the operable sub-part of the
chromosome.
Based upon the chosen cross-over rate, the cross-over operation is performed. Two parent
chromosomes are randomly selected from the population and a cross-over index is selected
randomly. This index separates the operable chromosome into left and right portions in each
parent. The right portions are then swapped between parents to form two new operable
chromosomes. These child chromosomes are then inserted into the population. The cross-over
operation is illustrated in Figure 1b.
The mutation operation perturbs values of randomly selected cells based on a chosen mu-
tation rate. The operation rst randomly selects chromosomes to operate upon based on the
mutation rate. Then, a mutation index is randomly selected. Using this index, the targeted
chromosome is modied as shown in the example of Figure 1c. The resulting chromosome is
left in the population in its modied form.
Upon completion of the cross-over and mutation operators, the chromosomes tness func-
tions are evaluated. In this domain, the tness metric is the output probability that the
9