2.3 Reinforcement Learning
In reinforcement learning, the goal is to learn via interaction and feedback, or in other words
learning to solve a task by trial-and-error. The mathematical foundation for reinforcement
learning is based on Markov Decision Processes (MDPs), which we dene below.
A discrete-time MDP is a tuple ( S;A;T;r; ) whereSis a nite set of states, Ais a nite
set of actions, Tis the set of transition probabilities, ris a reward function, and 2(0;1)
is a discount factor. Loosely speaking, reinforcement learning aims at maximizing the reward
function for a state s2Sand an action a2A. Two techniques are widely used in this
framework: Q-learning and policy learning.
InQ-learning, a function Qis dened that takes as input one state and one action and
returns the expected reward of that action and all subsequent actions at that state. Before
learning begins, Qis initialized to a random xed value and it gets updated as the learning
proceeds until it converges to an optimal value.
In policy learning, a mapping :S!Ais introduced from the set of states to the set of
actions. We refer to this map as policy: a=(s) means that when state sis observed, the
best thing to do is to take action a. The task then becomes to nd a policy with maximum
expected return.
2.4 Adversarial Machine Learning
Adversarial Machine Learning (AML) is a research eld that lies at the intersection of machine
learning and computer security. Here, we present a general categorization of attacks in the
context of machine learning. Below we classify possible attacks into three main pillars.
First, the timing of the attack plays a crucial role in the process. The main distinction
occurs between evasion attacks and poisoning attacks. The former ones are executed at decision
time: they assume that the model has already been trained, so the attacker aims at changing
its behavior to cause the model to make incorrect predictions. The latter ones, in contrast,
take place before the model is trained. They aim at modifying a part of the data used for
training purposes to corrupt the nal model.
Second, we highlight the nature of information the attacker has about the learning algo-
rithm. This allows us to compare white-box attacks and black-box attacks. Namely, white-box
attacks assume that the model is known to the adversary, whereas in black-box attacks the
adversary has limited or no information about the model, although may obtain some of the
information indirectly, for example, through queries and captured responses.
Third, attackers may have dierent reasons for attacking, such as evading detection or
reducing condence in the algorithm. We dierentiate between two broad classes of attack
goals: targeted attacks and reliability attacks. In a targeted attack, the attackers goal is to
cause a misclassication into a specic label or target. In contrast, a reliability attack aims
to degrade the perceived reliability of the machine learning system by maximizing prediction
error without any particular target label.
3 Related Work
The rst publication that hints at adversarial machine learning dates back to the early 2000's.
In 2004, Dalvi et al. [9] managed to fool classiers for spam detection by adding intentional
changes to the body of an email. In 2005, Lowd and Meek [27] introduced the adversarial clas-
5