1. The values within a single feature can be binary, continuous or categorical.
2. The values of dierent features in a data set can be correlated with one another.
3. Some features are xed and cannot be controlled by a potential adversary.
For these reasons, it was not clear whether constrained domains are less vulnerable to ad-
versarial example generation than unconstrained domains. In [40], Sheatsley tested the above
hypothesis by creating targeted universal perturbation vectors that encode feature saliency
within the envelope of domain constraints. The experiment was able to generate misclas-
sication rates greater than 95% by introducing two algorithms: the adaptive JSMA, which
crafts adversarial examples that obey domain constraints, and the histogram sketch generation,
which produces adversarial sketches.
In this work, we aim to provide more evidence to the same hypothesis. We adapt the
algorithms used in GA, PSO, and GAN to generate adversarial examples in unconstrained
domains. By doing so, we achieve high misclassication rates in the majority of commonly
used machine learning models applied to the data sets NSL-KDD and UNSW-NB15. Our
baseline MC simulation perturbation method generates more or less random perturbations in
the data.
We end this section by mentioning that similar techniques appeared previously in the
adversarial machine learning literature [39]. Hu and Tan [18] propose a GAN-based algorithm
named MalGAN to generate adversarial malware examples which are able to bypass black
box machine learning detection models. Nguyen, Yosinski and Clune [33] use evolutionary
algorithms to generate images that are given high prediction scores by convolutional neural
networks. Drawing ideas from genetic programming, Xu, Qi, and Evans [51] propose a generic
method to evaluate the robustness of classiers under attack. Their key idea is to stochastically
manipulate a malicious sample to nd a variant that preserves the malicious behavior but is
classied as benign by the classier. More recently, Alzantot et al. [2] introduced GenAttack,
a gradient-free optimization technique that uses genetic algorithms for synthesizing adversarial
examples in the black box setting. Mosli et al. [30] created AdversarialPSO, a black-box attack
that uses fewer queries to create adversarial examples with high success rates. AdversarialPSO
is based on particle swarm optimization, and is 
exible in balancing the number of queries
submitted to the target compared to the quality of imperceptible adversarial examples. Finally,
Devine and Bastian [10] used a machine learning approach for robust malware classication
that integrates a MC simulation for adversarial perturbation with meta learning using a stacked
ensemble-based methodology.
4 Methodology
In this section, we give a technical description of the features in the data sets used in our
experiments. We then explain the details of the techniques employed for adversarial example
generation. This leads to the layout of our computational setting.
4.1 Data sets
There are a small number of publicly available, well-known labeled data sets of network trac
for cyber security research. Two of these data sets are: NSL-KDD [45] and UNSW-NB15 [31].
Both data sets have a mix of benign and malicious trac with a variety of network trac
types and attack types. Both data sets have quality limitations due to factors like generation
7