shown in Algorithm 2.
Algorithm 2 Particle Swarm Optimization
1:Choose initial weights, number of particles, maximum iterations
2:Initialize swarm
3: Seed vector created as particle
4: Randomly generate remaining particles
5: Randomly generate initial velocities
6:while (iterations <maximum iterations) and (improvement >improvement minimum) do
7: Calculate each particles tness
8: Update global best tness and each particles best tness
9: foreach particle do
10: Calculate distance between location and particle best tness
11: Calculate distance between location and global best tness
12: Update particle velocity
13: Update particle location
14:Output global best tness location
4.2.3 Generative Adversarial Network
Generative adversarial networks are a deep learning technique that pits two neural networks
against each other in a game setting. The GAN is composed of a generator and a discriminator.
The generators task is to learn about the discriminator and thus train to deceive it. The
discriminator attempts to discern if its inputs are from the genuine data set or from the
adversarial data set. As described in the original work [12], the competition between the two
components continues until neither can improve their abilities. In our scenario, it is desired
that the generator, once trained, can modify malicious input vectors such that the output
is classied as benign by the target classier. The pseudo-code of the GAN is depicted in
Algorithm 3.
Because of the constrained data set, the data input to the generator is divided into mutable
and immutable parts like the GA and PSO. Noise is then added to the mutable portion of
the data by randomly selecting features and perturbing their values. One contribution that
we make in this heuristic is the addition of non-binary features in the GANs operations and
the consideration of constrained data sets. Other work in this area either does not consider
constrained data sets or only use binary features in their operation thus limiting their applica-
tion. Additionally, due to the nature of this domain, there is no need to search for a minimum
perturbation in the data. Unlike the image domain, large changes in the data are not subject
to easy recognition by human observers.
This noisy vector, containing the noisy mutable and original xed portions, is then fed
to the generator neural network whose output is a vector of the same size as the mutable
portion of the original input. This adversarial vector output is then combined with the initial
immutable portion of the input vector to form a new adversarial input, which is then fed to
the discriminator to generate labels (benign or malicious). These labels are used to improve
the neural networks predictions. To accomplish our goal, the generator and discriminator are
alternately trained using batches of training data. A depiction of the generators training is
shown in Figure 3.
12