methods, prevalence of attack trac, and size. Nevertheless, these data sets are commonly
used to evaluate machine learning based NIDS.
In general, the data sets contain elds with raw and processed data derived from the under-
lying network trac. Normally, this data is engineered in research work to detect intrusions
in a network. In many works [14, 15, 11], eort is made to alter the data to create adversarial
examples that can fool detection systems and classiers. In domains such as image and speech
recognition, perturbing the data to fool the systems can be done in a manner that does not
aect the functionality or appearance of the original item. For example, changing pixel values
in an image by a few bits can be undetectable to the human eye yet fool a trained machine
learning classier. In network security applications, which is an unconstrained domain, care
must be taken when generating adversarial examples that alter the source data. There are
data, such as the duration of a network packet 
ow, that if altered will not impact the func-
tionality of the protocol. However, there are elds that if changed can cause the functionality
of the transmission to fail, such as changing the protocol type from TCP to UDP.
The goal of an attacker (who may use adversarial examples) is to alter packets to achieve
a desired eect while still maintaining the functionality of the trac. Previous research [14,
15] acknowledge that certain elds in the data sets are immutable while others are open to
perturbations. In this work, we subscribe to this position and place technical constraints on
data elds that are mutable. For the data sets used, the mutable elds are described below.
4.1.1 NSL-KDD Data Set
This data set is an altered version of the KDD99 data set with over 125,000 training samples
and more than 22,000 test samples. As described in [19], it contains 41 features based upon raw
network trac elements, 
ow trac elements, and content. The data contains attacks from
four attack types that were more prevalent at the time of the set's creation (Denial of Service,
Probes, Remote-to-local, and User-to-Root). Attack trac comprises a little over 50 percent
of the data in the set and the normal data in the set is not representative of modern trac.
Engineering the features using common techniques such as one-hot encoding and Min-Max
Scaling results in a nal data set with 121 features. Of these features, some are immutable
such as protocol-type ,service , and 
ag. A change to these values would cause the underlying
trac to become non-functional. The remaining features are mutable, though we limit the
perturbations to changes that increase the initial values. The rationale behind such decision
is that these elds, such as srcbytes , can increase without altering the functionality of the
trac (e.g. null packets can be inserted). Decreasing these elds without expert knowledge
of the trac content would not be certiably feasible. Other constraints on perturbations to
the data are elds that are binary (the value can only be 
ipped from 0 to 1 and vice versa)
and elds that are linearly related such as samesrvrate anddiffsrvrate must sum to 1.
A change to one of these elds alters the content of the other. Our analysis of the engineered
features results in 93 immutable features and 29 mutable ones.
4.1.2 UNSW-NB15 Data Set
The UNSW-NB15 data set was generated at the Cyber Range Lab of the Australian Centre
for Cyber Security. It contains over 175,000 training samples and 82,000+ test samples that
are labeled as benign or malicious (including attack type). The data contains nine types of
more modern, low footprint attacks as described in [31]. The benign trac is more re
ective
of current network trac as well. In this set, attacks compromise a much smaller percentage
8