Figure 5: Adversarial Example Generation Algorithm Performance Against NSL-KDD Data Set
Table 2: NSL-KDD Data Set. Best Evasion Rate (%) by Adversarial Generation Method
MC PSO GA GAN
96.19 99.99 99.95 92.60
The former's performance can be attributed partially to the use of most of those models in the
evaluation function for the heuristics. The GAN's superior performance against the remaining
classiers is partially attributed to the learning of its discriminator using the voting classier
and the generator. Additionally, this suggests that when the classier under-the-hood of the
NIDS uses a tree-based classication model (DT, RF, GB and BAG), then the GAN-based
perturbation method is capable of achieving high misclassication rates.
Upon examination of Figure 5, it is evident that the DT classier has the least variability
across the four perturbation methods, with an evasion rate above 90%, which is more than
double the performance of the original vectors. This holds true for the UNSW-NB15 data set
as well. In this experiment, the DT classier was extremely vulnerable to adversarial examples
in general. It is also evident that for QDA and BAG classiers, the four perturbation methods
had limited performance in terms of evasion rate when compared to the original vectors. For
the LR classier, all four perturbation methods performed strictly worse than the unmodied
vectors; the results were somewhat mixed for the GB classier. The best evasion rates by
adversarial generation method are depicted in Table 2.
5.3 Results from the UNSW-NB15 Data Set
For the UNSW-NB15 data set, Table 3 highlights the comparative analysis of the four pertur-
bation methods for adversarial generation against the 11 machine learning models representing
the NIDS classier. Again, the performance is represented by the evasion rate of malicious vec-
tors in terms of percentage classied as normal using the classiers and compared against the
original vectors. On average, the GA performed strictly better than the PSO, GAN and MC
techniques and greatly fooled the NIDS compared to the original vectors (73.71% compared
to 5.00% accuracy).
Compared to the MC technique as the baseline perturbation method, PSO, GA and GAN
performed strictly better for the NB machine learning models, and the results were greatly
mixed for the other classiers representing the NIDS. When comparing the four adversarial
generation techniques against the original vectors, the NIDS evasion rate was strictly better for
17