sier reverse engineering (ACRE) learning problem, the task of learning sucient information
about a classier to construct adversarial attacks. They presented ecient algorithms for re-
verse engineering linear classiers with either continuous or Boolean features and demonstrated
their eectiveness using real data from the domain of spam ltering.
A taxonomy for attacks and defenses in adversarial setting was rst established by Barreno
et al. in [3] and later rened in [4]. This taxonomy clearly denes threat models and includes
the concept of adversarial examples without any mentioning of the term. The rst time this
term was coined was in 2013 when Szegedy et al. [44] investigated properties of deep neural
networks and found that by applying a certain imperceptible perturbation to an image, these
networks misclassied it with high condence. Moreover, they showed that the specic nature
of these perturbations is not a random artifact of learning: the same perturbation can cause
a dierent network, that was trained on a dierent subset of the data set, to misclassify the
same input.
The last decade has witnessed a large body of publications in the realm of adversarial
machine learning in several domains and it is impossible to summarize it all in a paragraph
or two. We point the curious reader to a couple of excellent recent articles that attempt to
survey the eld of AML. Liu et al. [26] investigate security threats and give a systematic
survey on them from two aspects, the training phase and the testing/inferring phase. They
also categorize existing defensive techniques of machine learning into four groups: security
assessment mechanisms, countermeasures in the training phase, those in the testing or inferring
phase, data security, and privacy. Further, Akhtar and Mian [1] focus on adversarial attacks
on deep learning in computer vision. They emphasize that adversarial attacks are possible
in practical conditions and review the contributions that evaluate such attacks in real-world
scenarios.
A more detailed survey is provided by Serban et al. in [38]. The authors introduce an
exhaustive list of attacks/defenses and thoroughly discuss the property of transferability. They
provide a taxonomy of attacks and defenses that is specic to the adversarial examples eld.
This taxonomy is meant to properly structure the methods in AML and help future researchers
to position their work in comparison to other publications.
Most of the adversarial machine learning research so far has focused on unconstrained
domains (e.g., image and object recognition). This is mainly due to the following assumption:
the adversary is always able to fully exploit each feature or pixel of a given image. Several
attack algorithms currently exist in the literature and many variations to their models are
widely implemented. These models include the Fast Gradient Sign Method (FGSM) [13], the
Jacobian-based saliency map attack (JSMA) [35], Deepfool [29], and the Carlini Wagner attack
(CW) [6].
Goodfellow et al. [13] proposed the FGSM to generate adversarial perturbations based on
the gradient of the loss function relative to the input image and, thus, enable computational
eciency through backpropagation. Papernot et al. [35] created adversarial saliency maps by
computing forward derivatives, which are used to identify the input feature to be perturbed
towards the target class. Moosavi-Dezfooli et al. [29] proposed an approach to nd the closest
distance from original input to the decision boundary of adversarial examples. Carlini and
Wagner [6] introduced three new gradient-based attack algorithms ( l2,l1, andl0) that are
more eective than all previously known methods in terms of the adversarial success rates
achieved with minimal perturbation amounts.
Unlike unconstrained domains, the situation is quite dierent in constrained ones due to
the following three characteristics:
6