Figure 6: Adversarial Example Generation Algorithm Performance Against UNSW-NB15 Data Set
creating perturbations using techniques from evolutionary computation (PSO and GA) and
deep learning (GAN). The main goal of our computational experimentation was to tweak ma-
licious trac in order to evade detection by NIDS, i.e. to \trick" the ML systems to classify
such trac as normal.
To the best of our knowledge, this work is the rst to incorporate evolutionary algorithms in
the realm of adversarial machine learning in the network intrusion detection setting. Through-
out our results, it was evident that the data vectors created via the PSO, GA, and GAN
methods achieved high misclassication rates against a handful of machine learning classiers.
We highlight some key takeaways below.
First, the support vector machine (SVM) and the decision tree (DT) classiers were the
most vulnerable against adversarial examples created by evolutionary algorithms and genera-
tive adversarial networks ( >90% evasion rate). This leads us to recommend refraining from
using them in NIDS and in mission-critical tasks in general. Second, in the network trac
data, it is not quite realistic to assume that a potential adversary has the capability to alter
each and every feature of the trac. This is a crucial assumption that distinguishes between
crafting adversarial examples in unconstrained domains versus ones in constrained domains.
In our work, we rely on subject matter expertise to lter the features that can be modied by
an attacker without breaking the functionality of the network trac. It is worth mentioning
that our strategy diers from that adopted in [40], where the choice of modiable features
does not seem to preserve the network functionality. Third, our results show that the same set
of adversarial examples that managed to fool one machine learning classier also succeeded at
fooling several others. A particular instance of such observation was the performance of the
adversarial examples generated by the PSO algorithm in the UNSW-NB15 data set (98 :06%
against GB, 85 :68% against LDA, and 97 :83% against BAG). This observation can be consid-
ered as additional evidence to the transferability phenomenon rst alluded to in [34] within
the image recognition setting and in [40] within the network intrusion detection setting.
In the future, we aim to analyze the internal operations of the ML models used in this
paper. It is clear that all of them are vulnerable to adversarial perturbations, but it not clear
why some of them are more robust than the others in the NIDS setting. We hope that a
systematic study of their mechanism would shed some light on their robustness and explain
their sensitivity to small input alterations.
19