12;828 malicious vectors while the UNSW-NB15 test set contains 45 ;328 malicious vectors.
The Scikit-learn package [36] is used for the development of our code with the exception of the
GAN which utilizes Keras models for the neural networks. A baseline classication is developed
on the unmodied test set using classiers similar to those described in the work of [19]. The
tness function used for GA and PSO is a Voting Ensemble Classier formed by soft voting and
the following sub-models: Support Vector Machine (SVM), Decision Tree (DT), Naive Bayes
(NB), and K-Nearest Neighbors (KNN). The SVM settings are: gamma = 0:01,C= 220:0,
tol= 0:01,probability =True . The Naive Bayes model has the default settings, while the
Decision Tree algorithm uses the settings: criterion = \entropy ",minsamplessplit = 4,
minsamplesleaf = 2,maxdepth = 20,minimpuritydecrease = 0:1. Finally, the KNN
algorithm settings are: nneighbors = 3,algorithm = \auto".
The parameters of the GA are a population size of 100 chromosomes, 1000 generations
maximum, a cross-over rate of 0 :25, a mutation rate of 0 :2, and an early termination criterion
of less than 0 :01% improvement in 5 generations. The parameters used in the PSO heuristic
are 200 particles, c1= 0:5 (coecient for particle local best solution), c2= 0:4 (coecient for
swarm global best solution), w= 0:7 (weight for last velocity), a maximum of 100 iterations,
and an early termination criterion of less than 0 :001% improvement. The MC simulation is
run with a maximum of 15 perturbed features per vector and a total of 250 iterations per
vector. The optimal settings on all the algorithms are determined experimentally.
The GAN generator is created using a Keras Sequential model with a dense input layer of
size 122 for the NSL-KDD data set and 196 for the UNSW-NB15 data set. The generator has
ve additional dense layers of size 29 for the NSL-KDD data set and 23 for the UNSW-NB15
data set, and uses a relu activation function for all layers. The model employs a stochastic
gradient descent (SGD) optimizer with an lrof 0:01, aclipvalue of 0:01 with a loss function of
meansquarederror . The GAN discriminator is a three-layer dense model with similar input
sizes to the generator but with a single output. The initial two layers use a relu activation
function while the output layer uses a sigmoid activation function. The model uses a RMSprop
optimizer with an lrof 0:01, aclipvalue of 0:01, and abinarycrossentropy loss function. The
models are trained for 300 iterations of 10 steps each and vector batch size of 50.
Each of the methods produces a set of perturbed malicious vectors. These vectors are
then input into 11 separate classication models to evaluate their performance. Four of the
evaluation classiers are the sub-models used in the GA/PSO voting ensemble. The remain-
ing seven are: Random Forest (RF), Multi-layer Perceptron (MLP), Gradient Boosting (GB),
Logistic Regression (LR), Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA), Quadratic Discriminant Anal-
ysis (QDA), and Bagging (BAG). The models are chosen to cover a broad range of classier
categories.
5 Results and Discussion
5.1 General Results
The dierences in the two data sets used in this work do not allow for comparison between
them in terms of commonalities. The attack types used in the sets only overlap in denial-of-
service and probing attacks and the techniques in the attacks dier greatly due to the fteen
plus years between their creation. Additionally, the weakness of the NSL-KDD data set with
respect to the composition of its training and test sets creates classication dierences that
are likely less prevalent in the UNSW-NB15 data set. Finally, the features of the two data sets
15