692 L. Floridi, M. Chiriatti 
1 3
Once these writing tools are commonly available to the general public, they will 
further improve—no matter whether they are used for good or evil purposes. The 
amount of texts available will skyrocket because the cost of their production will 
become negligible, like plastic objects. This huge growth of content will put pres-
sure on the available space for recording (at any given time there is only a finite 
amount of physical memory available in the world, and data production far exceeds 
its size). It will also translate into an immense spread of semantic garbage, from 
cheap novels to countless articles published by predatory journals9: if you can sim-
ply push a key and get some “written stuff”, “written stuff” will be published.
The industrial automation of text production will also merge with two other 
problems that are already rampant. On the one hand, online advertising will take 
advantage of it. Given the business models of many online companies, clickbait of 
all kinds will be boosted by tools like GPT-3, which can produce excellent prose 
cheaply, quickly, purposefully, and in ways that can be automatically targeted to the 
reader. GPT-3 will be another weapon in the competition for users’ attention. Fur -
thermore, the wide availability of tools like GPT-3 will support the development 
of “no-code platforms”, which will enable marketers to create applications to auto-
mate repetitive tasks, starting from data commands in natural language (written or 
spoken). On the other hand, fake news and disinformation may also get a boost. For 
it will be even easier to lie or mislead very credibly (think of style, and choice of 
words) with automatically-fabricated texts of all kinds (McGuffie and Newhouse 
2020). The joining of automatic text production, advertisement-based business mod-
els, and the spread of fake news means that the polarization of opinions and the pro-
liferation of “filter bubbles” is likely to increase, because automation can create texts 
that are increasingly tailored to the tastes and intellectual abilities (or lack thereof) 
of a reader. In the end, the gullible will delegate to some automatic text producer the 
last word, like today they ask existential questions to Google.10
At the same time, it is reasonable to expect that, thanks to GPT-3-like applica-
tions, intelligence and analytics systems will become more sophisticated, and able 
to identify patterns not immediately perceivable in huge amounts of data. Conver -
sational marketing systems (chatbots) and knowledge management will be able to 
improve relationships between consumers and producers, customers and companies.
Faced with all these challenges, humanity will need to be even more intelligent 
and critical. Complementarity among human and artificial tasks, and successful 
human–computer interactions will have to be developed. Business models should 
be revised (advertisement is mostly a waste of resources). It may be necessary to 
draw clear boundaries between what is what, e.g., in the same way as a restored, 
ancient vase shows clearly and explicitly where the intervention occurs. New mecha-
nisms for the allocation of responsibility for the production of semantic artefacts 
will probably be needed. Indeed, copyright legislation was developed in response to 
the reproducibility of goods. A better digital culture will be required, to make cur -
rent and future citizens, users and consumers aware of the new infosphere in which 
10 https ://visme .co/blog/most-searc  hed-quest ions-on-googl e/.9 https ://preda toryj ourna ls.com/journ als/.