682 L. Floridi, M. Chiriatti 
1 3
mathematical logic, for example, the NOT gate is reversible (in this case the term 
used is “invertible), but the exclusive or (XOR) gate is irreversible (not invert-
ible), because one cannot reconstruct its two inputs unambiguously from its sin-
gle output. This means that, as far as one can tell, the inputs are interchangeable. 
In philosophy, a very well known, related idea is the identity of indiscerni-
bles, also known as Leibniz’s law: for any x and y, if x and y have all the same 
properties F, then x  is identical to y . To put it more precisely if less legibly: 
∀x∀y(∀F(Fx↔Fy)→x=y) . This means that if x  and y  have the same properties 
then one cannot tell (i.e. reverse) the difference between them, because they are 
the same. If we put all this together, we can start understanding why the “ques-
tions game” can be confusing when it is used to guess the nature or identity of the 
source of the answers. Suppose we ask a question (process) and receive an answer 
(output). Can we reconstruct (reverse) from the answer whether its source is 
human or artificial? Are answers like mowed lawns? Some are, but some are not. 
It depends, because not all questions are the same. The answers to mathematical 
questions (2 + 2 = ?), factual questions (what is the capital of France?), or binary 
questions (do you like ice cream?) are “irreversible” like a mowed lawn: one can-
not infer the nature of the author from them, not even if the answers are wrong. 
But other questions, which require understanding and perhaps even experience of 
both the meaning and the context, may actually give away their sources, at least 
until now (this qualification is essential and we shall return to it presently). They 
are questions such as “how many feet can you fit in a shoe?” or “what sorts of 
things can you do with a shoe?”. Let us call them semantic questions.
Semantic questions, precisely because they may produce “reversible” answers, 
can be used as a test, to identify the nature of their source. Therefore, it goes 
without saying that it is perfectly reasonable to argue that human and artificial 
sources may produce indistinguishable answers, because some kinds of questions 
are indeed irreversible—while at the same time pointing out that there are still  
(again, more on this qualification presently) some kinds of questions, like seman-
tic ones, that can be used to spot the difference between a human and artificial 
source. Enter the Turing Test.
Any reader of this journal will be well acquainted with the nature of the test, so 
we shall not describe it here. What is worth stressing is that, in the famous article 
in which Turing introduced what he called the imitation game (Turing 1950), he 
also predicted that by 2000 computers would have passed it:
I believe that in about fifty years’ time it will be possible to programme 
computers, with a storage capacity of about  109, to make them play the imi-
tation game so well that an average interrogator will not have more than 70 
per cent chance of making the right identification after five minutes of ques-
tioning. (Turing 1950)
Hobbes spent an inordinate amount of time trying to prove how to square the circle. 
Newton studied alchemy, possibly trying to discover the philosopher’s stone. Turing 
believed in true Artificial Intelligence, the kind you see in Star Wars. Even geniuses