691
1 3 GPT -3: Its Nature, Scope, Limits, and Consequences  
effort. It is the biggest transformation of the writing process since the word proces-
sor. Some of its most significant consequences are already imaginable.
Writers will have less work, at least in the sense in which writing has functioned 
since it was invented. Newspapers already use software to publish texts that need to 
be available and updated in real time, such as comments on financial transactions, or 
on trends of a stock exchange while it is open. They also use software to write texts 
that can be rather formulaic, such as sports news. Last May, Microsoft announced 
the sacking of dozens of journalists, replaced by automatic systems for the produc-
tion of news on MSN (Baker 2020).
People whose jobs still consist in writing will be supported, increasingly, by tools 
such as GPT-3. Forget the mere cut & paste, they will need to be good at prompt & 
collate.8 Because they will have to learn the new editorial skills required to shape, 
intelligently, the prompts that deliver the best results, and to collect and combine 
(collate) intelligently the results obtained, e.g. when a system like GPT-3 produces 
several valuable texts, which must be amalgamated together, as in the case of the 
article in The Guardian. We write “intelligently” to remind us that, unfortunately, 
for those who see human intelligence on the verge of replacement, these new jobs 
will still require a lot of human brain power, just a different application of it. For 
example, GPT-3-like tools will make it possible to reconstruct missing parts of texts 
or complete them, not unlike what happens with missing parts of archaeological 
artefacts. One could use a GPT-3 tool to write and complete Jane Austen’s Sanditon, 
not unlike what happened with an AI system that finished the last two movements 
of Schubert’s Symphony No. 8 (Davis 2019), which Schubert started in 1822 but 
never completed (only the first two movements are available and fragments of the 
last two).
Readers and consumers of texts will have to get used to not knowing whether 
the source is artificial or human. Probably they will not notice, or even mind—just 
as today we could not care less about knowing who mowed the lawn or cleaned the 
dishes. Future readers may even notice an improvement, with fewer typos and bet-
ter grammar. Think of the instruction manuals and user guides supplied with almost 
every consumer product, which may be legally mandatory but are often very poorly 
written or translated. However, in other contexts GPT-3 will probably learn from its 
human creators all their bad linguistic habits, from ignoring the distinction between 
“if” and “whether”, to using expressions like “beg the question” or “the exception 
that proves the rule” incorrectly.
One day classics will be divided between those written only by humans and those 
written collaboratively, by humans and some software, or maybe just by software. 
It may be necessary to update the rules for the Pulitzer Prize and the Nobel Prize in 
literature. If this seems a far-fetched idea consider that regulations about copyright 
are already adapting. AIVA (Artificial Intelligence Virtual Artist) is an electronic 
music composer that is recognized by SACEM (Société des auteurs, compositeurs 
et éditeurs de musique) in France and Luxembourg. Its products are protected by 
copyright (Rudra 2019).
8 For an interesting analysis see (Elkins and Chun 2020).