685
1 3 GPT -3: Its Nature, Scope, Limits, and Consequences  
text, without supervision, input or training concerning the “right” or “correct” or 
“true” text that should follow the prompt. One only needs to write a prompt in plain 
language (a sentence or a question are already enough) to obtain the issuing text. 
We asked it, for example, to continue the initial description of an accident, the one 
described in the first sentence of Jane Austen’s Sanditon. This is a working draft of 
her last work, left unfinished by Austen at the time of her death (18 July, 1817). This 
is the original text:
A gentleman and a lady travelling from Tunbridge towards that part of the 
Sussex coast which lies between Hastings and Eastbourne, being induced by 
business to quit the high road and attempt a very rough lane, were overturned 
in toiling up its long ascent, half rock, half sand. The accident happened just 
beyond the only gentleman’s house near the lane—a house which their driver, 
on being first required to take that direction, had conceived to be necessarily 
their object and had with most unwilling looks been constrained to pass by. 
He had grumbled and shaken his shoulders and pitied and cut his horses so 
sharply that he might have been open to the suspicion of overturning them on 
purpose (especially as the carriage was not his master’s own) if the road had 
not indisputably become worse than before, as soon as the premises of the said 
house were left behind—expressing with a most portentous countenance that, 
beyond it, no wheels but cart wheels could safely proceed. The severity of the 
fall was broken by their slow pace and the narrowness of the lane; and the 
gentleman having scrambled out and helped out his companion, they neither of 
them at first felt more than shaken and bruised. But the gentleman had, in the 
course of the extrication, sprained his foot—and soon becoming sensible of it, 
was obliged in a few moments to cut short both his remonstrances to the driver 
and his congratulations to his wife and himself—and sit down on the bank, 
unable to stand. (From http://guten berg.net.au/ebook  s/fr008 641.html)
The prompt we gave to GPT-3 was the first sentence. This is indeed not much, and 
so the result in Fig.  1 is very different from what Austen had in mind—note the dif-
ferences in the effects of the accident—but it is still quite interesting. Because if all 
you know is the occurrence and nature of the accident, it makes a lot of sense to 
assume that the passengers might have been injured. Of course, the more detailed 
and specific the prompt, the better the outcome becomes.
We also ran some tests in Italian, and the results were impressive, despite the fact 
that the amount and kinds of texts on which GPT-3 is trained are probably predomi-
nantly English. We prompted GPT-3 to continue a very famous sonnet by Dante, 
dedicated to Beatrice. This is the full, original text:
Tanto gentile e tanto onesta pare
la donna mia, quand’ella altrui saluta,
ch’ogne lingua devèn, tremando, muta,
e li occhi no l’ardiscon di guardare.
ella si va, sentendosi laudare,