683
1 3 GPT -3: Its Nature, Scope, Limits, and Consequences  
make mistakes. Turing’s prediction was wrong. Today, the Loebner Prize (Floridi 
et al. 2009) is given to the least unsuccessful software trying to pass the Turing Test. 
It is still “won” by systems that perform not much better than refined versions of 
ELIZA.2 Yet there is a sense in which Turing was right: plenty of questions can be 
answered irreversibly by computers today, and the way we think and speak about 
machines has indeed changed. We have no problem saying that computers do this or 
that, think so or otherwise, or learn how to do something, and we speak to them to 
make them do things. Besides, many of us suspect they have a bad temperament. But 
Turing was suggesting a test, not a statistical generalisation, and it is testing kinds of 
questions that therefore need to be asked. If we are interested in “irreversibility” and 
how far it may go in terms of including more and more tasks and problem-solving 
activities, then the limit is the sky; or rather human ingenuity. However, today, the 
irreversibility of semantic questions is still beyond any available AI systems (Lev -
esque 2017). It does not mean that they cannot become “irreversible”, because in a 
world that is increasingly AI-friendly, we are enveloping ever more aspects of our 
realities around the syntactic and statistical abilities of our computational artefacts 
(Floridi 2019, 2020). But even if one day semantic questions no longer enable one to 
spot the difference between a human and an artificial source, one final point remains 
to be stressed. This is where we offer a clarification of the provisos we added above. 
The game of questions (Turing’s “imitation game”) is a test only in a negative (that 
is, necessary but insufficient) sense, because not passing it disqualifies an AI from 
being “intelligent”, but passing it does not qualify an AI as “intelligent”. In the same 
way, Ambrogio mowing the lawn—and producing an outcome that is indistinguish-
able from anything Alice could achieve—does not make Ambrogio like Alice in 
any sense, either bodily, cognitively, or behaviourally. This is why “what comput-
ers cannot do” is not a convincing title for any publication in the field. It never was. 
The real point about AI is that we are increasingly decoupling the ability to solve 
a problem effectively—as regards the final goal—from any need to be intelligent 
to do so (Floridi 2017). What can and cannot be achieved by such decoupling is an 
entirely open question about human ingenuity, scientific discoveries, technological 
innovations, and new affordances (e.g. increasing amounts of high-quality data).3 It 
is also a question that has nothing to do with intelligence, consciousness, semantics, 
relevance, and human experience and mindfulness more generally. The latest devel-
opment in this decoupling process is the GPT-3 language model.4
2 See https ://en.wikip edia.org/wiki/ELIZA  . A classic book still worth reading on the ELIZA effect and 
AI in general is (Weizenbaum 1976). In 2014 some people claimed, mistakenly, that a chatbot had passed 
the test. Its name is “Eugene Goostman”, and you can check it by yourself, by playing with it here: http://
eugen egoos  tman.elast icbea nstal k.com/. When it was tested, I was one of the judges, and what I noticed 
was that it was some humans who failed to pass the test, asking the sort of questions that I have called 
here “irreversible”, such as (real examples, these were asked by a BBC journalist) “do you believe in 
God?” and “do you like ice-cream”. Even a simple machine tossing coins would “pass” that kind of test.
3 See for example the Winograd Schema Challenge (Levesque et al. 2012).
4 For an excellent, technical and critical analysis, see McAteer (2020). About the “completely unrealis-
tic expectations about what large-scale language models such as GPT-3 can do” see Yann LeCun (Vice 
President, Chief AI Scientist at Facebook App) here:  https ://www.faceb ook.com/yann.lecun /posts /10157 
25320 56371 43.