684 L. Floridi, M. Chiriatti 
1 3
2  GPT‑3
OpenAI is an AI research laboratory whose stated goal is to promote and develop 
friendly AI that can benefit humanity. Founded in 2015, it is considered a com-
petitor of DeepMind. Microsoft is a significant investor in OpenAI (US $1 billion 
investment (OpenAI 2019)) and it recently announced an agreement with OpenAI to 
license its GPT-3 exclusively (Scott 2020).
GPT-3 (Generative Pre-trained Transformer) is a third-generation, autoregressive 
language model that uses deep learning to produce human-like text. Or to put it more 
simply, it is a computational system designed to generate sequences of words, code 
or other data, starting from a source input, called the prompt. It is used, for example, 
in machine translation to predict word sequences statistically. The language model 
is trained on an unlabelled dataset that is made up of texts, such as Wikipedia and 
many other sites, primarily in English, but also in other languages. These statistical 
models need to be trained with large amounts of data to produce relevant results. 
The first iteration of GPT in 2018 used 110 million learning parameters (i.e., the 
values that a neural network tries to optimize during training). A year later, GPT-2 
used 1.5 billion of them. Today, GPT-3 uses 175 billion parameters. It is trained on 
Microsoft’s Azure’s AI supercomputer (Scott 2020). It is a very expensive training, 
estimated to have costed $ 12 million (Wiggers 2020). This computational approach 
works for a wide range of use cases, including summarization, translation, grammar 
correction, question answering, chatbots, composing emails, and much more.
Available in beta testing since June 2020 for research purposes, we recently had 
the chance of testing it first-hand. GPT-3 writes automatically and autonomously 
texts of excellent quality, on demand. Seeing it in action, we understood very well 
why it has made the world both enthusiastic and fearful. The Guardian recently pub-
lished an article written by GPT-3 that caused a sensation (GPT-3 2020). The text 
was edited—how heavily is unclear5—and the article was sensationalist to say the 
least. Some argued it was misleading and a case of poor journalism (Dickson 2020). 
We tend to agree. But this does not diminish at all the extraordinary effectiveness of 
the system. It rather speaks volumes about what you have to do to sell copies of a 
newspaper.
Using GPT-3 is really elementary, no more difficult than searching for informa-
tion through a search engine. In the same way as Google “reads” our queries without 
of course understanding them, and offers relevant answers, likewise, GPT-3 writes 
a text continuing the sequence of our words (the prompt), without any understand-
ing. And it keeps doing so, for the length of the text specified, no matter whether the 
task in itself is easy or difficult, reasonable or unreasonable, meaningful or mean-
ingless. GPT-3 produces the text that is a statistically good fit, given the starting 
5 The following note was written by the journalists, not the software: “[…] GPT-3 produced eight dif-
ferent outputs, or essays. Each was unique, interesting and advanced a different argument. The Guardian 
could have just run one of the essays in its entirety. However, we chose instead to pick the best parts of 
each, in order to capture the different styles and registers of the AI. Editing GPT-3’s op-ed was no dif-
ferent to editing a human op-ed. We cut lines and paragraphs, and rearranged the order of them in some 
places. Overall, it took less time to edit than many human op-eds.” (GPT-3 2020).