Appl. Sci. 2022 ,12, 4184 12 of 27
Appl. Sci. 2022 , 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW  12 of 27 
 
of computer vision, so this paper uses 2D convolution to extract the spatial features of the 
data.  
The CNN module used in this paper is described as follows: firstly, the processed 
grayscale maps are input to the strides as 1  × 1, 1 × 1 and 3  × 3 convolutiona l modules to 
extract features , respectively. After that, the resulting features are fused to obtain the pro-
cessed feature maps. Its structure is shown in Figure 6.  
1× 1 CNN
1× 1 CNN
3× 3 CNNInput Feature
VCNN Model
HWC
Output Feature
VmC 
H 
W 
Feature concatenateI
IIIII
 
Figure 6. CNN structure . 
3.2.3. Model Structure  
The intrusion d etection model proposed in this paper consists of three main parts: in 
order to comprehensively and finitely learn the features of the data, the features are firstly 
assigned different weights through the CBAM attention mechanism module based on re-
sidual; secondly, the spatial features are extracted through the CNN module, and the spa-
tial information is further aggregated using fused Averagepooling and Maxpooling; then 
the temporal features are extracted through GRU, and finally the classification is carrie d 
out through the Softmax function, the specific structure of which is shown in Figure 7.  
(1) The grayscale map obtained after pre -processing is input to the CBAM module based 
on residual, and the features are given different weights to obtain the output F. 
(2) The new feature map F is input into the CNN module for feature extraction, after 
which the spatial information is aggregated using Maxpooling and Averagepooling 
to obtain the new feature map 
CF . 
(3) Pass 
CF  to the GRU unit to extract the dependencies between features and obtain 
the output 
GF . 
(4) Pass 
GF  to the fully connected layer, which uses Softmax as the activation function 
to achieve the classification of intrusion d etection behavior.  
Figure 6. CNN structure.
3.2.3. Model Structure
The intrusion detection model proposed in this paper consists of three main parts:
in order to comprehensively and ﬁnitely learn the features of the data, the features are
ﬁrstly assigned different weights through the CBAM attention mechanism module based
on residual; secondly, the spatial features are extracted through the CNN module, and the
spatial information is further aggregated using fused Averagepooling and Maxpooling;
then the temporal features are extracted through GRU, and ﬁnally the classiﬁcation is
carried out through the Softmax function, the speciﬁc structure of which is shown in
Figure 7.
Appl. Sci. 2022 , 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW  13 of 27 
 
Model S tructureGRUNormal
Exploits
Dos
Backdoor
Analysis
Fuzzers
Generic
Recon.
Shellcode
WormsClassified
Traffic
SoftmaxMaxPooling
AveragePooling
Grayscale 
imageReshapeGRU
Spatial
Attention
Input 
FeatureOutput 
Feature
ConvF Channel
Attention
CNN Module
ResBlock+CBAM
 
Figure 7. Intrusion detection model structure diagram . 
  denotes element -wise multiplication 
and 
  denotes feature concatenate.  
4. Experimental Simulations  
4.1. Experimental Setup  
In order to test the performance of the proposed network intrusion detection method 
fusing CNN and GRU, several sets of experiments are designed in this paper.  
Experiment 1: Feature selection analysis experiment  
Experiment 2: Comparis on of different feature selection methods  
Experiment 3: Comparison of different sampling methods  
Experiment 4: Comparison of single model and hybrid model  
Experiment 5: Comparison of different pooling methods  
Experiment 6: Performance comparison experiment  
The intrusion detection model experiments and comparison experiments presented 
in this paper were conducted on a 64 -bit Windows Intel(R) Core (TM) i7 -7700HQ CPU 
(2.80 GHz) with 1 6 GB RAM and a python -based Nvidia GeForce GTX 1050 GPU ( 4 GB), 
using Python ’s TensorFlow library to write the CNN and GRU models for this paper.  
After several experimental validations, the parameters of the model in this paper are 
specified in Table 2.  
Table 2. Model parameter settings . 
Model Parameters  Parameter Settings  
Batch s ize 1024  
Loss function  SparseCategoricalCrossentropy  
Optimizer  SGD  
Optimizer learning rate  0.001  
Epoch  200 
Resbloc k + CBAM  64 
GRU  32/64/128  
Dropout  0.5 
4.2. Dataset and Evaluation Criteria  
Over the years, many datasets related to intrusion detectio n have been introduced 
for research and development, including KDDCup99  [51], UNSW -NB15  [52], NSL -KDD  
[53], CIC -IDS2017  [54] and LITNET -2020 [ 55]. In this paper, we choose to use the UNSW -
NB15, NSL -KDD and CIC -IDS2017 datasets to evaluate the proposed mode l. These da-
tasets are the more widely used datasets in the existing intrusion detection field. The NSL -
Figure 7. Intrusion detection model structure diagram. 
denotes element-wise multiplication and
denotes feature concatenate.
(1) The grayscale map obtained after pre-processing is input to the CBAM module based
on residual, and the features are given different weights to obtain the output F.
(2) The new feature map Fis input into the CNN module for feature extraction, after
which the spatial information is aggregated using Maxpooling and Averagepooling to
obtain the new feature map FC.
(3) Pass FCto the GRU unit to extract the dependencies between features and obtain the
output FG.
(4) Pass FGto the fully connected layer, which uses Softmax as the activation function to
achieve the classiﬁcation of intrusion detection behavior.