Appl. Sci. 2022 ,12, 4184 4 of 27
Table 1. Cont.
Ref. Dataset Methods Evaluation Metrics Accuracy
[43] KDDCUP1999 CSWC-SVM precision, accuracy Obtained satisfactory results
[44] UNSW_NB15 FSL-SCNNprecision, recall
F1-score, FARObtained satisfactory results
[45] UNSW_NB15 VLSTMprecision, recall
F1-score, FAR, AUCGained 86% accuracy
To effectively select feature subsets and hyperparameters, Abdullah Alharbi et al. [ 36]
proposed a local-global optimal neural network Bat algorithm (LGBA-NN). They tested
on the N-BaIoT dataset and compared with several recent advanced methods, such as
the particle swarm optimization (PSO) algorithm and Bat algorithm. The experiments
demonstrate that the LGBA-NN algorithm has a signiﬁcant improvement in the detection
accuracy of multi-class botnets up to 90%.
Jevgenijus Toldinas et al. [ 37] ﬁrst transformed the original network data into four-
channel (Red, Green, Blue, and Alpha) images, which were later divided into a training
and a testing set. The obtained images were classiﬁed based on the ResNet50 model
and evaluated on the UNSW_NB15 and BOUN_Ddos datasets. The experimental results
demonstrate that the proposed model has a high accuracy in detecting anomalous attacks.
In response to the ongoing and changing malicious threats in the current cyber en-
vironment, Muhammad Ashfaq Khan [ 38] proposes a hybrid intrusion detection system
based on deep learning (HRCNNIDS). The authors use convolutional neural networks to
capture regional features and temporal features through recurrent neural networks and
evaluate the proposed system based on CSE-CIC-IDS2018 dataset. The experimental results
show that the method has a high detection rate for malicious attacks.
In recent years, the number and complexity of attacks on network environments have
continued to rise, and Guo Pu et al. [ 39] proposed an unsupervised anomaly detection
method for network intrusion detection work. They combined subspace clustering (SSC)
and a class of support vector machines (OCSVM) to achieve better performance on the
NSL-KDD dataset.
Gia Nhu Nguyen et al. [ 40] introduced blockchain data transfer technology to the ﬁeld
of intrusion detection to both secure data and improve detection efﬁciency. Their proposed
model uses sensors to collect data, after which intrusion detection is performed through
deep belief networks. In addition, the model ensures privacy and security by sharing the
created model. The authors evaluated the proposed model through NSL-KDD 2015 and
CIDDS-001 datasets and achieved better results.
To address the existing problem of imbalanced intrusion detection data samples,
Ranjit Panigrahi et al. [ 41] proposed a host-based intrusion detection algorithm. They
ﬁrst generate balanced samples from high-level imbalanced datasets in the preprocessing
stage by an improved random sampling mechanism. Then the datasets are ﬁltered by an
improved multi-class feature selection mechanism. Finally, a merged tree construction
algorithm based on the C4.5-based detector is built. The experimental results show that
their proposed algorithm achieves a very high detection accuracy.
In their study, MohammadNoor Injadat et al. [ 42] fully considered the impact of sam-
pling techniques on model performance and compared two feature selection techniques
based on information gain and correlation, and ﬁnally proposed the multi-stage optimiza-
tion of an intrusion detection system based on machine learning. In this system, they ﬁrst
sample the dataset by the SMOTE algorithm, followed by feature selection, and ﬁnally
optimize the parameters of the model by the optimization algorithm. Experiments through
evaluation on the UNSW_NB15 dataset and CIC-IDS2017 dataset demonstrate that the
proposed model signiﬁcantly improves the detection accuracy while reducing the training
sample size and feature set size.