Appl. Sci. 2022 ,12, 4184 5 of 27
A study [ 43] introduces sample-weighted and class-weighted algorithms into support
vector machines to solve the problems faced by intrusion detection. Experimental results
show that the algorithm can achieve the advantages of short time consumption, high recog-
nition accuracy, low false alarm rate and high classiﬁcation accuracy in different situations.
Xiaokang Zhou et al. [ 44] propose a few-shot learning model based on a Siamese
convolutional neural network for intrusion detection tasks. In their model, they ﬁrst
construct a Siamese convolutional neural network to measure the distance based on the
optimized feature representation of the input samples, and then efﬁciently identify the
cyber-physical attack types. Furthermore, to improve the efﬁciency of the training process,
they propose a robust cost function that includes three speciﬁc losses (transformation loss
in the relative feature representation, coding loss in the encoding process, and prediction
loss based on the distance between features). The experimental results show that their
proposed method has better detection performance.
To cope with the security problems in large-scale data streams, Xiaokang Zhou et al. [45]
proposed a learning model for variational long short-term memory networks based on a
reconfigured feature representation. They first designed an encoder neural network imple-
mentation associated with a variational reparameterization scheme to represent the low-
dimensional features of the original data. Then, three loss functions are defined and quan-
tified to constrain the reconstructed hidden variables to a more explicit and meaningful
form. Experimental results show that the model can effectively deal with imbalance and
high-dimensional problems, and also achieve better detection results.
3. Network Intrusion Detection Model Based on CNN and GRU
Traditional intrusion detection models are more concerned with time series features
and ignore spatial features in the process of detecting attacks. The CNN structure is more
effective in extracting the spatial features of the data trafﬁc, however, its ability to extract
long-distance dependent information is mediocre; the GRU structure is more effective
in extracting long-distance dependent information and can avoid forgetting during the
learning process, however, its number of parameters is large and the training time is long.
Therefore, this paper integrates the two to improve the model’s ability to learn features,
which can fully extract features from both spatial and temporal dimensions, and thus
achieve a higher classiﬁcation detection accuracy.
The proposed network intrusion detection model combining convolutional neural
network and GRU, referred to as the CNN-GRU model, consists of three main stages: ﬁrstly,
the pre-processing stage, in which the original data is converted into numerical features
and normalized, and then the dataset is balanced by the ADRDB algorithm, after which
the features are extracted by the RFP algorithm and ﬁnally converted into a grey-scale
map; Secondly, the training phase, in which the pre-processed data are assigned different
weights to the features by the Convolutional Block Attention Module (CBAM) based on
residuals ﬁrstly, then the spatial features are extracted by the CNN module, and the spatial
information is further aggregated by combining Averagepooling and Maxpooling. After
that, the temporal features are extracted by multiple GRU units. Finally, the classiﬁcation
is performed by the Softmax function; Thirdly, the testing phase, in which the test set is
passed into the trained model for classiﬁcation. The structure of the model proposed in this
paper is shown in Figure 1.