Appl. Sci. 2022 ,12, 4184 10 of 27
3.2. Model Structure
3.2.1. Convolutional Block Attention Module
The purpose of introducing an attention mechanism in the model is mainly to improve
the representational power. It mainly means that we give a larger weight to important
features and a smaller weight to unnecessary features. The Convolutional Block Atten-
tion Module (CBAM) is a lightweight attention module proposed by Woo et al. in 2018,
which contains of two main parts: the channel attention module and the spatial attention
module [48].
The speciﬁc structure of the channel attention module in CBAM is shown in Figure 3,
which uses the relationship of features between channels to generate a channel attention
map to form the input. Afterwards, the spatial information is aggregated using Aver-
agepooling and Maxpooling, respectively, to generate two different sources of spatial
information Fc
avgand Fc
max. The two spatial information sources are fed into a shared
network consisting of a multi-layer perceptron and a hidden layer, which in turn gen-
erate the required channel attention graph Mc, and ﬁnally output the feature vector by
element summation.
Mc(F) =s(MLP(AvgPool (F)) + MLP(MaxPool (F)))
=s(W1(W0(Fc
avg)) + W1(W0(Fc
max)))(4)
where srepresents the sigmoid function, W0and W1are the weights of the multilayer
perceptron, Fis the input and Mcis the ﬁnal output.
Appl. Sci. 2022 , 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW  10 of 27 
 
 
Figure 2 . Converted grayscale map . 
3.2. Model Structure  
3.2.1. Convolutional Block Attention Module  
The purpose of introducing an atte ntion mechanism in the model is mainly to im-
prove the representational power. It mainly means that we give a larger weight to im-
portant features and a smaller weight to unnecessary features. The Convolutional Block 
Attention Module (CBAM) is a lightweight attention module proposed by Woo et al. in 
2018, which contains of two main parts: the channel attention module and the spatial at-
tention module [ 48]. 
The specific structure of the channel attention module in CBAM is shown in Figure 
3, which uses the relat ionship of features between channels to generate a channel attention 
map to form the input. Afterwards, the spatial information is aggregated using Average-
pooling and Maxpooling , respectively , to generate two different sources of spatial infor-
mation 
c
avgF  and 
maxcF . The two spatial information sources are  fed into a shared network 
consisting of a multi -layer perceptron and a hidden layer, which in turn generate the re-
quired channel attention graph 
cM , and finally output the feature vector by element sum-
mation.  
1 0 1 0 max( ) ( ( ( )) ( ( )))
( ( ( )) ( ( )))c
cc
avgM F MLP AvgPool F MLP MaxPool F
W W F W W F
=+
=+
 (4) 
where  σ represents the sigmoid function, 
0W  and 
1W  are the weights of the multilayer 
perceptron, F is the i nput and 
cM  is the final output.  
Input Feature FMaxPool
AvgPool
Channel Attention
Channel Attention Module
Shared MLP
sigmoid function feature concatenate
 
Figure 3. Channel Attention Module . 
The specific structure of the spatial attention module in CBAM is shown in Figure 4, 
which uses the spatial relationships between feat ures to generate a spatial attention map 
to form the input. Afterwards, two 2D feature maps 
s
avgF  and 
maxsF  are generated in turn 
Normal Analysis Backdoor Dos Exploits
Fuzzers Generic Reconnaissance Shellcode Worms
Figure 3. Channel Attention Module.
The speciﬁc structure of the spatial attention module in CBAM is shown in Figure 4,
which uses the spatial relationships between features to generate a spatial attention map to
form the input. Afterwards, two 2D feature maps Fs
avgandFs
maxare generated in turn by
Averagepooling and Maxpooling, which effectively highlight the information region. The
two are ﬁnally fused and the desired 2D spatial attention map is generated by standard
convolution to output the feature vector.
Ms(F) =s(f77([AvgPool (F);MaxPool (F)]))
=s(f77([Fs
avg;Fs
max]))(5)
where f77represents a convolution operation with ﬁlter size 77,Fis the input and Ms
is the ﬁnal output.