Appl. Sci. 2022 ,12, 4184 2 of 27
to form a more abstract and non-linear high-level representation, and then mining the
input–output relationships between data. The neural networks commonly used in the ﬁeld
of intrusion detection mainly include convolutional neural networks (CNN), recurrent
neural networks (RNN), and deep belief networks. In the literature [ 19], the data trafﬁc
is converted into individual pixel points in bytes, and then the images generated from
the trafﬁc are fed into convolutional neural network for convolution, pooling and other
operations, and ﬁnally the classiﬁcation results are obtained. The method achieves high
accuracy in binary classiﬁcation and multi-classiﬁcation problems. The literature [ 20] used
the recognized KDD99 dataset to conduct experiments. During the experiments, the Long
Short-Term Memory (LSTM) network was used to complete the selection of parameters and
achieved more satisfactory experimental results, however, the method resulted in a high
false alarm rate due to the improper selection of training parameters. The literature [ 21]
proposed a hierarchical intrusion detection system based on spatial-temporal features,
which ﬁrst uses deep convolutional neural networks to learn low-level spatial features
of network trafﬁc, and then uses LSTM to obtain high-level temporal features, however,
the method does not consider the problems of feature fusion and data imbalance. The
literature [ 22] combines the features of WaveNet and Bidirectional Gated Recurrent Unit
(BiGRU) for feature extraction, and proposes an intrusion detection method that fuses
WaveNet and BiGRU. It can achieve better detection accuracy, although it does not consider
the problem of sample imbalance.
Although intrusion detection techniques have made great progress, there are also the
following problems. First, with regard to feature redundancy, more feature dimensions
will not only increase the training time of the model, but also reduce the detection effect of
the model. The literature [ 23] proposed an intrusion detection method based on Principal
Component Analysis (PCA) and recurrent neural networks. The principal component
analysis method was used to reduce the dimensionality and noise of the data to ﬁnd out
the subset of principal component features containing the maximum information, and then
the processed data was trained using RNN networks for classiﬁcation with a high accuracy
rate. The literature [ 24] proposed an intrusion detection method combining the advantages
of an autoencoder and residual network, in which feature extraction was performed by
reconstructing the network with an autoencoder, after which the extracted features were
used to train the designed residual network, and the experimental results showed good
performance in terms of accuracy, true rate and false alarm rate. However, the methods
mentioned above in the literature are generally effective in solving the feature redundancy
problem. Secondly, the dataset used to evaluate the effectiveness of the model has an
unbalanced sample of positive and negative classes. The literature [ 25] uses an improved
local adaptive synthetic minority oversampling technique for unbalanced trafﬁc data to
achieve trafﬁc anomaly detection using RNN, which is more accurate for different types of
detection, although the improvement is less obvious.
To address the above-mentioned problems, this paper designs an intrusion detection
model fusing CNN and GRU. The main contributions are as follows:
(1) To address the problem of feature redundancy, this paper proposes a feature selec-
tion algorithm (RFP algorithm). First, a random forest algorithm is introduced to
calculate the importance of features, and then Pearson correlation analysis is used to
select features;
(2) To address the problem of sample imbalance, this paper proposes a hybrid sam-
pling algorithm (ADRDB algorithm) by combining the Adaptive Synthetic Sampling
(ADASYN) [ 26] and Repeated Edited nearest neighbors (RENN) [ 27] sampling meth-
ods for sampling, while using Density-Based Spatial Clustering of Applications with
Noise (DBSCAN) [28] to reject noise, and ﬁnally achieving a balanced dataset;
(3) In this paper, CNN is introduced to extract spatial features from the network data
trafﬁc and use its weight sharing feature to improve the speed; GRU network is
introduced to extract temporal features and learn the dependency between features,
so as to avoid overﬁtting problems; the attention mechanism is introduced to assign