0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0
Agent steps1e60.00.20.40.60.81.01.2Episodic rewardDiscrete
Multi-Discrete
Tank, Discrete
Tank, Multi-Discrete
Continuous
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0
Agent steps1e6Tank, Discrete
Tank, Multi-Discrete
 Backward
+ StrafeFig. 1. Learning curves in Get-To-Goal environment, with various action
spaces (left), and various buttons available in tank-like controls (right).
Averaged over ten repetitions, with shaded region representing the standard
deviation.
as a (cos();sin())tuple, where 2[0;2]is the relative
rotation angle. We use this environment to test DC by using
discrete and continuous variants of the action space.
Multi-Discrete : Player can move on two axes
with the four buttons Up,Down ,Left and Right
(MultiDiscrete ).
Discrete : A ﬂattened version of above, where only one
of the buttons may be pressed at a time, i.e.no diagonal
movement allowed ( Discrete ).
Continuous : Player speciﬁes the exact direction of the
next move with a continuous value, with 0representing
straight up, 90straight right and 180 straight down
(Continuous ).
Tank, Discrete/Multi-Discrete : Player has a heading ,
and it can choose to increase/decrease it (turn left/right),
and/or to move forward/backward towards the heading
(Discrete andMultiDiscrete versions).
To study RA and CMD , we train agents with dif-
ferent number of actions available in Discrete and
MultiDiscrete spaces. Each action moves the player to
a different direction, equally spaced on a unit circle ( Extra
actions ). We also run experiments with additional no-op
actions, which do not do anything, to simulate e.g.theUSE
action in Doom, which only works in speciﬁc scenarios
(Bogus actions ). We also test the effect of “backward” and
“strafe” actions, which are often removed in FPS games,
by enabling/disabling them in tank-like action spaces. All
experiments are run with stable-baselines [39].
Figure 1 (left) shows the results with different action-spaces.
Learning with tank-like controls is slower than with the non-
tank controls and learning with Continuous spaces is the
slowest. It should be noted that with rllib [40] we observed
similar results, except Continuous learned faster than tank-
like controls. This indicates that policies for Continuous
actions are sensitive to the implementation, with the discrete
options being robust to this.
Figure 1 (right) shows results with tank-like controls,
with and without backward and strafe actions. In both
action-spaces, agents learn slower the more actions they
10 20 30 40 50
Number of actions0.751.001.251.501.752.002.25Steps to solve1e5 Extra actions
Discrete
Multi-Discrete
0 5 10 15 20
Number of actionsBogus actionsFig. 2. Results of an increasing number of actions in Get-To-Goal envi-
ronment. With Extra actions , each action moves the player to a different
direction, while in Bogus actions the extra actions do nothing. Averaged
over ten repetitions.
have available. This demonstrates how removing actions
can be detrimental to the performance ( RA ). It is evi-
dent, that agents learn faster on MultiDiscrete spaces
than on the Discrete alternatives. Figure 2 shows how
MultiDiscrete spaces are more robust to additional ac-
tions. These results demonstrate that there are situtaions where
RL agents can proﬁt from MultiDiscrete compared to
Discrete spaces ( CMD ).
C. Atari experiments
With Atari games, we test RA and CMD transformations.
Atari games have been a standard benchmark for DRL algo-
rithms [6], [34], [38], where their action space is deﬁned as a
Discrete action space. By default, the action space consists
of only the necessary actions to play the game ( minimal ). We
compare these minimal actions against the fullaction space,
and a multi-discrete action space, where joystick and ﬁre-
button are additional buttons with 9and2options respectively.
We use six games, selected for varying number of actions
in the minimal action space. All games have 18actions in
the full space, while Space Invaders and Q*bert have six,
MsPacman and Enduro have nine and Breakout has four
actions for minimal space. Gravitar uses all 18actions, and
thus do not have minimal spaces. We use the “v4” versions
of the environments (e.g. GravitarNoFrameskip-v4 ),
which are easier to learn. We use the PPO hyper-parameters
from stable-baselines rl-zoo [43].
Figure 3 shows the resulting learning curves. On average,
there is no clear difference between the different action-
spaces over all games, with MsPacman being an exception.
Here the multi-discrete agent achieved almost one-quarter
higher score than other action spaces. Interestingly, in Enduro ,
both action spaces using all buttons out-perform the minimal
space, despite the fact that full space does not offer any new
actions for agent to use. With these results, removing actions
(RM ) can limit the performance, but overall does not change
results. Same applies to converting multi-discrete into discrete
(CMD ), although in one of the games it did obtain higher
performance.