Action Space Shaping in Deep Reinforcement
Learning
Anssi Kanervisto
School of Computing
University of Eastern Finland
Joensuu, Finland
anssk@uef.ﬁChristian Scheller
Institute for Data Science
University of Applied Sciences
Northwestern Switzerland
Windisch, Swizerland
christian.scheller@fhnw.chVille Hautam ¨aki
School of Computing
University of Eastern Finland
Joensuu, Finland
villeh@uef.ﬁ
Abstract —Reinforcement learning (RL) has been successful in
training agents in various learning environments, including video
games. However, such work modiﬁes and shrinks the action space
from the game’s original. This is to avoid trying “pointless”
actions and to ease the implementation. Currently, this is mostly
done based on intuition, with little systematic research supporting
the design decisions. In this work, we aim to gain insight on these
action space modiﬁcations by conducting extensive experiments in
video game environments. Our results show how domain-speciﬁc
removal of actions and discretization of continuous actions can
be crucial for successful learning. With these insights, we hope
to ease the use of RL in new environments, by clarifying what
action-spaces are easy to learn.
Index Terms —video game, reinforcement learning, deep learn-
ing, action space, shaping
I. I NTRODUCTION
Reinforcement learning [1] has been successfully applied
to various video game environments to create human-level
or even super-human agents [2]–[7], and show promise as
a general way to teach computers to play games. However,
these results are accomplished with a signiﬁcant amount of
engineering, including questions like: how should the agent
perceive the environment, what should the rewards be and
when should the game terminate, just to name a few examples.
One of these concerns is the action space : how does the agent
act in the environment? Do we restrict the number of available
actions? Should we simplify it by creating combinations of
actions? How do we deal with continuous controls like mouse
movement? Intuitively, learning to control a system with more
buttons is harder, as the agent has to learn what each of the
actions mean. Reducing the number of buttons might ease
the learning but comes with the risk of limiting the agent’s
performance.
Such transformations of the action space, which we call
action space shaping , are prominent in reinforcement learning
research and competitions, especially when it comes to video
We gratefully acknowledge the support of NVIDIA Corporation with the
donation of the Titan Xp GPU used for this research.
©2020 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from
IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or future media,
including reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional
purposes, creating new collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers
or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works.games. Environments like Doom [8] and Minecraft [9] have
large action spaces with dozens of buttons, and in related
competitions all top participants modiﬁed the actions [5], [10].
This action space shaping comes in the forms of removing
actions, combining different actions into one action and dis-
cretizing continuous actions. The goal is to ease the learning
for the agent, similar to reward shaping [11].
Along with the well-known work on mastering Starcraft
II [2] and Dota 2 [3] with reinforcement learning, other
games have received similar attention, such as modern ﬁrst-
person shooters [4], [12], Minecraft [9], [13], popular ﬁghting-
games like Super Smash Bros [14], other massive online battle
arenas (MOBAs) [7] and driving in GTA V [15]. All of these
works do action space shaping, either because of limitations
of the learning environment or because of the sheer number
of actions, e.g.in strategy games and MOBAs.
The effect of different action spaces is no stranger to
RL research. A large number of possible actions is known
to lead to over-optimistic estimates of future rewards [16].
Previous research has addressed this problem by removing un-
promising actions [17], or by ﬁnding the closest neighbors of
promising ones [18]. Other works extended existing methods
by adding support for different action spaces [19], [20] or
by supporting large, complex action spaces [21]. The work
by Delalleau et al. [22] shares our focus and mindset, where
authors discussed different ways of processing complex action
spaces, speciﬁcally for video games. However, this and other
related works have not included experiments that study speciﬁc
changes to the action-spaces. We ﬁll this gap by running
experiments on various video game environments, testing
transformations successfully used in different competitions.
Our core research question is “ do these transformations
support the training of reinforcement learning agents? ”
By answering this question in the context of video games,
we aim to reduce the number of dials to tune when applying
RL to games. This is especially useful in the case of new
environments, where it is unknown if RL agents can learn to
play the game. If an agent fails to learn, it is often unclear if
the issue lies in the learning algorithm, the observation space,
the rewards, the environment dynamics or the action space.
By studying which types of action spaces work and whicharXiv:2004.00980v2  [cs.AI]  26 May 2020