020040060080010001200Episodic rewardSpaceInvaders
Multi-Discrete
Full
Minimal
05001000150020002500MsPacman
0100200300400Breakout
0.0 0.5 1.0
Agent steps1e702004006008001000Episodic rewardGravitar
0.0 0.5 1.0
Agent steps1e70200400600800Enduro
0.0 0.5 1.0
Agent steps1e7025005000750010000125001500017500Q*bertFig. 3. Results with six Atari games, using minimal ,fullandmulti-discrete
actions. Averaged over ﬁve training seeds. Minimal action-set only includes
actions that are available in that speciﬁc game. Multi-discrete uses all possible
actions, but by separating joystick and ﬁre-button into two different discrete
variables. Gravitar does not have a minimal action space.
D. Doom experiments
With Doom (1993), we test all of the transformations ( DC ,
RA and CMD ). We use the environment provided by
ViZDoom interface [8], with three different scenarios: Get-
To-Goal ,Health gathering supreme (HGS) and Deathmatch .
The ﬁrst is an implementation of the toy task described earlier,
in the form of a ﬁrst-person shooter scenario, where the agent
is tasked to reach a goal object in a room. The player receives
a reward of +1if it reaches the goal, 0otherwise, including
at the timeout-termination after 2100 frames (one minute of
game-time). HGS andDeathmatch are Doom scenarios, where
the player has to gather medkits in a maze to survive (HGS)
and ﬁght against randomly spawning enemies (Deathmatch).
We modify the Deathmatch scenario to give a +1reward per
kill. We also make enemies weaker, so they die from one shot.
Otherwise, the scenario is too difﬁcult to learn by a PPO agent
in the given time. We test four sets of buttons ( RA ):
Bare-Minimum . The only allowed buttons are moving
forward, turning left and attack (Deathmatch). These are
the bare-minimum number of buttons to complete tasks.
Minimal . Same as Bare-Minimum , but with an option
to turn right. This was a common conﬁguration in e.g.
the MineRL competition [10].
Backward . Same as Minimal , but with the additional
option of moving backward.
Strafe . Same as Backward , but with the additional
options of moving left and right. This corresponds to the
original movement controls of Doom.
For each set of buttons, we test ﬁve different action spaces:
The original MultiDiscrete space, where pressing each
button down is its own discrete choice, three levels of dis-
cretization ( CMD ) and continuous mouse control ( DC ).
Discretization is done by creating all possible combinations ofpressed down buttons, with varying levels of buttons pressed
down (n= 1,n= 2or all). For continuous actions, mouse ac-
tions correspond to a MultiDiscrete action space, where
turning left and right has been replaced with a mouse control
(a scalar, representing how much we should turn left or right).
This action space is not combined with the bare-minimum
button-set.
Observations consist of grayscale ( GetToGoal andHGS ) or
RGB ( Deathmatch ) image of size 8060, along with any
game-variables enabled in the scenario. Each action is repeated
for four frames. All experiments except mouse are run using
stable-baselines, as only rllib supports mixed action-spaces.
Other results are same between rllib and stable-baselines.
Figure 4 shows the results. Multi-discrete action space
performs as well as discretized versions. Using discrete actions
with only one button down is the least reliable out of discrete
spaces, as it is not able to reliably solve the easiest environ-
ment ( CMD ). Using continuous actions prevents learning in
all but the simplest environment ( DC ). Increasing number
of available actions improves the results in more difﬁcult
scenarios ( RA ).
E. Obstacle Tower experiments
Obstacle Tower [44] is a 3D platformer game with randomly
generated levels, designed for reinforcement learning research.
Its original action space is deﬁned as a MultiDiscrete
space, with options to move forward/backward and left-
/right, turn left/right and jump. We use this environment to
test CMD and RA transformations, by disabling straﬁng,
moving backward or forcing moving forward. Similar to
Doom experiments, Discrete space is obtained by creating
all possible combinations of the MultiDiscrete actions.
Observations are processed using the “retro” setting of the
environment ( 8484RGB images). We use 32concurrent
environments, set entropy coefﬁcient to 0:001and collect 128
steps per environment per update. These parameters were
selected based on the previous experiments with Obstacle
Tower environment.
Figure 5 shows the results. There is no signiﬁcant difference
between Discrete andMultiDiscrete spaces ( CMD ).
The only major difference is with backward action: all
experiments that allow moving backward have slower learning
than the rest. This supports the intuition to remove unnecessary
actions, and especially when the action can negate other
actions during random exploration ( RA ).
F . StarCraft II experiments
StarCraft II is a complex multi-player real-time strategy
game and a challenging domain for RL algorithms. Particularly
interesting for our work is the vast size of the action space.
For environment interaction we use the StarCraft II learning
environment (SC2LE) [21] that provides a parametric action
space, with base actions and action parameters. Base actions
describe an intended action such as move screen orbuild
barracks . Action parameters such as screen coordinates or
unit id modify these base actions. There are hundreds of