Input ImageInput ImageAcross Energy FunctionsMinimalEnergyState (Per InferredEnergyFunction)MinimalEnergyState (Per InferredEnergyFunction)
Across Energy Functions
Figure 1: COMET decomposes images into a set of energy functions. The minimal energy state across all
energy functions reconstructs the input image. The minimal energy states of individual energy functions
capture particular aspects of an image, in the form of local factors of variations such as individual objects, or
global factors of variation such as hair color, background lighting, facial expression, or skin color. Note that
reconstructed face images in the remainder of the paper are synthetic and not existing human faces.
factored vector spaces from separate datasets be combined, i.e. the facial expression in an image
from one dataset, and the background lighting in an image from another.
To address this weakness, a separate line of work decomposes a scene into a set of underlying ‘object’
factors. Each object factor represents a separate set of pixels in an image, as deﬁned by a disjoint
segmentation mask [ 22,47]. Such a representation allows for the composition of individual factors
by compositing the segmentation masks. However, by explicitly constraining the decomposition to be
in terms of disjoint segmentation masks, relationships between individual factors of variation become
more difﬁcult to represent and capture global factors describing a scene.
In this work, we propose instead to decompose a scene into a set of factors represented as energy
functions . An individual energy function represents a factor by assigning low energy to scenes
with said factor and high energy to scenes where said factor is absent. A scene is then generated by
optimizing the sum of energies for all factors. Multiple factors can be composed together, by summing
the energies for each individual factor. Simultaneously, these individual factors are deﬁned across the
entire scene, allowing energy functions to represent global factors (lighting, camera viewpoint) and
local factors (object existence).
Our work is inspired by recent work [ 12] which shows that energy based models may be utilized
to represent ﬂexible compositions of both global and local factors. However, while [ 12] required
supervision, as labels were used to represent concepts, we aim to decompose and discover concepts
in an unsupervised manner. In our approach, we discover energy functions from separate data points
by enforcing compositions of these energy functions to recompose data.
Our work is further inspired by the ability of humans to effortlessly and reliably combine concepts
gathered from disparate experiences. As a separate beneﬁt of our approach, we show that we may
take components inferred by one instance of our model trained on one dataset, and compose it with
other components inferred by other instances of our model trained on separate datasets.
We provide analysis showing why our approach, COMET†, is favorable compared to existing
unsupervised approaches for decomposing scenes. We contribute the following: First, we show
COMET provides a uniﬁed framework enabling us to decompose images into both global factors
of variation as well as local factors of variation. Second, we show that COMET enables us to
scale to more realistic datasets than previous work. Finally, we show that components obtained by
COMET generalize well, and are amenable to compositions across different modes of data, and with
components discovered by other instances of COMET.
2 Related Work
Our work is related to research in the areas of global factor disentanglement [ 4,7,23,34,38,43]
and independent component analysis (ICA) [ 2,9,25–27,31,32,42,51]. Work in said areas focus
on discovering an underlying global latent space which describes the input space. In contrast, we
decompose data into a set of compositional vector spaces. This enables our approach to compose
multiple instances of one factor together, as well as compose factors across distinct datasets.
†short for COMposable Energy neTwork
2