Unsupervised Learning of Compositional Energy
Concepts
Yilun Du
MIT CSAIL
yilundu@mit.eduShuang Li
MIT CSAIL
lishuang@mit.eduYash Sharma
University of Tübingen
yash.sharma@uni-tuebingen.de
Joshua B. Tenenbaum
MIT CSAIL, BCS, CBMM
jbt@mit.eduIgor Mordatch
Google Brain
imordatch@google.com
Abstract
Humans are able to rapidly understand scenes by utilizing concepts extracted from
prior experience. Such concepts are diverse, and include global scene descriptors,
such as the weather or lighting, as well as local scene descriptors, such as the
color or size of a particular object. So far, unsupervised discovery of concepts has
focused on either modeling the global scene-level or the local object-level factors
of variation, but not both. In this work, we propose COMET, which discovers and
represents concepts as separate energy functions, enabling us to represent both
global concepts as well as objects under a uniﬁed framework. COMET discovers
energy functions through recomposing the input image, which we ﬁnd captures
independent factors without additional supervision. Sample generation in COMET
is formulated as an optimization process on underlying energy functions, enabling
us to generate images with permuted and composed concepts. Finally, discovered
visual concepts in COMET generalize well, enabling us to compose concepts
between separate modalities of images as well as with other concepts discovered
by a separate instance of COMET trained on a different dataset *.
1 Introduction
Human intelligence is characterized by its ability to learn new concepts, such as the manipulation of
a new tool from only a few demonstrations [ 1]. Essential to this capability is the composition and
re-utilization of previously learned concepts to accomplish the task at hand [ 36]. This is especially
apparent in natural language, which is often described as a tool for making ‘inﬁnite use of ﬁnite
means’ [ 8]. Previously acquired words can be inﬁnitely nested using a set of grammatical rules to
communicate an arbitrary thought, opinion, or state one is in. In this work, we are interested in
constructing a system that can discover, in an unsupervised manner, a broad set of these compositional
components, as well as subsequently combine them across distinct modalities and datasets.
For obtaining such decompositions, two separate lines of work exist. The ﬁrst focuses on obtaining
global, holistic, compositional factors by situating data points, such as human faces, in an underlying
(ﬁxed) factored vector space [ 24,48]. Individual factors, such as emotion or hair color, are represented
as independent dimensions of the vector space, with recombination between factors corresponding
to the recombination of the underlying dimensions. Due to the ﬁxed dimensionality of the vector
space, multiple instances of a single factor, such as lighting, may not be combined, nor can individual
*Code and data available at https://energy-based-model.github.io/comet/
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).