InputGradient (Per Component)Generation (Per Component)Final
InputGenerationFinalFigure 6: Object Decomposition. COMET can decompose underlying object-level factors of variation in
CLEVR (left) and Tetris (right). Individual energy functions exhibit sharp gradients with respect to each object
in CLEVR.
Image 1Combined ObjectsImage 1Image 2
InputsLighting (Image 2)+ Object 1 (Image 1)+ Object 2 (Image 1)+ Object 3 (Image 2)+ Object 4 (Image 2)
Permuted  Reconstruction
Lighting (Image 2)+ Object 1 (Image 1)+ Object 2 (Image 1)+ Object 3 (Image 2)+ Object 4 (Image 2)Lighting (Image 2)+ Object 1 (Image 1)+ Object 2 (Image 1)+ Object 3 (Image 2)+ Object 4 (Image 2)
Image 2
Figure 7: Compositional Generalization (Left). We may combine energy functions from COMET on two
separate images together to generate a new image with 8 objects. Global/Local Factor Recombination (Right).
COMET is able to discover energy functions corresponding to global and local factors of variation simultaneously
from a given image. We can recombine individual energy functions corresponding to global factors of variation
(lighting) and local factors of variation (cube position).
encoder, similar to prior unsupervised object discovery work [ 5]. We provide additional training
algorithm and model architecture details for each experimental setup in the appendix.
Decomposition and Reconstructions. We illustrate object-level decomposition of individual
energy functions on CLEVR and Tetris in Figure 6. In both settings, we ﬁnd that individual energy
functions correspond to the underlying objects in the scene. On CLEVR, while in Figure 5 we obtain
global factor decompositions, by biasing our energy function to object level decompositions we
obtain individual cube decompositions in Figure 6.
Combinatorical Recombination. We next consider recombining inferred object components.
In Figure 7 (left), we combine energy functions for individual CLEVR objects across two separate
scenes. We ﬁnd that by combining 8 energy functions corresponding to 4 objects from separate
images, we are able to successfully generate an image containing all 8 objects, and with some
consistency with respect to occlusion. In contrast, objects composed together through MONET do
not respect occlusion, as they are represented as disjoint segmentation masks.
Quantitative Comparisons. For quantitative comparison with MONET, we create approximate
segmentation masks per energy function in CLEVR by thresholding the gradients (illustrated in
Figure 6) of the energy function. We ﬁnd that our approach obtains an ARI [ 22] of0:916and a mean
segmentation covering of 0.713. In contrast, we ﬁnd MONET obtains an ARI of 0:873and a mean
segmentation covering of 0.701.
Decompositions of Global and Object Level Factors. COMET is distinct from previous
approaches for unsupervised decomposition in that it is able to decompose both global and local
factors of variation. We ﬁnd that we are further able to control the capture of either a particular
global or local factor. In particular, we ﬁnd that by conditioning a particular energy function with a
positional embedding added to the image [ 37] and a small latent dimension we may effectively bias
a energy function to capture an object factor of the scene. In contrast, a larger latent size biases an
energy function to capture a global factor of the scene. In Table 2, we investigate the extent of these
two effects in enabling the capture of local factors in CLEVR as measured by ARI. We ﬁnd that the
8