InputsObject 1 (Dataset 1)+ Object 2 (Dataset 1)+ Object 3 (Dataset 2)+ Object 4 (Dataset 2)
Permuted Reconstruction
Object 1 (Dataset 1)+ Object 2 (Dataset 1)+ Object 3 (Dataset 2)+ Object 4 (Dataset 2)
Object 1 (Dataset 1)+ Object 2 (Dataset 1)+ Object 3 (Dataset 2)+ Object 4 (Dataset 2)InputsLighting (Dataset 2)+Object 1 (Dataset 1)+ Object 2 (Dataset 1)+ Object 3 (Dataset 2)+ Object 4 (Dataset 2)
Permuted ReconstructionDataset 1(Fixed Lighting)Dataset 2(Varying Lighting)
Lighting (Dataset 2)+Object 1 (Dataset 1)+ Object 2 (Dataset 1)+ Object 3 (Dataset 2)+ Object 4 (Dataset 2)Lighting (Dataset 2)+Object 1 (Dataset 1)+ Object 2 (Dataset 1)+ Object 3 (Dataset 2)+ Object 4 (Dataset 2)
Dataset 1(Cube/Sphere)Dataset 2(Truck/Pin)Figure 8: Cross Dataset Composition. Energy functions from COMET discovered in one dataset may be
combined with energy functions from a separate instance of COMET discovered on a different dataset. In
theleft panel , we recombine energy functions representing cube/sphere objects discovered in CLEVR with
energy functions representing truck/pin objects discovered in CLEVR Toy. We are able to generate novel
images consisting of objects from both datasets. In the right panel , we recombine energy functions representing
separate objects in CLEVR with energy functions representing both lighting and individual objects from CLEVR
Lighting. We are able to generate novel images consisting of novel combinations of both objects and lighting.
addition of utilizing both small latent dimension and positional embedding enable more effective
decomposition of underlying object factors.
Recurrent Small Pos ARI "
Encoder Latent Embed
No No No 0.413
Yes No No 0.407
Yes Yes No 0.641
Yes Yes Yes 0.889
Table 2: Local Factor Inductive Bias.
Analysis of different inductive biases
on underlying local factor decomposi-
tion as measured by ARI score on the
CLEVR dataset.By selectively enabling ourselves to specify both the under-
lying global and local factors of a scene, we may obtain an
unsupervised decomposition of a scene with both local and
global factors of variation. To test this, we render a novel
dataset, CLEVR Lighting , by increasing the lighting variation
in CLEVR (illustrated in Figure 7 (right)), and train COMET to
infer 5separate energy functions. We encourage the ﬁrst energy
function to capture a global factor of variation by removing the
positional embedding from the ﬁrst inferred energy function.
In such a setting, we ﬁnd COMET successfully infers lighting
as the ﬁrst energy function, and individual objects for the sub-
sequent components, which we illustrate in the appendix. We
present recombinations of these inferred components in Figure 7 (right). A limitation of our approach
is that that lighting and object factors of variations are not completely disentangled. For example, in
the the top row, the permuted reconstruction of the image has incorrect lighting in the center.
5.3 Compositional Factor Generalization
Finally, we assess the ability of components inferred from COMET to generalize. We study two
separate settings of generalization. We ﬁrst evaluate the ability of components to generalize to
multi-modal inputs by training COMET to decompose images drawn from both CelebA-HQ and
Danbooru datasets [ 3], as well as KITTI [ 19] and Virtual KITTI [ 6] datasets. We next assess the
ability of components from COMET to compose with a separate instance of COMET. We train
separate COMET models on CLEVR, CLEVR Lighting and an additional novel dataset, CLEVR Toy ,
which is rendered by replacing sphere/cylinder/cube objects with pin/boot/toy/truck objects.
Cross Dataset Recombination. COMET may compose inferred components from one dataset
with components discovered by a separate COMET trained on a separate dataset. We validate this in
Figure 8 (left), where we recombine components specifying objects in CLEVR and CLEVR Toy. In
Figure 8 (right), we further recombine components specifying objects in CLEVR with components
specifying objects & lighting in CLEVR Lighting.
Cross Modality Decomposition and Recombination. We assess COMET decompositions on
multi-modal datasets of Danbooru/CelebA-HQ and KITTI/Virtual KITTI in Figure 9. We ﬁnd
consistent decomposition of components between separate modes. Furthermore, we ﬁnd that these
components may be recombined between the separate modalities in Figure 10.
9