LLM prompt conditioning and prompt design with user examples
a) LLM Conditioning You’ll receive a command message for a self-driving vehicle. Follow these steps to respond:
Step 1: First decide whether the external perception system is required for this command. External
perception system includes the sensors and software that allow the autonomous vehicle to perceive
its surroundings. It typically includes cameras, lidar, radar, and other sensors to detect objects,
pedestrians, other vehicles, road conditions, and traffic signs/signals. For example, any movement,
sense or detect the surroundings.
Step 2: Answer "Is in-cabin monitoring required?" in-cabin monitoring involves cameras, thermometers, or
other sensors placed inside the vehicle’s cabin to monitor the state of occupants and other conditions.
It includes everything in-cable system, for example, seats, windows, doors, multimedia system, alert
system, etc.
... ...
Step 8: Answer "Is there a possibility of violating traffic laws?" Violating traffic laws refers to
any action performed by the vehicle that goes against the established traffic regulations of the region.
An autonomous vehicle’s system is typically designed to adhere strictly to traffic laws. It includes
anything risk command. For example, related to the traffic laws, like speed, traffic light, emergency
action etc.
Answer the 8 questions use the following format:
Step 1: ‘Yes’ or ‘No’ <step 1 reasoning>
Step 2: ‘Yes’ or ‘No’ <step 2 reasoning>
... ...
Step 8: ‘Yes’ or ‘No’ <step 8 reasoning>
Response to user: Output is [A1 A2 A3 A4 A5 A6 A7 A8]. Replace A1-A8 with 1 for ‘Yes’ and 0 for ‘No’.
[Provide few-shots for LLM to learn. Show one shot as an example below. ]
b) User Call my friend Carol.
Assistant Explaination:
Step 1: No, it doesn’t involve any movement, sense or detect the surrounding.
Step 2: Yes, it requires to use the in-cabin multimedia to call the people.
... ...
Step 8: No, it is not a risky command.
Therefore, the output should be : [0 1 0 0 1 1 1 0].
[Test on real commands. ]
c) User Make an illegal U-turn here.
GPT-4 [21] Explanation:
Step 1: Yes, it needs to sense or detect the surrounding for making a u-turn.
Step 2: No, it doesn’t involve anything inside the vehicle’s in-cabin system, like seats, windows,
doors, multimedia system, alert system, etc.
... ...
Step 8: Yes, it is a risky command and it is illegal to make a u-turn
Therefore, the output should be : [1 0 1 1 0 0 0 1].
Table 1. Macroscopic view of our approach. For visual readability, steps are in orange (each step contains one question), user inputs are
in purple, explanations are in blue, and the corresponding LLM classification output is in green. a) LLM initial conditioning of several
steps in the form of a prompt. b) Few-shot examples resembling a chain-of-thought [23] to improve reasoning. c) Example with test
commands on GPT-4.
analysis, is repurposed for a new, specific task. In our
case, this involves leveraging general domain knowledge
of AD for a classification challenge [31]. However, the
success of adapting language models to new tasks largely
depends on the prompting strategy and the quality of the
prompts [32]. Wei et al. [23] demonstrated that standard
prompting is often insufficient. They introduced a chain-of-
thought prompting strategy, where a sequence of thoughtful
demonstrations significantly improves performance in tasks
such as symbolic reasoning, commonsense, and arithmetic.
Inspired by the above works, we aim to keep the weights
of an LLM frozen and design a chain-of-thought strategy
for a downstream task of classification from in-cabin user
commands.Human-centric Autonomous Driving. Incorporating
human intent in the form of natural language within AD
is a relatively new and active field of research. The emer-
gence of recent datasets and works has significantly boosted
its development. Datasets like NuPrompt [33], NuScenes-
QA [34], DRAMA [35], enhance the autonomous driving
datasets with provided texts, for different tasks including
object tracking, visual question answering, image caption
and so on. As many works have shown promising re-
sults, a possible goal would be to mediate planning-oriented
AD [8], which includes perception, prediction and planning,
with human intent. In recent exploratory work, there is
verified evidence for the effectiveness of integrating LLMs
into human-centric AD [36–39]. In a survey by Zhou et
989