Detailed ExplanationFew ShotsLevel-based Accuracy (%) ↑
w/o step w step Command Question
13.00 75.00
✓ 22.00 81.00
✓ 26.00 79.00
✓ 35.00 87.00
✓ ✓ 42.00 88.63
✓ ✓ 40.00 87.88
Table 3. Ablation study in the impact of different prompts.
# of shotLevel-based Accuracy (%) ↑
Command Question
0 26.00 79.00
1 23.00 80.63
2 40.00 87.63
3 41.00 87.88
4 40.00 87.88
Table 4. Ablation study in the number of provided shots.
of parameters and is trained mainly on conversational inter-
actions enhanced with human reinforcement learning.
We compare the LLMs’ performance against two base-
lines. The first employs a simple random guessing strategy.
The second is a rule-based method that identifies specific
keywords in the user command to determine system require-
ments. It is noteworthy that these rules are automatically
generated by ChatGPT-4, augmented with the Advanced
Data Analysis plug-in.
Evaluation : The results are presented in Tab. 2. Com-
pared to the random guess and rule-based approaches,
LLMs exhibit notably higher accuracy, especially at the
command level. Among the LLMs tested, the GPT se-
ries surpasses the Llama models, where GPT-4 achieves a
peak accuracy of 89.02% at the question level and 38.03%
at the command level. Diving into question-specific accu-
racy, GPT consistently behaves excellently in determining
if a command requires perception, localization, entertain-
ment submodules, or if it might violate traffic laws. How-
ever, for the in-cabin monitoring, GPT’s predictions display
some inconsistency and lower accuracy, especially for GPT-
4 (74.89%). It is observed that in the evaluation of 1,099
commands, GPT-4 incorrectly responded to 276 queries re-
lated to in-cabin monitoring. A majority proportion of these
errors, amounting to 259 instances, involved GPT-4 say-
ing “Yes, it requires in-cabin monitoring” when the ground
truth doesn’t, with only a few errors being the reverse. To
further investigate why GPT-4 says yes often, 2 keywords
are found in its explanations: multimedia andalert system.
Both terms are typically associated with in-cabin monitor-ing in our given instructed prompts. Specifically, 155 com-
mands (56%) are related to multimedia - GPT-4 identifies
these as requiring in-cabin multimedia activities, such as
making calls, playing radio or videos, or screen displays.
Additionally, in 26% of the instances (71 commands), GPT-
4 associates the command with the utilization of in-cabin
monitoring systems for alerting or notifying the vehicle’s
occupants. Given this context, it’s difficult to conclusively
label GPT-4’s responses as incorrect. This is largely due
to the vague definition of what exactly constitutes in-cabin
monitoring in the context of our study.
Ablation Study : We perform two ablation studies to ex-
plore the impacts of providing a detailed explanation of in-
structions and the given number of shot examples. To re-
duce costs, we run experiments on GPT-3.5 with a small
test subset that matches the distribution of the original test
data created by ChatGPT-4. More specifically, ChatGPT-4
is asked to analyze the data distribution for each question
and sample 100 commands according to it.
The performance of combining three prompting meth-
ods is shown in Tab. 3. Note that for providing a detailed
instruction explanation, we experimented with two formats:
a step-by-step approach as illustrated in Tab. 1, and a con-
solidated paragraph format (labeled as ‘w/o step’ in Tab. 3).
For the latter case, we omit the word Step:# which causes
less structured prompts. Each prompting method exhibits
enhanced performance, with the few-shot method outper-
forming two detailed explanation methods. Notably, com-
bining one of the prompting methods from detailed expla-
nation and the few-shot method significantly augments the
performance.
Tab. 4 shows the impact of the number of given few
shot examples with the step-by-step detailed explanation
method. We observe a notable increase when two examples
are provided, which indicates the importance of providing
shot examples for performance gain. However, as the num-
ber of examples continues to increase, the impact on the
final results becomes subtle, suggesting the existence of a
saturation threshold or limitations.
5. Conclusion
In this paper, we offered a human-centric perspective by
providing several key insights with different prompting de-
signs to condition LLMs towards achieving AD system re-
quirements from verbal user commands. Our work included
an analysis of several online and offline popular LLMs with
a variety of ablation studies. We hope that this work in-
spires our community to consider human intent in the de-
sign of an AD system. Future work points towards the di-
rection of incorporating human feedback in a more intelli-
gent and effective way. This would pave the way for the
development of AD systems that are not only more reliable
and capable in their reasoning and comprehension skills
991