JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 10
contrastive candidates [45, 109]. However, these methods can
be memory-intensive, and ensuring the consistency of repre-
sentations is challenging when randomly extracting negative
samples from an additional storage space. Recent advance-
ments in non-contrastive learning, which eliminate the need for
negative samples, have exhibited promising outcomes [110].
BYOL [44] and SimSiam [57] serve as exemplars, achieving
remarkable results without the reliance on negative samples.
These methods leverage an additional learnable predictor
and employ a stop-gradient operation to prevent collapsing,
contributing to their successful performance [111]. Table IV
provides a succinct summary of instance-level contrastive
methods for time series representation learning. Further elab-
oration concerning these methods are explicated below.
a) SimCLR [43]: SimCLR greatly improves the quality
of representation learning by introducing a learnable nonlinear
projection between the representation and the contrastive loss.
Since the representation obtained from the encoder retains
information related to data augmentations, the role of the
nonlinear layer is to remove such information and allow repre-
sentations to reflect the essence of data. This aids in preventing
similarity-based losses from discarding crucial features during
training. SimCLR randomly draws a minibatch of Nsamples
and generates 2Naugmented views by applying geometric
and appearance transformations sequentially from the same
minibatch. Among these augmented views, a positive pair is
formed by selecting 2views derived from the same original
sample. The remaining 2(N−1)augmented views within the
minibatch are treated as negative ones. Such a sampling strat-
egy has been widely adopted in various contrastive models.
b) TimeCLR [105]: Direct applying SimCLR to the time
series field usually performs poorly due to data augmentation
and the feature extractor not being adapted to the temporal
dependencies within the time series data. TimeCLR adopts
Dynamic Time Warping (DTW) data augmentation not only
generates DTW-targeted phase shifts and amplitude changes,
but also retains the structure and feature information of
the time series. In addition, TimeCLR adopts InceptionTime
which has good feature extraction capabilities as the feature
extractor, to convert the time series into the corresponding
representations in an end-to-end manner.
c) MoCo [45]: MoCo leverages a moving-averaged mo-
mentum encoder and maintains a dynamic queue to enhance
negative sampling in contrastive learning. The dynamic queue
stores a diverse set of samples, enabling the decoupling of
dictionary size from the minibatch size and facilitating the
contrastive learning process. In each minibatch, MoCo treats
the encoded queries and their corresponding keys as positive
sample pairs, while the negative samples are selected from the
remaining samples in the dynamic queue. This approach helps
enhance the quality and diversity of the contrastive learning
process in MoCo.
d) BYOL [44]: BYOL utilizes a pair of neural networks
to perform training, namely the online network and the target
network. The online network is trained to predict the represen-
tation of the target network, and the target network is updated
with a slow-moving average of the online network. BYOL
exclusively treats 2 different augmented views of the samesample as the positive pair and learns representations without
explicitly using negative pairs, which provides new insight into
negative sampling in contrastive learning. Then, the augmen-
tations of the same sample are fed into both the online and
target networks, which interact and mutually learn from one
another. BYOL directly bootstraps the representations, which
makes it more robust to the choice of augmentations.
e) CPC [56]: Contrastive Predictive Coding (CPC) en-
codes the underlying shared information between different
parts of the original high-dimensional signal, while discarding
low-level information and noise that is more local. The com-
bination of predictive coding and a probabilistic contrastive
loss enables CPC to extract slow features that maximize
the mutual information between the encoded representations
that span many time steps. CPC utilizes an encoder and an
autoregressive model to reduce the dimensionality of the high-
dimensional signal, and then uses noise-contrastive estima-
tion to predict future representations. The encoder maps the
input high-dimensional signal to a latent vector in a lower-
dimensional space, and the autoregressive model aggregates
the latent vectors from previous and current time steps.
f) SimSiam [57]: Simsiam explores the use of Siamese
architectures in representation learning and adopts the stop-
gradient operation to prevent collapsing, while getting rid of
negative samples, large batches and momentum encoders. The
learning mechanism of SimSiam is similar to the Expectation-
Maximization (EM) algorithm to estimate the expected value
after data augmentation. Siamese networks are chosen as the
backbone due to their ability to incorporate inductive biases for
modeling invariance, which aids in capturing essential features
during representation learning.
g) MCL [106]: The inherent invariances within time
series data are often unknown beforehand, and incautious
application can lead to representations where dissimilar sam-
ples are embedded in close proximity. MCL exploits a data
augmentation scheme in which new samples are generated
by mixing 2 data samples with a mixing component. The
pretext task motivated through label smoothing is to predict
the strength of the mixing component based on the 2 data
points and the augmented sample. In addition, MCL is tasked
with predicting the mixing factor instead of hard decisions to
tackle the problem of overconfidence in neural networks.
2) Prototype-level Contrastive Learning Models: To ad-
dress the limitation that instance-level contrastive learning
models tend to treat semantically similar samples as nega-
tives, prototype-level contrastive learning models break the
independence between samples, and explore to exploit the
implicit semantics shared by samples within the same cluster.
By incorporating the additional prior information brought by
clustering, the learned representations are expected to preserve
more higher-level semantic information [60]. Prototype-level
contrastive learning models consider groups of similar samples
as clusters and pull the representations of samples from
different augmented views but belonging to the same class
(with similar semantics) together in the embedding space
during contrastive learning. For instance, CC [81], SwA V [59]
and PCL [58] are such methods that perform clustering-based
discrimination between groups of similar samples. However,