JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 2
SurveysApplications Core Techniques Types
Main ContributionsClassification
Forecasting
Others
Supervised
Unsupervised
Deep
Non-deep
Univariate
Multivariate
[10] ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ They classify algorithms according to the type of discriminatory features the
technique is attempting to find. The algorithms are grouped into those that
use the whole series, intervals, shapelets or repeating pattern counts.
[11] ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ They review recently proposed bespoke multivariate time series classification
algorithms based on deep learning, shapelets and bag-of-words approaches.
[20] ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ They group deep learning approaches for time series classification into
generative models including auto-encoders and echo state networks, and
discriminative models including feature engineering and end-to-end methods.
[21] ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ They examine the current state of eXplainable AI (XAI) methods with a focus
on approaches for opening up deep learning black boxes including MLPs,
RNNs, CNNs and ResNets for the task of time series classification.
[22] ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ They categorize early classification approaches for incomplete time series into
4 exclusive categories based on their proposed solution strategies, including
prefix-based, shapelet-based, model-based and miscellaneous ones.
[23] ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ They propose a taxonomy of distance-based classifiers, including KNN-based,
distance features-based and distance kernels-based ones.
[14] ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ They review 3 categories of deep learning architectures for time series
forecasting, including MLPs, RNNs and CNNs.
[12] ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ They classify deep learning methods for time series forecasting by application
domains (energy and fuels, image and video, finance, industry, health, etc.)
and network architectures (ENN, LSTM, GRU, BRNN, DFFNN, CNN, TCN).
[24] ✓✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ They divide compression algorithms into dictionary-based methods, functional
approximation, auto-encoders, and sequential algorithms.
[25] ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ They review approaches specifically proposed for multi-modal and temporal
data, then categorize discriminative self-supervised representation learning
models into pretext, contrastive, clustering and regularisation-based models.
[26] ✓✓ ✓ They divide main research orientations into 3 subfields: dimensionality reduc-
tion (time series representation), similarity measures and data mining tasks.
[27] ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ They review a variety of feature learning algorithms that have been developed
to explicitly capture temporal relationships (such as RBM, AE, RNN, TDNN).
Ours ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ Our comprehensive review encompasses a broad spectrum of unsupervised
representation learning methods, including both established and novel ap-
proaches, with a particular emphasis on the latest advancements in contrastive
learning techniques. Furthermore, we develop a unified and standardized
library called ULTS, which serves as a valuable resource for convenient
empirical evaluations and comparisons of these methods.
TABLE I
COMPARISONS OF EXISTING RELATED SURVEYS ON TIME SERIES REPRESENTATION LEARNING .
advantages in representation learning for various types of data,
including image [43, 44, 45, 46], video [47, 48, 49] and time
series [50, 51, 52, 53]. Alignment serves as a key motivation
in representation learning methods [54]. Specifically, in the
context of contrastive learning, alignment involves the map-
ping of 2 samples that form a positive pair to nearby features,
resulting in a high degree of invariance to unneeded noise
factors. Contrastive learning primarily focuses on 3 levels,
namely instance-level contrast [55, 56, 57], prototype-level
contrast [58, 59, 60], and temporal-level contrast [33, 51, 61].
The instance-level contrast treats samples independently and
distinguishes them by pulling positive pairs together and push-
ing negative pairs apart [62]. Prototype-level contrast, instead,
goes beyond the independence assumption and exploits latent
cluster information present within samples. Researchers havedemonstrated that the learned representations are expected to
retain higher-level semantic information by taking advantage
of additional prior information brought by clustering [58, 59,
63, 64]. Furthermore, considering the temporal dependency
inherent in time series data, researchers have explored the
feasibility of distinguishing contextual information at a fine-
grained temporal level [50, 51, 52].
As shown in Table I, existing empirical surveys primarily fo-
cus on end-to-end models associated with specific downstream
tasks such as time series classification [10, 11, 31, 65], fore-
casting [12, 14], or anomaly detection [1, 2]. However, they
tend to overlook the crucial representation learning process
that precedes these downstream tasks. The models reviewed
in current surveys primarily prioritize the optimization of the
entire end-to-end model, neglecting the in-depth exploration