JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 1
Unsupervised Representation Learning for Time
Series: A Review
Qianwen Meng, Hangwei Qian, Yong Liu, Yonghui Xu, Zhiqi Shen, and Lizhen Cui, Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract —Unsupervised representation learning approaches
aim to learn discriminative feature representations from unla-
beled data, without the requirement of annotating every sam-
ple. Enabling unsupervised representation learning is extremely
crucial for time series data, due to its unique annotation
bottleneck caused by its complex characteristics and lack of
visual cues compared with other data modalities. In recent years,
unsupervised representation learning techniques have advanced
rapidly in various domains. However, there is a lack of systematic
analysis of unsupervised representation learning approaches for
time series. To fill the gap, we conduct a comprehensive literature
review of existing rapidly evolving unsupervised representation
learning approaches for time series. Moreover, we also develop a
unified and standardized library, named ULTS ( i.e.,Unsupervised
Learning for Time Series), to facilitate fast implementations
and unified evaluations on various models. With ULTS, we
empirically evaluate state-of-the-art approaches, especially the
rapidly evolving contrastive learning methods, on 9 diverse real-
world datasets. We further discuss practical considerations as
well as open research challenges on unsupervised representation
learning for time series to facilitate future research in this field.
Index Terms —Time series, representation learning, unsuper-
vised learning, contrastive learning, self-supervised learning.
I. I NTRODUCTION
TIME series data can record the changing trends of
variables over time and are ubiquitous across various
fields such as Internet of Things (IoT) [1, 2, 3], industry
4.0 [4, 5], financial services [6], and healthcare services [7, 8].
In order to extract and infer useful information from complex
raw time series data, time series representation learning has
emerged as an effective learning paradigm. On the one hand,
This work was supported in part by the National Key R&D Program
of China No. 2021YFF0900800; the Major Scientific and Technological
Innovation Project of Shandong Province No. 2021CXGC010108; the Nat-
ural Science Foundation of Shandong Province No. ZR202111180007; the
Fundamental Research Fund of Shandong University, and the Chinese Gov-
ernment Scholarship - High Level Postgraduate Program of China Scholarship
Council. (Corresponding authors: Hangwei Qian; Lizhen Cui.)
Q. Meng is with the School of Software, Shandong University, Jinan, China,
and Joint SDU-NTU Centre for Artificial Intelligence Research, Shandong
University, Jinan, China (Email: mqw sdu@mail.sdu.edu.cn).
H. Qian is with Centre for Frontier AI Research (CFAR), A*STAR,
Singapore (Email: qian hangwei@cfar.a-star.edu.sg).
Y . Liu is with Joint NTU-UBC Research Centre of Excellence in Active
Living for the Elderly (LILY), Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
(Email: stephenliu@ntu.edu.sg).
Y . Xu is with the School of Software, Shandong University, Jinan, China
and Joint SDU-NTU Centre for Artificial Intelligence Research, Shandong
University, Jinan, China (Email: xuyonghui@sdu.edu.cn).
Z. Shen is with the School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang
Technological University, Singapore (Email: zqshen@ntu.edu.sg).
L. Cui is with the School of Software, Shandong University, Jinan, China
and Joint SDU-NTU Centre for Artificial Intelligence Research, Shandong
University, Jinan, China (Email: clz@sdu.edu.cn).the learned latent representations can capture potentially valu-
able information within time series and reveal the underlying
mechanisms of the corresponding systems or phenomena.
On the other hand, high-quality representations are essen-
tial for numerous downstream tasks, including time series
classification [9, 10, 11], forecasting [12, 13, 14, 15], and
clustering [16, 17]. Pervasive raw time series data are collected
through a wide spectrum of sensors or wearable devices with
varying frequencies [18]. Annotating corresponding labels for
such data, however, is inevitably inefficient and could be
erroneous due to the lack of obvious visual patterns in the
raw data. This would inhibit the training of conventional
supervised learning models since full label annotations are
required beforehand. Weakly-supervised learning methods can
alleviate the annotation challenge to some extent, but they still
necessitate partial or coarse labels for model training [19].
In this paper, we turn to the techniques that aim to learn
high-quality representations from raw time series data in an
unsupervised learning manner.
In general, unsupervised representation learning aims to
extract latent representations from complex raw time series
data without human supervision [28]. Previous studies have
shown remarkable performance with joint clustering and fea-
ture learning approaches [29]. However, clustering primarily
focuses on identifying specific data patterns and can be unre-
liable due to the poor generality of predefined priors [30]. The
advent of deep learning techniques has led to the widespread
adoption of auto-encoders and seq-to-seq models for repre-
sentation learning [31]. These approaches employ appropriate
learning objectives, such as self-reconstruction and context
prediction, to learn meaningful representations [16, 32]. Never-
theless, accurately reconstructing the complex time series data
remains challenging, especially with the high-frequency phys-
iological signals [33, 34]. Recently, self-supervised learning is
emerging as a new paradigm, which induces supervision by
designing pretext tasks instead of relying on pre-defined prior
knowledge [35, 36, 37]. Diverging from fully unsupervised
approaches, self-supervised learning methods leverage pretext
tasks to autonomously generate labels by utilizing intrinsic
information derived from the unlabeled data [38]. The learning
efficiency can be improved through discriminative pre-training
based on self-generated supervised signals that are freely
obtained from the raw data [25, 39, 40, 41].
More recently, self-supervised learning has made significant
leaps fueled by advancements in contrastive learning, which
employs the instance discrimination pretext task to bring simi-
lar pairs closer while pushing dissimilar pairs apart in the fea-
ture space [42]. Contrastive learning has achieved remarkablearXiv:2308.01578v1  [cs.LG]  3 Aug 2023