JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 11
Models Main Contributions Backbones DA Datasets Evaluations Metrics
SwA V [59] SwA V optimizes the learned representations by developing
a swapped prediction mechanism to simultaneously perform
scalable online clustering while enforcing the consistency
between cluster assignments produced for different aug-
mented views of the same sample.ResNet ✓ ImageNet,
VOC07, COCOClassification,
TransferabilityACC
PCL [58] PCL formulates prototypical contrastive learning as an
Expectation-Maximization algorithm to perform clustering
and representation learning iteratively. The E-step aims to
find the distribution of prototypes via clustering and the M-
step aims to optimize the network via contrastive learning.ResNet ✓ ImageNet,
VOC07,
Places205,
COCOClassification,
Clustering,
Object DetectionACC,
AMI
CCL [64] CCL refines the learned representations acquired through
deep convolutional neural networks by discovering dataset
clusters with high purity and typically few samples per clus-
ter, and leverage these cluster assignments as the potentially
noisy supervision.CNN ✓ BBT-0101, BF-
0502, ACCIOClassification,
ClusteringACC,
Precision,
Recall,
F1
SCCL [80] SCCL leverages contrastive learning for short text cluster-
ing to promote better separated and less dispersed clusters.
It effectively combines the top-down clustering with the
bottom-up instance-wise contrastive learning to achieve
better inter-cluster distance and intra-cluster distance.DistilBERT ✓ AgNews, Tweet,
SearchSnippets,
StackOverflow,
Biomedical,
GooglenewsClustering ACC,
NMI
CC [81] CC seamlessly integrates deep clustering and representation
learning by revealing that the row and column of the feature
matrix intrinsically correspond to the instance and cluster
representation when projecting instances into a subspace
whose dimensionality is equal to the cluster number.ResNet ✓ CIFAR-10,
CIFAR-100,
STL-10,
ImageNet-10Classification,
ClusteringACC,
NMI,
ARI
SLIC [82] SLIC combines iterative clustering with multi-view en-
coding and temporal discrimination to learn view-invariant
video representations and fine-grained motion features. The
clustering assignments are used to guide the sampling of
positive and negative pairs for updating representations.CNN ✓ UCF101,
HMDB51,
Kinetics400Classification,
Video RetrievalRecall
MHCCL [60] MHCCL incorporates the implicit semantic information ob-
tained from hierarchical clustering to guide the construction
of contrastive pairs. MHCCL exploits downward masking
to filter out fake negatives and supplement positives, while
also employing upward masking to refine prototypes.ResNet ✓ HAR, WISDM,
SHAR, Epilepsy,
UEA DatasetsClassification ACC,
MF1, κ
TABLE V
SUMMARY OF PROTOTYPE -LEVEL CONTRASTIVE METHODS FOR TIME SERIES REPRESENTATION LEARNING . DA INDICATES WHETHER THE MODEL
UTILIZES DATA AUGMENTATIONS . ACC REFERS TO ACCURACY , AMI REFERS TO ADJUSTED MUTUAL INFORMATION , NMI REFERS TO NORMALIZED
MUTUAL INFORMATION , F1 REFERS TO F1SCORE , ARI REFERS TO ADJUSTED RAND INDEX , MF1 REFERS TO MACRO -AVERAGED F1SCORE ,ANDκ
REFERS TO COHEN ’S KAPPA COEFFICIENT .
these methods require prior knowledge to pre-specify the
number of clusters, which is non-trivial for the unlabeled
time series data. What’s worse, the flat clustering algorithms
they adopt can only capture a single hierarchy of semantics,
which is insufficient to reflect the ground-truth data distri-
butions. Recently, methods such as CCL [64], SLIC [82]
and MHCCL [60] have merged to incorporate hierarchical
clustering into contrastive learning. By exploring the hierar-
chical structures, these methods are able to capture diverse
granularities of semantics in time series data. The differences
among the varying prototype-level contrastive learning models
lie in the selection of cluster centroids, clustering methods, and
cluster-level sampling strategies. Table V provides a succinct
summary of prototype-level contrastive methods for time series
representation learning. Further elaboration on these methods
is explicated below.
a) SwAV [59]: SwA V enhances representation learning
in a distinctive manner by leveraging cluster assignmentsand a swapped prediction mechanism to perform contrasting.
SwA V assigns samples to different clusters rather than directly
contrasting samples, where the cluster assignments are used to
construct the implied contrastive pairs. Instead of approximat-
ing each sample into a hard assignment, the soft assignment is
produced by the Sinkhorn-Knopp algorithm. Then, the implied
positive pair is formed by the one augmented view and the
cluster assignment of the other view, and the remaining pairs
are treated as implied negative pairs. The swapped prediction
mechanism involves predicting the cluster assignment of one
augmented view from the other augmented view.
b) PCL [58]: PCL formulates the prototypical con-
trastive learning framework as an Expectation-Maximization
(EM) algorithm. The framework consists of 2 iterative steps:
the E-step and the M-step. In the E-step, PCL performs
clustering to find the distribution of prototypes. In the M-
step, the network is optimized through contrastive learning.
The total loss is composed of a standard InfoNCE loss for