JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 8
networks (RNNs) in both the generator and discriminator
components of the GAN framework. By incorporating RNNs,
RGAN can capture temporal dependencies and generate se-
quences that exhibit realistic patterns and dynamics. This
approach is particularly valuable for generating realistic med-
ical time series data, where capturing temporal relationships
is crucial for accurate modeling and analysis. The use of
RNNs in both the generator and discriminator sets RGAN
apart from traditional GAN architectures and contributes to
its effectiveness in generating realistic time series data.
5) TimeVAE [70]: TimeV AE utilizes a decoder that allows
for the incorporation of user-defined distributions, enabling
flexibility in the generated data. TimeV AE is trained by using
the evidence lower bound loss function. A weight is used
on the reconstruction error, allowing for the adjustment of
emphasis placed on the reconstruction loss compared to the
KL-Divergence loss between the encoded latent space distri-
bution and the prior. In addition, TimeV AE injects temporal
structures including level, trend, and seasonal components into
the data generation process within the decoder to enhance the
interpretability of the modeled data generation process.
6) DIVERSIFY [101]: DIVERSIFY employs an adversarial
game strategy to simultaneously maximize the ’worst-case’
distribution scenario while minimizing distribution divergence.
Specifically, it learns to segment time series data into distinct
latent sub-domains, aiming to maximize the distribution gap
at the segment level to preserve diversities. Simultaneously,
it also focuses on reducing distribution divergence between
these obtained latent domains to achieve domain-invariant
representations. This approach leverages the inherent presence
of diverse latent distributions in time series data, such as
distinct activity patterns exhibited by multiple individuals.
B. Predictive Methods
Predictive methods learn meaningful representations that
capture the underlying shared information between different
parts of time series data by maximizing the mutual information
derived from related slices of original time series or diverse
views generated by data augmentations. The size of mutual
information indicates the strength of dependencies between re-
lated slices or augmented views. Compared to reconstruction-
based methods, predictive methods help eliminate the need to
reconstruct the complete input and learn representations by
predicting future, missing or contextual information. Hence,
they usually utilize context prediction or cross-view predic-
tion as the pretext task to predict partial data based on
limited views. The key insight of predictive methods is to
learn representations by predicting future or mixed values of
partial time series [56, 102, 103], predicting whether time
windows are sampled from the same temporal context or
not [71, 104], or predicting the cross-view representations of
original samples [51]. Such mechanism can be served as a
pretext task for contrastive learning as well, and methods such
as CPC [56] and TS-TCC [51] combine predictive coding
and noise-contrastive estimation to induce the latent space to
capture information that is maximally useful for prediction.
Further elaboration about CPC [56] and TS-TCC [51] will beintroduced in Section V-C. Below are the additional details
of the remaining predictive methods used for unsupervised
representation learning.
1) TST [104]: TST employs a transformer encoder to
extract dense representations of time series. This is achieved
through an input denoising objective, where the model is
trained to reconstruct the entire input under noise corruption,
typically using Gaussian noise. Unlike methods that rely on
additional unlabeled samples, TST maximizes the utilization
of existing samples for representation learning by employing
an unsupervised autoregressive objective. TST encourages the
model to attend to both preceding and succeeding segments
within individual variables, as well as the contemporary values
of the other variables within time series, enabling the model
to capture complex relationships across different dimensions.
2) EEG-SSL [71]: EEG-SSL focuses on predicting whether
time windows are sampled from the same temporal context
or not. EEG-SSL aims to learn informative representations
from EEG time series data by employing 2 kinds of temporal-
based pretext tasks: relative positioning and temporal shuffling.
In the relative positioning task, EEG-SSL predicts whether 2
time windows in the EEG signals are closer or farther apart in
time. The temporal shuffling task involves predicting whether
the selected time windows are in their original order or have
been shuffled. By training on these pretext tasks, EEG-SSL is
able to capture temporal dependencies and extract meaningful
representations from EEG time series data.
3) Wave2vec [102]: Wave2vec aims to predict the next time
step based on the given signal context. Wave2vec consists
of 2 multi-layer convolutional neural networks: an encoder
network that converts raw audio signals into a latent space,
and a context network that combines multiple time-steps of the
encoder’s output to obtain contextualized representations. The
pre-training approach allows Wave2vec to learn meaningful
audio representations that can capture the temporal dependen-
cies and facilitate the downstream audio processing tasks.
4) CaSS [103]: Prior research primarily emphasizes the
pretext task and tends to overlook the intricate issue of
encoding time series data, which often yields unsatisfactory
outcomes. In contrast, CaSS comprehensively addresses this
challenge from 2 aspects: encoder and pretext task. CaSS
introduces a channel-aware transformer architecture, which is
specifically designed to capture the intricate relationships be-
tween different time channels within time series. Furthermore,
CaSS integrates 2 innovative pretext tasks, namely next trend
prediction and contextual similarity, to further enhance the
encoding process.
C. Contrastive Methods
Contrastive methods learn meaningful representations from
time series by optimizing self-discrimination tasks. Instead of
directly modeling the complex raw data, they employ pretext
tasks that leverage the underlying similarity between samples,
which eliminates the need for reconstructing the complete
input and allows for the discovery of contextualized underly-
ing factors of variations [107]. Contrastive methods typically
generate augmented views of the raw data through various