JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 12
instance-level contrast and a ProtoNCE loss for prototype-
level contrast. The instance-level sampling follows the same
strategy as MoCo [45]. For prototype-level contrast, each
sample forms a positive pair with its corresponding prototype,
which represents the centroid of the cluster it belongs to. The
remaining prototypes are considered negative ones.
c) CCL [64]: Clustering-based Contrastive Learning
(CCL) learns cluster-based representations without relying on
prior knowledge of the number of clusters. It automatically
obtains labels from natural groupings using hierarchical clus-
tering that does not require any hyper-parameters. To construct
positive and negative pairs, CCL leverages clusters with high
purity and a few samples at early hierarchical partitions. For
each data point within a cluster, CCL randomly samples from
the same or nearest cluster to create one positive pair, while
using samples from the farthest clusters to create 2 negative
pairs. This approach ensures that the generated pairs capture
both intra-cluster similarities and inter-cluster differences.
d) SCCL [80]: SCCL focuses on short text data and
develops a joint model that leverages the beneficial properties
of instance-wise contrastive learning to improve unsupervised
clustering. This is implemented by jointly optimizing a top-
down clustering loss over the original data samples and a
bottom-up instance-wise contrastive loss over the associated
augmented pairs. The Student’s t-distribution is utilized to
compute the probability of assigning each sample to different
clusters. The instance-wise contrastive learning focuses on
distance discrimination, while unsupervised clustering focuses
on clustering-based discrimination between groups of samples
with higher-level semantic concepts.
e) CC [81]: Contrastive Clustering (CC) regards rows
of the feature matrix projected from augmentations as soft
labels of samples, while treating columns as prototype-level
representations distributed over the dataset. This is motivated
by the observation of “label as representation” when the di-
mensionality of representations during projection matches the
number of clusters. CC simultaneously learns discriminative
representations and performs online clustering in an end-to-
end manner. It adopts a dual contrastive learning strategy that
operates at both the instance level and cluster level to extract
informative representations.
f) SLIC [82]: SLIC is an iterative clustering-based con-
trastive learning framework to learn feature representations
from human action videos. SLIC integrates iterative clustering
with multi-view encoding and a temporal discrimination loss
to sample harder positives and negatives during pre-training.
The encoder is optimized by incorporating a temporal dis-
crimination loss and an instance-based triplet loss. To be
specific, SLIC alternates between periodically clustering video
representations to produce cluster assignments, which are used
to inform the sampling of positive and negative pairs to update
the video representations, by minimizing a triplet margin loss.
g) MHCCL [60]: MHCCL incorporates implicit hierar-
chical semantic information obtained by hierarchical clustering
into contrastive learning. This is inspired by the observation
of the multi-granularity of clustering. The novel bidirectional
masking strategies are employed to guide the selection of posi-
tive and negative pairs for multi-level contrast. Specifically, up-ward masking helps remove outliers while refining prototypes
to accelerate the hierarchical clustering process and enhance
the quality of clustering. Meanwhile, downward masking helps
supplement latent positives and filter out fake negatives for
effective contrastive learning. In this way, MHCCL enables
the extraction of informative representations that capture both
fine-grained and high-level semantic information.
3) Temporal-level Contrastive Learning Models: Although
contrastive learning methods have demonstrated remarkable
success in the field of computer vision, their application
to time series data often ignores the intricate characteristics
that are inherent to such data. Acknowledging this limitation,
researchers have recently turned their attention towards investi-
gating the influence of timestamps, and have begun developing
specifically tailored strategies to address the challenge posed
by time series data. Instance-level contrastive learning models
are able to learn general representations that capture the overall
characteristics of the entire time series. These representations
provide a holistic view of data and can be useful for tasks that
require a global understanding of the sequence. Temporal-level
contrastive learning models instead focus on capturing scale-
invariant representations at each individual timestamp. By con-
sidering both instance-level and temporal-level representation
learning strategies, researchers aim to enhance the capability
of contrastive learning methods in capturing the complexities
inherent in time series data. Existing temporal-level contrastive
learning models either consider the temporal dependencies
by leveraging temporal contrasting modules [33, 50, 51], or
focus on capturing multi-scale contextual information across
different granularities [52, 61, 112, 113]. Approaches such
as T-Loss [50] and TNC [33] utilize the information from
the neighborhood to construct positive and negative samples
for contrastive learning. TS-TCC [51] instead designs time-
series-specific augmented views for pair constructions and
performs cross-view temporal contrasting to learn represen-
tations. There also exist methods that explicitly emphasize
the timestamp-level [52] or segment-level [61, 112, 113]
representations in addition to the entire time-series level.
These models are designed to capture fine-grained temporal
patterns and variations, enabling them to extract more detailed
and localized information from time series. However, they
may ignore the higher-level semantic information which is
involved in the entire set of time series. Incorporating potential
semantic information such as class labels can help eliminate
fake negative samples of the same class, thereby reducing
noise in contrastive learning. Table VI provides a succinct
summary of temporal-level contrastive methods for time series
representation learning. Further elaboration on these methods
is explicated below.
a) TS2Vec [52]: TS2Vec utilizes multi-scale contextual
information with granularities to distinguish samples. It en-
ables the learning of timestamp-level representations, while
also supporting instance-level representations of the entire time
series by applying max pooling strategy across timestamps.
TS2Vec eliminates the need of the input projection layer so
that masks can be directly applied to raw input by setting
masked timestamps to zeros. Through the masking of latent
vectors rather than the raw values, the model acquires the