JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 6
following the initialization in the new feature space with a
stacked auto-encoder(SAE) and standard K-Means.
5) ODC [29]: Online Deep Clustering (ODC) devises
a joint clustering and feature learning paradigm with high
stability by performing clustering and network update si-
multaneously rather than performing them alternatively. To
achieve this, ODC introduces novel techniques including loss
re-weighting according to the number of samples in each class,
and processing small clusters in advance to avoid ODC from
getting stuck into trivial solutions. Loss re-weighting helps
to prevent the formation of huge clusters and eliminates ex-
tremely small clusters in advance. Specifically, the samples and
centroids’ memories are initialized via K-Means clustering,
and then the uninterrupted ODC is performed iteratively.
6) IDFD [63]: Inspired by the properties of classical
spectral clustering, IDFD applies deep representation learning
via instance discrimination to clustering. In addition, IDFD in-
troduces a softmax-formulated feature decorrelation constraint
for learning presentations in the latent space to achieve stable
improvements in clustering performance. The instance dis-
crimination module is used to capture the similarities among
data, while the feature decorrelation module is used to remove
the redundant correlations among features.
IV. R ECONSTRUCTION -BASED METHODS
Compared to deep clustering methods that jointly learn rep-
resentations and clustering assignments, reconstruction-based
methods instead prioritize minimizing the discrepancy between
the reconstructed output and the raw input, effectively training
the network to disregard insignificant data that may contain
noise [83, 84, 85]. Reconstruction-based methods generally
adopt utilize an encoder-decoder architecture to reconstruct
the original input data from a modified or incomplete version
of the input data. They learn meaningful representations by
emphasizing the salient features and filtering out irrelevant
or noisy information in the data [86]. Approaches such as
TimeNet [32] and Deconv [68] reconstruct the whole time
series in a reverse order to cater to the characteristics of time
series data. Particularly, HeartSpace [87] segments the heart
rate data into day-long time series because human behavior
presents day-long regularities. In addition, CRT [88] and
MBTGMM [89] are able to capture long-term dependencies
by utilizing transformer encoders compared to those that use
convolutional neural networks [68, 87]. Unlike methods such
as SimMTM [90] that mask certain segments of time series
data for construction, CRT [88] drops segments instead, pre-
serving the original pattern and minimizing noise introduced
during representation learning. The effectiveness of learned
representations is evaluated by how accurately the decoder
can regenerate the input data. Such evaluation ensures that
the model captures and encodes crucial information from the
input while maintaining the capacity to reconstruct it faithfully.
Consequently, reconstruction can also be utilized as a pretext
task into self-supervised learning since the generalization per-
formance of pre-trained representations in downstream tasks
can be further enhanced by reconstructing richer contextual in-
formation [91]. Below are additional details of reconstruction-
based methods used for unsupervised representation learning.1) TimeNet [32]: TimeNet tackles the challenges associated
with time series data, including the varying lengths and
the data scarcity. To reconstruct the time series, TimeNet
employs a sequence auto-encoder (SAE) network based on
the sequence-to-sequence model to transform the original time
series of varying lengths into fixed-dimensional representa-
tions. The encoder RNN serves as a pre-trained model while
the decoder RNN operates in reverse order, aligning with the
inherent temporal nature of time series data. They are trained
jointly to minimize the reconstruction error on time series.
2) Deconv [68]: Deconv utilizes deconvolutional networks
that employ inverse operations of convolution and pooling to
reconstruct time series data. This reverse procedure of con-
volution enables the reconstruction of hidden representations
within the network. The output of traditional unpooling layers
is usually an enlarged but sparse activation map, which may
lead to a loss of expressiveness in complex features required
for accurate reconstruction. To address this, Deconv combines
unpooling and deconvolution techniques to effectively capture
the cross-channel correlations with convolutions. By doing so,
it forces the pooling operation to perform dimension reduction
along each position of the individual channel, enabling more
robust reconstructions of the time series data.
3) HeartSpace [87]: HeartSpace designs a deep auto-
encoder module to reconstruct the day-specific time series to
latent representations, and optimizes parameters through the
Siamese-triplet network optimization strategy. The optimiza-
tion is based on the reconstruction loss and Siamese-triple
loss, where the Siamese-triple loss is constructed by sampling
the intra-series and the inter-series. To mitigate the side effect
caused by zero padding, HeartSpace introduces a dual-stage
gating mechanism into the convolutional auto-encoder module
to re-weight the hidden units. The channel-wise and temporal-
wise gating mechanisms focus on capturing dependencies in
the channel dimension and temporal dimension, respectively.
4) MBTGMM [89]: MBTGMM focuses on learning repre-
sentations of time series and detecting anomalies based on the
reconstruction error, where the anomalies are associated with
high reconstruction errors. MBTGMM utilizes a multi-branch
transformer-based model, which is designed to capture both
short-term and long-term temporal dependencies in the time
series while learning the context-aware representations. The
learned representations are then fed into a Gaussian mixture
model to estimate the density of learned normal representa-
tions. By identifying low-density regions, MBTGMM is able
to effectively detect anomalies in the raw time series data.
5) SimMTM [90]: SimMTM offers an effective approach
for recovering masked time points by leveraging the weighted
aggregation of neighbors outside the manifold. Directly mask-
ing a portion of time points can severely disrupt the temporal
variations present in the original time series. Such disruption
poses significant challenges for guiding representation learning
of time series during reconstruction. SimMTM facilitates the
reconstruction by assembling the ruined but complementary
temporal variations from multiple masked series. In addition
to the reconstruction loss, SimMTM incorporates a constraint
loss to guide the series-wise representation learning based on
the neighborhood assumption of the time series manifold.