JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 9
Models Main Contributions Backbones DA Datasets Evaluations Metrics
SimCLR [43] SimCLR advocates for a learnable nonlinear transforma-
tion bridging the representation and the contrastive loss
to enhance the quality of learned representations, and
highlights the significance of larger batch sizes, more
training steps, and the composition of data augmentations.ResNet ✓ ImageNet,
CIFAR-10Classification,
TransferabilityACC
TimeCLR [105] TimeCLR extends SimCLR to the time series domain,
amalgamating the benefits of dynamic time warping data
augmentation tailored for univariate time series, and the
potent feature extraction capability of InceptionTime, thus
facilitating the acquisition of representations.InceptionTime ✓ Hand Atlas Classification ACC,
F1
MoCo [45] MoCo maintains a dynamic queue to enrich the set of
negative samples, and proposes a slowly progressing key
encoder, implemented as a momentum-based moving av-
erage of the query encoder, to preserve the consistency of
key representations.ResNet ✓ ImageNet,
CIFAR-10Classification,
TransferabilityACC
BYOL [44] BYOL removes the need of using negative samples, and
employs a predictor on top of the online network to learn
the mapping from the online encoder to the target encoder,
which helps prevent mode collapse.ResNet ✓ ImageNet,
CIFAR,
SUN397,
VOC07, DTDClassification,
TransferabilityACC
CPC [56] CPC extracts compact latent representations to encode
predictions over the future observations by combining
autoregressive modeling and noise-contrastive estimation
with intuitions from predictive coding.ResNet, GRU LibriSpeech,
ImageNet,
BookCorpusClassification ACC
SimSiam [57] Simsiam learns representations by using Siamese archi-
tectures without negative sample pairs, large batches and
momentum encoders. SimSiam tackles the mode collapse
problem by using the stop-gradient mechanism.ResNet ✓ ImageNet,
VOC07, COCOClassification,
TransferabilityACC
MCL [106] MCL learns representations through the injection of noise.
Inspired by label smoothing, MCL adopts mixup that
creates new samples by convex combinations of training
examples, and predicts the strength of the mixing compo-
nent based on 2 data points and the augmented sample.FCN ✓ UCR Datasets,
UEA DatasetsClassification,
TransferabilityACC
TABLE IV
SUMMARY OF INSTANCE -LEVEL CONTRASTIVE METHODS FOR TIME SERIES REPRESENTATION LEARNING . DA INDICATES WHETHER THE MODEL
UTILIZES DATA AUGMENTATIONS . ACC REFERS TO ACCURACY , F1 REFERS TO F1SCORE .
transformations and then learn representations by contrasting
positive samples against negative samples [108]. Exploring
negative samples in a completely unsupervised manner can
be challenging for contrastive learning, as it often encounters
hard negative samples with features that are highly similar to
anchors but have different labels. To address this, researchers
have explored various techniques to introduce more negatives,
such as increasing the batch size [43] or exploiting external
data structures [45, 58]. There are also studies that remove
the need of using negative samples and instead use other
strategies such as utilizing a predictor [44], a stop-gradient op-
eration [57], or clustering [59] to learn the mapping. Within the
realm of computer vision, contrastive methods are commonly
categorized into instance-level and prototype-level methods,
with each approach focusing on different levels of contrast.
Additionally, there are specific methods tailored for time series
data, which consider the temporal-level contrast. We analyze
the similarities and differences between these representative
contrastive models in terms of their main contributions, back-
bone architectures, data augmentations (DA), datasets, evalua-
tion strategies, and performance metrics. Contrastive learning
enables the discovery of informative representations in timeseries data without relying on explicit reconstruction tasks.
This analysis provides insights into the key characteristics and
approaches of representative contrastive models in the field
of representation learning for time series data. The concise
overview of instance-level, prototype-level, and temporal-level
methods can be found in Table IV, Table V, and Table VI,
respectively. The following sections provide more in-depth
details about these methods.
1) Instance-level Contrastive Learning Models: Instance-
level contrastive learning models treat individual samples
independently for the purpose of instance discrimination. They
utilize data augmentations to transform original inputs into
a new embedding space. Within this space, augmentations
derived from the same sample are considered as positive pairs,
while those from different samples are treated as negative
pairs. During training, these models are optimized by maxi-
mizing the similarity between representations of positive pairs,
while simultaneously minimizing the similarity between repre-
sentations of negative pairs. Instance-level contrastive methods
achieve significant performance improvement by setting larger
batch size [43], using stronger augmentations [105, 106],
or introducing an additional storage space to store more