JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 3
of learning meaningful representations. Consequently, there is
a lack of systematic analysis of unsupervised representation
learning methods that prioritize the acquisition of effective
representations, whose efficacy on downstream tasks can be
verified by appending simple classifiers or predictors on top
of frozen representations. In addition, existing related surveys
fail to cover the rapidly evolving self-supervised approaches,
especially contrastive learning techniques. It can be observed
that approximately half of existing surveys primarily focus
on models that employ non-deep fundamental methods as
their core techniques. Among the surveys that do incorporate
deep learning models, the emphasis is mainly on supervised
approaches. In addition, most of them exclusively cover tra-
ditional methods within a completely unsupervised setting,
such as clustering [16, 66] or reconstruction-based meth-
ods [20, 24], thereby overlooking numerous contemporary and
highly effective techniques like self-supervised learning that
have proven to yield superior results in recent years. To fill
this gap, we carry out this extensive review of representation
learning methods for time series from an unsupervised deep
learning perspective.
Our comprehensive literature review encompasses i)the
deep clustering methods, ii)the reconstruction-based meth-
ods, and iii)the self-supervised learning methods particularly
contrastive learning methods. The purpose of this review is
to provide readers with a clear and thorough overview of
cutting-edge research in the field of unsupervised time series
representation learning. In addition, we observe that it is
extremely difficult to conduct fair comparisons to evaluate
existing works due to the rapid evolution and various tax-
onomies of unsupervised learning methods. These evaluations
often differ in components such as augmentation methods,
backbones, and even datasets, making it difficult to draw
meaningful comparisons. Consequently, there is a lack of com-
prehensive benchmark evaluations that can offer researchers
a holistic understanding of the strengths and weaknesses of
existing approaches from various perspectives. We notice that
the previous work [20] conducted an experimental evaluation
of pure discriminative time series classification models, but
excluded representation learning methods. In this work, we
aim to bridge this gap by developing a unified and standardized
library ULTS1to enable quick and convenient evaluations
of unsupervised representation learning approaches for time
series. Furthermore, we conduct empirical evaluations over
state-of-the-art approaches on 9 diverse real-world datasets
within this unified evaluation testbed. Our evaluation serves
as a valuable reference for understanding the strengths and
applicable scenarios of different models, helping researchers
design and evaluate customized models in the future. Overall,
the main contributions of this work are summarized as follows:
•We conduct a comprehensive literature review of unsuper-
vised representation learning approaches for time series,
and propose an up-to-date taxonomy that categorizes
different approaches.
•We develop a standardized library ULTS, to conveniently
evaluate various models in a unified testbed, and conduct
1The library ULTS is available at https://github.com/mqwfrog/ULTS.empirical evaluations of state-of-the-art methods, partic-
ularly contrastive ones, on 9 diverse real-world datasets.
•We discuss practical considerations as well as open re-
search challenges on unsupervised learning for time series
and provide new insights to facilitate future research in
this field.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: In Section II,
we introduce the definitions and terminology that are used
throughout this paper, and propose a taxonomy that classifies
existing unsupervised representation learning methods for time
series. Additionally, we introduce a unified and standardized
library ULTS that integrates 17 representative models encom-
passing various categories. Then, we briefly review related
works including deep clustering, reconstruction-based and
self-supervised learning methods in Section III, Section IV,
and Section V respectively. Finally, we conclude this paper
and discuss promising future research directions in Section VI.
II. O VERVIEW
A. Definitions and Terminology
Time series representation learning holds utmost signifi-
cance in time series modeling, as it strives to extract meaning-
ful and informative latent representations within the reservoir
space from the intricate raw complex time series data. The pri-
mary obstacle in time series representation learning lies in the
lack of well-annotated labels, resulting in insufficient super-
visory signals for training supervised models. Consequently,
unsupervised learning approaches are devised to tackle this
challenge by creating various pretext tasks that generate self-
generated labels without relying on human supervision. We
consider a set of Ntime series X={xi}N
i=1, where xi∈
RT×Vdenotes a sequence of time series data collected from
Vvariables within Ttimestamps. When V= 1, it becomes
the univariate time series. In general, we can formulate the
problem as follows: given an original time series xi, unsuper-
vised representation learning aims to learn an encoder fe(·)
that can map xiinto a D-dimensional representation vector zi
in the latent space. A crucial measure to assess the quality and
effectiveness of the acquired representations is their ability to
serve subsequent downstream tasks. Consequently, once the
latent representations are obtained, they are frozen without
further modification, and then can be utilized as input for
downstream tasks such as classification, forecasting, cluster-
ing, and anomaly detection to evaluate their performance. The
unified mathematical notations used throughout this paper are
summarized in Table II.
Notations Descriptions
X The set of original time series data
Z The set of learned representations in the latent space
C The set of cluster centroids (prototypes)
N The number of samples
V The number of variables
T The number of timestamps (the length of time series)
fe(·) The encoder that maps original data Xto representations Z
fd(·) The decoder that uses representations Zto reconstruct original data X
h(·) The nonlinear projection head to remap the representations
fm(·) The momentum encoder
TABLE II
LIST OF MATHEMATICAL NOTATIONS USED THROUGHOUT THIS PAPER .