Axioms 2022 ,11, 34 5 of 13
via transformation. Dropout through augmentation, practical solutions such as dropout
regularization, and batch normalization are performed on the original dataset. By data
warping or oversampling, this augmentation exaggerated the size of the training dataset.
3.3. Dense EfﬁcientNet CNN Model
A novel dense CNN model is presented in this article, which is a mix of pre-trained
EfﬁcientNetB0 with dense layers. EfﬁcientB0 has 230 layers and 7 MBConv blocks [ 22,23]. It
features a thick block structure consisting of four tightly linked layers with a development
rate of 4. Each layer in this structure uses the output feature maps of the preceding levels
as the input feature maps. The dense block concept is composed of convolution layers of
the same size as the input feature maps in EfﬁcientNet. Dense block takes advantage of
the preceding convolution layers’ output feature maps to generate more feature maps with
fewer convolution kernels. This CNN model retrieved 150 150 enhanced MRI image
data. The dense EfﬁcientNet network has an alternate dense and drop-out layer. A dense
layer is the basic layer which feeds all outputs from the previous layer to all its neurons,
each neuron providing one output to the next layer. The drop-out layer is used to reduce
the capacity or thin the network during training and avoids the overﬁtting. We begin by
adding a pooling layer, followed by four dense layers and three drop-out layers to ensure
the model runs smoothly. The numbers of neurons in the dense units are 720, 360, 360,
and 180, respectively. The drop-out values are 0.25, 0.25, and 0.5, respectively. Finally, the
authors have used a dense layer composed of four fully connected neurons in conjunction
with a Softmax output layer to compute and classify the probability score for each class.
Figure 4 illustrates the structure of the proposed EfﬁcientNet in detail.
Axioms 2022 , 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW 5 of 13 
 
3.2. Data Division and Augmentation 
The deep neural network needs large datasets for better results but our dataset is 
limited. Our dataset contains 3260 brain images, further divided into 80% for training, which remains for testing and validation purposes. So, data augmentation is needed to 
change in the minor. The authors have applie d rotation, width-shift, height-shift, and the 
zoom—range for the data requirement. They augmented the original data 21 times for better training. This will enhance the amount of training data, allowing the model to learn more effectively. This may assist in increasing the quantity of relevant data. It contributes 
to the reduction of overfitting and enhances generalization. Data augmentation (DA) is 
the process of creating additional samples to supplement an existing dataset via transfor-mation. Dropout through augmentation, practical solutions such as dropout regulariza-tion, and batch normalization are performed on the original dataset. By data warping or 
oversampling, this augmentation exaggerated the size of the training dataset.  
3.3. Dense EfficientNet CNN Model 
A novel dense CNN model is presented in this article, which is a mix of pre-trained 
EfficientNetB0 with dense layers. EfficientB0 has 230 layers and 7 MBConv blocks [22, 23]. It features a thick block structure consisting of four tightly linked layers with a develop-
ment rate of 4. Each layer in this structure uses the output feature maps of the preceding 
levels as the input feature maps. The dense block concept is composed of convolution 
layers of the same size as the input feature maps in EfficientNet. Dense block takes ad-
vantage of the preceding convolution layers’ output feature maps to generate more fea-ture maps with fewer convolution kernels. This CNN model retrieved 150 × 150 enhanced 
MRI image data. The dense EfficientNet network has an alternate dense and drop-out 
layer.  A dense layer is the basic layer which feeds all outputs from the previous layer to 
all its neurons, each neuron providing one output to the next layer. The drop-out layer is 
used to reduce the capacity or thin the network during training and avoids the overfitting. 
We begin by adding a pooling layer, followed by four dense layers and three drop-out 
layers to ensure the model runs smoothly. The numbers of neurons in the dense units are 
720, 360, 360, and 180, respectively. The drop-out values are 0.25, 0.25, and 0.5, respec-tively. Finally, the authors have used a dense layer composed of four fully connected neu-
rons in conjunction with a Softmax output layer to compute and classify the probability 
score for each class. Figure 4 illustrates the st ructure of the proposed EfficientNet in detail. 
 
Figure 4. Proposed dense EfficientNet CNN model architecture. 
Figure 4. Proposed dense EfﬁcientNet CNN model architecture.
4. Results and Discussion
Numerous experimental assessments have been conducted to determine the suggested
dense CNN model’s validity. All the experimental evaluations have been conducted using
a Python programming environment with GPU support. First, pre-processing is performed
to enhance the contrast in MRI images using max-min normalization and then the images
are augmented for training. The proposed dense-CNN model activated the augmented
tumors for better accuracy. The proposed model showed 99.97% accuracy on training data
and 98.78% accuracy on the testing dataset which is plotted in Figure 5.