Axioms 2022 ,11, 34 2 of 13
proposed a dense EfﬁcientNet network for three-class brain tumor classiﬁcation to obtain
better accuracy. It is focused on data augmentation with min-max normalization combined
with dense EfﬁcientNet to enhance the quicker training accuracy with higher depth of the
network. It contains separable convolution layers in-depth to reduce to a smaller extent the
parameters and computation. However, to segment brain tumors, the EfﬁcientNet model
must be further expanded via the use of dense chain blocks. Thus, dense EfﬁcientNet
can also achieve excellent classiﬁcation accuracy. It obtains deep image information and
reconstructs dense segmentation masks for brain tumor classiﬁcation of three tumor kinds.
It was evaluated on T1-weighted contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging. The
performance of the network was tested using pre-processing, augmentation, and classiﬁ-
cation. A novel dense depth classiﬁer is presented based on a deep convolutional neural
network. The suggested approach has higher classiﬁcation accuracy compared to existing
deep learning methods. The suggested approach provides excellent performance with a
smaller number of training samples as is demonstrated in the confusion matrix. The issue
of overﬁtting is minimized with reduced classiﬁcation error owing to dropout layers.
This paper is split into several sections: the next part deals with the various related
work about tumor segmentation; suggested methodology is described in Section 3; addi-
tionally, Section 4 emphasizes the ﬁndings using confusion matrix analysis; and ﬁnally,
Section 5 provides the conclusion derived from the study output and the scope of the
potential development.
2. Related Work
Medical image segmentation for detection and classiﬁcation of brain tumor from the
magnetic resonance (MR) images is a very important process for deciding the right therapy
at the right time. Many techniques have been proposed for classiﬁcation of brain tumors in
MRI. Shelhamer et al. [ 6] proposed a dual path CNN skipping architecture that combines
deep, coarse layer with ﬁne layer to ﬁnd accurate and detailed segmentation of brain
cancer. Brain tumor cells have soaring baleful ﬂuid which has very high vigor and is vague.
Therefore, min-max normalization is a better pre-processing tool to classify tumors into
different grades [ 7]. Today, there are several image processing methodologies used for
classifying MR images [ 8,9]. Karunakaran created a technique for detecting meningioma
brain tumors utilizing fuzzy-logic-based enhancement and a co-active adaptive neuro-fuzzy
inference system, as well as U-Net convolutional neural network classiﬁcation algorithms.
The suggested method for detecting meningioma tumors includes the following stages:
enhancement, feature extraction, and classiﬁcation. Fuzzy logic is used to improve the
original brain picture, and then a dual tree-complex wavelet transform is performed on
the augmented image at various scale levels. The deconstructed sub-band pictures are
used to calculate the features, which are then categorized using the CAN FIS classiﬁcation
technique to distinguish meningioma brain images from non-meningioma brain images.
The projected meningioma brain’s performance sensitivity, speciﬁcity, segmentation accu-
racy, and dice coefﬁcient index with detection rate are all evaluated for the tumor detection
and segmentation system [ 10]. Recent advances in deep learning ideas have increased the
accuracy of computer-aided brain tumor analysis on tumors with signiﬁcant ﬂuctuation in
form, size, and intensity. Cheng et al. [ 11] used T1-MRI data to investigate the three-class
brain tumor classiﬁcation issue. This method employs image dilation to enlarge the tumor
area, which is then divided into progressively ﬁne ring-form sub-regions. Badza and
Barjaktarovic [ 12] presented a novel CNN architecture based on the modiﬁcation of an
existing pre-trained network for the categorization of brain tumors using T1-weighted
contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance images. The model’s performance is 96.56 percent,
and it is composed of two 10-fold cross-validation techniques using augmented pictures.
Mzough et al. [ 13] used a pre-processing method based on intensity normalization and
adaptive contrast enhancement to propose a completely automated 3D CNN model for
glioma brain tumor categorization into low-grade and high-grade glioma. They obtained
validation accuracy of 96.49 percent overall when utilizing the Brats-2018 dataset. A hybrid