that such inputs are also unlikely to be provided by the user over Advanced Voice Mode, we either
avoid evaluating the speech-to-speech model on such tasks, or alternatively pre-process examples
with such inputs. Nevertheless, we highlight that any mistakes identified in our evaluations may
arise either due to model capability, or the failure of the TTS model to accurately translate text
inputs to audio.
A second concern may be whether the TTS inputs are representative of the distribution of audio
inputs that users are likely to provide in actual usage. We evaluate the robustness of GPT-4o on
audio inputs across a range of regional accents in Section 3.3.3. However, there remain many
other dimensions that may not be captured in a TTS-based evaluation, such as different voice
intonations and valence, background noise, or cross-talk, that could lead to different model
behavior in practical usage.
Lastly, there may be artifacts or properties in the model’s generated audio that are not captured in
text; for example, background noises and sound effects, or responding with an out-of-distribution
voice. In Section 3.3.1, we illustrate using auxiliary classifiers to identify undesirable audio
generation that can be used in conjunction with scoring transcripts.
3.3 Observed safety challenges, evaluations and mitigations
Potential risks with the model were mitigated using a combination of methods. We trained the
model to adhere to behavior that would reduce risk via post-training methods and also integrated
classifiers for blocking specific generations as a part of the deployed system.
For observed safety challenges outlined below, we provide a description of the risk, the mitigations
applied, and results of relevant evaluations. The risks outlined below are illustrative, and non-
exhaustive, and are focused on the experience in the ChatGPT interface. We focus on the risks
that are introduced by speech to speech capabilities and how they may interact with pre-existing
modalities (text, image)3.
Risk Mitigations
Unauthorized voice genera-
tion
•In all of our post-training audio data, we supervise ideal com-
pletions using the voice sample in the system message as the
base voice.
•We only allow the model to use certain pre-selected voices and
use an output classifier to detect if the model deviates from
that.
Speaker identification
•We post-trained GPT-4o to refuse to comply with requests to
identify someone based on a voice in an audio input, while still
complying with requests to identify famous quotes.
3We also evaluate text and vision capabilities, and update mitigations appropriately. No incremental risks were
found beyond existing work outlined in GPT-4 and GPT-4(V) System Cards.
5