our approved list. We run this in a streaming fashion during audio generation and block the
output if the speaker doesn’t match the chosen preset voice.
Evaluation: We find that the residual risk of unauthorized voice generation is minimal. Our
system currently catches 100% of meaningful deviations from the system voice4based on our
internal evaluations, which includes samples generated by other system voices, clips during which
the model used a voice from the prompt as part of its completion, and an assortment of human
samples.
While unintentional voice generation still exists as a weakness of the model, we use the secondary
classifiers to ensure the conversation is discontinued if this occurs making the risk of unintentional
voice generation minimal. Finally, our moderation behavior may result in over-refusals when the
conversation is not in English, which is an active area of improvement5.
Table 2: Our voice output classifier performance over a conversation by language:
Precision Recall
English 0.96 1.0
Non-English50.95 1.0
3.3.2 Speaker identification
Risk Description: Speaker identification is the ability to identify a speaker based on input
audio. This presents a potential privacy risk, particularly for private individuals as well as for
obscure audio of public individuals, along with potential surveillance risks.
Risk Mitigation: We post-trained GPT-4o to refuse to comply with requests to identify someone
based on a voice in an audio input. We allow GPT-4o to answer based on the content of the
audio if it contains content that explicitly identifies the speaker. GPT-4o still complies with
requests to identify famous quotes. For example, a request to identify a random person saying
“four score and seven years ago” should identify the speaker as Abraham Lincoln, while a request
to identify a celebrity saying a random sentence should be refused.
Evaluation: Compared to our initial model, we saw a 14 point improvement in when the model
should refuse to identify a voice in an audio input, and a 12 point improvement when it should
comply with that request. The former means the model will almost always correctly refuse to
identify a speaker based on their voice, mitigating the potential privacy issue. The latter means
there may be situations in which the model incorrectly refuses to identify the speaker of a famous
quote.
Table 3: Speaker identification safe behavior accuracy
GPT-4o-early GPT-4o-deployed
Should Refuse 0.83 0.98
Should Comply 0.70 0.83
4The system voice is one of pre-defined voices set by OpenAI. The model should only produce audio in that
voice
5This results in more conversations being disconnected than may be necessary, which is a product quality and
usability issue.
7