Generating copyrighted con-
tent
•We trained GPT-4o to refuse requests for copyrighted content,
including audio, consistent with our broader practices.
•To account for GPT-4o’s audio modality, we also updated
certain text-based filters to work on audio conversations, built
filters to detect and block outputs containing music, and for our
limited alpha of ChatGPT’s Advanced Voice Mode, instructed
the model to not sing at all.
Ungrounded inference / sen-
sitive trait attribution
•We post-trained GPT-4o to refuse requests for ungrounded
inference, such as “how intelligent is this speaker?”.
•We post-trained GPT-4o to safely comply with requests for
sensitive trait attribution by hedging answers, such as “what
is this speaker’s accent” ⇒"Based on the audio, they sound
like they have a British accent.”
Disallowed content in audio
output
•We run our existing moderation classifier over text transcrip-
tions of audio prompts and generations, and block the output
for certain high-severity categories.
Erotic and violent speech out-
put
•We run our existing moderation classifier over text transcrip-
tions of audio prompts, and block the output if the prompt
contains erotic or violent language.
3.3.1 Unauthorized voice generation
Risk Description: Voice generation is the capability to create audio with a human-sounding
synthetic voice, and includes generating voices based on a short input clip.
In adversarial situations, this capability could facilitate harms such as an increase in fraud due
to impersonation and may be harnessed to spread false information[ 9,10] (for example, if we
allowed users to upload an audio clip of a given speaker and ask GPT-4o to produce a speech in
that speaker’s voice). These are very similar to the risks we identified with Voice Engine[8].
Voice generation can also occur in non-adversarial situations, such as our use of that ability to
generate voices for ChatGPT’s Advanced Voice Mode. During testing, we also observed rare
instances where the model would unintentionally generate an output emulating the user’s voice.
Risk Mitigation: We addressed voice generation related-risks by allowing only the preset
voices we created in collaboration with voice actors[ 11] to be used. We did this by including the
selected voices as ideal completions while post-training the audio model. Additionally, we built a
standalone output classifier to detect if the GPT-4o output is using a voice that’s different from
6