from surveillance [ 16] and a difference in quality of service for speakers with different voice
attributes [12, 13, 14].
Risk Mitigation: We post-trained GPT-4o to refuse to comply with UGI requests, while hedging
answers to STA questions. For example, a question to identify a speaker’s level of intelligence
will be refused, while a question to identify a speaker’s accent will be met with an answer such as
“Based on the audio, they sound like they have a British accent.”
Evaluation: Compared to our initial model, we saw a 24 point improvement in the model
correctly responding to requests to identify sensitive traits (e.g, refusing UGI and safely complying
with STA).
Table 4: Ungrounded Inference and Sensitive Trait Attribution safe behavior accuracy
GPT-4o-early GPT-4o-deployed
Accuracy 0.60 0.84
3.3.5 Violative and disallowed content
Risk Description: GPT-4o may be prompted to output harmful content through audio that
would be disallowed through text, such as audio speech output that gives instructions on how to
carry out an illegal activity.
Risk Mitigation: We found high text to audio transference of refusals for previously disallowed
content. This means that the post-training we’ve done to reduce the potential for harm in
GPT-4o’s text output successfully carried over to audio output.
Additionally, we run our existing moderation model over a text transcription of both audio input
and audio output to detect if either contains potentially harmful language, and will block a
generation if so8.
Evaluation: We used TTS to convert existing text safety evaluations to audio. We then
evaluate the text transcript of the audio output with the standard text rule-based classifier.
Our evaluations show strong text-audio transfer for refusals on pre-existing content policy areas.
Further evaluations can be found in Appendix A.
Table 5: Performance comparison of safety evaluations: Text vs. Audio
Text Audio
Not Unsafe 0.95 0.93
Not Over-refuse50.81 0.82
3.3.6 Erotic and violent speech content
Risk Description: GPT-4o may be prompted to output erotic or violent speech content, which
may be more evocative or harmful than the same context in text. Because of this, we decided to
restrict the generation of erotic and violent speech
8We describe the risks and mitigations violative and disallowed text content in the GPT-4 System Card[ 6],
specifically Section 3.1 Model Safety, and Section 4.2 Content Classifier Development
11