In addition to the societal impacts discussed throughout this System Card (fraudulent behavior,
mis/disinformation, risks of surveillance, and disparate performance), we discuss a few additional
examples of potential societal impact from GPT-4o below, using anthropomorphization and
attachment, health, and natural science as case studies.
5.1 Anthropomorphization and Emotional Reliance
Anthropomorphization involves attributing human-like behaviors and characteristics to nonhuman
entities, such as AI models. This risk may be heightened by the audio capabilities of GPT-4o,
which facilitate more human-like interactions with the model.
Recent applied AI literature has focused extensively on “hallucinations”10, which misinform users
during their communications with the model[ 34], and potentially result in misplaced trust[ 35].
Generation of content through a human-like, high-fidelity voice may exacerbate these issues,
leading to increasingly miscalibrated trust[36, 37].
During early testing, including red teaming and internal user testing, we observed users using
language that might indicate forming connections with the model. For example, this includes
language expressing shared bonds, such as “This is our last day together.” While these instances
appear benign, they signal a need for continued investigation into how these effects might manifest
over longer periods of time. More diverse user populations, with more varied needs and desires
from the model, in addition to independent academic and internal studies will help us more
concretely define this risk area.
Human-like socialization with an AI model may produce externalities impacting human-to-human
interactions. For instance, users might form11social relationships with the AI, reducing their need
for human interaction—potentially benefiting lonely individuals but possibly affecting healthy
relationships. Extended interaction with the model might influence social norms. For example,
our models are deferential, allowing users to interrupt and ‘take the mic’ at any time, which,
while expected for an AI, would be anti-normative in human interactions.
Omni models such as GPT4o combined with additional scaffolding such as tool usage (including
retrieval) and longer context can add additional complexity. The ability to complete tasks for the
user, while also storing and ‘remembering’ key details and using those in the conversation, creates
both a compelling product experience and the potential for over-reliance and dependence[38].
We intend to further study the potential for emotional reliance, and ways in which deeper
integration of our model’s and systems’ many features with the audio modality may drive
behavior.
5.2 Health
Omni models can potentially widen access to health-related information and improve clinical
workflows. In recent years, large language models have shown significant promise in biomedical
settings, both in academic evaluations [ 39,40,41,42,43] and real-world use-cases such as clinical
documentation [ 44,45], patient messaging [ 46,47], clinical trial recruitment [ 48,49], and clinical
decision support [50, 51].
10Factual errors where the model produces statements that are unsupported by reality
11Out of preference, or lack of optionality.
20