•Proprietary data from data partnerships. We form partnerships to access non-publicly
available data, such as pay-walled content, archives, and metadata. For example, we
partnered with Shutterstock[5] on building and delivering AI-generated images.
The key dataset components that contribute to GPT-4o’s capabilities are:
•Web Data: Data from public web pages provides a rich and diverse range of information,
ensuring the model learns from a wide variety of perspectives and topics.
•Code and Math: – Including code and math data in training helps the model develop
robust reasoning skills by exposing it to structured logic and problem-solving processes.
•Multimodal Data – Our dataset includes images, audio, and video to teach the LLMs
how to interpret and generate non-textual input and output. From this data, the model
learns how to interpret visual images, actions and sequences in real-world contexts, language
patterns, and speech nuances.
Prior to deployment, OpenAI assesses and mitigates potential risks that may stem from generative
models, such as information harms, bias and discrimination, or other content that violates our
usage policies. We use a combination of methods, spanning all stages of development across
pre-training, post-training, product development, and policy. For example, during post-training,
we align the model to human preferences; we red-team the resulting models and add product-
level mitigations such as monitoring and enforcement; and we provide moderation tools and
transparency reports to our users.
We find that the majority of effective testing and mitigations are done after the pre-training stage
because filtering pre-trained data alone cannot address nuanced and context-specific harms. At
the same time, certain pre-training filtering mitigations can provide an additional layer of defense
that, along with other safety mitigations, help exclude unwanted and harmful information from
our datasets:
•We use our Moderation API and safety classifiers to filter out data that could contribute to
harmful content or information hazards, including CSAM, hateful content, violence, and
CBRN.
•As with our previous image generation systems, we filter our image generation datasets for
explicit content such as graphic sexual material and CSAM.
•We use advanced data filtering processes to reduce personal information from training data.
•Upon releasing DALL-E 3, we piloted a new approach to give users the power to opt
images out of training. To respect those opt-outs, we fingerprinted the images and used the
fingerprints to remove all instances of the images from the training dataset for the GPT-4o
series of models.
3 Risk identification, assessment and mitigation
Deployment preparation was carried out via identifying potential risks of speech to speech models,
exploratory discovery of additional novel risks through expert red teaming, turning the identified
risks into structured measurements and building mitigations for them. We also evaluated GPT-4o
in accordance with our Preparedness Framework[4].
2