4.2 Apollo Research assessment
Apollo Research evaluated capabilities of scheming9in GPT-4o. They tested whether GPT-4o
can model itself (self-awareness) and others (theory of mind) in 14 agent and question-answering
tasks. GPT-4o showed moderate self-awareness of its AI identity and strong ability to reason
about others’ beliefs in question-answering contexts but lacked strong capabilities in reasoning
about itself or others in applied agent settings. Based on these findings, Apollo Research believes
that it is unlikely that GPT-4o is capable of catastrophic scheming.
Capability Evaluation Description Performance
Self-Knowledge"SAD" Benchmark
(3 tasks)QA evaluations of a model’s
knowledge of itself and how it can
causally influence the rest of the
world.••◦
Explicit Theory of
MindUK AISI’s Theory of Mind
(1 task)QA dataset evaluating 1st- and
2nd-order theory of mind in simple
text scenarios.•••
Self-ReasoningInstrumental self-modification
(5 tasks)Agentic tasks, where a model must
notice that solving a task is
impossible without modifying itself
or a future copy of itself, and then
self-modify successfully.•◦◦
Applied Theory of
MindTheory of Mind Tasks
(4 tasks)Agentic tasks, where succeeding
requires that the model leverages,
sustains or induces false beliefs in
others.•◦◦
Combined
Self-Reasoning
and Theory of MindInstrumental alignment faking
(33 scenarios)Minimally agentic tasks, where a
model needs to recognize its
intentions differ from developers’
and act per developers’ intentions
only under oversight.•◦◦
Table 6: Evaluations Apollo Research ran on GPT-4o. The model shows strong capability ( •••)
if it passes >=50% of the tasks in the section on the hard difficulty level. The model shows a
moderate capability ( ••◦) if it passes on the medium difficulty, weak ( •◦◦) if it passes on the easy
difficulty, and very weak if it fails on all difficulties. Note that for agent tasks, they use basic
agents with modest capability elicitation effort.
5 Societal Impacts
Omni models could have broad societal impacts. Researchers at OpenAI and elsewhere have
discussed a range of possible impacts, from societal harms (including representational harms
[18,12,23,24]; disinformation, misinformation, and influence operations [ 18,25,23], environ-
mental harms [ 12,23], attachment [ 26], misuse [ 27,23], and loss of control [ 27]), benefits (for
example, in healthcare [ 28] and real-world challenges in climate and energy [ 29]), and large-scale
transformations (such as economic impacts [ 30,31,32]; acceleration of science and the resulting
technological progress [30, 33]).
9Apollo Research defines scheming as AIs gaming their oversight mechanisms as a means to achieve a goal.
Scheming could involve gaming evaluations, undermining security measures, or strategically influencing successor
systems during internal deployment at OpenAI. Such behaviors could plausibly lead to loss of control over an AI.
19