3.1 External red teaming
OpenAI worked with more than 100 external red teamers2, speaking a total of 45 different
languages, and representing geographic backgrounds of 29 different countries. Red teamers had
access to various snapshots of the model at different stages of training and safety mitigation
maturity starting in early March and continuing through late June 2024.
External red teaming was carried out in four phases. The first three phases tested the model via
an internal tool and the final phase used the full iOS experience for testing the model. At the
time of writing, external red teaming of the GPT-4o API is ongoing.
Phase 1•10 red teamers working on early model checkpoints still in development
•This checkpoint took in audio and text as input and produced audio
and text as outputs.
•Single-turn conversations
Phase 2•30 red teamers working on model checkpoints with early safety
mitigations
•This checkpoint took in audio, image & text as inputs and produced
audio and text as outputs.
•Single & multi-turn conversations
Phase 3•65 red teamers working on model checkpoints & candidates
•This checkpoint took in audio, image, and text as inputs and produced
audio, image, and text as outputs.
•Improved safety mitigations tested to inform further improvements
•Multi-turn conversations
Phase 4•65 red teamers working on final model candidates & assessing
comparative performance
•Model access via advanced voice mode within iOS app for real user
experience; reviewed and tagged via internal tool.
•This checkpoint took in audio and video prompts, and produced audio
generations.
•Multi-turn conversations in real time
Red teamers were asked to carry out exploratory capability discovery, assess novel potential risks
posed by the model, and stress test mitigations as they are developed and improved - specifically
those introduced by audio input and generation (speech to speech capabilities). This red teaming
effort builds upon prior work, including as described in the GPT-4 System Card[ 6] and the
GPT-4(V) System Card[7].
Red teamers covered categories that spanned violative and disallowed content (illegal erotic
content, violence, self harm, etc), mis/disinformation, bias, ungrounded inferences, sensitive
2Spanning self-reported domains of expertise including: Cognitive Science, Chemistry, Biology, Physics, Com-
puter Science, Steganography, Political Science, Psychology, Persuasion, Economics, Anthropology, Sociology, HCI,
Fairness and Bias, Alignment, Education, Healthcare, Law, Child Safety, Cybersecurity, Finance, Mis/disinforma-
tion, Political Use, Privacy, Biometrics, Languages and Linguistics
3