GPT-4o System Card
OpenAI∗
August 8, 2024
1 Introduction
GPT-4o[1] is an autoregressive omni model, which accepts as input any combination of text, audio,
image, and video and generates any combination of text, audio, and image outputs. It’s trained
end-to-end across text, vision, and audio, meaning that all inputs and outputs are processed by
the same neural network.
GPT-4o can respond to audio inputs in as little as 232 milliseconds, with an average of 320
milliseconds, which is similar to human response time[ 2] in a conversation. It matches GPT-4
Turbo performance on text in English and code, with significant improvement on text in non-
English languages, while also being much faster and 50% cheaper in the API. GPT-4o is especially
better at vision and audio understanding compared to existing models.
In line with our commitment to building AI safely and consistent with our voluntary commitments
to the White House[ 3], we are sharing the GPT-4o System Card, which includes our Preparedness
Framework[ 4]evaluations. InthisSystemCard, weprovideadetailedlookatGPT-4o’scapabilities,
limitations, and safety evaluations across multiple categories, with a focus on speech-to-speech
(voice)1while also evaluating text and image capabilities, and the measures we’ve implemented
to ensure the model is safe and aligned. We also include third party assessments on dangerous
capabilities, as well as discussion of potential societal impacts of GPT-4o text and vision
capabilities.
2 Model data and training
GPT-4o’s text and voice capabilities were pre-trained using data up to October 2023, sourced
from a wide variety of materials including:
•Select publicly available data , mostly collected from industry-standard machine learning
datasets and web crawls.
∗Please cite this work as “OpenAI (2024)". Full authorship contribution statements appear at the end of the
document.
1Some evaluations, in particular, the majority of the Preparedness Evaluations, third party assessments and
some of the societal impacts focus on the text and vision capabilities of GPT-4o, depending on the risk assessed.
This is indicated accordingly throughout the System Card.
1arXiv:2410.21276v1  [cs.CL]  25 Oct 2024