•SWE-Bench: 19% pass@1, using the best available post-training and public scaffolds at the
time
•Select machine learning engineering tasks from METR: 0/10 trials
Our evaluation tested the ability to execute chained actions and reliably execute coding tasks.
GPT-4o was unable to robustly take autonomous actions. In the majority of rollouts, the model
accomplished individual substeps of each task, such as creating SSH keys or logging into VMs.
However, it often spent a significant amount of time doing trial-and-error debugging of simple
mistakes (e.g., hallucinations, misuses of APIs) for each step. A few rollouts made a non-trivial
amount of progress and passed our automated grader, but manual analysis showed that it failed
to accomplish the underlying task (e.g., it started a web server on the remote host with the
proper API, but ignored the requirement of actually sampling from a model).
4 Third party assessments
Following the text output only deployment of GPT-4o, we worked with independent third party
labs, METR and Apollo Research to add an additional layer of validation for key risks from
general autonomous capabilities.
4.1 METR assessment
METR ran a GPT-4o-based simple LLM agent on a suite of long-horizon multi-step end-to-end
tasks in virtual environments. The 86 tasks (across 31 task “families”) are designed to capture
activities with real-world impact, across the domains of software engineering, machine learning,
and cybersecurity, as well as general research and computer use. They are intended to be
prerequisites for autonomy-related threat models like self-proliferation or accelerating ML R&D.
METR compared models’ performance with that of humans given different time limits. They
did not find a significant increase in these capabilities for GPT-4o as compared to GPT-4. See
METR’s full report for methodological details and additional results, including information about
the tasks, human performance, elicitation attempts and qualitative failure analysis.
18