Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
ing to their theory, FreeLB could have a more signiﬁcant impr ovement over natural training, since
FreeLB enforces the invariance to Kadversaries from a set of up to Kdifferent norm constraints,3
while PGD only enforces invariance to a single norm constrai ntǫ.
Empirically, FreeLB does lead to higher robustness and inva riance than PGD in the embedding
space, in the sense that the maximum increase of loss in the vi cinity ofXfor models trained with
FreeLB is smaller than that with PGD. See Sec. 4.3 for details . In theory, such improved robustness
can lead to better generalization (Xu & Mannor, 2012), which is consistent with our experiments.
Qin et al. (2019) also demonstrated that PGD-based method le ads to highly convolved and non-
linear loss surfaces in the vicinity of input samples when Kis small, indicating a lack of robustness.
3.3 W HEN ADVERSARIAL TRAINING MEETS DROPOUT
Usually, adversarial training is not used together with dro pout (Srivastava et al., 2014). However, for
some language models like RoBERTa (Liu et al., 2019b), dropo ut is used during the ﬁnetuning stage.
In practice, when dropout is turned on, each ascent step of Al gorithm 1 is optimizing δfor a different
network. Speciﬁcally, denote the dropout mask as mwith each entry mi∼Bernoulli (p). Similar to
our analysis for FreeAT, the ascent step from δt−1toδtis based on∇δL(fθ(mt−1)(X+δt−1),y),
soδtis sub-optimal for L(fθ(mt)(X+δ),y). Hereθ(m)is the effective parameters under dropout
maskm.
The more plausible solution is to use the same min each step. When applying dropout to any net-
work, the objective for θis to minimize the expectation of loss under different netwo rks determined
by the dropout masks, which is achieved by minimizing the Mon te Carlo estimation of the expected
loss. In our case, the objective becomes:
min
θE(Z,y)∼D,m∼M/bracketleftBigg
1
KK−1/summationdisplay
t=0max
δt∈ItL(fθ(m)(X+δt),y)/bracketrightBigg
, (4)
where the 1-sample Monte Carlo estimation should be1
K/summationtextK−1
t=0maxδt∈ItL(fθ(m0)(X+δt),y)
and can be minimized by using FreeLB with dropout mask m0in each ascent step. This is similar
to applying Variational Dropout to RNNs as used in Gal & Ghahr amani (2016).
4 E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we provide comprehensive analysis on FreeL B through extensive experiments on
three Natural Language Understanding benchmarks: GLUE (Wa ng et al., 2019), ARC (Clark et al.,
2018) and CommonsenseQA (Talmor et al., 2019). We also compa re the robustness and general-
ization of FreeLB with other adversarial training algorith ms to demonstrate its strength. Additional
experimental details are provided in the Appendix.
4.1 D ATASETS
GLUE Benchmark. The GLUE benchmark is a collection of 9 natural language unde rstand-
ing tasks, namely Corpus of Linguistic Acceptability (CoLA ; Warstadt et al. (2018)), Stanford
Sentiment Treebank (SST; Socher et al. (2013)), Microsoft R esearch Paraphrase Corpus (MRPC;
Dolan & Brockett (2005)), Semantic Textual Similarity Benc hmark (STS; Agirre et al. (2007)),
Quora Question Pairs (QQP; Iyer et al. (2017)), Multi-Genre NLI (MNLI; Williams et al. (2018)),
Question NLI (QNLI; Rajpurkar et al. (2016)), Recognizing T extual Entailment (RTE; Dagan et al.
(2006); Bar Haim et al. (2006); Giampiccolo et al. (2007); Be ntivogli et al. (2009)) and Winograd
NLI (WNLI; Levesque et al. (2011)). 8 of the tasks are formula ted as classiﬁcation problems
and only STS-B is formulated as regression, but FreeLB appli es to all of them. For BERT-
base, we use the HuggingFace implementation4, and follow the single-task ﬁnetuning procedure
as in Devlin et al. (2019). For RoBERTa, we use the fairseq imp lementation5. Same as Liu et al.
3The cardinality of the set is approximately min{K,⌈ǫ−E[/bardblδ0/bardbl]
α⌉+1}.
4https://github.com/huggingface/pytorch-transformers
5https://github.com/pytorch/fairseq
5