Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
We perform comprehensive experiments to evaluate the perfo rmance of a variety of adversarial train-
ing algorithms on state-of-the-art language understandin g models and tasks. In the comparisons
with standard PGD (Madry et al., 2018), FreeAT (Shafahi et al ., 2019) and YOPO (Zhang et al.,
2019), FreeLB stands out to be the best for the datasets and mo dels we evaluated. With FreeLB,
we achieve state-of-the-art results on several important l anguage understanding benchmarks. On
the GLUE benchmark, FreeLB pushes the performance of the BER T-base model from 78.3 to 79.4.
The overall score of the RoBERTa-large models on the GLUE ben chmark is also lifted from 88.5 to
88.8, achieving best results on most of its sub-tasks. Exper iments also show that FreeLB can boost
the performance of RoBERTa-large on question answering tas ks, such as the ARC and Common-
senseQA benchmarks. We also provide a comprehensive ablati on study and analysis to demonstrate
the effectiveness of our training process.
2 R ELATED WORK
2.1 A DVERSARIAL TRAINING
To improve the robustness of neural networks against advers arial examples, many defense strategies
and models have been proposed, in which PGD-based adversari al training (Madry et al., 2018) is
widely considered to be the most effective, since it largely avoids the the obfuscated gradient prob-
lem (Athalye et al., 2018). It formulates a class of adversar ial training algorithms (Kurakin et al.,
2017) into solving a minimax problem on the cross-entropy lo ss, which can be achieved reliably
through multiple projected gradient ascent steps followed by a SGD (Stochastic Gradient Descent)
step.
Despite being veriﬁed by Athalye et al. (2018) to avoid obfus cated gradients, Qin et al. (2019) shows
that PGD-based adversarial training still leads to highly c onvolved and non-linear loss surfaces when
Kis small, which could be readily broken under stronger adver saries. Thus, to be effective, the cost
of PGD-based adversarial training is much higher than conve ntional training. To mitigate this cost,
Shafahi et al. (2019) proposed a “free” adversarial trainin g algorithm that simultaneously updates
both model parameters and adversarial perturbations on a si ngle backward pass. Using a similar
formulation, Zhang et al. (2019) effectively reduce the tot al number of full forward and backward
propagations for obtaining adversarial examples by restri cting most of its adversarial updates in the
ﬁrst layer.
2.2 A DVERSARIAL EXAMPLES IN NATURAL LANGUAGES
Adversarial examples have been explored primarily in the im age domain, and received many atten-
tion in text domain recently. Previous works on text adversa ries have focused on heuristics for cre-
ating adversarial examples in the black-box setting, or on s peciﬁc tasks. Jia & Liang (2017) propose
to add distracting sentences to the input document in order t o induce mis-classiﬁcation. Zhao et al.
(2018) generate text adversaries by projecting the input da ta to a latent space using GANs, and
searching for adversaries close to the original instance. B elinkov & Bisk (2018) manipulate every
word in a sentence with synthetic or natural noise in machine translation systems. Iyyer et al. (2018)
propose a neural paraphrase model based on back-translated data to produce paraphrases that have
different sentence structures. Different from previous wo rk, ours is not to produce actual adversarial
examples, but only take the beneﬁt of adversarial training f or natural language understanding.
We are not the ﬁrst to observe that robust language models may perform better on clean test data.
Miyato et al. (2017) extend adversarial and virtual adversa rial training (Miyato et al., 2019) to the
text domain to improve the performance on semi-supervised c lassiﬁcation tasks. Ebrahimi et al.
(2018) propose a character/word replacement for crafting a ttacks, and show employing adversarial
examples in training renders the models more robust. Ribeir o et al. (2018) show that adversarial
attacks can be used as a valuable tool for debugging NLP model s. Cheng et al. (2019) also ﬁnd
that crafting adversarial examples can help neural machine translation signiﬁcantly. Notably, these
studies have focused on simple models or text generation tas ks. Our work explores how to efﬁ-
ciently use the gradients obtained in adversarial training to boost the performance of state-of-the-art
transformer-based models.
2