Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
Algorithm 1 “Free” Large-Batch Adversarial Training (FreeLB- K)
Require: Training samples X={(Z,y)}, perturbation bound ǫ, learning rate τ, ascent steps K,
ascent step size α
1:Initialize θ
2:forepoch= 1...Nepdo
3: forminibatch B⊂Xdo
4: δ0←1√NδU(−ǫ,ǫ)
5: g0←0
6: fort= 1...K do
7: Accumulate gradient of parameters θ
8: gt←gt−1+1
KE(Z,y)∈B[∇θL(fθ(X+δt−1),y)]
9: Update the perturbation δvia gradient ascend
10: gadv←∇δL(fθ(X+δt−1),y)
11: δt←Π/bardblδ/bardblF≤ǫ(δt−1+α·gadv//ba∇dblgadv/ba∇dblF)
12: end for
13: θ←θ−τgK
14: end for
15:end for
2019) and YOPO (Zhang et al., 2019) have been proposed to acce lerate adversarial training. They
achieve comparable robustness and generalization as stand ard PGD-trained models using only the
same or a slightly larger number of forward-backward passes as natural training (i.e., SGD on clean
samples). FreeAT takes one descent step on the parameters to gether with each of theKascent steps
on the perturbation. As a result, FreeAT may suffer from the “ stale gradient” problem (Dutta et al.,
2018), where in every step t,δtdoes not necessarily maximize the model with parameter θtsince
its update is based on ∇δL(fθt−1(X+δt−1),y), and vice versa, θtdoes not necessarily minimize
the adversarial risk with adversary δtsince its update is based on ∇θL(fθt−1(X+δt−1),y). Such
a problem may be more signiﬁcant when the step size is large.
Different from FreeAT, YOPO accumulates the gradient of the parameters from each of the ascent
steps, and updates the parameters only once after the Kinner ascent steps. YOPO also advocates
that after each back-propagation, one should take the gradi ent of the ﬁrst hidden layer as a constant
and perform several additional updates on the adversary usi ng the product of this constant and the
Jacobian of the ﬁrst layer of the network to obtain strong adv ersaries. However, when the ﬁrst
hidden layer is a linear layer as in their implementation, su ch an operation is equivalent to taking
a larger step size on the adversary. The analysis backing the extra update steps also assumes a
twice continuously differentiable loss, which does not hol d for ReLU-based neural networks they
experimented with, and thus the reasons for the success of su ch an algorithm remains obscure. We
give empirical comparisons between YOPO and our approach in Sec. 4.3.
To obtain better solutions for the inner max and avoid fundam ental limitations on the function class,
we propose FreeLB, which performs multiple PGD iterations t o craft adversarial examples, and
simultaneously accumulates the “free” parameter gradient s∇θLin each iteration. After that, it
updates the model parameter θall at once with the accumulated gradients. The overall proc edure
is shown in Algorithm 1, in which X+δtis an approximation to the local maximum within the
intersection of two balls It=BX+δ0(αt)∩BX(ǫ). By taking a descent step along the averaged
gradients at X+δ0,...,X+δK−1, we approximately optimize the following objective:
min
θE(Z,y)∼D/bracketleftBigg
1
KK−1/summationdisplay
t=0max
δt∈ItL(fθ(X+δt),y)/bracketrightBigg
, (3)
which is equivalent to replacing the original batch Xwith aK-times larger virtual batch, consisting
of samples whose embeddings are X+δ0,...,X+δK−1. Compared with PGD-based adversarial
training (Eq. 1), which minimizes the maximum risk at a singl e estimated point in the vicinity of each
training sample, FreeLB minimizes the maximum risk at each a scent step at almost no overhead.
Intuitively, FreeLB could be a learning method with lower ge neralization error than PGD.
Sokolic et al. (2017) have proved that the generalization er ror of a learning method invariant to a
set ofTtransformations may be up to√
Tsmaller than a non-invariant learning method. Accord-
4