arXiv:1909.11764v5  [cs.CL]  23 Apr 2020Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
FREELB: E NHANCED ADVERSARIAL TRAINING FOR
NATURAL LANGUAGE UNDERSTANDING
Chen Zhu1, Yu Cheng2, Zhe Gan2, Siqi Sun2, Tom Goldstein1, Jingjing Liu2
1University of Maryland, College Park2Microsoft Dynamics 365 AI Research
{chenzhu,tomg }@cs.umd.edu ,{yu.cheng,zhe.gan,siqi.sun,jingjl }@microsoft.com
ABSTRACT
Adversarial training, which minimizes the maximal risk for label-preserving in-
put perturbations, has proved to be effective for improving the generalization of
language models. In this work, we propose a novel adversaria l training algorithm,
FreeLB, that promotes higher invariance in the embedding sp ace, by adding adver-
sarial perturbations to word embeddings and minimizing the resultant adversarial
risk inside different regions around input samples. To vali date the effectiveness
of the proposed approach, we apply it to Transformer-based m odels for natural
language understanding and commonsense reasoning tasks. E xperiments on the
GLUE benchmark show that when applied only to the ﬁnetuning s tage, it is able
to improve the overall test scores of BERT-base model from 78 .3 to 79.4, and
RoBERTa-large model from 88.5 to 88.8. In addition, the prop osed approach
achieves state-of-the-art single-model test accuracies o f 85.44% and 67.75% on
ARC-Easy and ARC-Challenge. Extensive experiments furthe r demonstrate that
FreeLB can be generalized and boost the performance of RoBER Ta-large and AL-
BERT on other tasks as well.1
1 I NTRODUCTION
Adversarial training is a method for creating robust neural networks. During adve rsarial training,
mini-batches of training samples are contaminated with adv ersarial perturbations (alterations that
are small and yet cause misclassiﬁcation), and then used to u pdate network parameters until the
resulting model learns to resist such attacks. Adversarial training was originally proposed as a means
to enhance the security of machine learning systems (Goodfe llow et al., 2015), especially for safety-
critical systems like self-driving cars (Xiao et al., 2018) and copyright detection (Saadatpanah et al.,
2019).
In this paper, we turn our focus away from the security beneﬁt s of adversarial training, and in-
stead study its effects on generalization. While adversari al training boosts the robustness, it is
widely accepted by computer vision researchers that it is at odds with generalization, with clas-
siﬁcation accuracy on non-corrupted images dropping as muc h as10% on CIFAR-10, and 15% on
Imagenet (Madry et al., 2018; Xie et al., 2019). Surprisingl y, people observe the opposite result
for language models (Miyato et al., 2017; Cheng et al., 2019) , showing that adversarial training can
improve both generalization and robustness.
We will show that adversarial training signiﬁcantly improv es performance of state-of-the-art mod-
els for many language understanding tasks. In particular, w e propose a novel adversarial training
algorithm, called FreeLB (Free Large-Batch), which adds ad versarial perturbations to word embed-
dings and minimizes the resultant adversarial loss around i nput samples. The method leverages
recently proposed “free” training strategies (Shafahi et a l., 2019; Zhang et al., 2019) to enrich the
training data with diversiﬁed adversarial samples under di fferent norm constraints at no extra cost
than PGD-based (Projected Gradient Descent) adversarial t raining (Madry et al., 2018), which en-
ables us to perform such diversiﬁed adversarial training on large-scale state-of-the-art models. We
observe improved invariance in the embedding space for mode ls trained with FreeLB, which is pos-
itively correlated with generalization.
1Code is available at https://github.com/zhuchen03/FreeLB .
1