Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
3 A DVERSARIAL TRAINING FOR LANGUAGE UNDERSTANDING
Pre-trained large-scale language models, such as BERT (Dev lin et al., 2019), RoBERTa (Liu et al.,
2019b), ALBERT (Lan et al., 2020) and T5 (Raffel et al., 2019) , have proven to be highly effective
for downstream tasks. We aim to further improve the generali zation of these pre-trained language
models on the downstream language understanding tasks by en hancing their robustness in the em-
bedding space during ﬁnetuning on these tasks. We achieve th is goal by creating “virtual” adver-
sarial examples in the embedding space, and then perform par ameter updates on these adversarial
embeddings. Creating actual adversarial examples for lang uage is difﬁcult; even with state-of-the-
art language models as guidance (e.g., (Cheng et al., 2019)) , it remains unclear how to construct
label-preserving adversarial examples via word/characte r replacement without human evaluations,
because the meaning of each word/character depends on the co ntext (Ribeiro et al., 2018). Since
we are only interested in the effects of adversarial training, rather than producing actual adve rsarial
examples, we add norm-bounded adversarial perturbations t o the embeddings of the input sentences
using a gradient-based method. Note that our embedding-bas ed adversary is strictly stronger than a
more conventional text-based adversary, as our adversary c an make manipulations on word embed-
dings that are not possible in the text domain.
For models that incorporate various input representations , including word or subword embeddings,
segment embeddings and position embeddings, our adversari es only modify the concatenated word
or sub-word embeddings, leaving other components of the sen tence representation unchanged.2De-
note the sequence of one-hot representations of the input su bwords as Z= [z1,z2,...,zn], the em-
bedding matrix as V, and the language model (encoder) as a function y=fθ(X), whereX=V Z
is the subword embeddings, yis the output of the model (e.g., class probabilities for cla ssiﬁcation
models), and θdenotes all the learnable parameters including the embeddi ng matrix V. We add ad-
versarial perturbations δto the embeddings such that the prediction becomes y′=fθ(X+δ). To
preserve the semantics, we constrain the norm of δto be small, and assume the model’s prediction
should not change after the perturbation. This formulation is analogous to Miyato et al. (2017), with
the difference that we do not require Xto be normalized.
3.1 PGD FOR ADVERSARIAL TRAINING
Standard adversarial training seeks to ﬁnd optimal paramet ersθ∗to minimize the maximum risk for
anyδwithin a norm ball as:
min
θE(Z,y)∼D/bracketleftbigg
max
/bardblδ/bardbl≤ǫL(fθ(X+δ),y)/bracketrightbigg
, (1)
whereDis the data distribution, yis the label, and Lis some loss function. We use the Frobenius
norm to constrain δ. For neural networks, the outer “min” is non-convex, and the inner “max” is
non-concave. Nonetheless, Madry et al. (2018) demonstrate d that this saddle-point problem can be
solved reliably with SGD for the outer minimization and PGD ( a standard method for large-scale
constrained optimization, see (Combettes & Pesquet, 2011) and (Goldstein et al., 2014)), for the
inner maximization. In particular, for the constraint /ba∇dblδ/ba∇dblF≤ǫ, with an additional assumption that
the loss function is locally linear, PGD takes the following step (with step size α) in each iteration:
δt+1= Π/bardblδ/bardblF≤ǫ(δt+αg(δt)//ba∇dblg(δt)/ba∇dblF), (2)
whereg(δt) =∇δL(fθ(X+δt),y)is the gradient of the loss with respect to δ, andΠ/bardblδ/bardblF≤ǫ
performs a projection onto the ǫ-ball. To achieve high-level robustness, multi-step adver sarial ex-
amples are needed during training, which is computationall y expensive. The K-step PGD ( K-PGD)
requiresKforward-backward passes through the network, while the sta ndard SGD update requires
only one. As a result, the adversary generation step in adver sarial training increases run-time by an
order of magnitudea catastrophic amount when training larg e state-of-the-art language models.
3.2 L ARGE -BATCH ADVERSARIAL TRAINING FOR FREE
In the inner ascent steps of PGD, the gradients of the paramet ers can be obtained with almost no
overhead when computing the gradients of the inputs. From th is observation, FreeAT (Shafahi et al.,
2“Subword embeddings” refers to the embeddings of sub-word e ncodings such as the popular Byte Pair
Encoding (BPE) (Sennrich et al., 2016).
3