BERT-ATTACK: Adversarial Attack Against BERT Using BERT
Linyang Li, Ruotian Ma, Qipeng Guo, Xiangyang Xue, Xipeng Qiu
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, Fudan University
School of Computer Science, Fudan University
825 Zhangheng Road, Shanghai, China
flinyangli19,rtma19,qpguo16,xyxue,xpqiu g@fudan.edu.cn
Abstract
Adversarial attacks for discrete data (such as
texts) have been proved signiﬁcantly more
challenging than continuous data (such as im-
ages) since it is difﬁcult to generate adversar-
ial samples with gradient-based methods. Cur-
rent successful attack methods for texts usually
adopt heuristic replacement strategies on the
character or word level, which remains chal-
lenging to ﬁnd the optimal solution in the mas-
sive space of possible combinations of replace-
ments while preserving semantic consistency
and language ﬂuency. In this paper, we pro-
pose BERT-Attack , a high-quality and effec-
tive method to generate adversarial samples
using pre-trained masked language models ex-
empliﬁed by BERT. We turn BERT against its
ﬁne-tuned models and other deep neural mod-
els in downstream tasks so that we can success-
fully mislead the target models to predict incor-
rectly. Our method outperforms state-of-the-
art attack strategies in both success rate and
perturb percentage, while the generated adver-
sarial samples are ﬂuent and semantically pre-
served. Also, the cost of calculation is low,
thus possible for large-scale generations. The
code is available at https://github.com/
LinyangLee/BERT-Attack .
1 Introduction
Despite the success of deep learning, recent works
have found that these neural networks are vulnera-
ble to adversarial samples, which are crafted with
small perturbations to the original inputs (Goodfel-
low et al., 2014; Kurakin et al., 2016; Chakraborty
et al., 2018). That is, these adversarial samples are
imperceptible to human judges while they can mis-
lead the neural networks to incorrect predictions.
Therefore, it is essential to explore these adver-
sarial attack methods since the ultimate goal is to
make sure the neural networks are highly reliable
Corresponding author.and robust. While in computer vision ﬁelds, both
attack strategies and their defense countermeasures
are well-explored (Chakraborty et al., 2018), the
adversarial attack for text is still challenging due
to the discrete nature of languages. Generating of
adversarial samples for texts needs to possess such
qualities: (1) imperceptible to human judges yet
misleading to neural models; (2) ﬂuent in grammar
and semantically consistent with original inputs.
Previous methods craft adversarial samples
mainly based on speciﬁc rules (Li et al., 2018; Gao
et al., 2018; Yang et al., 2018; Alzantot et al., 2018;
Ren et al., 2019; Jin et al., 2019; Zang et al., 2020).
Therefore, these methods are difﬁcult to guaran-
tee the ﬂuency and semantically preservation in
the generated adversarial samples at the same time.
Plus, these manual craft methods are rather com-
plicated. They use multiple linguistic constraints
like NER tagging or POS tagging. Introducing
contextualized language models to serve as an au-
tomatic perturbation generator could make these
rules designing much easier.
The recent rise of pre-trained language models,
such as BERT (Devlin et al., 2018), push the per-
formances of NLP tasks to a new level. On the one
hand, the powerful ability of a ﬁne-tuned BERT
on downstream tasks makes it more challenging to
be adversarial attacked (Jin et al., 2019). On the
other hand, BERT is a pre-trained masked language
model on extremely large-scale unsupervised data
and has learned general-purpose language knowl-
edge. Therefore, BERT has the potential to gener-
ate more ﬂuent and semantic-consistent substitu-
tions for an input text. Naturally, both the proper-
ties of BERT motivate us to explore the possibility
of attacking a ﬁne-tuned BERT with another BERT
as the attacker.
In this paper, we propose an effective and
high-quality adversarial sample generation method:
BERT-Attack , using BERT as a language modelarXiv:2004.09984v3  [cs.CL]  2 Oct 2020