to generate adversarial samples. The core algo-
rithm of BERT-Attack is straightforward and con-
sists of two stages: ﬁnding the vulnerable words
in one given input sequence for the target model;
then applying BERT in a semantic-preserving way
to generate substitutes for the vulnerable words.
With the capability of BERT, the perturbations are
generated considering the context around. There-
fore, the perturbations are ﬂuent and reasonable.
We use the masked language model as a perturba-
tion generator and ﬁnd perturbations that maximize
the risk of making wrong predictions (Goodfellow
et al., 2014). Differently from previous attacking
strategies that require traditional single-direction
language models as a constraint, we only need to in-
ference the language model once as a perturbation
generator rather than repeatedly using language
models to score the generated adversarial samples
in a trial and error process.
Experimental results show that the proposed
BERT-Attack method successfully fooled its ﬁne-
tuned downstream model with the highest attack
success rate compared with previous methods.
Meanwhile, the perturb percentage and the query
number are considerably lower, while the semantic
preservation is high.
To summarize our main contributions:
•We propose a simple and effective method,
named BERT-Attack , to effectively generate
ﬂuent and semantically-preserved adversarial
samples that can successfully mislead state-
of-the-art models in NLP, such as ﬁne-tuned
BERT for various downstream tasks.
•BERT-Attack has a higher attacking success
rate and a lower perturb percentage with fewer
access numbers to the target model compared
with previous attacking algorithms, while
does not require extra scoring models there-
fore extremely effective.
2 Related Work
To explore the robustness of neural networks, adver-
sarial attacks have been extensively studied for con-
tinuous data (such as images) (Goodfellow et al.,
2014; Nguyen et al., 2015; Chakraborty et al.,
2018). The key idea is to ﬁnd a minimal pertur-
bation that maximizes the risk of making wrong
predictions. This minimax problem can be eas-
ily achieved by applying gradient descent over the
continuous space of images (Miyato et al., 2017).However, adversarial attack for discrete data such
as text remains challenging.
Adversarial Attack for Text
Current successful attacks for text usually adopt
heuristic rules to modify the characters of a word
(Jin et al., 2019), and substituting words with syn-
onyms (Ren et al., 2019). Li et al. (2018); Gao
et al. (2018) apply perturbations based on word em-
beddings such as Glove (Pennington et al., 2014),
which is not strictly semantically and grammati-
cally coordinated. Alzantot et al. (2018) adopts lan-
guage models to score the perturbations generated
by searching for close meaning words in the word
embedding space (Mrk ˇsi´c et al., 2016), using a trial
and error process to ﬁnd possible perturbations, yet
the perturbations generated are still not context-
aware and heavily rely on cosine similarity mea-
surement of word embeddings. Glove embeddings
do not guarantee similar vector space with cosine
similarity distance, therefore the perturbations are
less semantically consistent. Jin et al. (2019) apply
a semantically enhanced embedding (Mrk ˇsi´c et al.,
2016), which is context unaware, thus less consis-
tent with the unperturbed inputs. Liang et al. (2017)
use phrase-level insertion and deletion, which pro-
duces unnatural sentences inconsistent with the
original inputs, lacking ﬂuency control. To pre-
serve semantic information, Glockner et al. (2018)
replace words manually to break the language in-
ference system (Bowman et al., 2015). Jia and
Liang (2017) propose manual craft methods to at-
tack machine reading comprehension systems. Lei
et al. (2019) introduce replacement strategies using
embedding transition.
Although the above approaches have achieved
good results, there is still much room for improve-
ment regarding the perturbed percentage, attacking
success rate, grammatical correctness and semantic
consistency, etc. Moreover, the substitution strate-
gies of these approaches are usually non-trivial,
resulting in that they are limited to speciﬁc tasks.
Adversarial Attack against BERT
Pre-trained language models have become main-
stream for many NLP tasks. Works such as (Wal-
lace et al., 2019; Jin et al., 2019; Pruthi et al., 2019)
have explored these pre-trained language models
from many different angles. Wallace et al. (2019)
explored the possible ethical problems of learned
knowledge in pre-trained models.