Dataset Label
MNLIOri Some rooms have balconies . Hypothesis All of the rooms have balconies off of them . Contradiction
Adv Many rooms have balconies . Hypothesis All of the rooms have balconies off of them . Neutral
IMDBOriit is hard for a lover of the novel northanger abbey to sit through this bbc adaptation and to Negative
keep from throwing objects at the tv screen... why are so many facts concerning the tilney
family and mrs . tilney ’ s death altered unnecessarily ? to make the story more ‘ horrible ? ’
Advit is hard for a lover of the novel northanger abbey to sit through this bbc adaptation and to Positive
keep from throwing objects at the tv screen... why are so many facts concerning the tilney
family and mrs . tilney ’ s death altered unnecessarily ? to make the plot more ‘ horrible ? ’
IMDBOrii ﬁrst seen this movie in the early 80s .. it really had nice picture quality too . anyways , i ’m Positive
glad i found this movie again ... the part i loved best was when he hijacked the car from this
poor guy... this is a movie i could watch over and over again . i highly recommend it .
Advi ﬁrst seen this movie in the early 80s .. it really had nice picture quality too . anyways , i ’m Negative
glad i found this movie again ... the part i loved best was when he hijacked the car from this
poor guy... this is a movie i could watch over and over again . i inordinately recommend it .
Table 10: Some generated adversarial samples. Origin label is the correct prediction while label is adverse predic-
tion. Only red color parts are perturbed. We only attack premises in MNLI task. Text in FAKE dataset and IMDB
dataset is cut to ﬁt in the table. Original text contains more than 200 words.
5.6 Runtime Comparison
Since BERT-Attack does not use language mod-
els or sentence encoders to measure the output se-
quence during the generation process, also, the
query number is lower, therefore the runtime is
faster than previous methods. As seen in Table
9, BERT-Attack is much faster than generic algo-
rithm (Alzantot et al., 2018) and 3 times faster then
Textfooler.
5.7 Examples of Generated Adversarial
Sentences
As seen in Table 10, the generated adversarial sam-
ples are semantically consistent with its original
input, while the target model makes incorrect pre-
dictions. In both review classiﬁcation samples and
language inference samples, the perturbations do
not mislead human judges.
6 Conclusion
In this work, we propose a high-quality and effec-
tive method BERT-Attack to generate adversarial
samples using BERT masked language model. Ex-
periment results show that the proposed method
achieves a high success rate while maintaining a
minimum perturbation. Nevertheless, candidates
generated from the masked language model can
sometimes be antonyms or irrelevant to the original
words, causing a semantic loss. Thus, enhancing
language models to generate more semantically re-
lated perturbations can be one possible solution to
perfect BERT-Attack in the future.7 Acknowledgement
We would like to thank the anonymous review-
ers for their valuable comments. We are thank-
ful for the help of Demin Song, Hang Yan and
Pengfei Liu. This work was supported by the Na-
tional Natural Science Foundation of China (No.
61751201, 62022027 and 61976056), Shanghai
Municipal Science and Technology Major Project
(No. 2018SHZDZX01) and ZJLab.
References
Moustafa Alzantot, Yash Sharma, Ahmed Elgohary,
Bo-Jhang Ho, Mani B. Srivastava, and Kai-Wei
Chang. 2018. Generating natural language adversar-
ial examples. CoRR , abs/1804.07998.
Samuel R Bowman, Gabor Angeli, Christopher Potts,
and Christopher D Manning. 2015. A large anno-
tated corpus for learning natural language inference.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1508.05326 .
Daniel Cer, Yinfei Yang, Sheng-yi Kong, Nan Hua,
Nicole Limtiaco, Rhomni St John, Noah Constant,
Mario Guajardo-Cespedes, Steve Yuan, Chris Tar,
et al. 2018. Universal sentence encoder. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1803.11175 .
Anirban Chakraborty, Manaar Alam, Vishal Dey, Anu-
pam Chattopadhyay, and Debdeep Mukhopadhyay.
2018. Adversarial attacks and defences: A survey.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.00069 .
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and
Kristina Toutanova. 2018. BERT: pre-training of
deep bidirectional transformers for language under-
standing. CoRR , abs/1810.04805.