ARTICLE OPEN
Genetic algorithms for computational materials discovery
accelerated by machine learning
Paul C. Jennings1,2, Steen Lysgaard3, Jens Strabo Hummelshøj4, Tejs Vegge3and Thomas Bligaard1,2
Materials discovery is increasingly being impelled by machine learning methods that rely on pre-existing datasets. Where datasets
are lacking, unbiased data generation can be achieved with genetic algorithms. Here a machine learning model is trained on-the- ﬂy
as a computationally inexpensive energy predictor before analyzing how to augment convergence in genetic algorithm-basedapproaches by using the model as a surrogate. This leads to a machine learning accelerated genetic algorithm combining robust
qualities of the genetic algorithm with rapid machine learning. The approach is used to search for stable, compositionally variant,
geometrically similar nanoparticle alloys to illustrate its capability for accelerated materials discovery, e.g., nanoalloy catalysts. Themachine learning accelerated approach, in this case, yields a 50-fold reduction in the number of required energy calculations
compared to a traditional “brute force ”genetic algorithm. This makes searching through the space of all homotops and
compositions of a binary alloy particle in a given structure feasible, using density functional theory calculations.
npj Computational Materials            (2019) 5:46 ; https://doi.org/10.1038/s41524-019-0181-4
INTRODUCTION
The current rate of discovery of clean energy materials remains a
key bottleneck in the transition to renewable energy, and
computational tools enabling accelerated prediction of the
chemical ordering and structure of such materials, e.g., nanopar-ticle alloys and catalysts, are in high demand.
Genetic algorithms (GAs) are metaheuristic optimization algo-
rithms inspired by Darwinian evolution. Performing crossover,
mutation, and selection operations, the algorithm progresses apopulation of evolving candidate solutions. Selecting well-
designed operators and optimal parameters, GAs have exhibited
a high degree of robustness in terms of ﬁnding ideal solutions to
difﬁcult optimization problems.
1,2The robustness results from the
evolutionary process being able to advance solutions that wouldhave been very dif ﬁcult to predict a priori, though GAs often
require a large number of function evaluations, resulting from
typical offspring not being very “ﬁt”solutions. Modern machine
learning (ML) methods have the capacity to ﬁt complex functions
in high-dimensional feature spaces while controlling over ﬁtting.3,4
However, the high-dimensional feature space means that ﬁnding
an optimum in an ML model is not a simple task. The robustness
of the GA is analyzed while accelerating its convergence throughintegration with an on-the- ﬂy established Gaussian process (GP)
regression model of the feature space. Although we have used a
GP model, any ML framework, e.g., deep learning, would also beapplicable.
For materials applications, GAs have typically employed (semi-)
empirical potentials
5–11to describe the potential energy surface
(PES).12–15The utilization of more accurate methods to describe
the PES such as density functional theory (DFT) has been limited,
due to computational cost. To account for the increasedcomputational cost of searching the PES directly with DFT, studieshave often been limited in size,16though these methods have
successfully been used in a number of investigations.17–25This
study focuses on utilizing the GA to gain an understanding of
chemical ordering within larger particles. Searching across a rangeof compositions is particularly important in the ﬁeld of materials
discovery, where composition can have a profound effect on the
desired property, e.g., catalytic activity.26,27Further, the optimal
composition may vary with the size of the nanoparticle. Therefore,the accurate description of chemical ordering is important, where,
for certain motifs, the ordering is very complex.28Focus is placed
on expediting a fast unbiased homotop search by reducing thenumber of energy evaluations needed to explore the PES andlocate the putative global minimum, i.e., the full convex hull, for a
given template structure.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Icosahedral particlesThe chemical ordering of atoms is optimized for a 147-atom
Mackay icosahedral template structure.
29Searches elucidate the
full convex hull of possible Pt xAu147−xforx21;146½/C138 composi-
tions. The convex hull is de ﬁned as the line connecting the lowest
excess energy of each stable composition. A composition can beunstable if the homotop with the lowest excess energy lies abovethe line. The number of homotops for each particle rises
combinatorially toward the 1:1 composition. The number of
possible homotops is given by Eq. 1.
H
N¼N!
NA!NB!(1)
There are a total of 1.78 × 1044homotops for all 146
compositions. The total number homotops for each composition
Received: 11 December 2018 Accepted: 21 March 2019
1SUNCAT Center for Interface Science and Catalysis, Department of Chemical Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA;2SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory,
2575 Sand Hill Road, Menlo Park, CA 94025, USA;3Department of Energy Conversion and Storage, Technical University of Denmark, Lyngby, Denmark and4Toyota Research
Institute, Los Altos, CA 94022, USACorrespondence: Tejs Vegge (teve@dtu.dk)www.nature.com/npjcompumats
Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences