individuals for each composition, i.e., across niches, are given equal ﬁtness.
This negates the energy penalties that would otherwise prevent thealgorithm from searching for minima of all possible compositions and bias
the search toward a narrow composition window comprising the lowest
excess energies.
When initializing the traditional GA, the population size is set to 150
candidates. This will, due to niching, keep all compositions in thepopulation. The method for selecting parents is handled by roulettewheel selection. Selection probabilities are directly related to the ascribed
ﬁtness, which accounts for the stabilities of the nanoparticle. Offspring are
created by either mating two parents or by mutating a single candidate.
The mating and mutation routines are mutually exclusive and thus are not
allowed to stack, i.e., performing crossover and mutation beforeevaluation. Cut and splice crossover functions, described by Deaven and
Ho,
5are used to generate new candidates with a call probability of 0.6.
Random permutation mutations are utilized with a call probability of 0.2,
Fig. 3 aThe convex hull located with the machine learning (ML)-accelerated genetic algorithm (MLaGA) employing the effective-medium
theory calculator. bThe number of energy calculations as a function of composition of the particle. Data are shown for the traditional GA (GA),
the MLaGA, the serialized MLaGA (sMLaGA), and the MLaGA utilizing uncertainty (uMLaGA). The dark lines and the shaded areas show the
average and variation of ﬁve repeated searches, respectively
Fig. 4 aThe convex hull located with the machine learning-accelerated genetic algorithm (GA) employing the density functional theory
calculator. bThe convergence pro ﬁle for the GA search. The error is the cumulative energy deviation from the correct convex hull; it is plotted
against each energy calculation, i.e., it gives an indication of the energy gain of each calculationP.C. Jennings et al.
4
npj Computational Materials (2019)    46 Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences