is shown in Fig. 1as well as an example of a randomly ordered
icosahedral structure under consideration in this study. A small
number of PtAu compositions will preferentially distort to form
rosette-icosahedral instead of the Mackay icosahedral struc-tures.30,31Other distortions have previously been observed for
the AuPt system32but not in this study. The GA locates the rosette
distorted structures in a number of cases, though as structure
optimization is not the focus of these benchmarks, when thedistortion occurs, the calculations are prevented from entering the
population preserving the template structure.
Traditional GA
Weﬁrst run a traditional GA (described in detail in the Methods
section “Traditional GA ”) to baseline our benchmark and then
describe the ML extensions and their results. When using the
traditional GA, it is possible to locate the hull of local minima with
~16,000 candidate minimizations. This is signi ﬁcantly lower than
the total number of homotops that are present and thus the
number of energy calculations required if a brute-force method
was used (1.78 × 1044). However, this is still typically above the
number of energy calculations one would wish to perform if a
more expensive energy calculator were being employed. To
overcome inef ﬁciencies in this method, the underlying search
algorithm is optimized and coupled with ML selection. A GP
regression model is used to predict excess energies of nanopar-
ticles before employing electronic structure calculations. Adiscussion of the GP model is given in the Methods section “GP
regression model. ”
ML-accelerated GA (MLaGA)
Within the MLaGA implementation exists two tiers of energy
evaluation, one by the ML functions giving a predicted ﬁtness and
the other by the energy calculator providing the actual ﬁtness. A
nested GA has been implemented to search the surrogate model
representation, generated by the ML. This acts as a high-throughput screening function based solely on predicted ﬁtness,
running in the “master ”GA. The nested surrogate GA takes the
current population and is able to progress through additionalsearch iterations, where evaluation and selection are based only
on the current model of the PES. The ﬁnal population from the
nested GA returns unrelaxed candidates to the master GA.
This is well suited to making large steps on the PES without
performing expensive energy evaluations. A dif ﬁculty when
searching with the MLaGA is that convergence criteria typically
used in these studies is no longer suitable. The MLaGA
methodology is speci ﬁcally implemented to limit the number of
energy evaluations that are performed. Therefore, every candidate
in the generation typically progresses the population. This
progression within the population continues until the ML routine
is unable to ﬁnd new candidates that are predicted to be better,
essentially stalling the search. For this reason, convergence is
considered to have been achieved by the point at which the ML
routine prevents new candidates from being evaluated. The
general MLaGA methodology is shown in Fig. 2.
The GA can be run with a pool or generational population.
When running the MLaGA with a generational population, a ML
model is trained and utilized to search for a full generation of, e.g.,
150 candidates. When combining the MLaGA with the genera-
tional nested GA, a greater number of candidates are generated in
total, compared with the traditional GA. However, the majority ofcandidates generated in the nested GA routine are discarded prior
to the expensive energy evaluation step. Therefore, the MLaGA
with a nested search is able to locate the full convex hull of
minima in an average of 1200 candidates. It is possible to reduce
the total number of energy calculations by employing different
acceptance criteria. Tournament acceptance was particularly
efﬁcient at reducing the number of required energy minimiza-
tions, reducing to <600 for the search.
Tournament acceptance is able to improve search ef ﬁciency by
restricting the number of candidates passed from the nested to
the master GA. To exploit this further, the MLaGA can also be run
with a pool-based population where the surrogate model is
trained for each new data point resulting from an electronic
structure calculation. In this case, the search must progress in
serial. Despite the potential for further reduction in the number of
calculations required, this may end up being time consuming. This
is because performing the electronic structure calculations cannot
Fig. 1 The homotop optimization problem for the 147 Mackay icosahedral nanoparticle. ashows the number of homotops as a function of
composition. bis a randomly ordered PtAu 147 atom icosahedronP.C. Jennings et al.
2
npj Computational Materials (2019)    46 Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences1234567890():,;