be parallelized, as would be possible with the generational
population. When this methodology is utilized, the number of
energy minimizations required to search the convex hull is
approximately 310.
When training a new model for every energy calculation, it is
also possible to estimate and take advantage of the model
prediction uncertainty, as discussed in the Methods section “GP
regression model. ”Utilizing the cumulative distribution function
(Eq. 6) as a candidate ’sﬁtness the pool-based MLaGA is able to
locate the convex hull of stable minima in approximately 280
energy calculations. A comparison of the different methods is in
Fig.3. There are clear advantages to performing the search with
the augmented ML method.
DFT veri ﬁcation
To ensure that advantages of the methodologies discussed above
were not an artifact of utilizing the less accurate effective-medium
theory (EMT) calculator, the MLaGA was tested searching directly
on the DFT PES. As a signi ﬁcant reduction in the number of energy
calculations is likely to be achieved and parallelization of
calculations is favorable, the search is performed with thegenerational population set-up. Utilizing the MLaGA methodol-
ogy, while allowing the nested search to run for a greater number
of generations, it is possible to locate the convex hull of minima
with approximately 700 DFT calculations. When optimizinggeometries with the DFT calculator, there was a 0 eV barrier to
structural rearrangement for a small range of the Au-de ﬁcient
compositions.
The convex hull located for the DFT search is shown in Fig. 4a.
The shaded region shows the difference in stability between the
distorted structures and the most stable icosahedral structureslocated. The complete core –shell Au
92Pt55structure is located as
the most stable for both the EMT and DFT searches. There is good
general agreement between the structures obtained elsewhere onthe hull, aside from the region of distortion.9,33,34Further, there is
broad agreement in the ef ﬁciency of the search routines based on
the benchmarking and actual searches. Figure 4b shows the
convergence pro ﬁle as a function of each subsequent DFT
calculation. The abrupt bend after around 150 calculations
corresponds to a particularly favorable chemical ordering that is
distributed to all compositions in the following calculations. This isof course an effect of similar chemical ordering across the whole
Au–Pt composition range.
Coupling ML with the GA provides signi ﬁcant advantages in
accelerating searches. Performing a search on the surrogate
model provides a cheap energy descriptor without requiringexpensive electronic structure calculations to assess stability of
these nanoparticles. The exact method should be optimized based
on the advantages of parallelizing the execution of energycalculations and reducing the total CPU hour cost of the search.
A hierarchy of methods has been utilized to reduce the total
number of energy minimizations required to fully search theconvex hull of local minima from 16,000 to around 300.
We conclude this section with a discussion of how to include
geometrical optimization in this framework. First one would add
operators that move the atoms and use a ﬁngerprint able to
invariantly describe the local geometrical environment.
35,36
However, if any appreciable rearrangement takes place during
relaxation the ﬁngerprint is no longer reliable, leaving the ML-
predicted energies wrong. It is possible to limit the relaxation tomaintain reliable ﬁngerprints; this would require that the GA runs
through more candidates as the steps taken on the PES will be
smaller. Another possibility is to utilize ML schemes that can also
take care of relaxation37–39; some examples already exist for
coupling these with a GA.40,41
METHODS
Computational details
The EMT potential12is used as the energy calculator for initial
benchmarking. The fast inertial relaxation engine42optimization routine
is utilized to relax the structures, with forces on all individual atomsminimized to at least 0.1 eV Å−1. DFT calculations are performed using
GPAW with a real space implementation of the projector-augmented wave
method.43GPAW is run in the linear combination of atomic orbital mode44
with a double zeta basis set and RPBE exchange correlation functional.45
Calculations are run spin-polarized with a Fermi smearing of 0.05 eV in anon-periodic 32 × 32 × 32 Å unit cell.
Traditional GA
The GA implemented within the Atomic Simulations Environment (ASE)
software package46has been utilized.
The excess energy is used when determining ﬁtness within the GA, as in
Eq.2.
Eexcess ¼EAB/C0EA/C1nA
N/C0EB/C1nB
N(2)
For particles containing a total of Natoms, nAand nBare the number of
atoms of types A and B, respectively. EABis the total energy of the mixed
particle, while EAand EBare the energies of the pure particles. To ef ﬁciently
search across the full compositional convex hull, we employ a ﬁtness
function based on a niching routine.47The candidates are grouped
according to the composition and the ﬁtness assigned within each
composition niche is based on the excess energy (Eq. 2). The ﬁttest
Fig. 2 Flowchart for the machine learning (ML)-accelerated genetic
algorithm (GA) method. As speci ﬁed in the text, the method only
terminates when ML-assisted GA fails to produce candidates thatimprove the population as determined by the Gaussian processmodel predicted ﬁtnessP.C. Jennings et al.
3
Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences npj Computational Materials (2019)    46