ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE AND DATA -DRIVEN DESIGN  1825 INTERNATIONAL DESIGN CONFERENCE  – DESIGN 202 2 
https://doi.org/ 10.1017/pds.2022.185  
Gene rative Pre -Trained Transformer f or Design Concept 
Generation: An Exploration
Q. Zhu  and J. Luo  
Singapore University of Technology and Design, Singapore  
 qihao_zhu@mymail.sutd.edu.sg  
 
Abstract  
Novel concepts are essential for design innovation and can be generated with the aid of data stimuli and 
computers. However, current generative de sign algorithms focus on diagrammatic or spatial concepts that are 
either too abstract to understand or too detailed for early phase design exploration. This paper explores the 
uses of generative pre -trained transformers (GPT) for natural language design c oncept generation. Our 
experiments involve the use of GPT -2 and GPT -3 for different creative reasonings in design tasks. Both show 
reasonably good performance for verbal design concept generation.  
Keywords:  early design phase, idea generation, generative design, natural language generation, 
generative pre -trained transformer  
1. Introduction  
Design innovation is heavily dependent  on high-quality and novel concepts. Concept design activities 
are divided into two stages: divergence and convergence ( Tschimmel , 2012 ). Designers must generate 
a wide range of concepts during the divergence stage before any assessmen t and selection for 
convergence to be made. Therefore , much research has been conducted to develop methodologies and 
tools to aid designers to create  design concepts , often with the aid of data and computers (Chakrabarti 
et al., 2011 ; Han et al., 2018 ; Han et al ., 2020). 
Meanwhile , little progress has been made regarding " computer ideation ", i.e., computer s directly and 
automatically generat ing ideas , in contrast  to computer -aided ideation , i.e., computers aiding or 
stimulating human designers to generate ideas . In this study , we introduce a new technique from the 
field of artificial intelligence  (AI)--the generative pre -trained transformer (GPT) --for automated 
generation of verbal design concepts. GPT s are language model s pre-trained  on vast quantities  of textual 
data and can perform  a wide range  of language -related tasks ( Radford et al., 2019 ; Brown et al.,  2020 ). 
Our work experiments the applicability of different GPT models for both problem -driven reasoning  and 
analogy -driven reasoning for design , with customized dataset s. 
2. Literature Review  
Recent research  on design concept generation  can be categorized based on three dimensions: the role 
of method or tool, the form of concept representation, and the targeted design process  stage . 
A concept generation method or tool can play one of the three roles: as a guide,  as a stimulator , or 
as a generator. A method is considered as guide if it is instructively involved in the generation of 
design concept s, providing design rules or guidelines to the activities of the de signers . For instance, 
Bonnardel and Didier (2020)  proposed two variants of brainstorming, encouraging designers to focus 
on the evocation of both the design ideas and the constraints related to the design problem. A 
https://doi.org/10.1017/pds.2022.185  Published online by Cambridge University Press