ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE AND DATA -DRIVEN DESIGN  1831 “Applying accordion to computer mouse”) is inserted so that the GPT -3 may learn to develop ideas 
based on the input domains. When generating new concepts, w e simply need to update the tokens that 
specify the source and target domains in the input sentence.  
Table 3.  Analogy -driven reasoning  examples used as prompts for GPT -3 
Source  Domain  Target Domain  Link of the example  
Accordion  Computer Mouse  https://www.red -dot.org/project/ambi -48504  
Cells Building  https://www.red -dot.org/project/build -fender -27044  
Standing desk  Automobile  https://www.red -dot.org/project/sole -26525   
Folding chair  Wheelchair  https://www.red -dot.org/project/fold -light-wheelchair -26521/   
Circuit board  Desk https://www.red -dot.org/project/ca bletread -46563   
 
Table 4 reports  two drone  design  concepts generated by GPT -3, by drawing analogy from the given 
source domain s of lantern and origami  in two experiments (parameters: temperature = 0.85, top -p = 1, 
presence_penalty=0.5, frequency_penalty=0 .5). The model successfully understand s both source 
domain s and applie s the lighting feature of the lantern and the folding mechanism  of origami  to drone 
design . Without being trained with a large amount of analogical design  cases , the generated concepts do 
adhere to analog ical reasoning and learn to build a clear analogical mapping between the source and 
target domains , even when the two given source domains are culture -related and distant  from the 
technical domain of drone . This is because the G PT-3 is pre -trained on a massive text dataset that 
includes nearly all possible kinds of scenarios and knowledges  and a few examples as prompts are 
enough for the specific 'memory' to be evoked.  
Furthermore, consistent to the pervious experiment, we also tested for the model's performance with the 
input of the  same prompt sentences as in the given examples. It turn s out GPT -3 is more likely to repeat  
the ideas given  in the  examples  given low frequency penalty and presence penalty parameters , but it 
begins to generate novel texts as these parameters are set to  higher  value s. This reveals another  
differen ce between the mechanism s of GPT -2 and GPT-3 models when being applied to design concept 
generation task s, which will need further investigation . 
Table 4.  Analogy -driven reasoning  experiment: inputs  and generated concepts  
Input  Output  
Source  Target  Generated Concepts  
Lantern  Drone  Focused on the design of portable drone landing pads, Skylight is conceived as a 
portable lantern that allows operators to track flying drones for charging or repair. 
Developed into different designs that can fit with any situation, Skylight has two main 
forms: docking stations that are focused on portability and public space; and lamp -like 
structures for open areas.  
D-LIGHT is a decorative drone that is fitted with a lantern inspired by the Chinese 
‘paper lantern’. The drone’s movements control the position and movement of the 
lantern, which is mounted at its centre. The functional design of D -LIGHT focuses on 
responsive mechanisms for flying and controlling the lantern. This also enables it to be 
operated wherever necessary.  
Origami  Drone  Aerobowl is inspired by the art of origami. The drone folds like an aer ial paper aircraft 
and is able to fold itself up after landing. It can be launched without any human 
intervention, for example into lakes or rivers to help with rescue operations; it then 
folds its propellers into lightweight aircraft mode before floating along on the surface 
of the water like a boat.  
For centuries, paper folding has evolved into various different forms of art. Inspired 
by this, PaperDrone  is an origami -inspired drone that is designed to have its chassis 
structure be deformable. The main goal of the design is to minimize the folding part 
while maintaining its strength and rigidity, mainly focusing on the legs for this feature. 
There are thr ee feathered blades attached to each leg that can rotate in both directions 
at certain angles. The foldable body allows it to be very compact when folded, thus 
making easy storage possible.  
https://doi.org/10.1017/pds.2022.185  Published online by Cambridge University Press