1830  ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE AND DATA -DRIVEN DESIGN  be selected from the categories listed on RedDot official website. Table 2 reports  two solutions 
generated for each of the two design problems  in two experiments (parameters: temperature = 0.85, 
top-k = 40, and top -p = 1) . The first  problem statement is from in the example above and the other  
is from an IF award -winning design  (https://ifworlddesignguide.com/entry/324944 -ema), in order to test 
the model 's capability to generate solution ideas to known versus unknown problems to the model.  
Table 2.  Problem -driven reasoning  experiment: inputs  and generated concepts  
Input s Generated Concepts  
Category:  Personal 
Hygiene  
Problem Statement : One 
of the biggest and most 
common concerns of using 
public toilets is avoiding 
dermatosis and bacte rial 
infection that comes from 
sharing a toilet with others.  The concept of this redesign of the traditional single -roof toilet presents a new 
idea. Instead of storing the toilet and washing it under the seat, it keeps the air in 
and a circular filter on t he surface of the toilet seat, thereby preventing dermatosis 
from spreading. The built -in water tank is placed at the front of the seat so that it 
does not interfere with the efficiency of the cleaning process.  
Clean Seat has a toilet lid that automatica lly opens when the first one is defecated 
and closes automatically afterwards. In combination with a toilet lid with anti -
perspiratory properties, the lid can be fitted over the first defecation und prevent 
the spread of the bacteria. The design of the toi let lid is very simple and in 
harmony with the shape of the body. It has a built -in air -flow control that is 
operated via a single touch of the keypad.  
Category:  Life Science  
Problem Statement:  
Current electrocardiograph 
testing involves a large 
number of wires, making 
the process time -
consuming for doctors and 
stressful for children.  As a solution, the Electric Micro -Inspection Tool Show'em! is a wearable micro -
test device that alleviates the r epetitive testing procedure by simultaneously 
visualising the heart function of an implanted externa -nation. The externa -nation 
is a tiny, flexible device made of medical -grade silicone that can be readily 
attached to the patient’s clothing. When an electr ic current is applied to the 
device, the externa -nation collects data, which are then translated into a formable 
electronic document. The user is only required to turn the small switch to trigger 
the testing procedure.  
The Light Guide is a remote contro lled electrocardiograph that makes the process 
of testing electronic health records easier for both doctors and children. With a 
Light Guide, children can fully concentrate on examining themselves and their 
medical condition, which makes the testing of ele ctronic health records more 
stress -free. The controller is small and remote -controlled so that it can be easily 
taken along to be tested at home. The information stored in the Light Guide is 
saved with the child's medical records and is reviewed at a later  time. This allows 
doctors and families to have their medical records reviewed at a glance.  
 
For the known problem  with a known solution , GPT -2 can generate many new solution ideas based on 
the massive knowledge it has acquired from the training. For the unknown problem, it is also capable of 
comprehending the problem and generating solution ideas. However, as the text lengthens, it is likely to 
start talking about other features of the design that are unrelated to the given problem. This is not 
surpri sing as the design descriptions in the fine -tuning dataset often provide comprehensive elaboration 
of multiple aspects and the model learnt this well.  
5.2. Analogy -Driven Reasoning  
Design -by-analogy  is the projection of existing reference in a source domai n to address a comparable 
challenge in the target domain ( Gentner, 1983 ; Luo et al., 2021 ). It is usually considered as a problem -
solving approach. However, when  a problem is not specified, analogy reasoning c an also lead to open -
ended design concept  generation . This experiment is to test the analogy -driven reasoning of the model 
for concept generation, p articularly  for the context  when a designer aims to draw analogy from a given  
source domain to generating design concepts in a given target domain but has not establish ed clear 
analog y mapping  across domains to generate specific new concepts . 
As there are insufficient design -by-analogy examples to fine -tune a GPT -2, this experiment  employs 
five analogy -driven reasoning examples selected from RedDot dataset as prompts for GPT -3's few-shot 
learning. Table 3 shows the source and target domain s in each of the five example s for learning . Before 
each example  is inputted , a structured sentence specifying the source and target domains (e.g., 
https://doi.org/10.1017/pds.2022.185  Published online by Cambridge University Press