1828  ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE AND DATA -DRIVEN DESIGN  generation task. On the other hand, GPTs are autoregressive language models that are trained to predict 
the next token based on all tokens before it.  
GPT -2 uses the two -step training strategy of pre -training and fine -tuning , following Hinton and 
Salakhutdinov (2006) . The workflow is shown in Figure 2(a). During the pre -training step, the model is 
trained on a text dataset collected from millions of  webpages ( Radford et al, 2019 ). For downstream NLP 
tasks, the pre -trained model needs to be fine -tuned given a customized  and task -oriented dataset. The fine -
tuned model is trained through repeated gradient update s using a large dataset of corpus of the example 
task. This process updates the weights of the pre -trained model and  stores them for the use of the target 
task. However, the  large dataset suitable for the target NLP task  may be unavailable or difficult to c ollect.  
GPT -3 is the largest language model so far . It is trained on a mixture of datasets containing 400 billion 
tokens and has a maximum of 175 billion parameters. Comparing to its precursor, GPT -3 is capable of  
few-show learning ( Brown et al ., 2020 ), in which  the model learns from multiple examples  of the NLP 
or NLG task  called prompts . In this process , no gradient updates are performed ( Brown et al ., 2020 ). 
The training process of GPT -3 is shown in Figure 2 (b). 
 
Figure 2.  Training and r e-training process of GPT -2 (a) and GPT -3 (b) 
4. Research Method  
In this paper, we experiment the application s of different GPT  models in different design concept 
generation tasks. By customizing the fine -tunning dataset or examples for few -shot learning, GPT can 
learn  and generate concepts based on different reasonings in design. Figure 3 depicts the general 
framework of our experiments. First, knowledge for the task is the key component of our framework . It 
is provided through the dataset used for fine -tuning GPT-2 model , or in the examples of design concepts 
for few -shot learning  of GPT -3. Secondly, we take in varied input as for conditional  learning . The input 
should be custom ized and consistent with the specific reasoning  we want the model to learn , and output 
will be the generated design concept description. For instance, for analogy  reasoning , the input will be 
the source and target domains for analogy mapping . Finally, the transformer in the framework can be 
either a fine -tuned GPT -2 or the pre -trained GPT -3 for few -shot learning.  
 
Figure 3. Experiment al framework  
Table 1 summarizes the settings for two experiments, in which we explore the capability of GPT for 
generating concepts by problem -driven reasoning  and analog y-driven  reasoning . The data we use for 
knowledge acquirement in both experiments is from the repository of RedDot award -wining design s. 
The first experiment includes  three phrases for implementation: preparing the data for the NLG task, 
https://doi.org/10.1017/pds.2022.185  Published online by Cambridge University Press