ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE AND DATA -DRIVEN DESIGN  1829 fine-tuning the model with the provided dataset, and testing the performance. The fine -tuning phrase is 
not included for the second  experiment because we wi ll be employing GPT -3 few -shot learning.  
Table 1.  Experiment s ettings  
Experiment  Knowledge for the task  Input  Transformer  
Problem -driven 
reasoning  RedDot award -winning design  Problem statement , 
concept category  Fine-tuned 
GPT -2 
Analogy -driven 
reasoning  Examples of design -by-analogy concepts 
from RedDot award -winning design  Target  and source domain s GPT-3 few -shot 
learning  
5. Experiments  
5.1. Problem -Driven Reasoning  
Given GPT -2's capability to generate text based on understanding the context v ia training and fine -
tuning, we experiment its application to generating text of solution ideas for a given problem. Problem -
solving in design could be supported by different methods such as analogy and first principle. In this 
experiment we do not constra in GPT -2's problem -solving approach.  The dataset for model fine -tuning  
is collected from RedDot 's official website ( https://www.red -dot.org/ ), including 14,502  product designs 
from 2011 to 2020 and 1,486  design concepts from 2016 to 2020. Data preparation  includes  picking out 
the text description of each design and add ing its category name before the description. An example  
description of a problem -driven design in the RedDot dataset is shown below:  
“One of the biggest and most common concerns of using public toilets is avoiding 
dermatosis and bacterial infection that comes from sharing a toilet with others. Clean 
Seat has a toilet lid that automatically opens when the first sensor (located at the front 
of the toilet lid) detects a user approaching. A second sensor then detects the person 
leaving after using the toilet, prompting the toilet lid to close and lock itself. When the 
lid is locked, the system kickstarts the self -cleaning function of the toilet."  
As shown i n the example, the problem is stated in the first sentence, followed by the solution idea 
description . This structure is common in the description s of problem -driven design  and ideal for GPT 
to generate solution idea text as the output in response to a problem text  as the input . However, not all 
award -winning designs are problem -driven  and often t he description does not begin  with a problem 
description . Our hypothesis is that the model can learn from those problem -driven design descriptions 
(as the example above) in the total dataset to execute problem -solving tasks, while also learning from 
design descriptions of other structures  during training . A pre-trained GPT -2 of 355M parameters is fine -
tuned for 14,000 steps  with batch size of 1 . Figure 4 reports loss over the fine -tuning steps.  
 
Figure 4.  Loss with training steps when fine -tuning with RedDot data  
In the generation phrase, t he problem statement and the design domain category are both set as input. 
The problem statement can be a single sentence written by the designer , and the category input can 
https://doi.org/10.1017/pds.2022.185  Published online by Cambridge University Press