Journal of Machine Learning Research 23 (2022) 1-36 Submitted 1/22; Published 8/22
On the Convergence Rates of Policy Gradient Methods
Lin Xiao linx@fb.com
Meta AI Research
Seattle, WA 98109, USA
Editor: Alekh Agarwal
Abstract
We consider innite-horizon discounted Markov decision problems with nite state and
action spaces and study the convergence rates of the projected policy gradient method and
a general class of policy mirror descent methods, all with direct parametrization in the
policy space. First, we develop a theory of weak gradient-mapping dominance and use it to
prove sharp sublinear convergence rate of the projected policy gradient method. Then we
show that with geometrically increasing step sizes, a general class of policy mirror descent
methods, including the natural policy gradient method and a projected Q-descent method,
all enjoy a linear rate of convergence without relying on entropy or other strongly convex
regularization. Finally, we also analyze the convergence rate of an inexact policy mirror
descent method and estimate its sample complexity under a simple generative model.
Keywords: discounted Markov decision problem, policy gradient, gradient domination,
policy mirror descent, sample complexity.
1. Introduction
Markov decision process (MDP) is a fundamental model for sequential decision-making and
serves as the mathematical framework for stochastic control and reinforcement learning. In
this paper, we consider innite-horizon, discounted Markov decision processes with nite
state and action spaces. They are specied as a 5-tuple ( S;A;P;R;
 ), whereSis a nite
state space with cardinality jSj,Ais a nite action space with cardinality jAj,Pis a
transition probability function with P(s0js;a) denoting the probability of transitioning to s0
when taking action afrom state s,R:SA! [0;1] is a reward function with Rs;aor
R(s;a) being the (expected) reward of taking action afrom states, and nally 
2[0;1) is
a discount factor applied to the reward one-step in the future.
Starting from an initial state s02S, an agent takes an action at2Aat each time step
t= 0;1;2;:::, which leads to the next state st+1with probability P(st+1jst;at) and obtains
the immediate reward rt=R(st;at). Such interactions generate a trajectory
(s0;a0;r0);(s1;a1;r1);(s2;a2;r2); ::::
The goal of the agent is to nd a policy of choosing the actions a0;a1;a2;:::that maximizes
the discounted cumulative reward EP1
t=0
trt
. Here the expectation is taken with respect
to the possible randomness in s0, any randomness in choosing the actions at, and the
randomness of state transitions prescribed by P.
c
2022 Lin Xiao.
License: CC-BY 4.0, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ . Attribution requirements are provided
athttp://jmlr.org/papers/v23/22-0056.html .