International Journal of Medical Informatics 161 (2022) 104738
2(ELSI) in the field of AI-based medical decision-support tools. It is worth 
noting that the purpose of a solely ethical reflection varies considerably 
from the ELSI approach in that their respective foci differ according to 
disciplinary, regulatory, and institutional contexts. An ELSI reflection 
aims to inform decision-makers and, more broadly, all stakeholders by 
providing the most comprehensive picture of the issues at stake. It 
should consider all aspects under evaluation, as well as the overall 
context in which the intervention (in this case - the implementation of AI 
in healthcare) is being carried out. This allows for a reflection aimed at 
highlighting the complexity of such issues, which in turn informs its 
conclusions. It also facilitates collaborative work between the different 
stakeholders tasked with evaluating these aspects, allowing each to refer 
to a common terminology and methodological grounds. On the basis of 
this, the need for a broader analysis, extending beyond mere normative 
considerations in ethical analysis to include social implications, had 
already been recognized: in the context of genomics, director of the 
Human Genome Project (HGP) James Watson coined the acronym ELSI 
to mean ethical, legal, and social issues, insisting that the project should 
also focus on societal aspects of the genetics research and its applications 
[11]. While it is difficult to clearly delineate between ethical, legal, and 
social issues, the latter should not be overlooked, as medicine is an 
important social practice affected by the social determinants of health 
(SDoH) [12]. Existing disparities and social inequalities in global health 
risk being replicated in AI-powered healthcare through biases in AI al-
gorithms, causing further inequalities and potential discrimination. 
Earlier reviews have tended to focus solely on ethics [13–16], or only on 
regulatory perspectives [17], while a number have focused on specific 
fields such as neuroscience [18], nuclear medicine, gastroenterology, 
intensive care [19] and radiology [20]. The purpose of this review is to 
fill the gaps in the literature by bringing social issues into the discussion 
and to provide a coherent overview of ELSI from the broad spectrum of 
AI-based medical decision-making tools. This comprehensive review of 
ELSI is intended to guide various stakeholders (eg. designers, engineers, 
clinicians) in addressing these issues at the design stage using the Ethics 
by Design (EbD) approach [21]. 
1.2. Objectives 
The objective of this scoping review is to collate and synthesise the 
existing literature on ELSI of AI-based medical decision-making tools, to 
outline the most common ELSI, and to identify the gaps in the literature. 
Our analysis will be driven by the following research question: Which 
ELSI are most reported for AI-based medical decision support tools? This 
review further aims to call the attention of healthcare policymakers to 
the more overlooked ELSI of AI-assisted medical decision-making tools. 
2.Methods 
To outline the breadth of ELSI in the emerging field of AI decision- 
making tools, we followed the method defined by Levac, Colquhoun, 
and O’Brien [22] and the Joanna Brigs Institute [23], and used the 
PRISMA-ScR checklist [24]. 
2.1. Eligibility criteria 
We conducted a broad and comprehensive search, wherein all au-
thors agreed on the following inclusion and exclusion criteria: included 
publications focused on ELSI of AI-based decision-making tools, and 
papers on Big data (i.e. data sets too large and complex for traditional 
data processing and management) and robotics were excluded. The 
corpus of analysis included original research published in peer-reviewed 
journals, books, book chapters, conference proceedings, perspectives or 
viewpoints written in English, while following systematized scoping 
methodology commentaries, editorials, business reports, dissertations, 
reviews were excluded. Theoretical, empirical/descriptive, empirical/ 
experimental, empirical/quasi-experimental study designs were eligible for review. All publications published before January 1, 2021 were 
included in the review. 
2.2. Information sources and search criteria 
While developing a search strategy, all authors agreed to use the 
generic term artificial intelligence and its variants in the healthcare 
context, such as AI or augmented intelligence (ie, narrow AI), as it 
proved to be the most widely used term in our preliminary searches of 
ELSI literature. In these initial searches, we realized that the abbrevia -
tion AI yielded numerous results referring to apolipoprotein A-I, which 
we excluded from our Boolean search string. We conducted our search in 
the following online bibliographic databases: Pubmed, Web of science, 
Ovid, Scopus, IEEE Xplore, EBSCO Search (Academic Search Premier, 
CINAHL, PSYCINFO, APA PsycArticles, ERIC) on January 22nd 2021 
using the following keywords: health*, medic*, clinic*, *ethic*, legal, 
social, “ELSI ”, “artificial intelligence ”, AI, “augmented intelligence ”, 
excluding “apolipoprotein ”. As we once again obtained a broad and 
unrefined spectrum of results by searching both title and abstracts, we 
opted to limit our search to titles only to obtain more focused results, 
which is recommended as a methodologically sound strategy [25,26] . 
We then filtered the databases by publication type (journal articles, 
books, chapters, and conference proceedings), by studies focusing on 
humans, and by publications written in English (See Appendix A.). We 
also performed a backward and forward snowballing search, drawing on 
the reference lists publications selected for analysis. 
2.3. Selection of sources of evidence 
After A¯C, AT, ELM completed the search in the subsequent screening 
phases, the first and second author (A¯C, AT) independently analysed the 
corpus of selected publications to avoid bias in the review results. 
Firstly, we inserted all publications from the primary literature search 
into a Mendeley reference manager and removed duplicates. Then, on 
the online platform Rayyan [27] both researchers double-blindly 
screened the titles and abstracts of the selected publications against 
the inclusion and exclusion criteria. Where there was ambiguity in the 
first screening phase, the publication was included for further evaluation 
during full-text analysis. The authors A¯C and AT then proceeded to the 
full-texts analysis using Rayyan. In the third phase, the two researchers 
(A¯C, AT) briefed frequently on indicator labelling to avoid coder ’s drift 
and resolved disagreement of screening decisions and full-texts analysis 
with the third researcher (ELM). 
2.4. Data charting process and data items 
In the preliminary searches and throughout the first screening phase, 
we followed the data charting process as suggested by the Joanna Briggs 
Institute ’s Manual for Evidence Synthesis for scoping reviews [23] and 
jointly outlined a meta-data table of relevant indicators to determine 
which variables to extract from our corpus (Appendix A). Relevant 
metadata were extracted during full-text analysis: year of publication, 
first author ’s country of affiliation, technology discussed, and category 
of ELSI, namely ethical, social, or legal. 
2.5. Synthesis of results 
We analyzed original theoretical and empirical work for descriptive 
and conceptual themes in the ELSI of AI-based decision-making tools. A 
descriptive analysis revealed the distribution of the lead authors ’ 
country of affiliation. For the thematic analysis, we collated descriptive 
codes based on the first 25 articles to label technological issues and ELSI. 
After reaching a consensus among authors on the appropriate codes, 
they were applied throughout the entire body of literature, with new 
codes added as necessary. A narrative form of the results is presented 
below, followed by figures which provide visual representation of key A. ¯Cartolovni et al.