International Journal of Medical Informatics 161 (2022) 104738
7prejudices about AI’s epistemic superiority also exist among physicians. 
An online survey of physicians by Oh et. al. [70] revealed that fewer 
than half of the survey participants agreed that “AI is superior to doc-
tors’ experience ” (44%) and that “AI could replace doctors ” (35.4%). 
Stripping physicians of epistemic authority and transferring it to an AI- 
based decision-making support tool would lead to shallow and deficient 
trust relationships in the practice of medicine that have already been 
seen in paternalistic medicine shifting the medicine and healthcare a few 
decades back [79,80] . 
Although current AI regulatory frameworks are still in their infancy, 
a possible solution to address the ELSI outlined in this analysis, and to 
avoid deploying AI models with potentially unsafe and morally ques-
tionable outcomes in healthcare, is to explore different models of AI 
governance in healthcare [41,45,81] . As outlined in the recent WHO 
guidance Ethics and Governance of Artificial Intelligence for Health [82], 
they should be based on policies governing the implementation of AI- 
based tools and comply with the ethical principles of reproducibility, 
transparency, fairness and human dignity. Various approaches to tackle 
these issues have been proposed, exemplified by the global ethical 
framework and governance system suggested by Guan [83]. However, 
they may pose a logistically unfeasible solution given they would entail 
regular audits and monitoring mechanisms that need to be enforced at 
the global level to mitigate risks, with ongoing assessment of the safety, 
quality, transparency, and ethical factors of AI-based services [42]. A 
global effort and solidarity spanning regulatory aspects in both high and 
low-income countries is currently lacking. Our results are also consistent 
with this shortcoming, wherein most authors discussing ELSI of AI in 
healthcare are from high-income-countries. In the wake of EbD with its 
main aim to design and create a technology for social good, the already 
outlined and mapped ELSI with an emphasis on currently overlooked 
social issues represent a significant challenge for the development and 
deployment of AI-based decision-making tools and warrant timely 
attention to fulfill the promise of an impending AI-empowered 
healthcare. 
5.Limitations 
We recognize several limitations to our study. Firstly, our search 
strategy was limited to the broad terms - artificial intelligence and 
augmented intelligence . While additional terms and concepts (machine 
learning, deep learning etc.) might have further complemented our 
search, the scope of our review was very broad, encompassing all 
ethical, legal and social implications in the sphere of AI-based decision- 
making tools. Due to time and resource limitations, we did not expand 
our search to include additional terms, and opted to proceed with um-
brella terms only, given they are prevalent in the literature on the ELSI of 
AI. Furthermore, language was limited to English, so we may have 
overlooked influential articles published in other languages. Addition -
ally, in reporting the geographical distribution of papers across the 
globe, the first author ’s country of affiliation is not necessarily their 
country of activity. 
6.Concluding remarks 
Our review results support the view that there is potential to improve 
healthcare systems and advance patient care provision through AI, but 
its implementation implies several drawbacks, or ELSI, that require 
consideration. The ELSI we identified in our review reflect how AI 
decision-making tools will impact the future of healthcare and can be 
categorized into four clusters: issues that concern AI algorithms, issues 
with high potential to impact patients, issues with high potential to 
impact physicians, and issues with high potential to impact healthcare 
overall. The most represented are patient safety, algorithmic trans -
parency, lack of proper regulation, liability & accountability, and impact 
on patient-physician relationship and governance of AI-based health -
care. By far the most prevalent is the last cluster referring to the impact on the reciprocal and fiduciary relationship between patient and 
physician. With the integration of AI-based decision-making tools, that 
relationship will be extended from its bilateral foundation to a third 
party. In its current configuration, the physician-patient relationship is 
grounded in principles of medical ethics. Integrating a new moral actor 
challenges its applicability and requires both consideration and vigi-
lance towards all identified ELSI leading us towards more responsible 
healthcare innovation. The findings of this review can guide further 
research in the form of systematic reviews and meta-analyses of ELSI, to 
deliver more detailed insights. Based on our findings, we encourage 
more empirical research using qualitative and quantitative methods, to 
inform practice and policy. We further consider that comparison with 
existing principles of medical ethics is a key step in the effort to obtain 
such information, as they have recently guided the patient-physician 
relationship. In addition to a continuous reviewing of the literature, 
and to theoretical analyses, qualitative and quantitative empirical 
studies are imperative to further investigate the ELSI of AI with a focus 
on overlooked ELSI among key stakeholders, as a number of ELSI have 
been less frequently reported in the literature but deserve equal 
attention. 
Authors ’ contributions . 
A¯C, AT and ELM designed the study. ELM and A¯C collected data. AT 
and A¯C performed data extraction and analysis, and all authors inter-
preted the data. A¯C drafted the manuscript, and all authors critically 
revised the manuscript and gave approval for the publication of the final 
version. All authors had full access to the data in the study and can take 
responsibility for the integrity of the data and the accuracy of the data 
analysis. 
Funding 
This work was supported by the Croatian Science Foundation (CSF), 
grant “(New) Ethical and Social Challenges of Digital Technologies in 
the Healthcare Domain ”, grant number UIP-2019-04-3212. The funder 
had no role in the design of this study and its execution, analyses, 
interpretation of the data, or decision to submit results. 
8.Declarations 
Declarations of interest: none. 
Conflicts of interest 
Authors declare no conflict of interest. 
Appendix A.Supplementary material 
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2022.104738 . 
References 
[1]A. Esteva, B. Kuprel, R.A. Novoa, J. Ko, S.M. Swetter, H.M. Blau, S. Thrun, 
Dermatologist-level classification of skin cancer with deep neural networks, Nature 
542 (7639) (2017) 115–118. 
[2]F. Rahimian, G. Salimi-Khorshidi, A.H. Payberah, J. Tran, R. Ayala Solares, F. 
Raimondi, et al., Predicting the risk of emergency admission with machine 
learning: development and validation using linked electronic health records, PLoS 
Med. 15 (2018) e1002695. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1002695. 
[3]D. Killock, AI outperforms radiologists in mammographic screening, Nat. Rev. Clin. 
Oncol. 17 (3) (2020) . 
[4]S. Gaube, H. Suresh, M. Raue, A. Merritt, S.J. Berkowitz, E. Lermer, J.F. Coughlin, 
J.V. Guttag, E. Colak, M. Ghassemi, Do as AI say: susceptibility in deployment of 
clinical decision-aids, NPJ Digit. Med. 4 (1) (2021), https://doi.org/10.1038/ 
s41746-021-00385-9 . 
[5]D. Schneeberger, K. Stoger, A. Holzinger, The European Legal Framework for 
Medical AI. 4th IFIP TC 5, TC 12, WG 84, WG 89, WG 129 Int Cross-Domain Conf 
Mach Learn Knowl Extr CD-MAKE 2020 2020;12279 LNCS:209 –26. https://doi. 
org/10.1007/978-3-030-57321-8_12. A. ¯Cartolovni et al.