International Journal of Medical Informatics 161 (2022) 104738
6box medicine can manifest itself in two forms: literal opacity, when 
established relationships are completely hidden even if the algorithmic 
decision-making process is clear, and practical or approachable opacity, 
halfway between fully opaque black-box medicine and explicit person -
alized medicine [61]. However, although algorithmic opacity and 
algorithmic bias are related and yet independent from each other, this 
does not mean that greater transparency necessarily guarantees less bias 
[62]. Moreover, AI algorithms used in healthcare, besides being suffi-
ciently transparent, also require monitoring over the reasoning and ef-
fects of AI-based decisions by providing a reasonable explanation to the 
patient [63,64] . 
In the medical context, transparency entails not only explainability 
but also a clear communication with patients about the limitations and 
performance gaps in protecting patient identity and mitigating harm 
[65]. Explainability is a key feature for physicians themselves and is a 
critical factor in their acceptance of the recommendations made by an AI 
decision-making tool [66], which may affect the ethical relationship 
between physician and patient. With this in mind, several questions 
pertaining to the degree of AI transparency arise [36]:  
≡Can it be achieved, what is considered as adequate explanation from 
the patient ’s perspective?  
≡How to address residual opacity, at which level could the decision- 
making procedure be explained?  
≡Should we prioritize input-oriented transparency focused on data 
quality, or the output related transparency to explain how the AI 
based decision making support tool arrived at a decision? 
Even if transparency is achieved, a subsequent question is how to 
communicate AI decisions to the patient; in other words how to integrate 
it into the shared decision making process [28]. Therefore, AI-based 
decision-making support tools should incorporate a reasonable degree 
of transparency and mechanisms for responsible disclosure of their role 
in the decision-making process by enabling medical practitioners, pa-
tients, and their relatives to understand AI-based decisions [6]. 
4.1.2. Lack of proper regulation - liability & accountability 
Despite attempts at regulation in the EU and the US, there are no 
globally harmonized standards or laws [6]. Comparing the approaches 
between Europe and other continents, Europe ’s regulatory framework 
reflects a more cautious stance: lack of harm does not warrantee safe 
deployment and use of the technology. Currently, there is no explicit 
European legislation on AI in healthcare and AI is defined as a medical 
device or as any software used for prevention, diagnosis, treatment or 
monitoring [63]. The recently enforced European Medical Device 
Regulation (MDR) 2017/745 classifies AI-based tools and decision- 
making software for diagnosis or therapeutic purposes as class IIa de-
vices (in Rule 11), unless they result in death, irreversible deterioration 
of an individual ’s health (in that case, it is classified as class III), or a 
surgical intervention (class IIb) [35]. In the US, the Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA) took a step forward under the Digital Health 
Innovation Action Plan, launching a pilot pre-certification program 
evaluating medical software under development based on five criteria of 
excellence [59]. Until recently, current regulatory frameworks did not 
include the algorithmic self-learning capability of ML thereby failing to 
address specific risks of ML such as explainability or false positives/ 
negatives [5]. But the FDA ’s new regulatory framework, Software as a 
medical device (SaMD), is inching towards addressing this issue as well 
as that of the algorithms ’ ability to update themselves through self- 
learning mechanisms (learning, adapting and optimizing in real time) 
[6,67,68] . 
The current legal realm for medical malpractice which determines 
the liability for patient harm, cannot fully address issues of account -
ability that AI-based decision-making tools bring to medicine, prompt -
ing Richman [69] to suggest a shift away from them toward corporate 
and product liability, i.e. the legal realm defining blameworthiness for patient harm in manufacturers, distributors, suppliers, and retailers. 
Others are more inclined toward tort law and medical malpractice re-
gimes and suggest consulting corporate and product liability law only if 
AI-based decision-making support tools develop a level of sophistication 
such that their decisions are deemed a medical standard to follow. If AI- 
based treatments achieve greater accuracy than non-AI treatments, it 
will constitute the new “due standard of medical care” making health -
care professionals accountable for not exploiting their potential [5]. 
Results from a recent survey of physicians show that nearly half (49.3%) 
believe responsibility should lie with doctors, 31.2% with patients who 
consented to its use, and only 19.4% with the company which created 
the AI-based tool [70]. 
Price [71] argues that flexibility rather than rigid laws should be the 
path to a resilient legal framework. This should imply lighter premarket 
scrutiny, coupled with robust post-market scrutiny as these technologies 
enter the clinical care context, to avoid stifling innovation. New regu-
latory systems should promote meaningful human control by keeping 
humans in the loop [28], and their appraisal in regulatory impact as-
sessments will strongly depend on the level of human control over AI, 
complemented by validation and certification mechanisms for algo-
rithms [28]. Several countries, including EU states, announced new 
regulations and adapted general liability frameworks for AI to improve 
clarity, transparency and public trust in AI-driven solutions in health -
care [57]. 
4.1.3. Impact on patient-physician relationship and governance of future 
healthcare 
AI’s disruptive power may contribute to dismantling the conven -
tional bilateral physician-patient relationship by involving various ac-
tors with AI systems: programmers, product manufacturers and AI-based 
tools, which will all challenge the existing medical ethics model of 
“shared decision-making ” [46], downgrading medicine into a new kind 
of paternalism , namely computernalism [48,72] . Should clinicians 
embrace AI-based tools not only as supportive tools but as outright 
peers/actors, medical ethics will need to accommodate this inclusion of 
new morally relevant actors impacting the fiduciary relationship, mak-
ing it less strained and prone to the physician ’s personal responsibility 
[73]. Admittedly, the redefinition of this bilateral relationship is already 
underway, and is transitioning to a trilateral “physician-computer-pa -
tient ” relationship [74]. As a consequence, Triberti et al. [75] point out 
this new kind of relationship may lead to a “third wheel ” effect, 
undermining the effectiveness of shared decision-making through the 
perception that the physician is only an intermediary between the pa-
tient and the algorithm. Humane relational practices should by no 
means be excluded from the emerging trilateral relationship [76]. 
Empathy and compassion constitute the human aspects of medical care, 
and recent study results among consumers confirm patients ’ and phy-
sicians ’ concerns that AI devices may reduce these human aspects, such 
as face-to-face cues and personal interactions with physicians, who 
might assume a more passive position in healthcare decision making in 
the future [42]. 
As elaborated above, the benefits AI would bring – in terms of 
increasing the time spent on the humanness in medicine, may however 
lead to precision and efficiency becoming more valued than empathy 
and professional judgement. This might potentially shift the focus of 
medicine away from human-specific skills [48], which might in turn 
contribute, as mentioned earlier, to the concerns that increasingly ac-
curate AI algorithms might substitute physicians ’ judgement [43,77] . In 
this respect, a recent study of UK general practitioners ’ views suggests it 
is rather unlikely physicians will be substituted in the provision of 
empathic patient care [52]. Despite the epistemic superiority of AI- 
based decision-making tools, maintaining the clinician ’s professional 
integrity as the final decision-maker - “the human-in-the-loop ”, the one 
bearing responsibility for the decision-making - is arguably crucial 
[31,78] . Eschewing over-reliance and complacency by recognizing that 
AI cannot make moral judgments is key here [32]. However, negative A. ¯Cartolovni et al.