A.4 Images
Oftentimes, an exam question may include an image. Models like GPT-3.5, which consume text
(but not images) as input might not have access to all the information needed to correctly solve a
problem. When evaluating text models on multiple-choice questions, we included a text tag stating
IMAGE: with a non-meaningful filename wherever an image would be missing. This allows us to
lower-bound the text-based models’ performance on multiple-choice exams.12When evaluating
multimodal models on multiple-choice questions, we embedded the images into the prompt. The
SAT Reading and Writing, MKSAP, Sommelier, AP Psychology, AP English Language, and AP
English Literature exams’ multiple-choice sections did not contain any images. For all free-response
questions, plus the USABO 2020 Semifinal, we instead transcribed any images and diagrams as
objectively as possible. This reduced the manual grading load required to evaluate free-response
answers, because after this transcription process the free-response prompts include no images, so the
scores for GPT-4 could be run once and used for both the vision and no-vision conditions.
A.5 Scoring
We synthesized multiple-choice section scores and free-response section scores into overall scores
using the best available approximations of the real methodologies: for the SAT, we converted multiple-
choice scores into scaled scores using the score calculation chart from an official sample SAT as
republished on an SAT prep site [ 74]; for the GRE, we converted multiple-choice scores to the
130-170 scale using the official formula of multiplying accuracy by 40 and adding 130; for the AP
exams, we used the score calculators found on a public study site, which are based on the point
values from the official AP scoring guidelines from 2019-2020 [ 75]. Percentiles are based on the
most recently available score distributions for test-takers of each exam type.
For percentile results on the AMC 10 and 12, since 2022 score distributions are as yet unpublished,
we used two official published score distributions from November 2021 for exams A and B, and took
the minimum lower percentile of the two and the maximum upper percentile of the two to report an
estimated percentile range [ 76]. Other percentiles were based on official score distributions [ 77] [78]
[79] [80] [81].
A.6 Codeforces rating
To determine the Codeforces rating (ELO), we evaluated each model on 10 recent contests. Each
contest had roughly 6 problems, and the model was given 10 attempts per problem. After each
contest, we repeatedly perform ELO adjustments based on the model’s performance until the ELO
rating converges to an equilibrium rating (this simulates repeatedly attempting the contest with the
same model performance). We simulated each of the 10 contests 100 times, and report the average
equilibrium ELO rating across all contests.
Roughly 50% of simulations have 0 problems solved, which results in an equilibrium ELO rating of
0. As a result the final average ELOs are quite low. The maximum equilibrium ELO achieved on a
single contest was around 1000 for GPT-3.5 and 1300 for GPT-4.
A.7 Model snapshot details
We ran GPT-4 multiple-choice questions using a model snapshot from March 1, 2023, whereas
the free-response questions were run and scored using a non-final model snapshot from February
23, 2023. GPT-3.5’s multiple-choice questions and free-response questions were all run using a
standard ChatGPT snapshot. We ran the USABO semifinal exam using an earlier GPT-4 snapshot
from December 16, 2022.
Our evaluations suggest RLHF does not significantly affect the base GPT-4 model’s capability - see
Appendix B for more discussion.
12For example, on the AP Statistics exam, a common failure response was “Since there is no graph provided,
we cannot determine the correct answer for this problem."
25