Example of Chemical Compound Similarity and Purchase Tool Use
Answer the following questions as best you can. Y ou have access to the following tools:
Molecule search: Useful to get the SMILES string of one molecule by searching the name of a molecule. Only query
with a speciﬁc name.
Purchase: Places an order for a compound. Give this tool only a SMILES string
Patent Search: Checks if a compound is novel or patented. Give this tool only a SMILES string
Modify compound: Proposes small modiﬁcations to a compound, as speciﬁed by SMILES
Email: Format as email_address | subject | body
Literature Answer: Useful to answer questions that require speciﬁc information.
Ask a speciﬁc question.
Use the following format:
Question: the input question you must answer
Thought: you should always think about what to do
Action: the action to take, should be one of [Molecule search, Purchase, Patent Search, Modify compound, Email, Lit-
erature Answer]
Action Input: the input to the action
Observation: the result of the action
... (this Thought/Action/Action Input/Observation can repeat N times)
Thought: I now know the ﬁnal answer
Final Answer: the ﬁnal answer to the original input question
Begin!
Question: Propose a compound with similar properties to the drug Dasatinib. Find a supplier that sells it. Do
this by ﬁrst ﬁnding a few compounds with the same MOA/target, modify the compounds to make a novel (not
patented) compound and ﬁnally purchase the compound. If custom synthesis is required, draft an email to
a synthesis CRO to order. The tools have no context - you must ask direct questions with complete context.
Validate your work with tools if you are uncertain. Do not guess compound SMILES, use tools to get them.
Thought: I need to ﬁnd a few compounds with the same MOA/target as Dasatinib
Action: Literature Answer
Action Input: What are a few compounds with the same MOA/target as Dasatinib?
Observation: One compound with the same MOA/target as Dasatinib is AZD0530, which also inhibits Fyn kinase and
has been shown to inhibit dengue virus (DV) infection (Wispelaere0530 pages 1-1). Another compound with a similar
MOA is QSYQ, a Chinese medicine that has a multi-compound-multi-target-multi-pathway mode of action (MOA) and
is involved in the regulation of cell death, immune and inﬂammation response, and energy metabolism (Xiang2014
pages 5-6). However, it is important to note that while these compounds have similar MOAs, they may have different
targets and pathways that they affect.
Thought: I need to modify one of these compounds to make a novel compound
Action: Modify compound
Action Input: AZD0530
Observation: Given input is not valid SMILES
Thought: I need to get the SMILES string of AZD0530
Action: Molecule search
Action Input: AZD0530
Observation: CN1CCN(CC1)CCOC2=CC3=C(C(=C2)OC4CCOCC4)C(=NC=N3)NC5=C(C=CC6=C5OCO6)Cl
Thought: I need to modify this compound to make a novel compound
Action: Modify compound
Action Input: CN1CCN(CC1)CCOC2=CC3=C(C(=C2)OC4CCOCC4)C(=NC=N3)NC5=C(C=CC6=C5OCO6)Cl
99