Sensitive Prompts Disallowed Prompts0%10%20%30%40%50%
Prompt typeIncorrect behavior rate
Incorrect behavior rate on disallowed and sensitive content
text-davinci-003
gpt-3.5-turbo
gpt-4Figure 9. Rate of incorrect behavior on sensitive and disallowed prompts. Lower values are better.
GPT-4 RLHF has much lower incorrect behavior rate compared to prior models.
Overall, our model-level interventions increase the difficulty of eliciting bad behavior but doing so
is still possible. For example, there still exist “jailbreaks” (e.g., adversarial system messages, see
Figure 10 in the System Card for more details) to generate content which violate our usage guidelines.
So long as these limitations exist, it’s important to complement them with deployment-time safety
techniques like monitoring for abuse as well as a pipeline for fast iterative model improvement.
GPT-4 and successor models have the potential to significantly influence society in both beneficial
and harmful ways. We are collaborating with external researchers to improve how we understand and
assess potential impacts, as well as to build evaluations for dangerous capabilities that may emerge in
future systems. We will soon publish recommendations on steps society can take to prepare for AI’s
effects and initial ideas for projecting AI’s possible economic impacts.
7 Conclusion
We characterize GPT-4, a large multimodal model with human-level performance on certain difficult
professional and academic benchmarks. GPT-4 outperforms existing large language models on a
collection of NLP tasks, and exceeds the vast majority of reported state-of-the-art systems (which
often include task-specific fine-tuning). We find that improved capabilities, whilst usually measured
in English, can be demonstrated in many different languages. We highlight how predictable scaling
allowed us to make accurate predictions on the loss and capabilities of GPT-4.
GPT-4 presents new risks due to increased capability, and we discuss some of the methods and results
taken to understand and improve its safety and alignment. Though there remains much work to be
done, GPT-4 represents a significant step towards broadly useful and safely deployed AI systems.
14