based on a number of factors, including prior observed risks in language models and AI systems,
and domains where we have observed increased user interest in the application of language models.
Working with these experts enabled us to test model behavior in high-risk areas that require expertise
to evaluate, as well as nascent risks that are poorly understood.
Through this analysis, we ﬁnd that GPT-4 has the potential to be used to attempt to identify
private individuals when augmented with outside data. We also ﬁnd that, although GPT-4’s
cybersecurity capabilities are not vastly superior to previous generations of LLMs, it does continue
the trend of potentially lowering the cost of certain steps of a successful cyberattack, such as through
social engineering or by enhancing existing security tools. Without safety mitigations, GPT-4 is
also able to give more detailed guidance on how to conduct harmful or illegal activities. Finally, we
facilitated a preliminary model evaluation by the Alignment Research Center (ARC) of GPT-4’s
ability to carry out actions to autonomously replicate5and gather resources—a risk that, while
speculative, may become possible with suﬃciently advanced AI systems—with the conclusion that
the current model is probably not yet capable of autonomously doing so.
Further research is needed to fully characterize these risks. In particular, we would like to see
work on more robust evaluations for the risk areas identiﬁed and more concrete measurements of the
prevalence of such behaviors across diﬀerent language models, and to guide the development of these
models in safer directions. We are working on these types of evaluations, often in collaboration with
other research groups, with a focus on assessing risky emergent behaviors.
In addition to work on measurement, we aimed to mitigate the identiﬁed issues at various steps
of the development and deployment process. We reduced the prevalence of certain kinds of content
that violate our usage policies (such as inappropriate erotic content) in our pre-training dataset, and
ﬁne-tuned the model to refuse certain instructions such as direct requests for illicit advice. We also
reduced the tendency of the models to hallucinate and, by leveraging data from prior model usage,
reduced the surface area of adversarial prompting or exploits (including attacks sometimes referred
to as “jailbreaks”) that the model succumbs to. Additionally, we trained a range of classiﬁers on
new risk vectors and have incorporated these into our monitoring workﬂow, enabling us to better
enforce our API usage policies. The eﬀectiveness of these mitigations varies, but overall we were able
to signiﬁcantly reduce the ease of producing various kinds of potentially harmful content, thereby
making GPT-4-launch signiﬁcantly safer than GPT-4-early along these dimensions.
This system card is not comprehensive, and we expect to learn more over time about the
issues discussed below. Consistent with OpenAI’s deployment strategy,[ 21] we applied lessons from
earlier deployments and expect to apply lessons learned from this deployment both to make course
corrections and lay a foundation for future deployments.
Note that the examples included throughout this system card are not zero-shot and are cherry
picked from our evaluation eﬀorts to illustrate speciﬁc types of safety concerns or harms. We included
examples to provide readers with context about the nature of the observed risks. One example is
not enough to show the breadth of ways these issues may manifest.
In Section 1, we outline some of the observed safety challenges in the development of GPT-4. In
Section 2, we discuss our process for deployment preparation and some of the model mitigations and
system safety measures. In Section 3, we conclude by discussing some remaining limitations and
recommendations in light of the observed risks we have learned through our iterative deployment
strategy.
5Autonomously replicate is a reference to self-replication, a concept that dates back at least as far as the 1988, to
the self-replicating computer worms, “Morris worm”, written by Robert Morris.[20]
43