5 Limitations
Despite its capabilities, GPT-4 has similar limitations as earlier GPT models. Most importantly, it still
is not fully reliable (it “hallucinates” facts and makes reasoning errors). Great care should be taken
when using language model outputs, particularly in high-stakes contexts, with the exact protocol
(such as human review, grounding with additional context, or avoiding high-stakes uses altogether)
matching the needs of specific applications. See our System Card for details.
GPT-4 significantly reduces hallucinations relative to previous GPT-3.5 models (which have them-
selves been improving with continued iteration). GPT-4 scores 19 percentage points higher than our
latest GPT-3.5 on our internal, adversarially-designed factuality evaluations (Figure 6).
learning technology writing history math science recommendation code business0%20%40%60%80%
CategoryAccuracy
Internal factual eval by category
chatgpt-v2
chatgpt-v3
chatgpt-v4
gpt-4
Figure 6. Performance of GPT-4 on nine internal adversarially-designed factuality evaluations. Accuracy
is shown on the y-axis, higher is better. An accuracy of 1.0 means the model’s answers are judged to
be in agreement with human ideal responses for all questions in the eval. We compare GPT-4 to three
earlier versions of ChatGPT [ 64] based on GPT-3.5; GPT-4 improves on the latest GPT-3.5 model by 19
percentage points, with significant gains across all topics.
GPT-4 makes progress on public benchmarks like TruthfulQA [ 66], which tests the model’s ability to
separate fact from an adversarially-selected set of incorrect statements (Figure 7). These questions
are paired with factually incorrect answers that are statistically appealing. The GPT-4 base model is
only slightly better at this task than GPT-3.5; however, after RLHF post-training we observe large
improvements over GPT-3.5.9Table 4 shows both a correct and an incorrect answer. GPT-4 resists
selecting common sayings (you can’t teach an old dog new tricks), however it still can miss subtle
details (Elvis Presley was not the son of an actor, so Perkins is the correct answer).
GPT-4 generally lacks knowledge of events that have occurred after the vast majority of its pre-training
data cuts off in September 202110, and does not learn from its experience. It can sometimes make
simple reasoning errors which do not seem to comport with competence across so many domains, or
be overly gullible in accepting obviously false statements from a user. It can fail at hard problems the
same way humans do, such as introducing security vulnerabilities into code it produces.
GPT-4 can also be confidently wrong in its predictions, not taking care to double-check work when
it’s likely to make a mistake. Interestingly, the pre-trained model is highly calibrated (its predicted
9We did not check the RLHF post-training data for contamination with TruthfulQA
10The pre-training and post-training data contain a small amount of more recent data
10