on how worker performance changes on more complex tasks given access to models, surveys to our
users and ﬁrms building on our technology, and our researcher access program.
2.12 Acceleration
OpenAI has been concerned with how development and deployment of state-of-the-art systems like
GPT-4 could aﬀect the broader AI research and development ecosystem.23One concern of particular
importance to OpenAI is the risk of racing dynamics leading to a decline in safety standards, the
diﬀusion of bad norms, and accelerated AI timelines, each of which heighten societal risks associated
with AI. We refer to these here as "acceleration risk."24This was one of the reasons we spent six
months on safety research, risk assessment, and iteration prior to launching GPT-4.25In order
to speciﬁcally better understand acceleration risk from the deployment of GPT-4, we recruited
expert forecasters26to predict how tweaking various features of the GPT-4 deployment (e.g., timing,
communication strategy, and method of commercialization) might aﬀect (concrete indicators of)
acceleration risk. Forecasters predicted several things would reduce acceleration, including delaying
deployment of GPT-4 by a further six months and taking a quieter communications strategy around
the GPT-4 deployment (as compared to the GPT-3 deployment). We also learned from recent
deployments that the eﬀectiveness of quiet communications strategy in mitigating acceleration risk
can be limited, in particular when novel accessible capabilities are concerned.
We also conducted an evaluation to measure GPT-4’s impact on international stability and to
identify the structural factors that intensify AI acceleration. We found that GPT-4’s international
impact is most likely to materialize through an increase in demand for competitor products in
other countries. Our analysis identiﬁed a lengthy list of structural factors that can be accelerants,
including government innovation policies, informal state alliances, tacit knowledge transfer between
scientists, and existing formal export control agreements.
Our approach to forecasting acceleration is still experimental and we are working on researching
and developing more reliable acceleration estimates.
2.13 Overreliance
As noted above in 2.2, despite GPT-4’s capabilities, it maintains a tendency to make up facts, to
double-down on incorrect information, and to perform tasks incorrectly. Further, it often exhibits
these tendencies in ways that are more convincing and believable than earlier GPT models (e.g.,
due to authoritative tone or to being presented in the context of highly detailed information that is
accurate), increasing the risk of overreliance.
Overreliance occurs when users excessively trust and depend on the model, potentially leading
to unnoticed mistakes and inadequate oversight. This can happen in various ways: users may not be
vigilant for errors due to trust in the model; they may fail to provide appropriate oversight based on
the use case and context; or they may utilize the model in domains where they lack expertise, making
it diﬃcult to identify mistakes. As users become more comfortable with the system, dependency
23OpenAIs Charter states “We are concerned about late-stage AGI development becoming a competitive race without
time for adequate safety precautions. Therefore, if a value-aligned, safety-conscious project comes close to building
AGI before we do, we commit to stop competing with and start assisting this project. We will work out speciﬁcs in
case-by-case agreements, but a typical triggering condition might be “a better-than-even chance of success in the next
two years. ””[93]
24For more background, see [94].
25We began certain safety workstreams even earlier such as safety testing of earlier checkpoints.
26“Expertise” here is determined empirically, with reference to the forecasters quantitative track record in competitive
forecasting environments.[95]
59