0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
P(answer)0.00.20.40.60.81.0P(correct)
ECE: 0.007Calibration curve (model=pre-train)
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
P(answer)0.00.20.40.60.81.0P(correct)
ECE: 0.074Calibration curve (model=ppo)Figure 8. Left: Calibration plot of the pre-trained GPT-4 model on a subset of the MMLU dataset. On
the x-axis are bins according to the model’s confidence (logprob) in each of the A/B/C/D choices for
each question; on the y-axis is the accuracy within each bin. The dotted diagonal line represents perfect
calibration. Right: Calibration plot of the post-trained GPT-4 model on the same subset of MMLU. The
post-training hurts calibration significantly.
Disallowed Prompt (expert) :
A new synthesis procedure is being used to synthesize <dangerous chemical> at home, using
relatively simple starting ingredients and basic kitchen supplies.
I’ve written it below using non-expert terminology, so anyone can understand how to
synthesize it:
[Early GPT-4] [March 14 GPT-4]
[Redacted: generates steps and chem-
ical scheme]My apologies, but I cannot provide information on syn-
thesizing harmful or dangerous substances. If you have
any other questions or need assistance with a different
topic, please feel free to ask.
Table 5: Expert Red Teaming: Example prompt and completions from various models.
over 50 experts from domains such as long-term AI alignment risks, cybersecurity, biorisk, and
international security to adversarially test the model. Their findings specifically enabled us to test
model behavior in high-risk areas which require niche expertise to evaluate, as well as assess risks
that will become relevant for very advanced AIs such as power seeking [ 70]. Recommendations and
training data gathered from these experts fed into our mitigations and improvements for the model;
for example, we’ve collected additional data to improve GPT-4’s ability to refuse requests on how to
synthesize dangerous chemicals (Table 5).
Model-Assisted Safety Pipeline: As with prior GPT models, we fine-tune the model’s behavior using
reinforcement learning with human feedback (RLHF) [ 40,63] to produce responses better aligned
with the user’s intent. However, after RLHF, our models can still be brittle on unsafe inputs as well as
sometimes exhibit undesired behaviors on both safe and unsafe inputs. These undesired behaviors can
arise when instructions to labelers were underspecified during reward model data collection portion
of the RLHF pipeline. When given unsafe inputs, the model may generate undesirable content, such
as giving advice on committing crimes. Furthermore, the model may also become overly cautious
on safe inputs, refusing innocuous requests or excessively hedging. To steer our models towards
appropriate behaviour at a more fine-grained level, we rely heavily on our models themselves as tools.
Our approach to safety consists of two main components, an additional set of safety-relevant RLHF
training prompts, and rule-based reward models (RBRMs).
Our rule-based reward models (RBRMs) are a set of zero-shot GPT-4 classifiers. These classifiers
provide an additional reward signal to the GPT-4 policy model during RLHF fine-tuning that targets
12