from experience. Care should be taken when using the outputs of GPT-4, particularly in contexts
where reliability is important.
GPT-4’s capabilities and limitations create significant and novel safety challenges, and we believe
careful study of these challenges is an important area of research given the potential societal impact.
This report includes an extensive system card (after the Appendix) describing some of the risks we
foresee around bias, disinformation, over-reliance, privacy, cybersecurity, proliferation, and more.
It also describes interventions we made to mitigate potential harms from the deployment of GPT-4,
including adversarial testing with domain experts, and a model-assisted safety pipeline.
2 Scope and Limitations of this Technical Report
This report focuses on the capabilities, limitations, and safety properties of GPT-4. GPT-4 is a
Transformer-style model [ 39] pre-trained to predict the next token in a document, using both publicly
available data (such as internet data) and data licensed from third-party providers. The model was
then fine-tuned using Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) [ 40]. Given both
the competitive landscape and the safety implications of large-scale models like GPT-4, this report
contains no further details about the architecture (including model size), hardware, training compute,
dataset construction, training method, or similar.
We are committed to independent auditing of our technologies, and shared some initial steps and
ideas in this area in the system card accompanying this release.2We plan to make further technical
details available to additional third parties who can advise us on how to weigh the competitive and
safety considerations above against the scientific value of further transparency.
3 Predictable Scaling
A large focus of the GPT-4 project was building a deep learning stack that scales predictably. The
primary reason is that for very large training runs like GPT-4, it is not feasible to do extensive
model-specific tuning. To address this, we developed infrastructure and optimization methods that
have very predictable behavior across multiple scales. These improvements allowed us to reliably
predict some aspects of the performance of GPT-4 from smaller models trained using 1,000×–
10,000×less compute.
3.1 Loss Prediction
The final loss of properly-trained large language models is thought to be well approximated by power
laws in the amount of compute used to train the model [41, 42, 2, 14, 15].
To verify the scalability of our optimization infrastructure, we predicted GPT-4’s final loss on our
internal codebase (not part of the training set) by fitting a scaling law with an irreducible loss term
(as in Henighan et al. [15]):L(C) =aCb+c,from models trained using the same methodology
but using at most 10,000x less compute than GPT-4. This prediction was made shortly after the run
started, without use of any partial results. The fitted scaling law predicted GPT-4’s final loss with
high accuracy (Figure 1).
3.2 Scaling of Capabilities on HumanEval
Having a sense of the capabilities of a model before training can improve decisions around alignment,
safety, and deployment. In addition to predicting final loss, we developed methodology to predict
more interpretable metrics of capability. One such metric is pass rate on the HumanEval dataset [ 43],
which measures the ability to synthesize Python functions of varying complexity. We successfully
predicted the pass rate on a subset of the HumanEval dataset by extrapolating from models trained
with at most 1,000×less compute (Figure 2).
For an individual problem in HumanEval, performance may occasionally worsen with scale. Despite
these challenges, we find an approximate power law relationship −EP[log(pass _rate(C))] = α∗C−k
2In addition to the accompanying system card, OpenAI will soon publish additional thoughts on the social
and economic implications of AI systems, including the need for effective regulation.
2