demonstration data to ﬁnetune GPT-4 using supervised learning (SFT) to imitate the behavior
in the demonstrations. We use the ranking data to train a reward model (RM), which predicts
the average labeler’s preference for a given output, and use this signal as a reward to ﬁne-tune the
GPT-4 SFT model using reinforcement learning (speciﬁcally, the PPO algorithm).[ 99] We can then
steer the model towards the desired behavior by giving instructions to our contractors to reward
refusals to certain classes of prompts, and respond appropriately to sensitive prompts in domains
like medical and legal advice.
RLHF ﬁne-tuning makes our models signiﬁcantly safer. However, after this process is complete
our models are still quite brittle and sometimes exhibit undesired behaviors based on prompts where
instructions to labelers were underspeciﬁed. The GPT-4-early model also tends to become overly
cautious in certain ways, refusing innocuous requests and excessively hedging or “overrefusing” .
To steer our models at a more ﬁne-grained level, we relied heavily on our models themselves
as tools. One of our main tools for steering the model towards appropriate refusals is rule-based
reward models (RBRMs).[ 100,101] This technique uses a GPT-4 classiﬁer (the RBRM) to provide an
additional reward signal to the GPT-4 policy model during PPO ﬁne-tuning on a subset of training
prompts. The RBRM takes three things as input: the prompt (optional), the output from the policy
model, and a human-written rubric (e.g., a set of rules in multiple-choice style) for how this output
should be evaluated. Then, the RBRM classiﬁes the output based on the rubric. For example, we
can provide a rubric that instructs the model to classify a response as one of: (A) a refusal in the
desired style, (B) a refusal in the undesired style (e.g., evasive), (C) containing disallowed content, or
(D) a safe non-refusal response. Then, on a subset of prompts that we know request harmful content
such as illicit advice, we can reward GPT-4 for refusing these requests. Conversely, we can reward
GPT-4 for not refusing requests on a subset of known-safe prompts. This technique is related to
work by Glaese[ 100] and Perez.[ 29] In our case, the RBRM is simply a zero-shot GPT-4 classiﬁer.
We provide examples of RBRM instructions below:
In practice, we write multiple rubrics for content categories on which we want to steer GPT-4-
launch behavior. The main dataset comes from our production traﬃc (with consent from users).
We use our models (the Moderation API plus zero-shot GPT-4) and human reviewers to ﬁlter and
classify prompts into content categories. To enrich the training dataset, we also obtain prompts in
several other ways. We use prompts written by our red teamers, model-generated synthetic prompts,
and prompts from other internal or public datasets. To combine the RBRM signal with the reward
model, we rewrite some conﬂicting RM training data and compute the optimal RBRM weights to
overcome undesired preferences of the RM. We also mix synthetic demonstration data into the SFT
process that exhibits the desired refusal style to facilitate exploration during PPO.
To improve the model’s ability to discriminate edge cases, we have our models rewrite prompts
requesting disallowed content into new boundary prompts that are maximally similar to the old
prompts. The diﬀerence is they do not request disallowed content and use RBRMs to ensure that
our model is not refusing these prompts.
To improve the model’s robustness, we collect ranking data from labelers who attempt to
circumvent the desired GPT-4-launch behavior. Training on this data improves model robustness
but does not fully solve the problem of “jailbreaks” leading to harmful content.
The combination of above approaches has made GPT-4 safer compared to versions of the model
that did not have the above steps integrated. We’ve decreased the models tendency to respond to
requests for disallowed content by 82% compared to GPT-3.5, and GPT-4 responds to sensitive
requests (e.g. medical advice and self-harm) in accordance with our policies 29% more often. On the
RealToxicityPrompts dataset,29GPT-4 produces toxic generations 0.73% of the time while GPT-3.5
29Real Toxicity Prompts is a dataset of 100k sentence snippets from the web for researchers to further address the
62