where kandαare positive constants, and Pis a subset of problems in the dataset. We hypothesize
that this relationship holds for all problems in this dataset. In practice, very low pass rates are difficult
or impossible to estimate, so we restrict to problems Pand models Msuch that given some large
sample budget, every problem is solved at least once by every model.
We registered predictions for GPT-4’s performance on HumanEval before training completed, using
only information available prior to training. All but the 15 hardest HumanEval problems were split
into 6 difficulty buckets based on the performance of smaller models. The results on the 3rdeasiest
bucket are shown in Figure 2, showing that the resulting predictions were very accurate for this
subset of HumanEval problems where we can accurately estimate log(pass _rate) for several smaller
models. Predictions on the other five buckets performed almost as well, the main exception being
GPT-4 underperforming our predictions on the easiest bucket.
Certain capabilities remain hard to predict. For example, the Inverse Scaling Prize [ 44] proposed
several tasks for which model performance decreases as a function of scale. Similarly to a recent
result by Wei et al. [45], we find that GPT-4 reverses this trend, as shown on one of the tasks called
Hindsight Neglect [46] in Figure 3.
ada babbage curie gpt-3.5 gpt-4
Model050100AccuracyInverse scaling prize, hindsight neglect
Figure 3. Performance of GPT-4 and smaller models on the Hindsight Neglect task. Accuracy is
shown on the y-axis, higher is better. ada, babbage, and curie refer to models available via the OpenAI
API [47].
We believe that accurately predicting future capabilities is important for safety. Going forward we
plan to refine these methods and register performance predictions across various capabilities before
large model training begins, and we hope this becomes a common goal in the field.
4 Capabilities
We tested GPT-4 on a diverse set of benchmarks, including simulating exams that were originally
designed for humans.4We did no specific training for these exams. A minority of the problems in the
exams were seen by the model during training; for each exam we run a variant with these questions
removed and report the lower score of the two. We believe the results to be representative. For further
details on contamination (methodology and per-exam statistics), see Appendix C.
Exams were sourced from publicly-available materials. Exam questions included both multiple-
choice and free-response questions; we designed separate prompts for each format, and images were
included in the input for questions which required it. The evaluation setup was designed based
on performance on a validation set of exams, and we report final results on held-out test exams.
Overall scores were determined by combining multiple-choice and free-response question scores
using publicly available methodologies for each exam. We estimate and report the percentile each
overall score corresponds to. See Appendix A for further details on the exam evaluation methodology.
3For AMC 10 and AMC 12 2022 exams, the human percentiles are not yet published, so the reported numbers
are extrapolated and likely have wide uncertainty. See Appendix A.5.
4We used the post-trained RLHF model for these exams.
4