4 System Safety
4.1 Usage Policies and Monitoring
OpenAI disallows the use of our models and tools for certain activities and content, as outlined in
our usage policies. These policies are designed to prohibit the use of our models and tools in ways
that cause individual or societal harm. We update these policies in response to new risks and new
information on how our models are being used. Access to and use of our models are also subject to
OpenAIs Terms of Use.
We use a mix of reviewers and automated systems to identify and enforce against misuse of
our models. Our automated systems include a suite of machine learning and rule-based classiﬁer
detections that identify content that might violate our policies. When a user repeatedly prompts
our models with policy-violating content, we take actions such as issuing a warning, temporarily
suspending, or in severe cases, banning the user. Our reviewers ensure that our classiﬁers are
correctly blocking violative content and understand how users are interacting with our systems.
These systems also create signals that we use to mitigate abusive and inauthentic behavior on
our platform. We investigate anomalies in API traﬃc to learn about new types of abuse and to
improve our policies and enforcement.
4.2 Content Classiﬁer Development
Moderation classiﬁers play a key role in our monitoring and enforcement pipeline. We are constantly
developing and improving these classiﬁers. Several of our moderation classiﬁers are accessible to
developers via our Moderation API endpoint, which enables developers to ﬁlter out harmful content
while integrating language models into their products.
We have also experimented with building classiﬁers using the GPT-4 model itself, and have been
studying the eﬀectiveness of various approaches to doing so.31Given GPT-4’s heightened ability
to follow instructions in natural language, the model was able to accelerate the development of
moderation classiﬁers and augment safety workﬂows. This was done in two ways:
1.The model helped speed up development of robust, unambiguous taxonomies needed for content
classiﬁcation (i.e. content policies). This included classifying test sets when prompted with a
taxonomy, enabling an assessment of prompts that it labeled incorrectly by identifying gaps in
the taxonomy that led to the incorrect label.
2.The model helped facilitate the labeling of training data that was fed into classiﬁer training;
the model demonstrated high performance on few-shot classiﬁcation, which helped to bootstrap
the creation of labeled data for human review.
Harnessing GPT-4 in this manner enables us to build classiﬁers for new content areas faster
than before.[ 101] We continue to provide oversight for quality control and for input on edge cases.32
We note that further and ongoing testing is required to ensure that classiﬁers dont exacerbate
inequalities or biases in content moderation decisions.
Finally, as we discuss above in the Overreliance section product-level features and documentation
such as warnings and user education documents are essential to responsible uptake of increasingly
powerful language models like GPT-4.
31We will be sharing more about this work in a forthcoming publication.
32Content classiﬁers cannot ﬁx all issues related with content harms and can themselves be a source of harms by
potentially exacerbating bias in content moderation decisions.[105]
66