on the model may hinder the development of new skills or even lead to the loss of important skills.
Overreliance is a failure mode that likely increases with model capability and reach. As mistakes
become harder for the average human user to detect and general trust in the model grows, users are
less likely to challenge or verify the model’s responses.[96]
Our existing mitigations across all of these axes include documentation and hedging language
within the model. However, mitigating overreliance requires multiple defenses, and especially depends
on downstream interventions by developers. We recommend that developers using our tools provide
end users with detailed documentation on their systems’ capabilities and limitations, as well as
guidance on how to get the best performance from the system. To prevent dependency, we urge
developers to be cautious in how they refer to the model/system, and to generally avoid misleading
claims or implications—including that it is human—and to consider the potential impact of changes
to the model’s style, tone, or perceived personality on users. We also suggest that developers
communicate to users the importance of critically evaluating model outputs.
At the model-level we’ve also made changes to address the risks of both overreliance and
underreliance. Weve found that GPT-4 exhibits enhanced steerability which allows it to better infer
users intentions without extensive prompt tuning.
To tackle overreliance, we’ve reﬁned the model’s refusal behavior, making it more stringent in
rejecting requests that go against our content policy, while being more open to requests it can safely
fulﬁll. One objective here is to discourage users from disregarding the model’s refusals.
However, it’s worth noting that GPT-4 still displays a tendency to hedge in its responses. Some of
our early studies suggest that this epistemic humility may inadvertently foster overreliance, as users
develop trust in the model’s cautious approach. It’s crucial to recognize that the model isn’t always
accurate in admitting its limitations, as evidenced by its tendency to hallucinate. Additionally, users
might grow less attentive to the model’s hedging and refusal cues over time, further complicating
the issue of overreliance.
60