2.1.2 Quantitative Evaluations
As a complement to our qualitative evaluations and adversarial testing, we built internal quantitative
evaluations for categories against our content policy such as hate speech, self-harm advice, and illicit
advice. These evaluations measure the likelihood of a language model to generate content that would
fall into one of the above categories when given prompts aimed at eliciting content in each of those
categories. The generated text from the language model was classiﬁed as containing the unwanted
content using classiﬁers and human analysis.
These evaluations were built to automate and accelerate evaluations of diﬀerent model checkpoints
during training and to more easily compare diﬀerent models on safety-relevant criteria. We speciﬁcally
targeted content areas that were identiﬁed as being high risk and those that we were further targeting
for model mitigations. See ﬁndings in the Model Mitigations section.
In the remainder of this section, we provide further context, examples, and ﬁndings for some of
the areas we evaluated.
2.2 Hallucinations
GPT-4 has the tendency to “hallucinate,”9i.e. “produce content that is nonsensical or untruthful in
relation to certain sources.”[ 31,32] This tendency can be particularly harmful as models become
increasingly convincing and believable, leading to overreliance on them by users. [See further
discussion in Overreliance]. Counterintuitively, hallucinations can become more dangerous as models
become more truthful, as users build trust in the model when it provides truthful information in
areas where they have some familiarity. Additionally, as these models are integrated into society
and used to help automate various systems, this tendency to hallucinate is one of the factors that
can lead to the degradation of overall information quality and further reduce veracity of and trust in
freely available information.[33]
We have measured GPT-4’s hallucination potential in both closed domain and open domain
contexts10using a range of methods. We measured close domain hallucinations using automatic
evaluations (using GPT-4 as a zero-shot classiﬁer) and human evaluations. For open domain
hallucinations, we collected real-world data that had been ﬂagged as not being factual, reviewed
it, and created a ’factual’ set for it where it was possible to do so.11We used this to assess model
generations in relation to the ’factual’ set, and facilitate human evaluations.
GPT-4 was trained to reduce the model’s tendency to hallucinate by leveraging data from prior
models such as ChatGPT. On internal evaluations, GPT-4-launch scores 19 percentage points higher
than our latest GPT-3.5 model at avoiding open-domain hallucinations, and 29 percentage points
higher at avoiding closed-domain hallucinations.
9We use the term “hallucinations,” though we recognize ways this framing may suggest anthropomorphization,
which in turn can lead to harms or incorrect mental models of how the model learns.
10Closed domain hallucinations refer to instances in which the model is instructed to use only information provided
in a given context, but then makes up extra information that was not in that context. For example, if you ask the
model to summarize an article and its summary includes information that was not in the article, then that would be a
closed-domain hallucination. Open domain hallucinations, in contrast, are when the model conﬁdently provides false
information about the world without reference to any particular input context.
11See related work in this area and discussion of use of words like “factual” and “truthful” in, e.g. [34].
46