•The human then provides the results.
ARC found that the versions of GPT-4 it evaluated were ineﬀective at the autonomous replication
task based on preliminary experiments they conducted. These experiments were conducted on a
model without any additional task-speciﬁc ﬁne-tuning, and ﬁne-tuning for task-speciﬁc behavior
could lead to a diﬀerence in performance. As a next step, ARC will need to conduct experiments
that (a) involve the ﬁnal version of the deployed model (b) involve ARC doing its own ﬁne-tuning,
before a reliable judgement of the risky emergent capabilities of GPT-4-launch can be made.
2.10 Interactions with other systems
Understanding how GPT-4 interacts with other systems is critical for evaluating what risks might
be posed by these models in various real-world contexts.
In addition to the tests conducted by ARC in the Potential for Risky Emergent Behaviors section,
red teamers evaluated the use of GPT-4 augmented with other tools[ 76,77,78,79] to achieve tasks
that could be adversarial in nature. We highlight one such example in the domain of chemistry,
where the goal is to search for chemical compounds that are similar to other chemical compounds,
propose alternatives that are purchasable in a commercial catalog, and execute the purchase.
The red teamer augmented GPT-4 with a set of tools:
•A literature search and embeddings tool ( searches papers and embeds all text in vectorDB,
searches through DB with a vector embedding of the questions, summarizes context with LLM,
then uses LLM to take all context into an answer )
•A molecule search tool ( performs a webquery to PubChem to get SMILES from plain text )
•A web search
•A purchase check tool ( checks if a SMILES21string is purchasable against a known commercial
catalog )
•A chemical synthesis planner ( proposes synthetically feasible modiﬁcation to a compound, giving
purchasable analogs )
By chaining these tools together with GPT-4, the red teamer was able to successfully ﬁnd
alternative, purchasable22chemicals. We note that the example in Figure 5 is illustrative in that it
uses a benign leukemia drug as the starting point, but this could be replicated to ﬁnd alternatives
to dangerous compounds.
Models like GPT-4 are developed and deployed not in isolation, but as part of complex systems
that include multiple tools, organizations, individuals, institutions and incentives. This is one reason
that powerful AI systems should be evaluated and adversarially tested in context for the emergence
of potentially harmful system–system, or human–system feedback loops and developed with a margin
21SMILES refers to Simpliﬁed Molecular Input Line Entry System[80]
22The red teamer attempted to purchase one of the proposed chemicals from a supplier, but was required to
provide their university / lab address instead of a residential address. The red teamer then received the compound
at their home address, but it is unclear whether this was because the supplier knew of the red teamers status as a
university-aﬃliated researcher, due to a package processing error, or some other reason. This indicates that there
is some friction in executing a purchase in some cases, but further investigation would be required across various
suppliers and jurisdictions.
56