2.3 Harmful Content
Language models can be prompted to generate diﬀerent kinds of harmful content. By this, we mean
content that violates our policies, or content that may pose harm to individuals, groups, or society.12
This assessment of harm doesn’t account for context of usage, which plays a key role in determining
if a piece of content is eventually harmful or not.[ 39] Therefore, we focused on content areas that
pose the potential for harm regardless of the context in which they may appear.
As an example, GPT-4-early can generate instances of hate speech, discriminatory language,
incitements to violence, or content that is then used to either spread false narratives or to exploit
an individual. Such content can harm marginalized communities, contribute to hostile online
environments, and, in extreme cases, precipitate real-world violence and discrimination. In particular,
we found that intentional probing of GPT-4-early could lead to the following kinds of harmful content
[for background, see [6, 21]]:
1.Advice or encouragement for self harm behaviors
2.Graphic material such as erotic or violent content
3.Harassing, demeaning, and hateful content
4.Content useful for planning attacks or violence
5.Instructions for ﬁnding illegal content
Our work on model refusals (described in Section 2) aimed to reduce the tendency of the model
to produce such harmful content. Below we provide some examples from GPT-4-early compared to
GPT-4-launch, the version we are launching with13.
2.4 Harms of representation, allocation, and quality of service
Language models can amplify biases and perpetuate stereotypes.[ 40,41,42,43,44,45,46,6] Like
earlier GPT models and other common language models, both GPT-4-early and GPT-4-launch
continue to reinforce social biases and worldviews.
The evaluation process we ran helped to generate additional qualitative evidence of societal biases
in various versions of the GPT-4 model. We found that the model has the potential to reinforce and
reproduce speciﬁc biases and worldviews, including harmful stereotypical and demeaning associations
for certain marginalized groups. Model behaviors, such as inappropriate hedging behaviors, can also
12Terms like “harmful” or “toxic” can be wielded in ways that are themselves harmful or oppressive as discussed in
[35]. For example, mislabeling content as “harmful” or “toxic” can negatively impact users, particularly in the case
of false-positives due to bias in the classiﬁers. For instance, a harmless love story about a heterosexual couple may
not be ﬂagged, but may be deemed “unsafe” if it involves queer characters.[ 36] Thus, it is important to specify what
“unwanted” content means and who ﬁnds it undesirable. In some instances, “unwanted” refers to content a user did
not request or expect, so ﬁltering or otherwise ﬂagging it serves the user’s needs. In other cases, “unwanted” refers to
content the AI service provider does not want to share, for various reasons (perhaps an inability to distinguish one
category from another “actually” harmful category, or perhaps an inability to restrict certain limited harmful uses of
the content even if other uses are benign). While this may still be justiﬁed, whether via externalities to third-parties
or via second-order harms to the user, justifying it is less straightforward. OpenAI’s particular content taxonomy and
justiﬁcations for AI systems’ behavior are further discussed in [37] and [38].
13As we note in the introduction, the examples included here and throughout this system card are not zero-shot
and are cherry picked from our evaluation eﬀorts to illustrate speciﬁc types of safety concerns or harms. We included
examples to provide readers with context about the nature of the observed risks. One example is not enough to show
the breadth of ways these issues may manifest
47