safe usage.
•Build evaluations, mitigations, and approach deployment with real-world usage
in mind: Context of use such as who the users are, what the speciﬁc use case is, where the
model is being deployed, etc., is critical to mitigating actual harms associated with language
models and ensuring their deployment is as beneﬁcial as possible. It’s particularly important to
account for real-world vulnerabilities, humans roles in the deployment context, and adversarial
attempts. We especially encourage the development of high quality evaluations and testing of
model mitigations on datasets in multiple languages.
•Ensure that safety assessments cover emergent risks: As models get more capable, we
should be prepared for emergent capabilities and complex interactions to pose novel safety issues.
It’s important to develop evaluation methods that can be targeted at advanced capabilities that
could be particularly dangerous if they emerged in future models, while also being open-ended
enough to detect unforeseen risks.
•Be cognizant of, and plan for, capability jumps “in the wild”: Methods like ﬁne-tuning
and chain-of-thought prompting could lead to capability jumps in the same base model. This
should be accounted for explicitly in internal safety testing procedures and evaluations. And
a precautionary principle should be applied: above a safety critical threshold, assurance of
suﬃcient safety is required.
The increase in capabilities and adoption of these models have made the challenges and conse-
quences of those challenges outlined in this card imminent. As a result, we especially encourage
more research into:
•Economic impacts of AI and increased automation, and the structures needed to make the
transition for society smoother
•Structures that allow broader public participation into decisions regarding what is considered
the “optimal” behavior for these models
•Evaluations for risky emergent behaviors, such as situational awareness, persuasion, and
long-horizon planning
•Interpretability, explainability, and calibration, to address the current nature of “black-box”
AI models. We also encourage research into eﬀective means of promoting AI literacy to aid
appropriate scrutiny to model outputs.
As we see above, both improved language model capabilities and limitations can pose signiﬁcant
challenges to the responsible and safe societal adoption of these models. To ensure that we are all
well-prepared for the pace of progress, we need more research emphasis on areas such as AI literacy,
economic and social resilience, and anticipatory governance.[ 11] It is very important that OpenAI,
other labs, and academia further develop eﬀective evaluation tools and technical improvements in
model safety. Progress has been made in the last few years, and more investment in safety will likely
produce more gains.
We encourage readers interested in this topic to read our work on language model impacts in
areas such as disinformation, misuse, education, and economy and labor market.
69