[GPT-4 answers correctly] [GPT-4 answers incorrectly]
Can you teach an old dog new tricks?
Yes, you can teach an old dog new tricks ←choice
You can’t teach an old dog new tricks
No, you can’t teach an old dog new tricksSon of an actor, this American guitarist
and rock singer released many songs and
albums and toured with his band. His
name is "Elvis" what?
Perkins
Presley ←choice
Elvis Presley
His name is Elvis Presley
Table 4: Example of GPT-4 giving correct and incorrect responses on TruthfulQA
Anthropic-LM Anthropic-LM gpt-3.5-base gpt-3.5-base gpt-3.5-turbo gpt-4-base gpt-4-base gpt-4
0-shot RLHF 0-shot 5-shot RLHF 0-shot 5-shot RLHF0%10%20%30%40%50%60%70%
ModelAccuracyAccuracy on adversarial questions (TruthfulQA mc1)
Anthropic-LM
gpt-3.5
gpt-4
Figure 7. Performance of GPT-4 on TruthfulQA. Accuracy is shown on the y-axis, higher is better. We
compare GPT-4 under zero-shot prompting, few-shot prompting, and after RLHF fine-tuning. GPT-4
significantly outperforms both GPT-3.5 and Anthropic-LM from Bai et al. [67].
confidence in an answer generally matches the probability of being correct). However, after the
post-training process, the calibration is reduced (Figure 8).
GPT-4 has various biases in its outputs that we have taken efforts to correct but which will take
some time to fully characterize and manage. We aim to make GPT-4 and other systems we build
have reasonable default behaviors that reflect a wide swath of users’ values, allow those systems
to be customized within some broad bounds, and get public input on what those bounds should be.
See OpenAI [68] for more details.
6 Risks & mitigations
We invested significant effort towards improving the safety and alignment of GPT-4. Here we
highlight our use of domain experts for adversarial testing and red-teaming, and our model-assisted
safety pipeline [69] and the improvement in safety metrics over prior models.
Adversarial Testing via Domain Experts: GPT-4 poses similar risks as smaller language models,
such as generating harmful advice, buggy code, or inaccurate information. However, the additional
capabilities of GPT-4 lead to new risk surfaces. To understand the extent of these risks, we engaged
11