1 Introduction
Large language models, also known as LLMs, have become an increasingly prevalent part of our
day-to-day lives, with their use extending to a wide range of domains including web browsing, voice
assistants, and coding assistance tools.[ 1,2,3,4] These models have the potential to signiﬁcantly
impact society in numerous ways.[ 5,6,7] This system card analyzes GPT-4, the latest large language
model in the GPT family of models.[ 8,9,10] Since it ﬁnished training in August of 2022, we have
been evaluating, adversarially testing, and iteratively improving the model and the system-level
mitigations around it. Our mitigations and processes alter GPT-4’s behavior and prevent certain
kinds of misuses, though they have limitations, pointing to the need for anticipatory planning and
governance[ 11] and further safety research. Our approach to deployment balances minimizing risk
from deployment, enabling positive use cases, and learning from deployment.
GPT models are often trained in two stages. First, they are trained, using a large dataset of text
from the Internet, to predict the next word. The models are then ﬁne-tuned with additional data,
using an algorithm called reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF), to produce outputs
that are preferred by human labelers.[ 10,12,13] Training language models on large text datasets
has given rise to capabilities such as few-shot learning[ 10] and the ability to carry out a wide range
of natural language tasks spanning diﬀerent domains, including question answering, arithmetic, and
classiﬁcation. Fine-tuning has made these models more controllable and useful.
1.1 Overview of ﬁndings and mitigations
In this system card,1we outline the safety challenges that arise from GPT-4, and explain the
interventions we implemented to mitigate potential harms from its deployment. We focus on safety
challenges not because they necessarily outweigh the potential beneﬁts,2but because we wish to
motivate further work in safety measurement, mitigation, and assurance. The scope of this system
card is narrower than the potential scope of abilities GPT-4 can be used to unlock; notably, both
custom ﬁne-tuning and image capabilities are explicitly out of scope.
We focus on analyzing two versions of the model: an early version ﬁne-tuned for instruction
following (“GPT-4-early”); and a version ﬁne-tuned for increased helpfulness and harmlessness[ 18]
that reﬂects the further mitigations outlined in this system card (“GPT-4-launch”).3When we
discuss the risks of GPT-4 we will often refer to the behavior of GPT-4-early, because it reﬂects the
risks of GPT-4 when minimal safety mitigations are applied. In most cases, GPT-4-launch exhibits
much safer behavior due to the safety mitigations we applied.
Known risks associated with smaller language models are also present with GPT-4. GPT-4
can generate potentially harmful content, such as advice on planning attacks or hate speech. It
can represent various societal biases and worldviews that may not be representative of the users
intent,4or of widely shared values. It can also generate code that is compromised or vulnerable.
The additional capabilities of GPT-4 also lead to new risk surfaces.
To understand the extent of these risks, we engaged more than 50 experts to help us gain a more
robust understanding of the GPT-4 model and potential deployment risks. We selected these areas
1This document takes inspiration from the concepts of model cards and system cards.[ 14,15,16] This document
often takes the system level of analysis, with that system including non-model mitigations such as use policies, access
controls, and monitoring for abuse
2See, e.g. discussion of Diﬀerential Technology Development in[17].
3We intentionally focus on these two versions instead of a comparison to the base GPT-4 model, since the base
model proved challenging for domain expert red teamers to use eﬀectively to surface behaviors of interest.
4This includes tendencies to do things like repeat back a dialog user’s preferred answer (“sycophancy”), which can
worsen with scale.[19]
42