AP Calculus BCAMC 12Codeforces RatingAP English LiteratureAMC 10Uniform Bar ExamAP English LanguageAP ChemistryGRE QuantitativeAP Physics 2USABO Semifinal 2020AP MacroeconomicsAP StatisticsLSATGRE WritingAP MicroeconomicsAP BiologyGRE VerbalAP World HistorySAT MathAP US HistoryAP US GovernmentAP PsychologyAP Art HistorySAT EBRWAP Environmental Science
Exam0%20%40%60%80%100%Estimated percentile lower bound (among test takers)
Exam results (ordered by GPT-3.5 performance)gpt-4
gpt-4 (no vision)
gpt3.5Figure 4. GPT performance on academic and professional exams. In each case, we simulate the
conditions and scoring of the real exam. Exams are ordered from low to high based on GPT-3.5
performance. GPT-4 outperforms GPT-3.5 on most exams tested. To be conservative we report the
lower end of the range of percentiles, but this creates some artifacts on the AP exams which have very
wide scoring bins. For example although GPT-4 attains the highest possible score on AP Biology (5/5),
this is only shown in the plot as 85th percentile because 15 percent of test-takers achieve that score.
GPT-4 exhibits human-level performance on the majority of these professional and academic exams.
Notably, it passes a simulated version of the Uniform Bar Examination with a score in the top 10% of
test takers (Table 1, Figure 4).
The model’s capabilities on exams appear to stem primarily from the pre-training process and are not
significantly affected by RLHF. On multiple choice questions, both the base GPT-4 model and the
RLHF model perform equally well on average across the exams we tested (see Appendix B).
We also evaluated the pre-trained base GPT-4 model on traditional benchmarks designed for evaluating
language models. For each benchmark we report, we ran contamination checks for test data appearing
in the training set (see Appendix D for full details on per-benchmark contamination).5We used
few-shot prompting [1] for all benchmarks when evaluating GPT-4.6
GPT-4 considerably outperforms existing language models, as well as previously state-of-the-art
(SOTA) systems which often have benchmark-specific crafting or additional training protocols
(Table 2).
5During our contamination check we discovered that portions of BIG-bench [48] were inadvertently mixed
into the training set, and we excluded it from our reported results.
6For GSM-8K, we include part of the training set in GPT-4’s pre-training mix (see Appendix E for details).
We use chain-of-thought prompting [11] when evaluating.
6