produces toxic generation 6.48% of the time.
Additionally, GPT-4-launch substantially improves over previous models in the ability to follow
user intent [ 12]. On a dataset of prompts submitted to ChatGPT [ 103] and the OpenAI API [ 104],
the responses generated by GPT-4-launch were preferred over the responses generated by GPT-3.5
RLHF on 70.2%of prompts and GPT-3.5 Turbo RLHF on 61.1%of prompts.1130
Model-level safety reduces the burden on other safety-relevant infrastructure such as monitoring
or integration of classiﬁers in the product. However, model-level refusals and behavior changes can
impact all uses of the model, and often what is undesired or safe can depend on the context of model
usage (e.g., Typing “I will kill you” in a chatbot designed for children is an undesirable output,
while the same phrase in a ﬁctional story may be considered acceptable). Refusals enable the model
to refuse “harmful” requests, but the model can still be prone to producing content that could be
stereotypical or otherwise discriminatory for non-“harmful” requests. Additionally, many challenges
such as disparate performance in language models cannot be eﬀectively mitigated by the current
approaches we have explored for refusals in language models and pre-training ﬁltering of harmful
data alone.
In addition to refusals mitigations, we also intervened to reduce the frequency of model halluci-
nations. We pursue two diﬀerent technical approaches. For tackling open-domain hallucinations, we
collect real-world ChatGPT data that has been ﬂagged by users as being not factual, and collect
additional labeled comparison data that we use to train our reward models.
For closed-domain hallucinations, we are able to use GPT-4 itself to generate synthetic data.
Speciﬁcally, we design a multi-step process to generate comparison data:
1.Pass a prompt through GPT-4 model and get a response
2.Pass prompt + response through GPT-4 with an instruction to list all hallucinations
(a)If no hallucinations are found, continue
3.Pass prompt + response + hallucinations through GPT-4 with an instruction to rewrite the
response without hallucinations
4.Pass prompt + new response through GPT-4 with an instruction to list all hallucinations
(a)If none are found, keep (original response, new response) comparison pair
(b)Otherwise, repeat up to 5x
This process produces comparisons between (original response with hallucinations, new response
without hallucinations according to GPT-4), which we also mix into our RM dataset.
We ﬁnd that our mitigations on hallucinations improve performance on factuality as measured
by evaluations such as TruthfulQA[ 34] and increase accuracy to around 60% as compared to 30%
for an earlier version.
risk of neural toxic degeneration in models.[102]
30We collected 5,214 user prompts sent to us through ChatGPT and the OpenAI API, sampled one response from
each model, and sent these prompts and responses to human labelers. The labelers were instructed to judge whether
the response is what the user would have wanted given the prompt. The labelers were not told which response was
generated by which model and the order in which the responses were presented was randomised. We ﬁlter out prompts
containing personally identiﬁable information (PII).
64