2.6 Proliferation of Conventional and Unconventional Weapons15
Certain LLM capabilities can have dual-use potential, meaning that the models can be used for
“both commercial and military or proliferation applications” .[ 57] We subjected the model to stress
testing, boundary testing, and red teaming16in four dual-use domains to explore whether our models
could provide the necessary information to proliferators17seeking to develop, acquire, or disperse
nuclear, radiological, biological, and chemical weapons. Successful proliferation is dependent on
a number of “ingredients,” information being one such ingredient. Threat actors would also need
access to the dual-use items and laboratory equipment, which are often diﬃcult to acquire due to
export controls or other special licensing requirements.
On its own, access to GPT-4 is an insuﬃcient condition for proliferation but could alter the
information available to proliferators, especially in comparison to traditional search tools. Red
teamers selected a set of questions to prompt both GPT-4 and traditional search engines, ﬁnding
that the time to research completion was reduced when using GPT-4. In some cases, the research
process was shortened by several hours without sacriﬁcing information accuracy. We therefore
conclude that a key risk driver is GPT-4’s ability to generate publicly accessible but diﬃcult-to-ﬁnd
information, shortening the time users spend on research and compiling this information in a way
that is understandable to a non-expert user. The red team assessed the model’s capabilities but
their work was not intended to assess the probability or likelihood of a user accessing the model for
the purpose of developing unconventional weapons.
Speciﬁcally, we found that information generated by the model is most likely to be useful for
individuals and non-state actors who do not have access to formal scientiﬁc training. The model
can provide general information on common proliferation pathways, including historical attempts
at proliferation that were successful. The model can suggest vulnerable public targets, provide
general security measures that are typically used to protect dual-use materials, and generate the
fundamental components that are required to engineer a radiological dispersal device. The model
readily re-engineered some biochemical compounds that were publicly available online, including
compounds that could cause harm at both the individual and population level. The model is also
able to identify mutations that can alter pathogenicity. Red teamers could not successfully compel
the model to engineer new biochemical substances.
Red teamers noted that threat actors may beneﬁt from the model’s capability to critique and
provide feedback on user-proposed acquisition strategies. Red teamers found that the model generated
useful information about facility rentals, equipment, and companies that could be used to build
a weapon, including companies that were more likely to violate U.S export restrictions. Threat
actors may also beneﬁt from combining GPT-4 with internet browsing and open-source tools, as
highlighted in the section above on Interactions with other systems.
15We focus here on unconventional weapons, but note that large language models like GPT-4 can also contribute to
conventional weapons such as, for example, small arms.
16We note that in the past we have used the term red teaming somewhat diﬀerently than traditional usage in
cybersecurity.[ 26] Throughout this system card, we refer to the people performing stress testing, boundary testing,
and red teaming as “red teamers” for simplicity and in order to use language consistent with that we used with our
collaborators.
17When referring to proliferation, the System Card uses the deﬁnition oﬀered by the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization. “WMD proliferation refers to attempts by state or non-state actors to develop, acquire, manufacture,
possess, transport or transfer nuclear, radiological, chemical or biological weapons or devices and their means of delivery
or related material, including precursors, without prejudice to the rights and obligations of the States Parties to the
following agreements: the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons or Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT); the
Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on
their Destruction (CWC) and the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of
Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on their Destruction (BWC)” .[58]
52