of safety that respects the complex, emergent nature of such feedback loops. Other examples of
such feedback loops include algorithmic collusion[ 81] and manipulation of humans in the loop, e.g.,
polarization of users of recommender systems.[ 82] A novel kind of system-level risk created by
widely-deployed models like GPT-4 is the risk created by independent high-impact decision-makers
relying on decision assistance from models whose outputs are correlated or interact in complex ways.
For instance, if multiple banks concurrently rely on GPT-4 to inform their strategic thinking about
sources of risks in the macroeconomy, they may inadvertantly correlate their decisions and create
systemic risks that did not previously exist.
2.11 Economic Impacts
The impact of GPT-4 on the economy and workforce should be a crucial consideration for policymakers
and other stakeholders. While existing research primarily focuses on how AI and generative models
can augment human workers, GPT-4 or subsequent models may lead to the automation of certain
jobs.[ 83] This could result in workforce displacement.[ 84] Over time, we expect GPT-4 to impact
even jobs that have historically required years of experience and education, such as legal services.[ 85]
Research shows the role that AI and generative models, including GPT-3 and GPT-3.5, can play
in augmenting human workers, from upskilling in call centers,[ 86] to help with writing,[ 87] to coding
assistance.[ 88] This assistance can be positive for workers, potentially leading to better matching of
candidates to jobs[ 87] and improving overall job satisfaction. [ 89][90]. However, even using AI as a
productivity multiplier requires workers to adjust to new workﬂows and augment their skills.
We think it is important that workers, policymakers, and researchers not focus overly on just
the current state of capabilities. We expect GPT-4 to accelerate development of new applications
built on top of generative models, and that these applications will often solve more complex tasks
than the model on its own. Indeed, as discussed in the Acceleration section, it is plausible that the
overall pace of technological development will accelerate due to AI, especially the development of
better AI systems.
Historically, the introduction of automation technologies has increased inequality and had
disparate impacts on diﬀerent groups.[ 91] Similar trends his may manifest via GPT-4 in various
ways, including worker displacement, a decline of wages given the competitive cost of the model,
diﬀerential access and beneﬁts from access to new tools and applications, and changes in industrial
organization and power structures due to collection of and access to training data. Existing social
networks, technical infrastructure, and linguistic and cultural representation will play a role in who
gets access and beneﬁts from access. Additionally, the model may cause economic harms to certain
groups via its production of particular content or its deployment in particular contexts, as discussed
in the Harmful content, Interactions with other systems, and Overreliance sections;
The training data has a cutoﬀ point, meaning its knowledge of the world is locked in a certain
state. The primary method of direct deployment (ChatGPT) only shows one response per “query”;
this means the model has the power to entrench existing players and ﬁrms when there is little
variation in outputs for a given input. For example, the model has a single answer to “What is the
best bagel place in New York?” at temperature=0.
While these models also create new opportunities for innovation in various industries by enabling
more personalized and eﬃcient services and create new opportunities for job seekers, particular
attention should be paid to how they are deployed in the workplace over time.[ 92] From conversations
with our launch partners, we understand that GPT-4 makes it easier and more straightforward
to iterate and build applications that may have been possible with GPT-3.5 but weren’t explored
because of barriers to iterating with a more “sensitive” model.
We are investing in eﬀorts to continue to monitor the impacts of GPT-4, including experiments
58