Appendix
A Exam Benchmark Methodology
A.1 Sourcing.
We sourced either the most recent publicly-available official past exams, or practice exams in
published third-party 2022-2023 study material which we purchased. We cross-checked these
materials against the model’s training data to determine the extent to which the training data was not
contaminated with any exam questions, which we also report in this paper.
The Uniform Bar Exam was run by our collaborators at CaseText and Stanford CodeX.
A.2 Prompting: multiple-choice
For each multiple-choice section, we used a few-shot prompt with gold standard explanations and
answers for a similar exam format. For each question, we sampled an explanation (at temperature
0.3) to extract a multiple-choice answer letter(s).
We sourced each multiple-choice section as a pair of exams: one holdout and one nonholdout. We
iterated on our methodology using the nonholdout exam, and then ran each holdout exam once for a
final score. We did not source a nonholdout exam for the USABO and for the MKSAP questions
and instead ran these once using our best-guess methodology as determined by iterating on the AP
Biology exam.
For the AMC 10 and AMC 12 held-out test exams, we discovered a bug that limited response length.
We fixed the bug and reran these exams to ensure accurate results. For most exam runs, we extract the
model’s letter choice directly from the explanation. For the GPT-4 USABO and SAT reading/writing
runs (with and without vision), the GPT-3.5 runs, and the GPT-4 runs of SAT Math, GRE, USNCO,
AP Biology, AP Chemistry, and AP Environmental Science without vision, we instead sample a letter
choice at temperature 0 using the already-sampled explanation. These methodological differences
resulted from code mismatches detected post-evaluation, and we believe their impact on the results to
be minimal.
A.3 Prompting: free-response
For each free-response section, we gave the model the free-response question’s prompt as a simple
instruction-following-style request, and we sampled a response using temperature 0.6. For AP exams,
we used the most recent 2022 prompts, which are all publicly-available; for the SAT, we used three
prompts – Sample Essay Prompt 1 and Sample Essay Prompt 2 from Test Specifications for the
Redesigned SAT (CollegeBoard, 2015) plus the official SAT Practice Essay #1 (CollegeBoard, 2016)
and took the average score; for the GRE, we used the issue essay and argument essay prompts from a
commercially-available prep book.
Due to the longer iteration time of human expert grading, we did no methodology iteration on
temperature or prompt, instead we simply ran these free response questions each only a single time
at our best-guess temperature (0.6) and prompt (a simple instruction-following prompt displayed in
section A.8).
All free-response questions consisting of formal essays which required evaluation of writing quality
(AP English Language and Composition, AP English Literature and Composition, AP World History,
AP US History, AP US Government and Politics, AP Art History, the GRE, and the SAT) were
graded by 1-2 qualified third-party contractors with relevant work experience grading those essays.
We sampled these responses using a few-shot prompt containing one high-quality sample GRE
essay response (which you can also see in section A.8) in order to encourage the model to produce
appropriately sophisticated text, rather than an unnaturally terse reply. We graded all other free-
response questions on their technical content, according to the guidelines from the publicly-available
official rubrics.
24