testing, and red teaming.7We refer to these adversarial testing processes informally as “red teaming”
in line with the deﬁnition given in [ 27], namely“a structured eﬀort to ﬁnd ﬂaws and vulnerabilities
in a plan, organization, or technical system, often performed by dedicated ’red teams’ that seek to
adopt an attacker’s mindset and methods. ” We conducted internal adversarial testing GPT-4-launch
on March 10, 2023. We also tested multiple similar versions of GPT-4 in the lead-up to this
date, so analysis here is informed by that exploration as well. Red teaming has been applied to
language models in various ways: to reduce harmful outputs;[ 28] and to leverage external expertise
for domain-speciﬁc adversarial testing.[16] Some have explored red teaming language models using
language models.[29]
Red teaming in general, and the type of red teaming we call ’expert red teaming,’8is just one of
the mechanisms[ 27] we use to inform our work identifying, measuring, and testing AI systems. Our
approach is to red team iteratively, starting with an initial hypothesis of which areas may be the
highest risk, testing these areas, and adjusting as we go. It is also iterative in the sense that we
use multiple rounds of red teaming as we incorporate new layers of mitigation and control, conduct
testing and reﬁning, and repeat this process.
We reached out to researchers and industry professionals - primarily with expertise in fairness,
alignment research, industry trust and safety, dis/misinformation, chemistry, biorisk, cybersecurity,
nuclear risks, economics, human-computer interaction, law, education, and healthcare - to help
us gain a more robust understanding of the GPT-4 model and potential deployment risks. We
selected these areas based on a number of factors including but not limited to: prior observed risks in
language models and AI systems;[ 6,30] and domains where we have observed increased user interest
in the application of language models. Participants in this red team process were chosen based on
prior research or experience in these risk areas, and therefore reﬂect a bias towards groups with
speciﬁc educational and professional backgrounds (e.g., people with signiﬁcant higher education or
industry experience). Participants also typically have ties to English-speaking, Western countries
(such as the US, Canada, and the UK). Our selection of red teamers introduces some biases, and
likely inﬂuenced both how red teamers interpreted particular risks as well as how they probed
politics, values, and the default behavior of the model. It is also likely that our approach to sourcing
researchers privileges the kinds of risks that are top of mind in academic communities and at AI
ﬁrms.
These experts had access to early versions of GPT-4 (including GPT-4-early) and to the model
with in-development mitigations (precursors to GPT-4-launch). They identiﬁed initial risks that
motivated safety research and further iterative testing in key areas. We reduced risk in many of
the identiﬁed areas with a combination of technical mitigations, and policy and enforcement levers;
however, many risks still remain. We expect to continue to learn more about these and other
categories of risk over time. While this early qualitative red teaming exercise is very useful for
gaining insights into complex, novel models like GPT-4, it is not a comprehensive evaluation of all
possible risks.
We note further context, examples, and ﬁndings for some of the domains evaluated in the
remainder in the subcategories listed in this section.
7Note that, in addition to red teaming focused on probing our organization’s capabilities and resilience to attacks,
we also make ample use of stress testing and boundary testing methods which focus on surfacing edge cases and other
potential failure modes with potential to cause harm. In order to reduce confusion associated with the term ’red team’,
help those reading about our methods to better contextualize and understand them, and especially to avoid false
assurances, we are working to adopt clearer terminology, as advised in [ 26], however, for simplicity and in order to use
language consistent with that we used with our collaborators, we use the term “red team” in this document.
8We use the term ’expert’ to refer to expertise informed by a range of domain knowledge and lived experiences.
45