keeping only characters (including numbers). For each evaluation example, we randomly select
three substrings of 50 characters (or use the entire example if it’s less than 50 characters). A
match is identified if any of the three sampled evaluation substrings is a substring of the processed
training example. This yields a list of contaminated examples. We discard these and rerun to get
uncontaminated scores.
Our filtering approach has some limitations. Our substring match can result in false negatives (if there
is a small difference between the evaluation and training data) as well as false positives. We only use
partial information from the evaluation examples, utilizing just the question, context, or equivalent
data while ignoring answer, response, or equivalent data. In some cases, the multiple-choice options
are also excluded. These exclusions may lead to an increase in false positives.
The RLHF post-training dataset is vastly smaller than the pretraining set and unlikely to have any
particular question contaminated. However we did not check explicitly.
As can be seen in tables 9 and 10, contamination overall has very little effect on the reported results.
D Contamination on academic benchmarks
We measure cross-contamination between academic benchmarks and the pre-training data similarly
to the methodology presented in Appendix C. Results are presented in Table 11.
E GSM-8K in GPT-4 training
To improve GPT-4’s ability to do mathematical reasoning, we mixed in data from the training set of
MATH and GSM-8K, two commonly studied benchmarks for mathematical reasoning in language
models. The total number of tokens drawn from these math benchmarks was a tiny fraction of the
overall GPT-4 training budget. When mixing in data from these math benchmarks, a portion of the
training data was held back, so each individual training example may or may not have been seen by
GPT-4 during training.
We conducted contamination checking to verify the test set for GSM-8K is not included in the training
set (see Appendix D). We recommend interpreting the performance results reported for GPT-4
GSM-8K in Table 2 as something in-between true few-shot transfer and full benchmark-specific
tuning.
F Multilingual MMLU
We translated all questions and answers from MMLU [ 49] using Azure Translate. We used an
external model to perform the translation, instead of relying on GPT-4 itself, in case the model had
unrepresentative performance for its own translations. We selected a range of languages that cover
different geographic regions and scripts, we show an example question taken from the astronomy
category translated into Marathi, Latvian and Welsh in Table 13. The translations are not perfect, in
some cases losing subtle information which may hurt performance. Furthermore some translations
preserve proper nouns in English, as per translation conventions, which may aid performance.
We incorporated the same MMLU prompt as [ 4], the model is instructed that it is an intelligent
agent, supplied with the questions and a list of four answer options labelled ‘A-D’, followed by
‘Answer:’. We translate the model instruction, question and answers, however preserve the ‘Answer’
token along with the ‘A-D’ options in English. An example prompt is shown in Table 12. The
prompts are composed three-shot, with the three examples picked from the development set. We use
three-shot evaluation over the regular five-shot because some languages map to much longer token
sequences. Finally we classify the correct answer by picking the A-D token continuation with the
highest probability from the model.
G Examples of GPT-4 Visual Input
29