24 Gaurav Menghani
(1)FC layers ignore the spatial information of the input pixels. Intuitively, it is hard to build an
understanding of the given input by looking at individual pixel values in isolation. They also
ignore the spatial locality in nearby regions.
(2)Secondly, using FC layers also leads to an explosion in the number of parameters when
working with even moderately sized inputs. A 100×100RGB image with 3 channels, would
lead to each neuron in the first layer having 3×104connections. This makes the network
susceptible to overfitting also.
Convolutional layers avoid this by learning ‘filters’, where each filter is a 3D weight matrix of a
fixed size ( 3×3,5×5, etc.), with the third dimension being the same as the number of channels
in the input. Each filter is convolved over the input to generate a feature map for that given filter.
These filters learn to detect specific features, and convolving them with a particular input patch
results in a single scalar value that is higher if the feature is present in that input patch.
These learned features are simpler in lower layers (such as edges (horizontal, vertical, diagonal,
etc.)), and more complex in subsequent layers (texture, shapes, etc.). This happens because the
subsequent layers use the feature maps generated by previous layers, and each pixel in the input
feature map of the 𝑖-th layer, depends on the past 𝑖−1layers. This increases the receptive field of
the said pixel as 𝑖increases, progressively increasing the complexity of the features that can be
encoded in a filter.
The core idea behind the efficiency of Convolutional Layers is that the same filter is used
everywhere in the image, regardless of where the filter is applied. Hence, enforcing spatial invariance
while sharing the parameters. Going back to the example of a 100×100RGB image with 3 channels,
a5×5filter would imply a total of 75(5×5×3) parameters. Each layer can learn multiple unique
filters, and still be within a very reasonable parameter budget. This also has a regularizing effect,
wherein a dramatically reduced number of parameters allow for easier optimization, and reducing
the likelihood of overfitting.
Convolutional Layers are usually coupled with Pooling Layers, which allow dimensionality
reduction by subsampling the input (aggregating a sliding 2-D window of pixels, using functions
like max, avg, etc.). Pooling would lead to smaller feature maps for the next layer to process,
which makes it faster to process. LeNet5 [ 97] was the first Convolutional Network which included
convolutional layers, pooling, etc. Subsequently, many iterations of these networks have been
proposed with various improvements. AlexNet [ 92], Inception [ 146], ResNet [ 73], etc. have all made
significant improvements over time on known image classification benchmarks using Convolutional
Layers.
Depth-Separable Convolutional Layers : In the convolution operation, each filter is used to
convolve over the two spatial dimensions and the third channel dimension. As a result, the size of
each filter is 𝑠𝑥×𝑠𝑦×input_channels , where𝑠𝑥and𝑠𝑦are typically equal. This is done for each
filter, resulting in the convolution operation happening both spatially in the 𝑥and𝑦dimensions,
and depthwise in the 𝑧dimension.
Depth-separable convolution breaks this into two steps (Refer to Figure 16):
(1)Doing a point-wise convolution with 1×1filters, such that the resulting feature map now
has a depth of output_channels .
(2) Doing a spatial convolution with 𝑠𝑥×𝑠𝑦filters in the 𝑥and𝑦dimensions.
These two operations stacked together (without any intermediate non-linear activation) re-
sults in an output of the same shape as a regular convolution, with much fewer parameters ( 1×
1×input_channels×output_channels)+(𝑠𝑥×𝑠𝑦×output_channels), v/s𝑠𝑥×𝑠𝑦×input_channels
×output_channels for the regular convolution). Similarly there is an order of magnitude less
computation since the point-wise convolution is much cheaper for convolving with each input