6 Gaurav Menghani
concludes, the network is fine-tuned with the remaining parameters. This process is repeated a
number of times until the desired number of original parameters are pruned (Algorithm 1).
Algorithm 1: Standard Network Pruning with Fine-Tuning
Data: Pre-trained dense network with weights 𝑊, inputs𝑋, number of pruning rounds 𝑁, fraction of
parameters to prune per round 𝑝.
Result: Pruned network with weights 𝑊′.
1𝑊′←𝑊;
2for𝑖←1to𝑁do
3𝑆←compute_saliency_scores (𝑊′);
4𝑊′←𝑊′−select_min_k(𝑆,|𝑊′|
𝑝);
5𝑊′←fine_tune (𝑋,𝑊′)
6end
7return𝑊′
OBD approximates the saliency score by using a second-derivative of the parameters (𝜕2𝐿
𝜕𝑤2
𝑖),
where𝐿is the loss function, and 𝑤𝑖is the candidate parameter for removal. The intuition is that
the higher this value for a given parameter, the larger the change in the loss function’s gradient if
it were to be pruned.
For the purpose of speeding up the computation of the second-derivatives, OBD ignores cross-
interaction between the weights (𝜕2𝐿
𝜕𝑤𝑖𝜕𝑤𝑗), and hence computes only the diagonal elements of the
Hessian matrix. Otherwise, computing the full Hessian matrix is unwieldy for even a reasonable
number of weights (with 𝑛=104, the size of the matrix is 104×104=108). In terms of results,
LeCun et al. demonstrate that pruning reduced the parameters in a well-trained neural net by 8x
(combination of both automatic and manual removal) without a drop in classification accuracy.
Across different pruning strategies, the core algorithm could remain similar, with changes in the
following aspects.
•Saliency : While [ 72,98] use second-order derivatives, other methods rely on simpler magni-
tude based pruning [ 68,69], or momentum based pruning [ 46] etc. to determine the saliency
score.
•Structured v/s Unstructured : The most flexible way of pruning is unstructured (or random)
pruning, where all given parameters are treated equally. In structured pruning, parameters
are pruned in blocks (such as pruning row-wise in a weight matrix, or pruning channel-
wise in a convolutional filter [ 5,100,106,112], etc.). The latter allows easier leveraging of
inference-time gains in size and latency, since these blocks of pruned parameters can be
intelligently skipped for storage and inference. Note that unstructured pruning can also be
viewed as structured pruning with block size = 1.
•Distribution : The decision about how to distribute the sparsity budget (number of parame-
ters to be pruned), could be made either by pooling in all the parameters from the network
and then deciding which parameters to prune, or by smartly selecting how much to prune in
each layer individually [ 50,74]. [52,66] have found that some architectures like MobileNetV2,
EfficientNet [ 147] have thin first layers that do not contribute significantly to the number of
parameters and pruning them leads to an accuracy drop without much gain. Hence, intuitively
it would be helpful to allocate sparsity on a per-layer basis.
•Scheduling : Another question is how much to prune, and when? Should we prune an equal
number of parameters every round [ 69,72,98], or should we prune at a higher pace in the
beginning and gradually decrease [46, 167].