16 Gaurav Menghani
TransformationValidation Accuracy
Improvement (%)
rotate 1.3
shear-x 0.9
shear-y 0.9
translate-x 0.4
translate-y 0.4
sharpness 0.1
autoContrast 0.1
Table 3. A breakdown of the contribution of various transformations on the validation accuracy of a model
trained on the CIFAR-10 dataset. Source: [44].
Discussion : Apart from Computer Vision, Data-Augmentation has also been used in NLP, and
Speech. In NLP, a common idea that has been used is ‘back-translation’ [ 163] where augmented
examples are created by training two translation models, one going from the source language to the
target language, and the other going back from the target language to the original source language.
Since the back-translation is not exact, this process is able to generate augmented samples for the
given input. Other methods like WordDropout [ 139] stochastically set embeddings of certain words
to zero. SwitchOut [ 158] introduces a similarity measure to disallow augmentations that are too
dissimilar to the original input. In Speech [70], the input audio samples are translated to the left /
right before being passed to the decoder.
While the augmentation policies are usually hand-tuned, there are also methods such as Au-
toAugment [ 43] where the augmentation policy is learned through a Reinforcement-Learning
(RL) based search, searching for the transformations to be applied, as well as their respective
hyper-parameters. Though this is shown to improve accuracy, it is also complicated and expensive
to setup a separate search for augmentation, taking as many as 15000 GPU hours to learn the
optimal policy on ImageNet. The RandAugment [ 44] paper demonstrated that it is possible to
achieve similar results while reducing the search space to just two hyper-parameters (number of
augmentation methods, and the strength of the distortion) for a given model and dataset.
Overall, we see that data-augmentation leads to better generalization of the given models. Some
techniques can be specific for their domains RandAugment (Vision), BackTranslation and SwitchOut
(NLP), etc. However, the core principles behind them make it likely that similar methods can be
derived for other domains too (refer to our categorization of data-augmentation methods above).
3.2.3 Self-Supervised Learning. The Supervised-Learning paradigm relies heavily on labeled data.
As mentioned earlier, it requires human intervention, and is expensive as well. To achieve reasonable
quality on a non-trivial task, the amount of labeled data requires is large too. While techniques like
Data-Augmentation, Distillation etc., help, they too rely on the presence of some labeled data to
achieve a baseline performance.
Self-Supervised learning (SSL) avoids the need for labeled data to learn generalized representa-
tions, by aiming to extract more supervisory bits from each example. Since it focuses on learning
robust representations of the example itself, it does not need to focus narrowly on the label. This
is typically done by solving a pretext task where the model pretends that a part / structure of the
input is missing and learns to predict it (Refer to Figure 9 for examples). Since unlabeled data is vast
in many domains (Books, Wikipedia, and other text for NLP, Web Images & Videos for Computer
Vision, etc.), the model would not be bottlenecked by data for learning to solve these pretext tasks.
Once the models learn generic representations that transfer well across tasks, they can be adapted
to solve the target task by adding some layers that project the representation to the label space, and