Efficient Deep Learning: A Survey on Making Deep Learning Models Smaller, Faster, and Better 37
we use a combination of Data Augmentation & Distillation from a separately trained larger teacher
model with an accuracy of 90.86%, the accuracy of the smaller model improves to 84.18%, very
close to the target model that we want to deploy. The size of this smaller model is 392.49 KB, which
is13.8×smaller, and the latency is 8.15 ms, which is 2.94×faster at a comparable accuracy. It is
possible to further compress this model by using Quantization for some additional shrinking. The
same smaller model ( 𝑤=0.25) when Quantized in Table 6, is 111 KB in size ( 47.3×smaller ) and
has a latency of 4.52 ms ( 5.31×faster ), while retaining an accuracy of 84.18%. It is possible to do
this for other pairs of points on the curves.
Grow-Improve-Shrink for Quality-Sensitive Models : Assuming our goal is to deploy a
model that has footprint metrics comparable to the model with 𝑤=0.25(392.49 KB model size,
0.93 ms on a high-end Galaxy S10 device), but an accuracy better than the baseline 80.6%(refer to
Table 5). In this case, we can choose to first grow our model to 𝑤=0.5. This instantly blows up the
model size to 1.37 MB ( 3.49×bigger), and latency to 1.33 ms ( 1.43×slower). However, we ignore
that for a bit and improve our model’s quality to 88.03%with Data Augmentation & Distillation.
Then using Quantization for shrinking (refer to Table 6), we can get a model that is 359.31 KB in
size (32 KB smaller) and has a 0.58 ms latency on Galaxy S10 ( 1.6×faster), with an accuracy of
87.86%, an absolute 7.10% increase in accuracy while keeping the model size approximately same
and making it 1.6×faster. It is also possible to apply this strategy to other pairs of models.
Thus, we’ve verified that the above two strategies can work both ways, whether your goal is to
optimize for quality metrics or footprint metrics. We were also able to visually inspect through
Figures 26 and 27 that efficiency techniques can improve on the pareto frontiers constructed
through manual tuning. To contain the scope of experimentation, we selected two sets of efficiency
techniques (Compression Techniques (Quantization), and Learning Techniques (Data Augmentation
& Distillation). Hence, it would be useful to explore other techniques as well such as Automation (for
Hyper-Parameter Tuning to further improve on results), and Efficient Layers & Models (Separable
Convolution as illustrated in MobileNet [ 133] could be used in place of larger convolutional layers).
Finally, we would also like to emphasize paying attention to performance of Deep Learning models
(optimized or not) on underrepresented classes and out-of-distribution data to ensure model fairness,
since quality metrics alone might not be sufficient for discovering deeper issues with models [ 76].
5 CONCLUSION
In this paper, we started with demonstrating the rapid growth in Deep Learning models, and
motivating the fact that someone training and deploying models today has to make either implicit
or explicit decisions about efficiency. However, the landscape of model efficiency is vast.
To help with this, we laid out a mental model for the readers to wrap their heads around
the multiple focus areas of model efficiency and optimization. The surveys of the core model
optimization techniques give the reader an opportunity to understand the state-of-the-art, apply
these techniques in the modelling process, and/or use them as a starting point for exploration. The
infrastructure section also lays out the software libraries and hardware which make training and
inference of efficient models possible.
Finally, we presented a section of explicit and actionable insights supplemented by code, for a
practitioner to use as a guide in this space. This section will hopefully give concrete and actionable
takeaways, as well as tradeoffs to think about when optimizing a model for training and deploy-
ment. To conclude, we feel that with this survey we have equipped the reader with the necessary
understanding to break-down the steps required to go from a sub-optimal model to one that meets
their constraints for both quality as well as footprint.