14 Gaurav Menghani
Fig. 7. Distillation of a smaller student model from a larger pre-trained teacher model. Both the teacher and
student models receive the same input. The teacher is used to generate ‘soft-labels’ for the student, which
gives the student more information than just hard binary labels. The student is trained using the regular
cross-entropy loss with the hard labels, as well as using the distillation loss function which uses the soft labels
from the teacher. In this setting, the teacher is frozen, and only the student receives the gradient updates.
Another idea that has been well explored is exploiting a model trained in a supervised training
to label unlabeled data. Blum et al. [ 24] in their paper from 1998, report halving the error rate of
their classifiers by retraining on a subset of pseudo-labels generated using the previous classifiers.
This has been extended through distillation to use the teacher model to label a large corpus of
unlabeled data, which can then be used to improve the quality of the student model [ 109,161,162].
Overall, distillation has been empirically shown to improve both the accuracy as well as the
speed of convergence of student models across many domains. Hence, it enables training smaller
models which might otherwise not be have an acceptable quality for deployment.
Discussion :
•Distillation is an adaptable technique that needs minimal changes in the training infrastruc-
ture to be used. Even if the teacher model cannot be executed at the same time as the student
model, the teacher model’s predictions can be collected offline and treated as another source
of labels.
•When there is sufficient label data, there is ample evidence that distillation is likely to improve
the student model’s predictions. If there is a large corpus of unlabeled data, the teacher model
can be used to generate pseudo-labels on the unlabeled data, which can further improve the
student model’s accuracy.
•Strategies for intermediate-layer distillation have also shown to be effective in the case of
complex networks. In such scenarios, a new loss term minimizing the difference between the
outputs of the two networks at some semantically identical intermediate point(s) needs to be
added.
3.2.2 Data Augmentation. When training large models for complex tasks in a supervised learning
regime, the size of the training data corpus correlates with improvement in generalization. [ 143]
demonstrates logarithmic increase in the prediction accuracy with increase in the number of labeled