Efficient Deep Learning: A Survey on Making Deep Learning Models Smaller, Faster, and Better 3
1.1 Efficient Deep Learning
The common theme around the above challenges is efficiency . We can break it down further as
follows:
•Inference Efficiency : This primarily deals with questions that someone deploying a model
for inference (computing the model outputs for a given input), would ask. Is the model small?
Is it fast, etc.? More concretely, how many parameters does the model have, what is the disk
size, RAM consumption during inference, inference latency, etc.
•Training Efficiency : This involves questions someone training a model would ask, such as
How long does the model take to train? How many devices? Can the model fit in memory?,
etc. It might also include questions like, how much data would the model need to achieve the
desired performance on the given task?
If we were to be given two models, performing equally well on a given task, we might want to
choose a model which does better in either one, or ideally both of the above aspects. If one were to
be deploying a model on devices where inference is constrained (such as mobile and embedded
devices), or expensive (cloud servers), it might be worth paying attention to inference efficiency.
Similarly, if one is training a large model from scratch on either with limited or costly training
resources, developing models that are designed for training efficiency would help.
Fig. 2. Pareto Optimality: Green dots represent pareto-optimal models (together forming the pareto-frontier),
where none of the other models (red dots) get better accuracy with the same inference latency, or the other
way around.
Regardless of what one might be optimizing for, we want to achieve pareto-optimality . This
implies that any model that we choose is the best for the tradeoffs that we care about. As an example
in Figure 2, the green dots represent pareto-optimal models, where none of the other models (red
dots) get better accuracy with the same inference latency, or the other way around. Together, the
pareto-optimal models (green dots) form our pareto-frontier . The models in the pareto-frontier
are by definition more efficient than the other models, since they perform the best for their given
tradeoff. Hence, when we seek efficiency, we should be thinking about discovering and improving
on the pareto-frontier.
To achieve this goal, we propose turning towards a collection of algorithms, techniques, tools,
and infrastructure that work together to allow users to train and deploy pareto-optimal models
with respect to model quality and its footprint.