Efficient Deep Learning: A Survey on Making Deep Learning Models Smaller, Faster, and Better 15
examples. However, getting high-quality labeled data often requires a human in the loop and could
be expensive.
Data Augmentation is a nifty way of addressing the scarcity of labeled data, by synthetically
inflating the existing dataset through some augmentation methods . These augmentation methods
are transformations that can be applied cheaply on the given examples, such that the new label of
the augmented example does not change, or can be cheaply inferred. As an example, consider the
classical image classification task of labeling a given image to be a cat or a dog. Given an image of
a dog, translating the image horizontally / vertically by a small number of pixels, rotating it by a
small angle, etc. would not materially change the image, so the transformed image should still be
labeled as ‘dog’ by the classifier. This forces the classifier to learn a robust representation of the
image that generalizes better across these transformations.
The transformations as described above have long been demonstrated to improve accuracy of
convolutional networks [ 36,140]. They have also been a core part of seminal works in Image
Classification. A prime example is AlexNet [ 92], where such transformations were used to increase
the effective size of the training dataset by 2048 ×, which won the ImageNet competition in 2012.
Since then it has became common to use such transformations for Image Classification models
(Inception [146], XCeption [34], ResNet [73], etc.).
We can categorize data-augmentation methods as follows (also refer to Figure 8):
•Label-Invariant Transformations : These are some of the most common transformations,
where the transformed example retains the original label. These can include simple geometric
transformations such as translation, flipping, cropping, rotation, distortion, scaling, shearing,
etc. However the user has to verify the label-invariance property with each transformation
for the specific task at hand.
•Label-Mixing Transformations : Transformations such as Mixup [ 166], mix inputs from
two different classes in a weighted manner and treat the label to be a correspondingly weighted
combination of the two classes (in the same ratio). The intuition is that the model should be
able to extract out features that are relevant for both the classes. Other transformations like
Sample Pairing also seem to help [81].
•Data-Dependent Transformations : In this case, transformations are chosen such that they
maximize the loss for that example [ 56], or are adversarially chosen so as to fool the classifier
[67].
•Synthetic Sampling : These methods synthetically create new training examples. Algorithms
like SMOTE [ 30] allow re-balancing the dataset to make up for skew in the datasets, and
GANs can be used to synthetically create new samples [167] to improve model accuracy.
•Composition of Transformations : These are transformations that are themselves com-
posed of other transformations, and the labels are computed depending on the nature of
transformations that stacked.
Fig. 8. Some common types of data augmentations. Source: [102]