Efficient Deep Learning: A Survey on Making Deep Learning Models Smaller, Faster, and Better 25
Fig. 16. Depth-Separable Convolution. Source: [151].
channel depth-wise (for more calculations refer to [ 133]). The Xception model architecture [ 34]
demonstrated that using depth-wise separable convolutions in the Inception architecture, allowed
reaching convergence sooner in terms of steps and a higher accuracy on the ImageNet dataset
while keeping the number of parameters the same.
The MobileNet model architecture [ 133] which was designed for mobile and embedded devices,
also uses the depth-wise separable layers instead of the regular convolutional layers. This helps
them reduce the number of parameters as well as the number of multiply-add operations by 7−10×
and allows deployment on Mobile for Computer Vision tasks. Users can expect a latency between
10-100ms depending on the model. MobileNet also provides a knob via the depth-multiplier for
scaling the network to allow the user to trade-off between accuracy and latency.
3.4.2 Natural Language Understanding.
Attention Mechanism & Transformer Family : One of the issues plaguing classical Sequence-
to-Sequence (Seq2Seq) models for solving tasks such as Machine Translation (MT), was that of the
information-bottleneck. Seq2Seq models typically have one or more encoder layers which encode
the given input sequence ( x=(𝑥1,𝑥2,...,𝑥 𝑇)) into a fixed length vector(s) (also referred to as the
context, c), and one or more decoder layers which generate another sequence using this context.
In the case of MT, the input sequence can be a sentence in the source language, and the output
sequence can be the sentence in the target language.
However, in classical Seq2Seq models such as [ 145] the decoder layers could only see the hidden
state of the final encoder step ( 𝑐=ℎ𝑇). This is a bottleneck because the encoder block has to squash
all the information about the sequence in a single context vector for all the decoding steps, and the
decoder block has to somehow infer the entire encoded sequence from it (Refer to Figure 17). It is
possible to increase the size of the context vector, but it would lead to an increase in the hidden
state of all the intermediate steps, and make the model larger and slower.
The Attention mechanism was introduced in Bahdanau et al. [21] to be able to create a custom
context vector for each output token, by allowing all hidden states to be visible to the decoder
and then creating a weighted context vector, based on the output token’s alignment with each
input token. Essentially, the new weighted context vector is 𝑐𝑖=Í𝑇
𝑗𝛼𝑖 𝑗.ℎ𝑗, where𝛼𝑖 𝑗is the learned
alignment (attention weight) between the decoder hidden state 𝑠𝑖−1and the hidden state for the
𝑗-th token (ℎ𝑗).𝛼𝑖 𝑗could be viewed as how much attention should the 𝑖-th input token be given
when processing the 𝑗-th input token. This model is generalized in some cases by having explicit
Query (𝑄), Key (𝐾), and Value ( 𝑉) vectors. Where we seek to learn the attention weight distribution
(𝛼) between𝑄and𝐾, and use it to compute the weighted context vector ( c) over𝑉. In the above
encoder-decoder architecture, 𝑄is the decoder hidden state 𝑠𝑖−1, and𝐾=𝑉is the encoder hidden
stateℎ𝑗. Attention has been used to solve a variety of NLU tasks (MT, Question Answering, Text