Efficient Deep Learning: A Survey on Making Deep Learning Models Smaller, Faster, and Better 21
stopping, where a trial is terminated if it’s performance at a time step 𝑡is below the the median
performance of all trials run till that point of time.
Other algorithms for HPO include:
(1)Population Based Training (PBT) [83]: This method is similar to evolutionary approaches
like genetic algorithms, where a fixed number of trials (referred to as the population) are
spawned and trained to convergence. Each trial starts with a random set of hyper-parameters,
and trained to a pre-determined number of steps. At this point, all trials are paused, and every
trial’s weights and parameters might be replaced by the weights and parameters from the
‘best’ trial in the population so far. This is the exploitation part of the search. For exploration ,
these hyper-parameters are perturbed from their original values. This process repeats till
convergence. It combines both the search and training in a fixed number of trials that run in
parallel. It also only works with adaptive hyper-parameters like learning rate, weight-decay,
etc. but cannot be used where hyper-parameters change the model structure. Note that the
criteria for picking the ‘best’ trial does not have to be differentiable.
(2)Multi-Armed Bandit Algorithms : Methods like Successive Halving (SHA) [ 84] and Hyper-
Band [ 101] are similar to random search, but they allocate more resources to the trials which
are performing well. Both these methods need the user to specify the total computational
budget𝐵for the search (can be the total number of epochs of training, for instance). They
then spawn and train a fixed number of trials with randomly sampled hyper-parameters
while allocating the training budget. Once the budget is exhausted, the worse performing
fraction (𝜂−1
𝜂) of the trials are eliminated, and the remaining trials’ new budget is multiplied
by𝜂. In the case of SHA, 𝜂is 2, so the bottom1
2of the trials are dropped, and the training
budget for the remaining trials is doubled. For Hyper-Band 𝜂is 3 or 4. Hyper-Band differs
from SHA in that the user does not need to specify the maximum number of parallel trials,
which introduces a trade-off between the total budget and the per-trial allocation.
HPO Toolkits : There are several software toolkits that incorporate HPO algorithms as well as
an easy to use interface (UI, as well as a way to specify the hyper-parameters and their ranges).
Vizier [ 61] (an internal Google tool, also available via Google Cloud for blackbox tuning). Amazon
offers Sagemaker [ 122] which is functionally similar and can also be accessed as an AWS service.
NNI [ 131], Tune [ 103], Advisor [ 31] are other open-source HPO software packages that can be used
locally.
3.3.2 Neural Architecture Search (NAS). Neural Architecture Search can be thought of an extension
of Hyper-Parameter Optimization wherein we are searching for parameters that change the network
architecture itself.
We find that there is consensus in the literature [ 53] around categorizing NAS as a system
comprising of the following parts:
(1)Search Space : These are the operations that are allowed in the graph (Convolution ( 1×1,3×
3,5×5), Fully Connected, Pooling, etc.), as well as the semantics of how these operations
and their outputs connect to other parts of the network.
(2)Search Algorithm & State : This is the algorithm that controls the architecture search
itself. Typically the standard algorithms that apply in HPO (Grid Search, Random Search,
Bayesian Optimization, Evolutionary Algorithms), can be used for NAS as well. However,
using Reinforcement Learning (RL) [ 168], and Gradient Descent [ 105] are popular alternatives
too.
(3)Evaluation Strategy : This defines how we evaluate a model for fitness. It can simply be a
conventional metric like validation loss, accuracy, etc. Or it can also be a compound metric,