Efficient Deep Learning: A Survey on Making Deep Learning Models Smaller, Faster, and Better 31
Tensor Cores optimize the standard Multiply-and-Accumulate (MAC) operation [ 40],A=(B×
C)+D. Where, BandCare in a reduced precision (fp16, bfloat16, TensorFloat32), while AandD
are in fp32. The core speedup comes from doing the expensive matrix-multiplication in a lower-
precision. The result of the multiplication is in fp32, which can be relatively cheaply added with
D.When training with reduced-precision, NVIDIA reports between 1 ×to 15×training speedup
depending on the model architecture and the GPU chosen [ 142]. Tensor Cores in NVidia’s latest
Ampere architecture GPUs also support faster inference with sparsity (specifically, structured
sparsity in the ratio 2:4, where 2 elements out of a block of 4 elements are sparse) [ 114]. They
demonstrate an up to 1.5 ×speed up in inference time, and up to 1.8 ×speedup in individual layers.
NVIDIA also offers the cuDNN libary [ 114] that contains optimized versions of standard neural
network operations such as fully-connected, convolution, batch-norm, activation, etc.
Fig. 23. Common floating point format used in Training & Inference: fp32 is the standard 32-bit floating
point number from IEEE-754 standard [ 157]. One bit is allocated for storing the sign. The exponent controls
the range of the floating point value that can be expressed with that format, and the mantissa controls
the precision. Note that fp16 reduces the precision as well as range. The bfloat16 format is a reasonable
compromise because it keeps the same range as fp32 while trading of precision to take up a total of 16 bits.
NVidia GPUs also support Tensor Float 32 format that allocates 3 more bits to the mantissa than bfloat16
to achieve better precision. However, it takes up a total of 19 bits which does not make it a trivially portable
format.
TPU : TPUs are proprietary application-specific integrated circuits (ASICs) that Google has
designed to accelerate deep learning applications with Tensorflow. Because they are not general
purpose devices, they need not cater for any non-ML applications (which most GPUs have had to),
hence they are finely tuned for parallelizing and accelerating linear algebra operations. The first
iteration of the TPU was designed for inference with 8-bit integers, and was being used in Google
for a year prior to their announcement in 2016 [ 86]. Subsequent iterations of the TPU architectures
enabled both training and inference with TPUs in floating point too. Google also opened up access
to these TPUs via their Google Cloud service in 2018 [62].
The core architecture of the TPU chips leverages the Systolic Array design [ 94,95] (refer to Figure
24), where a large computation is split across a mesh-like topology, where each cell computes
a partial result and passes it on to the next cell in the order, every clock-step (in a rhythmic
manner analogous to the systolic cardiac rhythm). Since there is no need to access registers for the
intermediate results, once the required data is fetched the computation is not memory bound. Each
TPU chip has two Tensor Cores (not to be confused with NVidia’s Tensor Cores), each of which
has a mesh of systolic arrays. There are 4 inter-connected TPU chips on a single TPU board. To