10 Gaurav Menghani
layer inputs and outputs are also in fixed-point, and there is no need to dequantize the weight-
matrices since they can be used directly along with the inputs.
Vanhoucke et al. [ 153] demonstrated a 3×inference speedup using a fully fixed-point model on an
x86 CPU, when compared to a floating-point model on the same CPU, without sacrificing accuracy.
The weights are still quantized similar to post-training quantization, however all layer inputs
(except the first layer) and the activations are fixed-point. In terms of performance, the primary
driver for this improvement was the availability of fixed-point SIMD instructions in Intel’s SSE4
instruction set [ 41], where commonly used building-block operations like the Multiply-Accumulate
(MAC) [ 40] can be parallelized. Since the paper was published, Intel has released two more iterations
of these instruction sets [37] which might further improve the speedups.
Quantization-Aware Training (QAT) : The network that Vanhoucke et al. mention was a 5
layer feed-forward network that was post-training quantized. However post-training quantization
can lead to quality loss during inference as highlighted in [ 82,90,156] as the networks become more
complex. These could be because of: (a) outlier weights that skew the computation of the quantized
values for the entire input range towards the outliers, leading to less number of bits being allocated
to the bulk of the range, or (b) Different distribution of weights within the weight matrix, for eg.
within a convolutional layer the distribution of weights between each filter might be different, but
they are quantized the same way. These effects might be more pronounced at low-bit widths due
to an even worse loss of precision. Wang et al. [ 156] try to retain the post-training quantization
but with new heuristics to allocate the precision bits in a learned fashion. Tools like the TFLite
Converter [ 149] augment post-training quantization with a representative dataset provided by the
user, to actively correct for errors at different points in the model by comparing the error between
the activations of the quantized and unquantized graphs.
Jacob et al. [ 82] propose (and further detailed by Krishnamoorthi et al. [ 90]) a training regime
which is quantization-aware . In this setting, the training happens in floating-point but the forward-
pass simulates the quantization behavior during inference. Both weights and activations are passed
through a function that simulates this quantization behavior ( fake-quantized is the term used by
many works [82, 90]).
Assuming Xis the tensor to be fake-quantized, Jacob et al. [ 82] propose adding special quanti-
zation nodes in the training graph that collect the statistics (moving averages of 𝑥𝑚𝑖𝑛and𝑥𝑚𝑎𝑥)
related to the weights and activations to be quantized (see Figure 6(a) for an illustration). Once we
have these values for each X, we can derive the respective bXusing equations (1 and 2) as follows.
bX=FakeQuant(X)
=Dequantize(Quantize(X))
=𝑠((roundclamp(X,𝑥𝑚𝑖𝑛,𝑥𝑚𝑎𝑥)
𝑠
+𝑧)−𝑧)
=𝑠
roundclamp(X,𝑥𝑚𝑖𝑛,𝑥𝑚𝑎𝑥)
𝑠(3)
Since the above equation is not directly differentiable because of the rounding behavior, to
optimize a loss function 𝐿w.r.t. X, we can compute𝜕𝐿
𝜕Xby chain-rule using the Straight-Through
Estimator (STE) [ 22]. This allows us to make the staircase function differentiable with a linear
approximation (See [90] for details).
Quantization-Aware Training allows the network to adapt to tolerate the noise introduced by
the clamping and rounding behavior during inference. Once the network is trained, tools such as