Efficient Deep Learning: A Survey on Making Deep Learning Models Smaller, Faster, and Better 19
way of training high-quality models in the future as we move beyond tasks where labeled data is
abundant.
With unlabeled data being practically limitless, SSL’s success is dependent on creating useful
pretext tasks for the domain of interest. As demonstrated across NLP [ 47,78], Vision [ 32,120],
Speech [ 60], etc., Self-Supervision is indeed not just helpful in speeding and improving convergence,
but also enabling achieving high quality in tasks where it was intractable to get enough labeled
samples.
Practically, for someone training Deep Learning models on a custom task (say a speech recognition
model for a remote African dialect), having a pre-trained checkpoint of a model trained in a self-
supervised fashion (such as wav2vec [ 20], which pre-trained in a similar way to BERT [ 47]), enables
them to only spend an extremely tiny fraction of resources on both data labeling, as well as training
to fine-tune to a good enough quality. In some cases, such as SimCLR [ 33], SSL approaches have
actually beaten previous supervised baselines with sophisticated models like ResNet-50. Hence, we
are hopeful that SSL methods will be crucial for ML practitioners for training high-quality models
cheaply.
3.3 Automation
It is possible to delegate some of the work around efficiency to automation, and letting automated
approaches search for ways of training more efficient models. Apart from reducing work for
humans, it also lowers the bias that manual decisions might introduce in model training, apart
from systematically and automatically looking for optimal solutions. The trade-off is that these
methods might require large computational resources, and hence have to be carefully applied.
3.3.1 Hyper-Parameter Optimization (HPO). One of the commonly used methods that fall under
this category is Hyper-Parameter Optimization (HPO) [ 164]. Hyper-parameters such as initial
learning rate, weight decay, etc. have to be carefully tuned for faster convergence [ 85]. They can
also decide the network architecture such as the number of fully connected layers, number of filters
in a convolutional layer, etc.
Experimentation can help us build an intuition for the range in which these parameters might lie,
but finding the best values requires a search for the exact values that optimize the given objective
function (typically the loss value on the validation set). Manually searching for these quickly
becomes tedious with the growth in the number of hyper-parameters and/or their possible values.
Hence, let us explore possible algorithms for automating the search. To formalize this, let us assume
without the loss of generalization, that we are optimizing the loss value on the given dataset’s
validation split. Then, let Lbe the loss function, 𝑓be the model function that is learnt with the set
of hyper-parameters ( 𝜆),𝑥be the input, and 𝜃be the model parameters. With the search, we are
trying to find 𝜆∗such that,
𝜆∗=argmin
𝜆∈ΛL(𝑓𝜆(𝑥;𝜃),𝑦) (6)
Λis the set of all possible hyper-parameters. In practice, the Λcan be a very large set containing
all possible combinations of the hyper-parameters, which would often be intractable since hyper-
parameters like learning rate are real-valued. A common strategy is to approximate Λby picking a
finite set of trials ,𝑆={𝜆(1),𝜆(2),...,𝜆(𝑛)}, such that𝑆∈Λ, and then we can approximate Equation
(6) with:
𝜆∗≈ argmin
𝜆∈{𝜆(1),...,𝜆(𝑛)}L(𝑓𝜆(𝑥;𝜃),𝑦) (7)