26 Gaurav Menghani
Fig. 17. Information Bottleneck in a Seq2Seq model for trans-
lating from English to Hindi. The context vector 𝑐that the
decoder has access to is fixed, and is typically the last hidden
state (ℎ𝑇).
Fig. 18. Attention module learning a
weighted context vector for each output
token from the hidden states. Source: [ 21].
Classification, Sentiment Analysis), as well as Vision, Multi-Modal Tasks etc. [ 29]. We refer the
reader to [29] for further details on the taxonomy of attention models.
Fig. 19. Transformer with its Encoder and Decoder blocks. Source: [3].
The Transformer architecture [ 155] was proposed in 2017, which introduced using Self-Attention
layers for both the Encoder and the Decoder. They demonstrated that Attention layers could be
used to replace traditional RNN based Seq2Seq models. The Self-Attention layer the query, key,
and value vectors are all derived from the same sequence by using different projection matrices.
Self-Attention also allows parallelizing the process of deriving relationships between the tokens
in the input sequences. RNNs inherently force the process to occur one step at a time, i.e., learning
long range dependencies is 𝑂(𝑛), where𝑛is the number of tokens. With Self-Attention, all tokens
are processed together and pairwise relationships can be learnt in 𝑂(1)[155]. This makes it easier
to leverage optimized training devices like GPUs and TPUs. The authors reported up to 300×less
training FLOPs as required to converge to a similar quality when compared to other recurrent and
convolutional models. Tay et al. [ 148] discuss the computation and memory efficiency of several
Transformer variants and their underlying self-attention mechanisms in detail.
As introduced earlier, the BERT model architecture [ 47] beat the state-of-the-art in several
NLU benchmarks. BERT is a stack of Transformer encoder layers that are pre-trained using a
bi-directional masked language model training objective. It can also be used as a general purpose
encoder which can then be used for other tasks. Other similar models like the GPT family [ 26]
have also been used for solving many NLU tasks.
Random Projection Layers & Models Pre-trained token representations such as word2vec
[110], GLoVE [ 121], etc. are common for NLU tasks. However, since they require a 𝑑-dimensional