32 Gaurav Menghani
(a) A Systolic Array Cell
implementing a
Multiply-Accumulate (MAC)
operation.
(b) 4x4 Matrix Multiplication using
Systolic Array
Fig. 24. Systolic Arrays in TPUs: Figure (a) shows a Systolic Array implementing a MAC operation, where
the variables 𝐴and𝐵are received by the cell, and 𝐶is the resident memory. 𝐴is passed to the horizontally
adjacent cell on the right, and 𝐵is passed to the vertically adjacent cell below on the next clock tick. Figure (b)
demonstrates how two 4 ×4 matrices are multiplied using Systolic Arrays which is a mesh of cells constructed
in Figure (a). The 𝑖-th row of array is fed the 𝑖-th column of 𝐴(preceded by 𝑖−10s, which act as a delay).
Similarly, the 𝑖-th column of the array is fed the 𝑖-th column of 𝐵(preceded by 𝑖−10s). The corresponding
𝑎𝑖 𝑗and𝑏𝑗𝑘are passed to the neighboring cells on the next clock tick.
further scale training and inference, a larger number of TPU boards can be connected in a mesh
topology to form a ’pod’. As per publicly released numbers, each TPU chip (v3) can achieve 420
teraflops, and a TPU pod can reach 100+ petaflops [137].
TPUs have been used inside Google for applications like training models for Google Search,
general purpose BERT models [ 47], for applications like DeepMind’s world beating AlphaGo and
AlphaZero models [ 138], and many other research applications [ 147]. They have also set model
training time records in the MLPerf benchmarks. Similar to the GPUs, TPUs support the bfloat16
data-type [ 157] which is a reduced-precision alternative to training in full floating point 32-bit
precision. XLA support allows transparently switching to bfloat16 without any model changes.
EdgeTPU : EdgeTPU is a custom ASIC chip designed by Google for running inference on edge
devices, with low power requirements (4 Tera Ops / sec (TOPS) using 2 watts of power [ 64]). Like
the TPU, it is specialized for accelerating linear algebra operations, but only for inference and
with a much lower compute budget. It is further limited to only a subset of operations [ 65], and
works only with int8 quantized Tensorflow Lite models. Google releases the EdgeTPU using the
Coral platform in various form-factors, ranging from a Raspberry-Pi like Dev Board to independent
solderable modules [ 63]. It has also been released with the Pixel 4 smartphones as the Pixel Neural
Core [ 126], for accelerating on-device deep learning applications. The EdgeTPU chip itself is smaller
than a US penny, making it amenable for deployment in many kinds of IoT devices.
Jetson : Jetson [ 116] is a family of accelerators by Nvidia to enable deep learning applications for
embedded and IoT devices. It comprises of the Nano, which is a low-powered "system on a module"
(SoM) designed for lightweight deployments, as well as the more powerful Xavier and TX variants,
which are based on the NVidia Volta and Pascal GPU architectures. As expected, the difference
within the Jetson family is primarily the type and number of GPU cores on the accelerators. This