Efficient Deep Learning: A Survey on Making Deep Learning Models Smaller, Faster, and Better 23
Fig. 15. A NASNet controller generating the architecture, recursively making one decision at a time and
generating a single block in the image (making a total of 5 decisions). Source: [169].
[147] is one such work. It incorporates the model’s latency on the target device into the objective
function directly, as follows:
maximize𝑚𝐴𝐶𝐶(𝑚)×𝐿𝐴𝑇(𝑚)
𝑇𝑤
(8)
Where𝑚is the candidate model, 𝐴𝐶𝐶 is the accuracy metric, and 𝐿𝐴𝑇 is the latency of the given
model on the desired device. 𝑇is the target latency. 𝑤is recommended to be −0.07. FBNet [ 160]
uses a similar approach with a compound reward function that has a weighted combination of the
loss value on the validation set and the latency. However instead of measuring the latency of the
candidate model on device, they use a pre-computed lookup table to approximate the latency to
speed up the search process. They achieve networks that are upto 2.4×smaller and 1.5×faster than
MobileNet, while finishing the search in 216 GPU Hours. Other works such as MONAS [ 79] use
Reinforcement Learning to incorporate power consumption into the reward function along with
hard constraints on the number of MAC operations in the model, and discover pareto-frontiers
under the given constraints.
Discussion : Automation plays a critical role in model efficiency. Hyper-Parameter Optimization
(HPO) is now a natural step in training models and can extract significant quality improvements,
while minimizing human involvement. In case the cost HPO becomes large, algorithms like Bayesian
Optimization, Hyper-Band etc. with early stopping techniques can be used. HPO is also available
in ready-to-use software packages like Tune [ 103], Vizier via Google Cloud [ 61], NNI [ 131], etc.
Similarly, recent advances in Neural Architecture Search (NAS) also make it feasible to construct
architectures in a learned manner, while having constraints on both quality and footprint [ 147].
Assuming several hundred GPU hours worth of compute required for the NAS run to finish, and an
approx cost of $3 GPU / hour on leading cloud computing services, this makes using NAS methods
financially feasible and not similar in cost to manual experimentation with model architecture
when optimizing for multiple objectives.
3.4 Efficient Architectures
Another common theme for tackling efficiency problems is to go back to the drawing board, and
design layers and models that are efficient by design to replace the baseline. They are typically
designed with some insight which might lead to a design that is better in general, or it might be
better suited for the specific task. In this section, we lay out an examples of such efficient layers
and models to illustrate this idea.
3.4.1 Vision. One of the classical example of efficient layers in the Vision domain are the Convolu-
tional layers, which improved over Fully Connected (FC) layers in Vision models. FC layers suffer
from two primary issues: