22 Gaurav Menghani
as in the case of MNasNet [ 147] which creates a single custom metric based on accuracy as
well as latency.
Fig. 14. Neural Architecture Search: The controller can be thought of as a unit that encodes the search space,
the search algorithm itself, and the state it maintains (typically the model that helps generate the candidates).
The algorithm generates candidate models in the search space 𝑆, and receives an evaluation feedback. This
feedback is used to update the state, and generate better candidate models.
The user is supposed to either explicitly or implicitly encode the search space. Together with the
search algorithm, we can view this as a ‘controller’ which generates sample candidate networks
(Refer to Figure 14). The evaluation stage will then train and evaluate these candidates for fitness.
This fitness value is then passed as feedback to the search algorithm, which will use it for generating
better candidates. While the implementation of each of these blocks vary, this structure is common
across the seminal work in this area.
Zoph et. al’s paper from 2016 [ 168], demonstrated that end-to-end neural network architectures
can be generated using Reinforcement Learning. In this case, the controller is a Recurrent Neural
Network, which generates the architectural hyper-parameters of a feed-forward network one
layer at a time, for example, number of filters, stride, filter size, etc. They also support adding skip
connections (refer Figure 15). The network semantics are baked into the controller, so generating
a network that behaves differently requires changing the controller. Also, training the controller
itself is expensive (taking 22,400 GPU hours [ 169]), since the entire candidate network has to be
trained from scratch for a single gradient update to happen. In a follow up paper [ 169], they come
up with a refined search space where instead of searching for the end-to-end architecture, they
search for cells: A ‘Normal Cell’ that takes in an input, processes it, and returns an output of the
same spatial dimensions. And a ‘Reduction Cell’ that process its input, and returns an output whose
spatial dimensions are scaled down by a factor of 2. Each cell is a combination of 𝐵blocks. The
controller’s RNN generates one block at a time, where it picks outputs of two blocks in the past, the
respective operations to apply on them, and how to combine them into a single output. The Normal
and Reduction cells are stacked in alternating fashion ( 𝑁Normal cells followed by 1 Reduction
cell, where𝑁is tunable) to construct an end-to-end network for CIFAR-10 and ImageNet. Learning
these cells individually rather than learning the entire network seems to improve the search time
by 7×, when compared to the end-to-end network search in [ 168], while beating the state-of-the-art
in CIFAR-10 at that time.
Other approaches such as evolutionary techniques [ 130], differentiable architecture search [ 105],
progressive search [ 104], parameter sharing [ 123], etc. try to reduce the cost of architecture search
(in some cases reducing the compute cost to a couple of GPU days instead of thousands of GPU
days). These are covered in detail in [53].
While most of the early papers focused on finding the architectures that performed best on
quality metrics like accuracy, unconstrained by the footprint metrics. However, when focusing on
efficiency, we are often interested in specific tradeoffs between quality and footprint. Architecture
Search can help with multi-objective searches that optimize for both quality and footprint. MNasNet