Efficient Deep Learning: A Survey on Making Deep Learning Models Smaller, Faster, and Better 29
itself, it handles a lot of internal details like getting a graph ready for quantized inference,
fusing operations, adding other metadata to the model, etc. With respect to quantization, it
also allows post-training quantization as mentioned earlier with an optional representative
dataset to improve accuracy.
Other Tools for On-Device Inference : TF Micro [ 159] goes further, and consists of a slimmed
down interpreter, and a smaller set of ops for inference on very low resource microcontrollers.
TF Model Optimization toolkit [ 12] is a Tensorflow library for applying common compression
techniques like quantization, pruning, clustering etc. TensorflowJS (TF.JS) is a library within the TF
ecosystem that can be used to train and run neural networks within the browser or using Node.js
[113]. These models can also accelerated through GPUs via the WebGL interface [ 42]. It supports
both, importing models trained in TF, as well as creating new models from scratch in TF.JS.
XLA for Server-Side Acceleration : Typically a TF model graph is executed by TF’s executor
process and it uses standard optimized kernels for running it on CPU, GPU, etc. XLA [ 17] is a graph
compiler that can optimize linear algebra computations in a model, by generating new kernels
that are customized for the graph. These kernels are optimized for the model graph in question.
For example, certain operations which can be fused together are combined in a single composite
op. This avoids having to do multiple costly writes to RAM, when the operands can directly be
operated on while they are still in cheaper caches. Kanwar et al. [ 89] report a 7×increase in training
throughput, and 5×increase in the maximum batch size that can be used for BERT training. This
allows training a BERT model for $32 on Google Cloud.
3.5.2 PyTorch Ecosystem. PyTorch [ 119] is another popular machine-learning platform actively
used by both academia and industry. It is often compared with Tensorflow in terms of usability and
features.
On-Device Usecases : PyTorch also has a light-weight interpreter that enables running PyTorch
models on Mobile [ 9], with native runtimes for Android and iOS. This is analogous to the TFLite
interpreter and runtime as introduced earlier. Similar to TFLite, PyTorch offers post-training
quantization [ 10], and other graph optimization steps such as constant folding, fusing certain
operations together, putting the channels last (NHWC) format for optimizing convolutional layers.
General Model Optimization : PyTorch also offers the Just-in-Time (JIT) compilation facility
[11], which might seem similar to Tensorflow’s XLA, but is actually a mechanism for generating
a serializable intermediate representation (high-level IR, per [ 102]) of the model from the code
in TorchScript [ 11], which is a subset of Python. TorchScript adds constraints on the code that
it can convert, such as type-checks, which allows it to sidestep some pitfalls of typical Python
programming, while being Python compatible. It allows creating a bridge between the flexible
PyTorch code for research and development, to a representation that can be deployed for inference
in production. For example, exporting to TorchScript is a requirement to run on mobile devices [ 9].
This representation is analogous to the static inference mode graphs generated by TensorFlow. The
alternative for XLA in the PyTorch world seem to be the Glow [ 132] and TensorComprehension
[154] compilers. They help in generating the lower-level intermediate representation that is derived
from the higher-level IR (TorchScript, TF Graph). These low-level deep learning compilers are
compared in detail in [102].
PyTorch offers a model tuning guide [ 8], which details various options that ML practitioners
have at their disposal. Some of the core ideas in there are:
•Turn on mixed-precision training [ 7] when using NVIDIA GPUs. This is described further in
detail in the GPU sub-section in 3.5.4.
•Fusion of pointwise-operations (add, subtract, multiply, divide, etc.) using PyTorch JIT. Even
though this should happen automatically, but adding the torch.jit.script decorator to