Efficient Deep Learning: A Survey on Making Deep Learning Models Smaller, Faster, and Better 11
Model Architecture Quantization Type Top-1 Accuracy Size (MB) Latency (ms, Pixel2)
MobileNet v2-1.0 (224)Baseline 71.9% 14 89
Post-Training Quantization 63.7% 3.6 98
Quantization-Aware Training 70.9% 3.6 54
Table 2. A sample of various quantization results on the MobileNet v2 architecture for 8-bit quantization
[150]. We picked results on 8-bit, since from they can be readily used with hardware and software that exists
today.
the TFLite Model Converter [ 15] can generate the appropriate fixed-point inference model from a
network annotated with the quantization nodes.
Other Notable Works : Polino et al. [ 124] allow non-uniform distribution of precision with
learning a vector of quantization-points 𝑝, along with using distillation to further reduce loss of
accuracy. The results for simpler datasets like CIFAR-10 are comparable to [ 82,90]. However, when
working with ResNet architecture on the ImageNet dataset, they achieve lower model size and faster
inference by using shallower student networks. This is not a fair comparison, since other works do
not mix distillation along with quantization. Fan et al. [ 55] demonstrate accuracy improvement on
top of standard QAT ([ 82]) with𝑏<8. They hypothesize that the networks will learn better if the
fake-quantization is not applied to the complete tensor at the same time to allow unbiased gradients
to flow (instead of the STE approximation). Instead, they apply the fake-quantization operation
stochastically in a block-wise manner on the given tensor. They also demonstrate improvements
over QAT on 4-bit quantized Transformer and EfficientNet [147] networks.
Results : Refer to Table 2 for a comparison between the baseline floating-point model, post-
training quantized, and quantization-aware trained models [ 13]. The model with post-training
quantization gets close to the baseline, but there is still a significant accuracy difference. The model
size is 4×smaller, however the latency is slightly higher due to the need to dequantize the weights
during inference. The model with 8-bit Quantization-Aware Training (QAT) gets quite close to the
baseline floating point model while requiring 4×less disk space and being 1.64×faster.
Discussion :
•Quantization is a well-studied technique for model optimization and can help with very
significant reduction in model size (often 4×when using 8-bit quantization) and inference
latency.
•Weight quantization is straight-forward enough that it can be implemented by itself for
reducing model size. Activation quantization should be strongly considered because it en-
ables both latency reduction, as well as lower working memory required for intermediate
computations in the model (which is essential for devices with low memory availability)
•When possible, Quantization-Aware Training should be used. It has been shown to dominate
post-training quantization in terms of accuracy.
•However, tools like Tensorflow Lite have made it easy to rely on post-training quantization.
[149] shows that often there is minimal loss when using post-training quantization, and
with the help of a representative dataset this is further shrunk down. Wherever there is an
opportunity for switching to fixed-point operations, the infrastructure allows using them.
•For performance reasons, it is best to consider the common operations that follow a typical
layer such as Batch-Norm, Activation, etc. and ‘fold’ them in the quantization operations.
3.1.3 Other Compression Techniques. There are other compression techniques like Low-Rank
Matrix Factorization, K-Means Clustering, Weight-Sharing etc. which are also actively being used
for model compression [117] and might be suitable for further compressing hotspots in a model.