Efficient Deep Learning: A Survey on Making Deep Learning Models Smaller, Faster, and Better 5
size and latency improvements with quantized models, we need the inference platform to
support common neural network layers in quantized mode.
We will survey each of these areas in depth in the following section.
3 LANDSCAPE OF EFFICIENT DEEP LEARNING
3.1 Compression Techniques
Compression techniques as mentioned earlier, are usually generic techniques for achieving a more
efficient representation of one or more layers in a neural network, with a possible quality trade off.
The efficiency goal could be to optimize the model for one or more of the footprint metrics, such
as model size, inference latency, training time required for convergence, etc. in exchange for as
little quality loss as possible. In some cases if the model is over-parameterized, these techniques
can improve model generalization.
3.1.1 Pruning. Given a neural network 𝑓(𝑋,𝑊), where𝑋is the input and 𝑊is the set of parameters
(or weights), pruning is a technique for coming up with a minimal subset 𝑊′such that the rest of
the parameters of 𝑊are pruned (or set to 0), while ensuring that the quality of the model remains
above the desired threshold. After pruning, we can say the network has been made sparse , where
the sparsity can be quantified as the ratio of the number of parameters that were pruned to the
number of parameters in the original network ( 𝑠=(1−|𝑊′|
|𝑊|)). The higher the sparsity, the lesser
the number of non-zero parameters in the pruned networks.
Fig. 4. A simplified illustration of pruning weights (connections) and neurons (nodes) in a neural network
comprising of fully connected layers.
Some of the classical works in this area are Optimal Brain Damage (OBD) by LeCun et al. [ 98], and
Optimal Brain Surgeon paper (OBD) by Hassibi et al. [ 72]. These methods usually take a network that
has been pre-trained to a reasonable quality and then iteratively prune the parameters which have
the lowest ‘saliency’ score, such that the impact on the validation loss is minimized. Once pruning