8 Gaurav Menghani
the minimum weight value ( 𝑥𝑚𝑖𝑛) in that matrix to 0, and the maximum value ( 𝑥𝑚𝑎𝑥) to2𝑏−1
(where𝑏is the number of bits of precision, and 𝑏<32). Then we can linearly extrapolate all
values between them to an integer value in [ 0,2𝑏−1] (Figure 5). Thus, we are able to map each
floating point value to a fixed-point value where the latter requires a lesser number of bits than the
floating-point representation. This process can also be done for signed 𝑏-bit fixed-point integers,
where the output values will be in the range [- 2𝑏
2−1,2𝑏
2−1]. One of the reasonable values of 𝑏is
8, since this would lead to a 32/8=4×reduction in space, and also because of the near-universal
support for uint8_t andint8_t datatypes.
During inference, we go in the reverse direction where we recover a lossy estimate of the original
floating point value ( dequantization ) using just the 𝑥𝑚𝑖𝑛and𝑥𝑚𝑎𝑥. This estimate is lossy since we
lost32−𝑏bits of information when did the rounding (another way to look at it is that a range of
floating point values map to the same quantized value).
Fig. 5. Quantizing floating-point continuous values to discrete fixed-point values. The continuous values
are clamped to the range 𝑥𝑚𝑖𝑛to𝑥𝑚𝑎𝑥, and are mapped to discrete values in [ 0,2𝑏−1] (in the above figure,
𝑏=3, hence the quantized values are in the range [ 0,7].
[82, 90] formalize the quantization scheme with the following two constraints:
•The quantization scheme should be linear (affine transformation), so that the precision bits
are linearly distributed.
•0.0should map exactly to a fixed-point value 𝑥𝑞0, such that dequantizing 𝑥𝑞0gives us 0.0. This
is an implementation constraint, since 0is also used for padding to signify missing elements
in tensors, and if dequantizing 𝑥𝑞0leads to a non-zero value, then it might be interpreted
incorrectly as a valid element at that index.
The second constraint described above requires that 0be a part of the quantization range, which
in turn requires updating 𝑥𝑚𝑖𝑛and𝑥𝑚𝑎𝑥, followed by clamping 𝑥to lie in[𝑥𝑚𝑖𝑛,𝑥𝑚𝑎𝑥]. Following
this, we can quantize 𝑥by constructing a piece-wise linear transformation as follows:
quantize(𝑥)=𝑥𝑞=round𝑥
𝑠
+𝑧 (1)
𝑠is the floating-point scale value (can be thought of as the inverse of the slope, which can be
computed using 𝑥𝑚𝑖𝑛,𝑥𝑚𝑎𝑥and the range of the fixed-point values). 𝑧is an integer zero-point
value which is the quantized value that is assigned to 𝑥=0.0. This is the terminology followed in
literature [82, 90] (Algorithm 2).