12 Gaurav Menghani
(a) Quantization-Aware Training
 (b) Final fixed-point inference graph
Fig. 6. (a) shows the injection of fake-quantization nodes to simulate quantization effect and collecting tensor
statistics, for exporting a fully fixed-point inference graph. (b) shows the inference graph derived from the
same graph as (a). Inputs and weights are in uint8 , and results of common operations are in uint32 . Biases
are kept in uint32 [82, 90]
.
3.2 Learning Techniques
Learning techniques try to train a model differently in order to obtain better quality metrics
(accuracy, F1 score, precision, recall, etc.) while allowing supplementing, or in some cases replacing
the traditional supervised learning. The improvement in quality can sometimes be traded off for a
smaller footprint by reducing the number of parameters / layers in the model and achieving the
same baseline quality with a smaller model. An incentive of paying attention to learning techniques
is that they are applied only on the training, without impacting the inference.
3.2.1 Distillation. Ensembles are well known to help with generalization [ 71,93]. The intuition
is that this enables learning multiple independent hypotheses, which are likely to be better than
learning a single hypothesis. [ 48] goes over some of the standard ensembling methods such as
bagging (learning models that are trained on non-overlapping data and then ensembling them),
boosting (learning models that are trained to fix the classification errors of other models in the
ensemble), averaging (voting by all the ensemble models), etc.Bucila et al. [ 27] used large ensembles
to label synthetic data that they generated using various schemes. A smaller neural net is then
trained to learn not just from the labeled data but also from this weakly labeled synthetic data.
They found that single neural nets were able to mimic the performance of larger ensembles, while
being 1000×smaller and faster. This demonstrated that it is possible to transfer the cumulative
knowledge of ensembles to a single small model. Though it might not be sufficient to rely on just
the existing labeled data.
Hinton et al. [ 75], in their seminal work explored how smaller networks (students) can be taught
to extract ‘dark knowledge’ from larger models / ensembles of larger models (teachers) in a slightly
different manner. Instead of having to generate synthetic-data, they use the larger teacher model
to generate soft-labels on existing labeled data. The soft-labels assign a probability to each class,
instead of hard binary values in the original data. The intuition is that these soft-labels capture the
relationship between the different classes which the model can learn from. For example, a truck is