34 Gaurav Menghani
Grow
(Model Capacity)Shrink
(Footprint)Improve
(Quality)
Add layers, width, etc.
either manually or
using width / depth /
compound scaling
multipliersReduce layers, width, etc.
either manually or using
width / depth / compound
scaling multipliersManual Tuning (Architecture /
Hyper-Parameters /
Features, etc.)
Compression Techniques :
Quantization, Pruning,
Low-Rank Factorization, etc.Learning Techniques :
Data-Augmentation, Distillation,
Unsupervised Learning, etc.
Automation :
Hyper-Param Optimization,
Architecture Search, etc.Automation :
Hyper-Param Optimization,
Architecture Search, etc.
Efficient Layers & Models :
Projection, PQRNN, (NLP),
Separable Convolution (Vision),
etc.Efficient Layers & Models :
Transformers (NLP),
Vi-T (Vision), etc.
Table 4. Examples of techniques to use in the Grow, Shrink, and Improve phases.
compensated by the Improve phase. It is also possible to do the Improve phase before the
Shrink phase.
(2)Grow-Improve-and-Shrink for Quality-Sensitive Models : When you want to deploy
models that have better quality while keeping the same footprint, it might make sense to
follow this strategy. Here, the capacity is first added by growing the model as illustrated
earlier. The model is then improved using via learning techniques, automation, etc. and then
shrunk back either naively or in a learned manner. Alternatively, the model could be shrunk
back either in a learned manner directly after growing the model too.
We consider both these strategies as a way of going from a potentially non pareto-optimal model
to another one that lies on the pareto-frontier with the trade-off that is appropriate for the user.
Each efficiency technique individually helps move us closer to that target model.
4.1 Experiments
In order to demonstrate what we proposed above, we undertook the task of going through the
exercise of making a given Deep Learning model efficient. Concretely, we had the following goals
with this exercise:
(1)Achieve a new pareto-frontier using the efficiency techniques. Hence, demonstrating that
these techniques can be used in isolation as well as in combination with other techniques, in
the real-world by ML Practitioners.
(2)With various combinations of efficiency techniques and model scaling, demonstrate the
tradeoffs for both ‘Shrink-and-Improve’, and ‘Grow-Improve-and-Shrink’ strategies for dis-
covering and traversing the pareto-frontier. In other words, provide empirical evidence that
it is possible for practitioners to either reduce model capacity to bring down the footprint
(shrink) and then recover the model quality that they traded off (improve), or increase the
model capacity to improve quality (growing) followed by model compression (shrinking) to
improve model footprint.
We picked the problem of classifying images in the CIFAR-10 dataset [ 91] on compute constrained
devices such as smartphones, IoT devices etc. We designed a deep convolutional architecture where