Efficient Deep Learning: A Survey on Making Deep Learning
Models Smaller, Faster, and Better
GAURAV MENGHANI, Google Research, USA
Deep Learning has revolutionized the fields of computer vision, natural language understanding, speech recog-
nition, information retrieval and more. However, with the progressive improvements in deep learning models,
their number of parameters, latency, resources required to train, etc. have all have increased significantly.
Consequently, it has become important to pay attention to these footprint metrics of a model as well, not just
its quality. We present and motivate the problem of efficiency in deep learning, followed by a thorough survey
of the five core areas of model efficiency (spanning modeling techniques, infrastructure, and hardware) and the
seminal work there. We also present an experiment-based guide along with code, for practitioners to optimize
their model training and deployment. We believe this is the first comprehensive survey in the efficient deep
learning space that covers the landscape of model efficiency from modeling techniques to hardware support.
Our hope is that this survey would provide the reader with the mental model and the necessary understanding
of the field to apply generic efficiency techniques to immediately get significant improvements, and also equip
them with ideas for further research and experimentation to achieve additional gains.
1 INTRODUCTION
Deep Learning with neural networks has been the dominant methodology of training new machine
learning models for the past decade. Its rise to prominence is often attributed to the ImageNet
competition [ 45] in 2012. That year, a University of Toronto team submitted a deep convolutional
network (AlexNet [ 92], named after the lead developer Alex Krizhevsky), performed 41% better
than the next best submission. As a result of this trailblazing work, there was a race to create
deeper networks with an ever increasing number of parameters and complexity. Several model
architectures such as VGGNet [ 141], Inception [ 146], ResNet [ 73] etc. successively beat previous
records at ImageNet competitions in the subsequent years, while also increasing in their footprint
(model size, latency, etc.)
This effect has also been noted in natural language understanding (NLU), where the Transformer
[155] architecture based on primarily Attention layers, spurred the development of general purpose
language encoders like BERT [ 47], GPT-3 [ 26], etc. BERT specifically beat 11 NLU benchmarks
when it was published. GPT-3 has also been used in several places in the industry via its API. The
common aspect amongst these domains is the rapid growth in the model footprint (Refer to Figure
1), and the cost associated with training and deploying them.
Since deep learning research has been focused on improving the state of the art, progressive
improvements on benchmarks like image classification, text classification, etc. have been correlated
with an increase in the network complexity, number of parameters, the amount of training resources
required to train the network, prediction latency, etc. For instance, GPT-3 comprises of 175 billion
parameters, and costs millions of dollars to train just one iteration ([ 26]). This excludes the cost of
experimentation / trying combinations of different hyper-parameters, which is also computationally
expensive.
While these models perform well on the tasks they are trained on, they might not necessarily be
efficient enough for direct deployment in the real world. A deep learning practitioner might face
the following challenges when training or deploying a model.
•Sustainable Server-Side Scaling : Training and deploying large deep learning models is
costly. While training could be a one-time cost (or could be free if one is using a pre-trained
model), deploying and letting inference run for over a long period of time could still turn
Author’s address: Gaurav Menghani, gmenghani@google.com, Google Research, Mountain View, California, USA, 95054.arXiv:2106.08962v2  [cs.LG]  21 Jun 2021