Efficient Deep Learning: A Survey on Making Deep Learning Models Smaller, Faster, and Better 9
The dequantization step constructs ˆ𝑥, which is a lossy estimate of 𝑥, since we lose precision
when quantizing to a lower number of bits. We can compute it as follows:
dequantize(𝑥𝑞)=ˆ𝑥=𝑠(𝑥𝑞−𝑧) (2)
Since𝑠is in floating-point, ˆ𝑥is also a floating-point value (Algorithm 3). Note that the quantization
and dequantization steps can be performed for signed integers too by appropriately changing the
value𝑥𝑞𝑚𝑖𝑛(which is the lowest fixed-point value in 𝑏-bits) in Algorithm 2.
Algorithm 2: Quantizing a given weight ma-
trixX
Data: Floating-point tensor to compress X, number
of precision bits 𝑏for the fixed-point
representation.
Result: Quantized tensor Xq.
1X𝑚𝑖𝑛,X𝑚𝑎𝑥←min(X,0),max(X,0);
2X←clamp(X,X𝑚𝑖𝑛,X𝑚𝑎𝑥);
3𝑠←𝑥𝑚𝑎𝑥−𝑥𝑚𝑖𝑛
2𝑏−1;
4𝑧←round
𝑥𝑞𝑚𝑖𝑛−𝑥𝑚𝑖𝑛𝑠
;
5Xq←round
X𝑠
+𝑧;
6return Xq;Algorithm 3: Dequantizing a given
fixed-point weight matrix Xq
Data: Fixed-point matrix to dequantize Xq,
along with the scale 𝑠, and zero-point
𝑧values which were calculated
during quantization.
Result: Dequantized floating-point weight
matrix bX.
1bX←𝑠(Xq−𝑧);
2returnbX;
We can utilize the above two algorithms for quantizing and dequantizing the model’s weight
matrices. Quantizing a pre-trained model’s weights for reducing the size is termed as post-training
quantization in literature [ 13]. This might be sufficient for the purpose of reducing the model size
when there is sufficient representational capacity in the model.
There are other works in literature [ 80,99,127] that demonstrate slightly different variants of
quantization. XNOR-Net [ 127], Binarized Neural Networks [ 80] and others use 𝑏=1, and thus
have weight matrices which just have two possible values 0or1, and the quantization function
there is simply the sign(𝑥)function (assuming the weights are symmetrically distributed around 0).
The promise with such extreme quantization approaches is the theoretical 32/1=32×reduction
in model size without much quality loss. Some of the works claim improvements on larger net-
works like AlexNet [ 92], VGG [ 141], Inception [ 146] etc., which might already be more amenable
to compression. A more informative task would be to demonstrate extreme quantization on smaller
networks like the MobileNet family [ 77,133]. Additionally binary quantization (and other quan-
tization schemes like ternary [ 99], bit-shift based networks [ 127], etc.) promise latency-efficient
implementations of standard operations where multiplications and divisions are replaced by cheaper
operations like addition, subtraction, etc. These claims need to be verified because even if these
lead to theoretical reduction in FLOPs, the implementations still need support from the under-
lying hardware. A fair comparison would be using standard quantization with 𝑏=8, where the
multiplications and divisions also become cheaper, and are supported by the hardware efficiently
via SIMD instructions which allow for low-level data parallelism (for example, on x86 via the
SSE instruction set, on ARM via the Neon [ 108] intrinsics, and even on specialized DSPs like the
Qualcomm Hexagon [19]).
Activation Quantization : To be able to get latency improvements with quantized networks, the
math operations have to be done in fixed-point representations too. This means all intermediate