Efficient Deep Learning: A Survey on Making Deep Learning Models Smaller, Faster, and Better 17
Fig. 9. General theme of pretext tasks. Source: [96]
fine-tuning the model with the labeled data. Since the labeled data is not being used for learning
rudimentary features, but rather how to map the high-level representations into the label space, the
quantum of labeled data is going to be a fraction of what would have been required for training the
model from scratch. From this lens, fine-tuning models pre-trained with Self-Supervised learning
aredata-efficient (they converge faster, attain better quality for the same amount of labeled data
when compared to training from scratch, etc.) ([47, 78]).
Fig. 10. Validation Error w.r.t. number of training examples for different training methods on IMDb (from
scratch, ULMFiT Supervised: pre-training with WikiText-103 and fine-tuning using labeled data, ULMFit
Semi-Supervised: Pre-Training with WikiText-103 as well as unlabeled data from the target dataset and
fine-tuning with labeled data). Source: [78]
An example of this two step process of pre-training on unlabeled data and fine-tuning on labeled
data has gained rapid acceptance in the NLP community. ULMFiT [ 78] pioneered the idea of training
a general purpose language model, where the model learns to solve the pretext task of predicting
the next word in a given sentence, without the neeof an associated label. The authors found that
using a large corpus of preprocessed unlabeled data such as the WikiText-103 dataset (derived from
English Wikipedia pages) was a good choice for the pre-training step. This was sufficient for the
model to learn general properties about the language, and the authors found that fine-tuning such
a pre-trained model for a binary classification problem (IMDb dataset) required only 100 labeled
examples (≈10×less labeled examples otherwise). Refer to Figure 10. If we add a middle-step of
pre-training using unlabeled data from the same target dataset, the authors report needing ≈20×
fewer labeled examples.
This idea of pre-training followed by fine-tuning is also used in BERT [ 47] (and other related
models like GPT, RoBERTa, T5, etc.) where the pre-training steps involves learning to solve two
tasks. Firstly, the Masked Language Model where about 15% of the tokens in the given sentence are
masked and the model needs to predict the masked token. The second task is, given two sentences
𝐴and𝐵, predict if𝐵follows𝐴. The pre-training loss is the mean of the losses for the two tasks.
Once pre-trained the model can then be used for classification or seq2seq tasks by adding additional