30 Gaurav Menghani
methods which are completely composed of pointwise operations can force the TorchScript
compiler to fuse them.
•Enabling buffer checkpointing allows keeping the outputs of only certain layers in memory,
and computing the rest during the backward pass. This specifically helps with cheap to
compute layers with large outputs like activations. A reduced memory usage can be exchanged
for a larger batch size which improves utilization of the training platform (CPU, GPU, TPU,
etc.).
•Enabling device-specific optimizations, such as the cuDNN library, and Mixed Precision
Training with NVIDIA GPUs (explained in the GPU subsection).
•Train with Distributed Data Parallel Training, which is suitable when there is a large amount
of data and multiple GPUs are available for training. Each GPU gets its own copy of the
model and optimizer, and operates on its own subset of the data. Each replicas gradients are
periodically accumulated and then averaged.
3.5.3 Hardware-Optimized Libraries. We can further extract efficiency by optimizing for the hard-
ware the neural networks run on. A prime deployment target is ARM’s Cortex-family of processors.
Cortex supports SIMD (Single-Instruction Multiple Data) instructions via the Neon [ 108] archi-
tecture extension. SIMD instructions are useful for operating upon registers with vectors of data,
which are essential for speeding up linear algebra operations through vectorization of these opera-
tions. QNNPACK [ 51] and XNNPACK [ 18] libraries are optimized for ARM Neon for mobile and
embedded devices, and for x86 SSE2, AVX architectures, etc. QNNPACK supports several common
ops in quantized inference mode for PyTorch. XNNPACK supports 32-bit floating point models and
16-bit floating point for TFLite. If a certain operation isn’t supported in XNNPACK, it falls back to
the default implementation in TFLite.
Similarly, there are other low-level libraries like Accelerate for iOS [ 6], and NNAPI for Android [ 4]
that try to abstract away the hardware-level acceleration decision from higher level ML frameworks.
3.5.4 Hardware. GPU : Graphics Processing Units (GPUs) were originally designed for acclerating
computer graphics, but began to be used for general-purpose usecases with the availability of the
CUDA library [ 38] in 2007, and libraries like like cuBLAS for speeding up linear algebra operations.
In 2009, Raina et al. [ 125] demonstrated that GPUs can be used to accelerate deep learning models.
In 2012, following the AlexNet model’s [ 92] substantial improvement over the next entrant in the
ImageNet competition further standardized the use of GPUs for deep learning models. Since then
Nvidia has released several iterations of its GPU microarchitectures with increasing focus on deep
learning performance. It has also introduced Tensor Cores [ 115,142] which are dedicated execution
units in their GPUs, which are specialized for Deep Learning applications. TensorCores support
training and inference in a range of precisions (fp32, TensorFloat32, fp16, bfloat16, int8, int4). As
demonstrated earlier in quantization, switching to a lower precision is not always a significant
trade-off, since the difference in model quality might often be minimal.
Fig. 22. Reduced Precision Multiply-Accumulate (MAC) operation: An illustration of the A=(B×C)+D
operation. BandCare in a reduced precision (fp16, bfloat16, TensorFloat32 etc.), while AandDare in fp32.
The speedup comes from doing the expensive matrix-multiplication with a reduced precision format.