18 Gaurav Menghani
(a) Detecting relative order of patches.
Source: [49].
(b) Predicting the degree of rotation of
a given image.
Fig. 11. Pretext tasks for vision problems.
layers on top of the last hidden layer. When it was published, BERT beat the State-of-the-Art on
eleven NLP tasks.
Similar to NLP, the pretext tasks in Vision have been used to train models that learn general
representations. [ 49] extracts two patches from a training example and then trains the model to
predict their relative position in the image (Refer to Figure 11(a)). They demonstrate that using
a network pre-trained in this fashion improves the quality of the final object detection task, as
compared to randomly initializing the network. Similarly, another task is to predict the degree
of rotation for a given rotated image [ 59]. The authors report that the network trained in a self-
supervised manner this way can be fine-tuned to perform nearly as well as a fully supervised
network.
Another common theme is Contrastive Learning, where the model is trained to distinguish
between similar and dissimilar inputs. Frameworks such as SimCLR [ 32,33], try to learn representa-
tionsℎ𝑖andℎ𝑗for two given inputs ˜𝑥𝑖and ˜𝑥𝑗, where the latter two are differently augmented views
of the same input, such that the cosine similarity of the projections of ℎ𝑖andℎ𝑗,𝑧𝑖and𝑧𝑗(using a
separate function 𝑔(.)) can be maximized. Similarly, for dissimilar inputs the cosine similarity of 𝑧𝑖
and𝑧𝑗should be minimized. The authors report a Top-1 accuracy of 73.9%on ImageNet with only
1% labels (13 labels per class), and outperform the ResNet-50 supervised baseline with only 10%
labels.
Fig. 12. SimCLR framework for learning visual representations. Source: [32]
Discussion : Self-Supervised Learning (SSL) has demonstrated significant success in the general
representational learning with unlabeled data, followed by fine-tuning to adapt the model to the
target task with a modest number of labeled examples. Yann LeCun has likened Self-Supervision as
the cake, and Supervised Learning as the icing on top [ 96], implying that SSL will be the primary