20 Gaurav Menghani
(a) Grid Search
 (b) Random Search
 (c) Bayesian Optimization
Fig. 13. Hyper-Parameter Search algorithms. Source: [39]
As we see, the choice of 𝑆is crucial for the approximation to work. The user has to construct a
range of reasonable values for each hyper-parameter 𝜆𝑖∈𝜆. This can be based on prior experience
with those hyper-parameters.
A simple algorithm for automating HPO is Grid Search (also referred to as Parameter Sweep),
where𝑆consists of all the distinct and valid combinations of the given hyper-parameters based
on their specified ranges. Each trial can then be run in parallel since each trial is independent
of the others, and the optimal combination of the hyper-parameters is found once all the trials
have completed. Since this approach tries all possible combinations, it suffers from the curse of
dimensionality , where the total number of trials grow very quickly.
Another approach is Random Search where trials are sampled randomly from the search space
[23]. Since each trial is independent of the others, it can still be executed randomly. However, there
are few critical benefits of Random Search:
(1)Since the trials are i.i.d. (not the case for Grid Search), the resolution of the search can be
changed on-the-fly (if the computational budget has changed, or certain trials have failed).
(2)Likelihood of finding the optimal 𝜆∗increases with the number of trials, which is not the
case with Grid Search.
(3)If there are𝐾real-valued hyper-parameters, and 𝑁total trials, grid search would pick 𝑁1
𝐾
for each hyper-parameter. However, not all hyper-parameters might be important. Random
Search picks a random value for each hyper-parameter per trial. Hence, in cases with low
effective dimensionality of the search space, Random Search performs better than Grid Search.
Bayesian Optimization (BO) based search [ 2,111] is a model-based sequential approach where
the search is guided by actively estimating the value of the objective function at different points in
the search space, and then spawning trials based on the information gathered so far. The estimation
of the objective function is done using a surrogate function that starts off with a prior estimate.
The trials are created using an acquisition function which picks the next trial using the surrogate
function, the likelihood of improving on the optimum so far, whether to explore / exploit etc. As the
trials complete, both these functions will refine their estimates. Since the method keeps an internal
model of how the objective function looks and plans the next trials based on that knowledge, it is
model-based. Also, since the selection of trials depends on the results of the past trials, this method
is sequential. BO improves over Random Search in that the search is guided rather than random,
thus fewer trials are required to reach the optimum. However, it also makes the search sequential
(though it is possible to run multiple trials in parallel, overall it will lead to some wasted trials).
One of the strategies to save training resources with the above search algorithms is the Early
Stopping of trials that are not promising. Google’s Vizier [ 61] uses Median Stopping Rule for early