4 Gaurav Menghani
2 A MENTAL MODEL
In this section we present the mental model to think about the collection of algorithms, techniques,
and tools related to efficient deep learning. We propose to structure them in five major areas, with
the first four focused on modeling, and the final one around infrastructure and tools.
Fig. 3. A mental model for thinking about algorithms, techniques, and tools related to efficiency in Deep
Learning.
(1)Compression Techniques : These are general techniques and algorithms that look at op-
timizing the model’s architecture, typically by compressing its layers. A classical example
is quantization [ 82], which tries to compress the weight matrices of a layer, by reducing its
precision (eg., from 32-bit floating point values to 8-bit unsigned integers), with minimal loss
in quality.
(2)Learning Techniques : These are algorithms which focus on training the model differently
(to make fewer prediction errors, require less data, converge faster, etc.). The improved
quality can then be exchanged for a smaller footprint / a more efficient model by trimming
the number of parameters if needed. An example of a learning technique is distillation [ 75],
which allows improving the accuracy of a smaller model by learning to mimic a larger model.
(3)Automation : These are tools for improving the core metrics of the given model using
automation. An example is hyper-parameter optimization (HPO) [ 61] where optimizing the
hyper-parameters helps increase the accuracy, which could then be then exchanged for a
model with lesser parameters. Similarly, architecture search [ 168] falls in this category too,
where the architecture itself is tuned and the search helps find a model that optimizes both
the loss / accuracy, and some other metric such as model latency, model size, etc.
(4)Efficient Architectures : These are fundamental blocks that were designed from scratch
(convolutional layers, attention, etc.), that are a significant leap over the baseline methods used
before them (fully connected layers, and RNNs respectively). As an example, convolutional
layers introduced parameter sharing for use in image classification, which avoids having
to learn separate weights for each input pixel, and also makes them robust to overfitting.
Similarly, attention layers [ 21] solved the problem of Information Bottleneck in Seq2Seq
models. These architectures can be used directly for efficiency gains.
(5)Infrastructure : Finally, we also need a foundation of infrastructure and tools that help us
build and leverage efficient models. This includes the model training framework, such as
Tensorflow [ 1], PyTorch [ 119], etc. (along with the tools required specifically for deploying
efficient models such as Tensorflow Lite (TFLite), PyTorch Mobile, etc.). We depend on the
infrastructure and tooling to leverage gains from efficient models. For example, to get both