Efficient Deep Learning: A Survey on Making Deep Learning Models Smaller, Faster, and Better 33
makes the Nano suited for applications like home automation, and the rest for more compute
intensive applications like industrial robotics.
4 A PRACTITIONER’S GUIDE TO EFFICIENCY
Fig. 25. Trade off between Model Quality and Footprint: There exists a trade-off between model quality
and model footprint. Model quality can be improved with techniques like distillation, data-augmentation,
hyper-param tuning etc. Compression techniques can in turn help trade off some model quality for a better
model footprint. Some / all of the improvement in footprint metrics can also be traded for better quality by
simply adding more model capacity.
So far, we presented a broad set of tools and techniques in the Efficient Deep Learning landscape.
In this section, we present a practical guide for practitioners to use, and how these tools and
techniques work with each other. As mentioned earlier, what we seek are pareto-optimal models,
where we would like to achieve the best possible result in one dimension, while holding the other
dimensions constant. Typically, one of these dimensions is Quality , and the other is Footprint .
Quality related metrics could included Accuracy, F1, Precision, Recall, AUC, etc. While Footprint
related metrics can include Model Size, Latency, RAM, etc.
Naturally, there exists a trade-off between Quality and Footprint metrics. A higher-capacity /
deeper model is more likely to achieve a better accuracy, but at the cost of model size, latency, etc.
On the other hand a model with lesser capcity / shallower, while possibly suitable for deployment,
is also likely to be worse in accuracy. As illustrated in Figure 25, we can traverse from a model with
better quality metrics, and exchange some of the quality for better footprint by naively compressing
the model / reducing the model capacity ( Shrink ). Similarly it is possible to naively improve quality
by adding more capacity to the model ( Grow ). Growing can be addressed by the author of the model
via appropriately increasing model capacity and tweaking other hyper-parameters to improve
model quality. Shrinking can be achieved via Compression Techniques (Quantization, Pruning,
Low-Rank Approximation, etc.), Efficient Layers & Models, Architecture Search via Automation, etc.
In addition, we can also Improve the quality metrics, while keeping the footprint same through
Learning Techniques (Distillation, Data Augmentation, Self-Supervised Tuning), Hyper-Parameter
Tuning, etc. (See Table 4 for more examples.)
Combining these three phases, we propose two strategies towards achieving pareto-optimal
models:
(1)Shrink-and-Improve for Footprint-Sensitive Models : If as a practitioner, you want to
reduce your footprint, while keeping the quality the same, this could be a useful strategy
for on-device deployments and server-side model optimization. Shrinking should ideally be
minimally lossy in terms of quality (can be achieved via learned compression techniques,
architecture search etc.), but in some cases even naively reducing capacity can also be