28 Gaurav Menghani
[25] on top of the projected features. They report outperforming LSTMs while being 140×smaller,
and achieving 97.1%of the quality of a BERT-like model while being 350×smaller.
Proformer [ 136] introduces a Local Projected Attention (LPA) Layer, which combines the Pro-
jection operation with localized attention. They demonstrate reaching ≈97.2% BERT-base’s per-
formance while occupying only 13% of BERT-base’s memory. ProFormer also had 14.4 million
parameters, compared to 110 million parameters of BERT-base.
3.5 Infrastructure
In order to be able to train and run inference efficiently, there has to be a robust software and
hardware infrastructure foundation. In this section we go over both these aspects. Refer to Figure
21 for a mental model of the software and hardware infrastructure, and how they interact with each
other. In this section we provide a non-exhaustive but comprehensive survey of leading software
and hardware infrastructure components that are critical to model efficiency.
Fig. 21. A visualization of the hardware and software infrastructure with emphasis on efficiency. On the
left hand side is the model-training phase, which generates a trained model checkpoint. This model is then
used on the inference side, which could either be server-side (conventional machines in cloud or on-prem), or
on-device (mobile phones, IoT, edge devices, etc.).
3.5.1 Tensorflow Ecosystem. Tensorflow (TF) [ 1,14] is a popular machine learning framework,
that has been used in production by many large enterprises. It has some of the most extensive
software support for model efficiency.
Tensorflow Lite for On-Device Usecases : Tensorflow Lite (TFLite) [ 16] is a collection of tools
and libraries designed for inference in low-resource environments. At a high-level we can break
down the TFLite project into two core parts:
•Interpreter and Op Kernels : TFLite provides an interpreter for running specialized TFLite
models, along with implementations of common neural net operations (Fully Connected,
Convolution, Max Pooling, ReLu, Softmax, etc. each of which as an Op). The implementation
of such an operation is known as an Op Kernel . Both the interpreter and Op Kernels are
primarily optimized for inference on ARM-based processors as of the time of writing this
paper. They can also leverage smartphone DSPs such as Qualcomm’s Hexagon [ 19] for faster
execution. The interpreter also allows the user to set multiple threads for execution.
•Converter : The TFLite converter as the name suggests is useful for converting the given TF
model into a single flatbuffer file for inference by the interpreter. Apart from the conversion