Efficient Deep Learning: A Survey on Making Deep Learning Models Smaller, Faster, and Better 13
more similar to a car than to an apple, which the model might not be able to learn directly from
hard labels.
The student network learns to minimize the cross-entropy loss on these soft labels, along with
the original ground-truth hard labels. Since the probabilities of the incorrect classes might be
very small, the logits are scaled down by a ‘temperature’ value ≥1.0, so that the distribution is
‘softened’. If the input vector is X, and the teacher model’s logits are Z(t), the teacher model’s
softened probabilities with temperature 𝑇can be calculated as follows using the familiar softmax
function:
Y(𝑡)
𝑖=exp(Z(t)
i/𝑇)
𝑛∑︁
𝑗=1exp(Z(t)
j/𝑇)(4)
Note that as 𝑇increases, the relative differences between the various elements of 𝑌(𝑡)decreases.
This happens because if all elements are divided by the same constant, the softmax function would
lead to a larger drop for the bigger values. Hence, as the temperature 𝑇increases, we see the
distribution of 𝑌(𝑡)‘soften’ further.
When training along with labeled data ( X,Y), and the student model’s output ( Y(s)), we can
describe the loss function as:
𝐿=𝜆1·𝐿ground−truth+𝜆2·𝐿distillation
=𝜆1·CrossEntropy(Y,Y(s);𝜃)+𝜆2·CrossEntropy(Y(t),Y(s);𝜃)(5)
CrossEntropy is the cross-entropy loss function, which takes in the labels and the output. For
the first loss term, we pass along the ground truth labels, and for the second loss term we pass the
corresponding soft labels from the teacher model for the same input. 𝜆1and𝜆2control the relative
importance of the standard ground truth loss and the distillation loss respectively. When 𝜆1=0,
the student model is trained with just the distillation loss. Similarly, when 𝜆2=0, it is equivalent to
training with just the ground-truth labels. Usually, the teacher network is pre-trained and frozen
during this process, and only the student network is updated. Refer to Figure 7 for an illustration
of this process.
In the paper, Hinton et al. [ 75] were able to closely match the accuracy of a 10 model ensemble for
a speech recognition task with a single distilled model. Urban et al. [ 152] did a comprehensive study
demonstrating that distillation significantly improves performance of shallow student networks as
small as an MLP with one hidden layer on tasks like CIFAR-10. Sanh et al. [ 134] use the distillation
loss for compressing a BERT [ 47] model (along with a cosine loss that minimizes the cosine distance
between two internal vector representation of the input as seen by the teacher and student models).
Their model retains 97% of the performance of BERT-Base while being 40% smaller and 60% faster
on CPU.
It is possible to adapt the general idea of distillation to work on intermediate outputs of teachers
and students. Zagoruyko et al. [ 165] transfer intermediate ‘attention maps’ between teacher and
student convolutional networks. The intuition is to make the student focus on the parts of the
image where the teacher is paying attention to. MobileBERT [ 144] uses a progressive-knowledge
transfer strategy where they do layer-wise distillation between the BERT student and teacher
models, but they do so in stages, where the first 𝑙layers are distilled in the 𝑙-th stage. Along with
other architecture improvements, they obtain a 4.3 ×smaller and 5.5×faster BERT with small losses
in quality.