Causal Confusion in Imitation Learning
Pim de Haan1, Dinesh Jayaramanyz, Sergey Leviney
Qualcomm AI Research, University of Amsterdam,
yBerkeley AI Research,zFacebook AI Research
Abstract
Behavioral cloning reduces policy learning to supervised learning by training a dis-
criminative model to predict expert actions given observations. Such discriminative
models are non-causal: the training procedure is unaware of the causal structure of
the interaction between the expert and the environment. We point out that ignoring
causality is particularly damaging because of the distributional shift in imitation
learning. In particular, it leads to a counter-intuitive “causal misidentiﬁcation”
phenomenon: access to more information can yield worse performance. We inves-
tigate how this problem arises, and propose a solution to combat it through targeted
interventions—either environment interaction or expert queries—to determine the
correct causal model. We show that causal misidentiﬁcation occurs in several
benchmark control domains as well as realistic driving settings, and validate our
solution against DAgger and other baselines and ablations.
1 Introduction
Imitation learning allows for control policies to be learned directly from example demonstrations
provided by human experts. It is easy to implement, and reduces or removes the need for extensive
interaction with the environment during training [58, 41, 4, 1, 20].
However, imitation learning suffers from a fundamental problem: distributional shift [ 9,42]. Training
and testing state distributions are different, induced respectively by the expert and learned policies.
Therefore, imitating expert actions on expert trajectories may not align with the true task objective.
While this problem is widely acknowledged [ 41,9,42,43], yet with careful engineering, naïve
behavioral cloning approaches have yielded good results for several practical problems [ 58,41,44,
36, 37, 4, 33, 3]. This raises the question: is distributional shift really still a problem?
In this paper, we identify a somewhat surprising and very problematic effect of distributional shift:
“causal misidentiﬁcation.” Distinguishing correlates of expert actions in the demonstration set from
true causes is usually very difﬁcult, but may be ignored without adverse effects when training and
testing distributions are identical (as assumed in supervised learning), since nuisance correlates
continue to hold in the test set. However, this can cause catastrophic problems in imitation learning
due to distributional shift. This is exacerbated by the causal structure of sequential action: the very
fact that current actions cause future observations often introduces complex new nuisance correlates.
To illustrate, consider behavioral cloning to train a neural network to drive a car. In scenario A, the
model’s input is an image of the dashboard and windshield, and in scenario B, the input to the model
(with identical architecture) is the same image but with the dashboard masked out (see Fig 1). Both
cloned policies achieve low training loss, but when tested on the road, model B drives well, while
model A does not. The reason: the dashboard has an indicator light that comes on immediately when
the brake is applied, and model A wrongly learns to apply the brake only when the brake light is on.
Even though the brake light is the effect of braking, model A could achieve low training error by
misidentifying it as the cause instead.
1Work mostly done while at Berkeley AI Research.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.