are observable in the state, and is similar to what we might see from other sources of knowledge about
the past, such as memory or recurrence. We study three kinds of tasks: (i) MountainCar (continuous
states, discrete actions), (ii) MuJoCo Hopper (continuous states and actions), (iii) Atari games: Pong,
Enduro and UpNDown (states: two stacked consecutive frames, discrete actions).
(a) Pong
 (b) Enduro
 (c) UpNDown
Figure 3: The Atari environments with indicator of
past action (white number in lower left).For each task, we study imitation learning in
two scenarios. In scenario A (henceforth called
"CONFOUNDED "), the policy sees the augmented ob-
servation vector, including the previous action. In
the case of low-dimensional observations, the state
vector is expanded to include the previous action
at an index that is unknown to the learner. In the
case of image observations, we overlay a symbol
corresponding to the previous action at an unknown
location on the image (see Fig 3). In scenario B
("ORIGINAL "), the previous action variable is replaced with random noise for low-dimensional ob-
servations. For image observations, the original images are left unchanged. Demonstrations are
generated synthetically as described in Appendix A. In all cases, we use neural networks with
identical architectures to represent the policies, and we train them on the same demonstrations.
Fig 4 shows the rewards against varying demonstration dataset sizes for MountainCar, Hopper, and
Pong. Appendix E shows additional results, including for Enduro and UpNDown. All policies are
trained to near-zero validation error on held-out expert state-action tuples. ORIGINAL produces rewards
tending towards expert performance as the size of the imitation dataset increases. CONFOUNDED either
requires many more demonstrations to reach equivalent performance, or fails completely to do so.
Overall, the results are clear: across these tasks, access to more information leads to inferior perfor-
mance. As Fig 11 in the appendix shows, this difference is not due to different training/validation
losses on the expert demonstrations—for example, in Pong, CONFOUNDED produces lower validation
loss than ORIGINAL on held-out demonstration samples, but produces lower rewards when actually
used for control. These results not only validate the existence of causal misidentiﬁcation, but also
provides us with testbeds for investigating a potential solution.
Real-World Driving. Our testbeds introduce deliberate nuisance variables to the “original”
observation variables for ease of evaluation, but evidence suggests that misattribution is pervasive
in common real-world imitation learning settings. Real-world problems often have no privileged
“original” observation space, and very natural-seeming state spaces may still include nuisance factors—
as in our dashboard light setting (Fig 1), where causal misattribution occurs when using the full image
from the camera.
In particular, history would seem a natural part of the state space for real-world driving, yet
recurrent/history-based imitation has been consistently observed in prior work to hurt performance,
thus exhibiting clear symptoms of causal misidentiﬁcation [ 36,56,3]. While these histories contain
valuable information for driving, they also naturally introduce information about nuisance factors
such as previous actions. In all three cases, more information led to worse results for the behavioral
cloning policy, but this was neither attributed speciﬁcally to causal misidentiﬁcation, nor tackled
using causally motivated approaches.
Metrics! Validation Driving Performance
Methods# Perplexity Distance Interventions Collisions
HISTORY 0.834 144.92 2.941.79 6.495.72
NO-HISTORY 0.989 268.95 1.300.78 3.382.55
Table 1: Imitation learning results from Wang et al. [56].
Accessing history yields better validation performance,
but worse actual driving performance.We draw the reader’s attention to particularly
telling results from Wang et al. [56] for learning
to drive in near-photorealistic GTA-V [ 24] envi-
ronments, using behavior cloning with DAgger-
inspired expert perturbation. Imitation learn-
ing policies are trained using overhead image
observations with and without “history” infor-
mation ( HISTORY and NO-HISTORY ) about the
ego-position trajectory of the car in the past.
Similar to our tests above, architectures are identical for the two methods. And once again, like in
our tests above, HISTORY has better performance on held-out demonstration data, but much worse
performance when actually deployed. Tab 1 shows these results, reproduced from Wang et al. [56]
Table II. These results constitute strong evidence for the prevalence of causal misidentiﬁcation in
4