Figure 9: Samples from (top row) learned causal graph and (bottom row) random causal graph. (See text)
In the bottom row, the causal variables differ strongly, indicating that important aspects of the state
are judged as nuisance variables. This validates that, consistent with MountainCar and Hopper, our
approach does indeed identify true causes in Pong.
Mode Representation Reward
Policy execution Disentangled -137
Entangled -145
Expert queries Disentangled -140
Entangled -165
Table 2: Intervention on (dis)entangled MountainCar.Necessity of disentanglement. Our interven-
tion method assumes a disentangled representa-
tion of state. Otherwise, each of the nindivid-
ual dimensions in the state might capture both
causes as well as nuisance variables and problem
of discovering true causes is no longer reducible
to searching over 2ngraphs.
To test this empirically, we create a variant of
our MountainCar CONFOUNDED testbed, where the 3-D past action-augmented state vector is rotated
by a ﬁxed, random rotation. After training the graph-conditioned policies on the entangled and
disentangled CONFOUNDED state, and applying 30 episodes of policy execution intervention or
20 expert queries, we get the results shown in Tab 2. The results are signiﬁcantly lower in the
entangled than in the disentangled (non-rotated) setting, indicating disentanglement is important for
the effectiveness of our approach.
6 Conclusions
We have identiﬁed a naturally occurring and fundamental problem in imitation learning, “causal
misidentiﬁcation”, and proposed a causally motivated approach for resolving it. While we observe
evidence for causal misidentiﬁcation arising in natural imitation learning settings, we have thus far
validated our solution in somewhat simpler synthetic settings intended to mimic them. Extending
our solution to work for such realistic scenarios is an exciting direction for future work. Finally,
apart from imitation, general machine learning systems deployed in the real world also encounter
“feedback” [ 47,2], which opens the door to causal misidentiﬁcation. We hope to address these more
general settings in the future.
Acknowledgments: We would like to thank Karthikeyan Shanmugam and Shane Gu for pointers
to prior work early in the project, and Yang Gao, Abhishek Gupta, Marvin Zhang, Alyosha Efros,
and Roberto Calandra for helpful discussions in various stages of the project. We are also grateful to
Drew Bagnell and Katerina Fragkiadaki for helpful feedback on an earlier draft of this paper. This
project was supported in part by Berkeley DeepDrive, NVIDIA, and Google.
References
[1]Brenna D Argall, Sonia Chernova, Manuela Veloso, and Brett Browning. A survey of robot
learning from demonstration. Robotics and autonomous systems , 57(5):469–483, 2009.
[2]Drew Bagnell. Talk: Feedback in machine learning, 2016. URL https://youtu.be/
XRSvz4UOpo4 .
[3]Mayank Bansal, Alex Krizhevsky, and Abhijit Ogale. ChauffeurNet: Learning to drive by
imitating the best and synthesizing the worst. Robotics: Science & Systems (RSS) , 2019.
9