We propose two intervention modes, both of which can be carried out by interaction with the
environment via the actions:
Algorithm 1 Expert query intervention
Input: policy network fs.t.G(X) =f([X
G;G])
Initializew= 0;D=;.
Collect statesSby executing mix, the mixture of
policiesGfor uniform samples G.
For eachXinS, compute disagreement score:
D(X) =EG[DKL(G(X);mix(X))]
SelectS0S with maximal D(X).
Collect state-action pairs Tby querying expert on S0.
fori= 1:::N do
SampleGp(G)/exphw;Gi.
L Es;aT[`(G(s);a)]
D D[f (G;L)g
FitwonDwith linear regression.
end for
Return: arg maxGp(G)
Algorithm 2 Policy execution intervention
Input: policy network fs.t.G(X) =f([X
G;G])
Initializew= 0;D=;.
fori= 1:::N do
SampleGp(G)/exphw;Gi.
Collect episode return RGby executing G.
D D[f (G;RG)g
FitwonDwith linear regression.
end for
Return: arg maxGp(G)Expert query mode. This is the standard in-
tervention approach applied to imitation learn-
ing: intervene on Xtto assign it a value, and
observe the expert response A. To do this, we
sample a graph Gat the beginning of each in-
tervention episode and execute the policy G.
Once data is collected in this manner, we elicit
expert labels on interesting states. This requires
an interactive expert, as in DAgger [ 42], but re-
quires substantially fewer expert queries than
DAgger, because: (i) the queries serve only
to disambiguate among a relatively small set
of valid FCMs, and (ii) we use disagreement
among the mixture of policies in fto query the
expert efﬁciently in an active learning approach.
We summarize this approach in Algorithm 1.
Policy execution mode. It is not always pos-
sible to query an expert. For example, for a
learner learning to drive a car by watching a
human driver, it may not be possible to put the
human driver into dangerous scenarios that the
learner might encounter at intermediate stages
of training. In cases like these where we would
like to learn from pre-recorded demonstrations
alone, we propose to intervene indirectly by
using environmental returns (sum of rewards
over time in an episode) R=P
trt. The poli-
ciesG() =f([G;G])corresponding
to different hypotheses Gare executed in the
environment and the returns RGcollected. The likelihood of each graph is proportional to the
exponentiated returns expRG. The intuition is simple: environmental returns contain information
about optimal expert policies even when experts are not queryable. Note that we do not even assume
access to per-timestep rewards as in standard reinforcement learning; just the sumof rewards for each
completed run. As such, this intervention mode is much more ﬂexible. See Algorithm 2.
Note that both of the above intervention approaches evaluate individual hypotheses in isolation, but
the number of hypotheses grows exponentially in the number of state variables. To handle larger
states, we infer a graph distribution p(G), by assuming an energy based model with a linear energy
E(G) =hw;Gi+b, so the graph distribution is p(G) =Q
ip(Gi) =Q
iBernoulli (Gij(wi=)),
whereis the sigmoid, which factorizes in independent factors. The independence assumption is
sensible as our approach collapses p(G)to its mode before returning it and the collapsed distribution
is always independent. E(G)is inferred from linear regression on the likelihoods. This process
is depicted in Algorithms 1 and 2. The above method can be formalized within the reinforcement
learning framework [ 27]. As we show in Appendix H, the energy-based model can be seen as an
instance of soft Q-learning [16].
4.3 Disentangling Observations
In the above, we have assumed access to disentangled observations Xt. When this is not the case,
such as with image observations, Xtmust be set to a disentangled representation of the observation
at timet. We construct such a representation by training a -V AE [ 22,18] to reconstruct the original
observations. To capture states beyond those encountered by the expert, we train with a mix of expert
and random trajectory states. Once trained, Xtis set to be the mean of the latent distribution produced
at the output of the encoder. The V AE training objective encourages disentangled dimensions in the
latent space [5, 6]. We employ CoordConv [28] in both the encoder and the decoder architectures.
6