Scenario A: Full Information Scenario B: Incomplete Information
policy attends to brake indicator
Figure 1: Causal misidentiﬁcation: more information yields worse imitation learning performance. Model A
relies on the braking indicator to decide whether to brake. Model B instead correctly attends to the pedestrian.
This situation presents a give-away symptom of causal misidentiﬁcation: access to more information
leads to worse generalization performance in the presence of distributional shift. Causal misidentiﬁ-
cation occurs commonly in natural imitation learning settings, especially when the imitator’s inputs
include history information.
In this paper, we ﬁrst point out and investigate the causal misidentiﬁcation problem in imitation
learning. Then, we propose a solution to overcome it by learning the correct causal model, even when
using complex deep neural network policies. We learn a mapping from causal graphs to policies,
and then use targeted interventions to efﬁciently search for the correct policy, either by querying an
expert, or by executing selected policies in the environment.
2 Related Work
Imitation learning. Imitation learning through behavioral cloning dates back to Widrow and Smith,
1964 [ 58], and has remained popular through today [ 41,44,36,37,4,13,33,56,3]. The distributional
shift problem, wherein a cloned policy encounters unfamiliar states during autonomous execution,
has been identiﬁed as an issue in imitation learning [ 41,9,42,43,25,19,3]. This is closely tied
to the “feedback” problem in general machine learning systems that have direct or indirect access
to their own past states [ 47,2]. For imitation learning, various solutions to this problem have been
proposed [ 9,42,43] that rely on iteratively querying an expert based on states encountered by some
intermediate cloned policy, to overcome distributional shift; DAgger [ 43] has come to be the most
widely used of these solutions.
We show evidence that the distributional shift problem in imitation learning is often due to causal
misidentiﬁcation, as illustrated schematically in Fig 1. We propose to address this through targeted
interventions on the states to learn the true causal model to overcome distributional shift. As we
will show, these interventions can take the form of either environmental rewards with no additional
expert involvement, or of expert queries in cases where the expert is available for additional inputs. In
expert query mode, our approach may be directly compared to DAgger [ 43]: indeed, we show that we
successfully resolve causal misidentiﬁcation using orders of magnitude fewer queries than DAgger.
We also compare against Bansal et al. [3]: to prevent imitators from copying past actions, they train
with dropout [ 53] on dimensions that might reveal past actions. While our approach seeks to ﬁnd
the true causal graph in a mixture of graph-parameterized policies, dropout corresponds to directly
applying the mixture policy. In our experiments, our approach performs signiﬁcantly better.
Causal inference. Causal inference is the general problem of deducing cause-effect relationships
among variables [ 52,38,40,50,10,51]. “Causal discovery” approaches allow causal inference from
pre-recorded observations under constraints [ 54,17,29,15,30,31,26,14,34,57]. Observational
causal inference is known to be impossible in general [ 38,39]. We operate in the interventional
regime [ 55,11,49,48] where a user may “experiment” to discover causal structures by assigning
values to some subset of the variables of interest and observing the effects on the rest of the system.
We propose a new interventional causal inference approach suited to imitation learning. While
ignoring causal structure is particularly problematic in imitation learning, ours is the ﬁrst effort
directly addressing this, to our knowledge.
3 The Phenomenon of Causal Misidentiﬁcation
In imitation learning, an expert demonstrates how to perform a task (e.g., driving a car) for the beneﬁt
of an agent. In each demo, the agent has access both to its n-dim. state observations at each time t,
Xt= [Xt
1;Xt
2;:::Xt
n](e.g., a video feed from a camera), and to the expert’s action At(e.g., steering,
2