0.1 0.3 0.5 1 5
Demonstration dataset size (x 1000)200
180
160
140
120
100
Reward(a) MountainCar
0.1 0.5 1 5 20 100 300
Demonstration dataset size (x 1000)050010001500Reward (b) Hopper
10 200 250 800
Demonstration dataset size (x 1000)20
10
01020Reward
Scenario A (Confounded)
Scenario B (Original)
Expert (c) Pong
Figure 4: Diagnosing causal misidentiﬁcation: net reward (y-axis) vs number of training samples (x-axis) for
ORIGINAL and CONFOUNDED , compared to expert reward (mean and stdev over 5 runs). Also see Appendix E.
realistic imitation learning settings. Bansal et al. [3]also observe similar symptoms in a driving
setting, and present a dropout [ 53] approach to tackle it, which we compare to in our experiments.
Subsequent to an earlier version of this work, Codevilla et al. [8]also verify causal confusion in
realistic driving settings, and propose measures to address a speciﬁc instance of causal confusion.
4 Resolving Causal Misidentiﬁcation
Recall from Sec 3.1 that robustness to causal misidentiﬁcation can be achieved by ﬁnding the true
causal model of the expert’s actions. We propose a simple pipeline to do this. First, we jointly learn
policies corresponding to various causal graphs (Sec 4.1). Then, we perform targeted interventions to
efﬁciently search over the hypothesis set for the correct causal model (Sec 4.2).
4.1 Causal Graph-Parameterized Policy Learning
Figure 5: Graph-parameterized
policy.In this step, we learn a policy corresponding to each candidate causal
graph. Recall from Sec 3 that the expert’s actions Aare based
on an unknown subset of the state variables fXign
i=1. EachXi
may either be a cause or not, so there are 2npossible graphs. We
parameterize the structure Gof the causal graph as a vector of n
binary variables, each indicating the presence of an arrow from Xk
toAin Fig 2. We then train a single graph-parameterized policy
G(X) =f([XG;G]), whereis element-wise multiplication,
and[;]denotes concatenation. are neural network parameters,
trained through gradient descent to minimize:
EG[`(f([XiG;G]);Ai)]; (1)
whereGis drawn uniformly at random over all 2ngraphs and`is a mean squared error loss for the
continuous action environments and a cross-entropy loss for the discrete action environments. Fig 5
shows a schematic of the training time architecture. The policy network fmapping observations X
to actionsArepresents a mixture of policies, one corresponding to each value of the binary causal
graph structure variable G, which is sampled as a bernoulli random vector.
In Appendix D, we propose an approach to perform variational Bayesian causal discovery over
graphsG, using a latent variable model to infer a distribution over functional causal models (graphs
and associated parameters)—the modes of this distribution are the FCMs most consistent with the
demonstration data. This resembles the scheme above, except that instead of uniform sampling,
graphs are sampled preferentially from FCMs that ﬁt the training demonstrations well. We compare
both approaches in Sec 5, ﬁnding that simple uniform sampling nearly always sufﬁces in preparation
for the next step: targeted intervention.
4.2 Targeted Intervention
Having learned the graph-parameterized policy as in Sec 4.1, we propose targeted intervention to
compute the likelihood L(G)of each causal graph structure hypothesis G. In a sense, imitation
learning provides an ideal setting for studying interventional causal learning: causal misidentiﬁcation
presents a clear challenge, while the fact that the problem is situated in a sequential decision process
where the agent can interact with the world provides a natural mechanism for carrying out limited
interventions.
5