0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18
Num queries170
160
150
140
130
120
RewardMountainCar
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140
Num queries200400600800100012001400RewardHopper
Disc-Intervention [ours]
Unif-Intervention [ours]
DAgger [41]
Original [upper bound]
Confounded [lower bound]
Dropout [3]
GAIL [17] (100 episodes)
GAIL [17] (1.5k episodes)Figure 8: Reward vs. expert queries (expert query interventions) on MountainCar and Hopper. Our methods
partially bridge the gap from CONFOUNDED (lower bd) to ORIGINAL (upper bd), also outperforming DAG-
GER [43] and DROPOUT [3].GAIL [19] outperforms our methods on Hopper, but requires a large number of
policy roll-outs (also see Fig 7 comparing GAIL to our policy execution-based approach).
approach variants. GAIL requires about 1.5k episodes on Hopper to match the performance of our
approaches, which only need tens of episodes. Appendix G further analyzes the performance of GAIL.
Standard implementations of GAIL do not handle discrete action spaces, so we do not evaluate it on
MountainCar.
As described in Sec 4.3, we use a V AE to disentangle image states in Atari games to produce 30-D
representations for Pong and Enduro and 50-D representations for UpNDown. We set this dimension-
ality heuristically to be as small as possible, while still producing good reconstructions as assessed
visually. Requiring the policy to utilize the V AE representation without end-to-end training does
result in some drop in performance, as seen in Fig 6. However, causal misidentiﬁcation still causes a
very large drop of performance even relative to the baseline V AE performance. DISC -INTERVENTION
is hard to train as the cardinality of the state increases, and yields only minor advantages on Hopper
(14-D states), so we omit it for these Atari experiments. As Fig 6 shows, UNIF -INTERVENTION indeed
improves signiﬁcantly over CONFOUNDED W /VAEin all three cases, matching ORIGINAL W /VAEon
Pong and UpNDown, while the DROPOUT baseline only improves UpNDown. In our experiments thus
far, GAIL fails to converge to above-chance performance on any of the Atari environments. These
results show that our method successfully alleviates causal misidentiﬁcation within relatively few
trials.
Intervention by expert queries. Next, we perform direct intervention by querying the expert on
samples from trajectories produced by the different causal graphs. In this setting, we can also directly
compare to DAGGER [43]. Fig 8 shows results on MountainCar and Hopper. Both our approaches
successfully improve over CONFOUNDED within a small number of queries. Consistent with policy
execution intervention results reported above, we verify that our approach again identiﬁes the true
causal model correctly in both tasks, and also performs better than DROPOUT in both settings. It also
exceeds the rewards achieved by DAGGER , while using far fewer expert queries. In Appendix F, we
show that DAGGER requires hundreds of queries to achieve similar rewards for MountainCar and tens
of thousands for Hopper. Finally, GAIL with 1.5k episodes outperforms our expert query interventions
approach. Recall however from Fig 8 that this is an order of magnitude more than the number of
episodes required by our policy intervention approach.
Once again, DISC -INTERVENTION only helps in early interventions on MountainCar, and not at all on
Hopper. Thus, our method’s performance is primarily attributable to the targeted intervention stage,
and the exact choice of approach used to learn the mixture of policies is relatively insigniﬁcant.
Overall, of the two intervention approaches, policy execution converges to better ﬁnal rewards.
Indeed, for the Atari environments, we observed that expert query interventions proved ineffective.
We believe this is because expert agreement is an imperfect proxy for true environmental rewards.
Interpreting the learned causal graph. Our method labels each dimension of the V AE encoding
of the frame as a cause or nuisance variable. In Fig 9, we analyze these inferences in the Pong
environment as follows: in the top row, a frame is encoded into the V AE latent, then for all nuisance
dimensions (as inferred by our approach UNIF -INTERVENTION ), that dimension is replaced with a
sample from the prior, and new samples are generated. In the bottom row, the same procedure is
applied with a random graph that has as many nuisance variables as the inferred graph. We observe
that in the top row, the causal variables (the ball and paddles) are shared between the samples, while
the nuisance variables (the digit) differ, being replaced either with random digits or unreadable digits.
8