8
GPU CUDA Ubuntu ROS DockerCARLAOpenPCDet YOLO
Pytorch CVXPY OpenCV SUMOLSTM
Hardware & OSSimulation & AI ToolsAutonomous Driving Perception Tools CNNPoint -CloudTraffic Sign DetectionCAV Perception Tasks FL Frameworks
Federated Distillation
Device Selection
Dataset Annotation, Calibration, 
SynchronizationPerception DNN 
Performance Predictor
Weather Classification
……  Noisy  Aggregation ， 
Personalization, ……  CarlaFLCAV Simulator
Optimization 
Modules
Multi -Stage Lifelong FL
RGB ImageDataset Generation
Straight -road Cross -road
T-road Roundabout3D Object Detection
Trajectory PredictionMulti -Layer Graph 
Resource AllocationVehicle -Road Contrastive 
Sensor Placement
(a)
Testing in Real World Training in CarlaFLCAV Simulator
Simulation to Real World
 (b)
Fig. 5: a) Software architecture and supported functionalities of CarlaFLCA V; b) Training DNNs in the CarlaFLCA V simulator
and testing with real world datasets. The DNN trained with CarlaFLCA V successfully detects all objects in the real world.
importance-aware device selection, where vehicles with larger
gradient norms are assigned a higher probability to be sched-
uled. Besides, CarlaFLCA V includes noisy aggregation, which
injects random noises into the DNN parameters as a mask
to protect the data privacy against model inversion attacks.
DNN frozen is optional, which ﬁxes partial layer parameters
to reduce the communication cost.
B. Experimental Validation
First, to evaluate how close CarlaFLCA V is to real-life
conditions, we train the SECOND (in Fig. 1b) with 3000 point
cloud samples generated by CarlaFLCA V for 60 epochs and
test the trained SECOND on a real-world dataset KITTI. The
mean average precision (mAP) at IoU = 0:5is58% for object
detection. Qualitative results are shown in Fig. 5b, where the
DNN trained with CarlaFLCA V detects all objects in real data.
Next, to verify the effectiveness of the multi-stage FLCA V ,
we consider the single-task case (i.e., task 3 in Fig. 1b) and
compare the mAP of ﬁnal DNNs for different schemes, under
the same wireless and wireline uplink resource budgets (i.e.,
4GB). The settings and results are shown in Fig. 6a. Our
ﬁndings are summarized below.
(i) All FL schemes achieve higher mAPs than centralized
learning. This demonstrates the necessity of exploiting
domain-information of Town05.
(ii) With cloud FL, the mAP is improved, since the CA Vs in
Town03 provide new knowledge about corner-case and
occluded objects.
(iii) With equal resources in different stages, the VRCSP plac-
ing the road sensor at position 3 signiﬁcantly improves
the mAP compared with the conventional method placing
the sensor at position 8.
(iv) By jointly optimizing the network resources across three
stages, the mAP is further increased to 84.58, which
demonstrates the effectiveness of MLGRA. Our resultimplies that more wireless (wireline) resources should be
allocated to the edge (cloud) FL stage.
(v) Under the same VRCSP and MLGRA methods, the mAP
score with device selection is slightly higher than direct
FL, as the stragglers are removed from FL groups.
Finally, we simulate the multi-task multi-modal perception,
including tasks 1–3 in Fig. 1b. The settings and results are
shown in Fig. 6b. Our ﬁndings are summarized below.
(i) Since our goal is to maximize the perception accuracy of
all tasks, a larger area indicates better performance. The
baseline scheme (i.e., blue dotted-line) has the smallest
area, which can be treated as a worst-case performance
bound.
(ii) Leveraging the performance predictor in Fig. 3a, the equal
MLGRA method (i.e., red dashed-line) achieves a larger
triangle area than that of the baseline. This is because it
automatically allocates more resources to object detection
and sign recognition as shown in Fig. 6b, which are
harder tasks.
(iii) With joint resource allocation across different stages and
tasks, the proposed MLGRA method (i.e., black solid-
line) achieves the largest triangle in Fig. 6b. The per-
ception accuracies are 99:0;88:8;78:16for tasks 1;2;3,
respectively.
(iv) For task 2, the proposed MLGRA successfully detects
the STOP sign in cloudy days, while other methods
misclassify the STOP sign as a trafﬁc light. For task 3,
the proposed MLGRA successfully detects all the objects
at the cross-road, while other methods involve inaccurate
detections and false positives.
VI. C ONCLUSION
This article has reviewed the integration of FL and CA V for
overcoming perception challenges in open driving scenarios.
The multi-tier networking, multi-stage training, and multi-task