5
a vehicular edge network. Finally, road servers are parameter
servers for edge FL and process real-time tasks, e.g., feeding
the data of road sensors into road DNNs, merging the multi-
sensor data using fusion techniques (e.g., iterative closest point
(ICP)).
A cloud server differs from a road (edge) server since the
Internet is a part of the end-to-end communication. Therefore,
cloud servers execute long-term tasks, e.g., dataset annotation,
DNN training, simulation, and resource management. Note
that to prevent potential cyber attacks, any vehicle joining
FLCA V should be registered with a unique identiﬁer allocated
by authorities. The cloud server is responsible for maintaining
the identiﬁer and also executes security key generation and
certiﬁcation [8].
B. Training Pipeline
Training FLCA V perception systems in Fig. 2b consists of
cloud pretraining, edge FL, and cloud FL stages. Speciﬁcally,
cloud pretraining adopts annotated datasets on the cloud to
transform initial DNNs into pretrained DNNs that are released
to all CA Vs. Then, an FL request is generated at the CA V
upon a false detection event (e.g., due to occlusions or corner
cases). The FL request is sent to the edge parameter sever,
who calls for roadside infrastructures and other vehicles to
join the edge FL group via V2X. This helps the CA V ﬁx
the bug residing in its local DNN, as the knowledge migrates
from other agents to it and vice versa. With a few rounds
of output and parameter exchange, the edge parameter server
can form edge DNNs that serve as good representations of the
local region. Finally, the FL group can be enlarged by cloud
FL, which aggregates the edge DNNs from remote areas via
the Internet. To improve robustness, the cloud FL stage may
adopt personalization such that each edge client trains its own
regional DNNs while contributing to the global cloud DNNs
[12].
From the application perspective, FLCA V needs to train
a set (let Ndenote its cardinality) of DNNs for associated
perception tasks in 3 (or more) consecutive stages. From
the network perspective, FLCA V involves two types of com-
munications, i.e., wireless and wireline communication, and
their transmission capacities are ﬁnite. Combining both, the
summation of wireless/wireline throughput (in MBytes) over
Ntasks and 3 stages should be smaller than the network
throughput budget, and there exists a tradeoff among different
tasks and stages. Here we consider the uplink transmission
in Fig. 2b, as the downlink counterpart is usually not the
bottleneck in practice.
1) For Stage I, data samples should be uploaded from
vehicles to the edge and then to the cloud. The product of
the number of samples and the data size of each sample
should not exceed the minimum throughput of wireless
and wireline communication allocated to Stage I.
2) For Stage II, parameters are exchanged between the edge
server and vehicles through wireless communication. The
product of the number of edge FL rounds, the number of
vehicles in each FL group, and the data size of DNNs
should not exceed the wireless throughput allocated to
Stage II.3) For Stage III, parameters are exchanged between the edge
and cloud servers through wireline communication. The
product of the number of cloud FL rounds, the number
of edge servers, and the data size of DNNs should not
exceed the wireline throughput allocated to Stage III.
Note that perception outputs (e.g., bounding boxes) are also
shared among nodes, but the associated communication over-
head is negligible compared with those of samples and DNNs.
C. Task Generation
Tasks should match scenarios [14] and their construction
shown in Fig. 3a consists of the following 4 steps.
1)Operational Design Domain (ODD) Speciﬁcation .
Given the target ODD, e.g., urban (focus of this paper),
rural, campus, mine, port, or parking-lot, we deﬁne the
key parameters including trafﬁc density, speed limits,
rules, and FoV requirements [15].
2)Scenario Sampling . Scenarios are sampled inside the
ODD according to industrial standards such as ISO and
SAE [15]. Learning and optimization based methods can
also be adopted for scenario space exploration. Car-
laFLCA V provides straight-road, cross-road, T-road, and
roundabout scenarios.
3)Task Generation . Scenario-speciﬁc tasks are generated,
where each task is deﬁned as a set of data, labels and
DNNs [14]. We construct fewer tasks for low-complexity
scenarios to save computational costs and redundant tasks
for high-complexity scenarios to guarantee driving safety.
4)Task Evaluation . Perception tasks are categorized into
different priorities via a task importance evaluator, which
removes a task from the task list and observes the
associated performance loss. A task is deemed important
if the performance loss is signiﬁcant [14].
IV. R ESOURCE OPTIMIZATION FOR FLCAV P ERCEPTION
A. Multi-Modal Resource Allocation
1) Motivation: Intuitively, more resources should be al-
located to perception tasks accomplished by deeper neural
networks. Consider training a convolution neural network
(CNN) for weather classiﬁcation and a sparsely embedded
convolutional detection (SECOND) network for object detec-
tion. Due to larger number of parameters ( 5 millions) in
SECOND, the FLCA V network should allocate more com-
munication resources to vehicles that upload point clouds for
pretraining SECOND in Stage I, and call for more vehicles
and FL rounds for sharing SECOND parameters in Stages II
and III. In current vehicular networks, the purpose of resource
optimization is to improve key communication metrics, which
treats data equally and violates the above intuition.
2) Method: Since communication (i.e., a data pipeline)
becomes a sub-task in the FLCA V paradigm, we need to
directly minimize the perception error instead of maximizing
the communication throughput. The problem becomes how
to model the relation between perception errors and network
ﬂows. Here we present a multi-layer graph resource allocation
(MLGRA) approach shown in Fig. 3a. For layer 1, vertex