1
Federated Deep Learning Meets
Autonomous Vehicle Perception: Design and Veriﬁcation
Shuai Wang, Chengyang Li, Derrick Wing Kwan Ng, Fellow, IEEE , Yonina C. Eldar, Fellow, IEEE ,
H. Vincent Poor, Life Fellow, IEEE , Qi Hao, and Chengzhong Xu, Fellow, IEEE
Abstract —Realizing human-like perception is a challenge in
open driving scenarios due to corner cases and visual occlusions.
To gather knowledge of rare and occluded instances, federated
learning assisted connected autonomous vehicle (FLCA V) has
been proposed, which leverages vehicular networks to establish
federated deep neural networks (DNNs) from distributed data
captured by vehicles and road sensors. Without the need of
data aggregation, FLCA V preserves privacy while reducing
communication costs compared with conventional centralized
learning. However, it is challenging to determine the network
resources and road sensor placements for multi-stage training
with multi-modal datasets in multi-variant scenarios. This article
presents networking and training frameworks for FLCA V per-
ception. Multi-layer graph resource allocation and vehicle-road
contrastive sensor placement are proposed to address the network
management and sensor deployment problems, respectively. We
also develop CarlaFLCA V , a software platform that implements
the above system and methods. Experimental results conﬁrm the
superiority of the proposed techniques compared with various
benchmarks.
I. I NTRODUCTION
Perception determines the way a connected autonomous
vehicle (CA V) understands the world by transforming envi-
ronments into digits via sensors, signal processors, and deep
neural networks (DNNs) [1]. Conventionally, DNN training
is based on centralized learning, which collects the datasets
from CA Vs, trains the DNNs at the cloud, and deploys
trained DNNs on CA Vs for inference. This paradigm is
effective in closed driving areas where the owner of data-
collection vehicles is also the DNN provider. However, future
CA V systems must cope with multi-variate open scenarios,
which involves corner cases due to inﬁnite scenario space
and visual occlusions due to high scenario complexity [1].
CA V companies, e.g., Tesla, Waymo, Baidu, suggested that
these challenges be tackled via lifelong multi-stage training
that updates the DNN parameters whenever rare or occluded
objects are detected (e.g., Tesla Autopilot and over-the-air
updates solution https://karpathy.ai/). In this case, sensor data
is inherently distributed at customers’ vehicles and contains
high-resolution human-related private information, leading to
the potential of sensitive information leakage [2].
Shuai Wang is with Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy
of Sciences.
Chengyang Li is with Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou).
Derrick Wing Kwan Ng is with University of New South Wales.
Yonina C. Eldar is with Weizmann Institute of Science.
H. Vincent Poor is with Princeton University.
Qi Hao is with Southern University of Science and Technology and Shenzhen Research
Institute of Trustworthy Autonomous Systems.
Chengzhong Xu is with IOTSC, University of Macau.
: Equal contribution. Corresponding author: Qi Hao and Chengzhong Xu.Federated (deep) learning assisted CA V (FLCA V) is an
emerging paradigm to overcome the privacy issue by training
DNNs via parameter and output aggregation instead of dataset
aggregation [2]–[7]: parameter aggregation leverages vehicular
networks to migrate knowledge among different vehicles [4],
[5]; output aggregation leverages road sensors’ perception
results to annotate occluded objects for local parameter up-
dates [6], [7]. The performance of FLCA V highly depends on
the associated network resources and road sensor placements.
Existing works on FLCA V design these factors from either a
driving (e.g., [2], [3]) or networking (e.g., [4], [5]) perspective,
which ignores the interdependency between driving tasks (i.e.,
data consumer) and vehicular networks (i.e., data provider).
This research gap has been identiﬁed as the core issue in CA V
systems [8]. Yet, how to close this gap for FLCA V is still an
open issue.
This article integrates driving and networking features for
system-level FLCA V perception under practical network re-
source constraints. Frameworks of vehicle-edge-cloud net-
working, multi-stage DNN training, and multi-task gener-
ation, are presented. On top of these frameworks, multi-
layer graph resource allocation (MLGRA) and vehicle-road
contrastive sensor placement (VRCSP) are proposed. The
MLGRA jointly allocates the limited network resources across
different stages, tasks, and modalities to minimize perception
errors. The VRCSP automatically reduces (increases) the
number of sensors in low (high) complexity scenarios. To
verify the above methods, it is necessary to implement a
simulator with high-ﬁdelity rendering qualities, driving be-
haviors, and software interfaces [9], as FLCA V needs long-
term training that cannot be quickly tested in reality. However,
currently there is no such close-to-reality FLCA V simula-
tor. We thus develop CarlaFLCA V (https://github.com/SIAT-
INVS/CarlaFLCA V), an open-source software platform for
design and veriﬁcation of FLCA V systems. The platform
contains dataset generation, perception tasks, FL frameworks,
and optimization modules, and aims to provide a concrete step
towards FLCA V in the real world.
II. FL M EETS CAV
A. CAV Perception: Concept, Challenges, and Trends
1) CAV Perception: As shown in Fig. 1a, a CA V perception
system is an ensemble of the following functionalities [1]: 1)
semantic perception, e.g., recognition of lanes, road arrows,
and trafﬁc signs, which outputs semantics for rule understand-
ing; 2) geometry perception, e.g., road edge detection and ob-
ject detection, which outputs poses (including positions, sizes,arXiv:2206.01748v2  [cs.RO]  5 Dec 2022