3
nentially, making it impossible to enumerate all the pos-
sible cases during the training stage [1]. In other words,
there always exists new data outside the distribution of
training datasets, which are corner case instances.
Visual Occlusion . In complex urban scenarios (e.g.,
cross-road, T-junction, roundabout), an object can be oc-
cluded by another in the FoV , which leads to incomplete
data and perception errors [6].
Veriﬁcation Cost . Releasing new DNNs requires rig-
orous veriﬁcation. The cost of real-word testing is not
acceptable due to the long-term training required by
FLCA V and difﬁculties of testing in dangerous scenarios
(e.g., crashes, overtaking, bad weather) [10].
3) Research Trends: Possible solutions to address the above
challenges are as follows.
Lifelong multi-stage training , which updates the param-
eters whenever a corner case is detected, is a promising
solution to address the ﬁrst challenge [3]. The update is
executed on DNN copies, making sure that the inference
DNNs are ﬁxed during the training process. Releasing
new-version DNNs requires the acknowledgement of
DNN providers and customers.
As for the occlusion issue, the solution is cooperative
perception with road sensors . Practical road sensors are
authoritative, having absolute positions, broader FoVs,
and highly-optimized hardware units [6]. Furthermore,
the probability of a target object being occluded in FoVs
of all road sensors is signiﬁcantly smaller than that in
the FoV of a CA V . As such, the perception error due to
occlusions is signiﬁcantly mitigated.
To reduce the high veriﬁcation cost in reality, CA V
simulation becomes a necessity [9]. Various CA V simu-
lators have been released, e.g., Intel Car-Learning-to-Act
(CARLA), Nvidia DRIVE, Microsoft Aerial-Informatics-
and-Robotics-Simulation (AirSim), LG Silicon-Valley-
Lab (LGSVL), Baidu Augmented-Autonomous-Driving-
Simulation (AADS), UCLA OpenCDA, SJTU V2X-Sim
[7], [9], [10].
B. Paradigm Shift: From Centralized to Federated Learning
1) Federated Learning: The need for multi-stage training
results in the shift of learning paradigms. In one-stage train-
ing, the owner of data-collection vehicles is also the DNN
provider and the aggregated datasets can be directly fed to
DNN training pipelines. However, for multi-stage training,
the abnormal data is distributed at customers’ vehicles and
contains human-related private information. As a consequence,
conventional centralized learning is no longer applicable. To
this end, FLCA V emerges, which trains the DNNs from dis-
tributed datasets via parameter aggregation, thus conveying the
knowledge of corner cases to other vehicles and remote servers
while preserving data privacy [2]. In addition, communication
costs are reduced, since the size of a DNN is signiﬁcantly
smaller than that of a data sequence, e.g., the size of a 1-minute
point-cloud sequence is 1000 MB while that of a standard
object detection DNN is 60MB [1] (FL takes multiple roundsof communication; but with proper pre-training, only a few
rounds are needed).
2) Federated Distillation: FL can be integrated with coop-
erative perception, giving rise to the federated distillation (FD)
technique [7]. In the FDCA V framework, all road sensors and
CA Vs upload their bounding boxes and perception uncertain-
ties to a road server. The server computes the weighted average
of these outputs and this road-average output is downloaded to
surrounding vehicles. Each vehicle updates its local parameters
by minimizing the contrastive loss between its bounding
boxes and the road-average boxes [7]. Note that there exist
non-negligible computation and communication delays during
the vehicle-to-infrastructure output fusion progress. However,
FDCA V is a long-term DNN-update framework rather than
a real-time detection method for collision avoidance. There-
fore, it is possible to associate data from the roadside in-
frastructure with that from CA Vs by fusing a sequence of
data frames via pose graph optimization, which removes the
effects of random errors by extracting multi-frame spatial-
temporal patterns. FDCA V can also adopt spatial contexts of
road maps for generating ground-truth semantics and training
associated DNNs. For instance, the Road Experience Man-
agement (REM) of Mobileye (https://www.mobileye.com/our-
technology/rem/) adopts road sensors and maps to realize
automated road semantic identiﬁcation and annotation.
C. Related Work on FLCAV
1) Limitations of Existing Work: Current literature on
FLCA V can be categorized into two types: 1) network-layer
designs (e.g., FL resource allocation), and 2) application-
layer designs (e.g., FL perception and planning). Speciﬁcally,
network-layer designs, e.g., [4], [5], [11], aim to improve
FL performance by controlling the communication-related
variables such as topology, throughput, latency, and device
scheduling. These works address the challenges of FL from the
network perspective while taking the high mobility of vehicles
into account. However, they fail in matching FL to domain-
speciﬁc CA V scenarios, tasks, datasets, and DNNs. On the
other hand, application-layer designs, e.g., [2], [3], [6], [7],
improve the safety and efﬁcacy of CA V systems by designing
DNN structures and associated information fusion methods.
These works provide solutions to CA V issues such as train-
ing, inference, synchronization, calibration, and simulation.
Nonetheless, communications among CA Vs, edge servers, and
cloud servers therein are assumed to be perfect, which does
not hold for practical CA V systems with limited resources.
2) Research Opportunities: Since both types of designs
have different pros and cons, it is necessary to integrate them
to achieve lower detection/classiﬁcation/tracking errors under
network resource and sensor implementation constraints. This
leads to new technical problems, which cannot be tackled by
conventional methods.
Opportunity 1 (Network Resource Allocation) : How
can we effectively distribute the network resources across
different stages, tasks, and modalities to minimize the
perception errors of ﬁnal-stage DNNs while satisfy-
ing the stringent wireless and wireline communication