6
DNN -Modality 
GraphODD Specification
Modality -CAV 
Graph1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 Q
Task
Perception
DNN 1……  Task Generation
Point Cloud RGB Image Radar Data
1 2 3 L 4 5CAV……  
DNN
DataPerception
DNN 2Perception
DNN N
Train ing 
params 2Train ing 
params 1Train ing 
params N
……  ……  
L-1
Task -DNN 
Graph
Scenario Sampling Task Evaluation
Task    
Clustering
Performance 
Predictor
Throughput 
Maximization
(a)
31 2
56
7
89Bird’s Eye View of the Global Map FoV of Road Sensor 3 FoV of CAV 1
CAV 1CAV 3CAV 4
CAV 2
FoV of CAV 2 FoV of Road Sensor 8 Sensor Pose Optimization With 9 Candidates (Red Boxes) Data Aggregation of CAV 2 and Road Sensor 8Data Aggregation of CAV 1 and Road Sensor 3
Small Difference
Max Pose Difference3 4Large Difference
Zoom in
Zoom in
Vehicle -Road Contrastive PrincipleInaccurate CAV detection
(b)
Fig. 3: a) Illustration of the MLGRA method and the good ﬁtness of the performance predictor to the experimental data
generated by CarlaFLCA V; b) Illustration of the road-assisted FD and the VRCSP. The black box is the ground truth; the blue
box is from the CA Vs; the red box is from the road sensors.
represents task or DNN, while edge represents training weight;
for layer 2, vertex represents DNN or data modality, while
edge represents training parameters (e.g., number of training
samples, number of FL rounds); for layer 3, vertex represents
data or CA V , while edge represents vehicle throughput.
Task-DNN Graph . Tasks are clustered into groups such
that similar tasks share the same DNN and annotated
dataset. For example, the tasks of box regression (i.e.,
determining the poses of objects), object classiﬁcation
(e.g., determining if the object is a car or a truck),
and orientation classiﬁcation (e.g., determining the front
side) can be accomplished by one DNN with a common
feature extractor and 3 separate headers. The training loss
function is the weighted sum of three metrics.DNN-Modality Graph . Different DNNs may be trained
with different data modalities, and their connections
form a DNN-modality graph. The required resource for
a DNN-modality pair can be obtained by ﬁtting per-
formance predictors to historical datasets. For instance,
inverse-power models are adopted to predict perception
accuracies of 3 DNN-modality pairs (i.e., CNN-Image,
YOLOV5-Image, SECOND-PointCloud) under different
communication resources in Fig. 3a. The predictions
match the experiment data very well for all DNNs.
Modality-Vehicle Graph . For each data modality (e.g.,
point cloud data), the associated data samples may come
from multiple CA Vs. If the data is independent and
identically distributed (IID) among different vehicles, we