8
Deep learning based ASC has attracted a lot of interest
and a variety of neural network based models have been
proposed and brought large performance improvements
[50, 14, 15]. To model the interaction between the aspect
and sentence context, pioneering neural models such as
TC-LSTM [51] employ relatively simple strategies such
as concatenation to fuse the aspect information with the
sentence context. Based on the intuition that different parts
of the sentence play different roles for a speciﬁc aspect, the
attention mechanism is widely employed to obtain aspect-
speciﬁc representations [52, 126, 55, 57, 128, 70]. A repre-
sentative work is Attention-based LSTM with Aspect Em-
bedding (ATAE-LSTM) model proposed by Wang et al. [52]
which appends the aspect embedding to each word vector of
the input sentence for computing the attention weight, and
an aspect-speciﬁc sentence embedding can be computed
accordingly to classify the sentiment. The following meth-
ods design more complicated attention mechanisms to learn
better aspect-speciﬁc representations, for instance, IAN [54]
interactively learns attention in the aspect and sentence, and
generate the representations for them separately. Apart from
the LSTM network, other network structures have also been
explored for supporting the attention mechanism, including
the CNN-based network [58, 59], memory network [53, 56],
and the gated network [129, 58]. Recently, pre-trained lan-
guage models have become the mainstream building block
for the ASC task [130, 62, 131, 132]. For example, Sun et al.
[130] transform the ASC task as a sentence pair classiﬁcation
problem by constructing an auxiliary sentence, which can
better utilize the sentence pair modeling ability of BERT.
Another line of the ASC research explicitly models the
syntactic structure of the sentence to make the prediction,
since the structural relation between the aspect and its
associated opinion often indicates the sentiment orientation.
In fact, earlier machine learning based ASC systems already
take mined syntactic trees as features for the classiﬁcation
[133, 134]. However, as the dependency parsing itself is
a challenging NLP task, ASC methods with inaccurate
parsers did not show clear advantages than other methods
[132]. Thanks to the improvements from the neural network
based dependency parsing in recent years, more accurate
parse trees have brought signiﬁcant improvements for the
dependency-based ASC model. For example, Sun et al. [67]
and Zhang et al. [66] employ the graph neural network
(GNN) [135] to model the dependency tree for exploiting the
syntactical information and word dependencies. Following
this direction, a variety of GNN-based methods have been
proposed to explicitly leverage the syntactic information
[136, 68, 137, 138, 69, 73, 71, 72, 75]. Besides the syntactic
structure inside the sentence, other structural information
has also been considered. Ruder et al. [139] model the
relation between multiple review sentences, with the as-
sumption that they build and elaborate upon each other and
thus their sentiments are also related. Similarly, Chen et al.
[140] consider the document-level sentiment preference to
fully utilize the information in the existing data to improve
the ASC performance.
AOPEOTEATEASCACDE2E-ABSAACSAASTEACSDASQPOpinion  TermAspect  TermSentiment PolarityAspect  CategoryFig. 3. The relations between the four sentiment elements, single ABSA
tasks, and compound ABSA tasks.
4 C OMPOUND ABSA T ASKS
We then describe compound ABSA tasks whose target in-
volves multiple sentiment elements. A detailed task taxon-
omy and representative methods are shown in the bottom
branch of Fig. 2. Very often, these tasks can be treated as
integrated tasks of the aforementioned single ABSA tasks.
However, the goal of these compound tasks is not only the
extraction of multiple sentiment elements, but also coupling
them by predicting the elements in the pair (i.e., two ele-
ments), triplet (i.e., three elements), or even quad (i.e., four
elements) format. Fig. 3 shows the relation between these
tasks. Considering the inter-related dependency of the four
sentiment elements, providing an integrated solution is a
promising direction. Many research efforts have been made
recently, which we systematically review in this section.
4.1 Aspect-Opinion Pair Extraction (AOPE)
As discussed in Sec 3.3, studies of the aspect opinion co-
extraction (AOCE) task often found that the extraction of
each element can mutually reinforce each other. However,
the output of the AOCE task contains two separate sets: an
aspect set and an opinion set. The corresponding pairwise
relation is neglected. This motivates the task of aspect-
opinion pair extraction (AOPE), aiming to extract the aspect
and opinion terms in pairs so as to provide a clear picture
of what the opinion target is and what the corresponding
opinion expression is [13, 11].
To tackle AOPE, one can adopt the pipeline approach
to decouple it into several subtasks and pipe them together
to obtain the aspect-opinion pairs. One solution is to ﬁrst
conduct the AOCE task for obtaining the aspect and opinion
sets, then employ a classiﬁcation model to pair the potential
aspect and opinion terms, i.e., classify whether an aspect-
opinion pair is valid. An alternative method is to ﬁrst extract
the aspect (i.e., the ATE task), then identify the correspond-
ing opinion terms for each predicted aspect term (i.e., the
TOWE task). Gao et al. [77] take the second approach with
theMRC paradigm where they ﬁrst use an MRC model to
extract all aspect terms, then for each extracted aspect term,
a query is constructed for another MRC model to identify
the text span of the corresponding opinion term.
Efforts have also been made to tackle AOPE in a uniﬁed
manner, for alleviating the potential error propagation of
the pipeline approach. Wu et al. [76] propose a grid tag-
ging scheme (GTS): for each word pair, the model predicts