14
ter way for cross-domain ABSA and language model pre-
training can be introduced as a plug-and-play component
to further enhance the domain adaptation performance.
6.2 Cross-lingual ABSA
The majority of existing ABSA works are conducted on
the resource-rich language (mostly in English), while opin-
ions are often expressed in different languages in practice.
However, annotating labeled data for each language can be
time-consuming, which motivates the task of cross-lingual
ABSA (XABSA). Due to the difﬁculty of cross-lingual trans-
fer, most XABSA studies are conducted on simple ABSA
tasks such as cross-lingual aspect term extraction (XATE)
[173, 174, 175, 176], cross-lingual aspect sentiment classiﬁ-
cation (XASC) [177, 178, 179], and cross-lingual End-to-End
ABSA [180, 181].
To realize the cross-lingual transfer, the key problem is
to obtain the language-speciﬁc knowledge in the target lan-
guage. Early methods typically rely on translation systems
to obtain such knowledge. The sentence is ﬁrst translated
from the source to the target language with an off-the-shelf
translation system. The label is then similarly projected from
the source to target, either directly or with word alignment
tools such as FastAlign [182] since some ABSA tasks (e.g.,
XATE) require token-level annotations. Therefore, an ABSA
model can be trained with the obtained (pseudo-)labeled
target language data. Because the performance of this type
of method heavily relies on the quality of the translation and
label projection, many techniques have been proposed to
improve the data quality, including the co-training strategy
[173], instance selection [174], or constrained SMT [177].
Cross-lingual word embeddings pre-trained on large
parallel bilingual corpus have also been used for XABSA.
By sharing a common vector space, the model can be used
in a language-agnostic manner [178, 179]. For example,
Wang and Pan [175] utilize a transition-based mechanism
to tackle the XATE task by aligning representations in dif-
ferent languages into a shared space through an adversarial
network. Jebbara and Cimiano [176] consider the zero-shot
ATE task with two types of cross-lingual word embeddings.
Especially, they ﬁnd that transferring from multiple source
languages can largely improve the performance.
Recently, inspired by the success of exploiting monolin-
gual PLMs, utilizing multilingual PLMs (mPLMs) such as
multilingual BERT [17] and XLM-RoBERTa [183] to tackle
cross-lingual NLP tasks has become a common practice.
Typically, a PLM is ﬁrst pre-trained on a large volume of
multilingual corpus, then ﬁne-tuned on the source language
data for learning task-speciﬁc knowledge. Finally, it can be
directly used to conduct inference on the target language
testing data (called zero-shot transfer ). Thanks to the lan-
guage knowledge obtained in the pre-training stage, zero-
shot transfer has shown to be an effective method for many
cross-lingual NLP tasks [184, 185]. However, the language
knowledge learned in the pre-training step may be insufﬁ-
cient for the XABSA problem. As compensation, utilizing
the translated (pseudo-)labeled target language data can
equip the model with richer target language knowledge. For
example, Li et al. [180] propose a warm-up mechanism to
distill the knowledge from the translated data in each lan-
guage to enhance the performance. Zhang et al. [181] pointout the importance of the translated target language data
and propose an alignment-free label projection method to
obtain high-quality pseudo-labeled target data. They show
that even ﬁne-tuning the mPLMs on such data can establish
a strong baseline for the XABSA task.
Compared with the monolingual ABSA problem, the
XABSA problem is relatively underexplored. Although
mPLMs are widely used for various cross-lingual NLP tasks
nowadays, exploring their usage in the XABSA can be tricky
since language-speciﬁc knowledge plays an essential role in
any ABSA task. Therefore, it calls for better adaption strate-
gies of the mPLMs to inject the model with richer target
language knowledge. On the other hand, existing studies
mainly focus on relatively easier ABSA tasks, exploring the
cross-lingual transfer for more difﬁcult compound ABSA
tasks can be challenging while useful in practice.
7 C HALLENGES AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
Over the last decade, we have seen great progress on the
ABSA problem, either new tasks or novel methods. Despite
the progress, there remains challenges for building more
intelligent and powerful ABSA systems. In this section,
we discuss some challenges, as well as potential directions
which we hope can help advance the ABSA study.
7.1 Quest for Larger and More Challenging Datasets
As discussed in Sec 2.4, most existing ABSA datasets are
derived from the SemEval shared challenges [114, 115, 116]
with additional data processing and annotations for spe-
ciﬁc tasks. However, the relatively small size of data (e.g.,
hundreds of sentences) makes it difﬁcult to clearly compare
different models, especially for PLM-based models having
millions of parameters. Currently, it is a common practice
to train a model with different random seeds (often ﬁve or
ten) and report the model performance with averaged scores
across different runs, but it would be better to introduce
larger datasets for more fair and reliable comparisons. Be-
sides, although existing datasets provide valuable test beds
for comparing different methods, there remains a great need
for proposing more challenging datasets to satisfy the real-
world scenarios. For example, datasets containing reviews
from multiples domains or multiple languages can help
evaluate multi-domain and multi-lingual ABSA systems.
Moreover, since user opinions can be expressed in any kind
of format, we also expect datasets collected from different
opinion-sharing platforms such as question-answering plat-
forms [141] or customer service dialogs [186].
7.2 Multimodal ABSA
Most existing ABSA works focus on analyzing opinionated
texts such as customer reviews or tweets. However, users
often share their opinions with other modalities such as im-
ages. Since contents in different modalities are often closely
related, exploiting such multimodal information can help
better analyze users’ sentiments towards different aspects
[187, 188]. Recent studies on multimodal ABSA mainly
concentrate on simple ABSA tasks such as multimodal
ATE [189, 190] and multimodal ASC [191, 192, 193, 194].
To align the information from different modalities, the text