12
model to learn the mapping relation. Zhang et al. [7] further
design a Paraphrase model which constructs a natural lan-
guage sentence containing all the sentiment elements as the
target sequence for the sequence-to-sequence learning.
4.6 Aspect Sentiment Quad Prediction (ASQP)
The primary motivation of various compound ABSA tasks
discussed above is to capture more detailed aspect-level
sentiment information, either in the format of pair extraction
(e.g., AOPE) or triplet extraction (e.g., ASTE). Although they
can be useful under different scenarios, a model which can
predict the four sentiment elements in one shot is supposed
to provide the most complete aspect-level sentiment struc-
ture. This leads to the aspect sentiment quad prediction
(ASQP) task proposed recently7[103, 7], aiming to predict
all the four sentiment elements in the quadruplet form
given a text item. Returning to the example in Table 3, two
sentiment quads are expected: ( food , pizza, POS, delicious)
and ( service , service, NEG, terrible).
Cai et al. [103] study the ASQP task with an emphasis
on the implicit aspects or opinions. The authors argue that
implicit aspects or opinions appear frequently in real-world
scenarios, and use “null” to denote them in the sentiment
quads. They introduce two new datasets with sentiment
quad annotations and construct a series of Pipeline base-
lines by combining existing models to benchmark the task.
Zhang et al. [7] propose a Paraphrase modeling strategy to
predict the sentiment quads in an end-to-end manner. By
combining the annotated sentiment elements with a pre-
built template and using the obtained natural language
sentence as the target sequence, they transform the original
quad prediction task to a text generation problem and tackle
it via the Seq2Seq modeling paradigm. Therefore, the label
semantics (i.e., the meaning of the sentiment elements) can
be fully exploited. Following this direction, later meth-
ods further formulate the task as generating opinion trees
[104, 105] or structured schema [101].
Compared to other ABSA tasks, ASQP is the most
complete and also the most challenging task. The main
difﬁculty lies in the accurate coupling of different sentiment
elements. Given the importance of the it and the potential
large improvement space (e.g., the current best-performing
models only achieve about 40% F1 scores on benchmark
datasets), we expect to see more related studies in the future.
5 ABSA WITH PRE-TRAINED LANGUAGE MODELS
Conventional neural ABSA models usually couple the pre-
trained word embeddings, such as Word2Vec [148] and
GloVe [149], with a well-designed task-speciﬁc neural ar-
chitecture. Despite their effectiveness compared with early
feature-based models, the improvement from these mod-
els gradually reached a bottleneck. One reason is that
the context-independent word embeddings are insufﬁcient
for capturing the complex sentiment dependencies in the
sentence. Besides, the sizes of existing ABSA datasets do
not support the training of very complicated architecture.
In recent years, pre-trained language models (PLMs) such
7. It is also called Aspect-Category-Opinion-Sentiment (ACOS)
quadruple extraction task in [103].as BERT [17] and RoBERTa [18] have brought substantial
improvements on a wide range of NLP tasks. Naturally, they
are also introduced for further improving the performance
of the ABSA problem.
The initial works [62, 150, 151] do not spend too much ef-
fort on task-speciﬁc model designs, but simply introduce the
contextualized embeddings from PLMs as the replacement
of word embeddings. Given the rich knowledge learned in
the pre-training stage, simply utilizing such contextualized
embeddings already brings in a large performance gain.
For instance, Li et al. [19] investigate the usage of stacking
several standard prediction layers on top of a PLM for the
E2E-ABSA task. They ﬁnd that using the simplest linear
classiﬁcation layer with a PLM can outperform previous
carefully-designed neural ABSA models. Similarly, simply
concatenating the given sentence and a concerned aspect as
the input to PLMs and utilizing the sentence-level output
(e.g., representations corresponding to the [CLS] token for
BERT) establishes new state-of-the-art results of the ASC
task [62]. Moreover, the authors show that further post-
training the model on the domain and task related data can
capture better domain- and task-speciﬁc knowledge, thus
leading to better performance.
However, simply adopting PLMs as the context-aware
embedding layer might be insufﬁcient. From the perspective
of ABSA tasks, complicated tasks often require not only
the identiﬁcation of the sequence- or token-level labels but
also the dependency relations between them, it thus needs
more designs to make full use of the contextualized embed-
dings from PLMs. From the perspective of PLMs, the rich
knowledge learned in the pre-training stage might not be
sufﬁciently induced and utilized for the concerned ABSA
tasks. To this end, many efforts have been made on better
adapting the PLMs for different downstream ABSA tasks.
An early attempt is Sun et al. [130] where they transform the
ASC as a sentence pair classiﬁcation task. Motivated by the
observation that BERT has an advantage in tackling sentence
pair classiﬁcation problems such as question answering,
they construct an auxiliary sentence for each aspect and
feed the original sentence and the constructed sentence to
BERT, achieving much better performance than previous
works. Following similar intuition, Gao et al. [77], Chen
et al. [94], Mao et al. [95] solve the AOPE task and ASTE
task via the MRC modeling paradigm. By decomposing the
original task as a series of MRC processes, the pairwise
relation is thus naturally captured via the query-answer
matching. Another line of work is to utilize the pre-trained
generative models such as BART [152] and T5 [153] to solve
various ABSA tasks [96, 97, 7, 91]. By transforming the
original task to a Seq2Seq problem, the label semantics
(i.e., the meaning of the desired sentiment elements) can
be appropriately incorporated.
In addition to serving as the backbone of ABSA models,
PLMs can beneﬁt tackling ABSA tasks from other aspects.
For example, the language modeling task used in the pre-
training stage of PLMs often brings in the capability of per-
forming generative data augmentation. Li et al. [31] employ
PLMs as a conditional text generator and design a mask-
then-predict strategy to generate the augmented training
sentences for the ATE task. Hsu et al. [146] do not borrow the
external linguistic resources but utilize the PLMs to achieve