11
ThepizzaisdeliciousbuttheserviceisterribleOS+2,2OOOOS−2,2OO(pizza, POS, delicious)(service, NEG, terrible)
Seq2SeqThe pizza is delicious but the service is terrible( pizza , delicious , positive ) ; ( sevice , terrible , negative )(a) pipeline SeqClassTrue(pizza, POS)  deliciousThepizzaisdeliciousbuttheserviceisterribleTokenClassOS+OOOOS−OO(pizza, POS)(service, NEG)OOOSOOOOSdelicious, terribleTokenClass
MRCThe pizza is delicious but the service is terrible{1,6}Find the aspect terms in the text{1,6}The pizza is delicious but the service is terribleMRC{3}Find the sentiment polarity and the opinion terms of pizza{3}SeqClassPOS
(c) MRC (pipeline) (b) TokenClass
(d) Seq2SeqTokenClasspizza, serviceEncoder
Fig. 5. Different modeling paradigms for tackling the ASTE task, where (a), (b), (c), and (d) are simpliﬁed illustrations of the methods proposed in
TwoStage [12], JET [92], BMRC [94], and GAS [96] respectively.
between the whole spans of aspects and those of opinions
to improve the performance.
Other modeling paradigms such as MRC (see Fig. 5(c))
[94, 95] and Seq2Seq modeling (see Fig. 5(d)) [97, 96,
100, 99] have also been employed for tackling ASTE. Mao
et al. [95] transform the original problem as two MRC
tasks by designing speciﬁc queries: the ﬁrst MRC model
is used to extract the aspect terms, the second MRC model
then predicts the corresponding opinion term and sentiment
polarity. Chen et al. [94] take a similar approach while they
use a bidirectional MRC framework: one predicts aspect
term then opinion term, another ﬁrst predicts the opinion
then the aspect. Seq2Seq modeling provides an elegant
solution to make the triplet prediction in one shot. Zhang
et al. [96] transform the original task as a text generation
problem and propose two modeling paradigms including
the annotation style and extraction style for predicting the
sentiment triplets. Yan et al. [97] and Hsu et al. [146] take the
sentence as input and treat the pointer indices as the target.
Then to predict the aspect term (or the opinion term), the
target becomes predicting the starting index and ending in-
dex of the term. Fei et al. [99] presents a non-autoregressive
decoding (NAG-ASTE) method which models the ASTE
task as an unordered triplet set prediction problem.
4.5 Aspect-Category-Sentiment Detection (ACSD)
Although the aspect category and aspect term can both
serve as the opinion target when analyzing aspect-level
sentiment, the sentiment often depends on both of them
[147]. To capture such a dual dependence, Wan et al. [46]
propose to detect all (aspect category, aspect term, senti-
ment polarity) triplets for a given sentence6. They separate
the joint prediction task into two subtasks on the basis
of (aspect category, sentiment polarity) pairs, whose idea
is similar to the “Cartesian Product” for the ACSA task
6. The authors call “aspect category” and “aspect term” as “aspect”
and “target” respectively in the original paper. Here we use uniﬁed
terminologies to refer to those sentiment elements.described in Sec 4.3. Therefore, given a sentence with a
speciﬁc combination of the aspect category and sentiment,
the remaining problems are: whether any aspect terms exist
for such a combination, and if so, what the aspect terms are?
The former one can be formulated as a binary SeqClass
task, and the latter becomes a conditional TokenClass
problem. For example, given the sentence “ The pizza is
delicious ” with ( food ,POS) pair, the ﬁrst subtask would pre-
dict that this combination exists and the sequence labeling
model should extract “ pizza ” as the corresponding aspect
term. Then a triplet ( food ,POS,pizza ) can be output as
a prediction. However, when receiving the same sentence
with the ( service ,POS) pair as input, the ﬁrst subtask is
supposed to predict this combination does not exist. The
overall training objective can be the combined loss of these
two subtasks.
Following this direction, Wu et al. [102] propose a model
called MEJD which handles the task by using the sentence
and a speciﬁc aspect category as input, then the remaining
problems becomes: (1) predicting the sentiment polarity
for the given category (i.e., a SeqClass problem), and
(2) extract the corresponding aspect terms if exist (i.e., a
TokenClass problem). Since a speciﬁc aspect category may
not always exist in the concerned sentence, MEJD adds
an extra dimension “N/A” in the SeqClass task, sharing
the similar idea of the “add-one-dimension” method [89]
introduced in Sec 4.3. Therefore, when the classiﬁcation
model outputs “N/A”, it shows that there is no triplet
related to the category in the input. Moreover, a GCN with
an attention mechanism is employed in MEJD to capture the
dependency between the aspect and the context.
As the number of predeﬁned aspect categories for a spe-
ciﬁc domain is generally small, the aforementioned methods
can decompose the original ACSD task by combining the
sentence with each category as the input. Instead, Zhang
et al. [96] tackle the problem in a Seq2Seq manner where
they append the desired sentiment elements in the original
sentence and treat it as the target sequence for a generation