15
and image are often ﬁrst encoded to feature representations,
then some interaction networks are designed to fuse the
information for making the ﬁnal prediction. More recently,
inspired by the success of the E2E-ABSA task in a single
modal (i.e., based on texts only), Ju et al. [195] study the task
of multimodal E2E-ABSA, aiming to capture the connection
between its two subtasks in the multimodal scenario. They
present a multimodal joint learning method with auxiliary
cross-modal relation detection to obtain all aspect term and
sentiment polarity pairs. Despite these initial attempts, there
remain some promising directions: from the perspective
of the task, handling more complicated multimodal ABSA
tasks should be considered; from the perspective of the
method, more advanced multimodal techniques should be
proposed for fusing the multimodal opinion information,
e.g., constructing models based on the multimodal PLMs.
We believe multimodal ABSA would receive more attention
given its increasing popularity in real-world applications.
7.3 Uniﬁed Model for Multiple Tasks
During the introduction of various ABSA tasks, we can
notice that some ideas and model designs appear from time
to time. Indeed, solutions to one ABSA task can be easily
borrowed to tackle another similar task since these tasks are
often closely related. This naturally posts a question: can
we build a uniﬁed model that can tackle multiple (if not
all) ABSA tasks at the same time? If so, there is no need to
design speciﬁc models for every task. It can be also useful
in practice because we may not want to change the model
architecture and re-train it every time we have some new
data with different types of opinion annotations. In Sec 2.3,
we show that different tasks can be tackled via the same
model if they can be formulated as the same modeling
paradigm. Several recent studies demonstrate some initial
attempts along this direction. They either transform the task
into the MRC paradigm by designing task-speciﬁc queries for
the MRC model [77, 94, 95], or the Seq2Seq paradigm by
directly generating the target sentiment elements in the nat-
ural language form [96, 97, 7]. Beyond solving multiple tasks
with the same architecture, Zhang et al. [7] further found
that the task-speciﬁc knowledge could be easily transferred
across different ABSA tasks (called cross-task transfer ) if they
are under the same modeling paradigm. We expect more
research efforts would appear to enable more practically
useful ABSA systems.
7.4 Lifelong ABSA
Lifelong learning, also referred to as continual learning,
aims at accumulating knowledge learned from previous
tasks and adapting it for helping future learning during a
sequence of tasks [196]. Chen et al. [197] ﬁrst study the sen-
timent analysis from the perspective of lifelong learning and
propose the lifelong sentiment classiﬁcation problem which
requires a model to tackle a series of sentiment classiﬁcation
tasks. Wang et al. [198] impose the idea of lifelong learning
into the ASC task with memory networks. Recent studies
begin to investigate the catastrophic forgetting issue during
the sequential learning [199, 200, 201, 202], instead of sim-
ply studying it as an extension of cross-domain sentiment
analysis for knowledge accumulation. However, existingstudies mainly focus on domain incremental learning for
the ASC task [201, 202], where all tasks sharing the same
ﬁxed label classes (e.g., positive, negative, and neutral) and
no task information is required. To develop more advanced
lifelong ABSA systems, it inevitably requires studying the
incremental learning of the class and task. For instance, the
classes of aspect categories vary in different applications,
which calls for methods that can adapt to the changing
categories. Besides, cross-task transfer [7] has been shown
to be effective in transferring knowledge learned from low-
level ABSA tasks to high-level ABSA tasks. Therefore, it is
also worth exploring lifelong learning across different types
of ABSA tasks.
8 C ONCLUSIONS
This survey aims to provide a comprehensive review of
the aspect-based sentiment analysis problem, including its
various tasks, methods, current challenges, and potential
directions. We ﬁrst set up the background of ABSA research
with the four sentiment elements of ABSA, the deﬁnition,
common modeling paradigms, and existing resources. Then
we describe each ABSA task with their corresponding so-
lutions in detail, with an emphasis on the recent advances
of the compound ABSA tasks. Meanwhile, we categorize
existing studies from the sentiment elements involved and
summarize representative methods of different modeling
paradigms for each task, which provides a clear picture of
current progress. We further discuss the utilization of pre-
trained language models for the ABSA problem, which has
brought large improvements to a wide variety of ABSA
tasks. We investigate the advantages they have, as well
as their limitations. Besides, we review advances of cross-
domain and cross-lingual ABSA, which can lead to more
practical ABSA systems. Finally, we discuss some current
challenges and promising future directions for this ﬁeld.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The work described in this paper is substantially supported
by a grant from the Research Grant Council of the Hong
Kong Special Administrative Region, China (Project Code:
14200719).
REFERENCES
[1] B. Liu, “Sentiment analysis and opinion mining,”
Synthesis lectures on human language technologies , vol. 5,
no. 1, pp. 1–167, 2012.
[2] P . D. Turney, “Thumbs up or thumbs down? semantic
orientation applied to unsupervised classiﬁcation of
reviews,” in ACL , 2002, pp. 417–424.
[3] B. Pang, L. Lee, and S. Vaithyanathan, “Thumbs up?
sentiment classiﬁcation using machine learning tech-
niques,” in EMNLP , 2002, pp. 79–86.
[4] H. Yu and V . Hatzivassiloglou, “Towards answering
opinion questions: Separating facts from opinions
and identifying the polarity of opinion sentences,” in
EMNLP , 2003, pp. 129–136.
[5] K. Schouten and F. Frasincar, “Survey on aspect-level
sentiment analysis,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng. ,
vol. 28, no. 3, pp. 813–830, 2016.