6
3 S INGLE ABSA T ASKS
We ﬁrst discuss single ABSA tasks in this section, whose
target is to predict a single sentiment element only. As
introduced in Sec 2.1, there are four tasks (corresponding to
four sentiment elements), namely the aspect term extraction
(ATE), aspect category detection (ACD), aspect sentiment
classiﬁcation (ASC), and opinion term extraction (OTE). A
detailed taxonomy and representative methods are listed in
the top branch of Fig. 2.
3.1 Aspect Term Extraction (ATE)
Aspect term extraction is a fundamental task of ABSA,
aiming to extract explicit aspect expressions on which users
express opinions in the given text. For example, two aspect
terms “ pizza ” and “ service ” are supposed to be extracted for
the example sentence “ The pizza is delicious, but the service is
terrible. ” in Table 3. According to the availability of labeled
data, ATE methods can be categorized into three types:
supervised, semi-supervised, and unsupervised methods.
Supervised ATE problem is often formulated as a token-
level classiﬁcation (i.e., TokenClass ) task since the desired
aspect terms are usually single words or phrases appeared
in the sentence. Therefore, sequence labeling methods based
on CRF [22], RNN [8], and CNN [27] have been proposed.
Since ATE requires domain-speciﬁc knowledge to identify
aspects in a given domain, many research efforts are dedi-
cated to improving word representation learning. Yin et al.
[22] utilize the dependency path to link words in the em-
bedding space for learning word representations. DE-CNN
model proposed by Xu et al. [27] employs a dual embedding
mechanism, including general-purpose and domain-speciﬁc
embeddings. Xu et al. [62] further post-train BERT on
domain-speciﬁc data to obtain better word representations.
Yin et al. [30] design a positional dependency-based word
embedding (POD) to consider both dependency relations
and positional context. Speciﬁc network designs have been
also proposed, e.g., modeling the relation between an aspect
and its corresponding opinion expression [23, 25, 24, 26],
and transforming the task to a Seq2Seq problem to capture
the overall meaning of the entire sentence to predict the
aspect with richer contextual information [28].
Although achieving satisfactory results (e.g., around 80%
F1 scores on benchmark datasets), supervised ATE methods
require a large amount of labeled data, especially when
training very sophisticated neural models. This motivates
the recent trend on semi-supervised ATE studies. Given a set
of labeled ATE data, as well as a (comparatively) large unla-
beled dataset (e.g., plain review sentences), data augmenta-
tion is an effective solution to produce more pseudo-labeled
data for training the ATE model. Various augmentation
strategies have been proposed, such as masked sequence-
to-sequence generation [31], soft prototype generation [32],
and progressive self-training [33].
Unsupervised ATE task aims to extract aspect terms
without any labeled data and has been extensively studied
in the literature [121]. In the context of neural network
based methods, He et al. [34] present an autoencoder model
named Attention-based Aspect Extraction (ABAE) that de-
emphasizes the irrelevant words to improve the coherence
of extracted aspects. Following this direction, Luo et al.[35] leverage sememes to enhance lexical semantics when
constructing the sentence representation. Liao et al. [36]
propose a neural model to couple both local and global
context (LCC+GBC) to discover aspect words. Tulkens and
van Cranenburgh [41] propose a simple solution named CAt
where they only use a POS tagger and in-domain word
embeddings to extract the aspect terms: the POS tagger ﬁrst
extracts nouns as the candidate aspect, a contrastive atten-
tion mechanism is then employed to select aspects. Shi et al.
[42] formulate the problem as a self-supervised contrastive
learning task to learn better aspect representations.
3.2 Aspect Category Detection (ACD)
Aspect category detection is to identify the discussed as-
pect categories for a given sentence, where the categories
belong to a pre-deﬁned category set and is often domain-
speciﬁc [114]. As shown in Table 3, an ACD method should
predict the category food andservice given the sentence.
Compared with the ATE task, ACD can be beneﬁcial from
two perspectives: Firstly, ATE predicts individual aspect
terms while the predicted category of ACD can be re-
garded as an aggregated prediction, which is more concise
to present the opinion target. Secondly, ACD can identify
the opinion targets even when they are not explicitly men-
tioned. For example, given a sentence “ It is very overpriced
and not tasty ”, ACD can detect two aspect categories price
andfood , whereas ATE is not applicable to such a case.
ACD can be classiﬁed into supervised ACD and unsu-
pervised ACD, depending on whether the annotated data is
available. The supervised ACD task is usually formulated as
a multi-label classiﬁcation (i.e., SeqClass ) problem, treat-
ing each aspect category as a label. An early work named
RepLearn [37] trains the word embedding on a noisy la-
beled dataset and obtains hybrid features through different
feed-forward networks. A logistic regression model is then
trained with such features to make the prediction. Later
methods further leverage different characteristics of the task
to improve the performance, e.g., using attention mecha-
nism to attend to different parts of the text for different
categories [38], considering the word-word co-occurrence
patterns [122], and measuring the text matching between the
sentence and a set of representative words in each speciﬁc
category to predict whether a category exists [39].
To tackle the ACD task in an unsupervised manner, it is
often decomposed into two steps: (1) extracting candidate
aspect terms, and (2) mapping or clustering the aspect
terms to aspect categories in a pre-deﬁned category set [34],
e.g., clustering “ pizza ” and “ pasta ” to the aspect category
food . The ﬁrst step is essentially the same as tackling the
unsupervised ATE problem. For the second step, the most
straightforward solution is to manually assign a label for
each detected aspect cluster from the ﬁrst step as the aspect
category [34, 35], but it is time-consuming and may lead to
errors when the detected aspects are noisy. In CAt [41], the
cosine similarity between the sentence vector and the cate-
gory vector is computed to assign the category label. Most
recently, Shi et al. [42] propose a high-resolution selective
mapping strategy to improve the mapping accuracy.