2
ABSA SystemAspect Term pizzaAspect CategoryfoodOpinion TermdeliciousSentiment PolarityPOSThe pizza is delicious. 
Fig. 1. An example of the four key sentiment elements of ABSA.
understanding of what the mentioned opinion target and
its associated opinion expression are. Following some pio-
neering works, a wide variety of frameworks have been pro-
posed to tackle different compound ABSA tasks for enabling
aspect-level opinion mining in different scenarios. However,
a systematic review of various ABSA tasks, especially recent
progress on compound ABSA tasks, is lacking in the existing
surveys [1, 5, 14, 6, 15, 16], which we aim to ﬁll through this
survey paper.
Aside from designing speciﬁc models for different tasks,
the advent of pre-trained language models (PLMs) such
as BERT [17] and RoBERTa [18] has brought substantial
improvements on a wide range of ABSA tasks in recent
years. With PLMs as the backbone, the generalization ca-
pability and the robustness of ABSA models have been
signiﬁcantly improved. For example, Li et al. [19] show
that using a simple linear classiﬁcation layer stacked on top
of BERT can achieve more competitive performance than
previous speciﬁcally designed neural models for the End-
to-End ABSA task. Although constructing ABSA models
based on PLMs has become ubiquitous nowadays, they are
not discussed in the existing surveys [6, 15, 16] due to their
recency of publication. Therefore, in this paper, we provide
an in-depth analysis of existing PLM-based ABSA models
by discussing both their advances and limitations.
To conduct ABSA in practical settings, we also review the
recent works tackling the cross-domain and cross-lingual
ABSA problem. Current ABSA models that achieved sat-
isfactory performance in various tasks often hold a common
assumption: the training and testing data come from the
same distribution (e.g., the same domain or the same lan-
guage). When the distribution of data changes, re-training
the ABSA model is often needed to guarantee the perfor-
mance. However, it is usually expensive or even impossible
to collect additional large volume of labeled data, especially
for the ABSA task requiring aspect-level annotations. In
this case, adapting the trained model to unseen domains,
i.e., cross-domain transfer [20] or unseen languages, i.e.,
cross-lingual transfer [21], provides an alternative solution
for building ABSA systems well generalizing to different
domains and languages.
There have been other surveys and reviews about ABSA.
Existing surveys of general sentiment analysis research
[1, 16] discuss the ABSA problem, but they do not provide a
detailed description of the recent advances and challenges.
The earliest ABSA survey by Schouten and Frasincar [5]
comprehensively introduces the ABSA studies before 2016,
but it mainly focuses on the non-neural ABSA methods.Zhou et al. [14], Liu et al. [15], and Nazir et al. [6] introduce
the deep learning based ABSA models. However, their
discussions are only limited to single ABSA tasks with a
few pioneering works on the End-to-End ABSA task. A
comprehensive review of all ABSA tasks, the impacts of
PLMs for the ABSA problem, as well as recent progress on
the cross-domain/lingual transfer are not covered.
Overall, the main goal of this survey paper is to system-
atically review the advances and challenges of the ABSA
problem from a modern perspective. More speciﬁcally, we
provide a new taxonomy for ABSA which organizes var-
ious ABSA studies from the axes of concerned sentiment
elements, with an emphasis on the compound ABSA tasks
studied in recent years. Along this direction, we discuss
and summarize all kinds of methods proposed for each
task. Besides, we investigate the potentials and limitations
of exploiting pre-trained language models for the ABSA
problem. We also summarize the research efforts on cross-
domain and cross-lingual ABSA. Finally, we discuss some
emerging trends and open challenges, aiming to shed light
on potential future directions in this area. We maintain a
GitHub repository to collect useful resources such as the pa-
per list discussed in this survey, links to tools and datasets:
https://github.com/IsakZhang/ABSA-Survey .
2 B ACKGROUND
2.1 Four Sentiment Elements of ABSA
According to Liu [1], the general sentiment analysis problem
consists of two key components: target and sentiment. For
ABSA, the target can be described with either an aspect
category cor an aspect term a, while the sentiment involves
a detailed opinion expression - the opinion term o, and a
general sentiment orientation - the sentiment polarity p.
These four sentiment elements constitute the main line of
ABSA research:
aspect category cdeﬁnes a unique aspect of an entity
and is supposed to fall into a category set C, pre-
deﬁned for each speciﬁc domain of interest. For ex-
ample, food andservice can be aspect categories
for the restaurant domain.
aspect term ais the opinion target which explicitly
appears in the given text, e.g., “ pizza ” in the sentence
“The pizza is delicious. ” When the target is implicitly
expressed (e.g., “ It is overpriced! ”), we can denote the
aspect term as a special one named “ null”.
opinion term ois the expression given by the opinion
holder to express his/her sentiment towards the
target. For instance, “ delicious ” is the opinion term
in the running example “ The pizza is delicious ”.
sentiment polarity pdescribes the orientation of the
sentiment over an aspect category or an aspect term,
which usually belongs to positive ,negative , and
neutral .
Note that in the literature, the terminologies of ABSA
studies are often used interchangeably, but sometimes they
have different meanings according to the context. For exam-
ple, “opinion target”, “target”, “aspect”, “entity” are usually
used to refer to the target on which the opinion is expressed.
However, they can be either an aspect category or an aspect