13
semantic-preserved augmentation in a generative manner,
obtaining clear improvements over the baseline method
on a series of ABSA tasks. Another interesting but largely
ignored role of PLMs is to provide better dependency
trees for various ABSA models, e.g., methods discussed
in Sec 3.4. Explicitly utilizing the semantic relation can
be beneﬁcial for many ABSA tasks, but their performance
heavily depends on the accuracy of the adopted dependency
tree [133, 134, 132]. As the ﬁrst attempt, Wu et al. [154]
discover the dependency parse tree from PLMs with a
tailor-made probing method and feed the obtained tree into
a dependency-based ABSA model, achieving better ASC
results than the model using the tree from the off-the-shelf
parsers. Following them, Dai et al. [132] ﬁne-tune the PLMs
with the ASC data to inject the sentiment knowledge. The
sentiment-oriented dependency tree is then induced from
the ﬁne-tuned PLMs, which further improves the perfor-
mance of several state-of-the-art dependency-based models.
So far, the common viewpoint in the NLP community is
that PLMs are capable of accurately reﬂecting the semantic
meanings of input words [155]. However, the contextualized
embeddings obtained via the self-attention mechanism that
captures full word dependencies within the sentence are
presumably redundant for the ABSA tasks. In fact, the
superiority of the works [29, 138, 71], which explicitly guide
the further transformation of PLM representations with
meaningful structure, to those using “[CLS]” representation
for predictions indirectly suggests the existence of such
redundancy. How to consolidate meaningful and sparse
structure with PLMs or reﬁne the intrinsic fully-connected
self-attention for obtaining ABSA-related representations in
a more efﬁcient way deserves more attention and research
efforts. On the other hand, there is still room for improving
the robustness of PLM-based ABSA models. Particularly, as
observed in Xing et al. [119], even though the PLM-based
models signiﬁcantly outperform the previous neural models
on the adversarial examples, it still suffers from more than
25% performance drop on the simplest ASC task. We believe
that exploiting PLMs for truly understanding the aspect-
level sentiment, e.g., being robust to the reversed opinion
and sentiment negation, instead of learning the spurious
correlations between the aspect and sentiment labels is the
future challenge for building PLM-based ABSA models. But
there is still a long way to realize such kind of intelligence.
6 T RANSFERABLE ABSA
6.1 Cross-domain ABSA
The supervised ABSA models within a single domain have
been well developed. However, in real-world scenarios
which involve texts from multiple or even unseen domains,
it is likely that these models fail to obtain satisfactory
predictions. The major reason is that the aspects referring
to the opinion target from different domains are usually
of great difference, and the models may not have prior
knowledge about the frequently-used terms in the unseen
domains. A straightforward solution is to create labeled data
for these domains and re-train additional in-domain mod-
els. Considering that the ABSA tasks require ﬁne-grained
annotations, it is often expensive or even impossible tocollect sufﬁcient amount of labeled data. To enable the cross-
domain ABSA predictions at lower cost, domain adaptation
techniques [156, 20] are employed to provide alternative
solutions for well generalizing the ABSA systems to other
domains. Roughly speaking, the majority of these works
can be separated into two groups: feature-based transfer
and data-based transfer .
The core idea of feature-based transfer is to learn
domain-independent representations for the ABSA tasks.
Jakob and Gurevych [157] and Chernyshevich [158] instan-
tiate this idea by introducing rich syntactic features, which
are invariant across domains, into a CRF tagger for the
cross-domain ATE task. Wang and Pan [123, 159] design a
dependency edge prediction task to enforce the learning of
syntactic-aware representations, with the aim of reducing
the domain shift at the word level. Other auxiliary tasks,
such as domain classiﬁcation [160, 161], aspect-opinion in-
teraction prediction [162] and opinion term detection [163],
are also integrated to better align the representations in
different domains. Different from the above studies, Chen
and Qian [164] simply aggregate the syntactic roles for each
word and regard the syntactic embedding as the bridge
between the source domain and target domain, which con-
siderably improves the efﬁcacy of domain adaptation. Liang
et al. [165] assume the availability of sentence-level aspect
category annotations in the target domain and propose
an interaction transfer network to capture the domain-
invariant category-term correlations.
Compared to feature-based transfer, data-based transfer
aims to adjust the distribution of the training data to better
generalize the ABSA model to the target domain [166, 167].
Ding et al. [168] employ high-precision syntactic patterns to-
gether with some domain-independent opinion terms to cre-
ate pseudo-labeled data in the target domain. The pseudo-
labeled target data is then augmented to the source domain
training set for building cross-domain ABSA models. Li
et al. [169] build target-domain pseudo-labeled data in a
similar way and perform re-weighting on the source domain
training instances based on the pseudo-labeled data. Instead
of producing supervision signals on the unlabeled target-
domain data, Yu et al. [166] develop an aspect-constrained
(opinion-constrained) masked language model, which takes
the source domain labeled reviews as input and perform in-
place aspect term (opinion term) conversion from the source
domain to the target domain as the silver training data.
In addition, Gong et al. [170] propose to couple a token-
level instance re-weighting strategy with domain-invariant
representation learning from auxiliary tasks to consolidate
feature-based transfer and data-based transfer for better
domain adaptation for cross-domain E2E-ABSA. Pereg et al.
[171] and Rietzler et al. [151] regard the embeddings from
PLMs as the features for the ABSA predictions across dif-
ferent domains and obtain reasonable results, showing that
the PLMs pre-trained on large-scale corpus are already able
to provide good domain-independent representations. Xu
et al. [172] further strengthen the domain speciﬁcity of
PLMs by continually pre-training BERT with the unlabeled
texts from multiple relevant domains, drastically improving
the domain generalization capability of BERT on the E2E-
ABSA task. Such advances suggest that the consolidation
of feature-based transfer and data-based transfer is a bet-