9
TABLE 4
Demonstration of the joint and uniﬁed tagging methods for the E2E-ABSA task.
The AMD Turin Processor seems to always perform better than Intel .
JointO B I E O O O O O O S O
O POS POS POS O O O O O O NEG O
Uniﬁed O B-POS I-POS E-POS O O O O O O S-NEG O
whether they belong to the same aspect, the same opinion,
the aspect-opinion pair, or none of the above. Then the
original pair extraction task is transformed into a uniﬁed
TokenClass problem. Zhao et al. [13] treat the problem
as a joint term and relation extraction, and design a span-
based multi-task learning (SpanMlt) framework to jointly
extract the aspect/opinion terms and the pair relation: a
span generator is ﬁrst used to enumerate all possible spans,
then two output scorers assign the term label and evaluate
the pairwise relations. Similarly, Chen et al. [11] propose
a model containing two channels to extract aspect/opinion
terms, and the relations respectively. Two synchronization
mechanisms are further designed to enable the information
interaction between two channels. More recently, syntactic
and linguistic knowledge is also considered for improving
the extraction performance [78].
4.2 End-to-End ABSA (E2E-ABSA)
Given a sentence, End-to-End ABSA is the task of extracting
the aspect term and its corresponding sentiment polarity
simultaneously, i.e., extracting the (a; p)pairs5. It can be
naturally broken down into two sub-tasks, namely ATE
and ASC [84], and an intuitive pipeline method is to
conduct them sequentially. However, detecting the aspect
boundary and classifying the sentiment polarity can often
reinforce each other. Taking the sentence “ I like pizza ” as an
example, the context information “ like” indicates a positive
sentiment and also implies that the following word “ pizza ”
is the opinion target. Inspired by such an observation, many
methods have been proposed to tackle the problem in an
end-to-end manner.
These end-to-end methods can be generally divided into
two types [10, 79], as shown in Table 4. The ﬁrst “ joint ”
method exploits the relation between two subtasks via train-
ing them jointly within a multi-task learning framework
[82, 83, 85, 86, 87]. Two label sets including the aspect
boundary label (the ﬁrst row) and the sentiment label (the
second row) are adopted to predict the two types of senti-
ment elements. Then the ﬁnal prediction is derived from the
combination of the outputs of two subtasks. Another type of
method dismisses the boundary of these two subtasks and
employs a “ uniﬁed ” (also called collapsed) tagging scheme
to denote both sentiment elements in the tag of each token
[80, 81, 19]. As shown in the last row of Table 4, the tag for
each token now contains two parts of information: the ﬁrst
5. Since extracting mentioned aspects and classifying their sentiments
lies in the core of ABSA problem [1], it is often directly referred to as
the “ABSA problem”. In recent years, to differentiate this task from the
general ABSA problem (consisting of multiple tasks), it is called end-to-
end ABSA [19, 83] or uniﬁed ABSA [85, 96]. Following this convention,
we thus take the name E2E-ABSA here to denote this task.partfB, I, E, S, Ogdenotes the boundary of the aspect (B-
beginning, I-inside, O-outside, E-ending, S-singleton) [111],
the second partfPOS, NEG, NEUgis the sentiment polarity
of the corresponding token. For instance, B-NEG refers to
the beginning of an aspect whose sentiment is negative.
By using a collapsed label scheme, the E2E-ABSA task can
be tackled with the TokenClass paradigm via a standard
sequence tagger [19].
Whichever type of method is adopted, some ideas are
often shared and appear frequently in different models.
For example, considering the relation between the aspect
boundary and sentiment polarity has shown to be an im-
portant factor [81]. As opinion terms provide indicative
clues for the appearance of aspect terms and the orien-
tation of the sentiment, opinion term extraction is often
treated as an auxiliary task [81, 83, 87, 88]. For example, the
relation-aware collaborative learning (RACL) framework
[85] explicitly models the interactive relation of three tasks
with a relation propagation mechanism to coordinate these
tasks. Liang et al. [87] further design a routing algorithm
to improve the knowledge transfer between these tasks.
Document-level sentiment information is also used to equip
the model with coarse-grained sentiment knowledge, so as
to better classify the sentiment polarity [83, 87].
Regarding these three types of methods for tackling E2E-
ABSA (i.e., pipeline, joint, and uniﬁed method), it is still
unclear which one is the most suitable. Early works such
as [10] found that the pipeline method performs better, but
Li et al. [81] show that using a tailor-made neural model
with the uniﬁed tagging scheme gives the best performance.
Later, Li et al. [19] further verify that using a simple linear
layer stacked on top of the pre-trained BERT model with
the uniﬁed tagging scheme can achieve promising results,
without complicated model design. More recently, research
works based on either pipeline [95, 94], uniﬁed [141], or
the joint method [87] all achieve good performance, i.e.,
around 70% F1 scores on benchmark datasets. This makes
the comparison between different types of methods unclear
and needs further exploration.
4.3 Aspect Category Sentiment Analysis (ACSA)
Aspect category sentiment analysis (ACSA) aims to jointly
detect the discussed aspect categories and their correspond-
ing sentiment polarities. For example, an ACSA model is
expected to predict two category-sentiment pairs ( food ,
POS) and ( service ,NEG) for the example in Table 3.
Though ACSA is similar to the E2E-ABSA task (only the
format of the aspect is different), the results of ACSA can
be provided regardless of whether the aspect is implicit or
explicitly mentioned in the sentence, thus ACSA is widely
used in industries [120].