1
A Survey on Aspect-Based Sentiment Analysis:
Tasks, Methods, and Challenges
Wenxuan Zhang, Xin Li, Y ang Deng, Lidong Bing, and Wai Lam
Abstract —As an important ﬁne-grained sentiment analysis problem, aspect-based sentiment analysis (ABSA), aiming to analyze and
understand people’s opinions at the aspect level, has been attracting considerable interest in the last decade. To handle ABSA in
different scenarios, various tasks are introduced for analyzing different sentiment elements and their relations, including the aspect
term, aspect category, opinion term, and sentiment polarity. Unlike early ABSA works focusing on a single sentiment element, many
compound ABSA tasks involving multiple elements have been studied in recent years for capturing more complete aspect-level
sentiment information. However, a systematic review of various ABSA tasks and their corresponding solutions is still lacking, which we
aim to ﬁll in this survey. More speciﬁcally, we provide a new taxonomy for ABSA which organizes existing studies from the axes of
concerned sentiment elements, with an emphasis on recent advances of compound ABSA tasks. From the perspective of solutions, we
summarize the utilization of pre-trained language models for ABSA, which improved the performance of ABSA to a new stage. Besides,
techniques for building more practical ABSA systems in cross-domain/lingual scenarios are discussed. Finally, we review some
emerging topics and discuss some open challenges to outlook potential future directions of ABSA.
Index Terms —Aspect-Based Sentiment Analysis, Sentiment Analysis, Opinion Mining, Pre-trained Language Models
F
1 I NTRODUCTION
DISCOVERING and understanding opinions from on-
line user-generated content is crucial for widespread
applications. For example, analyzing customer sentiments
and opinions from reviews in E-commerce platforms helps
improve the product or service, and make better marketing
campaigns. Given the massive amount of textual content, it
is intractable to manually digest the opinion information.
Therefore, designing an automatic computational frame-
work for analyzing opinions hidden behind the unstruc-
tured texts is necessary, resulting in the emergence of the
research ﬁeld sentiment analysis and opinion mining [1].
Conventional sentiment analysis studies mainly perform
prediction at the sentence or document level [2, 3, 4], iden-
tifying the overall sentiment towards the whole sentence
or document. To make the prediction, it is assumed that a
single sentiment is conveyed towards the single topic in the
given text, which may not be the case in practice. Under this
circumstance, the need for recognizing more ﬁne-grained
aspect-level opinions and sentiments, dubbed as Aspect-
Based Sentiment Analysis (ABSA), has received increasing
attention in the past decade [5, 6]. In the ABSA problem,
the concerned target on which the sentiment is expressed
shifts from an entire sentence or document to an entity or a
certain aspect of an entity. For instance, an entity can be a
speciﬁc product in the E-commerce domain, and its property
or characteristics such as the price and size are the aspects of
it. Since an entity can also be regarded as a special “general”
Wenxuan Zhang, Xin Li and Lidong Bing are with DAMO Academy,
Alibaba Group.
E-mail:fsaike.zwx, xinting.lx, l.bing g@alibaba-inc.com
Yang Deng and Wai Lam are with The Chinese Univerisity of Hong Kong.
E-mail:fydeng, wlamg@se.cuhk.edu.hk
This work has been submitted to the IEEE for possible publication. Copyright
may be transferred without notice, after which this version may no longer be
accessible.aspect, we collectively refer to an entity and its aspect as
“aspect” in this paper. ABSA is thus the process of build-
ing a comprehensive opinion summary at the aspect level,
which provides useful ﬁne-grained sentiment information
for downstream applications.
Generally, the main research line of ABSA involves the
identiﬁcation of various aspect-level sentiment elements,
namely, aspect terms, aspect categories, opinion terms and
sentiment polarities [7]. As shown in Fig. 1, given a sen-
tence “ The pizza is delicious. ”, the corresponding sentiment
elements are “ pizza ”, “food ”, “delicious ”, and “ positive ”
respectively, where “ pizza ” and “ delicious ” are explicitly ex-
pressed, “ food ” and “ positive ” belong to the pre-deﬁned
category and sentiment sets. Early works in ABSA begin
with identifying each single sentiment element separately.
For instance, the aspect term extraction (ATE) task [8] aims
to extract all mentioned aspect terms in the given text;
while the aspect sentiment classiﬁcation task [9] predicts the
sentiment polarity for a speciﬁc aspect within a sentence. In
this paper, we refer to these tasks as Single ABSA tasks.
However, ﬁnding a single sentiment element is still far
from satisfactory for understanding more complete aspect-
level opinion, which requires not only the extraction of
multiple sentiment elements but also the recognition of
the correspondence and dependency between them. To this
end, several new ABSA tasks [10, 11, 12, 7] together with
corresponding benchmark datasets have been introduced in
recent years to facilitate the study on the joint prediction of
multiple sentiment elements. These tasks are referred to as
Compound ABSA tasks, in contrast to Single ABSA tasks
involving a single sentiment element only. For example, the
aspect-opinion pair (AOPE) extraction task [11, 13] requires
extracting the aspect and its associated opinion term in a
compound form, i.e., extracting ( pizza ,delicious ) pair from
the previous example sentence. It thus provides a clearerarXiv:2203.01054v2  [cs.CL]  6 Nov 2022