7
TABLE 3
An overview of the input and output for each ABSA task with examples.
Task Input Example Input* Output Example Output
Aspect Term Extraction s sentence fag fpizza, serviceg
Aspect Category Detection s sentence fcg ffood ,serviceg
Aspect Opinion Co-Extraction s sentencefag,fogfpizza, serviceg,fdelicious, terribleg
Target-oriented Opinion Words Extractions,a1 sentence, pizza o1 delicious
s,a2 sentence, service o2 terrible
Aspect Sentiment Classiﬁcations,a1 sentence, pizza p1 POS
s,a2 sentence, service p2 NEG
Aspect-Opinion Pair Extraction s sentence f(a,o)g (pizza, delicious), (service, terrible)
End-to-End ABSA s sentence f(a; p )g (pizza, POS), (service, NEG)
Aspect Category Sentiment Analysis s sentence f(c; p)g (food ,POS), (service ,NEG)
Aspect Sentiment Triplet Extraction s sentencef(a; p; o )g (pizza, POS, delicious), (service, NEG, terrible)
Aspect-Category-Sentiment Detection s sentencef(c; a; p )g (food , pizza, POS), (service , service, NEG)
Aspect Sentiment Quad Prediction s sentencef(c; a; p; o )g(food , pizza, POS, delicious),
(service , service, NEG, terrible)
* We assume the concerned “ sentence ” for all example inputs is: “ The pizza is delicious, but the service is terrible ”.
3.3 Opinion Term Extraction (OTE)
Opinion term extraction (OTE) is the task to identify opinion
expressions towards an aspect. Since the opinion term and
aspect term always co-occur, solely extracting the opinion
term without considering its associated aspect is mean-
ingless. Therefore, depending on whether the aspect term
appears in the input or output, OTE can be roughly divided
into two tasks: 1) aspect opinion co-extraction (AOCE) and
2) target-oriented opinion words extraction (TOWE).
Aspect opinion co-extraction (AOCE) attempts to predict
the aspect and opinion terms together. For the running
example in Table 3, the target output of AOCE is thus
two aspect terms “ pizza ” and “ service ”, as well as two
opinion terms “ delicious ” and “ terrible ”. Note that although
two sentiment elements are involved here, AOCE is still a
single ABSA task since the dependency relation between the
two sentiment elements (e.g., “ delicious ” is used to describe
“pizza ”) is not considered4. Very often, it is formulated as a
TokenClass problem with either two label sets to extract
aspect and opinion terms separately [43], or a uniﬁed label
set (e.g.,fB-A, I-A, B-O, I-O, N gdenotes the beginning
(B) or inside (I) of an aspect (-A) or opinion term (-O),
or none of them (N)) to extract both sentiment elements
simultaneously [123, 44]. Considering the close relation-
ship between the aspect and opinion, the main research
question of AOCE is how to model such a dependency
relation. Various models have been developed to capture
the aspect-opinion dependency, including dependency-tree
based models [22, 23], attention-based models [25, 24, 26],
and the models considering the syntactic structures to ex-
plicitly constrain the prediction [43, 44].
On the other hand, TOWE aims to extract the corre-
sponding opinion terms given a speciﬁc aspect term within
the text [45]. As shown in Table 3, an aspect of interest (e.g.,
“pizza”) is assumed to be given with the sentence, then a
TOWE model aims to predict the corresponding opinion
4. In fact, we can directly call this task as “OTE” if we neglect the
prediction of aspect terms. But purely extracting opinion expressions
without their targets is meaningless, leading to the AOCE task.term (e.g., “delicious”). TOWE is also often formulated
as a TokenClass problem towards the input sentence,
whereas the main research problem becomes how to model
the aspect-speciﬁc representation in the input sentence to
extract the corresponding opinions. Fan et al. [45] propose
a neural model to incorporate the aspect information via an
inward-outward LSTM to generate the aspect-fused context.
Later methods manage to enhance the accuracy of extraction
from several aspects: Wu et al. [124] utilize the general
sentiment analysis dataset to transfer the latent opinion
knowledge for tackling TOWE. Veyseh et al. [47] leverage
the syntactic structures such as the dependency tree-based
distance to the aspect to help identify the opinion terms.
Mensah et al. [48] empirically evaluate the importance of
positional embeddings based on various text encoders and
ﬁnd that BiLSTM-based methods have an inductive bias
appropriate for the TOWE task, and using a GCN [125]
to explicitly consider the structure information only brings
minor performance gains.
3.4 Aspect Sentiment Classiﬁcation (ASC)
Aspect sentiment classiﬁcation (ASC), also called aspect-
based/-targeted/-level sentiment classiﬁcation, aims to pre-
dict the sentiment polarity for a speciﬁc aspect within a
sentence. Generally, the aspect can be instantiated as either
aspect term or aspect category, yielding two ASC prob-
lems: aspect term-based sentiment classiﬁcation and aspect
category-based sentiment classiﬁcation. Regardless of some
subtle differences (e.g., the given aspect term comes from
the sentence, then its position information can be exploited),
the main research question underlying these two settings is
the same: how to appropriately exploit the connection be-
tween the aspect (term/category) and the sentence context
to classify the sentiment. In fact, some works consider these
two subtasks at the same time and tackle them seamlessly
with the same model [52, 126, 58, 127]. Therefore, we do not
speciﬁcally differentiate these two subtasks in this section
and use “aspect” to refer to either an aspect term or an
aspect category.