10
(1) Cartesian Product100001000foodservicepricePOSNEUNEGPricePOS0NEG0NEU0N/A1ServerPOS0NEG0NEU1N/A0foodPOS1NEG0NEU0N/A0(2) Add-one-dimension(3) Hierarchy Classificationfoodserviceprice110100POSNEUNEG001POSNEUNEG
(4) Seq2Seq ModelingThe pizza is delicious!EncoderDecoderThe sentiment polarity for food is positive
Fig. 4. Demonstrations of the four types of uniﬁed methods for the ACSA task.
The most straightforward method to tackle ACSA is the
pipeline approach: ﬁrst detecting the mentioned aspect
categories (i.e., the ACD task), then predicting the sentiment
polarities for those detected categories (i.e., the ASC task).
However, the detection of a subset of the aspect categories
appearing in the sentence is nontrivial, as discussed in Sec
3.2. The errors from the ﬁrst step would severely limit the
performance of the overall pair prediction. Moreover, the re-
lations between these two steps are ignored, which is found
to be important for both tasks [142]. In fact, performing these
two tasks in the multi-task learning framework has shown
to be beneﬁcial for each separate task [143, 142, 144].
In essence, the ACD task is a multi-label classiﬁcation
problem (treating each category as a label), and the ASC task
is a multi-class classiﬁcation problem (where each sentiment
polarity is a class) for each detected aspect category. As
shown in Fig. 4, existing methods of tackling ACSA in a
uniﬁed manner can be roughly categorized into four types:
(1) Cartesian product, (2) add-one-dimension, (3) hierar-
chy classiﬁcation, and (4) Seq2Seq modeling. The Cartesian
product method enumerates all possible combinations of
category-sentiment pairs by a Cartesian product. Then a
classiﬁer takes both the sentence and a speciﬁc category-
sentiment pair as input, the prediction is thus a binary value,
indicating whether such a pair holds [46]. However, it gen-
erates the training set several times larger than the original
one, greatly increasing the computation cost. An alternative
solution is to add one extra dimension to the prediction of
the aspect category. Previously, for each aspect category, we
predict its sentiment polarity, which normally has three pos-
sibilities: positive, negative, and neutral. Schmitt et al. [89]
add one more dimension called “N/A” denoting whether
the category appears in the sentence or not, thus handling
the ACSA in a uniﬁed way.
Cai et al. [90] propose a hierarchical GCN-based method
named Hier-GCN: a lower-level GCN ﬁrst captures the re-
lations between categories, then a higher-level GCN is used
to capture the relations between categories and category-
oriented sentiments. Finally, an integration module takes
the interactive features as inputs to perform the hierarchy
prediction. Similarly, Li et al. [145] utilize a shared sentiment
prediction layer to share the sentiment knowledge between
different aspect categories to alleviate the data deﬁciency
issue. Recently, Liu et al. [91] adopts the Seq2Seq modeling
paradigm to tackle the ACSA problem. Based on a pre-
trained generative model, they use natural language sen-tences to represent the desired output (see Fig. 4(4)) which
outperforms previous classiﬁcation type models. Moreover,
the experimental results suggest that such paradigm can
better utilize the pre-trained knowledge and have large
advantages in few-shot and zero-shot settings.
4.4 Aspect Sentiment Triplet Extraction (ASTE)
The aspect sentiment triplet extraction (ASTE) task attempts
to extract (a; o; p )triplets from the given sentence, which
tells what the opinion target is, how its sentiment orienta-
tion is, and why such a sentiment is expressed (through the
opinion term) [12]. Therefore, a model which can predict
opinion triplets shows more complete sentiment informa-
tion, compared with previous models working for individ-
ual tasks. The ASTE task has attracted lots of attention
in recent years. A variety of frameworks with different
paradigms have been proposed for the ASTE task, we show
some representative works of each paradigm in Fig. 5.
Peng et al. [12] ﬁrst introduce the ASTE task and propose
a two-stage pipeline method for extracting the triplets.
As shown in Fig. 5(a), two sequence tagging models are ﬁrst
performed to extract aspects with their sentiments, and the
opinion terms respectively. In the second stage, a classiﬁer
is utilized to ﬁnd the valid aspect-opinion pairs from the
predicted aspects and opinions and ﬁnally construct the
triplet prediction. To better exploit the relations of multi-
ple sentiment elements, many uniﬁed methods have been
proposed. Zhang et al. [93] present a multi-task learning
framework including aspect term extraction, opinion term
extraction, and sentiment dependency parsing tasks. Then
heuristic rules are applied to produce the sentiment triplets
from the predictions of those subtasks. Another potential
direction is to design uniﬁed tagging schemes to extract the
triplet in one-shot [92, 76]: JET model proposed by Xu et al.
[92] utilizes a position-aware tagging scheme which extends
the previous uniﬁed tagging scheme of the E2E-ABSA task
[81] with the position information of the opinion term, as
depicted in Fig. 5(b). Similarly, Wu et al. [76] extend the
grid tagging scheme (GTS) for the AOPE task described in
Sec 4.1 to also make a prediction on the sentiment polarity.
Since those methods rely on the interactions between word
pairs, they may not perform well when the aspect terms or
the opinion terms are multi-word expressions. Motivated
by this observation, Xu et al. [98] propose a span-level
interaction model which explicitly considers the interactions