García  and Camacho -Torregrosa   
9 
  1 
Figure 7 Vehicle dimensions and free lateral space.  2 
 3 
The aim of the paper was to provide a framework to test lane width -related disengagements 4 
without considering the vehicle te chnology . Thus, the technolog y-related causes triggering 5 
disengagements that take place at narrow lanes remains unknown.  Two alternative potential  explanations 6 
are provided  therefore : 7 
• The visual sub system cannot perceive /process  narrower lanes in an accurate way . In this case, 8 
other vehicles with the same driving automation system would present the same limitation 9 
regardless their dimensions (including heavy vehicles).  10 
• The driving automation system requires some free space for steering . In this case, other 11 
vehicles with the same driving automation system would require  lanes wider than 𝑣𝑤,𝑚+ 12 
0.62 m and 𝑣𝑤,𝑛𝑚+0.88, where  𝑣𝑤,𝑚 is the width of the vehicle including mirrors  and 13 
𝑣𝑤,𝑛𝑚 is the vehicle width without mirrors . This would set a  minimum lane width of 3 .43- 14 
3.48 m to accommodate autonomous heavy vehicles (Figure 8).  15 
 16 
 17 
Figure 8 Minimum requirements for a heavy vehicle using the same driving automation system . 18 
 19 
To summarize , these findings clearly define 2.50 m to 2.75 m as a n Operational Design Domain 20 
threshold  for this driving automation technology.  Other systems could be tested following a similar 21 
methodo logy, hence determining the lane width they require to fully perform autonomously (again, as 22 
long as other limiting parameters are met).  HD GPS maps should therefore include information about the 23 
lane width, allowing any driving automation system to compare it to its limitations.  24 
For autonomous heavy vehicles, their automatic lane width might define another ODD threshol d 25 
(around 3.40 -3.50 m) . From a design perspective, dedicated lanes for automated heavy vehicles could be 26 
proposed , increasing road capacity . At this point, it would be necessary to force harmonization of the 27 
driving automation system capabilities  to these widths.  Dedicated lanes for light vehicles could be 28 
designed following the same principle, as well.  29 
Finally, it is necessary to highlight  that all tests were performed at daytime and under good 30 
weather conditions , but other aspects that might affect the system performance were undetermined 31 
variable s. These factors were related to the road marking pattern and discontinuity , color (white or 32 
yellow), visibility of road markings  and some dust; some shadows over the ca rriageway; and sun glar ing 33 
(E/W orientation).  Some of these parameters are static and some others are dynamic, all requiring further 34