García  and Camacho -Torregrosa   
3 
 INTRODUCTION  1 
The number of semi -autonomous vehicles is on the rise. With increasing technical capabilities 2 
and efforts by the Original Equipment Manufa cturers ( OEMs ) and public administrations, these vehicles 3 
are expected to dominate the market in five years , despite cyberattack and safety concerns  (1). The 4 
European Commission has recently included a new policy action with a strong focus on a comprehensive 5 
framework f or connected (2) and automated driving (3), requiring all new marketed vehicles by 2022 to 6 
be semi -autonomous. All these actions help fostering the deployment of full -autonomous vehicles, 7 
although this scenario is still unforeseeable in an accurate way (4). 8 
The Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) scaled automated driving systems from 0 to 5 (5) as 9 
a function of how driving negotiation is controlled by the system (longitudinal and/or lateral ), fallback 10 
response, and Operational Design Domain (ODD).  An ODD is defined as the circumstances under an 11 
Autonomous Driving System is designed to operate.  12 
In automation level 2, the vehicle can control both longitudinal and lateral  negotiation . However, 13 
level 2 systems are not perfect and occasionally fail at perceiving/interpreting the road  path, giving  the 14 
control to the driver in what is called a disengagement. This is why the human must always be  monitoring 15 
the system . Automation level 3 goes a step further, only requesting take -over by the driver for fallb ack 16 
response.  A level 4 semi -autonomous driving system should be able to take control of the vehicle under a 17 
given Operational Design Domain (ODD), continuously and uninterruptedly.  Current marketed vehicles 18 
may reach level 2 and, under certain limited operational domains, level 3.  19 
Since these systems require continuous human presence and monitoring, a Human -Machine 20 
Interface (HMI) is needed. This  interface alerts the driver when a disengagement occurs  (level 2) or their 21 
intervention  is about to be required (Take -Over Request, TOR) (level 3)  (6). Unfortunately, existing semi - 22 
autonomous systems are in a n early development stage and disengagements are relatively frequent . This 23 
may end into the drivers not willing to activate the system, or eventual surprises caused by unexpected 24 
disengagements  – which might be  risky, since it increases drivers’ response times ( 7,8). The effect of 25 
these failures is higher  as the system is more intervening on the driving task.  In addition, the HMI 26 
warnings are often quite subtle, given their relative frequency.  27 
Semi -autonomous driving automation systems  use center and edgeline road markings  to 28 
automatically facilitate keepi ng the vehicle within the lane.  There are different technologies to assist 29 
drivers in negotiation: Lane Departure Warning (LDW, it warns the driver if the vehicle is to leave the 30 
lane), Lane Keep Assist (LKA, in warns the driver and performs slight steering movements to avoid 31 
leaving the lane), and Lane Centering Assist (LCA, the system completely negotiates the vehicle direction  32 
following the lane path ). In addition, there are many different technologies behind these Advanced Driv er 33 
Assistance Syste ms (ADAS), with different performance  outcomes . 34 
Despite the technological variability  across systems, most of them are based on digital image 35 
processing , given the higher cost of other systems with good results ( 9). This system normally uses video 36 
cameras to record the oncoming road path.  Artificial vision systems must process a large amount of 37 
information per second, in real time and with high reliability. For that purpose, the information is 38 
generally  first cropped to a certain Region of Interest (RoI). Every photogram will be further decomposed 39 
into matrices, being the HSI system the most general one ( 10). Each one of these matrices is then 40 
processed to detect object boundaries and textures. Classic edge detection algorithms compare adjacent 41 
pixel s, while ridge -type algorithms use more pixels and give better results ( 11). 42 
This is a critical process, since road markings might not be in good state, thus leading to unclear 43 
zones, or shady areas that are difficult to be interpret ed as a road marking. C ácere et al. proposed a 44 
methodology to overcome this limitation, based on an RGB filtering followed by an intensity clustering 45 
(12). 46 
With this information, another algorithm depicts a polyline centered in each road marking, and 47 
inverse conic restitution is  later applied ( 9), taking the visualized road markings and project ing them into 48 
a X-Y reference . Besides the correct detection of these lines in every photogram, it is necessary their 49 
temporal comparison, checking that the geometry from consecutive photograms is  consistent ( 9). In most 50 
cases, stochastic methods are used.  51