García  and Camacho -Torregrosa   
4 
 Some methodologies may be applied in this step, to increase the reliability  of the result  and/or 1 
alleviate the processing requirements . These kind s of methodologies help the system when encountering  2 
confusing zones.  Some of them compare the layout of the boundary lines that conform a lane (which 3 
should be parallel in nearly all situations). Du and Tan applied a ridge detection methodology for this 4 
purpose ( 11), after enhancing the quality of the photograms  with several filtering processes.  5 
The relative position of the vehicle is also very important. Its position is normally determined 6 
based on inverse conical restitution, but more advanced systems such as stere oscopic vision and a helping 7 
camera are currently under development ( 9). 8 
Many disengagements and take over requests are caused by an impossibility of clearly tracking 9 
road markings or a misinterpretation of road geometry. This may partially be explained si nce the 10 
remarkable advances in vehicle automation are not being developed in line with road infrastructure and 11 
regulations ( 13, 14, 15 ). 12 
Harmonization and update of regulations to consider both human and autonomous vehicles would 13 
help at minimizing some  disengagements.  This would require more information about what aspect 14 
triggered the disengagement  but given the variety of systems  and the limited information available, it is 15 
sometimes very difficult to know  it. This is why the authors have focused on developing methodologies to 16 
test how well a  certain  driving automation system adapts to road infrastructure, regardless its underlying 17 
technology. This information would help to a) establish a clear benchmark  for OEMs to develop their 18 
systems, and b) shorten the path towards SAE level 4 systems and adequately defined ODDs.  19 
In recent studies, t he authors explored the geometric -related limitations of a driving automation 20 
system, showing a clear relationship betw een speed , geometry  and disengagements  (14). They also 21 
studied how the same driving automation system  responds  to existing edgeline road marking  gaps (such 22 
as those present at exit, entrance ramps, lane merging and so on)  (13). It was observed that near 25% of 23 
entrance and exit ramps  caused the system to fail, as well as diverging, merging sections, and similar  ones 24 
(Figure 1 ). 25 
 26 
 27 
Figure 1 Freeway lane reductio n losing the continuity of one of the edgeline road marking  28 
 29 
OBJECTIVES  AND HYPOTHESIS  30 
The literature review allowed  to establish the scope for this research, not having found 31 
experimental studies about  the impact of the lane width in the performance of automatic lateral control.  32 
The objective of this research is to study the impact of lane width and road marking layout on a certain 33 
Lane Keeping Assist (LKA)  system . The main hypothesis is th at a wider  lane increases the reliabi lity of 34 
this autonomous driving system . To check  that, a single semi -autonomous vehicle was tested along some 35 
tangent sections of urban streets, with different lane widths and road marking  patterns.  36