USM-CTC models outperform Whisper by a wide margin on YouTube en-US, despite training on
significantly less supervised data (3.5k hours versus Whisper’s 400k hours [1]). While the USM-LAS
model also requires segmented decoding to reduce long-form degradation as discussed in section
2.4, it is far more robust, out-performing Whisper by a relative 30% WER on those 18 languages.
USM-CTC does not exhibit long-form performance degradation and achieves the best performance
on YouTube.
On the out-of-domain long-form CORAAL set, both USM-CTC and USM-LAS outperform Whisper
by more than 10% relative WER. USM-CTC and USM-LAS similary outperform Whisper on
SpeechStew, whose training data the models have not had access to.
We further compare the multilingual performance of the models on the held-out set from FLEURS.
As shown in Table 3, USM-LAS and USM-CTC both outperform Whisper by 66% relative WER,
despite using a smaller amount of multilingual supervised data (90k versus Whisper’s 117k, when
en-US is excluded). USM-LAS consistently outperforms USM-CTC for short-form ASR tasks.
4.2 Massively Multilingual Results Beyond 100 Languages
The lower part of Table 3 shows our results for in-domain fine-tuning. Our pre-trained model improves
the FLEURS benchmark significantly, even when using only 10 hours per language. Compared to the
previous SoTA in [67], our model achieves a 30% relative improvement in terms of WER across 102
languages. Our results show that while generic speech models can be powerful, performance is still
maximized by in-domain fine-tuning.
4.3 MOST Produces Robust Representations that Generalize to New Domains
MOST training aligns the representations of speech and text by training simultaneously on the two
modalities. We investigate whether MOST representations are useful for adapting the model to new
domains by freezing the entire learned encoder produced by MOST and adjusting a small amount of
parameters added to the network by residual adapters. As shown in Table 3, by adding only 2% to
the total number of parameters, the MOST representation model (USM-M-adapter) only performs
slightly worse than the fine-tuning baselines, still showing competitive performance on downstream
ASR and AST tasks. The small number of parameters being trained in this approach makes it feasible
to extend our system to a large number of new domains and new tasks, even with a limited amount of
training data, such as in FLEURS.
4.4 Pushing the Quality of ASR on Unseen Languages
Table 4: Noisy student training for unseen languages. WERs (%) for the teacher adapter models and
the student models are presented. The relative improvement (%) of the student models can be found
in the last column.
Languages Whisper-v2 # hrs in YT-NTL USM-LAS-Adapter USM-M + pseudo label Rel. Imprv.
Hausa (ha) 88.9 2175.0 24.5 22.8 7.5
Kazakh (kk) 37.7 196.0 11.8 10.9 8.3
Shona (sn) 121.0 247.0 29.1 22.2 31.1
Pashto (ps) 93.7 254.0 36.0 35.4 1.7
Yoruba (yo) 94.8 1292.0 33.4 30.6 9.2
Tail languages often do not have paired transcriptions for supervised learning—we refer to these
languages as unseen languages, as the model has not seen paired data for these lanugages during
training. To create pseudo-labels for these languages, we first build a USM-LAS-Adapter by attaching
residual adapters to USM-LAS and training them using FLEURS data. By using the USM-LAS-
Adapter as a teacher, we can now transcribe the unlabeled data in the unseen languages as part
of the YT-NTL dataset. As shown in Table 4, we observe consistent wins for all languages on
the FLEURS benchmark. For some languages, the improvement is larger than 30%. This further
demonstrates the robustness of the USM-LAS model—despite using only 10 hours of out of domain
data from FLEURS, the USM-LAS-Adapter is able to transcribe YouTube data to produce meaningful
recognition results that lead to these improvements. We find the approach of training adapter models
13