are usually trained on much shorter segments, typically less than 30 seconds. For systems that use
attention-based encoders, it is impractical to use global attention to attend to the entire audio. Local
self attention, which only attends to the fixed length of left and right context, is thus widely used.
For example, in BEST-RQ pre-training, only 128 left and 128 right context frames are used for local
self attention. However, stacking many local self attention layers creates a significant receptive field
mismatch between training and inference. The left figure in Fig. 4 illustrates this issue with a network
consisting of 4 local self attention layers, each using only 1 left and 1 right context frames. Since the
context is leaked in every layer, the receptive field width grows linearly with respect to the number of
layers; for a big encoder like that of the Conformer-2B, this means that the receptive field width for
the encoder output is longer than 327 seconds. During training, the model is trained with at most 30
seconds speech segments, while at inference time, when minutes or hours long audio is fed to the
model, the encoder needs to process over 300 seconds of audio to produce one encoder output—a
pattern it has never trained on. Our empirical observations demonstrate that, under this train-test
mismatch, these models with deep architectures and high capacity suffer from high deletion errors.
We henceforth refer to this problem as the “long-form (performance) degradation" problem.
Receptive 
field 
for 
y3
Receptive 
field 
for 
y4
Receptive 
field 
for 
y0,..y3 
Receptive 
field 
for 
y4,..y8 
Chunk-wise 
Self-Attention
Local 
Self-Attention
Figure 4: Comparing receptive fields of two networks with 4 layers of local self attention and chunk-
wise attention.
To solve this problem, we propose a simple modification to the attention mechanism; the attention is
restricted to audio chunks. This is illustrated on the right side of Fig. 4, in which 8 frames are divided
into 2 chunks, and the attention is performed within each chunk. In this case, there is no context
leaking in the attention layer, and thus the receptive field width is independent of the number of layers.
In our experiments an 8-second chunk resulted in the best recognition quality vs. computational cost
trade-off.
It is worthwhile to note there are a few other works in the literature which also modify the attention
pattern to deal with the long-form audio in ASR, e.g., [61 –66]. Though conceptually similar to block
processing (e.g. [65, 66]), chunk-wise attention is more flexible. Block processing is performed at
the input feature level, which limits the encoder layers to the context frame at the current chunk. On
the other hand, chunk-wise attention allows other layers in the encoder (e.g., convolution layers) to
process contextual frames beyond the current chunk. Compared with Whisper [1], which segments
the audio into 30 second chunks and uses a heuristic process to carry the decoder states over, we only
chunk the attention state, and allow the decoder to access the entire encoder output. We also use
either a CTC or RNN-T decoder to decode on long-form audio, neither of which have been observed
to hallucinate compared to attention-based sequence-to-sequence decoders. We observe our systems
are robust on long-form ASR tasks with a simpler decoding process on long-form speech signals.
7