Google USM:
Scaling Automatic Speech Recognition
Beyond 100 Languages
Yu Zhang Wei Han James Qin Yongqiang Wang Ankur Bapna Zhehuai Chen
Nanxin Chen Bo Li Vera Axelrod Gary Wang Zhong Meng Ke Hu
Andrew Rosenberg Rohit Prabhavalkar Daniel S. Park Parisa Haghani
Jason Riesa Ginger Perng Hagen Soltau Trevor Strohman
Bhuvana Ramabhadran Tara Sainath Pedro Moreno Chung-Cheng Chiu
Johan Schalkwyk Françoise Beaufays Yonghui Wu∗ †
Abstract
We introduce the Universal Speech Model (USM), a single large model that per-
forms automatic speech recognition (ASR) across 100+ languages. This is achieved
by pre-training the encoder of the model on a large unlabeled multilingual dataset
of 12 million (M) hours spanning over 300 languages, and fine-tuning on a smaller
labeled dataset. We use multilingual pre-training with random-projection quantiza-
tion and speech-text modality matching to achieve state-of-the-art performance on
downstream multilingual ASR and speech-to-text translation tasks. We also demon-
strate that despite using a labeled training set 1/7-th the size of that used for the
Whisper model [1], our model exhibits comparable or better performance on both
in-domain and out-of-domain speech recognition tasks across many languages.
1 Introduction
Recent advances in self-supervised learning have ushered in a new era for speech recognition.
Whereas previous works focused mostly on improving the quality of monolingual models for main-
stream languages, recent studies have increasingly turned to “universal” models [1 –4]. These may
take the form of a single model that performs well on multiple tasks [1,2], or one that covers multiple
domains [2,3], or one that supports multiple languages [1,5]. In this work, we explore the frontiers of
language expansion. Our long-term goal is to train a universal ASR model that covers all the spoken
languages in the world.
A fundamental challenge in scaling speech technologies to many languages is obtaining enough data
to train high-quality models. With conventional supervised training approaches, audio data needs
to be manually transcribed, which is lengthy and expensive, or collected from existing transcribed
sources which are hard to find for tail languages. While transcribed speech may be scarce in many
∗All authors are affiliated with Google Inc.
†Contact author at ngyuzh@google.com .
Preprint.arXiv:2303.01037v3  [cs.CL]  25 Sep 2023