schedule where training initially is conducted with un-transcribed speech and paired speech-text data,
and unspoken text is utilized only after 20k steps. The joint training employing all three types of data
lasts for another 100K steps.
Supervised Training: We use two separate optimizers for the encoder parameters and the decoder
parameters of the network [71]. For USM-CTC and USM-LAS, we train the model for 100k steps
with 2048 batch size. For in-domain experiments, the checkpoint is selected based on development
set performance.
Training Large Models: We use the GShard [72] framework with the GSPMD backend [73] to
train our large models on TPUs.
3 Datasets
3.1 Audio Data
Figure 6: The video category and length distribution of YT-513-U.
The following audio datasets are used in this report to train our models:
•YouTube SUPervised Plus (YT-SUP+) :
–YT-SUP: 90k hours of segmented, labeled audio across 75 languages.
–YT-Pseudo-Labeled: 100k hours of segmented, pseudo-labeled en-US audio from YT-
NTL-U. The pseudo-labels are generated by a 600M CTC model trained on YT-SUP
en-US data.
•YouTube Next Thousand Languages Unsupervised (YT-NTL-U) : 12.1M hours of seg-
mented, unlabeled audio, including:
–YT-55-U: 12M hours of segmented, unlabeled audio on 55 rich resource languages
identified by YouTube production language id models.
–YT-513-U: 100k hours of segmented, unlabeled audio across 513 tail languages not
covered by YouTube production language id models. These languages are identified by
vendors.
Let us expand upon how each dataset has been constructed.
YT-SUP+: YT-SUP is a dataset with audio from videos that have user-uploaded transcripts from 75
languages. We group consecutive segments into a longer unit similar to [57]. The maximal sequence
length for training is 30 seconds. The total amount of training data is 90k hours, ranging from English
(en-US) (3.5k hours) to Amharic (Am-Et) (150 hours). We also introduce an additional 100k hours of
en-US audio from YT-NTL-U to YT-SUP. We choose to generate pseudo-labels on this dataset using
a 600M-parameter CTC YT teacher model trained on YT-SUP. Each audio is randomly segmented
between 5 to 15 seconds.
YT-55-U: YT-55-U is built by first randomly collecting 3 million hours of audio from "speech-heavy"
YouTube videos, filtered by language. The 3 million hours of audio is then further segmented by the
YT teacher model. Instead of using a teacher model as in [3], the non-speech segments identified
by a V oice Activity Detection (V AD) model are removed to yield approximately 1 million hours of
10