Figure 2: (Left)†WERs (%) Our language expansion effort to support more languages on YouTube
(73 languages) and extending to 100+ languages on the public dataset (FLEURS). Lower is better.
To the best of our knowledge, no published model can successfully decode all 73 languages from
our YouTube set, thus we only list our results. (Middle)†Our results on ASR benchmarks, with or
without in-domain data. Lower is better. (Right) SoTA results on public speech translation tasks.
Results presented are presented as high/middle/low resources languages defined in [20]. Higher is
better.
400k hours of transcribed data (we select 18 languages that Whisper can successfully decode with
lower than 40% WER). The second panel of Fig. 2 demonstrates that our YouTube captions model
generalizes well to unseen domains.
BEST-RQ is a scalable speech representation learner: We find that BEST-RQ pre-training can
effectively scale to the very large data regime with a 2B parameter Conformer-based backbone,
comparing favorably against Wav2Vec 2.0 [6] and W2v-BERT [21] in this setting.
MOST (BEST-RQ + text-injection) is a scalable speech and text representation learner: We
demonstrate that MOST is an effective method for utilizing large scale text data for improving
quality on downstream speech tasks, as demonstrated by quality gains exhibited for the FLEURS
and CoV oST 2 tasks. Fig. 2 depicts USM’s performance, establishing a new state-of-the-art on the
FLEURS benchmark across 102 languages for ASR and on CoV oST 2 across 21 languages on AST.
Representations from MOST (BEST-RQ + text-injection) can quickly adapt to new domains:
We find that it is possible to obtain powerful downstream ASR/AST models by attaching and training
light-weight residual adapter modules, which only add 2% of additional parameters, while keeping
the rest of the model frozen.
Chunk-wise attention for robust long-form speech recognition: We introduce chunk-wise
attention, an effective, scalable method for extending the performance of ASR models trained on
shorter utterances to very long speech inputs. We find that the USM-CTC/LAS models trained
with chunk-wise attention is able to produce high-quality transcripts for very long utterances in the
YouTube evaluation sets.
1.3 Outline
The outline of this report is as follows:
Methods: We review the architecture and the methods used in the paper. We provide brief summaries
of the Conformer [9], BEST-RQ [10], text-injection [12, 13] used for MOST, and Noisy Student
Training (NST) [7,8]. We also introduce chunk-wise attention for scalable training on long utterances.
Data: We describe the four types of datasets used to train our models: the unlabeled multilingual
speech dataset YT-NTL-U, the multilingual text corpus Web-NTL, labeled datasets, and pseudo-
labeled datasets.
Key Results: We present the performance of our USM models on downstream ASR and AST
tasks. We demonstrate that USM establishes new states-of-the-art on several speech understanding
benchmarks.
4