Figure 3: BEST-RQ based pre-training with conformer encoder.
large-scale unlabeled audio data. We discuss the comparative advantage of BEST-RQ against other
pre-training methods in section 5.3.
BEST-RQ employs a BERT-style training task for the audio input that attempts to predict masked
speech features. To make the task compatible with BERT-style training, the original speech features
corresponding to the masked frames are quantized, and the task requires predicting the quantized
label of these features. For a given number of quantization targets c, random “codebook" vectors
v0,···, vc−1are chosen in an embedding space. The discrete label of the speech feature is obtained
by first projecting the feature into the embedding space by a randomly initialized, frozen projection
matrix and then finding the closest codebook vector. The index of this codebook vector is identified
as the label of the speech feature. Cosine similarity is used as the distance measure for determining
the code.
We note that while w2v-BERT [21] pre-training has proven to be an effective method for unsupervised
pre-training, it requires an additional quantization module which introduces more complexity. As we
increase the model size and language coverage, the learnt codebook module proves costly to tune and
can impede progress of model development. Meanwhile, the BEST-RQ algorithm does not require
such a module, making it a more scalable method for pre-training.
2.2.1 Multi-softmax
Instead of utilizing a single codebook [10], we use multiple codebooks to improve BEST-RQ training
in this study. More precisely, we use Nsoftmax layers to produce Nprobability predictions from
the output of the encoder to compare against Nindependent quantization targets obtained from the
masked speech features. We train the network with equal weights for each softmax layer. The use of
multiple codebooks improves the stability and convergence of the model.
2.3 Self-training: Noisy Student Training
We utilize noisy student training (NST) [7, 8] to generate pseudo-labeled data to augment supervised
training. This is done by first training a teacher model with augmentation on a supervised set, then
using that teacher to generate transcripts for unlabeled audio data. A heuristic filtering method based
on the ratio between the number of words and audio length is used to filter the pseudo-labeled data.
The pseudo-labeled data is mixed with supervised data to train the student model.
2.4 Chunk-wise Attention for Long-form ASR
In many real-world applications, ASR systems are required to transcribe minutes- or hours-long
audio. This poses significant challenges to many end-to-end ASR systems, as these ASR systems
6