2. The paired speech-text data serves multiple functions.
•The labeled speech flows through the speech encoder, the shared encoder and the
decoder unit and contributes to the standard ASR loss computed against the paired text.
Here, the speech-text alignments of the paired data are extracted from the decoder unit
and used to train the duration upsampler within the text encoder.
•The text of the paired data also passes through the text encoder. The encoded text
sequence is used to compute a consistency loss against the encoded speech sequence.
This loss is used to train solely the text encoder—the speech encoder weights are frozen
for this particular forward-propagation.
3.The unlabeled text data contributes to a reconstruction loss. This loss is constructed by
passing the text through the text encoder, then masking chunks of the feature sequence
produced. These masked text features live in the same embedding space as masked speech
features, and thus can be passed through the shared encoder and the decoder unit to compute
the ASR loss against the original text. This is the reconstruction loss used to train the model.
For training stability, MOST proceeds in two stages—we first train solely on paired data to learn
stable decoder alignments for 20k steps. We then train the duration upsampler and activate the losses
for unlabeled text. We refer the reader to [13] for further details.
When fine-tuning for ASR, we initialize the feature encoder of the ASR model with the speech feature
encoder, initialize the conformer block with the shared conformer encoder, and add a randomly
initialized task-specific transducer.
In the MOST set-up, the speech and text representations live in a shared representation space, thereby
allowing us to utilize text machine translation (MT) data during the fine-tuning stage of AST tasks.
We follow the same approach described in [13, 20] and report the AST results with joint fine-tuning
for models prepared with MOST.
2.6 Residual Adaptation with a Frozen Encoder
Ideally, the fine-tuning process of the model should be scalable with the number of downstream
tasks while in reality, fine-tuning the pre-trained USM individually for various domains and tasks
becomes prohibitively expensive. In order to mitigate this issue, we explore a lightweight alternative
[19] to training the full network where residual adapters with a small number of parameters are
added for each individual language while the pre-trained USM is entirely frozen during fine-tuning.
We experiment with adding two parallel adapters to each Conformer block, whose parameter count
amounts to 2% of the original pre-trained USM, and fine-tune the adapters on downstream language
tasks. When serving the model, the adapter is dynamically loaded according to the language of the
input batch [68, 69]. This enables one to conduct inference on 100+ languages while keeping the
total number of parameters manageable by re-using the same parameters and computation process for
the majority of the time. We also find that training the adapter versus fine-tuning the entire model can
reduce over-fitting especially when the training data is limited.
2.7 Training Details
Data Processing: The audio is uniformly sampled to 16 kHz quality—any audio with a different
native sampling rate is either up-sampled or down-sampled. The audio is then featurized into 128-
dimensional log-mel filterbank coefficients. Graphemes are used to tokenize the text for FLEURS
in-domain fine-tuning, while word-piece models (WPMs) [70] are used for tokenization for all other
tasks.
BEST-RQ: We follow default masking and quantization parameters of BEST-RQ as in [10]. We use
a 16 codebook multi-softmax loss to stabilize training and improve performance as described in 5.1.
We do not use EMA for pre-training.
MOST: We follow the text encoder and decoder architecture described in [13] but use 4k sentence-
piece models (SPMs). We use a single 1536-dimensional Conformer layer as the speech encoder and
Conformer-2B encoder as the shared encoder. We mix un-transcribed speech, unspoken text, and
transcribed speech in each batch with fixed batch sizes of, respectively, 4096, 8192, and 1024. The
model is initialized with the BEST-RQ pre-trained encoder. MOST employs a curriculum learning
9