languages, untranscribed speech and text data are practically unlimited. Recent developments in semi-
supervised algorithms for speech recognition makes it possible to leverage such data for pre-training
and produce high-quality speech models with a limited amount of transcribed data [3, 6].
Moreover, recent studies have shown that a single large model can utilize large data sets more
effectively than smaller models [1,4]. This all points to a promising direction where large amounts of
unpaired multilingual speech and text data and smaller amounts of transcribed data can contribute to
training a single large universal ASR model.
1.1 Our approach
We produce large “Universal Speech Models" (USMs) through a training pipeline that utilizes three
types of datasets:
•Unpaired Audio:
–YT-NTL-U : A large unlabeled multilingual dataset consisting of 12M hours of
YouTube-based audio covering over 300 languages.
– Pub-U : 429k hours of unlabeled speech in 51 languages based on public datasets.
•Unpaired Text:
–Web-NTL : A large multilingual text-only corpus with 28B sentences spanning over
1140 languages.
•Paired ASR Data: We utilize two corpora of paired audio-text data with O(10k) hours of
audio for supervised training.
–YT-SUP+ : 90k hours of labeled multilingual data covering 73 language and 100k hours
of en-US pseudo-labeled data generated by noisy student training (NST) [7, 8] from
YT-NTL-U.
–Pub-S : 10k hours of labeled multi-domain en-US public data and 10k labeled multilin-
gual public data covering 102 languages.
2B-parameter Conformer [9] models are built using these datasets through the following steps:
1.Unsupervised Pre-training: BEST-RQ ( BERT-based Speech pre- Training with Random-
projection Quantizer) [10] is used to pre-train the encoder of the model with YT-NTL-U.
2.MOST (Multi-Objective Supervised pre- Training): The model can optionally be further
prepared by a multi-objective supervised pre-training pipeline that utilizes all three kinds
of datasets: YT-NTL-U, Pub-U, Web-NTL and Pub-S. Here, a weighted sum of the BEST-
RQ masked language model loss [11], along with the text-injection losses (including the
supervised ASR loss and modality matching losses) [12, 13] is optimized during training.
3.Supervised ASR Training : We produce generic ASR models trained with connectionist
temporal classification (CTC) [14] and Listen, Attend, and Spell (LAS) [15] tranducers for
downstream tasks.
Two types of models are produced through this pipeline—pre-trained models that can be fine-tuned
on downstream tasks, and generic ASR models for which we assume no downstream fine-tuning
occurs. The generic ASR models are trained with chunk-wise attention, which we introduce later in
this report.
Table 1: USM models prepared in this work. The generic ASR models are trained on a large
"upstream" ASR corpus and not finetuned further, while the pre-trained models are fine-tuned on
downstream tasks.
Model BEST-RQ MOST Model-Type Decoder Upstream Chunk-wise
ASR Dataset Attention
USM
YT-NTL-UN Pre-trained Downstream Dependent - N
USM-M Y Pre-trained Downstream Dependent - N
USM-LAS N Generic ASR LAS YT-SUP+ Y
USM-CTC N Generic ASR CTC YT-SUP+ Y
2