Table 8: RTF for USM-2B.
Model bf-16 Streaming # Params (B) TPU [88] Batch Size 1.0/RTF
Conformer-0.1B Y Y 0.1 TPUv4i 64 3047
Conformer-0.6B N N 0.6 TPUv4i 64 1920
Conformer-2B N N 2.0 TPUv4i 32 827
measure the serving capacity of the USM-CTC model as represented by the real time factor (RTF) in
an ideal setup where we assume that each batch sent to TPU is fully packed along the time axis. The
results of these measurements are presented in Table 8. Surprisingly, we find that the 2B-paramter
USM-CTC model is only 3.9×slower than the 100M-parameter streaming model [89], primarily
due to the fact that our models operate at batch processing mode. This result demonstrates that the
USM-CTC can be used as an offline transcriber efficiently on TPUs (or GPUs).
6 Discussion
In this report, we put forward a practical and flexible approach for training speech understanding
models capable of scaling speech recognition to hundreds of languages. We conclude the report with
summarizing insights gained in the process:
Unlabeled versus weakly labeled data: We believe diverse unlabeled data is more practical to
acquire for building usable ASR for tail languages than weakly labeled data. We have demonstrated
that collaborating with native speakers to identify unsupervised data in hundreds of tail languages
can be an effective route to improving recognition performance on low resource languages.
In-domain data is best: We have demonstrated that we can build a robust ASR system across many
domains by utilizing a large amount of unsupervised data and a small amount of labeled data. Our
results, however, also confirm that the most effective way to optimize the performance for a given
domain is to use in-domain data to fine-tune the model.
CTC vs RNN-T vs LAS: The best transducer depends on the downstream task. A large pre-trained
model with a frozen encoder can allow experimenters to test different transducers quickly and select
the optimal transducer for their purpose.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Alexis Conneau, Min Ma, Shikhar Bharadwaj, Sid Dalmia, Jiahui Yu, Jian
Cheng, Paul Rubenstein, Ye Jia, Justin Snyder, Vincent Tsang, Yuanzhong Xu, Tao Wang, Anusha
Ramesh, Calum Barnes, Salem Haykal for useful discussions.
We appreciate valuable feedback and support from Eli Collins, Jeff Dean, Sissie Hsiao, Zoubin
Ghahramani. Special thanks to Austin Tarango, Lara Tumeh, and Jason Porta for their guidance
around responsible AI practices.
References
[1]A. Radford, J. W. Kim, T. Xu, G. Brockman, C. McLeavey, and I. Sutskever, “Robust speech recognition
via large-scale weak supervision,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.04356 , 2022.
[2]W. Chan, D. Park, C. Lee, Y . Zhang, Q. Le, and M. Norouzi, “Speechstew: Simply mix all available speech
recognition data to train one large neural network,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.02133 , 2021.
[3]Y . Zhang, D. S. Park, W. Han, J. Qin, A. Gulati, J. Shor, A. Jansen, Y . Xu, Y . Huang, S. Wang, Z. Zhou, B. Li,
M. Ma, W. Chan, J. Yu, Y . Wang, L. Cao, K. C. Sim, B. Ramabhadran, T. N. Sainath, F. Beaufays, Z. Chen,
Q. V . Le, C.-C. Chiu, R. Pang, and Y . Wu, “Bigssl: Exploring the frontier of large-scale semi-supervised
learning for automatic speech recognition,” IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Signal Processing , vol. 16,
no. 6, pp. 1519–1532, 2022.
[4]B. Li, R. Pang, T. N. Sainath, A. Gulati, Y . Zhang, J. Qin, P. Haghani, W. R. Huang, and M. Ma, “Scaling
end-to-end models for large-scale multilingual asr,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.14830 , 2021.
16