…On Speech input On paired input On text input 
Figure 5: Overview of MOST text injection. The left-most panel depicts MOST training on unlabeled
speech input; the center panel depicts training on paired speech and text input; the right-most panel
depicts training on unlabeled text data.
2.5 Multi-Objective Supervised Pre-training: BEST-RQ + text-injection
In addition to pre-training with unlabeled speech, we add an additional stage of Multi-Objective
Supervised pre- Training (MOST) as shown in Fig. 5, where we train the model jointly on unlabeled
speech, unlabeled text and paired speech and text data. The training loss for this procedure is
based on the text-injection loss including duration modeling and consistency regularization as in
[13], to which we add a weighted BEST-RQ loss for the encoder of the model. MOST yields two
benefits: (i) Training with paired speech and text data with alignment losses results in learning
speech representations that are better aligned with text, improving quality on tasks like ASR and
AST that require mapping the acoustics of the speech signal to text. (ii) Training simultaneously on
unlabeled text in a model that learns speech and text representations jointly improves the robustness
of learned representations, especially on low resource languages and domains, also generalizing to
new languages with no paired data seen during training [67].
The key architectural components for constructing the text-injection loss as utilized in our approach
include: (i) A speech-only encoder that utilizes a convolutional sub-sampling feature encoder and a
single conformer layer. For continued pre-training the feature encoder is initialized from the BEST-
RQ pre-trained checkpoint while the conformer layer is initialized randomly. (ii) A text-only encoder
that consists of an embedding layer, an upsampler, and a conformer layer block. The upsampler used
in this work is a learned duration based upsampling model [13], though a fixed or random repetition
upsampler can also be used for text-injection [47, 53]. All components are initialized randomly. (iii)
A shared conformer encoder initialized from the pre-trained BEST-RQ speech encoder. (iv) The
BEST-RQ speech softmax layers initialized from the BEST-RQ checkpoint. (v) The decoder unit
which is initialized randomly.
The main idea of text-injection (e.g. [13,53,54]) is to produce joint, co-aligned embeddings of speech
and text as sequences in the same embedding space. Given this embedding space, text data with no
associated audio can contribute to improving the speech task. The speech and text encoders presented
above are intended to produce these embeddings, which need to be matched in the embedding space
and are also required to be co-aligned in the time dimension. The embeddings enable the text data to
contribute to preparing the model for downstream tasks.
To achieve these objectives, the architecture as presented above is trained using three types of data,
each contributing to different types of losses:
1. The unlabeled speech passes through the shared encoder and the BEST-RQ softmax layers
to contribute to the BEST-RQ loss.
8