13Confidential and Proprietary —Qualcomm Technologies, Inc. and/or its affiliated companies.Source sample textPTQ Pipeline
Pre-trained FP Model
Add Quantizers
CLE
Weight Range SettingYesNo
Use Data
Symmetric Weights
Asymmetric Activations
MSE Range Setting
MSE Range Setting
Bias Correction
AdaRound
Activation Range SettingFigure 8: Standard PTQ pipeline. Blue boxes represent required steps and the turquoise boxes
recommended choices.
3.5 Standard PTQ pipeline
In this section, we present a best-practice pipeline for PTQ based on relevant literature and extensive
experimentation. We illustrate the recommended pipeline in ﬁgure 8. This pipeline achieves competi-
tive PTQ results for many computer vision as well as natural language processing models and tasks.
Depending on the model, some steps might not be required, or other choices could lead to equal or
better performance.
Cross-layer equalization First we apply cross-layer equalization (CLE), which is a pre-processing
step for the full precision model to make it more quantization friendly. CLE is particularly
important for models with depth-wise separable layers and for per-tensor quantization, but it
often also shows improvements for other layers and quantization choices.
Add quantizers Next we choose our quantizers and add quantization operations in our network as
described in section 2.3. The choice of quantizer might depend on the speciﬁc target HW;
for common AI accelerators we recommend using symmetric quantizers for the weights
and asymmetric quantizers for the activations. If supported by the HW/SW stack then it is
favorable to use per-channel quantization for weights.
Weight range setting To set the quantization parameters of all weight tensors we recommend using
the layer-wise MSE based criteria. In the speciﬁc case of per-channel quantization, using
the min-max method can be favorable in some cases.
AdaRound In case we have a small calibration dataset4available we next apply AdaRound in
order to optimize the rounding of the weights. This step is crucial to enable low-bit weight
quantization (e.g. 4 bits) in the PTQ.
Bias correction In case we do not have such a calibration dataset and the network uses batch
normalization, we can use analytical bias correction instead.
Activation range setting As the ﬁnal step, we determine the quantization ranges of all data-
dependent tensors in the network (i.e., activations). We use the MSE based criteria for
most of the layers, which requires a small calibration set to ﬁnd the minimum MSE loss.
Alternatively, we can use the BN based range setting to have a fully data-free pipeline.
3.6 Experiments
We now evaluate the performance of the aforementioned PTQ pipeline on common computer vision
and natural language understanding applications. Our results are summarized in table 6. For the
task of semantic segmentation, we evaluate DeepLabV3 (with a MobileNetV2 backbone) (Chen
et al., 2017) on Pascal VOC and for object detection, EfﬁcientDet (Tan et al., 2020) on COCO 2017.
The rest of the computer vision models are evaluated on the ImageNet classiﬁcation benchmark.
For natural language understanding, we evaluate BERT-base on the GLUE benchmark (Wang et al.,
2018).
In all cases, we observe that 8-bit quantization of weights and activation (W8A8) leads to only
marginal loss of accuracy compared to ﬂoating-point (within 0.7%) for all models. For W8A8
4Usually, between 500 and 1000 unlabeled images are sufﬁcient as a calibration set.
16