5 Summary and Conclusions
Deep learning has become an integral part of many machine learning applications and can now
be found in countless electronic devices and services, from smartphones and home appliances to
drones, robots and self-driving cars. As the popularity and reach of deep learning in our everyday life
increases, so does the need for fast and power-efﬁcient neural network inference. Neural network
quantization is one of the most effective ways of reducing the energy and latency requirements of
neural networks during inference.
Quantization allows us to move from ﬂoating-point representations to a ﬁxed-point format and, in
combination with dedicated hardware utilizing efﬁcient ﬁxed-point operations, has the potential
to achieve signiﬁcant power gains and accelerate inference. However, to exploit these savings, we
require robust quantization methods that can maintain high accuracy, while reducing the bit-width
of weights and activations. To this end, we consider two main classes of quantization algorithms:
Post-Training Quantization (PTQ) and Quantization-Aware Training (QAT).
Post-training quantization techniques take a pre-trained FP32 networks and convert it into a ﬁxed-
point network without the need for the original training pipeline. This makes them a lightweight,
push-button approach to quantization with low engineering effort and computational cost. We describe
a series of recent advances in PTQ and introduce a PTQ pipeline that leads to near ﬂoating-point
accuracy results for a wide range of models and machine learning tasks. In particular, using the
proposed pipeline we can achieve 8-bit quantization of weights and activations within only 1% of
the ﬂoating-point accuracy for all networks. We further show that many networks can be quantized
even to 4-bit weights with only a small additional drop in performance. In addition, we introduce a
debugging workﬂow to effectively identify and ﬁx problems that might occur when quantizing new
networks.
Quantization-aware training models the quantization noise during training through simulated quanti-
zation operations. This training procedure allows for better solutions to be found compared to PTQ
while enabling more effective and aggressive activation quantization. Similar to PTQ, we introduce a
standard training pipeline utilizing the latest algorithms in the ﬁeld. We also pay special attention to
batch normalization folding during QAT and show that simple static folding outperforms other more
computationally expensive approaches. We demonstrate that with our QAT pipeline we can achieve
4-bit quantization of weights, and for some models even 4-bit activations, with only a small drop of
accuracy compared to ﬂoating-point.
The choice between PTQ and QAT depends on the accuracy and power requirements of the application.
Both approaches are an essential part of any model efﬁciency toolkit and we hope that our proposed
pipelines will help engineers deploy high-performing quantized models with less time and effort.
References
Banner, R., Nahshan, Y ., and Soudry, D. Post training 4-bit quantization of convolutional networks
for rapid-deployment. Neural Information Processing Systems (NeuRIPS) , 2019. 9
Bengio, Y ., Léonard, N., and Courville, A. Estimating or propagating gradients through stochastic
neurons for conditional computation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1308.3432 , 2013. 19
Bhalgat, Y ., Lee, J., Nagel, M., Blankevoort, T., and Kwak, N. Lsq+: Improving low-bit quantization
through learnable offsets and better initialization. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) Workshops , June 2020. 20
Chen, L.-C., Papandreou, G., Schroff, F., and Adam, H. Rethinking atrous convolution for semantic
image segmentation, 2017. 16
Chin, T.-W., Chuang, P. I.-J., Chandra, V ., and Marculescu, D. One weight bitwidth to rule them
all. In Bartoli, A. and Fusiello, A. (eds.), Computer Vision – ECCV 2020 Workshops , pp. 85–103,
Cham, 2020. Springer International Publishing. ISBN 978-3-030-68238-5. 24
Dong, Z., Yao, Z., Gholami, A., Mahoney, M. W., and Keutzer, K. HAWQ: hessian aware quantization
of neural networks with mixed-precision. International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) ,
2019. 8
25