moving from 32 to 8 bits, the memory overhead of storing tensors decreases by a factor of 4 while the
computational cost for matrix multiplication reduces quadratically by a factor of 16. Neural networks
have been shown to be robust to quantization, meaning they can be quantized to lower bit-widths
with a relatively small impact on the network’s accuracy. Besides, neural network quantization can
often be applied along with other common methods for neural network optimization, such as neural
architecture search, compression and pruning. It is an essential step in the model efﬁciency pipeline
for any practical use-case of deep learning. However, neural network quantization is not free. Low
bit-width quantization introduces noise to the network that can lead to a drop in accuracy. While
some networks are robust to this noise, other networks require extra work to exploit the beneﬁts of
quantization.
In this white paper, we introduce the state-of-the-art in neural network quantization. We start with an
introduction to quantization and discuss hardware and practical considerations. We then consider two
different regimes of quantizing neural networks: Post-Training Quantization (PTQ) and Quantization-
Aware Training (QAT). PTQ methods, discussed in section 3, take a trained network and quantize
it with little or no data, requires minimal hyperparameter tuning and no end-to-end training. This
makes them a push-button approach to quantizing neural networks with low engineering effort and
computational cost. In contrast, QAT, discussed in section 4, relies on retraining the neural networks
with simulated quantization in the training pipeline. While this requires more effort in training and
potentially hyperparameter tuning, it generally further closes the gap to the full-precision accuracy
compared to PTQ for low-bit quantization. For both regimes, we introduce standard pipelines based
on existing literature and extensive experimentation that lead to state-of-the-art performance for
common computer vision and natural language processing models. We also propose a debugging
workﬂow to identify and address common issues when quantizing a new model.
2 Quantization fundamentals
In this section, we introduce the basic principles of neural network quantization and of ﬁxed-point
accelerators on which quantized networks run on. We start with a hardware motivation and then
introduce standard quantization schemes and their properties. Later we discuss practical considerations
related to layers commonly found in modern neural networks and their implications for ﬁxed-point
accelerators.
2.1 Hardware background
Before diving into the technical details, we ﬁrst explore the hardware background of quantization
and how it enables efﬁcient inference on device. Figure 1 provides a schematic overview of how
a matrix-vector multiplication, y=Wx+b, is calculated in a neural network (NN) accelerator.
This is the building block of larger matrix-matrix multiplications and convolutions found in neural
networks. Such hardware blocks aim at improving the efﬁciency of NN inference by performing as
many calculations as possible in parallel. The two fundamental components of this NN accelerator
are the processing elements Cn;mand the accumulators An. Our toy example in ﬁgure 1 has 16
processing elements arranged in a square grid and 4accumulators. The calculation starts by loading
the accumulators with the bias value bn. We then load the weight values Wn;mand the input values
xminto the array and compute their product in the respective processing elements Cn;m=Wn;mxm
in a single cycle. Their results are then added in the accumulators:
An=bn+X
mCn;m (1)
The above operation is also referred to as Multiply-Accumulate (MAC). This step is repeated many
times for larger matrix-vector multiplications. Once all cycles are completed, the values in the
accumulators are then moved back to memory to be used in the next neural network layer. Neural
networks are commonly trained using FP32 weights and activations. If we were to perform inference
in FP32, the processing elements and the accumulator would have to support ﬂoating-point logic,
and we would need to transfer the 32-bit data from memory to the processing units. MAC operations
and data transfer consume the bulk of the energy spent during neural network inference. Hence,
signiﬁcant beneﬁts can be achieved by using a lower bit ﬁxed-point or quantized representation for
these quantities. Low-bit ﬁxed-point representations, such as INT8, not only reduce the amount data
transfer but also the size and energy consumption of the MAC operation (Horowitz, 2014). This is
2