Model (FP32 accuracy) ResNet18 (69.68) MobileNetV2 (71.72)
PTQ QAT PTQ QAT
W4A8 baseline 18.58 69.74 0.10 0.10
W4A8 w/ CLE 16.29 69.76 12.99 70.13
W4A8 w/ CLE + BC 38.58 69.72 46.90 70.07
Table 9: Ablation study with various PTQ initialization. The learning rate is individually optimized
for each conﬁguration. ImageNet validation accuracy (%) averaged over 3 runs.
Effect of CLE In table 9 we compare the effect of other PTQ improvements such as CLE and
bias correction. While for ResNet18 we do not see a signiﬁcant difference in the ﬁnal QAT perfor-
mance, for MobileNetV2 we observe that it cannot be trained without CLE. This is likely due to the
catastrophic performance drop caused by per-tensor quantization, which we discussed in section 3.2.
In conclusion, for models that have severe issues with plain PTQ we may need advanced PTQ
techniques such as CLE to initialize QAT. In most other cases, an improved PTQ initialization leads
only to a minor improvement in the ﬁnal QAT performance.
4.4 Standard QAT pipeline
In this section, we present a best-practice pipeline for QAT based on relevant literature and extensive
experimentation. We illustrate the recommended pipeline in ﬁgure 12. This pipeline yields good QAT
results over a variety of computer vision and natural language processing models and tasks, and can
be seen as the go-to tool for achieving low-bit quantization performance. As discussed in previous
sections, we always start from a pre-trained model and follow some PTQ steps in order to have faster
convergence and higher accuracy.
Cross-layer equalization Similar to PTQ, we ﬁrst apply CLE to the full precision model. As
we saw in table 9, this step is necessary for models that suffer from imbalanced weight
distributions, such as MobileNet architectures. For other networks or in the case of per-
channel quantization this step can be optional.
Add quantizers Next, we choose our quantizers and add quantization operations in our network as
described in section 2.3. The choice for quantizer might depend on the speciﬁc target HW,
for common AI accelerators we recommend using symmetric quantizers for the weights
and asymmetric quantizers for the activations. If supported by the HW/SW stack, then it is
favorable to use per-channel quantization for weights. At this stage we will also take care
that our simulation of batch normalization is correct, as discussed in section 4.2.
Range estimation Before training we have to initialize all quantization parameters. A better ini-
tialization will help faster training and might improve the ﬁnal accuracy, though often
the improvement is small (see table 8). In general, we recommend to set all quantization
parameters using the layer-wise MSE based criteria. In the speciﬁc case of per-channel
quantization, using the min-max setting can sometimes be favorable.
Learnable Quantization Parameters We recommend making the quantizer paramaters learnable,
as discussed in section 4.1. Learning the quantization parameters directly, rather than
updating them at every epoch, leads to higher performance especially when dealing with
low-bit quantization. However, using learnable quantizers requires special care when setting
up the optimizer for the task. When using SGD-type optimizers, the learning rate for the
quantization parameters needs to be reduced compared to the rest of the network parameters.
The learning rate adjustment can be avoided if we use optimizers with adaptive learning
rates such as Adam or RMSProp.
4.5 Experiments
Using our QAT pipeline, we quantize and evaluate the same models we used for PTQ in section
3.6. Our results are presented in table 10 for different bit-widths and quantization granularities.
DeepLabV3 is trained for 80 epochs on Pascal VOC; EfﬁcientDet for 20 epochs on COCO 2017;
all other vision models are trained for 20 epochs on ImageNet. BERT-base is trained on each of the
23