A White Paper on Neural Network Quantization
Markus Nagel
Qualcomm AI Researchy
markusn@qti.qualcomm.comMarios Fournarakis
Qualcomm AI Researchy
mfournar@qti.qualcomm.com
Rana Ali Amjad
Qualcomm AI Researchy
ramjad@qti.qualcomm.comYelysei Bondarenko
Qualcomm AI Researchy
ybodaren@qti.qualcomm.com
Mart van Baalen
Qualcomm AI Researchy
mart@qti.qualcomm.comTijmen Blankevoort
Qualcomm AI Researchy
tijmen@qti.qualcomm.com
Abstract
While neural networks have advanced the frontiers in many applications, they
often come at a high computational cost. Reducing the power and latency of neural
network inference is key if we want to integrate modern networks into edge devices
with strict power and compute requirements. Neural network quantization is one
of the most effective ways of achieving these savings but the additional noise it
induces can lead to accuracy degradation.
In this white paper, we introduce state-of-the-art algorithms for mitigating the
impact of quantization noise on the network’s performance while maintaining
low-bit weights and activations. We start with a hardware motivated introduction
to quantization and then consider two main classes of algorithms: Post-Training
Quantization (PTQ) and Quantization-Aware-Training (QAT). PTQ requires no
re-training or labelled data and is thus a lightweight push-button approach to
quantization. In most cases, PTQ is sufﬁcient for achieving 8-bit quantization with
close to ﬂoating-point accuracy. QAT requires ﬁne-tuning and access to labeled
training data but enables lower bit quantization with competitive results. For both
solutions, we provide tested pipelines based on existing literature and extensive
experimentation that lead to state-of-the-art performance for common deep learning
models and tasks.
1 Introduction
With the rise in popularity of deep learning as a general-purpose tool to inject intelligence into
electronic devices, the necessity for small, low-latency and energy efﬁcient neural networks solutions
has increased. Today neural networks can be found in many electronic devices and services, from
smartphones, smart glasses and home appliances, to drones, robots and self-driving cars. These
devices are typically subject to strict time restrictions on the execution of neural networks or stringent
power requirements for long-duration performance.
One of the most impactful ways to decrease the computational time and energy consumption of
neural networks is quantization. In neural network quantization, the weights and activation tensors
are stored in lower bit precision than the 16 or 32-bit precision they are usually trained in. When
Equal contribution.yQualcomm AI Research is an initiative of Qualcomm Technologies, Inc.arXiv:2106.08295v1  [cs.LG]  15 Jun 2021