•Try per-channel quantization. This will address the issue of uneven per-channel weight
distribution.
• Apply bias correction or AdaRound if calibration data is available.
Fixing activation quantization To reduce the quantization error from activation quantization, we
can also try using different range setting methods or adjust CLE to take activation quantiza-
tion ranges into account, as vanilla CLE can lead to uneven activation distribution.
Per-layer analysis If the global solutions have not restored accuracy to acceptable levels, we consider
each quantizer individually. We set each quantizer sequentially, to the target bit-width while
keeping the rest of the network to 32 bits (see inner for loop in ﬁgure 9).
Visualizing layers If the quantization of a individual tensor leads to signiﬁcant accuracy drop, we
recommended visualizing the tensor distribution at different granularities, e.g. per-channel
as in ﬁgure 5, and dimensions, e.g., per-token or per-embedding for activations in BERT.
Fixing individual quantizers The visualization step can reveal the source of the tensor’s sensitivity
to quantization. Some common solutions involve custom range setting for this quantizer or
allowing a higher bit-width for problematic quantizer, e.g., BERT-base from table 6. If the
problem is ﬁxed and the accuracy recovers, we continue to the next quantizer. If not, we
may have to resort to other methods, such as quantization-aware training (QAT), which is
discussed in section 4.
After completing the above steps, the last step is to quantize the complete model to the desired
bit-width. If the accuracy is acceptable, we have our ﬁnal quantized model ready to use. Otherwise,
we can consider higher bit-widths and smaller granularities or revert to more powerful quantization
methods, such as quantization-aware training.
4 Quantization-aware training
The post-training quantization techniques described in the previous section are the ﬁrst go-to tool in
our quantization toolkit. They are very effective and fast to implement because they do not require
retraining of the network with labeled data. However, they have limitations, especially when aiming
for low-bit quantization of activations, such as 4-bit and below. Post-training techniques may not
be enough to mitigate the large quantization error incurred by low-bit quantization. In these cases,
we resort to quantization-aware training (QAT). QAT models the quantization noise source (see
section 2.3) during training. This allows the model to ﬁnd more optimal solutions than post-training
quantization. However, the higher accuracy comes with the usual costs of neural network training,
i.e., longer training times, need for labeled data and hyper-parameter search.
In this section, we explore how back-propagation works in networks with simulated quantization
and provide a standard pipeline for training models with QAT effectively. We will also discuss the
implications of batch normalization folding and per-channel quantization in QAT and provide results
for a wide range of tasks and models.
4.1 Simulating quantization for backward path
In section 2.3, we saw how quantization can be simulated using ﬂoating-point in deep learning
frameworks. However, if we look at the computational graph of ﬁgure 4, to train such a network
we need to back-propagate through the simulated quantizer block. This poses an issue because the
gradient of the round-to-nearest operation in equation (4)is either zero or undeﬁned everywhere,
which makes gradient-based training impossible. A way around this would be to approximate the
gradient using the straight-through estimator (STE, Bengio et al. 2013), which approximates the
gradient of the rounding operator as 1:
@bye
@y= 1 (36)
Using this approximation we can now calculate the gradient of the quantization operation from
equation (7). For clarity we assume symmetric quantization, namely z= 0, but the same result
applies to asymmetric quantization since the zero-point is a constant. We use nandpto deﬁne the
integer grid limits, such that n=qmin=sandp=qmax=s. The gradient of equation (7) w.r.t its input,
19