characters. Word internal character swaps have
been shown to not affect human readers greatly
(McCusker et al., 1981), hence making them likely
to be meaning-preserving. Moreover we add the
additional constraint that the substitution must not
be in the vocabulary, which will likely be partic-
ularly meaning-destroying on the target side for
the word-based models we test here. In such cases
where word-internal character swaps are not pos-
sible or can’t produce out-of-vocabulary (OOV)
words, we resort to the naive strategy of repeat-
ing the last character of the word. The exact pro-
cedure used to produce this kind of perturbations
is described in Appendix A.1. Note that for a
word-based model, every OOV will look the same
(a special <unk> token), however the choice of
OOV will still have an inﬂuence on the output of
the model because we use unk-replacement.
In contrast, we refer the base attack without
constraints as Unconstrained hereforth. Table 1
gives qualitative examples of the kind of perturba-
tions generated under the different constraints.
For subword-based models, we apply the same
procedures at the subword-level on the origi-
nal segmentation. We then de-segment and re-
segment the resulting sentence (because changes
at the subword or character levels are likely to
change the segmentation of the resulting sen-
tence).
4 Experiments
Our experiments serve two purposes. First, we ex-
amine our proposed framework of evaluating ad-
versarial attacks (x2), and also elucidate which au-
tomatic metrics correlate better with human judg-
ment for the purpose of evaluating adversarial
attacks (x4.2). Second, we use this evaluation
framework to compare various adversarial attacks
and demonstrate that adversarial attacks that are
explicitly constrained to preserve meaning receive
better assessment scores ( x4.3).
4.1 Experimental setting
Data: Following previous work on adver-
sarial examples for seq2seq models (Be-
linkov and Bisk, 2018; Ebrahimi et al.,
2018a), we perform all experiments on the
IWSLT2016 dataset (Cettolo et al., 2016) in the
fFrench,German,Czech g!English directions
(fr-en ,de-en andcs-en ). We compile
all previous IWSLT test sets before 2015 asvalidation data, and keep the 2015 and 2016 test
sets as test data. The data is tokenized with the
Moses tokenizer (Koehn et al., 2007). The exact
data statistics can be found in Appendix A.2.
MT Models: We perform experiments with
two common neural machine translation (NMT)
models. The ﬁrst is an LSTM based encoder-
decoder architecture with attention (Luong et al.,
2015). It uses 2-layer encoders and decoders, and
dot-product attention. We set the word embedding
dimension to 300 and all others to 500. The
second model is a self-attentional Transformer
(Vaswani et al., 2017), with 6 1024-dimensional
encoder and decoder layers and 512 dimensional
word embeddings. Both the models are trained
with Adam (Kingma and Ba, 2014), dropout
(Srivastava et al., 2014) of probability 0.3 and
label smoothing (Szegedy et al., 2016) with value
0.1. We experiment with both word based models
(vocabulary size ﬁxed at 40k) and subword
based models (BPE (Sennrich et al., 2016) with
30k operations). For word-based models, we
perform <unk> replacement, replacing <unk>
tokens in the translated sentences with the source
words with the highest attention value during
inference. The full experimental setup and source
code are available at https://github.
com/pmichel31415/translate/tree/
paul/pytorch_translate/research/
adversarial/experiments .
Automatic Metric Implementations: To eval-
uate both sentence and corpus level BLEU
score, we ﬁrst de-tokenize the output and use
sacreBLEU8(Post, 2018) with its internal intl
tokenization, to keep BLEU scores agnostic to to-
kenization. We compute METEOR using the of-
ﬁcial implementation9. ChrF is reported with the
sacreBLEU implementation on detokenized text
with default parameters. A toolkit implementing
the evaluation framework described in x2.1 for
these metrics is released at https://github.
com/pmichel31415/teapot-nlp .
4.2 Correlation of Automatic Metrics with
Human Judgment
We ﬁrst examine which of the automatic metrics
listed inx2.2 correlates most with human judg-
ment for our adversarial attacks. For this exper-
iment, we restrict the scope to the case of the
8https://github.com/mjpost/sacreBLEU
9http://www.cs.cmu.edu/ ˜alavie/METEOR/