On Evaluation of Adversarial Perturbations
for Sequence-to-Sequence Models
Paul Michel1, Xian Li2, Graham Neubig1, Juan Miguel Pino2
1Language Technologies Institute, Carnegie Mellon University
2Facebook AI
fpmichel1,gneubig g@cs.cmu.edu ,
fxianl,juancarabina g@fb.com
Abstract
Adversarial examples — perturbations to the
input of a model that elicit large changes in the
output — have been shown to be an effective
way of assessing the robustness of sequence-
to-sequence (seq2seq) models. However, these
perturbations only indicate weaknesses in the
model if they do not change the input so sig-
niﬁcantly that it legitimately results in changes
in the expected output. This fact has largely
been ignored in the evaluations of the growing
body of related literature. Using the example
of untargeted attacks on machine translation
(MT), we propose a new evaluation framework
for adversarial attacks on seq2seq models that
takes the semantic equivalence of the pre- and
post-perturbation input into account. Using
this framework, we demonstrate that existing
methods may not preserve meaning in general,
breaking the aforementioned assumption that
source side perturbations should not result in
changes in the expected output. We further use
this framework to demonstrate that adding ad-
ditional constraints on attacks allows for ad-
versarial perturbations that are more meaning-
preserving, but nonetheless largely change the
output sequence. Finally, we show that per-
forming untargeted adversarial training with
meaning-preserving attacks is beneﬁcial to the
model in terms of adversarial robustness, with-
out hurting test performance.1
1 Introduction
Attacking a machine learning model with ad-
versarial perturbations is the process of making
changes to its input to maximize an adversarial
goal, such as mis-classiﬁcation (Szegedy et al.,
2013) or mis-translation (Zhao et al., 2018). These
attacks provide insight into the vulnerabilities of
machine learning models and their brittleness to
1A toolkit implementing our evaluation framework is
released at https://github.com/pmichel31415/
teapot-nlp .samples outside the training distribution. Lack of
robustness to these attacks poses security concerns
to safety-critical applications, e.g. self-driving
cars (Bojarski et al., 2016).
Adversarial attacks were ﬁrst deﬁned and in-
vestigated for computer vision systems (Szegedy
et al. (2013); Goodfellow et al. (2014); Moosavi-
Dezfooli et al. (2016) inter alia), where the input
space is continuous, making minuscule perturba-
tions largely imperceptible to the human eye. In
discrete spaces such as natural language sentences,
the situation is more problematic; even a ﬂip of a
single word or character is generally perceptible
by a human reader. Thus, most of the mathemati-
cal framework in previous work is not directly ap-
plicable to discrete text data. Moreover, there is
no canonical distance metric for textual data like
the`pnorm in real-valued vector spaces such as
images, and evaluating the level of semantic simi-
larity between two sentences is a ﬁeld of research
of its own (Cer et al., 2017). This elicits a natural
question: what does the term “adversarial pertur-
bation” mean in the context of natural language
processing (NLP) ?
We propose a simple but natural criterion for
adversarial examples in NLP, particularly untar-
geted2attacks on seq2seq models: adversarial
examples should be meaning-preserving on the
source side, but meaning-destroying on the target
side. The focus on explicitly evaluating mean-
ing preservation is in contrast to previous work
on adversarial examples for seq2seq models (Be-
linkov and Bisk, 2018; Zhao et al., 2018; Cheng
et al., 2018; Ebrahimi et al., 2018a). Nonethe-
less, this feature is extremely important; given two
sentences with equivalent meaning, we would ex-
pect a good model to produce two outputs with
2Here we use the term untargeted in the same sense as
(Ebrahimi et al., 2018a): an attack whose goal is simply to
decrease performance with respect to a reference translation.arXiv:1903.06620v2  [cs.CL]  19 Mar 2019