tasks by adapting stgt(e.g. for classiﬁcation one
would use the zero-one loss, and adapt the success
threshold).
2.2 Similarity Metrics
Throughoutx2.1, we have not given an exact de-
scription of the semantic similarity scores ssrcand
stgt. Indeed, automatically evaluating the semantic
similarity between two sentences is an open area
of research and it makes sense to decouple the def-
inition of adversarial examples from the speciﬁc
method used to measure this similarity. In this sec-
tion, we will discuss manual and automatic met-
rics that may be used to calculate it.
2.2.1 Human Judgment
Judgment by speakers of the language of interest
is the de facto gold standard metric for semantic
similarity. Speciﬁc criteria such as adequacy/ﬂu-
ency (Ma and Cieri, 2006), acceptability (Goto
et al., 2013), and 6-level semantic similarity (Cer
et al., 2017) have been used in evaluations of MT
and sentence embedding methods. In the context
of adversarial attacks, we propose the following
6-level evaluation scheme, which is motivated by
previous measures, but designed to be (1) symmet-
ric, like Cer et al. (2017), (2) and largely considers
meaning preservation but at the very low and high
levels considers ﬂuency of the output4, like Goto
et al. (2013):
How would you rate the similarity between
the meaning of these two sentences?
0. The meaning is completely different or
one of the sentences is meaningless
1. The topic is the same but the meaning is
different
2. Some key information is different
3. The key information is the same but the
details differ
4. Meaning is essentially equal but some
expressions are unnatural
5. Meaning is essentially equal and the two
sentences are well-formed Englisha
aOr the language of interest.
4This is important to rule out nonsensical sentences and
distinguish between clean and “noisy” paraphrases ( e.g. ty-
pos, non-native speech. . . ). We did not give annotators addi-
tional instruction speciﬁc to typos.2.2.2 Automatic Metrics
Unfortunately, human evaluation is expensive,
slow and sometimes difﬁcult to obtain, for exam-
ple in the case of low-resource languages. This
makes automatic metrics that do not require hu-
man intervention appealing for experimental re-
search. This section describes 3 evaluation metrics
commonly used as alternatives to human evalua-
tion, in particular to evaluate translation models.5
BLEU: (Papineni et al., 2002) is an automatic
metric based on n-gram precision coupled with
a penalty for shorter sentences. It relies on ex-
act word-level matches and therefore cannot detect
synonyms or morphological variations.
METEOR: (Denkowski and Lavie, 2014) ﬁrst
estimates alignment between the two sentences
and then computes unigram F-score (biased to-
wards recall) weighted by a penalty for longer sen-
tences. Importantly, METEOR uses stemming,
synonymy and paraphrasing information to per-
form alignments. On the downside, it requires lan-
guage speciﬁc resources.
chrF: (Popovi ´c, 2015) is based on the char-
actern-gram F-score. In particular we will use
the chrF2 score (based on the F2-score — recall
is given more importance), following the recom-
mendations from Popovi ´c (2016). By operating
on a sub-word level, it can reﬂect the semantic
similarity between different morphological inﬂec-
tions of one word (for instance), without requir-
ing language-speciﬁc knowledge which makes it a
good one-size-ﬁts-all alternative.
Because multiple possible alternatives exist, it
is important to know which is the best stand-in for
human evaluation. To elucidate this, we will com-
pare these metrics to human judgment in terms of
Pearson correlation coefﬁcient on outputs result-
ing from a variety of attacks in x4.2.
3 Gradient-Based Adversarial Attacks
In this section, we overview the adversarial attacks
we will be considering in the rest of this paper.
3.1 Attack Paradigm
We perform gradient-based attacks that replace
one word in the sentence so as to maximize an ad-
versarial loss function Ladv, similar to the substitu-
tion attacks proposed in (Ebrahimi et al., 2018b).
5Note that other metrics of similarity are certainly appli-
cable within the overall framework of x2.2.1, but we limit our
examination in this paper to the three noted here.