Figure 1: Graphical representation of the results in Table 2 for word-based models. High source chrF and target
RDchrF (upper-right corner) indicates a good attack.
4.3 Attack Results
We can now compare attacks under the three con-
straints Unconstrained, kNN and CharSwap and
draw conclusions on their capacity to preserve
meaning in the source and destroy it in the tar-
get. Attacks are conducted on the validation set
using the approach described in x3.1 with 3 sub-
stitutions (this means that each adversarial input is
at edit distance at most 3 from the original input).
Results (on a scale of 0 to 100 for readability) are
reported in Table 2 for both word- and subword-
based LSTM and Transformer models. To give a
better idea of how the different variables (language
pair, model, attack) affect performance, we give a
graphical representation of these same results in
Figure 1 for the word-based models. The rest of
this section discusses the implication of these re-
sults.
Source chrF Highlights the Effect of Adding
Constraints: Comparing the kNN and CharSwap
rows to Unconstrained in the “source” sections of
Table 2 clearly shows that constrained attacks have
a positive effect on meaning preservation. Beyond
validating our assumptions from x3.2, this shows
that source chrF is useful to carry out the compar-
ison in the ﬁrst place10. To give a point of refer-
ence, results from the manual evaluation carried
out inx4.2 show that that 90% of the French sen-
tence pairs to which humans gave a score of 4 or 5
in semantic similarity have a chrF >78.
10It can be argued that using chrF gives an advantage to
CharSwap over kNN for source preservation (as opposed to
METEOR for example). We ﬁnd that this is the case for
Czech and German (source METEOR is higher for kNN) but
not French. Moreover we ﬁnd (see A.3) that chrF correlates
better with human judgement even for kNN.Successful attack
(source chrF = 80:89, target RDchrF = 84:06)
Original Ils le r ´einvestissent directement en engageant
plus de proc `es.
Adv. src Ilss le r ´einvestissent dierctement en engagaent
plus de proc `es.
Ref. They plow it right back into ﬁling more troll
lawsuits.
Base output They direct it directly by engaging more cases.
Adv. output .. de plus.
Unsuccessful attack
(source chrF = 54:46, target RDchrF = 0:00)
Original C’ ´etait en Juillet 1969.
Adv. src C’ ´etiat en Jiullet 1969.
Ref. This is from July, 1969.
Base output This was in July 1969.
Adv. output This is. in 1969.
Table 4: Example of CharSwap attacks on the fr-en
LSTM. The ﬁrst example is a successful attack (high
source chrF and target RDchrF) whereas the second is
not.
Different Architectures are not Equal in the
Face of Adversity: Inspection of the target-
side results yields several interesting observations.
First, the high RDchrF of CharSwap for word-
based model is yet another indication of their
known shortcomings when presented with words
out of their training vocabulary, even with <unk> -
replacement. Second, and perhaps more interest-
ingly, Transformer models appear to be less robust
to small embedding perturbations (kNN attacks)
compared to LSTMs. Although the exploration of
the exact reasons for this phenomenon is beyond
the scope of this work, this is a good example that
RDchrF can shed light on the different behavior of
different architectures when confronted with ad-
versarial input. Overall, we ﬁnd that the Char-