Content
Round 1Style
Round 20OursStyleFormerIEST AdaAttN ArtFlow MCC MAST AAMS SANet Avatar AdaINFigure 5. Visualization of the content leak issue. Top/bottom: results after running the same stylization process using a certain method afterthe 1stand the 20thround, respectively.representation. By contrast, we leverage the capabilityof transformer-based architecture to capture long-rangedependencies. Thus, our method can signiﬁcantly alleviatethe content leak issue.We compare StyTr2with CNN-based methods andﬂow-based model ArtFlow [1]. Fig.5demonstrates thecorresponding results after the 1st and the 20th rounds ofthe repeating stylization process. As shown in the top row,the content structures generated by CNN-based methodsafter the ﬁrst round are damaged to various degrees, but ourresult still presents clear content details. Although the resultsgenerated by ArtFlow maintain clear content structures, thestylized effect is not satisfactory (e.g., the marginal ﬂawsand inappropriate style patterns). The bottom row of Fig.5shows that with increasing rounds of the stylization process,the content structures generated by CNN-based methodstend to be blurry, while the content structures generated byour method remain distinct. The same problem applies toStyleFormer, which also relies on the CNN-based encoder-decoder pipeline. Therefore, our model captures precisecontent representation leading to superior style transferresults while effectively alleviating the content leak issue.4.4. Analysis of CAPEAs described in Section3.1, when calculating PE, weshould take the semantic information of content images intoaccount. To compare the proposed CAPE with sinusoidalPE which is not semantics-aware, we show two cases wherethe input content image has repetitive patterns or is simplycollaged by repeating one image four times. As shown inFig.6, we can observe inconsistent stylized regions in theﬁnal results when using sinusoidal PE. The input resolutionis set to be256⇥256, which is the same as the imageresolution for training.Moreover, handling input resolution different from thetraining examples is generally challenging for a learning-based method. To this end, an ideal PE for vision tasksshould be scale-invariant, but a drastic change of imageresolution leads to a signiﬁcant difference in traditionalPE. We compare our CAPE with sinusoidal PE in Fig.7.In the third row, the input size is512⇥512, which istwice the image resolution for training. Consequently,the results present vertical track artifacts due to the large
Content Style Sinusoidal PE CAPEFigure 6. Comparisons of sinusoidal PE and CAPE using contentimages with repetitive patterns.positional deviation. In the second row, the input resolutionis256⇥256, which is the same as the training data. Thecorresponding results do not have the issue of vertical tracksbut are not satisfactory due to the small resolution. Bycontrast, our method supports any input resolution withCAPE by design. Therefore, our results in the last rowof Fig.7present clear content structures and proper stylizedpatterns. Additional ablation studies are provided in oursupplementary materials.To verify whether CAPE could provide position infor-mation, we show CAPEs with different inputs in Fig.8.Although two CAPEs are not the same, they have similarencoding behaviors such as highlighted diagonal, repeat,and periodic patterns as learnable PE [16] and sinusoidalPE. Different from learnable PE where the encoding isconditioned on the whole dataset, our CAPE dynamicallyencodes different input and thus can easily generalize tovarious resolutions.4.5. User studyWe conduct a user study to further compare our method.AdaAttN [35], ArtFlow [1], MCC [13], AAMS [63] andAdaIN [22] are selected as baselines. We reuse the imagesin the quantitative comparison and invite100participants toevaluate the results of different approaches. The participantsare informed of the purpose and details of our user study. Theparticipants comprise52males and48females, in the agerange of 19⇠45. Given a content image and a style image,we show the result generated by our approach and the outputfrom another randomly selected method for comparison and
11332