content will change drastically.
With the success of transformer [ 51] in natural language
processing (NLP), transformer-based architectures have been
adopted in various vision tasks. The charm of applying
transformer to computer vision lies in two aspects. First,
it is free to learn the global information of the input with
the help of the self-attention mechanism. Thus, a holistic
understanding can be easily obtained within each layer.
Second, the transformer architecture models relationships
in input shapes [ 41], and different layers extract similar
structural information [ 46] (see Fig. 1(b)). Therefore,
transformer has a strong representation capability to capture
precise content representation and avoid ﬁne detail missing.
Thus, the generated structures can be well-preserved.
In this work, we aim to eliminate the biased representation
issue of CNN-based style transfer methods and propose a
novel image StyleTransfer Transformer framework called
StyTr2. Different from the original transformer, we design
two transformer-based encoders in our StyTr2framework to
obtain domain-speciﬁc information. Following the encoders,
the transformer decoder is used to progressively generate the
output sequences of image patches. Furthermore, towards
the positional encoding methods that are proposed for NLP,
we raise two considerations: (1) different from sentences
ordered by logic, the image sequence tokens are associated
with semantic information of the image content; (2) for the
style transfer task, we aim to generate stylized images of any
resolution. The exponential increase in image resolution will
lead to a signiﬁcant change of positional encoding, leading
to large position deviation and inferior output quality. In
general, a desired positional encoding for vision tasks should
be conditioned on input content while being invariant to
image scale transformation. Therefore, we propose a content-
aware positional encoding scheme ( CAPE ) which learns the
positional encoding based on image semantic features and
dynamically expands the position to accommodate different
image sizes.
In summary, our main contributions include:
•A transformer-based style transfer framework called
StyTr2, to generate stylization results with well-preserved
structures and details of the input content image.
•A content-aware positional encoding scheme that is scale-
invariant and suitable for style transfer tasks.
•Comprehensive experiments showing that StyTr2outper-
forms baseline methods and achieves outstanding results
with desirable content structures and style patterns.
2. Related Work
Image style transfer. Gatys et al.[19] ﬁnd that hierarchi-
cal layers in CNNs can be used to extract image content
structures and style texture information and propose anoptimization-based method to generate stylized images itera-
tively. Some approaches [ 25,28] adopt an end-to-end model
to achieve real-time style transfer for one speciﬁc style. For
more efﬁcient applications, [ 7,17,32] combine multiple
styles in one model and achieve outstanding stylization
results. More generally, arbitrary style transfer gains more
attention in recent years. Huang et al .[22] propose an
adaptive instance normalization (AdaIN) to replace the mean
and variance of content with that of style. AdaIN is widely
adopted in image generation tasks [ 2,21,26,33,52] to fuse the
content and style features. Li et al.[29] design a whiten and
colorization transformation (WCT) to align the second-order
statistics of content and style features. Moreover, many
methods [ 1,50,57] also aim at promoting the generation
effect in the premise of efﬁciency. Based on the CNNs
model, [ 13,14,35,39,56] introduce self-attention to the
encoder-transfer-decoder framework for better feature fusion.
Chen et al.[9] propose an Internal-External Style Transfer
algorithm (IEST) containing two types of contrastive loss,
which can produce a harmonious and satisfactory stylization
effect. However, existing encoder-transfer-decoder style
transfer methods cannot handle the long-range dependencies
and may lead to missing details.
Transformer for vision tasks. As an alternative to recur-
rent and convolutional neural networks, transformer [ 51]
is ﬁrst proposed for machine translation tasks and has
been widely used in various NLP tasks [ 4,11,15,36,43,
44]. Inspired by the breakthrough of transformer in NLP,
many researchers have developed vision transformers for
various image/video related tasks [ 60], including object
detection [ 6,12,65], semantic segmentation [ 53,64], image
classiﬁcation [ 10,16,37,55,61], image processing and
generation [ 8,10,24]. Compared with fully convolutional
networks, transformer-based networks can capture long-term
dependencies of the input image by using self-attention
mechanisms. In this paper, we introduce transformer-based
structures for style transfer tasks which can be seen as
sequence-to-sequence generation of image patches.
Positional encoding. Positional encoding is commonly
used in transformer-based models to provide position in-
formation. There are two types of positional encoding
are used: functional andparametric positional encoding.
Functional positional encoding is calculated by pre-deﬁned
functions, such as sinusoidal functions [ 51]. Parametric
positional encoding is learned via model training [ 15]. To
ensure translational-invariance for the transformers, relative
positional encoding [ 20,45,48,62] considers the distance
between tokens in the image sequence. [ 59] and [ 23] further
include positional encoding in CNN-based models as spatial
inductive. In this paper, we propose a content-aware
positional encoding mechanism that is scale-invariant and
more suitable for image generation tasks.
11327