StyTr2: Image Style Transfer with Transformers
Yingying Deng1,2Fan Tang3⇤Weiming Dong1,2*Chongyang Ma4
Xingjia Pan2Lei Wang5Changsheng Xu1,2
1School of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, UCAS2NLPR, Institute of Automation, CAS
3School of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Jilin University4Kuaishou Technology5CIPUC
Abstract
The goal of image style transfer is to render an image
with artistic features guided by a style reference while
maintaining the original content. Owing to the locality
in convolutional neural networks (CNNs), extracting and
maintaining the global information of input images is
difﬁcult. Therefore, traditional neural style transfer methods
face biased content representation. To address this critical
issue, we take long-range dependencies of input images into
account for image style transfer by proposing a transformer-
based approach called StyTr2. In contrast with visual
transformers for other vision tasks, StyTr2contains two
different transformer encoders to generate domain-speciﬁc
sequences for content and style, respectively. Following the
encoders, a multi-layer transformer decoder is adopted to
stylize the content sequence according to the style sequence.
We also analyze the deﬁciency of existing positional encoding
methods and propose the content-aware positional encoding
(CAPE), which is scale-invariant and more suitable for
image style transfer tasks. Qualitative and quantitative
experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed
StyTr2compared with state-of-the-art CNN-based and ﬂow-
based approaches. Code and models are available at
https://github.com/diyiiyiii/StyTR-2 .
1. Introduction
Image style transfer is an interesting and practical
research topic that can render a content image using a
referenced style image. Based on texture synthesis, tra-
ditional style transfer methods [ 5,18] can generate vivid
stylized images, but are computationally complex due to
the formulation of stroke appearance and painting process.
Afterward, researchers focus on neural style transfer based
on convolutional neural networks (CNNs). Optimization-
based style transfer methods [ 19,31,47] render the input
content images with learned style representation iteratively.
Following the encoder-transfer-decoder pipeline, arbitrary
*Co-corresponding authors
Woman with a Hat ,
Henri Matisse,
1905.
conv1_1
layer_1
{conv1_1,conv2_1}
layer_2
{conv1_1,...,conv4_1}
layer_3(a)
(b)
Figure 1. Comparisons of intermediate layers using the leftmost
image as the input content and the style reference in a style transfer
task. (a) Feature visualizations of a pretrained VGG based on Gatys
et al.[19]. (b) Feature visualizations of our transformer decoder.
style transfer networks [ 2,3,22,29,30,33,38,52,54] are
optimized by aligning second-order statistics of content
images to style images and can generate stylized results in
a feed-forward manner efﬁciently. However, these methods
cannot achieve satisfactory results in some cases due to the
limited ability to model the relationship between content
and style. To overcome this issue, several recent methods
[13,14,35,39,63] apply a self-attention mechanism for
improved stylization results.
The aforementioned style transfer methods utilize CNNs
to learn style and content representations. Owing to the
limited receptive ﬁeld of convolution operation, CNNs
cannot capture long-range dependencies without sufﬁcient
layers. However, the increment of network depth could
cause the loss of feature resolution and ﬁne details [ 24]. The
missing details can damage the stylization results in aspects
of content structure preservation and style display. As shown
in Fig. 1(a), some details are omitted in the process of
convolutional feature extraction. An et al.[1] recently show
that typical CNN-based style transfer methods are biased
toward content representation by visualizing the content leak
of the stylization process, i.e., after repeating several rounds
of stylization operations, the extracted structures of input
11326