Beyond Expertise and Roles: A Framework to Characterize the 
Stakeholders of Interpretable Machine Learning and their Needs 
Harini Suresh Steven  R. Gomez 
hsuresh@mit.edu steven.gomez@mit.edu 
MIT MIT 
Kevin K. Nam 
kevin.nam@mit.edu Arvind Satyanarayan 
arvindsatya@mit.edu 
MIT MIT 
ABSTRACT 
To ensure accountability and mitigate harm, it is critical that di-
verse stakeholders can interrogate black-box automated systems 
and fnd information that is understandable, relevant, and useful 
to them. In this paper, we eschew prior expertise- and role-based 
categorizations of interpretability stakeholders in favor of a more 
granular framework that decouples stakeholders’ knowledge from 
their interpretability needs. We characterize stakeholders by their 
formal, instrumental, and personal knowledge and how it mani-
fests in the contexts of machine learning, the data domain, and 
the general milieu. We additionally distill a hierarchical typology 
of stakeholder needs that distinguishes higher-level domain goals 
from lower-level interpretability tasks. In assessing the descriptive, 
evaluative, and generative powers of our framework, we fnd our 
more nuanced treatment of stakeholders reveals gaps and opportu-
nities in the interpretability literature, adds precision to the design 
and comparison of user studies, and facilitates a more refexive 
approach to conducting this research. 
CCS CONCEPTS 
• Human-centered computing → User models ; HCI theory, 
concepts and models. 
KEYWORDS 
interpretability; explainability; machine learning; expertise; knowl-
edge; needs; goals; framework 
ACM Reference Format: 
Harini Suresh, Steven R. Gomez, Kevin K. Nam, and Arvind Satyanarayan. 
2021. Beyond Expertise and Roles: A Framework to Characterize the 
Stakeholders of Interpretable Machine Learning and their Needs. In CHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’21), May 8– 
13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 16 pages. https: 
//doi.org/10.1145/3411764.3445088 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or 
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed 
for proft or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation 
on the frst page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored. 
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s). 
CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan 
© 2021 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). 
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-8096-6/21/05. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3411764.3445088 1 INTRODUCTION 
Automated systems based on machine learning (ML) and artifcial 
intelligence (AI) are often described as “black boxes” due to the 
difculty of extracting the logic behind their outputs in an under-
standable way. The inscrutability of such systems makes it difcult 
for them to facilitate efective trust-building and to be held account-
able for the decisions they afect. A growing body of recent work 
has focused on tackling these issues through model interpretabil-
ity, which involves producing visual explanations about a model’s 
behavior for its users. But to design efective interpretability mech-
anisms, we need to frst consider the question: who, exactly, are the 
stakeholders involved, and what are they trying to achieve? 
Take, for example, an ML-based medical decision-making tool. 
The physicians using the system need to be able to align the output 
with their own clinical expectations and justify their recommenda-
tions to patients. Patients, then, need to have some confdence in 
the validity of these recommendations, and may want to explain de-
cisions to family members. Other medical staf need to understand 
the decision-making processes insofar as it afects the treatment 
they administer to the patient. The developers who created the 
system should be able to monitor its performance and understand 
how to make improvements. Physicians and patients, as well, may 
want and be well-suited to provide feedback about on-the-ground 
errors the system makes. And there are undoubtedly other people 
involved in or afected by this system, from external legal agencies 
to all the people whose data went into training the ML model. 
Existing methods for model interpretability, however, often do 
not explicitly identify or describe their intended user. As a result, 
many of these methods inadvertently end up being most under-
standable to the people that build them (i.e., ML researchers or 
developers). In other cases, the recipient of the interpretability sys-
tem is described generally as a “layperson” or “end user”; resulting 
methods may produce simpler visuals, but experimental studies 
have shown they too often are not useful for people in practice 
[23, 72, 95, 110]. In our prior example, doctors, patients, and medi-
cal staf may all be considered “end users,” but have signifcantly 
diferent needs and goals when interpreting, understanding, and 
reacting to the output of the ML model. Indeed, when it comes 
down to it, many organizations say they want to give users insight 
into ML systems through interpretability mechanisms, but these 
methods are only actually used internally by developers [17]. 
Part of this disconnect stems from the difculty in identifying 
and characterizing diferent stakeholders and their interpretability 
needs. A growing body of work has engagedwith this problem, 
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution International 
4.0 License.