Beyond Expertise and Roles: Characterizing Interpretable ML Stakeholders and Needs CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan 
width         
tive version of the fgure2, hovering over specifc nodes selects all 
papers that contain the code, and highlights links to visualize the 
co-occurrence of other codes. In doing so, the fgure demonstrates 
the composable, many-to-many nature of our framework. 
4.2 Evaluative Power 
Our framework’s evaluative power comes from it’s ability to help 
design more ecologically valid and appropriately-scoped evalua-
tions of interpretability systems/methods. 
Similar to prior work [38], we noticed three methods that are 
primarily used to evaluate interpretability techniques when coding 
the interpretability literature. The most popular approach does 
not involve human evaluation. Instead, example outputs generated 
by the technique are used to illustrate its performance [28, 42,
46, 49, 78, 133, 134] and capabilities including how expressive the 
technique is [91, 92]. The next-most frequent style of evaluation 
are user studies conducted with proxy stakeholders (e.g., sourced 
from Amazon Mechanical Turk or a similar online platform) and/or 
proxy tasks (e.g., guessing a model’s outcome) [26, 29, 37, 71, 79,
95, 130]. Recent work, however, has demonstrated the fallibility
of using proxies — as Buçinca et al. [24] describe, proxies induce a 
diferent style of cognition, forcing participants to explicitly attend 
to explanations and the AI rather than implicitly incorporating 
them as part of the overall process. 
The current gold standard evaluative methodology are 
application-grounded studies [38] in which domain experts en-
gage with real-world tasks which include interpretable ML. For
example, Bussone et al. [23], Wang et al. [119] , and Lundberg et al.
[81] evaluate interpretability methods by asking healthcare profes-
sionals to engage in hypothetical diagnostic scenarios. Although 
these studies often elicit richer and more relevant feedback about a 
system’s real-world implications, they remain relatively rarely used.
We posit that this lack of adoption is due, in part, to the difculty of 
designing such studies — there is little principled guidance on how
to recruit participants, particularly when the real-world situation 
requires specifc types of expertise. Moreover, when comparing 
interpretability techniques, it can be difcult to design a task that 
is equitable for the various conditions. And, even when studies are 
successfully conducted, it can be difcult to understand how the 
results generalize or inform future work. 
We believe our framework’s vocabulary begins to make address-
ing these issues more tractable. In particular, stakeholder knowledge 
and context ofers a more precise way of defning the participant 
pool, including identifying vectors along which it may be accept-
able to introduce proxying. For instance, consider an ML-enabled 
clinical diagnosis; if it were difcult to recruit a sufcient number
of doctors to participate in the study, our framework suggests that 
residents or medical students might also be viable participants be-
cause of their shared formal data domain knowledge (medicine).
Similarly, consider evaluating explanations for loan applications;
our framework helps identify that a study may not be ecologically
valid if participants do not draw from similar pools of personal 
knowledge of the milieu. encoding the number of papers. In a supplemental interac-
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2The interactive fgure is also available online at vis.csail.mit.edu/pubs/beyond-
expertise-roles/framework-connections. Finally, our three-level typology of goals, objectives, and tasks 
provides a structure to operationalize comparative studies. For ex-
ample, to evaluate the relative efectiveness of similar interpretabil-
ity techniques (e.g., the plethora of saliency and attribution meth-
ods) in a human-centric manner, our framework’s tasks may be the 
appropriate level of abstraction to target — they describe operations 
that can be performed directly and measured through quantitative 
and qualitative means, and are thus conducive for A/B testing style 
experiments. On the other hand, for larger-scale interpretability 
systems, it may be more appropriate to target objectives as the 
specifc sequence of operations a participant performs will likely 
vary signifcantly between conditions; thus, results will likely be 
generated qualitatively, through observation and conversation. 
4.3 Generative Power 
Finally, we operationalize our framework to imagine either novel 
futures or futures underexplored by the existing work. 
Generating new personas. Where prior literature has treated 
“non-experts” (i.e., stakeholders without expertise in either machine 
learning or the data domain) as a single, homogeneous group, and 
has designed for them as such, our framework makes explicit how 
heterogenous this group may be. By introducing the context of the 
general milieu, and considering how instrumental and personal 
knowledge may manifest in it, we can generate new stakeholder 
personas and imagine the implications on interpretability design. 
For instance, consider everyday people who have some familiarity 
or exposure to coding, or have tinkered with the Maker move-
ment; we might describe them as having developed mental models 
for “computational thinking,” or instrumental knowledge in the 
milieu under our framework. As a result of this knowledge, per-
haps they would be more amenable to interpretability interfaces 
that promoted interactive question-answering by manipulating in-
puts. Similarly, consider someone who has been closely following 
mainstream media reporting on the propensity of social media rec-
ommendation algorithms to radicalize individuals — our framework 
would describe them as having rich personal knowledge in the 
milieu. Perhaps as a result of this knowledge, this person would be 
initially suspicious of an ML model. In this case, instead of starting 
with a tabula rasa, perhaps an interpretability interface would be 
initialized with summaries of the model’s strengths and weaknesses 
(akin to a model card [84]). 
Generating new persona-need combinations. Deriving 
needs from defnitions of stakeholders has led to a relatively rigid 
set of interpretability needs that are recognized and developed for. 
But, by decoupling needs from stakeholder attributes, our frame-
work allows for a much richer intersection of concerns than prior 
approaches. For example, consider the objective of debugging or 
improving a model (O1) — prior work has typically viewed this as a 
need faced by ML experts, and debugging tools are thus built to pri-
marily serve them. Under our framework, we might describe these 
prior target users as having formal or instrumental ML knowledge; 
but our framework also exposes other stakeholders who might wish 
to address this objective as well: people with personal knowledge 
in the data domain or milieu. Indeed, this aligns with theories of 
personal and formal knowledge in Participatory Action Research. 
As Greenwood and Levin say, “[p]recisely because local stakeholders