CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan Suresh et. al. 
Figure 1: A visualization of the latent chronology in goals and objectives. Categories along the horizontal axis are relevant 
phases of the ML process. Colored cells indicate the phase in which a particular goal or objective typically occurs. Phases need 
not occur linearly, may be iteratively revisited, and many diferent stakeholders may be involved at any given phase. 
has also been broadly accepted in European data protection 
law. Hildebrandt [55] makes a further argument that people 
should understand not only what data about them is being 
utilized, but the potential consequences of this usage as well. 
And Buneman et al. [22] distinguish between diferent types 
of data provenance users may be interested in. Clearly, given 
the prevalence of data mining, this objective is relevant to a 
wide range of stakeholders. 
(O6) Learn about a domain. Through interview studies, both 
Hong et al. [58] and Liao et al. [76] describe how stakehold-
ers across diferent domains use interpretability to generate 
new hypotheses or insights about a domain. For example, 
one participant aimed to use a model predicting surgeons’ 
future performances as a tool to better understand what 
factors drive good performance, rather than using it as a 
predictive system. Hohman et al. [56] focus specifcally on 
data scientists, describing how interpretability helped them 
fnd “valuable nuggets of information” in the data. Similarly, 
Doshi-Velez and Kim [38] identify the use of interpretabil-
ity to advance scientifc understanding. Indeed, there is a 
growing subfeld of machine learning investigating how in-
terpretability mechanisms can aid in scientifc discovery [1]. 
(O7) Contest a decision made based on the model’s output. 
Citron and Pasquale [31] posit that the right to challenge a 
decision afecting oneself should be ensured under due pro-
cess, and Doshi-Velez et al. [39] draw a comparison to the 
legal system, where mechanisms for redress serve as a pow-
erful form of accountability. Wachter et al. [118] also notes 
that the right to contest an automated decision is provided in 
Art. 22(3) of the European General Data Protect Regulation 
(GDPR). An individual afected by an algorithmic system 
may not be the only one who wishes to contest it, either. We 
can imagine that external stakeholders like lawyers, judges, 
or activists may also be interested in pushing back against 
model outputs that seem incorrect, arbitrary, or unfair. 
The third and fnal level of our typology identifes the specifc 
asks a stakeholder can perform to achieve the goals described above. tWe break tasks  out as a separate level of the typology to make clear 
that tasks do not map to objectives in a one-to-one fashion; rather, 
the same task may be used to accomplish several diferent objec-
tives. For instance, detecting discrimination or other undesirable 
behavior in a model’s prediction is likely to be a necessary task for 
both contesting a decision (O7) but also for understanding whether 
or how to incorporate model output in downstream actions (O3). Al-
though the task is shared across these objectives, the specifc type of 
discriminatory behavior a stakeholder may wish to detect, and the 
manner in which is it exposed and communicated, may difer based 
on the domain, the higher-level objective, and the stakeholder’s 
knowledge. Here, we describe several such underlying tasks that we 
found to recur in the literature and give examples of how they can 
be relevant for multiple objectives. As with objectives, we expect 
this level of the typology to grow as ML continues to be deployed 
in new situations. 
(T1) Assess reliability of a given prediction. Understanding 
the reliability of a given prediction is important for deciding 
how (or whether) to incorporate the model’s output into 
further actions (O3), to prevent harmful outcomes or over-
reliance [23, 135]. Similarly, the ability to assess a given 
prediction and show, for example, that it may not have been 
reliable, is likely to provide important evidence for contesting 
a decision (O7). 
(T2) Detect mistaken, discriminatory, or arbitrary behav-
ior. The ability to detect discrimination or other unwanted 
logic codifed in a model is considered a crucial tool for being 
able to contest an automated decision (O7) [39]. Similarly, 
ensuring that predictions are not being made arbitrarily is 
likely necessary to ensure compliance with ethical or legal 
standards (O2). In other cases, detecting incorrect reasoning 
was a way to guide model debugging and elucidate areas 
for improvement (O1) [27]. Some papers also frame this task 
as its converse, i.e., verifying that predictions are sensible 
and/or fair (by some defnition) [101]. 
(T3) Understand the extent of the information the model 
is using. Understanding details and extent of features used