Beyond Expertise and Roles: Characterizing Interpretable ML Stakeholders and Needs CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan 
evaluation system: explanations in the ML context would articulate 
the output decision in terms of model components, while expla-
nations in the data domain might also discuss distributions in the 
training or test set and how this may lead to biased output. How-
ever, under our framework, we would consider these explanations 
to be incomplete if they were not situated the broader sociocultural 
milieu — for instance, how disparities in data distributions have 
occurred through policies such as redlining, or in the difculty 
ex-ofenders have in fnding employment. 
Finally, by decoupling knowledge and context as two orthog-
onal dimensions of the problem space, our framework enables a 
more systematic analysis of the stakeholders of interpretability. 
It eschews prior easily-quantifable linear scales in favor of more 
descriptive treatments of expertise. Designers can work with each 
dimension individually — for example, how might interpretability 
help stakeholders formalize their personal knowledge in the data 
domain by scafolding example-based explanation with featured-
based saliency methods akin to faded worked examples [8]; or, as 
described previously, how might instrumental knowledge in the 
data domain transfer to the machine learning context [27]. And, 
by considering the intersection of the two dimensions as well, our 
framework can help us identify the ways in which expertise recurs 
in the interpretability ecosystem. 
3.2 Distilling Stakeholder Needs into Goals, 
   Objectiv
es, and Tasks
Through our open coding and refection process, we distilled a 
three-level typology of interpretability needs. The frst level iden-
tifes two long-term goals : understanding the model (G1) and 
building trust in the model (G2). These goals are high-level and 
difcult to defne precisely, but we include them in our framework 
to acknowledge that they underlie almost every single piece of 
work we read. We do not expect stakeholders to be able to directly 
accomplish these goals, nor do we imagine that future methods or 
systems will address them squarely. Rather, these goals function 
like substrates which inform and infuence the two lower levels of 
needs we describe below. For instance, we expect stakeholders to 
develop an understanding of models over time — through repeated 
exposure and interactions. And much work has framed trust as 
something society as a whole needs in order to accept new tech-
nologies [21, 118, 132] — indeed, trust may grow as stakeholders 
better understand the model, but may also develop in a proxied or 
deferred fashion through increased regulations and standards. 
The second level of our typology describes the shorter-term 
objectives stakeholders might target to achieve their longer-term 
goals. We give real examples for each objective, and demonstrate 
how they can be relevant to a diverse range of stakeholders. These 
objectives are grounded in stakeholders’ current real-world needs, 
but as ML tools continue to be deployed in new domains, we expect 
this typology will continue to evolve. 
(O1) Debug or improve a model. The objective of improving a 
system or correcting its mistakes appears frequently in the 
literature, and is often posed in terms of the needs of devel-
opers [21, 54, 76]. For example, Bhatt et al. [17] describe how 
internal members of organizations try to use interpretability 
techniques to uncover inconsistencies between the model’s logic and their intuition or expectations, in order to guide 
further improvements. However, it is critical to acknowledge 
that developers are not the only stakeholder group to which 
this need applies. For instance, Tonekaboni et al. [114] and 
Zarsky [132] both highlight the value of allowing a larger 
group of stakeholders, including the general public, to pro-
vide feedback for improving systems. Indeed, theories from 
Participatory Action Research also hold that people on the 
ground in a specifc context are often much better suited 
to realize errors and devise appropriate fxes, as opposed 
to developers for whom the errors typically have no direct 
consequence [50]. 
(O2) Ensure compliance with standards or regulations. Au-
diting, or ensuring that the development, deployment, and 
results of a certain system are compliant with a particular 
set of standards (whether they are legal, ethical, safety, or 
other) is already necessary in other areas such as fnance or 
aerospace, and is emerging as an important objective for ML 
systems as well. The introduction of the GDPR, for example, 
has established a set of legal standards that automated sys-
tems must comply with. And it is not only external watchdog 
agencies or governments that are interested in ensuring such 
compliance. Individuals or groups within an organization 
may also have their own internal standards they want to 
ensure are met — for example, Raji et al. [97] describe the 
design of an internal auditing pipeline. 
(O3) Understand how to incorporate the model’s output 
into downstream actions. Several prior papers mention 
the need for guidance on whether and how to incorporate 
model predictions into further actions — whether that in-
volves relating the model’s output to relevant and actionable 
decisions, or understanding how much weight to place on 
the model’s prediction [17, 21, 58, 76, 114]. This objective 
emerged as important for a number of diferent types of 
stakeholders, such as doctors using a diagnostic aid [58, 114], 
people applying for health insurance that involves auto-
mated screening [17], or for those subjected to automated 
decisions more generally [118]. 
(O4) Justify or explain actions infuenced by a model’s out-
put. Through interviews with Intensive Care Unit and Emer-
gency Department clinicians, Tonekaboni et al. [114] de-
scribe clinicians’ desire to justify decisions infuenced by a 
model’s output to patients or colleagues. Similarly, by in-
terviewing the head of AI at a bank using automated credit 
evaluations, Hong et al. [58] identify the need to justify to 
customers decisions that were infuenced by the model. In 
addition to the immediate stakeholders acting on the model 
output (executors according to Tomsett et al. [113] ), this goal 
can also stem from people about whom a decision was made 
(decision subjects ). For example, Zarsky [132] frames the need 
to provide someone with an explanation of a decision or ac-
tion that afects them as one that is necessary in order to 
respect their autonomy. 
(O5) Understand how one’s data is being used. Zarsky [132] 
grounds this objective in the theoretical premise of informa-
tion privacy rights, framing it as an extension of individual 
autonomy. The need to have control over one’s personal data