CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan Suresh et. al. 
take action in their own environments, the consequences of errors are 
both signifcant to them and often rapidly apparent” [50]. In con-
trast, researchers with more formal knowledge may “rarely know 
whether they are right or not, as their fndings seldom are acted upon 
and the practical results from their research rarely have direct conse-
quences for them.” Feminist standpoint theory [51] would further 
posit that what is even considered an “error” or harmful might 
difer depending on the stakeholder’s personal knowledge. 
Generating new designs. One might initially consider our 
framework to be silent on how to design for particular stakehold-
ers — for instance, it does not explicitly prescribe when to use local 
explanations [100], saliency maps, or feature visualization [91, 92]. 
However, our more granular defnitions of expertise allows us to 
adapt theories of knowledge development from cognitive science 
and pedagogy. In particular, the cognitive science literature de-
scribes a process of “chunking”, where people organize and think 
about information in terms of high-level concepts (or “chunks”) 
which develop through experience, familiarity, and with increased 
knowledge [4, 82, 88]. Similarly, the literature on expertise ofers 
several models of decision making that posit two modes: analytic or 
deliberative thinking that is based in formal or instrumental knowl-
edge, and intuitive thinking that is based on informal or personal 
knowledge. Thus, when designing interfaces for ML interpretabil-
ity, designers could begin by frst eliciting and characterizing the 
knowledge their stakeholders have, and the associated cognitive 
chunks and/or modes of thinking. Standardized instruments — such 
as the Preference for Intuition and Deliberation (PID) scale [15] — 
could also be used. These results could then inform what features 
are used in an explanation (e.g., raw features or higher level combi-
nations of features that align more with the stakeholder’s cognitive 
chunks) or what types of explanations are given (e.g., more intuitive 
example-based explanations versus more analytical or mechanistic 
explanations). Prior work by Wang et al. [119] provides further 
guidance on how particular types of explanations can be more/less 
suited to diferent modes of reasoning. 
Situating stakeholders’ knowledge and goals within broader 
societal power dynamics can also help inform what sorts of inter-
pretability methods do or do not work towards subverting existing 
hierarchies. Indeed, the literature on expertise from which we de-
rive our framework inextricably links types of knowledge with 
issues of power. In particular, as Fleck notes, “the view of knowledge 
as being disinterested or value neutral is idealistic” and “the posses-
sion of formal knowledge confers status and consequently a measure 
of power or infuence within organizations” [45]. Interpretability 
can play a key role here, addressing the “pathology of benefcence” 
that Yielder describes [128] — where experts have a tendency to 
make decisions for people rather than allowing them to decide for 
themselves — and reducing the ability of experts to merely “rent” 
out their knowledge [70]. However, this work must be conducted 
carefully for, as Thatcher et al. [111] observes, “[t]he very obscurity 
of transformation from individual data point to commodifed, aggre-
gate big data also masks the asymmetrical power relations between 
users of technology and the almost exclusively corporate entities which 
algorithmically collect, link, and analyze the data points of many 
users. ” Take the example of a mortgage applicant living in a redlined 
neighborhood, who wishes to contest the ML-based decision to re-
ject their application. Their relative lack of power in this situation may be further compounded if they have little formal ML or data 
domain knowledge. We can begin to see, then, that interpretability 
methods that put the onus on the individual to change things about 
themselves in order to receive a better outcome (e.g., “Had your 
income been $3000 higher, you would have received the loan”) help 
uphold, rather than subvert, existing hierarchies. Interpretability 
methods that instead shift their gaze upwards and focus on alert-
ing afected stakeholders to potentially discriminatory or arbitrary 
behaviors by the algorithm might provide much stronger evidence 
to fght against the reigning power diferentials [13]. 
Generating a more refexive design process. The scope of 
interpretable ML should not be imagined by researchers or en-
gineers alone — building interpretability systems that challenge 
power hinge on the involvement of stakeholders with diferent 
goals and knowledge. Indeed, people with formal knowledge (e.g., 
interpretability researchers, developers and designers, and the in-
stitutions within which they work) are often precisely the ones in 
positions of power over those with more personal knowledge (often 
those most directly afected by algorithmic systems). The concept 
of interest convergence, which stems from critical race theory, holds 
that those in power tend to support goals that serve their own inter-
ests [90]. In other words, without actively involving stakeholders 
whose interests are in opposition to existing power structures, and 
considering their input crucial, resultant interpretability systems 
will ft the standards and needs of those in power — for example, 
executives with a vested interest in maintaining the status quo, or 
engineers and researchers who might communicate about model 
decisions in a way that is not understandable to people without for-
mal ML knowledge. Involving stakeholders with diferent interests 
frst requires refexivity, or explicitly acknowledging what our own 
backgrounds and interests are. However, doing so in the abstract 
can be difcult. While our framework was primarily designed to 
describe the external stakeholders of interpretable ML, we believe 
it can also be turned to focus internally on the participants of the 
interpretability design process. By using it to describe our knowl-
edge and goals, we can more clearly recognize gaps in our own 
knowledge and, thus, the additional people we must deliberately 
include. 
5 LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, we present a framework to characterize the stakehold-
ers of interpretable ML, and their needs. Our framework depicts 
stakeholder expertise as a two-dimensional space that describes 
the knowledge they possess (formal, instrumental, and personal 
knowledge), and the contexts in which this knowledge manifests 
(ML, the data domain, and the milieu). Our framework also de-
tails stakeholder needs as a three-level typology of long-term goals 
(understanding the model, and building trust in it), shorter-term ob-
jectives that build towards these goals (e.g., debugging a model, or 
contesting a decision), and fnally immediate tasks that stakeholders 
can perform to meet their objectives (e.g., assess prediction relia-
bility, and detect mistakes). In evaluating our framework, we fnd 
that it suitably covers a sample of 58 papers on ML interpretability, 
and its granular structure reveals gaps in the literature. Moreover, 
while speculative, we believe the framework ofers the necessary 
vocabulary to assist in more precisely comparing and conducting