CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan Suresh et. al. 
Table 1: Examples of how the three types of knowledge manifest in the three contexts described by our framework. 
Knowledge 
Context Formal Instrumental Personal 
ML The math behind model architectures, optimiza-
tion and training processes, etc. Familiarity with ML toolkits, of-the-shelf models, 
etc. Tricks of the trade (e.g., hyperparameter values, 
feature engineering, etc.) 
Data Domain Theories relevant to the data domain (e.g., symp-
toms and treatments, case law and legal precedent, 
etc.) Experience working with other related technol-
ogy (e.g., medical devices, document mining tools, 
etc.) Lived experience (e.g., prior memories of similar 
events) 
Milieu Sociocultural theories (e.g., redlining, gerryman-
dering, mass incarceration, etc.) Familiarity with broader ML-enabled systems 
(e.g., virtual assistants, recommendation algo-
rithms, etc.) Lived experience and cultural knowledge (e.g., 
values, attitudes) 
of expertise, we adapt models of expertise from Fleck [45] and Er-
aut [43] to decompose a singular notion of expertise into three con-
stituent types of knowledge. Formal knowledge comprises an un-
derstanding of codifed theories, embodied in text or diagrams such 
as those found in textbooks, and is acquired through a prolonged 
educational process. Instrumental knowledge is an understanding 
of how to “apply” formal knowledge. It is embodied in the use of 
tools or other instruments, and is learnt through demonstration and 
practice. Finally, personal knowledge describes information that is 
entirely embodied in individual people, and is gained through their 
participation in specifc domains. It is difcult to codify [43] as it 
consists of a person’s lived experience (e.g., memories of specifc 
events, self-knowledge about the way they may react in certain 
scenarios, etc.) as well as values that may be distributed in the 
cultures and societies they are a member of. 
These types of knowledge manifest in contexts, or the domains 
or situations that determine what knowledge is relevant. We iden-
tify three contexts: machine learning , or the knowledge required 
to research, develop, operate, or deploy machine learning models; 
the data domain , or the knowledge necessary to collect, organize, 
analyze, and communicate the data the model was trained with 
or makes decisions about; and milieus , which refer to the envi-
ronments that the human-AI interaction may be occurring within. 
These environments include both the physical surroundings (e.g., a 
home, bank, courthouse, doctor’s ofce, etc.) as well as the broader 
sociocultural context (e.g., mass incarceration, redlining, gerryman-
dering, etc.). 
Our framework provides a more expansive yet precise treat-
ment of expertise in interpretable ML. While prior expertise- or 
role-based approaches latently encode notions of formal and instru-
mental knowledge, by explicitly articulating these concepts, our 
framework facilitates teasing apart diferences and understanding 
the implications on interpretability design. For example, “model 
users” [57] and “model breakers” [58] cover an extremely broad 
range of possible stakeholders including model architects, trainers, 
engineers, data scientists, and machine learning artists [57], as well 
as domain experts, product managers, and auditors [58], respec-
tively. These categories appear primarily focused on stakeholders’ 
instrumental knowledge and, by analyzing contexts, we can sepa-
rate machine learning instrumentalists (model architects, trainers) from data domain instrumentalists (artists, domain experts, prod-
uct managers), and those that may span the two (data scientists, 
auditors). Doing so suggests that these stakeholder groups may 
have diferent interpretability needs that the broader categories 
of “model users” or “model breakers” obscured. For instance, per-
haps interfaces for machine learning instrumentalists should be 
articulated in terms of the components exposed by popular toolkits. 
Similarly, for data domain instrumentalists, how might we analo-
gize interpretability to tools and systems that they already work 
with in order to enable expertise transfer (akin to how Cai et al. 
found medical practitioners reasoning about uncertainty [27])? 
Moreover, our framework explicitly recognizes the personal 
knowledge stakeholders may have — including “tricks of the trade” 
a person may have acquired, their experiences and memories, or 
the more distributed values of the cultures and societies they are 
a member of — as an important consideration when designing for 
interpretability. Critically, by placing it alongside formal and in-
strumental knowledge, our framework identifes it as an equally 
important form of knowledge. As a result, one might consider de-
signing for stakeholders’ personal knowledge — for instance, using 
example-based explanations such that a stakeholder might better 
“see themselves” in the data [2, 94, 99]. But our framework also sug-
gests designing with stakeholders, to better account for personal 
knowledge that designers do not have — a position advocated for by 
various communities including participatory action research [50] & 
design [69, 108]. For instance, members of the general public might 
have diferent notions of what constitutes an “error” based on their 
personal knowledge [51]. 
Our framework also highlights that interpretability design must 
attend to more than the immediate contexts of machine learning and 
the data domain — explanations must be situated in stakeholders’ 
milieu. Here, we draw an analogy to data visualization. Researchers 
and data journalists consider annotations to be a crucial component 
of efective visualization design because it helps readers understand 
the broader context associated with the visualized data. As Amanda 
Cox, Data Editor for The New York Times, says, “the annotation 
layer is the most important thing we do ... otherwise it’s a case of here 
it is, you go fgure it out [33]. We believe this property holds true for 
interpretability as well — it is insufcient for an explanation to be 
articulated purely in terms of the model or data if it misses critical 
aspects of the milieu. For instance, consider an ML-backed loan