Beyond Expertise and Roles: Characterizing Interpretable ML Stakeholders and Needs CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan 
emerged as important for explaining actions infuenced by 
the model (O4). Tonekaboni et al. [114] , for example, describe 
how doctors felt that understanding the clinically relevant 
model features that were used was critical to frst rationaliz-
ing the predictions to themselves, and then explaining them 
to patients. Depending on the context, recognizing higher-
level groups of features (e.g., “demographic information,” 
“patient medical history”) may be more understandable and 
feasible than individual features. We can also imagine that 
developing this understanding will also be an important way 
for stakeholders to identify what aspects of their personal 
data are being incorporated into a specifc system (O5) [55]. 
(T4) Understand the infuence of diferent factors on the 
model’s output. For stakeholders who are interested in 
generating new insights about a domain (O6), understanding 
how diferent factors infuence the output is key. Roscher 
et al. [102] provide several examples of deriving scientifc or 
medical insights by investigating the impact of scientifcally-
meaningful factors on predictive outcomes. This task is also 
important for ensuring compliance with particular standards 
or regulations (O2), which may detail when/how it is accept-
able to use certain features. Unlike T3, this task may not 
provide a comprehensive understanding of the features used 
(e.g., perhaps just listing the most important) and is more 
focused on the ways those features infuence the output. 
(T5) Understand model strengths and limitations. Under-
standing the model’s overall potential weaknesses is crit-
ical for understanding how to incorporate its output into 
further actions (O3). For example, Cai et al. [27] describe 
how doctors consistently wanted to know the proposed AI 
tool’s specifc limitations so that they could anticipate and 
account for them during decision-making. Understanding 
areas of weakness is likely to also be useful for debugging 
and improving the model (O1), e.g., by guiding additional 
data collection or training. 
Note that specifc implementations (e.g., counterfactual expla-
nations [118]) are not included at the task-level; rather, they are 
used to implement a particular task. For example, counterfactual 
explanations might be one way to implement the task “detect dis-
criminatory behavior” (T2), but might be more or less appropriate 
depending on the stakeholder’s knowledge, their overarching objec-
tive, and the surrounding context. Section 4.3 (Generative Power) 
further discusses the implications our framework might have on 
choosing particular methods. 
While several prior literature surveys have sought to collate and 
organize a list of interpretability needs, our framework makes some 
key advances to provide a more nuanced understanding these needs. 
First, where prior surveys focus primarily on computer science sub-
disciplines [44, 57, 87], our framework incorporates these insights 
and extends them by looking to the legal literature [31, 55, 118, 132] 
and research on participatory action and design [50, 108]. As a re-
sult, our framework is able to surface objectives such as “contesting 
a decision” (O7) or “understanding how one’s data is being used” 
(O5) that prior surveys did not identify. 
Second, and more importantly, where prior approaches defne 
interpretability needs as a function of stakeholder expertise or role, our framework defnes these needs as an independent component 
of the problem space. As a result, and as the examples above illus-
trate, our framework helps reveal that interpretability needs can 
cut across several diferent stakeholders. For instance, model debug-
ging (O1) is one of the most frequently identifed interpretability 
goals; but, prior work has primarily categorized it as a need ma-
chine learning experts (or model builders and developers) have. In 
contrast, our framework identifes that although certain stakehold-
ers may not have much formal or instrumental machine learning 
knowledge, their personal knowledge may be crucial for identifying 
or fxing model errors. Similarly, while it may have previously been 
tempting to think that contesting a decision (O7) is a need primarily 
expressed by decision subjects, our framework highlights that other 
stakeholders (including lawyers, judges, and activists) may wish to 
do so as well to afect systematic change. 
Finally, in contrast to the uniform treatment of prior interpretabil-
ity surveys, our framework provides new levels of abstraction for 
discussing interpretability needs. In doing so, we can distinguish 
that these needs form a hierarchy: immediate tasks help stakehold-
ers accomplish short-term objectives which, over time, achieve 
long-term goals. As with other multi-level typologies [20], this 
structure surfaces the compositionality latent in this space. For 
instance, as described above, there is a many-to-many relationship 
between goals, objectives, and tasks: one task may apply to sev-
eral objectives; many tasks may be required to accomplish a single 
objective; and, together, they are all necessary to achieve goals. Sim-
ilarly, our three-level sequence allows for describing interpretability 
needs as sequences of action. For example, to improve a model (O1), 
a stakeholder may wish to understand its strengths and limitations 
(T5) by repeatedly assessing the reliability of individual predictions 
(T1); or, a stakeholder’s trust in the model (G2) may increase or 
decrease as a result of better understanding how it works (G1). 
While we do not ascribe objectives to specifc roles or expertise 
levels as in prior work, we note that they nevertheless exhibit a la-
tent temporal structure — for example, the need to understand how 
a model’s output should be incorporated into a decision (O3) occurs 
before someone wishing to contest that decision (O7). However, 
formalizing this latent chronology is not straightforward, as a given 
objective may (re)occur at several diferent stages during the ML 
process. And, there is a risk of unintentionally recapitulating prior 
stakeholder categorizations as particular roles or expertise may be 
implicitly associated with diferent stages of the ML process. 
As a result, the chronology we settle on, shown in Figure 1, is 
more fexible and refers to broad phases of the ML process. Rather 
than provide a precise ordering, it is meant to lend some help-
ful structure to the many stakeholder objectives. We indicate the 
phase(s) in which a particular objective typically occurs, and note 
that these phases are likely to unfold iteratively. For example, the 
development and deployment stages may be revisited after observ-
ing a system’s downstream impact. Furthermore, many diferent 
stakeholders may be involved in each phase. For example, beyond 
engineers with formal ML or data knowledge, downstream users 
with signifcant personal knowledge may provide input to the devel-
opment phase of a particular system if they report bugs or provide 
feedback that is used to retrain the model. We omit tasks from 
this chronology to preserve the many-to-many mapping between 
objectives and tasks.