Beyond Expertise and Roles: Characterizing Interpretable ML Stakeholders and Needs CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan 
confate expertise and interpretability needs — for example, model 
“creators” are likely most expert with machine learning, and thus 
need debugging tools at the level of individual instances or features; 
but, one could imagine “auditors” appreciating insight at this level 
of abstraction even if they lack an equivalent level of machine learn-
ing expertise. Similarly, consider the domain of clinical diagnoses: 
model “consumers” could equally describe doctors and patients 
despite these users likely requiring diferent explanations of the 
model’s output as a result of diferent levels of medical expertise. 
Here, model “executors” does not provide much more precision 
as both doctors and patients are tasked with making decisions in-
formed by the model — doctors about what treatment to prescribe, 
and patients about whether they do indeed wish to proceed with the 
treatment. Finally, although most role-based frameworks explicitly 
note that roles are not mutually exclusive (i.e., a single role may 
map to more than one individual, and one person may play several 
roles), roles are nevertheless depicted as relatively static constructs. 
Not only might an individual user’s role change over time but, even 
if they remain in the same role(s), their interpretability needs may 
change through repeated exposure to and increased familiarity with 
the models they are working with, or the situations in which these 
models are deployed. 
Expertise-based frameworks exhibit similar limitations. In par-
ticular, a key concern is how these frameworks portray expertise 
as a linear scale from “novice” to “expert.” Several external litera-
tures have articulated concerns with this framing of expertise. For 
instance, in critiquing the infuential Dreyfus linear model of skill 
acquisition [40], Dall’Alba & Sandberg note that “[s]tage models of 
development appear to assume we know what skillful performance 
entails for each area of skill” and that the “focus on stages veils 
more fundamental aspects of development; it directs attention away 
from the skill that is being developed” [34]. Moreover, Dall’Alba 
& Sandberg point to the fact that such models are primarily con-
cerned with cognitive development and fail to acknowledge ex-
pertise gained through embodied practice of a skill [34]. We see a 
form of this latter critique in the literature on participatory design 
as well, which advocates that all stakeholders in a design process 
possess valuable expertise through their lived experience and tacit 
knowledge [69, 108]. Finally, although recent frameworks usefully 
consider domain expertise in addition to machine learning expertise, 
such a clean decoupling does not account for the ways expertise 
may transfer. For example, Cai et al. fnd that while medical practi-
tioners express a desire for an “AI primer”, they are nevertheless 
able to bring some of their training and experience working with 
other clinical technologies to bear — for instance, in understanding 
that the output of a model will not be perfect, or in enumerating 
“test cases” for an AI assistant [27]. Similarly, as AI/ML-enabled 
technologies increasingly permeate every day life, this ubiquity 
and familiarity will shape users’ interpretability needs in ways that 
current expertise-based frameworks leave unaddressed. 
And, across the two types of frameworks, interpretability needs 
or goals are determined primarily by the category a user falls within. 
While many frameworks allow for categories to overlap, this ap-
proach nevertheless obscures the fact that many goals can cut across 
several roles or expertise. For instance, almost every stakeholder 
involved will likely want to have trust in the model, and want to 
be able to assess the degree to which it may be biased — we see explicit evidence for this for machine learning experts [57] and 
data experts [87], model creators and breakers [58], model opera-
tors [27, 114], as well as for decision- and data-subjects who may 
wish to contest a decision or otherwise seek recourse [ 6, 69]. Sim-
ilarly, while current frameworks primarily pose debugging and 
improving the model as goals model creators, builders, or any other 
traditionally-“expert” stakeholders may have, one could imagine 
that activists and other groups with non-traditional expertise may 
also wish to assess the outcome of domain-specifc test cases. 
In summary, recent work has recognized that better defning 
the problem space is a key challenge for machine learning inter-
pretability, and has advanced our understanding by contributing 
frameworks for describing the stakeholders involved and their goals 
or needs. However, in analyzing the descriptive and generative pow-
ers of these frameworks, we see several limitations. In particular, 
by not providing a sufciently granular or composable vocabulary, 
existing frameworks poorly distinguish the rich intersection that 
exists between attributes of the stakeholder (e.g., their expertise), 
the role that they may play (e.g., model creator or consumer), and 
their ultimate goals or needs with regards to interpretability (e.g., 
debugging the model, or building trust). 
3 A FRAMEWORK TO CHARACTERIZE THE 
STAKEHOLDERS OF INTERPRETABLE ML 
To develop a more granular and composable vocabulary for de-
scribing the stakeholders of interpretable machine learning, we 
engaged in an iterative process with alternating phases to diverge 
and converge our thinking. In particular, we began by survey-
ing the literature on interpretability summarized in the previous 
section, and extracting passages that described users and stake-
holders, as well as their needs, actions, and goals. To diverge our 
thinking, we looked to domains outside of interpretability and 
computer science, including the literatures on expertise and ped-
agogy [18, 34, 43, 45, 52, 53, 64, 120, 123, 128, 129], critical the-
ory [6, 74, 85, 90, 111], law [31, 39, 55, 118, 132], and participatory 
action research [50, 60]. To converge our thinking, we refected 
on how concepts from these external domains could be adapted 
within interpretability. This refection process involved alternating 
phases of open coding to map external concepts to the passages we 
had initially extracted, afnity diagramming to identify recurring 
groupings and patterns between codes, analytic memo writing, and 
weekly hour-long conversations between all authors. 
Our framework comprises two halves. First, it describes the 
knowledge stakeholders may possess and the contexts this knowl-
edge may manifest in. And, second, it enumerates the long-term 
goals stakeholders may have, and breaks these goals down into 
shorter-term objectives and specifc tasks they can perform. 
3.1 Decomposing Stakeholder Expertise into Knowle
dge and Context 
Prior work has identifed, either explicitly [57] or implicitly via 
roles [58, 87, 113], that expertise is a defning attribute of inter-
pretable ML stakeholders. To provide a more granular treatment