CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan Suresh et. al. 
proposing an ecosystem of stakeholders [96, 113], and conducting 
literature surveys [44, 57, 87, 131] and interview studies [27, 58, 114] 
to understand their goals. Resultant frameworks typically adopt 
one of two approaches: they either categorize stakeholders by 
their expertise (using labels such as “experts”, “novices”, or “non-
experts” [57, 87, 131]) or by their functional role in the ecosystem 
(e.g., “executives” and “engineers” [17], model “breakers” and “con-
sumers” [58], or model “operators” and “executors” [113]). Stake-
holder needs and goals then follow from these categories. While 
usefully advancing our understanding of the stakeholders involved, 
these initial frameworks are limited in their descriptive and gener-
ative powers [14]. For instance, role-based frameworks implicitly 
confate a person’s expertise with what they need from the sys-
tem, with roles often depicted as a relatively static constructs. And 
expertise-based categories typically portray stakeholders lying on 
roughly linear scales that only account for cognitive notions of 
expertise and, thus, do not acknowledge the rich tacit knowledge 
and lived experience they may possess. 
In response, we introduce a framework with a more granular 
and composable vocabulary to characterize the stakeholders of 
interpretable machine learning, and their needs. Our framework 
comprises two components. First, we decompose stakeholder ex-
pertise into two dimensions that describe the types of knowledge a 
stakeholder may possess (i.e., formal, instrumental, and personal 
knowledge), and the contexts in which this knowledge manifests 
(i.e., machine learning, the data domain, and the milieu). Second, 
we defne stakeholder needs using a three-level typology of long-
term goals, shorter-term objectives that target these goals, and 
immediate tasks that stakeholders perform to meet their objectives. 
To understand the implications of our framework, we assess its 
descriptive, evaluative, and generative powers — three properties of 
interaction models frst described by Michel Beaudouin-Lafon [14]. 
We code 58 papers describing interpretability systems or users, and 
fnd that our framework is consistently able to describe stakehold-
ers’ knowledge and interpretability needs while adding granularity 
and drawing new connections between them. We describe how 
our framework’s abstractions can allow us to design more precise 
application-grounded evaluations [38], including bringing precision 
to participant recruiting and providing a structure to operationalize 
comparative studies. And fnally, we demonstrate that our frame-
work generates a rich intersection of user expertise and needs for 
study, and can also be turned inwards to facilitate a more refexive 
design process. 
2 BACKGROUND AND MOTIVATION 
Researchers have recognized that more precisely defning “inter-
pretability” or “explainability” is a key challenge for the feld [80]. 
Although some work seeks to develop formal or technical defni-
tions of interpretability [36, 38, 47], and though the burgeoning 
set of interpretability techniques often do not name specifc target 
users or tasks [ 9, 42, 100, 133, 137], there is a growing recognition 
for the need to approach this problem space in a human-oriented 
manner. In this section, we motivate our contribution by surveying 
prior work and describing the limitations we observe with cur-
rent approaches for defning the why and who of machine learning 
interpretability. In early defnitions, Lipton [80] and Doshi-Velez & Kim [38] 
identifed that the need for interpretability primarily stems from 
a mismatch between the formal defnition of the machine learn-
ing model, and its output and real-world impact. Lipton further 
expanded on this need by enumerating a set of desiderata for inter-
pretability including building trust in the model, inferring causal 
relationships between the input and output, improving model tran-
ferability and generalizability, providing introspection, and fnally 
to facilitate fair and ethical decision-making. Others have since 
contributed to this list in a variety of ways including detailing 
how diferent interpretability methods can be chosen to mitigate 
particular cognitive biases [119], proposing taxonomies of ques-
tions used to arrive at an appropriate interpretability method [7], 
discussing how applications with diferent contexts or levels of 
automation might necessitate diferent design decisions [77, 106], 
and grounding the need for explanations in the social sciences [83]. 
Most relevant to our paper is a body of work that seeks to better 
defne interpretability by studying the specifc users involved. In 
surveying this work, we identifed two distinct approaches to doing 
so. First are a group of papers that characterize users based on 
their expertise. For instance, both Yu & Shi [131] and Hohman et 
al. [57] classify users on roughly linear scales of machine learning 
expertise (from beginner to expert for Yu & Shi, while Hohman et al. 
adopt the terms “model developers and builders,” “model users,” and 
“non-experts”). Similarly, Mohseni et al. [87] identify “AI Novices” 
and “AI Experts” and add “Data Experts” to the mix. With all of 
these schemes, a user’s needs then stem from their expertise. For 
instance, novices are typically described as needing educational 
or teaching tools, whereas experts require tools for debugging or 
deploying models, or assessing model performance. 
The second category of papers characterize users based on their 
functional role instead. For instance, Tomsett et al. [113] posit an 
ecosystem of stakeholders including model creators, operators, ex-
ecutors and examiners, as well as the decision and data subjects 
that are afected by the model or whose data the model was trained 
with, respectively. Similarly, through semi-structured interviews, 
Bhatt et al. [17] identify four categories of stakeholders (executives, 
ML engineers, end users, and others) while Hong et al. [58] identify 
model builders, breakers, and consumers. Across this work, the 
role a person inhabits within an organization (or the role they play 
during the human-AI interaction) determines their interpretability 
needs. For example, model creators/builders/engineers are said to 
want introspection of the level of individual instances and features, 
model operators/breakers may wish to monitor the performance of 
the model including authoring test cases, and fnally model execu-
tors/executives/consumers want to be able to have confdence and 
trust in the model. Cai et al. [27] and Tonekaboni et al. [114] follow 
this approach of role-based needfnding as well by interviewing 
clinicians. 
While both expertise-oriented and role-oriented frameworks 
have usefully brought further defnition to the problem of machine 
learning interpretability, we can observe limitations to their descrip-
tive and generative powers (i.e., the degree to which they describe 
existing points, and help us identify new points in the problem 
space, respectively [14]). Role-based frameworks, for instance, do 
not break the problem space down into sufciently granular and 
composable units. As a result, several roles appear to implicitly