CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan Suresh et. al. 
Figure 2: A state of an interactive fgure, included in supplementary material2, that visualizes the results of the analysis of our 
framework’s descriptive power. We see how the two halves of the framework (knowledge-contexts and goals-objectives-tasks) 
provide a more granular and composable vocabulary with which to describe 58 papers from the literature on ML interpretabil-
ity. Light grey links represent the set of all papers, and connect codes that appear together. The width of the link corresponds 
to the number of papers it represents. We use "code undetermined" to indicate cases where we were not able to code a particular 
category (e.g., if a paper did not explicitly specify a knowledge-context). In the interactive fgure, hovering over a code selects 
all papers that contain the code, and highlights links to visualize the co-occurrence of other codes (e.g., "O2" shown here). 
which capture substantial technical expertise. The most observed 
objectives were justifying or explain decisions infuenced by 
model output (O4, 21/58) and debugging and model improvement 
(O1, 21/58). The most common tasks were understanding factors 
that infuence the model output (T4, 11/58) and detecting mis-
taken/arbitrary behavior (T2, 8/58). We note, however, that there 
were some goals or objectives that arose which we were not able 
to categorize given our current framework, such as persuading the 
user [89, 105]. In the current version, we have chosen not to explic-
itly integrate this into the framework because it was presented as a 
need imposed upon a stakeholder by, e.g., the company deploying 
a particular system, while the current needs we describe are driven 
by the stakeholder themselves. 
Beyond its comprehensiveness, the framework is often able to 
add an additional layer of granularity. For example, whereas many 
papers describe people with various types of milieu knowledge as 
“lay users,” we are able to recognize and tease apart the diferent 
types of expertise they possess. In other cases, we are able to pro-
vide consistency and draw similarities between concepts that were 
previously obscured — for example, from looking at Table 3, we can 
see that there are many papers that use diferent terminology to 
ultimately refer to the same goal. 
In using our framework as a descriptive instrument, we found 
that users’ personal knowledge is often the most challenging to 
defne due to the subtle ways it may interact with its context. For 
example, personal knowledge in a particular domain may cross 
over into the milieu in cases where a decision domain intersects 
with everyday functions in society, like fnance (“loan applicants", 
who learn to interact with banking ecosystems). At the same time, another decision subject such as a medical patient might acquire 
personal domain knowledge by learning about a medical condi-
tion that afects them and relating that knowledge to their own 
symptoms and experiences. Personal knowledge may also be less 
observable by experimenters who are evaluating and developing 
systems using traditional processes; however, we believe devel-
oping methods for eliciting this knowledge is an under-explored 
opportunity for human-centered design. 
Our framework also helps reveal patterns of under- and over-
representation of certain stakeholders and needs in current inter-
pretability research. For example, we noticed a relative lack of 
interpretability methods specifcally focused on objectives like un-
derstanding how one’s data is being used (O5) and contesting a 
decision based on the model’s output (O7). The papers that did 
cover these areas were primarily justifying these needs from a legal 
perspective, rather than systems or methods development to help 
meet them. Similarly, while users with formal ML and data domain 
knowledge are mentioned frequently, there is signifcantly less at-
tention paid to those with formal knowledge in the milieu. These 
stakeholders, however, are likely to have a deep understanding of 
the broader sociotechnical context in which systems are deployed. 
Our framework gives us the vocabulary to consciously recognize 
these gaps, and subsequently, work towards flling them. 
Figure 2 uses a parallel coordinates display to summarize the 
framework’s descriptive power, and connect its two halves. Axes 
correspond to the four components of the framework (knowledge-
contexts, goals, objectives, and tasks) and nodes correspond to 
individual codes used during our qualitative process. Lines connect 
nodes to represent papers which contain these codes, with line