J. Imaging 2023 ,9, 131 15 of 19
of counts. They trained and evaluated several neural network models that detect and count
vehicles in various scenes and achieved accuracy above 90% [31].
Pereira et al. [ 29] (pp. 210–239) also developed a computer algorithm for automated
trafﬁc counting, emphasizing the speed and accuracy of counts. The authors reported that
the accuracy of their program varies from 60 percent to 70 percent. The study reported that
low-resolution video is responsible for the failure of the program to count trafﬁc.
Developed method: The algorithms developed in this study can provide 90 percent
accurate counts, which is signiﬁcant compared to other computer algorithms. Although
the accuracy of pneumatic road tube counting, piezoelectric sensors, and inductive loops is
higher than that of the developed algorithms, these technologies are expensive, especially
for small projects. Therefore, the developed algorithms can be a suitable alternative
regarding cost and accuracy.
3.7. Limitations of Program
The program is not efﬁcient enough when vehicles pass at high speed because vehicles
appear for a short time in the footage, and the program does not have enough time to
detect the vehicle. Figure 5 explains this scenario in the case of an entrance of a strip mall,
where vehicles enter from the major road to the parking lot at high speed, and the program
sometimes fails to detect vehicles. Conversely, the vehicles pass slowly and even stop
in a queue when exiting the parking space. In this case, the program is very efﬁcient in
detecting and counting vehicles.
J. Imaging 2023 , 9, x  15 of 19 
 
 the accuracy of their program varies from 60 percent to 70 percent. The study reported 
that low-resolution video is responsible for the failure of the program to count traffic.  
Developed method:  The algorithms developed in this study can provide 90 perce nt 
accurate counts, which is significant compared to other computer algorithms. Although 
the accuracy of pneumatic road tube counting, piezoelectric sensors, and inductive loops 
is higher than that of the developed algorithms, these technologies are expens ive, 
especially for small projects. Therefore, the developed algorithms can be a suitable 
alternative regarding cost and accuracy.  
3.7. Limitations of Program  
The program is not efficient enough when vehicles pass at high speed because 
vehicles appear for a short time in the footage, and the program does not have enough 
time to detect the vehicle. Figure 5 explains this scenario in the case of an entrance of a 
strip mall, where vehicles enter from the major road to the parking lot at high speed, and 
the program sometimes fails to detect vehicles. Conversely, the vehicles pass slowly and 
even stop in a queue when exiting the parking space. In this case, the program is very 
efficient in detecting and counting vehicles.  
 
Figure 5. Error due to arrival and depa rture speed.  
The camera angle is a significant reason for reducing the accuracy of counts. When 
the camera is very close to the entrance, vehicles appear on a large scale and cover most 
of the frame; sometimes, some parts of the vehicle remain out of the f rame. Figure 6 shows 
that the camera is very close to the entrance and does not cover the full view of the 
entrance. As a result, the UPS vehicle appears large, and most of the parts remain out of 
the frame. So, it is not the ideal frame for efficient coun ting.  
 
Figure 5. Error due to arrival and departure speed.
The camera angle is a signiﬁcant reason for reducing the accuracy of counts. When the
camera is very close to the entrance, vehicles appear on a large scale and cover most of the
frame; sometimes, some parts of the vehicle remain out of the frame. Figure 6 shows that
the camera is very close to the entrance and does not cover the full view of the entrance. As
a result, the UPS vehicle appears large, and most of the parts remain out of the frame. So, it
is not the ideal frame for efﬁcient counting.
Raindrops obscure the camera lenses, resulting in a bad-quality video recording, and
the program cannot count accurately.
Visibility is an important factor that controls the quality of the video, and low visibility
results in poor video quality and inefﬁcient counting. The causes of low visibility are rain,
low light, evening recording, and cloudy weather.
The program cannot detect overlapped vehicles, which results in undercounting. This
happens when two vehicles arrive or depart simultaneously, and overlap in the video frame.
The counting speed of the program varies depending on the hardware platform. The
counting speed increases with the conﬁguration of the computer.