J. Imaging 2023 ,9, 131 3 of 19
designated region. Redmon and Farhadi [ 23] (pp. 779–788) developed a different object
detector called YOLO, which feeds the image once through the network and identiﬁes
the objects. In terms of speed and accuracy, the YOLO model performs better than other
models [ 24,25]. YOLO uses the non-maximal suppression technique to process an image,
which is an outstanding technique compared to other detectors. Initially, YOLO divides
an input image into a 13 13 grid of cells and each cell predicts several bounding boxes
in the image [ 23]. Then, YOLO algorithms estimate a single probability value for each
bounding box. The acceptance of a bounding box as a valid object detection is controlled
by a threshold value.
The performance of YOLO was found to be superior to that of other neural-network-
based object detectors in terms of accuracy and speed [ 24,26]. The accuracy of the model
reduces when the target video frame contains tiny objects. Since vehicle counts of this study
do not involve any small object detections, the YOLO model performs well in this case.
Several studies have been conducted on in situ trafﬁc counting technologies; for ex-
ample, Patrizia Bellucci and Ernesto Cipriani [ 27] (pp. 175–187) applied a piezoelectric
sensor; Patrick McGowen and Michael Sanderson [ 3] (p. 1) applied a pneumatic road tube;
and Chen-Fu Liao [ 2] (p. 1) implemented inductive loops, which perform well in terms of
accuracy of counting. These technologies are costly, so many trafﬁc counting projects cannot
afford them. This factor motivated this research to work on an economical automated
vehicle counting method. Automated counting methods can be a good replacement for in
situ technologies [ 28]. Many studies have been conducted on automated trafﬁc detection
and counting; for example, Baoxin Li and Rama Chellappa [ 10] (pp. 530–544) applied a se-
quential Monte Carlo method, Lei Xie et al. [ 19] (pp. 883–886) used a scale-adaptive spatial
appearance feature density technique, Hsieh et al. [ 18] (pp. 175–187 ) applied a novel line-
based shadow algorithm, Pereira et al. [ 29] (pp. 210–239) applied a LWR trafﬁc ﬂow model,
Honghong Yang and Shiru Qu [ 30] (pp. 75–850) applied a background subtraction model
with low-rank decomposition, Mattias Gustafsson and Sebastian Hjelm [ 31] (pp. 1–93 ) ap-
plied neural network models, Duc-Liem Dinh et al. [ 32] (pp. 1–15) applied edge computing
methods, Amie Rosarie Cubeta Caballo and Chris Jordan Aliac [ 33] (pp. 150–154) applied
a YOLO-based model for real-time tracking, and Subhrasankha Dey et al. [ 34] (pp. 1–14)
applied a stochastic method. Though these studies conducted signiﬁcant research on object
detection and counting, some of these studies’ accuracy is not signiﬁcant, some methods
are not fast, and some methods cannot provide counts in ﬂexible intervals. Compared
to these studies, our proposed method is a signiﬁcantly more efﬁcient object detection
model in terms of cost, speed, and accuracy that implements YOLO object detection model.
Counting time intervals is also an important consideration, as many projects demand
trafﬁc data at varying intervals, such as 5 or 15 min intervals [ 35]. The proposed method
can provide directional vehicle counts with ﬂexible time interval counting, which is a
major requirement for transportation planners. Therefore, the proposed method provides
promising outcomes that will be valuable for the researchers, planners, engineers, and
policymakers involved with transportation planning, design, and management, enabling
them to obtain economical directional trafﬁc counts with ﬂexible time intervals. Moreover,
the study will demonstrate a beneﬁt–cost (B/C) analysis to investigate the beneﬁt of the
adaptation of the developed automated counting method.
2. Materials and Methods
2.1. Collection of Video Data
Ten strip mall business sites were selected to collect video data in the Baton Rouge
metropolitan area, Louisiana, USA. The video footage of trafﬁc movement was collected
at the entrance and exit points of the strip malls using MioVision (Altanta, GA, USA);
CountCam, and CountingCars (Spacksolutions, Minneapolis, MN, USA) cameras. The
video was collected for two successive days from 8 AM to 6 PM for each site. Later, these
video data were processed using the developed automated trafﬁc counting method to
evaluate the model’s performance.