J. Imaging 2023 ,9, 131 5 of 19
titled ‘input’ by dragging and dropping the ﬁle. The video ﬁle’s name is manually typed
before the ‘.mp4’ title in the algorithm. When the program is executed, it checks for all the
deﬁned arguments and the input video ﬁle directory. If the program validates the directory
and title of the video, it moves to the processing step.
2.5. Detection of Vehicles
In this section, algorithms were developed to draw reference lines and detect vehicles
in each video frame. The algorithms allow users to draw a reference line with simple mouse
clicks when the very ﬁrst video frame appears. The reference lines validate the program to
make a successful vehicle count in the later steps. Though the detection of vehicles in each
video frame was conducted by applying the converted YOLO weight ﬁle, a few algorithms
were developed to execute the detection process, for example, the conversion of each image
to a common size and providing threshold a value to identify potential detected objects.
The total vehicle detection process is shown in Figure 1.
J. Imaging 2023 , 9, x  5 of 19 
 
 2.4. Settings for Input Files  
First, this step defines the directory of the YOLO weight file, anchor definitions, 
YOLO model class definition, and the number of graphics processi ng units available for 
use. After that, the arguments were developed for the name and directory of the input 
pre-recorded video footage using the ‘parser’ task. All these developed arguments were 
executed using the function ‘__main__’, the fundamental functi on that manages the 
vehicle detection algorithms.  
The input video files must be processed before uploading to the program. All video 
files must be converted to the .mp4 format. If there are multiple video files, it is suggested 
that the video files be join ed together because multiple video files cannot be uploaded 
simultaneously in the program. After processing the video file, it is uploaded in the section 
titled ‘input’ by dragging and dropping the file. The video file ’s name is manually typed 
before the ‘.mp4’ title in the algorithm. When the program is executed, it checks for all the 
defined arguments and the input video file directory. If the program validates the 
directory and title of the video, it moves to the processing step.  
2.5. Detection of Vehicl es 
In this section, algorithms were developed to draw reference lines and detect vehicles 
in each video frame. The algorithms allow users to draw a reference line with simple 
mouse clicks when the very first video frame appears. The reference lines validat e the 
program to make a successful vehicle count in the later steps. Though the detection of 
vehicles in each video frame was conducted by applying the converted YOLO weight file, 
a few algorithms were developed to execute the detection process, for exampl e, the 
conversion of each image to a common size and providing threshold a value to identify 
potential detected objects. The total vehicle detection process is shown in Figure 1.  
 
Figure 1. The flow chart diagram of a successful vehicle detection by YOLO . 
Figure 1. The ﬂow chart diagram of a successful vehicle detection by YOLO.
When the input argument receives the name and the path of an input video ﬁle, the
program calls the detector function (‘detect_start’) and passes the ﬁle information. Then
the program calls another function (‘getFirstFrame’) to capture and display the ﬁrst frame
with the help of OpenCV , as shown in Figure 2 [ 44]. After that, the developed algorithm
calls the mouse handling function (‘setMouseCallback’), which allows a user to select the
starting and ending point of a reference line with simple mouse clicks. The algorithms
automatically connect two points and draw a reference line, as shown in Figure 2. According