Citation: Majumder, M.; Wilmot, C.
Automated Vehicle Counting from
Pre-Recorded Video Using You Only
Look Once (YOLO) Object Detection
Model. J. Imaging 2023 ,9, 131.
https://doi.org/10.3390/
jimaging9070131
Academic Editor: R émi Boutteau
Received: 3 June 2023
Revised: 20 June 2023
Accepted: 22 June 2023
Published: 27 June 2023
Copyright: © 2023 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
Journal of 
Imaging
Article
Automated Vehicle Counting from Pre-Recorded Video Using
You Only Look Once (YOLO) Object Detection Model
Mishuk Majumder * and Chester Wilmot
Department of Civil & Environmental Engineering, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, LA 70803, USA;
cecgw@lsu.edu
*Correspondence: mishuk.cee@gmail.com
Abstract: Different techniques are being applied for automated vehicle counting from video footage,
which is a signiﬁcant subject of interest to many researchers. In this context, the You Only Look Once
(YOLO) object detection model, which has been developed recently, has emerged as a promising tool.
In terms of accuracy and ﬂexible interval counting, the adequacy of existing research on employing
the model for vehicle counting from video footage is unlikely sufﬁcient. The present study endeavors
to develop computer algorithms for automated trafﬁc counting from pre-recorded videos using the
YOLO model with ﬂexible interval counting. The study involves the development of algorithms
aimed at detecting, tracking, and counting vehicles from pre-recorded videos. The YOLO model was
applied in TensorFlow API with the assistance of OpenCV . The developed algorithms implement
the YOLO model for counting vehicles in two-way directions in an efﬁcient way. The accuracy of
the automated counting was evaluated compared to the manual counts, and was found to be about
90 percent. The accuracy comparison also shows that the error of automated counting consistently
occurs due to undercounting from unsuitable videos. In addition, a beneﬁt–cost (B/C) analysis shows
that implementing the automated counting method returns 1.76 times the investment.
Keywords: automated vehicle counting; You Only Look Once (YOLO); object detection; TensorFlow;
OpenCV; pre-recorded video; accuracy of automated trafﬁc counting; beneﬁt–cost (B/C) analysis
1. Introduction
The act of automated vehicle counting can be executed through a variety of approaches,
including applying in situ technologies and computer algorithms. In situ technologies
refer to counting trafﬁc using detectors located along the roadside [ 1]. There are different
types of detectors in current use, such as pneumatic road tubes, piezoelectric sensors,
magnetic loops, and microwave radar [ 2–7]. These technologies, however, come with
signiﬁcant expenses, and their accuracy depends on different factors such as weather (rain,
fog, sun, and wind), the volume of trafﬁc, and type of roads. A better alternative to these
methods is using computer algorithms, which involve counting trafﬁc automatically from
pre-recorded video.
There are different traditional models for applying computer algorithms to count trafﬁc.
The basic procedure of all models is the application of the image processing technique [8].
The common methods for image processing are the traditional background subtraction
method [ 9] and the sequential Monte Carlo method [ 10]. The background subtraction
method involves separating the moving part of the image from the entire frame being
analyzed [ 11]. The background subtraction method can be applied in different ways
depending on the modeling of each pixel of the image. For example, Ridder et al. [ 12]
(pp. 193–199) modeled each pixel of the background applying a Kalman ﬁlter to identify
which pixels belong to the background and which do not, while Wren [ 13] (pp. 780–785)
modeled the background using a single Gaussian value to estimate the probability that
a pixel belongs to the background or not. However, these initial types of background
J. Imaging 2023 ,9, 131. https://doi.org/10.3390/jimaging9070131 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/jimaging