J. Imaging 2023 ,9, 131 16 of 19
J. Imaging 2023 , 9, x  15 of 19 
 
 the accuracy of their program varies from 60 percent to 70 percent. The study reported 
that low-resolution video is responsible for the failure of the program to count traffic.  
Developed method:  The algorithms developed in this study can provide 90 perce nt 
accurate counts, which is significant compared to other computer algorithms. Although 
the accuracy of pneumatic road tube counting, piezoelectric sensors, and inductive loops 
is higher than that of the developed algorithms, these technologies are expens ive, 
especially for small projects. Therefore, the developed algorithms can be a suitable 
alternative regarding cost and accuracy.  
3.7. Limitations of Program  
The program is not efficient enough when vehicles pass at high speed because 
vehicles appear for a short time in the footage, and the program does not have enough 
time to detect the vehicle. Figure 5 explains this scenario in the case of an entrance of a 
strip mall, where vehicles enter from the major road to the parking lot at high speed, and 
the program sometimes fails to detect vehicles. Conversely, the vehicles pass slowly and 
even stop in a queue when exiting the parking space. In this case, the program is very 
efficient in detecting and counting vehicles.  
 
Figure 5. Error due to arrival and depa rture speed.  
The camera angle is a significant reason for reducing the accuracy of counts. When 
the camera is very close to the entrance, vehicles appear on a large scale and cover most 
of the frame; sometimes, some parts of the vehicle remain out of the f rame. Figure 6 shows 
that the camera is very close to the entrance and does not cover the full view of the 
entrance. As a result, the UPS vehicle appears large, and most of the parts remain out of 
the frame. So, it is not the ideal frame for efficient coun ting.  
 
Figure 6. Unsuitable camera angle and frame.
4. Discussion
The proposed automated vehicle counting model implements the YOLO object detec-
tion model with the assistance of OpenCV for vehicle counting from pre-recorded videos.
The total error, classiﬁcation error, and interval error of the proposed automated counting
method were evaluated by comparing the automated counts with the manual counts and
statistical analysis. The accuracy of automated counting was found to be about 90%, where
it was observed that the errors occur due to undercounting of vehicles. The accuracy is
consistent and signiﬁcant compared to that of other methods. The automated analysis
indicates that processing an hour of video takes about one hour and thirty minutes. The
proposed model can be useful for real-time manner implementation for different applica-
tions such as trafﬁc management systems, Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITSs), trafﬁc
congestion monitoring, parking management, trafﬁc safety analysis, and transit planning.
It was found from the study that the proposed model has some excellent advantages, such
as providing trafﬁc counts with 90 percent accuracy in a consistent manner; providing
directional vehicle counts with ﬂexible time intervals as required by many engineers, plan-
ners, and policymakers; and being economical, especially for small transportation projects.
On the other hand, the proposed model has some drawbacks, such as the program not
being efﬁcient enough when vehicles pass at high speed, and the program compromises
accuracy when the video quality is poor, especially when recorded during rain, low light,
evening, and cloudy weather. In addition, the wrong camera angle and vehicles overlap-
ping during recording may reduce the model’s accuracy. To overcome the drawbacks, it
is recommended to use high-resolution cameras to obtain good-quality videos, properly
install the cameras to avoid oscillation due to wind, and clean the camera lens before every
installation. Moreover, it is recommended to use high-resolution computers to increase the
speed of counting and save energy. A beneﬁt–cost analysis was conducted considering
different factors, including the energy consumption of the system. From the beneﬁt–cost
(B/C) analysis, the B/C was found to be greater than or equal to 1.54, which means the
automated counting method has 54 percent greater beneﬁt than the traditional manual
counting method. In other words, it can be implied that the model can be suitable for the
practical application of vehicle counting, especially for projects that cannot afford in situ
counting technologies.
5. Conclusions
This study presents an efﬁcient method of automated vehicle counting from pre-
recorded video by applying a pre-trained YOLO object detector in TensorFlow API. The
accuracy of automated counting was found to be about 90 percent, with automated counting
consistently being undercounted. This accuracy is very signiﬁcant compared to the other
automated counting method. The average processing speed for an hour of video was found
to be about one hour and thirty minutes. The advantage of the model is that it can provide