J. Imaging 2023 ,9, 131 8 of 19
J. Imaging 2023 , 9, x  8 of 19 
 
  
Figure 4.  Vehicle counts displayed on screen as shown as R2L and L2R.  
2.9. Apply YOLO with OpenCV and CUDA  
In order to allow YOLO to operate in a GPU environment at increased video 
processing speed, the model must be applied with OpenCV (Open -Source Computer 
Vision Library) before running the program. To accomplish this task, two open -source 
programs, cuDNN (a deep neural network -based library that provides graphics 
processing unit functionality) and CUDA (NVIDIA ’s programming language used to 
code the graphics card ), are required. Both cuDNN and CUDA can be downloaded from 
the NVIDIA website ( developer.nvidia.com , accessed on 5 June 2019 ) [50]. CUDA must 
be installed properly since the success of the application of YOLO with OpenCV and 
cuDNN depends on the correct i nstallation of CUDA. The success of the installation can 
be checked by running a sample video file in the program. If the installation is successful, 
the graphics properties are shown at the bottom of the program as a response to the 
installation.  
2.10. Embedded Hardware Platforms  
The counting speed of the program depends on the configuration of the hardware 
platform. The following hardware platform was used in this study : 
Processor: Intel(R) Core (TM)i7 -8750CPU @ 2.20 GHz 2.21 GHz ; 
RAM: 2.7 GHz, 16.0 GB ; 
GPU: NVIDIA GeForce GTX 1060, 6 GB. 
In this platform, it was found that the program takes about one hour forty minutes 
to one hour fifty minutes to process an hour of video. Using a high -configuration 
computer for processing videos is recommended to achieve increased video processing 
speed. A 2060 GPU with a video memory of more than 6 GB is recommended for timely 
processing.  
2.11. Benefit–Cost Analysis  
Lastly, a benefit–cost (B/C) analysis was conducted to evaluate the benefit of the 
automated counti ng method for practical implementation [51]. The video data collection 
and manual counting from the pre -recorded video were considered the minimum benefit 
of B/C analysis of automated counting [52]. Three types of cameras were used to collect 
video data: a MioVision Camera, a CountCam2 Traffic Recorder, and a CountCam. The 
manual counts were conducted from pre -recorded videos using a computer. In this 
research, it was found that it takes 21 min to manually count an hour of video by the 
optimum increase in video player speed. Using this ratio, the total video hours were 
converted to actual working time. The actual working hours were converted to monetary 
Figure 4. Vehicle counts displayed on screen as shown as R2L and L2R.
2.9. Apply YOLO with OpenCV and CUDA
In order to allow YOLO to operate in a GPU environment at increased video pro-
cessing speed, the model must be applied with OpenCV (Open-Source Computer Vision
Library) before running the program. To accomplish this task, two open-source programs,
cuDNN (a deep neural network-based library that provides graphics processing unit func-
tionality) and CUDA (NVIDIA’s programming language used to code the graphics card),
are required. Both cuDNN and CUDA can be downloaded from the NVIDIA website
(developer.nvidia.com, accessed on 5 June 2019) [ 50]. CUDA must be installed properly
since the success of the application of YOLO with OpenCV and cuDNN depends on the
correct installation of CUDA. The success of the installation can be checked by running a
sample video ﬁle in the program. If the installation is successful, the graphics properties
are shown at the bottom of the program as a response to the installation.
2.10. Embedded Hardware Platforms
The counting speed of the program depends on the conﬁguration of the hardware
platform. The following hardware platform was used in this study:
Processor: Intel(R) Core (TM)i7-8750CPU @ 2.20 GHz 2.21 GHz;
RAM: 2.7 GHz, 16.0 GB;
GPU: NVIDIA GeForce GTX 1060, 6 GB.
In this platform, it was found that the program takes about one hour forty minutes to
one hour ﬁfty minutes to process an hour of video. Using a high-conﬁguration computer
for processing videos is recommended to achieve increased video processing speed. A 2060
GPU with a video memory of more than 6 GB is recommended for timely processing.
2.11. Beneﬁt–Cost Analysis
Lastly, a beneﬁt–cost (B/C) analysis was conducted to evaluate the beneﬁt of the
automated counting method for practical implementation [ 51]. The video data collection
and manual counting from the pre-recorded video were considered the minimum beneﬁt of
B/C analysis of automated counting [ 52]. Three types of cameras were used to collect video
data: a MioVision Camera, a CountCam2 Trafﬁc Recorder, and a CountCam. The manual
counts were conducted from pre-recorded videos using a computer. In this research, it was
found that it takes 21 min to manually count an hour of video by the optimum increase in
video player speed. Using this ratio, the total video hours were converted to actual working
time. The actual working hours were converted to monetary value using an hourly pay rate.
Another important factor is the electricity consumption while conducting manual counts by
trained individuals. This factor is also included in the estimation of minimum beneﬁt. The
per kilowatt electricity cost of the research area (East Baton Rouge Parish, LA, USA) is USD