J. Imaging 2023 ,9, 131 2 of 19
subtraction methods have many limitations, such as not being robust when video footage
contains shadows, low light, light changes, and slow-moving vehicles. In addition, the
video processing speed of most of those methods is too slow for practical vehicle counting.
To overcome these problems, Stauffer and Grimson [ 9] (pp. 246–252) modeled each
pixel as a mixture of Gaussian values, i.e., each pixel is modeled as a mixture of values. The
method involves dividing each frame into several pixels and modeling each pixel based on
certain rules. A single Gaussian is used for a pixel having a single lighting surface, whereas
an adaptive Gaussian is used to approximate multiple surfaces and changing lighting
conditions [ 14]. Objects are detected by grouping Gaussian values that do not match those
of the previous frame using connected components. Moving objects are tracked from frame
to frame to determine their direction of movement. However, the method is slow, performs
poorly with large and overlapped objects, and only detects objects without classifying them.
Cucchiara et al. [ 15] (pp. 1–11) used a more robust method involving image processing
and rule-based reasoning for vehicle tracking on visual data. This method is capable of
tracking vehicles during the day or night. During the day, the spatio-temporal module
extracts the blocks of pixels that move from frame to frame [ 16]. Their algorithm considers
three consecutive frames to detect moving pixels. In this way, the vehicles are detected and
tracked during the day. A high-level knowledge-based system is used to count vehicles,
which separates the moving, stopped, and road-crossing vehicles for the desired vehicle
counting purpose. At night, the system uses the morphological analysis of headlights
to detect vehicles with headlight pairs. The algorithm separates headlight pairs from
the image using image-masking and thresholding techniques. Headlight pairs are then
matched with templates, and those that match are considered vehicles. However, this
method cannot detect vehicles with a single headlight, such as motorcycles, and cannot
classify vehicles.
Baoxin Li and Rama Chellappa [ 10] (pp. 530–544) applied a sequential Monte Carlo
method for detecting, tracking, and verifying objects. This task is executed in three steps.
Firstly, the current state of an object is deﬁned by its position, density, and velocity. Secondly,
sequential importance sampling (SIS) is used to identify objects in a particular frame [ 17].
Thirdly, the object is tracked from one frame to another frame and veriﬁed as a target object
by setting the state ‘x’ to some parametrization (for example, the location of the object)
of objects, which is determined in the ﬁrst step. The results suggest that the algorithm
provides a promising approach for tracking and verifying objects.
Removing unwanted shadows and classifying objects in an image was a great chal-
lenge for researchers in automated trafﬁc counting. Hsieh et al. [ 18] (pp. 175–187) used a
novel line-based shadow algorithm to solve these problems. In the ﬁrst stage, vehicles are
extracted from the background using image differencing, and these vehicles are passed
through a shadow-elimination process to reduce shadows to a minimum level. A Kalman
ﬁlter is used to track vehicles, which is accomplished based on the position and motion
of the vehicles. The length and size of the vehicles are obtained through line ﬁtting and
connected component analysis. These two features are applied to categorize vehicles into
different classes. This approach is an excellent method for tracking and classifying vehicles.
Lei Xie et al. [ 19] (pp. 883–886) propose a method for tracking objects from frame to
frame. The method uses a scale-adaptive spatial appearance feature density technique,
increasing object tracking sensitivity for both the scale and rotation scale. The image-
tracking method can track objects in unfavorable imaging conditions by combining the
object’s appearance with its background.
The advancement in deep learning has presented different object detection models,
such as the Region-Based Convolutional Neural Network (R-CNN), Fast R-CNN, Single
Shot Multi-Box Detector (SSD), and You Only Look Once (YOLO) [ 20]. R-CNN and Fast
R-CNN, developed by Ross Girshick et al. [ 21] (pp. 580–587), use selective searches to
detect objects. The Single Shot Detector (SSD), developed by Lui et al. [ 22] (pp. 21–37), is
an object detection algorithm that utilizes a grid-based approach to divide an image into
smaller regions, where each grid cell is assigned the task of detecting objects within its