J. Imaging 2023 ,9, 131 7 of 19
discussed more in the counting vehicle section. A typical centerline is shown in Figure 3, as
marked by the red arrow.
J. Imaging 2023 , 9, x  7 of 19 
 
 values, it updates the object (i.e., bounding box), memorizes it for c onsideration in the next 
frame, and repeats the process.  
In this research , the tracker entitles each bounding box using a numeric value such 
as 1, 2, and 3. Rectangles are drawn around each tracked object using the function 
‘draw.rectangle ’, which was developed in the study. The rectangles are displayed on the 
computer screen, as shown in Figure 3. The purpose of these rectangular boxes is to draw 
a dotted line in the center of the boxes that leads to counting vehicles, which will be 
discussed more in the c ounting vehicle section. A typical centerline is shown in Figure 3, 
as marked by the red arrow.  
 
Figure 3. A typical dotted centerline as displayed in red color and rectangular bounding boxes as 
displayed in pink color.  
2.7. Settings for Output File  
In this step, algorithms were developed to obtain the vehicle counts in a spreadsheet 
format with a flexible time interval and desired direction. This study requires counting 
vehicles in a flexible real -time interval, while YOLO ’s counting speed differs fr om the real -
time clock. To solve this problem, YOLO evaluates the number of frames in the desired 
time interval and the time to process a single frame. Then it estimates the total processing 
time of all frames in the desired time interval and considers tha t as the YOLO time 
interval. The algorithms are capable of providing vehicle counts in entry and exit 
directions.  
2.8. Algorithm for Counting Vehicle  
The algorithms determine the number and directions of counts based on the passing 
direction of the dotted center line through the mid -line and parallel  line. For example, 
when the center  line intersects the left parallel  line first, the program confirms that the 
vehicle is coming from the left side. It can be a ssumed that the left side direction is the 
entry direction. Afterward, the program considers it a successful entry count when it 
intersects the mid -line. The developed ‘leftToright_counter ’ and ‘rightToleft_counter ’ 
functions count vehicles from the left and right sides, respectively.  
Counts are provided in a spreadsheet with the desired time interval. In addition , the 
counts are displayed on the computer screen. Figure 4 shows typical entry and exit counts 
for strip malls. This figure assumes that when vehicles are coming from right to left, they 
are depa rting the strip mall, and when approaching from left to right , they are entering 
the parking lot. Figure 4 shows the exit counts as R2L and the number of counts is three 
vehicles, and entry counts as L2R, where the number of counts is fourteen.  
Figure 3. A typical dotted centerline as displayed as a red dot and shown by a red arrow, and
rectangular bounding boxes as displayed in purple color.
2.7. Settings for Output File
In this step, algorithms were developed to obtain the vehicle counts in a spreadsheet
format with a ﬂexible time interval and desired direction. This study requires counting
vehicles in a ﬂexible real-time interval, while YOLO’s counting speed differs from the
real-time clock. To solve this problem, YOLO evaluates the number of frames in the desired
time interval and the time to process a single frame. Then it estimates the total processing
time of all frames in the desired time interval and considers that as the YOLO time interval.
The algorithms are capable of providing vehicle counts in entry and exit directions.
2.8. Algorithm for Counting Vehicle
The algorithms determine the number and directions of counts based on the passing
direction of the dotted center line through the mid-line and parallel line. For example,
when the center line intersects the left parallel line ﬁrst, the program conﬁrms that the
vehicle is coming from the left side. It can be assumed that the left side direction is the entry
direction. Afterward, the program considers it a successful entry count when it intersects
the mid-line. The developed ‘leftToright_counter’ and ‘rightToleft_counter’ functions count
vehicles from the left and right sides, respectively.
Counts are provided in a spreadsheet with the desired time interval. In addition, the
counts are displayed on the computer screen. Figure 4 shows typical entry and exit counts
for strip malls. This ﬁgure assumes that when vehicles are coming from right to left, they
are departing the strip mall, and when approaching from left to right, they are entering
the parking lot. Figure 4 shows the exit counts as R2L and the number of counts is three
vehicles, and entry counts as L2R, where the number of counts is fourteen.