J. Imaging 2023 ,9, 131 4 of 19
2.2. Selection of YOLO Version
The authors selected YOLO version 3 for this research. This version is signiﬁcantly
faster, accurate, and user-friendly [ 24]. However, four new versions of YOLO models are
available after the release of YOLO version 3, which are YOLOv4, YOLOv5, YOLOv6, and
YOLOv7. Compared to versions 4, 5, and 6, YOLO version 7 is the most accurate [ 36,37].
The reason for the higher accuracy is the resolution capability of the model. YOLO version
7 processes an image with a resolution of 608 pixels by 60 pixels, whereas YOLO version
3 processes an image at a resolution of 416 by 416 [ 37,38]. This higher resolution enables
version 7 to detect tiny objects in the image and provides higher accuracy than version 3.
Since vehicle counting does not involve any tiny object detections, the results of the
proposed method using YOLO version 3 do not affect the result.
Since the proposed method does not involve any tiny object detection, the research
results are also not affected by the other compared methods. For example, a recent (2023)
version of the stochastic method proposed by Subhrasankha Dey et al. [ 34] (pp. 1–14) shows
that the model can reach accuracy up to 90%, where our proposed model provides consistent
accuracy of 90 percent. In addition, a recent version of the background subtraction model
proposed by Honghong Yang and Shiru Qu [ 30] (pp. 75–850) 2017 showed an accuracy
of 89.4 percent. This model still provides less accuracy, and the speed is slower than
that of YOLO version 3. Moreover, a vision-based vehicle counting method proposed by
Keith A. Redmill [39] (pp. 5086) shows an accuracy of 88.8 percent. Though the other in
situ technologies, such as piezoelectric sensors, pneumatic road tubes, and inductive loops,
provide more accurate counts, these methods are costly. Therefore, the other compared
methods do not affect the proposed method results.
Thus, in this study YOLOv3 [ 40] (pp. 1–6) was selected for the development of
automated vehicle counting method. The YOLO model was applied with TensorFlow [ 41]
(pp. 265–283) and OpenCV [ 42] (pp. 120–123) libraries for vehicle detection and counting.
Python was used for developing all the algorithms.
2.3. Conversion of YOLO Weight File to TensorFlow API
The YOLO weight ﬁle was originally developed using the C/C++ programming
language. In order to apply the model in the Python preferable environment, the weight
ﬁle was converted to TensorFlow architecture. The required packages for this conversion
were TensorFlow 18.0 (a deep learning library), Numpy (a package of routines in Python
that support many mathematical functions), OpenCV (an open-source computer vision
library), TQDM (a progress bar library that provides useful routines for nested loops),
and Python. The open-source YOLO weight ﬁle was downloaded from the ofﬁcial YOLO
website (pjreddie.com) [ 43]. After that, the directory of the downloaded YOLO weight ﬁle
was provided under the root project directory ‘./data/darknet_weights/’, in the command
prompt [ 43]. The ‘python convert_weight.py’ command was run from the project directory
to convert the YOLO weight ﬁle to the TensorFlow format. The reason for using Python
instead of compiling and running a Darknet trainer from the C source is the convenience of
the project and working with the Python programming language.
2.4. Settings for Input Files
First, this step deﬁnes the directory of the YOLO weight ﬁle, anchor deﬁnitions,
YOLO model class deﬁnition, and the number of graphics processing units available for
use. After that, the arguments were developed for the name and directory of the input
pre-recorded video footage using the ‘parser’ task. All these developed arguments were
executed using the function ‘__main__’, the fundamental function that manages the vehicle
detection algorithms.
The input video ﬁles must be processed before uploading to the program. All video
ﬁles must be converted to the .mp4 format. If there are multiple video ﬁles, it is suggested
that the video ﬁles be joined together because multiple video ﬁles cannot be uploaded
simultaneously in the program. After processing the video ﬁle, it is uploaded in the section