J. Imaging 2023 ,9, 131 6 of 19
to the developed algorithms, the reference line is titled ‘mid_line’. Afterward, the ‘while
True’ (a developed conditional loop statement) is executed to open every video frame.
J. Imaging 2023, 9, x   6 of 19 
 
 When the input argument  receives the name and the path of an input video ﬁle, the 
program  calls the detector function (‘detect_start’)  and passes the ﬁle information.  Then 
the program  calls another function (‘getFirstFrame’)  to capture and display the ﬁrst frame 
with the help of OpenCV,  as shown in Figure 2 [44]. After that, the developed  algorithm  
calls the mouse handling  function (‘setMouseCallback’),  which allows a user to select the 
starting and ending point of a reference  line with simple mouse clicks. The algorithms  
automatically  connect two points and draw a reference  line, as shown in Figure 2. 
According  to the developed  algorithms,  the reference  line is titled ‘mid_line’.  Afterward,  
the ‘while True’ (a developed  conditional  loop statement)  is executed  to open every video 
frame. 
 
(a)  (b) 
Figure 2. The visualization  of the ﬁrst frame, mid-line,  and parallel lines by the program.  (a) The 
ﬁrst frame of a video ﬁle displayed  by the program.  (b) A mid-line  as displayed  in yellow color and 
two parallel lines in white color, drawn by the user. 
After that, the program  calls the ‘detect_image’  function.  The parameters  of this 
function are a single video frame and reference  lines. Under this function,  a few more 
functions  are deﬁned, such as ‘get_right_line’  and ‘get_left_line’,  which draw parallel 
lines on the right side and left side of the ‘mid_line’,  respectively,  as shown in Figure 2. 
Typical geometry-based  arguments  are applied to draw these parallel lines, and the 
program  automatically  draws parallel lines when a user draws the mid-reference  line. 
The ‘detect_image’  function passes each video frame to the function ‘letter_box 
image’. This function converts each video frame to a common  size (128 × 128 pixels) as 
required  by the converted  YOLO weight ﬁle in the TensorFlow  API. Then, TensorFlow  
calls the converted  YOLO weight ﬁle to detect objects in each frame [45–47]. At this stage, 
the YOLO weight ﬁle detects every potential  object in an image. Following  a successful  
detection  of an object in an image, YOLO draws a rectangular  box surrounding  the object. 
As a result, the outputs of a processed  image are rectangular  bounding  boxes and the 
score of the corresponding  boxes. A score value means a detected  object’s conﬁdence level, 
which lies between 0 to 1. The bounding  boxes are processed  by YOLO using the non-
maximal  suppression  method [23,48]. The controlling  factor in this process is a threshold  
value, which screens out the bounding  boxes with a low conﬁdence interval. This study 
used a threshold  value of 0.2, meaning  that bounding  boxes with a score higher than 0.2 
are accepted  for further processing  and vice versa. The sorted bounding  boxes are sent to 
the ‘dets’ array to track detected objects. 
2.6. Tracking Vehicles 
Since video footage consists of thousands  of frames (i.e., images), an object must be 
tracked from one frame to another to determine  its direction  of movement  [18]. The main 
task of this section is to develop algorithms  to track the detected  object frame by frame. 
The sorted bounding  boxes from the ‘dets’ array are tracked using the 
‘KalmanBoxTracker’,  which compares  the current frame with the immediately  previous  
frame using the pixel variance of the frame [19,49]. When it ﬁnds a similarity  in pixel 
Figure 2. The visualization of the ﬁrst frame, mid-line, and parallel lines by the program. ( a) The ﬁrst
frame of a video ﬁle displayed by the program. ( b) A mid-line as displayed in yellow color and two
parallel lines in white color, drawn by the user.
After that, the program calls the ‘detect_image’ function. The parameters of this
function are a single video frame and reference lines. Under this function, a few more
functions are deﬁned, such as ‘get_right_line’ and ‘get_left_line’, which draw parallel lines
on the right side and left side of the ‘mid_line’, respectively, as shown in Figure 2. Typical
geometry-based arguments are applied to draw these parallel lines, and the program
automatically draws parallel lines when a user draws the mid-reference line.
The ‘detect_image’ function passes each video frame to the function ‘letter_box image’.
This function converts each video frame to a common size (128 128 pixels) as required
by the converted YOLO weight ﬁle in the TensorFlow API. Then, TensorFlow calls the
converted YOLO weight ﬁle to detect objects in each frame [ 45–47]. At this stage, the YOLO
weight ﬁle detects every potential object in an image. Following a successful detection
of an object in an image, YOLO draws a rectangular box surrounding the object. As a
result, the outputs of a processed image are rectangular bounding boxes and the score of
the corresponding boxes. A score value means a detected object’s conﬁdence level, which
lies between 0 to 1. The bounding boxes are processed by YOLO using the non-maximal
suppression method [ 23,48]. The controlling factor in this process is a threshold value,
which screens out the bounding boxes with a low conﬁdence interval. This study used
a threshold value of 0.2, meaning that bounding boxes with a score higher than 0.2 are
accepted for further processing and vice versa. The sorted bounding boxes are sent to the
‘dets’ array to track detected objects.
2.6. Tracking Vehicles
Since video footage consists of thousands of frames (i.e., images), an object must be
tracked from one frame to another to determine its direction of movement [ 18]. The main
task of this section is to develop algorithms to track the detected object frame by frame.
The sorted bounding boxes from the ‘dets’ array are tracked using the ‘KalmanBoxTracker’,
which compares the current frame with the immediately previous frame using the pixel
variance of the frame [ 19,49]. When it ﬁnds a similarity in pixel values, it updates the
object (i.e., bounding box), memorizes it for consideration in the next frame, and repeats
the process.
In this research, the tracker entitles each bounding box using a numeric value such
as 1, 2, and 3. Rectangles are drawn around each tracked object using the function
‘draw.rectangle’, which was developed in the study. The rectangles are displayed on
the computer screen, as shown in Figure 3. The purpose of these rectangular boxes is to
draw a dotted line in the center of the boxes that leads to counting vehicles, which will be