IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY 11
Fig. 19: An illustration of the conventional VQA approach, ﬁgure from [108].
Fig. 20: Spatial-based versus object-based visual features,
ﬁgure from [113].
Multi-modal fusion. Instead of building models merely
based on visual and textual features via deep neural networks,
several works seek for structural representations to handle the
multi-modal nature in VQA. A series of works related to
compositional models [123]–[127] have shown exciting visual
reasoning abilities on synthetic datasets. Their fundamental
ideas are to compose instance-speciﬁc networks based on
compositional structures of questions via a collection of jointly
trained neural modules. This can be regarded as a process of
multi-modal information fusion where the question informa-
tion is encoded inside the network architecture. An example
of neural module networks is shown in Figure 22.
Another promising attempt is to exploit graph-structured
representations in VQA [128], [129], where object relations
and language structures are represented as graphs whosestructure information can be further explored via techniques
such as graph convolutional networks (GCN). As is shown in
Figure 23, Norcliffe-Brown et al. [129] propose a graph-based
approach for visual question answering. This work exploits
a graph convolution-based method [130] to learn new visual
representations from spatial graphs, where graph nodes are
bounding boxes for object detections and graph edges are
learned via an attention-based “Graph Learner” component.
The graph convolution operator is deﬁned at kernel kfor node
ias:
fk(i) =X
j2N(i)wk(u(i;j))vjij; k = 1;2;:::;K (17)
where u(i;j)is a pseudo-coordinate function describing the
relative spatial positions of vertex iandj,wk(u)is thekth
convolution kernel, N(i)denotes the neighbourhood of vertex
i,vjis the associated feature vector of vertices j,ijis the
edge weight produced by the “Graph Learner” component.
In the end, the convolutional feature of vertex iis obtained
through a concatenation over the Kkernels.
Incorporating domain knowledge. In some situations, vi-
sual questions are not answerable by analyzing the questions
and visual information themselves alone. Correctly answering
visual questions may require extra information ranging from
common-sense to expert domain knowledge, which is far
beyond what the training dataset can provide. Thus it will be
attractive to incorporate useful domain knowledge retrieved
from other sources into VQA systems. Several pioneering
works [131], [132] explore explicit reasoning on visual con-
cepts and supporting facts in structural knowledge base, where
raw visual signals are transformed into semantic symbols. In
contrast to above symbolic-based methods, Li et al. [122]
propose a Knowledge-incorporated Dynamic Memory Net-
work (KDMN) framework which incorporates massive domain
knowledge into a semantic space to answer visual questions.