IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY 5
(a) Joint Adaptation Network (JAN) (b) Adversarial Joint Adaptation Network (JAN-A)
Fig. 5: Joint Adaptation Network and its adversarial version, ﬁgure from [45].
Transfer learning aims to enhance the ability of a model
to generalize and transfer learned knowledge (from source
domain) to new scenarios (target domains), which has been
an active research topic for quite a long time before the
proliferation of deep neural network and we refer readers to an
excellent survey [50] published in 2010 for details about early
models. Multi-modal transfer learning particularly focuses on
transferring knowledge from one modality (source) to a differ-
ent one (target). This method enables us to handle labeled data
in a new modality through leveraging the existing labeled data
in the original modality. Different from Pan’s work [50], we
focus on multi-modal transfer learning in multimedia through
adding more recent and advanced technologies including deep
learning methods and so forth in this section.
One beneﬁt brought by deep neural network is the famous
deep convolutional neural network (CNN) features trained on
ImageNet [51] which can be used as pre-trained features for
new task(s) in the target domain. The credits should be given
to CNN’s capability of learning the basic components such as
edges and shapes which serve as general elements in images.
Thus a straightforward way to handle a new task can be simply
applying some pre-trained CNN features on ImageNet to this
new task, with parameters either ﬁxed or slightly tuned under
a very small learning rate [52].
However, CNN is designed speciﬁcally for image data
(pixels) and what if we have data from other domains such as
text or signal data? The idea of domain adaptation which tries
to preserve general knowledge that does not change in different
domains can serve as an appropriate candidate. Several works
on natural language processing (NLP) [53], [54] and computer
vision (CV) [55] have gained success through employing
stacked denoising autoencoders to learn the domain-invariant
deep representations.
Besides, forcing the learned representations of source do-
main and target domain to be similar to each other may also
be an option because this procedure is able to remove domain-
speciﬁc features while keeping common features shared across
the two domains. It is possible to achieve this goal through
either applying the strategy to the initial representations before
training [56], [57] or ensuring the representations of source
and target domains to be similar during the training pro-
cess [47], [58].
The works [59], [60] by Ganin et al. propose a novel
setting which makes the deep feature extraction part of themodel produce features incapable of distinguishing between
source and target domain. As is shown by the pink part
in Figure 6, this can be done through adding a gradient
reversal layer that multiplies the gradient by a certain negative
constant during back propagation. In other words, the designed
model in Figure 6 is able to minimize the label classiﬁcation
error in the source domain and fails to distinguish between
different domains simultaneously, forcing the feature extractor
to generate features beneﬁcial for knowledge transfer.
Fig. 6: Indistinguishable domains with a gradient reversal layer
(in pink), ﬁgure from [59].
Aside from the traditional images and texts data that are
widely used in transfer learning, other recent works study
multi-modal transfer learning based on various data including
audio and video [61], head movement and co-speech [62],
Alzheimers disease (AD) and mild cognitive impairment
(MCI) [63], [64] etc.
Assumption : Source Domain and Target Domain are unbalanced
Semantic
larger gapsmall gap
 larger datasize
small datasize
Conclusion : Source domain knowledge will be more reliable and robust!Case1 Case2
Fig. 7: The unbalanced problem between the resource-rich
source domain and resource-poor target domain.