IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY 20
Fig. 39: Framwork for disparity-awared deep cross-modal video recommendation, ﬁgure from [170].
we think deeper about what makes current algorithms take a
further step towards human intelligence, the answer will be
”reasoning”. The ability of reasoning distinguishes human be-
ing from animals. One representative embodiment of reasoning
lies in the process of communications among humans — the
ability of reasoning meanings of spoken languages during a
conversation or major ideas of written articles when reading
becomes a vital necessity in understanding each other. This
being the case, cross-modal intelligence reasoning over the
evolution of knowledge serves as a key solution in bridging the
gap between current machine learning algorithms and human
intelligence. It will result in a more human-like cognition in
cross-modal intelligence. Therefore, being capable of perform-
ing human-like reasoning over various kinds of knowledge in
cross-modal analysis may be an great opportunity for the next
breakthrough in artiﬁcial intelligence.
Cross-modal cognition . Let us consider another question:
how do human learn and how can infants learn so well? The
ability of cognition through “real” understanding the world
could be one main answer to the question. We continuously
learn different skills (tasks) since we are babies and obtaining
new skills (learning new tasks) seldom deteriorates our posses-
sions of old skills (learned old tasks). Most existing machine
learning algorithms are capable of tackling only one single
type of task. For instance, an image classiﬁcation algorithm
can hardly solve (or achieve a very poor performance on) the
trajectory prediction problem, although both image classiﬁ-
cation and trajectory prediction can be handled by human
easily. This indicates that the ability of learning to solve
new tasks while maintaining the capacity to tackle previous
tasks (a reﬂection of cognitive process) plays a crucial role in
generating human-like algorithms for cross-modal analysis.
We remark that as another reﬂection of cognition, common-
sense learning will be an effective path to the goal of touching
real human intelligence. Just imagine what kind of scene willappear in your mind when seeing the following sentence “Tom
picks up his bag and goes out”: Tom is probably a man who
is at work, he stretches out his arm and holds the grip of his
bag, stands up and walks to the door, opens it and goes out
— Tom does not ﬂy or crawl to the door, nor does he go
out by walking through the wall. It is obvious that none of the
existing models are able to obtain the above knowledge which
is easily understood by human given the quoted sentence as
input. We call the process of learning such commonsense
knowledge commonsense learning , which may lead to another
breakthrough in research on cross-modal intelligence.
Cross-modal collective intelligence . The concept of collective
intelligence (also refers as wisdom of crowd) was originally
derived from the observations of entomologist William Morton
Wheeler. On the surface, independent individuals can work
very closely so that they look like a single organism. In
1911, Wheeler observed such a collaborative process indeed
works on ants. An ant behaves like an animal’s cell and
processed the ability of collective thinking. He called these
collective ants a larger creature, namely the cluster of ant
colonies seems to form a “superorganism”. In human society,
given that decisions made by a single individual tend to
be inaccurate compared to decisions made by the majority,
collective intelligence becomes a shared intelligence as well
as the process of assembling opinions and turning them into
decision-making procedure. Wikipedia, as a type of media
that fully demonstrates collective intelligence, serves as an
encyclopedia that can be changed by anyone at almost any
time, which connects people on the web to create a huge
intelligent brain. All these phenomena or instances conﬁrm
one thing, i.e., collective intelligence can produce a more
power “superorganism” or brain that possesses more intelli-
gence. With abundant cross-modal information, we believe that
collective intelligence can be employed for human planning
which is another unique and complex characteristic shared by