IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY 25
Wenwu Zhu is currently a Professor and the Vice
Chair of the Department of Computer Science and
Technology at Tsinghua University, the Vice Dean
of National Research Center for Information Science
and Technology, and the Vice Director of Tsinghua
Center for Big Data. Prior to his current post, he
was a Senior Researcher and Research Manager at
Microsoft Research Asia. He was the Chief Scientist
and Director at Intel Research China from 2004
to 2008. He worked at Bell Labs New Jersey as
Member of Technical Staff during 1996-1999. He
received his Ph.D. degree from New York University in 1996 in Electrical
and Computer Engineering.
Wenwu Zhu is an AAAS Fellow, IEEE Fellow, SPIE Fellow, and a member
of The Academy of Europe (Academia Europaea). He has published over 300
referred papers in the areas of multimedia computing, communications and
networking, and big data. He is inventor or co-inventor of over 50 patents.
He received seven Best Paper Awards, including ACM Multimedia 2012 and
IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology in 2001.
His current research interests are in the area of Cyber-Physical-Human big
data computing, and Cross-media big data and intelligence.
Wenwu Zhu currently serves as EiC for IEEE Transactions on Multimedia.
He served as Guest Editors for the Proceedings of the IEEE, IEEE Journal
on Selected Areas in Communications, ACM Transactions on Intelligent
Systems and Technology, etc.; and Associate Editors for IEEE Transactions
on Mobile Computing, ACM Transactions on Multimedia, IEEE Transactions
on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology, and IEEE Transactions on
Big Data, etc. He served in the steering committee for IEEE Transactions
on Multimedia (2015-2016) and IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing
(2007-2010), respectively. He served as TPC Co-chair for ACM Multimedia
2014 and IEEE ISCAS 2013, respectively. He serves as General Co-Chair for
ACM Multimedia 2018 and ACM CIKM 2019, respectively.
Xin Wang is currently an Assistant Researcher at the
Department of Computer Science and Technology,
Tsinghua University. He got both of his Ph.D. and
B.E degrees in Computer Science and Technology
from Zhejiang University, China. He also holds a
Ph.D. degree in Computing Science from Simon
Fraser University, Canada. His research interests
include cross-modal multimedia intelligence and in-
ferable recommendation in social media. He has
published several high-quality research papers in top
conferences including ICML, MM, KDD, WWW,
SIGIR etc. He is the recipient of 2017 China Postdoctoral innovative talents
supporting program.
Hongzhi Li is principal researcher and research
manager in Microsoft AI & Research. His research
interests are machine learning, multimodal content
analysis and cloud-based computing. His current
research is focused on deep learning for visual
intelligence and its applications on cloud computing
platform. Dr. Li received his PhD degree in Com-
puter Science from Columbia University in 2016.
Before that, he received his Bachelor and masters de-
gree in computer science from Zhejiang University,
China and Columbia University, US, in 2010 and
2012, respectively. Dr. Li has published in ACM Multimedia, TMM, ICMR,
EMNLP, NAACL, SPIE and other venues. He received best poster award in
ACM ICMR 2018. He is the winner of grand challenge (ﬁrst place) in ACM
Multimedia 2012. Dr. Li severed in program committee of major international
conferences, including ACM MM, ICME, IJCAI, etc. He also severed as a
reviewer in journals including IEEE TMM, IEEE TCSVT, TPAMI, JVCI,
JVIS, etc.