IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY 4
A general comment on these two strategies is that feature-
fusion is suitable for problems whose modalities share many
correlated features while the semantic-fusion approach ﬁts for
those who have signiﬁcantly uncorrelated modalities.
The prevalent success of deep learning brings us a new
option for multi-modal fusion — intermediate-fusion. Thanks
to deep neural network that provides variable number of layers
for latent representations, it becomes ﬂexible to choose when
and which layer(s) can be used to fuse data from different
modalities [20]–[24].
On the other side, it is also possible to categorize multi-
modal methods based on whether they are discriminative,
generative or both (hybrid). Discriminative models [19], [25]–
[29] usually learn conditional distributions of labels given
features. Generative models [30]–[39] tend to learn their
joint distributions. And hybrid models [40]–[42] learn both
conditional distributions and joint distributions by combining
discriminative and generative parts. We refer readers to a
survey paper on multi-modal deep learning [43] for further
information. Different from the survey paper [43], in this
work we focus on multi-modal scenarios in areas related to
multimedia, which includes but is not limited to deep neural
network based architectures.
Next, we discuss two works [44], [45] utilizing the idea of
domain adaption to bridge the deep representations of different
modalities, which is not covered by the referred survey paper.
We start from the classic work [46] by Yosinski et al. on the
the transferability in deep neural networks. The conclusion is
that for a given deep neural network, deeper representation lay-
ers are more dependent on the speciﬁc task to be solved. While
the shallow layers are responsible for capturing more general
features. This principle inspires us to adapt those deeper
representation layers in deep learning for multi-modal tasks.
As such, Tzeng et al. propose a representative method (called
DCC) [47] to adapt deeper layers by employing Maximum
Mean Discrepancy (MMD) [48] to reduce the disagreement
between two modalities on the seventh layer (before softmax)
of a eight-layer AlexNet. DCC has two drawbacks: 1) it only
adapts one single layer (i.e., the seventh layer) in the deep
neural network (AlexNet). It may not be enough as Yosin-
ski et al. [46] point out that more than one layer is transferable
and 2) it adopts a single-kernel MMD (SK-MMD) which may
not serve as the optimal kernel. To tackle these weakness,
Long et al. propose a Deep Adaptation Network (DAN) [44]
that adapts three deep layers simultaneously through a multi-
kernel MMD (MK-MMD) which is capable of constructing
the ﬁnal kernel by combining multiple kernels together in Re-
producing Kernel Hilbert Space (RKHS). Figure 3 illustrates
the architecture of Deep Adaptation Network (DAN).
The objective of DAN then consists of two components:
1) Deep adaptation which matches distributions of repre-
sentation layers in multiple modalities,
2) Optimal matching which maximizes two-sample test
power by MK-MMD in RKHS.
DAN, on the other side, is also not perfect because it
matches the marginal distributions P(x)andQ(x)rather than
the joint distributions P(x;y)andQ(x;y). As is shown in
Figure 4, matching the joint distributions can achieve a better
Fig. 3: Deep Adaptation Network, ﬁgure from [44]
(a) Match Marginal Distributions (b) Match Joint Distributions
Fig. 4: Matching Marginal Distributions v.s. Matching Joint
Distributions, ﬁgure from [45].
performance than matching the marginal distributions. Thus
a model based on Joint Adaptation Network (JAN) [45] is
proposed by Long et al. to match the joint distributions be-
tween deep representations from different modailities. Figure 5
illustrates the structures of Joint Adaptation Network (JAN)
and its adversarial version (JAN-A). As the RKHS is nor-
mally high-dimensional or even inﬁnite-dimensional, Gaussian
kernel mapping samples to inﬁnite spaces is usually adopted
as the kernel function, and the ﬁnal bandwidth parameter is
selected according to empirical experiences.
We note that although these two works study the transferring
representations between different (two) modalities, their learn-
ing processes are bidirectional and the proposed models can
be tested on any two modalities without a ﬁxed requirement
of “source” or “target” domain in the experiments. Therefore,
we group these two works in the category of multi-modal
deep representation rather than multi-modal transfer learning.
Besides domain adaptation, there are also works aiming at
feature learning by means of deep neural networks, such as a
recent work [49] by Liu et al.
C. Multi-modal Transfer Learning
In the past decade, researchers have developed plenty of
good models that can achieve fairly good performances on
large amounts of labeled data including images, sentences
etc. which is for the same task and in the same domain
(e.g., predicting image class labels given images and their
corresponding labels as input for training). However, these
models still suffer in situations containing new scenarios that
the models have never taken into account in their training
phases. For instance, a model trained on detecting pedestrians
during day-time may experience a deterioration in performance
when being applied to detect bicyclists during night-time.