IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY 13
Fig. 24: Workﬂow of the music video summarization, ﬁgure
from [140].
(a) Illustration of logos in the MMSS work
(b) An example of G MMSS
Fig. 25: Illustration of multi-modal story-oriented video sum-
marization (MMSS), ﬁgure from [141].
with abundant information from other modalities, such as
audio signals, text descriptions and so on. All the modality
information is aligned or complementary with each other,
and capable of reﬂecting video contents in different aspects.
Simultaneously considering different modality information of
videos can provide video summarization model with a more
comprehensive view. Therefore, various multi-modal video
summarization methods are proposed based on this idea and
we remark that video summarization can also be treated as
one application of multi-modal fusion.Conventional multi-modal video summarization. Conven-
tional multi-modal video summarization methods mainly focus
on summarizing movies or music videos. These methods often
detect and synthesize low-level visual/audio/textual cues from
video itself to assess the saliency, representativeness or quality
of different video parts, and then extract those informative
parts to create the ﬁnal video summary. Xu et al. [140] propose
a music video summarization method based on audio-visual-
text analysis and alignment. As is shown in Figure 24, they
ﬁrst separate the music video into a music track and a video
track. For the music track, the chorus is detected based on
music structure analysis. For the video track, the (video)
shots are segmented and classiﬁed into close-up face shots
and non-face shots, followed by extraction of the lyrics and
detection of the most repeated lyrics from these shots. The
music video summary is generated based on the alignment
of boundaries of the detected chorus, shot class and the most
repeated lyrics from the music video. Pan et al. [141] introduce
a multi-modal story-oriented video summarization (MMSS)
model through encoding both textual and scene information,
as well as logos which link shots of a story as a graph. As is
shown in Figure 25(a), broadcast news production commonly
shows a small icon beside an anchorperson to represent the
story. The same icon is usually reused later in the shots about
the follow-up development of the story, as an aid for the
viewers to link current coverage to past coverage. These icons
are called “newslogos”. The property of logos makes them
a robust feature for linking separated footages of a story.
Based on the above observations, Pan et al. [141] build a
GMMSS graph as shown in Figure 25(b), which is a three-
layer graph with three types of nodes and two types of edges.
The three types of nodes are logo-node, frame-node and term-
node, corresponding to the logos, keyframes (each representing
a shot), and terms, respectively. The two types of edges are
the term-occurrence edge and the “same-logo” edge. In logo
story summarization, frames and terms forming the summary
are selected based on their “relevance” to the query object, the
logo (node) of the story. The strategy of random walk with
restarts (RWR) is used to obtain a story-speciﬁc relevance
ranking among the terms and shot key frames in the graph
GMMSS , then the frames (i.e., nodes) and terms (nodes)
with the highest RWR scores will be selected as the story
summary. Evangelopoulos et al. [142] formulate the detection
of perceptually important video events on the basis of saliency
models for the audio, visual and textual information conveyed
in a video stream. Audio saliency Sais assessed by cues
that quantify multi-frequency waveform modulations. Visual
saliencySvis measured through a spatio-temporal attention
model driven by intensity, color and motion. Text saliency Stis
extracted by part-of-speech tagging on the subtitle information
from videos. The various modality curves are integrated into
a single attention curve by a weighted linear combination of
the audio, visual and text saliency,
Savt=waSa+wvSv+wtSt; (23)
where the presence of an event may be identiﬁed in one or
multiple domains. This multi-modal saliency curve is the basis