IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY 3
conclude the whole paper in Section V.
II. D ATA-DRIVEN MULTI -MODAL CORRELATIONAL
REPRESENTATION
In this section, we brieﬂy introduce the concept and aim
of multi-modal analysis, succinctly summarize multi-task and
multi-view learning, two classic and well-documented tech-
niques that target at learning from multiple angles, followed by
our comprehensive analysis on three important categories of
approaches for multi-modal correlational representation, i.e.,
multi-modal deep representation, multi-modal transfer learning
and multi-modal hashing.
A. Multi-task and Multi-view Learning
Multi-modal/Cross-media correlational representation seeks
a way to represent different modality data in a common space
such that data from every modality becomes comparable with
each other and as many properties in their original spaces can
be preserved in the common space as possible. As two classic
methodologies, multi-task learning and multi-view learning
serve as two popular ways to consider the learning process
from more than one angle.
Multi-task learning aims to learn distinct tasks simultane-
ously by ﬁnding relationships among multiple tasks, which has
been studied for roughly 20 years. One of the most important
strategies in multi-task learning is to take both differences and
connections among multiple tasks into account simultaneously.
This strategy has been widely used in multi-label classiﬁcation
, face recognition, and etc. Multi-task learning can be roughly
divided into two categories:
1) Methods forcing multiple tasks to share common param-
eters;
2) Methods mining the common latent features among
multiple tasks;
Evgeniouand and Pontil [2] propose Regularized Multi-
task Learning , a representative model on common parameters
which minimizes the regularization function during the learn-
ing process. Evgeniouand and Pontil combine the concept of
multi-task learning with single-task SVM and illustrate the
connections among different single SVM tasks. They assume
all tasks share a common central separation hyper plane which
in turn determines the ﬁnal decision boundary for the current
task through an offset parameter. As for methods mining the
latent features, Argyriou et al. [3] introduce a typical Convex
Multi-task Feature Learning framework, laying the foundation
of many later multi-task learning algorithms. Jebara, in his
overview paper [4], discusses four groups of multi-task learn-
ing algorithms in terms of feature selection, kernel selection,
adaptive pooling and graphical model structure. For more
details, please refer to survey articles [5], [6] .
Multi-view learning, as its name indicates, considers mul-
tiple views from the same input data through employing one
function to model each view and jointly optimizing all the
functions so that the information of multiple views can be
best exploited and the learning performance therefore can
be dramatically improved. Different from multi-task learning
which input data may come from multiple tasks, multi-viewlearning takes distinct views of the same task as input. For
example, these different views can be face ID and ﬁngerprint
in recognition task, or color and words in image representation
task. Multi-view learning can be categorized into three types:
1) Co-training: train models to achieve the maximization
of the mutual consistency between two different views
of the unlabeled data;
2) Multi-kernel learning: combine different kernels corre-
sponding to distinct views together to achieve a perfor-
mance boost;
3) Subspace learning: assume that there exists a common
latent subspace shared by all views such that different
view data can be generated from this shared latent
subspace;
Besides, there are two principles widely adopted to make
sure that information from multiple views can be sufﬁciently
utilized.
1) Consensus principle (used by co-training): maximize the
mutual consistency between two views by requiring the
two hypotheses to be as consistent as possible, i.e.,
P(f16=f2)maxfPerr(f1);Perr(f2)g;(1)
whereP(f16=f2)is the disagreement rate between
two hypotheses from the corresponding two views and
Perr(f1),Perr(f2)are error rates of single hypothesis
f1,f2. Thus the error rate of each single hypothesis is
indirectly minimized through minimizing P(f16=f2).
2) Complementary principle: every distinct view has some
unique information which is not possessed by others.
Thus we may improve the learning performance by
making full use of complementary knowledge from
different views can result in an improvement for the
learning performance.
Readers with interests may refer to overview papers [7], [8]
on multi-view learning for more detailed information.
Besides the “pure” multi-view learning, others have investi-
gated metric fusion [9] or similarity learning [10] based on the
muli-view data as well. There are also some works combining
“multi-task” and “multi-view” together whose details can be
found in [11]–[14]. We note that both multi-task and multi-
view learning are not customized for multi-modal correlational
representation. This being the case, we highlight three promis-
ing groups of multi-modal methods designed speciﬁcally for
multi-modal data and discuss them in the rest of this section.
B. Multi-modal Deep Representation
Before deep learning is widely used in computer vision
and multimedia research works, muti-modal methods can be
mainly divided into two groups:
Feature-fusion approaches [15], [16]: aggregate features
extracted from each modality and feed the aggregated
features to the model (similar to the process of feature
engineering);
Semantic-fusion approaches [17]–[19] : feed features
from each modality into the model separately and com-
bine the results from all the models to get the ﬁnal results
(similar to the methodology of ensemble learning);