IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY 16
Fig. 30: The overview for query-focused video summarizer with memory network, ﬁgure from [146].
Fig. 31: The architecture of multi-modal auto-encoders, ﬁgure
from [147].
the semantic relevance between video frames and domain
knowledge can be measured in the hidden layers of the multi-
modal auto-encoders and semantically meaningful parts are se-
lected from videos to generate video summaries by minimizing
their distances to domain knowledge in the constructed latent
subspace. The whole picture of DSSE model is demonstrated
in Figure 32.
3)Multi-modal Visual Pattern Mining: Knowledge base
is a collection of entities, attributes and the relations between
them. knowledge base schema is the structure of knowledge
base and used to guide how the knowledge base is built. It is
often constructed manually using experts with speciﬁc domain
knowledge for the ﬁeld of interest. Many tasks such as au-
tomatic content extraction highly depend on knowledge base.
However, the current approaches ignore visual information that
could be used to build or populate these structured ontologies.
Preliminary work on visual knowledge base construction only
explores limited basic objects and scene relations. A few novel
multi-modal pattern mining approaches are proposed in [148]–
[152], towards constructing a high-level “event” schema semi-
automatically, which has the capability to extend text-only
methods for schema construction. A large unconstrained cor-
pus of weakly-supervised image-caption pairs related to high-
level events is utilized to both discover visual aspects of
an event, and name these visual components automatically.
Li et al. [148] leverage the activation signal of the convolution
ﬁlters to encode the visual content, and utilize the skip-
gram language model to encode the textual information. The
association rule mining algorithm is introduced to jointly
model the visual and textual information from multi-modal
data. The encoded visual and textual contents are considered
as transactions in association rule mining algorithm. The visual
transactions generation pipeline can be found in Figure 33.To discover the event related multi-modal patterns for
knowledge base construction, two criteria, representative and
discriminative , are deﬁned to ﬁnd the high quality multi-modal
visual patterns. Discriminative means the patterns discovered
from a category should not be found in other categories.
Representative means the discovered patterns should be com-
monly available in the category. In association rule mining
algorithm, representative property is deﬁned by support rate
of a transaction, as is shown in (33), and the discriminative
property is deﬁned by conﬁdence rate, as is shown in (34):
s(t) =jfTajtTa;Ta2Sgj
m; (33)
c(t!y) =s(t[y)
s(t); (34)
whereTais a transaction, tis a set of items and yis the target
category. The discovered association rules can be converted
to multi-modal visual patterns by the algorithm in [148].
Mathematically, the two pattern mining requirements can be
deﬁned as:
c(t!y)cmin;
s(t)smin;
t\I;6=;;
t\C;6=;; (35)
whereyis the event category, cmin is the threshold of
minimum conﬁdence rate, smin is the threshold of minimum
support rate, Iis the visual transactions, and Care the text
transactions. Each multi-modal pattern thas a set of visual
items and a set of text patterns. The end-to-end multi-modal
pattern discovery and naming framework can be found in
Figure 34.
Multi-modal pattern mining approach can be used as a
bridge to ﬁll the gap between text analysis and visual analysis.
Zhang et al. [150], [152] use the multi-modal visual pattern
mining framework proposed in [148], [153] to improve the
knowledge and event extraction problem in Natural Language
Processing community. Compare to the traditional text only
event extraction approach, multi-modal approach introduces
the discovered domain knowledge from visual domain and
achieve signiﬁcantly better performance.