IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY 1
Multi-modal Deep Analysis for Multimedia
Wenwu Zhu, Fellow, IEEE , Xin Wang, Member, IEEE , Hongzhi Li Member, IEEE
Abstract —With the rapid development of Internet and mul-
timedia services in the past decade, a huge amount of user-
generated and service provider-generated multimedia data be-
come available. These data are heterogeneous and multi-modal
in nature, imposing great challenges for processing and analyzing
them. Multi-modal data consist of a mixture of various types
of data from different modalities such as texts, images, videos,
audios etc. In this article, we present a deep and comprehensive
overview for multi-modal analysis in multimedia. We introduce
two scientiﬁc research problems, data-driven correlational repre-
sentation and knowledge-guided fusion for multimedia analysis.
To address the two scientiﬁc problems, we investigate them
from the following aspects: 1) multi-modal correlational represen-
tation : multi-modal fusion of data across different modalities,
and 2) multi-modal data and knowledge fusion : multi-modal fusion
of data with domain knowledge. More speciﬁcally, on data-
driven correlational representation, we highlight three important
categories of methods, such as multi-modal deep representation,
multi-modal transfer learning, and multi-modal hashing. On
knowledge-guided fusion, we discuss the approaches for fusing
knowledge with data and four exemplar applications that require
various kinds of domain knowledge, including multi-modal visual
question answering, multi-modal video summarization, multi-
modal visual pattern mining and multi-modal recommendation.
Finally, we bring forward our insights and future research
directions.
Index Terms —Multi-modal analysis, Data-driven correlational
representation, Knowledge-guided data fusion
I. I NTRODUCTION
WE ARE now living in the era of Cyber ,Physical and
Human (CPH) spaces. The Moore Law illustrates that
the CPU speed will double every 18 months, resulting in the
ubiquity of computing; the Bell Laws indicates that the chip
size tends to reduce by half every 18 months, making devices
including all types of sensors everywhere; the Gilders Law
shows that the network bandwidth can double every 6 months,
causing communications which connect human, computers and
physical identities to be ubiquitous in our daily lives. In short,
data are everywhere in the era of Cyber ,Physical andHuman
(CPH) spaces. For example, various kinds of user-generated
and service provider-generated data in social media together
Manuscript received February 12, 2019; revised June 21, 2019; accepted
August 28, 2019. This work is in part supported by the National Program
on Key Basic Research Project under Grant 2015CB352300, in part by the
China Postdoctoral Science Foundation under Grant BX201700136 and in
part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China Major Project
under Grant U1611461. ( Corresponding author: Xin Wang. )
W. Zhu and X. Wang are with the Department of Computer
Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China (e-mail:
wwzhu@tsinghua.edu.cn; xin wang@tsinghua.edu.cn).
H. Li is with Microsoft Research, Redmond, USA (e-mail:
Hongzhi.Li@microsoft.com).
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TCSVT.2019.2940647
Copyright c
2019 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted.
However, permission to use this material for any other purposes must be
obtained from the IEEE by sending an email to pubs-permissions@ieee.org.with the growing popularity of other information sources such
as cell phones and cameras have produced a large amount
of multi-modal multimedia data. Multi-modal data consists
of a mixture of various types of data such as texts, images,
audios, videos etc. In the past decades, most researchers
focus on analyzing data in a single modality, making uni-
modal/single-medium analysis a well studied topic to date.
However, we need to study multi-modal data in real life,
which is particular important when we enter the “Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (AI) Epoch”. Discoveries in cognitive science [1]
have conﬁrmed the fact that human are able to perceive their
surrounding environment through fusing the feedback from
multiple sensory organs (eyes, nose, ears, etc.) together. As
such, the investigation of multi-modal analysis serves as a very
promising direction in boosting the progress of research in big
data and AI. Fortunately, the advent of multi-modal data brings
us great opportunities for multi-modal analysis in multimedia.
Nevertheless, analyzing multi-modal multimedia data im-
poses great challenges. One scientiﬁc problem is how to jointly
consider and fuse information from different modalities such
that multi-modal approaches are able to outperform uni-modal
methods which utilize information from single modality sep-
arately. Traditional approaches for multi-modal analysis can
be categorized into two groups: feature fusion andsemantic
fusion . Feature fusion (also known as feature engineering)
approaches simply conduct feature concatenations on raw
features from different modalities, which is normally achieved
via manual operations and has very low efﬁciency, as is shown
in Figure 1(a). Semantic fusion ﬁrst analyzes information from
single modality separately in the beginning and conduct multi-
modal fusion at semantic level, as is illustrated in Figure 1(b).
This type of methods can maintain the explainability in seman-
tic fusion, but fails to make full use of the rich information
hidden in multi-modal.
Thanks to the success of deep neural network in computer
science, a new type of approaches capable of fusing informa-
tion from different modalities in hidden space at intermediate
level cuts a splendid ﬁgure in multi-modal analysis, as is
demonstrated in Figure 1(c). This type of methods can fully
utilize the multi-modal data through learning a correlational
representation for different modality in a data-driven way.
Figure 2 demonstrates a common way for multi-modal corre-
lational representation, which is to map multi-modal data (left-
most) to a hidden representation (middle) and/or correlational
representation (rightmost). Quite a few methods including
deep learning can be used to learn the hidden representation
and further correlational mining techniques are necessary for
the correlational representation learning.
Though being capable of handling large-scale multi-modal
data, the results obtained from data-driven approaches (e.g.,arXiv:1910.04964v2  [cs.MM]  4 Jan 2020