IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY 2
Feature Fusion
Modality 1 Modality n
 Modality m
Semantic Fusion
Modality 1 Modality n
 Modality m
Intermediate Fusion
Modality 1 Modality n
 Modality m
(a) Feature fusion (b) Semantic fusion (c) Intermediate fusion
Fig. 1: Schematic diagram for semantic fusion methods and intermediate fusion methods
Heterogeneous 
multi- modal dataHidden  
representationCo rrelational 
representation
1Hidden 
attribute
Fig. 2: Correlational representation
deep neural networks) can sometimes be unexplainable, which
do not utilize too much domain knowledge, leading to a
huge exploration space and low accuracy. Therefore it is very
challenging to get explainable correlational representations
from uncertain big data. Human, on the other hand, is capable
of utilizing domain knowledge to help making decisions,
resulting in high explainability and accuracy. As such, there
exists a paradox between scalability and explainability, and
it is desirable to ﬁgure out a balance which requires the best
cooperative fusion between data and knowledge between data-
driven and knowledge-driven methods.
The goal of this article is two-fold. We ﬁrst give a deep
and comprehensive overview for multi-modal problems in
multimedia from two aspects: 1) data-driven correlational
representation : multi-modal fusion of data from different
modalities and 2) knowledge-guided data fusion : multi-modal
fusion of data with domain knowledge. We then present our
insights and thinkings on future directions for multi-modal
research in the new era of artiﬁcial intelligence, and point out
several promising research directions including cross-modal
reasoning, cross-modal cognition and cross-modal collective
intelligence, for further investigation.
One natural scientiﬁc problem is how to ﬁnd a hidden rep-
resentation that can best correlate information from different
modalities. Several methodologies have the potential to tackle
this challenge and we highlight three important categories
of data-driven approaches that focus on multi-modal cor-
relational representation: Multi-modal Deep Representation,
Multi-modal Transfer Learning and Multi-modal Hashing.
Given an effective hidden correlation representation for
different modality data, the next scientiﬁc research problem
is how we can increase the explainability of data-drivenapproaches while maintaining their scalability via the guidance
of domain knowledge and take advantage of their superiority.
However, to the best of our knowledge, there have been no
systematic or consolidated methodologies for incorporating
domain knowledge into the process of cross-modal learning.
We observe that there exist mainly three families of meth-
ods that may be suitable for knowledge-guided cross-modal
fusion, i.e., Bayesian Inference, Teacher-student Network and
Reinforcement Learning. We will elaborate our thoughts on
why these three methodologies deserve further investigations
for future research later in the paper.
On the other hand, many existing approaches for multi-
modal oriented problems have unwittingly tried resorting to
domain knowledge for the improvement of model perfor-
mances. Among these methods, some utilize domain knowl-
edge in a naive or straightforward way while some others
may do it more sufﬁciently or elegantly. Although the existing
literature is still in the preliminary stage, we believe these
trials deserve attentions from researchers in the community.
For a clear elaboration on the existing ideas of knowledge-
guided cross-modal data fusion, we pick up four exemplar
multi-modal oriented applications that require various domain
knowledge, and discuss their research directions in terms of
knowledge-guided multi-modal data fusion, i.e., Multi-modal
Visual Question Answering, Multi-modal Video Summariza-
tion, Multi-modal Visual Pattern Mining and Multi-modal
Recommendation.
In a nutshell, we present our insights on the key problems
for multi-modal analysis, review some representative state-of-
the-art multi-modal approaches in multimedia and summarize
their characteristics in essence. Our discussions will center
around the two mentioned scientiﬁc research problems in
multi-modal analysis for multimedia. We discuss approaches
focusing on data-driven multi-modal correlational representa-
tionin Section II and analyze several exemplar applications in
knowledge-guided multi-modal data fusion in Section III. We
then highlight our insights on promising research directions
that may lead the next breakthrough in cross-modal intelli-
gence, i.e., cross-modal reasoning ,cross-modal cognition and
cross-modal collective intelligence . We share our opinions
about why and how researchers should pay more attentions
on these topics in the future in Section IV. In the end, we