(a) Fetch Push
 (b) Point-Mass
(c) Pusher Push
 (d) Pusher Draw
Figure 2: (a) Using the Fetch robot we demonstrate that we can train exploration policies through our approach
to state-marginal matching. Figures in order are: Fetch environment, target, and two policies’ state marginals.
Full image region depicts the extent of the table. (b) In the point-mass domain we train policies that exhibit
complex and multi-modal trajectories. (c) Using state-marginal matching we train policies for solving the
Pusher Push task. Left image is Pusher environment. The next two columns correspond to the target and policy
distribution of the arm tip position. Top images are bird’s eye view (x-y) and bottom images are side view (y-z)
of these distributions. (d) Pusher Draw target and policy distributions. Top images are top-down view of arm
tip distribution and bottom images visualize the zcoordinate as a function of angle of rotation around the circle.
demonstrates we can also train a Pusher agent [13] — a joint-velocity controlled 7-DoF simulated
arm — to draw a sinusoidal function on the surface of an imaginary cylinder in 3D space.
Pusher Push Beyond path-tracing, we attempt to train the Pusher agent to solve the pushing task
it was originally designed for [13]. The target and trained policy state distributions are presented in
Figure 2c. While this result is far from what can be achieved using RL algorithms and the provided
reward function for this task, we believe this an intriguing result as our policies were merely guided
by lines and points drawn in 3D space using a short python script.
Fetch Push Lastly, in the spirit of the original motivation of [16] we examine whether our method
can lead to successful exploration strategies. To this end we use the position-controlled Fetch robot
in the pick and place environment [13]. We ﬁx the grippers height slightly above the table and
train policies to uniformly explore the region depicted in Figure 2a. We observe that our training
procedure gives rise to a diverse range of policies which learn to push the block around the target
region, yet exhibit sufﬁcient control to prevent the block from moving outside the boundary.
9 Conclusion
The central motivation for this work stemmed from the superior performance of recent adversarial
IRL methods [2, 1] compared to BC in the low-data regime, and the desire to understand the relation
among various approaches for Imitation Learning. We presented f-MAX, a generalization of AIRL
[1] based on f-divergence [14]. This enabled us to form a uniﬁed view of Imitation Learning and
interpret various IL methods as different forms of divergence minimization. From these ﬁndings,
we generated hypotheses for why IRL methods outperformed BC, and empirically evaluated them
in high-dimensional continuous control benchmarks. To tease apart the differences between prior
IRL methods and BC, we addressed the degeneracy of f-MAX in a special case, and provided a
one-line modiﬁcation of AIRL, named FAIRL, which optimizes the forward KL divergence. Our
experiments conclusively disambiguated that the factor contributing most to IRL’s gain over BC is
the additional state marginal matching objective. Lastly, we demonstrated the efﬁcacy of applying
f-MAX to the problem of state-marginal matching, suggesting future directions where we could
replace the need for expert demonstrations in IRL with simple hand-designed state distributions.
8