Details for DAgger The DAgger algorithm was trained for 200 epochs. At the end of each epoch
the policy at that point is run for 8000 timesteps. The states observed through these rollouts are
labelled by the expert policy and added to the aggregate dataset.
H State-Marginal Matching Experimental Details
H.1 Environments
Point-Mass The point-mass environment we experiment with is a very simple environment im-
plemented in NumPy with 2-dimensional observation and action space. Each episode starts with the
agent initialized near the origin. At each timestep, the agent’s action is a 2-dimensional vector (with
magnitude of at most 1) and the agent’s location is displaced by that vector. For Iniﬁnity sign task
the horizon is 120 timesteps, and for the Spiral task the horizon is 480 steps.
Pusher Draw For this experiment we use the Pusher environment found in OpenAI gym [13] and
remove the table and object. The agent is controlled by setting velocities at various joints. We also
increase the range of motion of the central joint to increase range of motion. Episode horizon is 500
timesteps.
Pusher Push For this experiment we use the Pusher environment as found in OpenAI gym [13].
The agent is controlled by setting velocities at various joints. Episode horizon is the default 100
timesteps.
Fetch Push For this experiment we use the Fetch Pick and Place environment found in OpenAI
gym [13]. The Fetch robot is a position controlled robot, meaning that at each timestep, the agent
outputs a bounded displacement vector for the gripper position. We modify the initial state distri-
bution to start the gripper at about the same height as the block at the center of the table. In each
episode the block is randomly initialized at 0.08 radius from the center of the table. We ﬁx the
gripper height and make the action space be only operate on the x-ycoordinate. Full model and
environment ﬁles will be released with code release. Episode horizon is 200 timesteps.
H.2 Models
As a note, we likely used excessively large models and our choices were somewhat arbitrary with
no attempt at tuning the architecture. It is very feasible that one can obtain similar performance with
much more compact model architectures.
Discriminator In all experiments, the discriminator architecture is as follows. First the input is
linearly embedded into a 128-dim vector. This hidden state then passes through 6 resnet blocks of
128-dimensions; the residual path uses batch normalization and Tanh activation. The last hidden
state is then linearly embedded into a single-dimensional output, which is the logits of the discrimi-
nator. The logit is clipped to be within the range [-10,10] .
Policy and SAC Models For any given experiment the policy, Q, and V function had the same
architecture, with the only difference being 1) the input-output dimensions, and 2) the policy outputs
Tanh(Normal( ;))given a state. All models used relu activations. The dimensionality and
number of layer for each experiment were: Point-Mass (4 layers, 64 dim), Pusher (3 layers 128
dim), Fetch (3 layers, 256 dim).
H.3 Target Distributions
In this section we include the code (including parameters) used to generate the target distributions
for the various experiments.
Point-Mass For the Point-Mass domain, target distributions are parameteric curves.
import numpy as np
15