Recent “adversarial” IRL methods [2, 12, 1] have shown tremendous success in benchmarks for con-
tinuous control [13]; these methods outperform Behaviour Cloning by a wide margin, particularly
in the low data regime where a very limited number of expert trajectories are available. However,
it is not immediately clear why adversarial IRL methods outperform BC, since at optimality both
methods exactly recover the expert policy. This question motivates the work presented here.
The contribution of this work are as follows. Drawing upon the literature on f-divergences [14, 15],
we begin by presenting f-MAX, an algorithm for Max-Ent IRL. We demonstrate how f-MAX gen-
eralizes AIRL [1], and provides new intuition for what similar algorithms accomplish. From our
ﬁndings we generate hypotheses for why Max-Ent IRL methods outperform BC, and empirically
evaluate them in continuous control benchmarks. Through this process we gain a uniﬁed under-
standing of Imitation Learning methods from a divergence minimization perspective. To demon-
strate the versatility of this perspective, we present a new approach to the recently proposed problem
of state-marginal matching [16] and show that we can train policies for a diverse range of behaviours
using no reward functions or expert demonstrations.
2 Related Work
The connections between RL and divergence minimization have long been studied in the rich prior
literature of control as probabilistic inference [17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23]. Speciﬁcally, they have
shown that optimal control under entropy regularization can be viewed as approximate inference
on a graphical model, or equivalently minimizing reverse KL divergence between reward-weighted
trajectory and policy trajectory distributions [20, 24]. Building on such intuitions, a number of work
extended RL algorithms based on picking another divergence metric, such as forward KL [25, 26],
and demonstrated substantially improved empirical performances in certain situations. Our work
draws signiﬁcant inspirations from these prior works in RL and aims to provide a probabilistic
perspective in Imitation Learning (IL).
In the ﬁeld of robotics, imitation learning (IL), or bootstrapping from IL, has often been the method
of choice over RL due to difﬁculty in exploration and scarcity of data [3, 4, 5, 6]. While Behavioural
Cloning (BC) is the most widely used IL algorithm due to the simplicity of its objective, it suffers
from the problem of covariate shift between train and test time. Methods such as DAgger [27] and
Dart [28] aim to relieve this mismatch, yet assume interactive access to expert policies.
Inverse Reinforcement Learning (IRL) algorithms have shown promising results in challenging con-
tinuous control problems [29, 30, 2, 1, 7], outperforming BC. Similarly to RL, the connections
between IRL and divergence minimization have long been alluded. Early works in IRL operated
by matching feature expectations or moments [9] between policies and experts, a popular approach
in distribution matching [31, 32]. Furthermore, Maximum Entropy (Max-Ent) IRL [21, 22] —
an IRL framework that addresses degeneracies of the original IRL formulation [10, 11] — is ex-
plicitly formulated as an energy-based modeling problem. Recent scalable approaches to Max-Ent
IRL [2, 1, 12], motivated by adversarial approaches to generative modeling [33], demonstrate addi-
tional connections to distribution matching. Our work generalizes the objective proposed in [1, 12]
based on recent insights from generative modeling [15], and further provides a uniﬁed perspective
for viewing common IL algorithms. Concurrent to our work, Ke et al. [34] also present a unify-
ing probabilistic perspective on IL; however, their empirical experiments solely focus on grid world
domains, while our work provides comparative results on high-dimensional continuous control en-
vironments and also evaluates the effectiveness of IL algorithms for state marginal matching [16].
3 Background
Consider a Markov Decision Process (MDP) represented as a tuple (S;A;P;r; 0;
)with state-
spaceS, action-spaceA, dynamicsP:SAS! [0;1], reward function r(s;a), initial state
distribution 0, and discount factor 
2(0;1). Throughout this work we will denote the marginal
state-action and marginal state distribution of a policy by (s;a)and(s)respectively.1
1Intuitively, the marginal distributions of a policy are obtained by generating inﬁnitely many trajectories
(i.e. ﬁnite or inﬁnite horizon episodes) with a the given policy and computing the frequency of (s;a)or(s).
2