A Divergence Minimization Perspective
on Imitation Learning Methods
Seyed Kamyar Seyed Ghasemipour
University of Toronto, Vector Institute
kamyar@cs.toronto.eduRichard Zemel
University of Toronto, Vector Institute
zemel@cs.toronto.edu
Shixiang Gu
Google Brain
shanegu@google.com
Abstract: In many settings, it is desirable to learn decision-making and con-
trol policies through learning or bootstrapping from expert demonstrations. The
most common approaches under this Imitation Learning (IL) framework are Be-
havioural Cloning (BC), and Inverse Reinforcement Learning (IRL). Recent meth-
ods for IRL have demonstrated the capacity to learn effective policies with ac-
cess to a very limited set of demonstrations, a scenario in which BC methods
often fail. Unfortunately, due to multiple factors of variation, directly comparing
these methods does not provide adequate intuition for understanding this differ-
ence in performance. In this work, we present a uniﬁed probabilistic perspective
on IL algorithms based on divergence minimization. We present f-MAX, anf-
divergence generalization of AIRL [1], a state-of-the-art IRL method. f-MAX
enables us to relate prior IRL methods such as GAIL [2] and AIRL [1], and un-
derstand their algorithmic properties. Through the lens of divergence minimiza-
tion we tease apart the differences between BC and successful IRL approaches,
and empirically evaluate these nuances on simulated high-dimensional continu-
ous control domains. Our ﬁndings conclusively identify that IRL’s state-marginal
matching objective contributes most to its superior performance. Lastly, we ap-
ply our new understanding of IL method to the problem of state-marginal match-
ing, where we demonstrate that in simulated arm pushing environments we can
teach agents a diverse range of behaviours using simply hand-speciﬁed state dis-
tributions and no reward functions or expert demonstrations. For datasets and re-
producing results please refer to https://github.com/KamyarGh/rl_swiss/
blob/master/reproducing/fmax_paper.md .
Keywords: Imitation Learning, State-Marginal Matching
1 Introduction
Modern advances in reinforcement learning (RL) aim to alleviate the need for hand-engineered
decision-making and control algorithms by designing general purpose methods that learn to optimize
provided reward functions. In many cases however, it is either too challenging to optimize a given
reward (e.g. due to sparsity of signal), or it is simply impossible to design a reward function that
captures the intricate details of desired outcomes [3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8]. One approach to overcoming such
hurdles is Imitation Learning (IL) or Learning from Demonstrations (LfD) [3, 4, 9] where algorithms
are provided with expert demonstrations of how to accomplish desired tasks.
The most common approaches in IL framework are Behavioural Cloning (BC) and Inverse Rein-
forcement Learning (IRL) [10, 11]. In standard BC, learning from demonstrations is treated as a
supervised learning problem and policies are trained to regress expert actions from a dataset of ex-
pert demonstrations. On the other hand, in IRL the aim is to infer the reward function of the expert,
and subsequently train a policy to optimize this reward. The motivation for IRL stems from the
intuition that the reward function is the most concise and portable representation of a task [11, 9].
3rd Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL 2019), Osaka, Japan.