Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
Hypothesis: 
Animal / Vehicle 
Airplane Ship Car Truck 
 Horse Deer 
Frog Bird Dog Cat 
(a)
(b)
Figure 9: A Node’s meaning. (Left) Visualization of node hypothesis test performed on a CIFAR10-trained
WideResNet28x10 model, by sampling from CIFAR100 validation set for OOD classes. (Right) Classiﬁcation
accuracy is high (80-95%) given unseen CIFAR100 samples of Vehicles (top) and Animals (bottom), for the
WordNet-hypothesized Animal/Vehicle node.
B.2 E XPLAINABILITY OF NODES ’ VISUAL MEANINGS
This section describes the method used in Table 6 in more detail. Since the induced hierarchy
is constructed using model weights, the intermediate nodes are not forced to split on foreground
objects. While hierarchies like WordNet provide hypotheses for a node’s meaning, the tree may
split on unexpected contextual and visual attributes such as underwater andon land , depicted in
Figure 7b. To diagnose a node’s visual meaning, we perform the following 4-step test:
1. Posit a hypothesis for the node’s meaning (e.g. Animal vs. Vehicle ). This hypothesis can be
computed automatically from a given taxonomy or deduced from manual inspection of each
child’s leaves (Figure 9).
2. Collect a dataset with new, unseen classes that test the hypothesised meaning from step 1 (e.g.
Elephant is an unseen Animal ). Samples in this dataset are referred to as out-of-distribution
(OOD) samples, as they are drawn from a separate labeled dataset.
3. Pass samples from this dataset through the node. For each sample, check whether the selected
child node agrees with the hypothesis.
4. The accuracy of the hypothesis is the percentage of samples passed to the correct child. If the
accuracy is low, repeat with a different hypothesis.
Figure 9a depicts the CIFAR10 tree induced by a WideResNet28x10 model trained on CIFAR10.
The WordNet hypothesis is that the root note splits on Animal vs. Vehicle . We use the CIFAR100
validation set as out-of-distribution images for Animal andVehicle classes that are unseen at training
time. We then compute the hypothesis’ accuracy. Figure 9b shows our hypothesis accurately predicts
which child each unseen-class’s samples traverse.
B.3 H OWMODEL ACCURACY AFFECTS INTERPRETABILITY
Induced hierarchies are determined by the proximity of class weights, but classes that are close
in weight space may not have similar visual meaning: Figure 10 depicts the trees induced by
WideResNet28x10 and ResNet10, respectively. While the WideResNet induced hierarchy (Fig-
ure 10a) groups visually-similar classes, the ResNet (Figure 10b) induced hierarchy does not, group-
ing classes such as Frog ,Cat, and Airplane . This disparity in visual meaning is explained by
WideResNet’s 4% higher accuracy: we believe that higher-accuracy models exhibit more visually-
sound weight spaces. Thus, unlike previous work, NBDTs feature better interpretability with higher
accuracy, instead of sacriﬁcing one for the other. Furthermore, the disparity in hierarchies indicates
that a model with low accuracy will not provide interpretable insight into high-accuracy decisions.
14