Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
96.0% 98.5% 
34.5% 
96.6% 
dog dog
96.6% 96.4% 
98.9% 55.2% 
NN
Bird (98%) , Dog (0.8%), Cat (0.4%) Cat (80%) , Dog (18%), Automobile (0.3%) NBDT EXPLANATION 
Figure 5: Types of Ambiguous Labels. All these examples have ambiguous labels. With NBDT (top), the
decision rule deciding between equally-plausible classes has low certainty (red, 30-50%). All other decision
rules have high certainty (blue, 96%+). The juxtaposition of high and low certainty decision rules makes
ambiguous labels easy to distinguish. By contrast, ResNet18 (bottom) still picks one class with high probability.
(Left) An extreme example of a “spug” that may plausibly belong to two classes. (Right) Image containing two
animals of different classes. Photo ownership: “Spug” by Arne Fredriksen at gyyporama.com. Used with
permission. Second image is CC-0 licensed at pexels.com.
RESNET-18 ENTROPY (BASELINE) NBDT PATH ENTROPY (OURS) 
Figure 6: ImageNet Ambiguous Labels. These images suggest that NBDT path entropy uniquely identiﬁes
ambiguous labels in Imagenet, without object detection labels. We plot ImageNet validation samples that in-
duce the most 2-class confusion, using TinyImagenet200-trained models. Note that ImageNet classes do not
include people. (Left) Run ResNet18 and ﬁnd samples that (a) maximize entropy between the top 2 classes and
(b) minimize entropy across all classes, where the top 2 classes are averaged. Despite high model uncertainty,
half the classes are from the training set – bee, orange, bridge, banana, remote control – and do not show visual
ambiguity. (Right) For NBDT, compute entropy for each node’s predicted distribution; take the difference be-
tween the largest and smallest values. Now, half of the images contain truly ambiguous content for a classiﬁer;
we draw green boxes around pairs of objects that could each plausibly be used for the image class.
decisions, which we ﬁnd is a much stronger indicator of ambiguity than entropy in the original neural
network prediction. The intuition is as follows: If all intermediate decisions have high certainty
except for a few decisions, those decisions are deciding between multiple equally plausible cases.
Using this intuition, we can identify ambiguous labels by ﬁnding samples with high “path entropy”
– or highly disparate entropies for intermediate decisions on the NBDT prediction path.
Per Figure 6, the highest “path entropy” samples in ImageNet contain multiple objects, where each
object could plausibly be used for the image class. In contrast, samples that induce the highest
entropy in the baseline neural network do not suggest ambiguous labels. This suggests NBDT
entropy is more informative compared to that of a standard neural network.
6 C ONCLUSION
In this work, we propose Neural-Backed Decision Trees that see (1) improved accuracy: NBDTs
out-generalize (16%+), improve (2%+), and match (0.15%) or outperform (1%+) state-of-the-art
neural networks on CIFAR10, CIFAR100, TinyImageNet, and ImageNet. We also show (2) im-
proved interpretability by drawing unique insights from our hierarchy, conﬁrming that humans trust
NBDT’s over saliency and illustrate how path entropy can be used to identify ambiguous labels.
This challenges the conventional supposition of a dichotomy between accuracy and interpretability,
paving the way for jointly accurate andinterpretable models in real-world deployments.
9