Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
...x1 
x2
xd...x3 ŷ1 
ŷ2 
ŷ3 
ŷk w2 w3 w4 w1 w5 
w2 w3 w4 w6 
w1 w5 
w2 w3 w4 w6 w7 
w1 
Step A. 
Load Weights Step B. 
Set Leaf Vectors Step C. 
Set Parent Vectors Step D. 
Set Ancestor Vectors w4w3w2w1
Figure 2: Building Induced Hierarchies. Step A. Load the weights of a pre-trained model’s ﬁnal fully-
connected layer, with weight matrix W2RDK.Step B. Take rowswk2Wand normalize for each leaf
node’s weight. For example, the red w1in A is assigned to the red leaf in B. Step C. Average each pair of leaf
nodes for the parents’ weight. For example, w1andw2(red and purple) in B are averaged to make w5(blue) in
C.Step D. For each ancestor, average all leaf node weights in its subtree. That average is the ancestor’s weight.
Here, the ancestor isthe root, so its weight is the average of all leaf weights w1;w2;w3;w4.
other conditionally-executed models (Tanno et al., 2019; Veit & Belongie, 2018), our method can
recover from a mistake early in the hierarchy with sufﬁcient uncertainty in the incorrect path (Figure
1 C, Appendix Table 7). This inference mode bests classic tree inference (Appendix C.2).
3.2 B UILDING INDUCED HIERARCHIES
Existing decision-tree-based methods use (a) hierarchies built with data-dependent heuristics like
information gain or (b) existing hierarchies like WordNet. However, the former overﬁts to the data,
and the latter focuses on conceptual rather than visual similarity: For example, by virtue of being an
animal, Bird is closer to Catthan to Plane , according to WordNet. However, the opposite is true for
visual similarity: by virtue of being in the sky, Bird is more visually similar to Plane than to Cat.
Thus, to prevent overﬁtting and reﬂect visual similarity, we build a hierarchy using model weights.
Our hierarchy requires pre-trained model weights. Take row vectors wk:k2[1;K], each repre-
senting a class, from the fully-connected layer weights W. Then, run hierarchical agglomerative
clustering on the normalized class representatives wk=kwkk2. Agglomerative clustering decides
which nodes and groups of nodes are iteratively paired. As described in Sec 3.1, each leaf node’s
weight is a row vector wk2W(Figure 2, Step B) and each inner node’s weight niis the average of
its leaf node’s weights (Figure 2, Step C). This hierarchy is the induced hierarchy (Figure 2).
3.3 L ABELING DECISION NODES WITH WORDNET
WordNet is a hierarchy of nouns. To assign WordNet meaning to nodes, we compute the earliest
common ancestor for all leaves in a subtree: For example, say Dog andCatare two leaves that share
a parent. To ﬁnd WordNet meaning for the parent, ﬁnd all ancestor concepts that Dog andCatshare,
likeMammal ,Animal , and Living Thing . The earliest shared ancestor is Mammal , so we assign
Mammal to the parent of Dog andCat. We repeat for all inner nodes.
However, the WordNet corpus is lacking in concepts that are not themselves objects, like object
attributes (e.g., Pencil andWire are both cylindrical) and (b) abstract visual ideas like context (e.g.,
ﬁshandboat are both aquatic). Many of these which are littered across our induced hierarchies
(Appendix Figure 14). Despite this limitation, we use WordNet to assign meaning to intermediate
decision nodes, with more sophisticated methods left to future work.
3.4 F INE-TUNING WITH TREE SUPERVISION LOSS
Even though standard cross entropy loss separates representatives for each leaf, it is not trained to
separate representatives for each inner node (Table 3, “None”). To amend this, we add a tree super-
4