Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
A. 
Hard B. 
Soft 
+
Figure 12: Tree Supervision Loss has two variants: Hard Tree Supervision Loss (A) deﬁnes a cross entropy
term per node. This is illustrated with the blue box for the blue node and the orange box for the orange node.
The cross entropy is taken over the child node probabilities. The green node is the leaf representing a class
label. The dotted nodes are not included in the path from the label to the root, so do not have a deﬁned loss.
Soft Tree Supervision Loss (B) deﬁnes a cross entropy loss over all leaf probabilities. The probability of the
green leaf is the product of the probabilities leading up to the root (in this case, hx;w 2ihx;w 6i= 0:60:7).
The probabilities for the other leaves are similarly deﬁned. Each leaf probability is represented with a colored
box. The cross entropy is then computed over this leaf probability distribution, represented by the colored box
stacked on one another.
C.1 H ARD TREE SUPERVISION LOSS
An alternative loss would be hierarchical softmax – in other words, one cross entropy loss per
decision rule. We denote this the hard tree supervision loss , as we construct a variant of hierarchical
softmax that (a) supports arbitrary depth trees and (b) is deﬁned over a single, un-augmented fully-
connected layer (e.g. k-dimensional output for a k-leaf tree). The original neural network’s loss
Loriginal minimizes cross entropy across the classes. For a k-class dataset, this is a k-way cross
entropy loss. Each internal node’s goal is similar: minimize cross-entropy loss across the child
nodes. For node iwithcchildren, this is a c-way cross entropy loss between predicted probabilities
D(i)predand labelsD(i)label. We refer to this collection of new loss terms as the hard tree supervision
loss(Eq. 4). The individual cross entropy losses for each node are scaled so that the original cross
entropy loss and the tree supervision loss are weighted equally, by default. If we assume Nnodes
in the tree, excluding leaves, then we would have N+ 1 different cross entropy loss terms – the
original cross entropy loss and Nhard tree supervision loss terms. This is Loriginal +Lhard, where:
Lhard=1
NNX
i=1CROSS ENTROPY (D(i)pred;D(i)label)| {z }
over the cchildren for each node: (4)
C.2 H ARD INFERENCE
Hard inference is more intuitive: Starting at the root node, each sample is sent to the child with
the most similar representative. We continue picking and traversing the tree until we reach a leaf.
The class associated with this leaf is our prediction (Figure 1, A. Hard). More precisely, consider
a tree with nodes indexed by iwith set of child nodes C(i). Each node iproduces a probability of
child nodej2C(i); this probability is denoted p(jji). Each node thus picks the next node using
argmaxj2C(i)p(jji).
Whereas this inference mode is more intuitive, it underperforms soft inference (Figure 7). Fur-
thermore, note that hard tree supervision loss ( i.e.modiﬁed hierarchical softmax) appears to more
speciﬁcally optimize hard inference. Despite that, hard inference performs worse (Figure 8) with
hard tree supervision loss than the “soft” tree supervision loss (Sec 3.4) used in the main paper.
D I MPLEMENTATION
Our inference strategy, as outlined above and in Sec. 3.1 of the paper, includes two phases: (1)
featurizing the sample using the neural network backbone and (2) running the embedded decision
rules. However, in practice, our inference implementation does not need to run inference with the
16