Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
NBDT: N EURAL -BACKED DECISION TREE
Alvin Wan 1, Lisa Dunlap1, Daniel Ho
1, Jihan Yin 1, Scott Lee 1, Suzanne Petryk 1,
Sarah Adel Bargal 2, Joseph E. Gonzalez 1
UC Berkeley 1, Boston University 2
falvinwan,ldunlap,danielho,jihan yin,scott.lee.3898,spetryk,jegonzal g@berkeley.edu
sbargal@bu.edu
ABSTRACT
Machine learning applications such as ﬁnance and medicine demand accurate and
justiﬁable predictions, barring most deep learning methods from use. In response,
previous work combines decision trees with deep learning, yielding models that
(1) sacriﬁce interpretability for accuracy or (2) sacriﬁce accuracy for interpretabil-
ity. We forgo this dilemma by jointly improving accuracy and interpretability us-
ing Neural-Backed Decision Trees (NBDTs). NBDTs replace a neural network’s
ﬁnal linear layer with a differentiable sequence of decisions and a surrogate loss.
This forces the model to learn high-level concepts and lessens reliance on highly-
uncertain decisions, yielding (1) accuracy: NBDTs match or outperform modern
neural networks on CIFAR, ImageNet and better generalize to unseen classes by
up to 16%. Furthermore, our surrogate loss improves the original model’s accu-
racy by up to 2%. NBDTs also afford (2) interpretability: improving human trust
by clearly identifying model mistakes and assisting in dataset debugging. Code
and pretrained NBDTs are at github.com/alvinwan/neural-backed-decision-trees.
1 I NTRODUCTION
Many computer vision applications (e.g. medical imaging and autonomous driving) require insight
into the model’s decision process, complicating applications of deep learning which are tradition-
ally black box. Recent efforts in explainable computer vision attempt to address this need and can
be grouped into one of two categories: (1) saliency maps and (2) sequential decision processes.
Saliency maps retroactively explain model predictions by identifying which pixels most affected the
prediction. However, by focusing on the input, saliency maps fail to capture the model’s decision
making process. For example, saliency offers no insight for a misclassiﬁcation when the model
is “looking” at the right object for the wrong reasons. Alternatively, we can gain insight into the
model’s decision process by breaking up predictions into a sequence of smaller semantically mean-
ingful decisions as in rule-based models like decision trees. However, existing efforts to fuse deep
learning and decision trees suffer from (1) signiﬁcant accuracy loss, relative to contemporary mod-
els (e.g., residual networks), (2) reduced interpretability due to accuracy optimizations (e.g., impure
leaves and ensembles), and (3) tree structures that offer limited insight into the model’s credibility.
To address these, we propose Neural-Backed Decision Trees (NBDTs) to jointly improve both
(1) accuracy and (2) interpretability of modern neural networks, utilizing decision rules that pre-
serve (3) properties like sequential, discrete decisions; pure leaves; and non-ensembled predictions.
These properties in unison enable unique insights, as we show. We acknowledge that there is no
universally-accepted deﬁnition of interpretability (Lundberg et al., 2020; Doshi-Velez & Kim, 2017;
Lipton, 2016), so to show interpretability, we adopt a deﬁnition offered by Poursabzi-Sangdeh et al.
(2018): A model is interpretable if a human can validate its prediction, determining when the model
has made a sizable mistake. We picked this deﬁnition for its importance to downstream beneﬁts we
can evaluate, speciﬁcally (1) model or dataset debugging and (2) improving human trust. To ac-
complish this, NBDTs replace the ﬁnal linear layer of a neural network with a differentiable oblique
decision tree and, unlike its predecessors ( i.e.decision trees, hierarchical classiﬁers), uses a hierar-
chy derived from model parameters, does not employ a hierarchical softmax, and can be created from
anyexisting classiﬁcation neural network without architectural modiﬁcations. These improvements
denotes equal contribution
1arXiv:2004.00221v3  [cs.CV]  28 Jan 2021