Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
Figure 4: CIFAR10 Blurry Images. To make the classiﬁcation task difﬁcult for humans, the CIFAR10 images
are downsampled by 4. This forces at least partial reliance on model predictions, allowing us to evaluate
which explanations are convincing enough to earn the user’s agreement.
intermediate decisions that can be checked. This is reﬂected in the results: For each explainability
technique, we collected 600survey responses. When given saliency maps and class probabilities,
only 87predictions were correctly identiﬁed as wrong. In comparison, when given the NBDT series
of predicted classes and child probabilities (e.g., “Animal (90%) !Mammal (95%)”, without the
ﬁnal leaf prediction) 237images were correctly identiﬁed as wrong. Thus, respondents can better
recognize mistakes in NBDT explanations nearly 3 times better.
Although NBDT provides more information than saliency maps about misclassiﬁcation, a majority
– the remaining 363 NBDT predictions – were not correctly identiﬁed. To explain this, we note that
37% of all NBDT errors occur at the ﬁnal binary decision, between two leaves; since we provide
all decisions except the ﬁnal one, these leaf errors would be impossible to distinguish.
5.2 S URVEY : EXPLANATION -GUIDED IMAGE CLASSIFICATION
In this section we aim to answer a question posed in (Poursabzi-Sangdeh et al., 2018) “To what
extent do people follow a model’s predictions when it is beneﬁcial to do so?” . In this ﬁrst survey,
each user is asked to classify a severely blurred image (Fig 4). This survey afﬁrms the problem’s
difﬁculty, decimating human performance to not much more than guessing: 163of600responses
are correct (27.2% accuracy).
In the next survey, we offer the blurred image and two sets of predictions: (1) the original neural
network’s predicted class and its saliency map, and (2) the NBDT predicted class and the sequence
of decisions that led up to it (“Animal, Mammal, Cat”). For all examples, the two models predict
different classes. In 30% of the examples, NBDT is right and the original model is wrong. In another
30%, the opposite is true. In the last 40%, both models are wrong. As shown in Fig. 4, the image
is extremely blurry, so the user must rely on the models to inform their prediction. When offered
model predictions, in this survey, 255of600responses are correct (42.5% accuracy), a 15.3 point
improvement over no model guidance. We observe that humans trust NBDT-explained prediction
more often than the saliency-explained predictions. Out of 600responses, 312responses agreed with
the NBDT’s prediction, 167responses agreed with the base model’s prediction, and 119responses
disagreed with both model’s predictions. Note that a majority of user decisions ( 80%) agreed
with either model prediction, even though neither model prediction was correct in 40% of examples,
showing our images were sufﬁciently blurred to force reliance on the models. Furthermore, 52% of
responses agreed with NBDT (against saliency’s 28%), even though only 30% of NBDT predictions
were correct, showing improvement in model trust.
5.3 S URVEY : HUMAN -DIAGNOSED LEVEL OF TRUST
The explanation of an NBDT prediction is the visualization of the path traversed. We then compare
these NBDT explanations to other explainability methods in human studies. Speciﬁcally, we ask
participants to pick an expert to trust (Appendix, Figure 13), based on the expert’s explanation –
a saliency map (ResNet18, GradCAM), a decision tree (NBDT), or neither. We only use samples
where ResNet18 and NBDT predictions agree. Of 374 respondents that picked one method over
the other, 65.9% prefer NBDT explanations; for misclassiﬁed samples, 73.5% prefer NBDT. This
supports the previous survey’s results, showing humans trust NBDTs more than current saliency
techniques when explicitly asked.
5.4 A NALYSIS : IDENTIFYING FAULTY DATASET LABELS
There are several types of ambiguous labels (Figure 5), any of which could hurt model performance
for an image classiﬁcation dataset like ImageNet. To ﬁnd these images, we use entropy in NBDT
8