Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021
B.
Soft 
A.
Hard 
C.
Hard vs. Soft 
Figure 1: Hard and Soft Decision Trees. A. Hard: is the classic “hard” oblique decision tree. Each node
picks the child node with the largest inner product, and visits that node next. Continue until a leaf is reached.
B. Soft: is the “soft” variant, where each node simply returns probabilities, as normalized inner products, of
each child. For each leaf, compute the probability of its path to the root. Pick leaf with the highest probability.
C. Hard vs. Soft: Assumew4is the correct class. With hard inference, the mistake at the root (red) is
irrecoverable. However, with soft inference, the highly-uncertain decisions at the root and at w2are superseded
by the highly certain decision at w3(green). This means the model can still correctly pick w4despite a mistake
at the root. In short, soft inference can tolerate mistakes in highly uncertain decisions.
3 M ETHOD
Neural-Backed Decision Trees (NBDTs) replace a network’s ﬁnal linear layer with a decision tree.
Unlike classical decision trees or many hierarchical classiﬁers, NBDTs use path probabilities for
inference (Sec 3.1) to tolerate highly-uncertain intermediate decisions, build a hierarchy from pre-
trained model weights (Sec 3.2 & 3.3) to lessen overﬁtting, and train with a hierarchical loss (Sec
3.4) to signiﬁcantly better learn high-level decisions (e.g., Animal vs.Vehicle ).
3.1 I NFERENCE
Our NBDT ﬁrst featurizes each sample using the neural network backbone; the backbone consists
of all neural network layers before the ﬁnal linear layer. Second, we run the ﬁnal fully-connected
layer as an oblique decision tree. However, (a) a classic decision tree cannot recover from a mistake
early in the hierarchy and (b) just running a classic decision tree on neural features drops accuracy
signiﬁcantly, by up to 11% (Table 2). Thus, we present modiﬁed decision rules (Figure 1, B):
1. Seed oblique decision rule weights with neural network weights. An oblique decision tree
supports only binary decisions, using a hyperplane for each decision. Instead, we associate a weight
vectorniwith each node. For leaf nodes, where i=k2[1;K], eachni=wkis a row vector from
the fully-connected layer’s weights W2RDK. For all inner nodes, where i2[K+ 1;N], ﬁnd all
leavesk2L(i)in nodei’s subtree and average their weights: ni=P
k2L(i)wk=jL(i)j.
2. Compute node probabilities. Child probabilities are given by softmax inner products. For
each sample xand nodei, compute the probability of each child j2C(i)usingp(jji) =
SOFTMAX (h~ ni;xi)[j], where~ ni= (hnj;xi)j2C(i).
3. Pick a leaf using path probabilities. Inspired by Deng et al. (2012), consider a leaf, its class k
and its path from the root Pk. The probability of each node i2Pktraversing the next node in the
pathCk(i)2Pk\C(i)is denotedp(Ck(i)ji). Then, the probability of leaf and its class kis
p(k) =  i2Pkp(Ck(i)ji) (1)
In soft inference, the ﬁnal class prediction ^kis deﬁned over these class probabilities,
^k=argmaxkp(k) =argmaxki2Pkp(Ck(i)ji) (2)
Our inference strategy has two beneﬁts: (a) Since the architecture is unchanged, the fully-connected
layer can be run regularly (Table 5) or as decision rules (Table 1), and (b) unlike decision trees and
3