2
techniques that reduce both storage and computation requir e-
ments of the DNN model. We categorize the different DNN
compression techniques into ﬁve broad categories based on t he
type of strategy they followed for compression DNN model
with minimal accuracy compromise. The ﬁve broad categories
for DNN compression are network pruning, sparse representa -
tion, bits precision, knowledge distillation, and miscell aneous.
Fig. 1 illustrates the categorization hierarchy with diffe rent
DNN compression techniques and their subcategories.
Next, section discusses the categorization of the DNN
compression technique. Section III presents the overview o f
network pruning technique with all sub-categories. The sum -
mary of the sparse representation technique is presented in
Section IV. Further, Section V and section VI demonstrate
the detailed description of bits precision and knowledge di stil-
lation techniques, respectively. The miscellaneous techn iques
that are not included in the above four category is discussed
in Section VII. Finally, Section VIII presents the discussi ons
and future directions of the DNN compression techniques.
II. C ATEGORIZATION OF DNN COMPRESSION
TECHNIQUES
This section classiﬁes the existing work on DNN compres-
sion in ﬁve broad categories, i.e.,network pruning, sparse rep-
resentation, bits precision, knowledge distillation, and miscel-
laneous techniques. These categories were chosen through a n
extensive literature review on DNN compression techniques .
For example, based on the network shrinking, we come up
with network pruning, and through sparsiﬁcation of the weig ht
matrix, we can obtain the category for sparse representatio n.
Fig. 1 illustrates the overview of the paper with different
categories of DNN compression. Table I summarises the
existing work on DNN compression under different categorie s.
The broad categories of the DNN compression techniques are
deﬁned as
A. Network pruning
Deep network pruning is one of the popular techniques to
reduce the size of a deep learning model by incorporating
the removal of the inadequate components such as channels,
ﬁlters, neurons, or layers to produce a lightweight model [2 2],
[23]. The resultant lightweight model is a low power con-
suming, memory-efﬁcient, and provides faster inference wi th
minimal accuracy compromise. The adequacy of a component
relies on the amount of loss incurred when a component is
removed from the model [24]. Sometimes pruning is also
said to be a binary criterion to determine the removal or
persistence of a component in the DNN. The pruning is
performed on a pre-trained model iteratively, such that onl y
inadequate components are pruned from the model. We further
categorized the network pruning techniques into four parts ,
i.e.,channel pruning, ﬁlter pruning, connection pruning, and
layer pruning. It helps in reducing the storage and computat ion
requirements of the DNN model. The detailed overview of
existing network pruning techniques [25]–[45] for the DNN
model is discussed in Section III.B. Sparse representation
Sparse representation exploits the sparsity present in the
weight matrices of the DNN model [46]. In sparse represen-
tation, the weights there are zero or near to zero are removed
from the weight matrix, which reduces the storage and compu-
tation requirements of the DNN model. In other words, those
links in the network having similar weights are multiplexed ,
where, in-place of multiple weights with a single link is re-
placed with a single weight with the multiplex link . The sparse
representation includes low-rank estimates [47], quantiz ation,
multiplexing, etc. The principle motive behind the sparse
representation is to concise the weight matrix without losi ng
the performance of the DNN model. In this work, we illustrate
the overview of existing approaches on DNN compression
that incorporates sparse representation. Further, we cate gorized
the DNN compression using sparse representation into three
sub-categories, i.e., quantization, multiplexing, and weight
sharing. Section IVpresents a detailed description of the s parse
representation techniques in the existing literature [35] , [37],
[38], [43], [45], [48]–[52] on DNN compression.
C. Bits precision
Bits precision in the DNN compression technique reduces
the number of bits required for storing the weights in the
weight matrices W. For example, the FLOPs in the DNN
model requires 32bits, which can be replaced with integer
operation that requires only 8bits. Similarly, we can use
binary,6bits,16bits for replacing 32bits FLOPs in DNN
model [53]. We categorized the existing literature on DNN
compression using bits precision into three sub-categorie s,
namely, estimation using integer, low bits representation , and
binarization. Section V highlights the overview of differe nt
bits precision techniques [41], [48], [54]–[58] for DNN com -
pression using limited number of bits.
D. Knowledge distillation
In DNN model, the term knowledge distillation is deﬁned
as the process of transferring the generalization ability o f the
cumbersome model (teacher) to the compact model (student)
to improve its performance [59]. Knowledge distillation pr o-
vides a mechanism to overcome the accuracy compromise due
to DNN compression. The training of the student model using
knowledge distillation improves its generalization abili ty such
that it can mimic similar behaviour as the teacher model for
predicting the class label probabilities. In this work, we h ave
covered a detailed overview of three categories of knowledg e
distillation, i.e,logits transfer, teacher assistant, and domain
adaptation. Section VI provides a detailed description of t he all
subcategories of knowledge distillation covered in the exi sting
literature [60]–[68].
E. Miscellaneous
The DNN compression technique that do-not qualiﬁes the
above four categories are classiﬁed as miscellaneous. They
include such DNN compression techniques, which perform
modelling of DNN in such a manner that can be easily