10
of weight sharing also comes into the picture, while, repre-
senting DNN model using minimal weights. Thus, it could be
beneﬁcial to reduce the complexity of weight sharing in the
DNN model.
V. B ITS PRECISION
This section presents an overview of the DNN compression
technique that incorporates bits precision for reducing st orage
and computation requirements. In bits precision, the numbe r
of bits required for representing weight matrices is suppre ssed
for reducing the storage and computation [95]. For example,
we require 32bits for storing the weights in the weight
matrix in ﬂoating-point operations of DNN model. It can be
reduced to 8bits by performing operations using integers. This
transformation from ﬂoat-to-integer simultaneously redu ces
storage and computation requirements. However, it comes up
with the challenge of conversion complexity from ﬂoat to
integer along with a higher accuracy compromise. The existi ng
literature on bits precision [41], [48], [54]–[58] tried to tackle
out these challenges. Table IV summarizes different DNN
compression techniques using bits precision. The overview
of the bits precision techniques in existing literature are as
follows.
A. Estimation using integer
This section covers, the most straightforward strategy of
reducing computation through bits precision is replacing
ﬂoating-point operations with the integers. Here, the only
complexity is to convert ﬂoating values to the integer. The
existing work on bits precision using integer [48], [54] are
elaborated as follows. Authors in [54] proposed a mechanism
of opportunistically accelerating the inference performa nce
of the DNN model, named Neuro.ZERO. They adopt four
accelerating mechanisms, i.e., extended inference, expedited
inference, ensemble inference, and latent training. Furth er, the
authors proposed two algorithms for applying these acceler -
ating mechanisms. They have adopted integer arithmetic by
replacing ﬂoating-point operations. The authors emphasiz ed on
facilitating runtime adaptations, where, accuracy during run-
time suppose to increase when the resources are available. T he
authors adopt co-processor architecture for toggling duri ng
availability and scarcity of resources. The extended infer ence
involves an extension of DNN structure that improves the
accuracy. It uses additional resources of the secondary pro -
cessor for running extended part Next, the expedited infere nce
speedup by ofﬂoading some task portion of the original DNN
model. Later, in ensemble inference, multiple DNN models
run simultaneously on primary and secondary processors, an d
their outputs are combined. Finally, in latent training pri mary
model run as usual, but for unseen data, training is performe d
on secondary processors.
Jacob et. al. [48] proposed a quantization mechanism, which
uses integer arithmetic despite ﬂoating points operations . It
relies on the facts that multiplications are inefﬁcient if t he
operands are wide (ﬂoating points 32bits) and eliminating
multiplication leads to performance degradation. Therefo re,
it could be beneﬁcial to adopt integer multiplication inspi te
to integerInput
to integerWeights
to integer
BiasesReLu
to integerlayerConvolutional
Output ⊕
Fig. 6: Process of converting ﬂoating point operations into integer operations
in DNN model.
of ﬂoating-point operations to reduce the temporary storag e
for computation. Fig. 6 illustrates the entire steps involv e in
performing integer operations by replacing all ﬂoating poi nt
operations.
•Remarks: The estimation using the integer values plays a
vital role in reducing the bits requirements for storing wei ghts.
The prior studies [48], [54] have successfully performed th e
DNN operations using integer values. However, they lack in
estimating the amount of memory we can preserve through
integer estimation. Additionally, beyond integer, other l ow bits
estimations are also possible, which could be explored.
B. Low bits representation
This section extends the concept of the integer representa-
tion to reduce the storage and computation of DNN model.
It generalizes the concept of bits precision for using any
number of bits for representing weights instead of 8-bits
integers only. The concept of Quantized Neural Networks
(QNNs) is discussed in [55]. Here, the authors design a
DNN network that requires very low precision ( e.g.,1bits,
4bits, and so on) weight and activations during inference.
While training the quantized weights and activations helps
in estimating the gradient. This QNN scheme highly reduces
memory requirements, access latency, and replace ﬂoating-
point operations with bit-wise operations. Therefore, col ossal
power efﬁciency is observed. Authors have used two types
of quantization schemes for reducing the bits requirements
for representing weights and activations, namely, linear a nd
logarithmic. The linear quantization LQ(·)is deﬁned as
LQ(r,lb) =Clip/parenleftBig
round/parenleftBigr
2lb−1/parenrightBig
2lb−1,Vmin,Vmax/parenrightBig
,
(15)
where,ris the real valued number, lbis the length of bits,
andround(·)is the round-off function. VminandVmax are
the minimum and maximum scale range, respectively. Further ,
the logarithmic quantization LogQ(·)is given as follows
LogQ(r,lb) =Clip/parenleftBig
logap2(r),−(2lb−1−1),2lb−1/parenrightBig
,(16)
where,logap2(r)denotes the log of approximate power of 2,
in other words it uses the logarithm for most signiﬁcant bits .
•Remarks: The low bits representation in [55] is an extension
of integer estimation and provides the facility of using any
number of bits for performing the DNN operations. However,