16
concatenation of multi-sensors values. Here, the authors h ave
used the modality-speciﬁc partition. Mathur et. al. [75] pre-
sented a DNN compression technique called DeepEye. The
DeepEye provide a matchbox size computational unit having
attached camera sensor. The small size device can process th e
image captured by the camera in the same way the image
processed at high-end machines (Cloud). On the matchbox
size device, the DNN model runs successfully to perform
image recognition with signiﬁcant accuracy in short durati on.
The local execution is possible by optimizing the operation of
convolutional and fully connected layers in the DNN model.
The convolutional layers are computationally expensive bu t
require low storage. On the other hand, fully connected laye rs
are computationally inexpensive and require higher storag e
than convolution layer. This reciprocal relationship betw een
convolutional and fully connected layer creates a tradeoff for
optimizing a DNN model. If the embedded device has sufﬁ-
cient storage and limited processing capacity, then perfor m the
maximum operations by loading the fully connected layer on
the device. Similarly, in vice-versa condition, the convol utional
layers are loaded on the device.
Authors in [76] proposed a cache designing mechanism
that helps in providing inference on mobile devices. The
authors named the approach as DeepCache. They suggest that
the cache memory must be available and should handle the
memory variation in the raw sensory data. The caching provid e
space to store results and helps in exploiting result reusab ility.
The authors claim to require minimal efforts of the develope r
in designing the proposed mechanism. Through experimental
analysis DeepCache have proved to reduce execution time
by18% and energy consumption by 20%. In [77] authors
proposed a deep reinforcement learning framework named
DeepApp. It determines the mobile device usage pattern usin g
historical data of the applications being used by the user.
The features from the historical data are extracted using co m-
pressed DNN model. Further, the compressed DNN classiﬁer
recognizes the different usage pattern.
Xue et. al. [78] proposed a uniﬁed framework (named
DeepFusion) that incorporates values of multiple sensors f or
recognition of different IoT based task. DeepFusion paral-
lelly combines spatial features extracted from CNN for each
sensory values. This parallelisation reduces the complexi ty of
the DNN model and makes it suitable for its deployment on
mobile devices. The multimodal sensory value is considered as
it not only provides better distinguishable characteristi cs but
also reduces the noise in the sensory data. In [79] authors
have implemented a technique to train the DNN model in
a distributed manner. Here, the author trends to perform the
execution on multiple GPUs. The authors tried to reduce the
resource requirement through distributed operations.
Authors in [80] elaborates the contradiction between re-
source requirements of the DNN models and deployment of
DNN model on miniature mobile devices having limited re-
sources. Other issues associated with training of DNN model s
on the high-end machine is the privacy and security concern
about individual data. The cumbersome DNN models exceed
the limited storage on the mobile device and its deployment
off the device results in higher energy consumption anddelay. It is tedious to perform both training and inference o n
mobile devices. During the training of DNN model on mobile
devices, it requires distributed data generation and proce ssing.
Further, upon running a DNN model, it can dominate the
entire processing on the device due to a huge number of
ﬂoating-point operations. In [81] authors have incorporat ed
two crucial operations, i.e.,pointwise group convolution and
channel shufﬂe for compressing DNN model. The proposed
approach was named as ShufﬂeNet that reduces the power
consumption by reducing the ﬂoating-point operations with out
accuracy compromise.
•Remarks: The DNN compression techniques,
DeepSense [69], FastDeepIoT [70], AdaDeep [71],
NestDNN [73], DeepEye [75], DeepCache [76], DeepApp [77]
DeepFusion [78], ShufﬂeNet [81], [74], [79], [80] in
miscellaneous approach have reduced the storage and
computation requirements with a different perspective.
For example, DeepSense proposed a lightweight feature
extraction mechanism using parallelization of sensory val ues
and DeepFusion combines spatial and temporal features of
sensory values using a parallelized architecture. Through ,
these mechanisms are effective and shown signiﬁcant
performance on smartphone using compressed DNN models.
However, a higher degree of compression is needed for
RCDs, where, storage and computation resources are much
smaller than that of smartphones.
VIII. D ISCUSSIONS AND FUTURE RESEARCH DIRECTIONS
The presented categorization for compressing DNN model
gives a glimpse of the existing literature and their colossa l
contributions. After a thorough review of the existing lite rature
on DNN compression, we come up with ﬁve broad cate-
gories, i.e., network pruning, sparse representation, bits pre-
cision, knowledge distillation, and miscellaneous techni ques.
All these categories seem to be the predominating area of
research that encourages effective utilization of DNN mode l
on resource constraint devices. As, demand for IoT based
applications is proliferating, which enables data scienti sts to
incorporate DNN models in IoT. Therefore, it is beneﬁcial
to provide a thorough overview of the DNN compression
technique that can meet out the limited storage and processi ng
capacity available at the resource constraint IoT devices.
The overview of different categories of DNN compression
provides several research possibilities. Even though seve ral
work have been done in the DNN compression, there are still
a lot more to be uncovered. The existing literature mainly
emphasized on compressing convolutional neural network an d
fully connected layers, but very few work have been done for
the recurrent neural networks. Additionally, despite diff erent
accuracy preserving mechanism adopted in existing litera-
ture, still, the DNN compression techniques face performan ce
degradation. Finally, the dynamic resources on tiny comput ing
devices need more exploration.