14
LogitsStudent modelFully connected layer
Convolutional layer
Input layer
Teaching assitant model
Teacher modelKnowledge transferKnowledge transfer
Fig. 8: An example scenario of teacher assistant between tea cher model and
student model [65].
disparity while training student model using logits of the
teacher. The domain disparity leads to poor generalization
ability of the student model [100]. To handle domain dispari ty,
different domain adaptation techniques have been proposed
in the existing literature [60], [66], [67]. Fig. 9 illustra tes
the layer-by-layer feature extraction from teacher and stu dent
model followed by knowledge distillation from teacher to
student. The simultaneous training helps in preserving the
student model generalization ability.
The overview of different work on knowledge distillation
incorporating domain adaptation are as follows.
distillation and Estimating
losscross−entropy
Classifier
Convolutional layer Input layer Feature per layerStudent model Teacher modelLayer 1Layer 1 Layer 2
Layer 2Layer 3
Layer 3
Knowledge distillationF1
tF1
s
F2
t F3
tF3
s F2
s
Fig. 9: Layer-by-layer knowledge distillation from teache r to student for
eliminating domain disparity.
Duong et. al. [66] proposed a knowledge distillation tech-
nique that helps in shrinking the gap between cumbersome
teacher and compact student model. Therefore, the authors
called this technique as ShrinkTeaNet. The objective of Shr ink-
TeaNet is simple to train a few parameter student models usin g
cumbersome teacher model. However, the authors emphasized
on developing a technique that is more robust towards open-s et
problem along with maintaining signiﬁcant accuracy. Furth er,
authors have introduced angular distillation loss for dete rmin-
ing the feature direction despite the hard targets that resu lt
in overﬁtting. The angular distillation loss helps in reduc ing
the domain adaptation problem in knowledge distillation. T he
angular distillation loss ( Ladl(S,T)) is deﬁned as
Ladl(S,T) =dist/parenleftBig
trans(Ft),trans(Fs)/parenrightBig
=/vextenddouble/vextenddouble/vextenddouble1−trans(Ft)
trans(Ft)×trans(Fs)
trans(Fs)/vextenddouble/vextenddouble/vextenddouble2
2(24)where,dist(·)is the distance function that estimates the
distance between the transformation function of the teache r
(trans(Ft)) and student ( trans(Fs)). Eq. 24 is similar to
the cosine similarity for estimating the distance between t wo
vectors. In this approach, the authors suggest training the
student model, along with the teacher model parallelly. Thi s
parallel training provides a soft target at each step despit e
ﬁnal class label predictions that seem to be a hard target for
the student model during training.
In [67] authors emphasized on the problem of domain
adaptation that is encountered during the training of the DN N
model on embedded Internet of Things (IoT) devices. The au-
thors discovered the DNN model achieves prominent result on
the high-end machine but suffers from degradation in accura cy
and efﬁciency on IoT devices. They proposed a framework
for Mobile Domain Adaptation (MobileDA) that can learn the
transferrable features. The learning is performed in such a
way that the structure of the DNN model remains simpliﬁed
as possible. The authors use cross-domain distillation for
training student model on IoT devices using cumbersome
teacher model on the high-end machine. The main objective
of the MobileDA is to perform training on simpliﬁed DNN
model that can handle the domain shift problem along with
achieving signiﬁcant accuracy. In other words, the trainin g
phase addresses the domain adaptation using cumbersome
DNN model running on a high-end machine and testing
phase is performed using a simpliﬁed DNN model deployed
on the embedded device. Further, the authors proposed an
algorithm that simultaneously optimizes different loss fu nction
for handling domain adaptation.
•Remarks: The domain adaptation technique proposed in the
existing literature [60], [66], [67] have successfully cov ered
the domain disparity problem. However, the gap between the
student model and teacher model sometimes hampers the
performance of the domain adaptation technique. Thus, it
could be beneﬁcial to adopt the teacher assistant in domain
adaptation problem to get overall beneﬁts.
VII. M ISCELLANEOUS
This section covers the DNN compression technique in the
existing literature [69]–[81] that do not meet the differen t
categorization criteria discussed in the previous section s. Apart
from the outlier of categorization criteria, some of them
simultaneously incorporate a group of DNN compression
techniques. The principal motive behind the miscellaneous
category, i.e.,to reduce the storage and computation require-
ment of the DNN model is same as the above-discussed
techniques. In other words, the miscellaneous category enl ights
the optimization of various DNN parameters before actually
building the model. Thus, it helps in developing a storage
and computationally efﬁcient model for resource constrain t
devices. The overview of the DNN compression technique
under miscellaneous category is illustrated in Table VI.
Authors in [69] proposed a uniﬁed framework that can han-
dle the noise insertion in the collected dataset due to on-de vice
sensors. Since the exact estimation of the noise distributi on is
highly tedious; therefore, a classiﬁcation approach is nee ded