13
the compressed model, when ∇ →0. At this stage, the com-
pressed model achieves signiﬁcant performance by consumin g
minimal resources. Fig. 7 illustrates the steps involve in t he
knowledge distillation using logits transfer.
Original 
DNN model
Model
training
Model
trainingDatasetPre−trained
modelLogits
DNN modelCompressed 
DNN modelCompressed
classifierKnowledge distillation
(D)
Fig. 7: Illustration of knowledge distillation using logit s of original DNN
model.
Yun et. al. [62] distilled the predictive distribution among
the same class labels for training. This distillation resul ts in the
regularization of knowledge obtained from wrong predictio ns,
in a single DNN model. In other words, the model improves
its performance using self-knowledge distillation by rapi dly
training and employing more precise predictions. Thus, the
authors have tried to improve the performance of a build
classiﬁer in self-improving mode using dark knowledge of
wrong predictions. The authors have combined two loss func-
tions, i.e.,cross-entropy and Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence
loss, using a regularization parameter λ. The combined loss
functionLcomb(·)is deﬁned as
Lcomb(x,x′,y,φ,T) =LCE(x,y,φ)+λT2LKL(x,x′,φ,T),
where,LCE(·)andLKL(·)are the cross-entropy and KL-
divergence losses, respectively. xis the data instance instance
having label yandx′is another data instance having label y.φ
is the network parameter and Tis the temperature used in the
knowledge distillation for softening the prediction proba bilities
of the knowledge inferring model.
In [60] authors have designed a private model compression
framework, named pRivate mOdel compressioN frAmework
(RONA). The authors have highlighted the need for DNN
compression to provide signiﬁcant privacy to the user by
analysing the collected data on the limited resource device s.
Using knowledge distillation, the accuracy of the compress ed
model is improved by jointly using a hint, distillation, and self
learnings. In performing knowledge distillation, the cumb er-
some model is carefully perturbed for enforcing a high level
of privacy. Therefore, the authors try to meet two crucial go als
simultaneously, i.e.,model compression and preserve privacy.
Authors in [63] highlighted the complexity of ﬁne-tuning
of compress DNN model. The compression of DNN using
pruning, quantization, weight decomposition requires ﬁne -
tuning, which may take a massive number of epochs for
stabilization. Therefore, they established a relationshi p that
higher the compression rate higher will be the epochs counts
for stabilizing the performance of the model. Another probl em
associated with ﬁne-tuning is the compressed DNN modelthat requires large training dataset for achieving conside rable
accuracy. Here, the authors try to realize both data and
processing efﬁciency. The authors proposed a Few Sample
Knowledge Distillation (FSKD) that performs efﬁcient net-
work compression. The efﬁciency is achieved in terms of both
model training and inference.
In [64] authors presented a method for successful interpre-
tation of knowledge distillation that involve both relevan t and
irrelevant features related to the visual task. They presen ted
three types of hypothesis for knowledge distillation, incl uding,
1) it helps in learning more precise class label predictions
from raw data, 2) it ensures simultaneously learning multip le
class form the dataset, and 3) it provides the well-optimize d
direction for leaning. The authors have demonstrated the pr os
and cons of the hypothesis using empirical and experimental
analysis on the different datasets.
•Remarks: The existing work on logits transfer [60]–[64]
in knowledge distillation improves the performance of the
compressed DNN model. However, the logits of original pre-
trained DNN model sometimes lead to overﬁtting, which leads
to poor generalization ability of the compressed model. As
during ﬁne-tuning of the compressed DNN model, the student
model can mimic the exact prediction behaviour as teacher
model but lose its generalization ability. It could be a rese arch
direction to determine the exact point for halting the train ing
of the student model to retain its generalization ability an d
avoid overﬁtting.
B. Teacher assistant
Authors in [65] studied the concept of knowledge distil-
lation from a different perspective. The authors introduce d
teacher assistant in between teacher and student model duri ng
knowledge distillation. This insertion of teacher assista nt has
the main motive to reduce the gap between student and
teacher model. They claim, when the size of the student model
is ﬁxed, then we can not employ a large teacher model.
In other terms, the gap between teacher and student model
beyond a limit leads to improper knowledge transmission fro m
student to teacher. To mitigate such difﬁculty in improving
the performance of the student model through knowledge
distillation, the teacher assistant plays a decisive role. Fig. 8
illustrates an example scenario demonstrates the role of te acher
assistant to ﬁll the gap between large teacher model and smal l
student model. The authors also suggest the futuristic appr oach
of inserting multiple teaching assistants for providing hi gh
order compression with minimal accuracy compromise.
•Remarks: The work in [65] have discussed the beneﬁts
of inserting a teaching assistant between teacher and stude nt
models, but unfortunately, it will increase the training ti me
by nearly two-fold. First, the training of teacher assistan t is
performed using teacher model followed by training of stude nt
model using teacher assistant. Despite signiﬁcant improve ment
in the student model performance, the complexity of trainin g
could be a loophole of the proposed approach.
C. Domain adaptation
The knowledge distillation techniques discussed in the pre -
vious sections do not consider the consequence of domain