arXiv:2010.03954v1  [cs.LG]  5 Oct 20201
A Survey on Deep Neural Network Compression:
Challenges, Overview, and Solutions
Rahul Mishra, Hari Prabhat Gupta, and Tanima Dutta
Abstract —Deep Neural Network (DNN) has gained unprece-
dented performance due to its automated feature extraction
capability. This high order performance leads to signiﬁcan t
incorporation of DNN models in different Internet of Things
(IoT) applications in the past decade. However, the colossa l
requirement of computation, energy, and storage of DNN mode ls
make their deployment prohibitive on resource constraint I oT
devices. Therefore, several compression techniques were p ro-
posed in recent years for reducing the storage and computati on
requirements of the DNN model. These techniques on DNN
compression have utilized a different perspective for comp ressing
DNN with minimal accuracy compromise. It encourages us
to make a comprehensive overview of the DNN compression
techniques. In this paper, we present a comprehensive revie w of
existing literature on compressing DNN model that reduces b oth
storage and computation requirements. We divide the existi ng
approaches into ﬁve broad categories, i.e., network pruning,
sparse representation, bits precision, knowledge distill ation, and
miscellaneous, based upon the mechanism incorporated for c om-
pressing the DNN model. The paper also discussed the challen ges
associated with each category of DNN compression technique s.
Finally, we provide a quick summary of existing work under
each category with the future direction in DNN compression.
Index Terms —Application, compression, deep neural network,
knowledge distillation, pruning, sparse representation.
I. I NTRODUCTION
Recent years have witnessed signiﬁcant growth in ma-
chine learning-based Internet of Things (IoT) application s
due to easier and cheaper availability of small computing
devices [1], [2]. The machine learning-based approaches re -
quire handcrafted features which reduces its suitability f or
a new dataset, where, information about data distribution i s
missing [3]. Therefore, Deep Neural Network (DNN) based
IoT applications have achieved dominance in different appl i-
cation domains, including smart home, agriculture, locomo tion
mode recognition, etc[4]–[9]. It is because the DNN provides
automatic feature extraction capability from a large amoun t of
raw data. The DNN models not only eliminates the human in-
tervention for calculating domain-related features but ac hieves
coercive performance [4]. DNN model involves the following
components, including Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) ,
Fully Connected (FC) layers, and RNN (Recurrent Neural net-
work). A DNN model can have all these components at a time
or any of its combination. The CNN extract spatial features
and RNN identiﬁes temporal features form the dataset. These
features archives a high order performance in classiﬁcatio n,
regression and prediction of different tasks [10], [11].
The authors are with the Department of Computer Science and E n-
gineering, Indian Institute of Technology (BHU) Varanasi, India (e-
mail: rahulmishra.rs.cse17@iitbhu.ac.in; hariprabhat. cse@iitbhu.ac.in; tan-
ima.cse@iitbhu.ac.in)Despite these advantages, the DNN models require a sig-
niﬁcant amount of resources including, energy, processing
capacity, and storage. This resource requirement reduces t he
suitability of DNN model for Resources constraint Devices
(RCDs) [12]. The huge resource requirements of the DNN
model also become a bottleneck for real-time inference and
to run DNN model on browser-based applications. Therefore,
to mitigate these shortcomings of DNN model, i.e., energy,
processing capacity, and storage, different DNN compressi on
techniques have been proposed in the existing literature.
We can achieve several beneﬁts by compressing the DNN
model over the traditional cumbersome DNN model. Some of
these beneﬁts are as follows:
•Storage capacity: The DNN model achieves signiﬁcant
accuracy that comes up with a large number of pa-
rameters, which requires considerable storage [13], [14].
Therefore, by compressing the DNN model, we can
preserve storage that facilitates the deployment of DNN
model on Resource Constraint Devices (RCDs).
•Computation requirements: A large number of FLoating
point OPerations (FLOPs) involve in the DNN operation
can exceed the limited computational capacity of the
RCDs [15]. Thus, it would be beneﬁcial to employ DNN
compression for reducing the computation requirement.
•Earliness: The training and inference time of a DNN
model is signiﬁcantly high that hampers its real-time
inference performance [16], [17]. The DNN compression
mechanisms, therefore, provides a higher degree of ear-
liness in both training and inference phases.
•Privacy: The data transmission from the source to the
high-end machine leads to the security breach and privacy
compromise [18]. Thus, it would be beneﬁcial to employ
in-situ processing using compressed DNN model on
RCDs, which helps in preserving privacy and provides
data security.
•Energy consumption: The DNN compression also pre-
serves energy for processing the data [19]–[21]. It en-
hances its suitability for the deployment of compressed
DNN model on battery-operated IoT devices.
The demand for IoT based applications is growing day-by-
day that encourages data scientists to incorporate DNN mode ls
in IoT applications. Therefore, it is beneﬁcial to provide a
thorough overview of the DNN compression technique that can
meet out the limited storage and processing capacity availa ble
at the resource constraint IoT devices. Thus, we carry out a
comprehensive survey of existing literature on different D NN
compression technique and propose a useful categorization
to point out a potential research gap for future work. This
paper presents a systematic overview of DNN compression