6
in [33] proposed a mechanism named DeepMon to provide
deep learning inference on mobile devices. They claim to run
the inference in limited time and provides energy efﬁciency
using the Graphical Processing Unit (GPU) on the mobile
device. The authors proposed an optimization mechanism
for processing convolutional operation on mobile GPU. The
mechanism utilizes the internal processing structure of CN N
incorporating ﬁlters and the number of connections to reuse
the results. Thus, removing unimportant ﬁlters and connect ions
for proving faster inference.
Authors in [34] speed up the test-time evaluation of the
large DNN model, designed for object recognition tasks. The
authors have exploited the redundancy present within the
convolutional ﬁlters to derive approximations that signiﬁ cantly
reduce the required computation. They have started compres -
sion of each convolutional layer by ﬁnding an appropriate
low-rank approximation, and then ﬁne-tune until the predic tion
performance is restored.
•Remarks: The ﬁlter pruning technique presented in the
existing literature [30]–[34] have successfully reduced t he
number of ﬂoating-point operations in the CNN. However,
the fully connected layers and recurrent layers also contri bute
a major portion of ﬂoating-point operations in the DNN
model, which should not be ignored during DNN compression.
Additionally, the existing work cannot be employed on the
DNN model that is having a large number of layers with
minimal ﬁlters on each convolutional layer.
C. Connection pruning
The number of input and output connections to a layer
of DNN model determines the number of parameters. These
parameters can be used to estimate the storage and com-
putation requirement of the DNN model [82]. Since the
DNN model requires a large number of parameters in their
operations; therefore, it is convenient to reduce the param eters
by eliminating unimportant connection for different layer s
in the DNN model [89]. The existing studies on the con-
nection pruning [35]–[43], [83] have attempted to remove
the unimportant connection from the DNN models. Fig. 4
illustrates an example scenario of connection pruning in th e
DNN model. The overview of different connection pruning
techniques discussed in the existing literature are as foll ows
Connection
pruning
Original DNN model Pruned DNN model
Fig. 4: An illustration of connection pruning in the DNN mode l.
Authors in [35] proposed a connection pruning technique
that ﬁrst prunes the DNN model by learning only importantconnection using dropout. Next, the learned weights are qua n-
tized using clustering technique, and further Huffman codi ng
is applied to reduce the storage requirement. The authors
under this technique try to ﬁt the model into cache memory
rather than main memory. In this way, they encourage us
to run applications on tiny computing devices with limited
storage and energy. Here, the goal is to reduce the storage
and bandwidth of the DNN model with minimal accuracy
compromise. It also justiﬁed the goal of tiny device executi on,
such as better privacy, uses least network bandwidth and
provides output in real-time.
In [36] authors proposed an approach that helps in the
deployment of deep learning models on IoT devices. Thus,
named the approach as DeepIoT. The proposed approach is
capable of performing compression on commonly used deep
learning structures, including CNN, fully connected layer s, and
recurrent neural network. DeepIoT incorporates dropout te ch-
niques to remove unimportant connections from the network.
Here, the chosen dropout is not a ﬁxed value but optimally
determined for generating optimal compressed networks. In
DeepIoT, small dense matrices are obtained by performing
compression of the different structures in the network. The se
dense matrices contain a minimal number of non-redundant
elements, such as input and output dimension of a layer, ﬁlte rs,
etc. The process of obtaining dense matrices must safeguard
the network from higher accuracy compromise.
Han et. al. [37] proposed an Energy efﬁcient Inference En-
gine (EIE) to perform DNN based inference on the compressed
network obtained after pruning of redundant connections an d
weight sharing among different elements. The EIE accelerat es
the sparse matrix multiplication by adopting weight sharin g
without losing the accuracy of the model. In EIE, the pro-
cessing is performed using an array of processing elements.
Each element simultaneously partitions the network in SRAM
and perform the computation of their respective part. In [43 ]
authors proposed a Multi-Tasking Zipping (MTZ) framework
that automatically merges multiple correlated DNN models t o
perform cross model compression. In MTZ, the compression
is performed using layer-wise neuron sharing and subsequen t
weight update. Here, the authors induced a minimal change in
error upon layer sharing.
Authors in [38] developed a quantitative characterization
approach for a deep learning model to make its deployment
on embedded devices. It not only provides a better selection
mechanism for deployment of DNN model on the embed-
ded device but also guides the development of compression
technique using a wiser connection pruning. In [39] authors
proposed a zero-valued weight estimation from a network
during training that is generated from ReLU operation. The
authors named the approach as Sparse CNN (SCNN). It is
a DNN compression architecture that improves performance
and provides energy efﬁciency. SCNN uses both weight
and activation sparsity, which enhances the power of the
compressed DNN. SCNN also employ an effective dataﬂow
mechanism inside the DNN that maintains the sparse weights
and activations in the DNN compression. It further reduces
unimportant data transmission and storage requirement.
Authors in [40] proposed a sparse variational dropout, whic h