11
TABLE IV: Summary of the DNN compression incorporating bits precision for reducing computation and storage.
PaperAbbreviated
nameAddress the challenge Proposed solutionSuitable forCategoryCNN FC RNN
[54] Neuro.ZEROAdopt integer arithmetic by replacing
ﬂoating-point operationsCo-processor architecture for toggling during
availability and scarcity of resources✓ ✓ ✓ Estimation
using integer[48] — To reduce the temporary storage for computation Quantization mechanism that uses integer ✓ ✓ ✓
[55] QNNTo design a DNN network that requires very low
precision weight and activation during inferenceLinear and logarithmic scheme for reducing
the bits requirements✓ ✓ ✓Low bits
representation
[56] BNNTo replace ﬂoating-point operations in the DNN
with binary operationsDeterministic and stochastic techniques ✓ ✓ ✓
Binarization [58] FINNHeterogeneous architecture for achieving high
order ﬂexibilityParametric architecture for dataﬂow
and optimized method for classiﬁcation✓ ✓ ✓
[57] cDeepArchDividing the task into multiple sub-task and
using binarization of weightsQuantitative measure to estimate the
reduction in resources✓ ✗ ✗
selecting an optimal number of bits for any estimation is a
tedious task.
C. Binarization
In this section, we illustrate an overview of bits preci-
sion techniques [56]–[58] that incorporates binary number
for performing the different operation of the DNN model.
Binarization refers to the process of converting ﬂoating-p oint
operations into binary operations for reducing the storage and
processing requirement of the DNN model [96]. The overview
of the different binarization techniques in DNN models is
as follows. Authors in [56] introduced a training method
that incorporates binary activations and weights. The resu ltant
network is called Binary Neural Network (BNN). During
the training of the model; the gradient is estimated using
binary activations and weights. Binarization helps in redu cing
storage requirements and provides energy efﬁciency. Here, the
ﬂoating-point operations in the DNN model are replaced with
binary operations. The authors in the paper have highlighte d
two binarization techniques, i.e.,deterministic and stochastic.
In deterministic binarization, the real-valued number ris
transformed into binary value busingSign(·)function, which
is deﬁned as
b=Sign(r) =/braceleftbigg+1 ifr≥0,
−1otherwise .(17)
In stochastic binarization, a probability pis estimated for
converting real value rto binary value bas
b=/braceleftBigg
+1 ifp= max/parenleftBig
0,min/parenleftBig
1,r+1
2/parenrightBig/parenrightBig
,
−1 if1−p.(18)
Umuroglu et. al. [58] presented a framework for building a
fast and ﬂexible DNN compression mechanism, named FINN.
It provides a heterogeneous architecture that achieves hig h
order ﬂexibility. The framework is a parametric architectu re
for dataﬂow and optimized method for classiﬁcation on limit ed
resource device. The authors have implemented fully con-
nected, convolutional, and pooling layers with computatio n as
per the requirements of the user. It provides compressed DNN
with sub-microsecond latency, thus enhance its suitabilit y for
deployment on embedded devices.
In [57] authors presented a compact DNN architecture,
where a task is divided into multiple subtasks for reducing
the resource requirement of the DNN model. The authorsnamed the approach as cDeepArch. The decomposition of
the task in cDeepArch efﬁciently utilizes the limited stora ge
and processing capacity during the execution of the task. Th e
authors emphasized that the unorganized compression of the
DNN models results in unreliable and low performance for
recognizing multiple tasks. Further, the authors establis hed a
quantitative measure to estimate the reduction in resource s and
available resources. cDeepArch incorporates ofﬂine train ing
followed by the execution of the task on user smartphone. It
also preserves the privacy of sensitive information. Here, to
provide privacy of the sensitive information, it is convert ed
into image format for training a DNN model. For reducing
the DNN model, cDeepArch adopted layer separation, delayed
pooling, integration of activation, and binarization for r educing
the computation.
•Remarks: The binarization of DNN model presented in the
prior studies [56]–[58] reduce the storage and computation s.
The proposed binarization approaches achieve a high-order
compression but with performance degradation. Thus, it cou ld
be beneﬁcial to mitigate this degradation for the successfu l
adaptation of binarization techniques in DNN compression.
VI. K NOWLEDGE DISTILLATION
This section gives an overview of the DNN compression
technique that adopts knowledge distillation [97] to impro ve
the performance of the compressed DNN model. The existing
literature on knowledge distillation [60]–[67] is further clas-
siﬁed into three parts, i.e., logits transfer, teacher assistant,
and domain adaptation, as illustrated in Table V. In logits
transfer, the unnormalized output of the original DNN model
(teacher) act as a soft target for training the compressed DN N
model (student) [98]. However, sometimes the gap between
student and teacher is large, which hinders the appropriate
knowledge transmission. It could be mitigated by inserting a
teacher assailant in the between teacher and student. Furth er,
the domain adaptation is discussed, where, the generalizat ion
ability of the teacher model could not improve the performan ce
of the student model due to domain disparity between trainin g
and testing data of the student model.
A. Logits transfer
Logits transfer is the simpliﬁed approach for knowledge
distillation from teacher to student model. Firstly, the te acher
model is trained on a given dataset D. Next, the logit vectors
(output of DNN model before the softmax layer) of the teacher