1482 Machine Learning (2019) 108:1467–1501
to the delayed policy update, as both the estimated and the true TD error are already close
to zero by mid-learning. In Appendix A we further investigate this behavior and show thatTD3 policy update delay is unnecessary if TD-REG is used. The beneﬁts of TD-REG in thepolicy space can also be seen in Fig. 1. Whereas vanilla DPG falls victim to the wrong critic
estimates and diverges, DPG TD-REG enables more stable updates.
The strength of the proposed TD-regularization is also conﬁrmed by its application to SPG,
as seen in Fig. 3. Along with SPG and SPG TD-REG, we evaluated REINFORCE (Williams
1992 ), which does not learn any critic and just maximizes Monte Carlo estimates of the Q-
function, i.e., /hatwideQ
π(st,at)=/summationtextT
i=tγi−tri. For all three algorithms, at each iteration samples
from only one trajectory of 150 steps are collected and used to compute the gradients, whichare then normalized. For the sake of completeness, we also tried to collect more samples periteration, increasing the number of trajectories from one to ﬁve. In this case, all algorithmsperformed better, but still neither SPG nor REINFORCE matched SPG TD-REG, as theyboth needed several samples more than SPG TD-REG. More details in “Appendix A.2”.
5.1.2 Analysis of the TD-regularization coefﬁcient /DC1
In Sect. 3.4we have discussed that Eq. ( 15) is the result of solving a constrained optimization
problem by penalty function methods. In optimization, we can distinguish two approachesto apply penalty functions (Boyd and V andenberghe 2004 ).Exterior penalty methods start
at optimal but infeasible points and iterate to feasibility as η→∞ . By contrast, interior
penalty methods start at feasible but sub-optimal points and iterate to optimality as η→0. In
actor-critic, we usually start at infeasible points, as the critic is not learned and the TD erroris very large. However, unlike classical constrained optimization, the constraint changes ateach iteration, because the critic is updated to minimize the same penalty function. This trendemerged from the results presented in Figs. 2and 3, showing the change of the mean squared
TD error, i.e., the penalty.
In the previous experiments we started with a penalty coefﬁcient η
0=0.1 and decreased
it at each policy update according to ηt+1=κηt, withκ=0.999. In this section, we provide
a comparison of different values of κ, both as decay and growth factor. In all experiments we
start again with η0=0.1 and we test the following κ: 0, 0.1, 0.5, 0.9, 0.99, 0.999, 1, 1.001.
As shown in Fig. 4a, b, results are different for DPG TD-REG and SPG TD-REG. In DPG
TD-REG, 0.999 and 1 allowed to always converge to the optimal policy. Smaller κdid not
provide sufﬁcient help, up to the point where 0.1 and 0.5 did not provide any help at all.However, it is not true that larger κyield better results, as with 1.001 performance decreases.
This is expected, since by increasing ηwe are also increasing the magnitude of the gradient,
which then leads to excessively large and unstable updates.
Results are, however, different for SPG TD-REG. First, 0.99, 0.999, 1, 1.001 all achieve
the same performance. The reason is that gradients are normalized, thus the size of the updatestep cannot be excessively large and κ> 1 does not harm the learning. Second, 0.9, which
was not able to help enough DPG, yields the best results with a slightly faster convergence.The reason is that DPG performs a policy update at each step of a trajectory, while SPG onlyat the end. Thus, in DPG η, which is updated after a policy update, will decay too quickly if
as m a l l κis used.
5.1.3 Analysis of non-uniform observation noise
So far, we have considered the case of high TD error due to an overﬁtting critic and noisy
transition function noise. However, the critic can be inaccurate also because of noisy or
123