Machine Learning (2019) 108:1467–1501 1493
Fig. 11 Paths followed by the policy parameters during runs in which no algorithm diverged. Each arrow
represents 100 update steps. Contour denotes the expected return magnitude. The initial policy parametervector θis denoted by the white circle. The TD-regularization enables safer and more stable trajectories,
leading the policy parameters more straightforwardly to the optimum. We can also see that blue and greenarrows are initially shorter, denoting smaller update steps. In fact, due to the initial inaccuracy of the critic,the TD-regularization gradient “conﬂicts” with vanilla gradient at early stages of the learning and avoidsdivergence. However, in the case of TD3 TD-REG (green arrows) the use of both two critics, delayed policyupdates and TD-regularization slows down the learning up to the point that the algorithm never convergedwithin the time limit, as in ( b) (Color ﬁgure online)
Figure 10hints that the “slow learning” behavior of TD3 TD-REG may be due to the
delayed policy update, as both the estimated and the true TD error are close to zero by mid-learning. To further investigate this behavior, we performed the same experiments withoutdelayed policy updates for both TD3 and TD3-REG. For the sake of clarity, we report theresults on separates plots without DPG and DPG NO-TAR and without shaded areas forconﬁdence interval. In the case of quadratic features (Fig. 12)b o t hT D 3a n dT D 3T D -
REG gain from the removal of the policy update delay. However, in the case of cubicfeatures (Fig. 13), TD3 NO-DELAY performs worse than TD3, as it diverges six times
instead of two. By contrast, TD3 TD-REG NO-DELAY performs better than TD3 TD-REG, and the expected return curve shows traits of both TD3 and TD-REG: initially itimproves faster, like TD3, and then it always converges to optimality, like DPG TD-REG.We can conclude that delaying policy updates is not necessary when appropriate featuresare used and overﬁtting cannot happen. Otherwise, the combination of two critics andTD-regularization yields the best results, with the TD-regularization providing the mostbeneﬁts.
A.2 SPG evaluation on the LQR
DPG is an on-line algorithm, i.e., it performs a critic/actor update at each time step, usingmini-batches of previously collected samples. Instead, stochastic policy gradient (SPG) col-lects complete trajectories with a stochastic policy before updating the critic/actor. In thissection, we evaluate SPG, SPG TD-REG, and REINFORCE (Williams 1992 ). The ﬁrst two
maximize Q-function estimates given by a learned critic. SPG TD-REG additionally appliesthe TD-regularization presented in the paper. REINFORCE, instead, maximizes Monte Carloestimates of the Q-function, i.e.,
123