1480 Machine Learning (2019) 108:1467–1501
and then decaying it according to ηi+1=κηiwhere κ=0.999. We then investigate different
decaying factors κand the behavior of our approach in the presence of non-uniform noise.
The algorithms tested are DPG and SPG. For DPG, we also compare to the twin delayedversion proposed by Fujimoto et al. ( 2018 ), which achieved state-of-the-art results.
The second evaluation is performed on the single- and double-pendulum swing-up
tasks (Y oshikawa 1990 ; Brockman et al. 2016 ). Here, we apply the proposed TD- and
GAE-regularization to TRPO together with and against Retrace (Munos et al. 2016 )a n d
double-critic learning (van Hasselt 2010 ), both state-of-the-art techniques to stabilize the
learning of the critic.
The third evaluation is performed on OpenAI Gym (Brockman et al. 2016 ) continuous
control benchmark tasks with the MuJoCo physics simulator (Todorov et al. 2012 )a n d
compares TRPO and PPO with their TD- and GAE-regularized counterparts. Due to timeconstraints, we were not able to evaluate Retrace on this tasks as well. For details of the otherhyperparameters, we refer to “Appendix C”.
For the LQR and the pendulum swing-up tasks, we tested each algorithm over 50 trials
with ﬁxed random seeds. At each iteration, we turned the exploration off and evaluated thepolicy over several episodes. Due to limited computational resources, we tested MuJoCoexperiments over ﬁve trials with ﬁxed random seeds. For TRPO, the policy was evaluatedover 20 episodes without exploration noise. For PPO, we used the same samples collectedduring learning, i.e., including exploration noise.
5.1 2D linear quadratic regulator (LQR)
The LQR problem is deﬁned by the following discrete-time dynamics
s/prime=As+Ba+N(0,0.12), a=Ks, R(s,a)=− sTXs−aTYa,
where A,B,X,Y∈Rd×d,Xis a symmetric positive semideﬁnite matrix, Yis a symmetric
positive deﬁnite matrix, and K∈Rd×dis the control matrix. The policy parameters we want
to learn are θ=vec(K). Although low-dimensional, this problem presents some challenges.
First, the policy can easily make the system unstable. The LQR, in fact, is stable only if the
matrix (A+BK)has eigenvalues of magnitude smaller than one. Therefore, small stable
steps have to be applied when updating the policy parameters, in order to prevent divergence.Second, the reward is unbounded and the expected negative return can be extremely large,especially at the beginning with an initial random policy. As a consequence, with a commonzero-initialization of the Q-function, the initial TD error can be arbitrarily large. Third, statesand actions are unbounded and cannot be normalized in [0, 1], a common practice in RL.
Furthermore, the LQR is particularly interesting because we can compute in closed form
both the expected return and the Q-function, being able to easily assess the quality of theevaluated algorithms. More speciﬁcally, the Q-function is quadratic in the state and in theaction, i.e.,
Q
π(s,a)=Q0+sTQsss+aTQaaa+sTQsaa,
where Q0,Qss,Qaa,Qsaare matrices computed in closed form given the MDP character-
istics and the control matrix K. To show that actor-critic algorithms are prone to instability
in the presence of function approximation error, we approximate the Q-function linearly inthe parameters /hatwideQ(s,a;ω)=φ(s,a)
Tω,w h e r e φ(s,a)includes linear, quadratic and cubic
features.
123