1486 Machine Learning (2019) 108:1467–1501
given that all versions without Retrace performed poorly. We believe that this is due to the
larger number of new samples collected per iteration.
From this evaluation, we can conclude that the TD- and GAE-regularization are comple-
mentary to existing stabilization approaches. In particular, the combination of Retrace andGAE-REG yields very promising results.
5.3 MuJoCo continuous control tasks
We perform continuous control experiments using OpenAI Gym (Brockman et al. 2016 )
with the MuJoCo physics simulator (Todorov et al. 2012 ). For all algorithms, the advantage
function is estimated by GAE. For TRPO, we consider a deep RL setting where the actor andthe critic are two-layer neural networks with 128 hyperbolic tangent units in each layer. ForPPO, the units are 64 in each layer. In both algorithms, both the actor and the critic gradientsare optimized by ADAM (Kingma and Ba 2014 ). For the policy update, both the advantage
and the TD error estimates are standardized. More details of the hyperparameters are givenin “Appendix C”.
From the evaluation on the pendulum tasks, it emerged that the value of the regularization
coefﬁcient ηstrongly depends on the magnitude of the advantage estimator and the TD error.
In fact, for TD-REG we had to decrease η
0from 1 to 0.1 in the double-pendulum task because
the TD error was larger. For this reason, for PPO we tested different initial regularizationcoefﬁcients η
0and decay factors κ, choosing among all combinations of η0=0.1,1a n d
κ=0.99,0.9999. For TRPO, due to limited computational resources, we tried only η0=0.1
andκ=0.9999.
Figure 7shows the expected return against training iteration for PPO. On Ant, HalfCheetah
and Walker2d, both TD-REG and GAE-REG performed substantially better, especially onAnt-v2, where PPO performed very poorly. On Swimmer and Hopper, TD-REG and GAE-REG also outperformed vanilla PPO, but the improvement was less substantial. On Reacherall algorithms performed the same. This behavior is expected, since Reacher is the easiest ofMuJoCo tasks, followed by Swimmer and Hopper. On Ant and Walker, we also notice the“slow start” of TD-regularized algorithms already experienced in the LQR. For the ﬁrst 1000iterations, in fact, vanilla PPO expected return increased faster than PPO TD-REG and PPOGAE-REG, but then it also plateaued earlier.
Results for TRPO (Fig. 8) are instead mixed, as we did not perform cross-validation for
η
0andκ. In all tasks, TD-REG always outperformed or performed as good as TRPO. GAE-
REG achieved very good results on HalfCheetah and Walker2d, but performed worse thanTRPO in Ant and Swimmer. On Reacher, Humanoid, and HumanoidStandup, all algorithmsperformed the same.
From this evaluation it emerged that both TD-REG and GAE-REG can substantially
improve the performance of TRPO and PPO. However, as for any other method based onregularization, the tuning of the regularization coefﬁcient is essential for their success.
6 Conclusion
Actor-critic methods often suffer from instability. A major cause is the function approxi-mation error in the critic. In this paper, we addressed the stability issue taking into accountthe relationship between the critic and the actor. We presented a TD-regularized approachpenalizing the actor for breaking the critic Bellman equation, in order to perform policy
123