1474 Machine Learning (2019) 108:1467–1501
reduce the bias of TD error estimates, we can also rely on TD( λ) (more details in Sect. 4.5).
Note that this ﬁnal modiﬁcation only approximately satisﬁes the Bellman constraint.
3.4 Final algorithm: the TD-regularized actor-critic method
Equation ( 15) is the ﬁnal objective we will use to update the actor. For the ease of notation,
in the rest of the paper, we will refer to the two terms in L(θ,η) using the following notation
L(θ,η):=J(θ)−ηG(θ), where (16)
J(θ):= Eμπ(s),π( a|s;θ)[/hatwideQ(s,a;ω)], (17)
G(θ):= Eμπ(s),π( a|s;θ),P(s/prime|s,a)[δQ(s,a,s/prime;θ,ω)2]. (18)
We propose to replace the usual policy search step (Eq. ( 5)) in the actor-critic method by a
step that optimizes the TD-regularized objective for a given ηiin iteration i,
θi+1=θi+αθ/parenleftbigg
∇θEμπ(s)π(a|s;θ)/bracketleftbig/hatwideQ(s,a;ωi)/bracketrightbig/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
θ=θi−ηi∇θG(θ)/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
θ=θi/parenrightbigg
. (19)
The blue term is the extra penalty term involving the TD error, where we allow ηito change
with the iteration. We can alternate between the above update of the actor and the update ofthe critic, e.g., by using Eq. ( 7) or any other method. We call this method the TD-regularized
actor-critic. We use the terminology “regularization” instead of “penalization” since it ismore common in the RL and machine learning communities.
A simple interpretation of Eq. ( 15) is that the actor is penalized for increasing the squared
TD error, implying that the update of the actor favors policies achieving a small TD error.The main objective of the actor is still to maximize the estimated expected returns, but thepenalty term helps to avoid bad updates whenever the critic’s estimate has a large TD error.Because the TD error is an approximation to the deviation from the Bellman equation, weexpect that the proposed method helps in stabilizing learning whenever the critic’s estimateincurs a large TD error.
In practice, the choice of penalty parameter is extremely important to enable a good trade-
off between maximizing the expected return and avoiding the bias in the critic’s estimate. In atypical optimization problem where the constraints are only functions of θ, it is recommended
to slowly increase η
iwith i. This way, as the optimization progresses, the constraints become
more and more important. However, in our case, the constraints also depend on ωwhich
changes with iterations, therefore the constraints also change with i. As long as the overall
TD error of the critic decreases as the number of iterations increase, the overall penalty duethe constraint will eventually decrease too. Therefore, we do not need to artiﬁcially makethe constraints more important by increasing η
i. In practice, we found that if the TD error
decreases over time, then ηican, in fact, be decreased with i. In Sect. 5,w eu s eas i m p l e
decaying rule ηi+1=κηiwhere 0 <κ< 1 is a decay factor.
4 Application of TD-regularization to existing actor-critic methods
Our TD-regularization method is a general plug-and-play method that can be applied to
any actor-critic method that performs policy gradient for actor learning. In this section, weﬁrst demonstrate its applications to popular actor-critic methods including DPG (Silver et al.2014 ), TRPO (Schulman et al. 2015 ) and PPO (Schulman et al. 2017 ). Subsequently, building
123