6 Broader Impact
Our research falls under the category of advancing machine learning techniques for computer vision
and scene understanding. We focus on improving image representations for dense prediction tasks,
which subsumes a large array of fundamental vision tasks, such as image segmentation and object
detection. While there are potentially many implications for using these applications, here we discuss
two aspects. First, we highlight some social implications for image understanding with no or very
little labeled data. Second, we provide some insights on foundational research questions regarding the
evaluation of general purpose representation learning methods.
Improving capabilities of image understanding using unlabeled data, especially for pixel-level tasks,
opens up a wide range of applications that are beneﬁcial to the society, and which cannot be tackled
otherwise. Medical imagery applications suffers from lack of labeled data due to the need of very
specialized labelers. Another application, tackling harmful online content—including but not limited
to terrorist propaganda, hateful speech, fake news and misinformation—is a huge challenge for
governments and businesses. What makes these problems especially difﬁcult is that it is very difﬁcult
to obtain clean labeled data for training machine learning models—think of ﬁlming a terrorist attack on
live video as in the unfortunate Christchurch attack. Self-supervised learning can potentially move the
needle in advancing models for detecting extremely rare yet highly impactful incidents. On the other
hand, such technologies can be potentially misused for violating privacy and freedom of expression.
We acknowledge these risks as being a feature of any amoral technology, and we invite governments,
policy makers and all citizens—including the research community—to work hard on striking a balance
between those beneﬁts and risks.
Another interesting aspect of our research is highlighting the importance of aligning representation
learning methods with the nature of downstream applications. With our method, we show that learning
pixel-level representations from unlabeled data we can outperform image-level methods on a variety of
dense prediction tasks. Our ﬁndings highlight that the research community should go beyond limited
test-beds for evaluating generic representation learning techniques. We invite further research on
developing comprehensive evaluation protocols for such methods. In fact, we see many research
opportunities in the computer vision domain, such as developing a sweep of standardized benchmarks
across a variety of geometric and semantic image understanding tasks, and designing methods that can
bridge the gap between ofﬂine and online performance.
Funding Disclosure
This work was supported by Element AI.
References
[1]Philip Bachman, R Devon Hjelm, and William Buchwalter. Learning representations by maximizing mutual
information across views. In NeurIPS , 2019.
[2]Mohamed Belghazi, Maxime Oquab, and David Lopez-Paz. Learning about an exponential amount of
conditional distributions. In NeurIPS , 2019.
[3]Mathilde Caron, Piotr Bojanowski, Armand Joulin, and Matthijs Douze. Deep clustering for unsupervised
learning of visual features. In ECCV , 2018.
[4]Liang-Chieh Chen, George Papandreou, Iasonas Kokkinos, Kevin Murphy, and Alan L Yuille. Deeplab:
Semantic image segmentation with deep convolutional nets, atrous convolution, and fully connected crfs.
PAMI , 2017.
[5]Ting Chen, Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, and Geoffrey Hinton. A simple framework for contrastive
learning of visual representations. In ICML , 2020.
[6]Christopher B Choy, JunYoung Gwak, Silvio Savarese, and Manmohan Chandraker. Universal correspon-
dence network. In NIPS , 2016.
[7]Marius Cordts, Mohamed Omran, Sebastian Ramos, Timo Rehfeld, Markus Enzweiler, Rodrigo Benenson,
Uwe Franke, Stefan Roth, and Bernt Schiele. The cityscapes dataset for semantic urban scene understanding.
InCVPR , 2016.
9