Unsupervised Learning of Dense
Visual Representations
Pedro O. Pinheiro1, Amjad Almahairi, Ryan Y. Benmalek2,
Florian Golemo13,Aaron Courville34
1Element AI,2Cornell University,3Mila, Université de Montréal,
4CIFAR Fellow
Abstract
Contrastive self-supervised learning has emerged as a promising approach to
unsupervised visual representation learning. In general, these methods learn
global (image-level) representations that are invariant to different views ( i.e.,
compositions of data augmentation) of the same image. However, many visual
understanding tasks require dense (pixel-level) representations. In this paper, we
propose View-Agnostic Dense Representation (V ADeR) for unsupervised learning
of dense representations. V ADeR learns pixelwise representations by forcing local
features to remain constant over different viewing conditions. Speciﬁcally, this
is achieved through pixel-level contrastive learning: matching features (that is,
features that describes the same location of the scene on different views) should be
close in an embedding space, while non-matching features should be apart. V ADeR
provides a natural representation for dense prediction tasks and transfers well to
downstream tasks. Our method outperforms ImageNet supervised pretraining (and
strong unsupervised baselines) in multiple dense prediction tasks.
1 Introduction
Since the introduction of large-scale visual datasets like ImageNet [ 9], most success in computer
vision has been primarily driven by supervised learning. Unfortunately, most successful approaches
require large amounts of labeled data, making them expensive to scale. In order to take advantage
of the huge amounts of unlabeled data and break this bottleneck, unsupervised and semi-supervised
learning methods have been proposed.
Recently, self-supervised methods based on contrastive learning [23] have shown promising results
on computer vision problems [ 73,55,30,80,29,63,1,26,49,5]. Contrastive approaches learn
a similarity function between views of images—bringing views of the same image closer in a
representation space, while pushing views of other images apart. The deﬁnition of a view varies
from method to method but views are typically drawn from the set of data augmentation procedures
commonly used in computer vision.
Current contrastive self-supervision methods have one thing in common: similarity scores are
computed between global representations of the views (usually by a global pooling operation on the
ﬁnal convolutional layer). See Figure 1a. Global representations are efﬁcient to compute but provide
low-resolution features that are invariant to pixel-level variations. This might be sufﬁcient for few
tasks like image classiﬁcation, but are not enough for dense prediction tasks.
Dense representations , contrary to their global counterpart, yield encodings at pixel level. They provide
a natural way to leverage intrinsic spatial structure in visual perception [ 70] during training ( e.g.,
nearby pixels tend to share similar appearances, object boundaries have strong gradients, object-centric
properties). Moreover, many—arguably, most—visual understanding tasks rely on structured, dense
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.