recognition to geometry (see Figure 3for examples of tasks evaluated). We consider two transfer
learning experimental protocols: (i) feature extraction , where we evaluate the quality of ﬁxed learned
features, and (ii) ﬁne-tuning , where we use the learned features as weight initialization and the whole
network is ﬁne-tuned. For each experiment, we consider identical models and hyperparameters for
V ADeR and baselines, only changing the ﬁxed features or the initialization for ﬁne-tuning. For more
details about datasets and implementations of downstream tasks, see supplementary material.
4.1 Feature Extraction Protocol
Semantic segmentation and depth prediction. We follow common practice of self-supervised
learning [ 21,37] and assess the quality of features on ﬁxed image representations with a linear predictor.
The linear classiﬁer is a 1⇥1convolutional layer that transform the features into logits (followed by
a softmax) for per-pixel classiﬁcation (semantic segmentation) or into a single value for per-pixel
regression (depth prediction). We train the semantic segmentation tasks with cross entropy and the
depth prediction with L1 loss. We test the frozen features in two datasets for semantic segmentation
(PASCAL VOC12 [ 17] and Cityscapess [ 7]) and one for depth prediction (NYU-depth v2 [ 51]). In
all datasets, we train the linear model on the provided train set2and evaluate on the validation set.
sem. seg. (mIoU) depth (RMSE)
VOC CS NYU-d v2
random 04.9 10.6 1.261
sup. IN 54.4 47.1 0.994
MoCo 43.0 32.3 1.136
V ADeR 56.7 44.3 0.964
Table 1: Sem. seg. and depth prediction
evaluated with ﬁxed features.We compare V ADeR with randomly initialized network
(which serves as a lower bound), supervised ImageNet
pretraining and MoCo (all with ResNet-50 architecture).
Because baselines are trained for global representations,
we need to adapt them to be more competitive for dense
prediction tasks. We ﬁrst remove the last average pooling
layer so that the ﬁnal representation has a resolution of 1/32.
Then, we reduce the effective stride to 1/4by replacing
strided convolution with dilated ones, following the large
ﬁeld-of-view design in [ 4]. This way, the baselines produce
a feature map with same resolution as V ADeR.
Table 1compares results (averaged over 5 trials) in standard mean intersection-over-union (mIoU)
and root mean square error (RMSE). V ADeR outperform MoCo in all tasks by a considerable margin.
It also achieves better performance than supervised ImageNet pretraining in one semantic segmenta-
tion task and in depth prediction. This corroborates our intuition that explicitly learning structured
representations provides advantages for pixel-level downstream tasks.
Video instance segmentation. We also use ﬁxed representations to compute dense correspondence
for instance segmentation propagation in videos. Given the instance segmentation mask of the ﬁrst
frame, the task is to propagate the masks to the the rest of the frames through nearest neighbours in
embedding space. We evaluate directly on learned features, without any additional learning. We follow
the testing protocol of [ 67] and report results in standard metrics, including region similarity J(IoU)
and contour-based accuracy F3.
Table 2shows results on DA VIS-2017 validation set [ 59], considering input resolution of 320⇥320
and480⇥480. V ADeR results are from a model trained on 2.4M iterations, as we observed that it
performs slightly better on this problem (while performing equal or slightly worse on other tasks).
Once again, we observe the advantage of explicitly modelling dense representations: V ADeR surpass
recent self-supervised methods [ 66,67,38] and achieve comparable results with current state of the
art [40]. V ADeR, contrary to competitive methods, achieve these results without using any video data
nor specialized architecture. We note that MoCo alone is already a strong baseline, achieving similar
performance to some specialized methods and close to supervised ImageNet pretrain.
4.2 Fine-tuning Protocol
In this section, we compare how good features are for ﬁne-tuning on downstream tasks. All baselines
have the same FPN architecture of V ADeR (described in Section 3.2) and are trained with identical
hyperparameters and data. Apart from weight initialization, everything else is kept identical—this
allows for straight comparison of different initialization methods. We compare V ADeR with two
2We consider train_aug for VOC.
3We use the evaluation code provided by [ 67] in:https://github.com/xiaolonw/TimeCycle
6