644 Complex & Intelligent Systems (2021) 7:639–657
NAS based on reinforcement learning
Early work on NAS depends on RL to search for high-
performance neural architectures [ 36–38]. The design of a
network model is considered as an agent’s action, which spec-iﬁes the architecture of the network (i.e., a child model). Thenetwork is then trained and its performance on the validation
data is returned as the agent’s reward.
A policy gradient method has attempted to approximate
some nondifferentiable reward function to train a model
which needs parameter gradients. Zoph et al. [ 36,38]ﬁ r s t
adopt this algorithm in NAS to train a recurrent neural net-work (RNN) model that generates architectures. As is shown
in Fig. 6, the controller as a navigating tool to ﬁnd more
promising architectures in the search space. The originalmethod in [ 36] uses a macro-search space that generates the
entire network at once. As is shown in Fig. 5, the whole archi-
tecture consists of nsequential layers where the dashed lines
indicate skip connections. Hence, the macro-search spaceaims to design the entire CNN architecture in terms of the
number of hidden layers n, operations types (e.g. convo-
lution), network hyper parameters (e.g., the convolutionalkernel size), and the link methods (e.g. skip connections).
However, this method is expensive when the data set is large.
To reduce the computational cost, Zoph et al. [ 38] propose
a more structured search space, called micro-search space.The micro-search space only covers repeated smaller mod-
ules, called normal cell and reduction cell, and then connects
them together to form an entire network. As shown in Fig.5, these cells are built in complex multi-branch operations
(e.g. convolution). Each cell structure contains two inputsh[i−1]and h[i−2]coming from two previous layers.
Hence, the micro-search space aims to design structures ofthese two types of cells. In addition, the cell structures should
have a good capability of generalizing to other related tasks.
For example, the proposed method searches for optimal cellstructures on the CIFAR10 data set and transfers them to theImageNet data set by stacking together multiple copies of
this cell. After that, the NASNet [ 38] method is extended
to a multi-objective optimization variant to simultaneouslyoptimize the classiﬁcation performance and computational
cost using different scalarization parameters.
Q-learning [ 51], as a class of popular RL methods, has
been widely used for NAS. Baker et al. [ 52]e m p l o ya n /epsilon1-
greedy Q-learning strategy to train a policy that sequentially
chooses a type of layers (e.g. convolutional layer, poolinglayer, and fully connected layer) and their correspondinghyperparameters. Zhong et al. [ 53] extend this method to
a block-wise network generation approach, which designs
blocks with the same Q-learning paradigm. After that, theoptimal blocks are repeated and stacked to construct the
entire network architecture. To accelerate the search pro-
cess, a distributed asynchronous strategy and an early-stopapproach are adopted.
Parameter sharing introduced in efﬁcient NAS (ENAS)
[46] is a promising approach for speeding up the search pro-
cess for RL-based NAS methods, which treats architecturesas different sub-graphs (sub-net) of a larger graph (super-net)
and forces all sub-graphs to share a common set of weights
that have edges of this larger graph in common. Pasunuruet al. [ 54] propose a multi-task architecture search (MAS)
approach based on ENAS [ 46] for ﬁnding a cell structure that
Fig. 5 Illustration of the marco-
and micro-search spaces
123