646 Complex & Intelligent Systems (2021) 7:639–657
Fig. 7 A generic EA-based
NAS framework
Real et al. [ 73] propose a large-scale evolutionary NAS
method, which utilizes a variable-length encoding method
in which the network architectures can adaptively changetheir depths. Sun et al. [ 40] propose an AE-CNN algorithm
that can fully automatically design CNN architectures, with-
out requiring any pre-processing or post-processing. Inspiredby the ResNet [ 74] and DenseNet [ 75], AE-CNN’s search
space is deﬁned by some predetermined building blocks,
including ResNet block and DenseNet block, max pool-ing layer and mean pooling layer. Then, the authors designan EA-based NAS framework, including the variable-length
encoding and a novel crossover and mutation operators based
on the variable-length encoding, as the search strategy tosearch the optimal depth of the CNN. Given the nature of
the variable-length encoding strategy, the algorithm employs
a repair mechanism that avoids to produce invalid CNNs.Inspired by directed acyclic graph (DAG), William et al.
[76] introduce a DAG-based encoding strategy, which can
represent CNNs of an arbitrary connection structure and anunlimited depth.
Suganuma et al. [ 77] propose a CGP-CNN algorithm to
design CNN architectures using genetic programming. The
search space of CGP-CNN is represented by a DAG, wherethe nodes represent either convolutional blocks or concatena-
tion operations. Then CGP-CNN uses the Cartesian genetic
programming (CGP) [ 78,79] encoding scheme to represent
network architectures and their connectivity. This encoding
scheme can represent variable-length network architectures
and skip connections.Most EA-based NAS methods aim at ﬁnding better topolo-
gies for DNNs while leaving the learning of weights to SGD.
It is known that the SGD optimizer heavily relies on the ini-tial values of the weights. To alleviate this problem, Sun et
al. [80] propose an EA-based NAS method, named Evolving
Deep CNNs (EvoCNN), to automatically design CNN archi-tectures and corresponding connection weight initialization
values without manual intervention. To reduce the search
space, two statistical measures, including the mean and stan-dard deviation of the connection weights, are encoded in thechromosome to represent tremendous numbers of the con-
nection weights. In addition, the incomplete training scheme
is employed to accelerate the ﬁtness evaluation. Accordingto the Occam’s razor theory [ 81], the number of connection
weights is also considered as an indicator to scale the quality
of candidate networks.
Sun et al. [ 41] use a genetic algorithm (GA) to design CNN
architectures (CNN-GA). In CNN-GA, the standard convo-
lutional layer is replaced by a novel building block, calledthe skip layer. The skip layer consists of two convolutionallayers and one skip connection. Hence, the genotype encodes
information of the skip layers and pooling layers. The fully
connected layers are discarded, mainly because they easilyresult in the overﬁtting [ 82].
Rather than generating the entire CNNs, the micro-search
space [ 46] has also been successfully employed by many
recent EA-based NAS algorithms [ 83–87]. Real et al. [ 85]
propose an extension of the large-scale evolution [ 73], called
AmoebaNet, which has achieved better results on ImageNetcompared with hand-designed methods for the ﬁrst time.
123