640 Complex & Intelligent Systems (2021) 7:639–657
of handling multiple objectives in federated learning, such as
accuracy, communication costs, model complexity and mem-ory requirements on the local devices. Finally, we outline the
main remaining challenges in federated neural architecture
search.
Federated learning
Federated learning [ 3] distinguishes itself from distributed
learning in three aspects. First, the main purpose of federated
learning is to protect user’s private information while dis-
tributed learning aims to accelerate training speed. Second,federated learning cannot determine the data distribution ofany client devices. By contrast, distributed learning is able to
arbitrarily allocate subsets of the whole learning data. Finally,
federated learning faces a more challenging training environ-ment as it may contain millions of unbalanced participating
clients whose connections to the server are probably unstable.
For example, edge devices like mobile phones are frequentlyofﬂine.
Federated learning is often categorized based on the distri-
bution characteristics of the data [ 2] which is originally used
in distributed learning. Strictly speaking, federated learningdoes not have the concept of ’the whole dataset’; therefore,
it is hard to accurately describe the federated data distribu-
tion to some extent as deﬁned in distribute learning. In thefollowing, we will discuss the data distributions in federated
learning in greater detail.
Horizontal federated learning
Horizontal federated learning is proposed for the scenarios inwhich datasets on the participating clients share the same fea-
ture space but have different samples. The name ’horizontal’originates from instance distributed learning [ 4]a ss h o w ni n
Fig. 1a, where the whole dataset is horizontally partitioned
over data samples and allocated to two clients. Similarly, asindicated by the part surrounded by the two dashed lines in
Fig. 1b, the data can be considered as horizontally partitioned
in federated learning, when different data are generated ondifferent clients that have the same attributes (features). For
instance, two hospitals in different regions may have differ-ent patients, although they performed the same tests for each
patients and collected the same personal information such as
the name, age, gender and address.
There are three main differences between instance dis-
tributed learning and horizontal federated learning. First, data
are typically independent and identically distributed (IID) in
distributed learning but may be non-IID in horizontal fed-erated learning. As mentioned before, distributed learning
is mainly designed for reducing the training time; there-
fore, designers can manually allocate every subsets of theclient data to be IID to enhance the convergence. However,
in horizontal federated learning, the central server has no
access to any raw data, which are usually non-IID on dif-ferent clients. Second, horizontal federated learning alwayscontains massive connected clients, but instance distributed
learning often does not have a very large number of workers,
because too many workers will worsen the performance ofdistributed training, when the total amount of data is ﬁxed
[5]. Finally, global model update mechanisms are slightly
different. In instance distributed learning, such as multi-GPU training (GPUs are always embedded inside a server,
communication effects can thus be ignored), a deep neural
network tends to synchronously update the global model oncethe local gradients of the mini-batch data are calculated, toensure the correct distributed model learning direction. This
global model updating approach is intrinsically not suited for
horizontal federated learning because frequent upload anddownload of data are not desirable due to the constraints on
the communication costs.
Typical horizontal federated learning (Fig. 2) algorithms,
such as the FedAvg proposed in [ 3], consist of the following
main steps.
1. Initialize the global model parameters on the server and
download the global model to every participating (con-
nected) clients.
2. Every connected clients learn the downloaded global
model on its own data for several training epochs. Once
completed, the updated model parameters or gradients
Fig. 1 Instance distributed
learning ( a) and horizontal
federated learning ( b)
123