Complex & Intelligent Systems (2021) 7:639–657 651
Fig. 10 Overall framework of online federated NAS. Client sampling
are often used to ensure all offspring models are evaluated within onecommunication round
5. Repeat from step 2 to step 4 until convergence.
Unlike aforementioned two ofﬂine federated NAS frame-
work, this scheme is not population based since all candidate
operations are jointly optimized. In addition, architecturesearch and weight training of the supernet model areconducted alternately during the period of federated train-
ing. Therefore, no additional communication resources are
required for training the candidate models. However, jointlyoptimizing the supernet on local clients requires much more
computation and memory resources, which is not well suited
for the edge devices like mobile phones.
To reduce the memory usage of local devices, a more
light-weighted real-time evolutionary NAS framework (RT-
FedEvoNAS) is proposed in [ 120]. Different from the previ-
ous gradient-based approach, RT-FedEvoNAS adopts modelsampling technique [ 47,122] in federated learning, where
only one path of repeated cells in the global model is sam-
pled and downloaded to local clients. As a result, both localcomputation and uploading costs are signiﬁcantly reduced.
The overall process is described as follows:
1. Initialize the supernet in the server. Generate the parent
population containing Nindividuals, each representing a
one-path subnet sampled from the supernet using a choicekey. Do client sampling to allocate Lclients evenly into
Ngroups.
2. Download the subnet of each parent individual to each
group of clients for training. Once the training is com-pleted, upload the Llocal subnets to the server for
aggregation to update the supernet model.
3. Generate Noffspring individuals using crossover and
mutation. Similarly, generate a choice key for each off-
spring individual to sample a one-path subnet from thesupernet. And then use client sampling technique to down-load sampled subnets (download the choice keys from the
second generation) for training and uploading the trained
subnets to the server for aggregation.
4. Download the supernet together with the choice keys of
all parent and offspring individuals to all participating
clients to evaluate the objectives. Upload all the objectivevalues to the server and calculate the weighted average of
the validation errors for each individual.
5. Combine the parent and offspring individuals into a whole
population. Perform environmental selection to select N
new parents.
6. Repeat Step 3 to Step 4 until the generation number
reaches the pre-deﬁne maximum value.
Since only one path of the supernet needs to be trained on
each client, this sampling approach can signiﬁcantly reduceboth upload and local computation costs. There is a smalldetail in Step 4 that downloads all the supernet model to every
client to calculate the validation accuracies; thus, only choice
keys are downloaded in the next generation since the wholesupernet has been already downloaded in the last generation.
Online methods enable federated NAS systems to perform
architecture search and train the model simultaneously. Bothﬁtness evaluation thresholds, e.g. the number of communi-
cation rounds in federated learning and extra communication
resources for training the searched models are not requiredusing online approaches, which are highly desired for feder-ated learning. However, the search space of online federated
NAS is fairly limited, which affects the diversity of the archi-
tecture search.
Single- and multi-objective search
The aforementioned gradient-based federated NAS frame-
work only considers and optimizes the model performances,
which is usually not enough for federated learning, becausefederated NAS is naturally a multi-objective optimizationproblem. In addition to the maximization of the model perfor-
mance, the payload (communication costs) to be transferred
between the server and clients should be minimized. Single-objective optimization often aggregates conﬂict objectives
into one objective using hyperparameters, while Pareto
approaches aim to obtain a set of models presenting trade-offrelationships between the conﬂicting objectives.
For example in RT-FedEvoNAS, the validation accuracy,
model size and model ﬂoating point operations per second(FLOPs) of the sampled subnets are considered as the objec-
123