Complex & Intelligent Systems (2021) 7:639–657 645
Fig. 6 An overview of
RL-based NAS method
performs well across multiple tasks. Hence, the cell struc-
ture generated by NAS can transfer to a new task. Bender
et al. [ 55] propose a thorough comparison between random
search NAS methods and ENAS [ 46] on a larger search
spaces for image detection and classiﬁcation tasks, respec-
tively. In addition, a new reward function is suggested, which
can effectively improve the quality of the generated networksand reduce the difﬁculty for manual hyperparameter tun-ing. Liu et al. [ 56] present a novel knowledge distillation
[57] approach to NAS, called architecture-aware knowledge
distillation (AKD), which ﬁnds student models (compressedteacher models) that are best for distilling the given teacher
model. The authors employ a RL-based NAS method with
a KD-guided reward function to search for the best studentmodel based on a given teacher model.
NAS based on EAs
EAs are a class of population-based, gradient-free heuristicsearch paradigms, which have been widely used in solving
various complex optimization problems [ 12,58–60]. His-
torically, EAs have already been used for simultaneousoptimization of the topology, weights of the connections
and hyperparameters of artiﬁcial neural networks (ANNs)
[61,62,62–64]. The neuroevolution with augmenting typolo-
gies (NEA T) algorithm [ 65] is one of the popular early
methods that have shown powerful performance. However,
the traditional approaches are not well suited for optimizingDNNs due to the complex network architectures and largequantities of connection weights. EA-based NAS approaches
to optimizing deep network architectures have started gain-
ing momentum again recently [ 66,67], mainly because they
can simultaneously explore multiple areas of the search space
and their relative insensitiveness to a local minimum [ 68,69].
Figure 7shows a generic framework of EA-based NAS algo-
rithms. Broadly speaking, the whole process of an EA-based
NAS algorithm follows the procedure of an EA contain-
ing at least four-steps: population initialization, offspringgeneration, ﬁtness evaluation, and environmental selection.Generally, each neural network in the search space is encoded
as a chromosome, and crossover and mutation operations
of the chromosomes are performed in the exploration. Then
each chromosomes is transformed into a corresponding neu-ral network, and iteratively trained on the training dataset.
The trained network is evaluated on the validation dataset to
get their ﬁtness value.
Xie et al. proposed a genetic CNN [ 39] method that
is one of the early studies using an EA for optimizing
convolutional neural networks (CNNs). The genetic CNN
algorithm searches over the entire architecture space andemploys a ﬁxed-length binary string to represent the connec-
tion between a number of ordered nodes (e.g. a convolutional
operation). Although this early algorithm has some limita-tions, including a limited number of nodes as well as limited
sizes and operations of convolutional ﬁlters, the generated
structures have not only achieved competitive results on theCIFAR and SVHN datasets, but also shown excellent trans-ferability to the ImageNet dataset [ 70].
Miikkulainen et al. [ 71] propose a coevolution DeepNEA T
(CoDeepNEA T) method by extending the NEA T algorithm[65] to DNNs. In CoDeepNEA T, each neural network is
assembled by modules and blueprints. A coevolutionary
method is adopted that evolves two populations of modulesand blueprints separately, in which each module chromo-
some represents a small DNN. The blueprints chromosome
represents a graph where each node contains a pointer toa particular module species. The assembled networks aretrained and evaluated in an ordinary way of NAS. The ﬁtness
of the network is the average ﬁtness of the entire candidate
models containing the blueprints or modules. In addition,Liang et al. found that the CoDeepNEA T also achieves
promising performance in the Omniglot multi-task learning
domain [ 72].
In fact, the length of a chromosome usually represents
the depth of the corresponding neural network and a ﬁxed
encoding scheme may limit the performance of the optimizednetwork. To address this issue, some recent NAS algorithmshave attempted to use a variable-length encoding scheme.
123