Complex & Intelligent Systems (2021) 7:639–657
https://doi.org/10.1007/s40747-020-00247-z
SURVEY AND STATE OF THE ART
From federated learning to federated neural architecture search: a
survey
Hangyu Zhu1·Haoyu Zhang2,3·Yaochu Jin1,3
Received: 11 September 2020 / Accepted: 1 December 2020 / Published online: 4 January 2021
© The Author(s) 2021
Abstract
Federated learning is a recently proposed distributed machine learning paradigm for privacy preservation, which has found
a wide range of applications where data privacy is of primary concern. Meanwhile, neural architecture search has become
very popular in deep learning for automatically tuning the architecture and hyperparameters of deep neural networks. Whileboth federated learning and neural architecture search are faced with many open challenges, searching for optimized neural
architectures in the federated learning framework is particularly demanding. This survey paper starts with a brief introduction
to federated learning, including both horizontal, vertical, and hybrid federated learning. Then neural architecture searchapproaches based on reinforcement learning, evolutionary algorithms and gradient-based are presented. This is followed by
a description of federated neural architecture search that has recently been proposed, which is categorized into online and
ofﬂine implementations, and single- and multi-objective search approaches. Finally, remaining open research questions areoutlined and promising research topics are suggested.
Keywords Federated learning ·Deep learning ·Privacy preservation ·Neural architecture search ·Reinforcement learning ·
Evolutionary algorithm ·Real-time optimization
Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have made great success
in the ﬁelds of image classiﬁcation, natural language pro-
cessing, autonomous driving systems, and many others.
However, designing DNNs with high-quality architecturesusually requires to manually try a large number of different
hyperparameters, which is always a tedious task requiring
broad expertise in both machine learning and the applica-tion area. Therefore, neural architecture search (NAS) has
B Yaochu Jin
yaochu.jin@surrey.ac.uk
Hangyu Zhu
hangyu.zhu@surrey.ac.uk
Haoyu Zhang
zhy920816@sina.cn
1Department of Computer Science, University of Surrey,Guildford GU2 7XH, UK
2Engineering Research Center of Digitized Textile & Apparel
Technology, Ministry of Education, Shanghai 201620, China
3College of Information Science and Technology, Donghua
University, Shanghai 201620, Chinabecome increasingly popular in recent years [ 1], which aims
to automatically search for good neural architectures.
Conventional centralized learning systems, however,
require that all training data generated on different devices
be uploaded to a server or cloud for training a global model,
which may give rise to serious privacy concerns. To addressthis concern, federated learning [ 2] has been proposed to
protect user’s data privacy by communicating the model
parameters or other model information instead of the rawdata between the server and local devices. Naturally, per-
forming NAS in a federated learning environment becomes
of particular importance, although it is still in its infant stage.
This survey aims to provide an overview of research work
both on federated learning and neural architecture search,
focusing, however, on the emerging area of federated neu-
ral architecture search. We categorize federated learningsystems into ofﬂine and online approaches, where online fed-
erated neural architecture search is more challenging due to
additional requirements on the performance of the networksduring the search process and stronger constraints on the
computational resources. In addition, we brieﬂy discuss the
differences between single- and multi-objective search neu-ral architecture search methods to highlight different ways
123