Complex & Intelligent Systems (2021) 7:639–657 649
GPU memory) of NAS to the same level of normal train-
ing. Hence, ProxylessNAS algorithm can generate networkarchitectures on the ImageNet dataset without any proxy.
Most recently GD-based NAS methods are formulated
as bilevel optimization problems, However, He et al. [ 116]
observe that bilevel optimization in the current methods issolved based on a heuristic. For instance, solution of the
problem needs to get an approximation of the second-order
methods [ 109,110]. He et al. [ 116] demonstrate that the
approximation has a superposition inﬂuence mainly because
it is based on a one-step approximation of the network
weights. As a result, gradient errors may cause the algorithmto fail to converge to a (locally) optimal solution. Hence, the
authors propose mixed-level reformulation NAS (MiLeNAS)
that uses a ﬁrst-order method on the mixed-level formula-tion. Experimental results show that MiLeNAS has achievedhigher classiﬁcation accuracies than those achieved by the
original bilevel optimization methods.
Federated neural architecture search
Federated NAS aims to optimize the architecture of neu-
ral network models in the federated learning environment.
As discussed in section “Federated Learning”, distributed
model training is intrinsically more difﬁcult than central-ized training, and it becomes even more challenging for
NAS problems. In this section, we would like to introduce
the current research on federated NAS and discuss themfrom two perspectives: online and ofﬂine optimization, and
single- and multi-objective optimization. It should be noticed
that research on federated NAS work is presently limited tohorizontal federated learning and federated NAS in verticalfederated learning has not been reported so far.
Offline and online federated neural architecture
search
Most NAS methods include two steps, i.e., search the archi-
tecture of the neural network model, and training the weights
of the found neural network model afterwards. And most
importantly, only the ﬁnal performance matters. We deﬁnethese approaches as ofﬂine NAS, because the search andtraining steps are typically separate and only an optimized
network will be used. By contrast, online NAS requires that
the architecture optimization and weight training be done atthe same time, and some of the models must be used dur-
ing the search process. As a result, the performance of the
models during the optimization must be acceptable.
This concept can be easily extended to federated learning.
In other words, federated NAS systems in which neural archi-
tecture search and weight training of the global model mustbe performed simultaneously are called online or real-timefederated NAS, whilst federated NAS in which neural archi-
tecture search can be conducted at ﬁrst and then the weightsof the found models are trained are ofﬂine. Similarly, online
federated NAS requires that the neural network models can
be used during the optimization process.
For example, the method proposed in [ 12] is a typical
ofﬂine federated NAS framework using a multi-objective
evolutionary algorithm. An ofﬂine evolutionary federated
NAS algorithm can be summarized as follows:
1. Initialize parents with a population size Nand each indi-
vidual represents one architecture of the neural network.
Construct and train Nneural network models in federated
learning with all participating clients to achieve the ﬁtnessvalues (e.g., validation accuracy) of the parents.
2. Generate Noffspring individuals by applying genetic
operators on the parents. Construct and train all the gener-ated offspring models for ﬁtness evaluations in federated
learning.
3. Combine the parent and offspring populations into one
population and perform environmental selection. Select
the best Nindividual from the combined population as
the new parents.
4. Repeat the above two steps until the evolutionary algo-
rithm converges.
5. Train the weights of the optimized neural network models
in federated learning.
It can be seen that all participating clients are used for
federated model training, i.e., at each generation, all partici-
pating clients must train each of the Nindividuals for certain
rounds for ﬁtness evaluations, which signiﬁcantly increasesboth computation and communication costs. Client sampling
can be used to alleviate this issue, in which only subsets
of participating clients contribute to one individual’s modeltraining. For example in [ 117], all the connected clients are
divided into different groups and each sampled model use
one group of clients for local training. The overall process ofthis approach is summarized as follows:
1. Initialize the global model and a list of resource budgets
in the server.
2. Generate a list of simpliﬁed global models by model
pruning [ 118] based on the current global model. And
then these global models are distributed to different group
clients.
3. For each communication round, every group of clients
train their allocated group models for a number of pre-
deﬁned epochs and calculate the test accuracies on thevalidation datasets. Then both local test accuracies and
validation data sizes are uploaded to the server. The server
aggregates the uploaded local models and calculates aweighted accuracy for each group model. Remove α%
123