648 Complex & Intelligent Systems (2021) 7:639–657
Fig. 8 A generic pipeline GD-based NAS method
a custom-designed approximate network morphisms, which
makes offspring individuals to share weights with their fore-runners, avoiding training new networks from scratch. Note
that evolutionary multi-objective structure optimization of
shallow networks can be traced back to a decade ago [ 102].
Lu et al. [ 103] proposed a method that integrates multi-
objective evolutionary algorithm and online transfer learning
for designing task-dependent network architectures trading-off model performance and computational complexity. The
authors ﬁrst train a task-speciﬁc one-shot model covering the
search space once, then specialized sub-models can be sam-pled from the search space without additional training. Andthen they adopt an online regressor as a surrogate model to
predict the performance of sub-models in the one-shot model.
NAS based on GD
Compared with the above gradient-free optimization meth-
ods, the GD-based methods (Fig. 8) have become increas-
ingly popular recently, mainly because their search speed
is much faster than RL-based and EA-based methods.Early GD-based methods [ 104–107] implement this idea for
optimizing layer hyperparameters or connectivity patterns,
respectively. Lorraine et al. [ 108] introduce an algorithm for
inexpensive GD-based hyperparameter optimization. Liu et
al. [109] employ GD in the DARTS algorithm, which opti-
mizes both the network weights and the architecture. Theauthors use relaxation tricks to make a weighted sum ofcandidate operations differentiable, and then apply the gra-
dient descent method to directly train the weights. Inspired
by DARTS [ 109], Dong et al. [ 110] introduce gradient-
based search using the differentiable architecture sampler
(GDAS) method. The authors develop a differentiable archi-
tecture sampler which samples individual architectures in adifferentiable way to accelerate the architecture search proce-
dure. Stochastic NAS (SNAS) [ 111] optimizes a probability
distribution of the connections between different candidateoperations. Li et al. [ 112] observe that models with a higherperformance during the search phase may perform worse in
the evaluation. Hence, they divided the search process intosub-problems and proposed sequential greedy architecture
search (SGAS) based on DARTS, which chooses and prunes
candidate operations (e.g. convolutional layers) greedily. Theauthors apply SGAS for CNNs and graph convolutional net-
works (GCNs) and have achieved competitive performance.
Xu et al. [ 113] present Partially-Connected DARTS (PC-
DARTS), which samples a small part of super-network to
reduce the redundancy in exploring the network space. Com-
pared with DARTS, PC-DARTS not only enjoys both fasterspeed and higher training stability but also a highly com-petitive learning performance. Gao et al. [ 114] propose the
ﬁrst GD-based NAS method in generative adversarial net-
works (GANs), called adversarial neural architecture search(AdversarialNAS), which can search the architectures of gen-
erator and discriminator simultaneously in a differentiable
manner.
One bottleneck of the above GD-based NAS methods (e.g.
DARTs) is that it requires excessive GPU memory during
search in that all candidate network layers must be explicitlyinstantiated in the GPU memory. As a result, the size of thesearch space is constrained. To address this issue, Wan et
al. [ 115] propose DMaskingNAS, a memory and computa-
tionally efﬁcient DARTS variant. DMaskingNAS employs amasking mechanism for feature map reuse. Hence, although
the search space of DMaskingNAS is expanded up to 10
14×
over conventional DARTS, memory and computational costsstay nearly constant.
Another way to address the above problem is to utilize
proxy tasks, e.g., learning with only a small number of build-ing blocks or training for a small number of epochs [ 109,111].
However, these approaches cannot guarantee to be optimal on
the target task due to the restricted block diversity [ 107]. Cai
et al. [ 107] proposed ProxylessNAS method, which directly
designs the networks based on the target task and hardware
instead of with proxy. Meanwhile, the authors used path bina-
rization to reduced the computational cost (GPU-hours and
123