Complex & Intelligent Systems (2021) 7:639–657 647
Since EAs are a class of population-based search meth-
ods, the main computational bottleneck of EA-based NASapproaches lies in evaluating the ﬁtness of the individuals
by invoking the lower-level weight optimization. One such
evaluation typically takes several hours to days if the net-work is large and if the training dataset is huge. For instance,on the CIFAR10 datasets, the AE-CNN [ 40] consumed 27
GPU days, CNN-GA [ 41] consumed 35 GPU days, and the
large-scale evolutionary algorithm [ 73] consumed 2750 GPU
days, AmoebaNet [ 85] consumed 3150 GPU days. This seri-
ously limits the practical usability of most evolutionary NAS
methods under a constrained search budget.
Therefore, various techniques have been suggested to
accelerate the ﬁtness evaluation, such as information reuse
[44,47] and SAEAs [ 88]. SAEAs have been popular to solve
computationally expensive optimization problems, whichuse cheap classiﬁcation and regression models, e.g., radial
basis function networks (RBFNs) [ 89,90] and Gaussian pro-
cess (GP) models [ 91,92], to replace the expensive ﬁtness
evaluation [ 93]. Generally, the candidate networks are trained
from a few number of expensive ﬁtness evaluations, and then
the trained networks are used to build a ﬁtness predictors toreduce the cost of ﬁtness evaluations. In the area of evolution-
ary NAS, Swersky et al. [ 33] adopt Bayesian optimization
[94] to speed up evolutionary optimization, which is called
freeze–thaw Bayesian optimization. Unfortunately, this algo-rithm is based on Markov chain Monte Carlo sampling and
also suffers from high computational complexity. Sun et al.
proposed a performance predictor termed E2EPP , which isbased on a class of SAEAs method [ 43] meant for ofﬂine
data-driven evolutionary optimization of expensive engineer-
ing problems. Speciﬁcally, E2EPP builds a surrogate thatcan predict the quality of a candidate CNN, thereby avoid-
ing the training of a large number of neural networks during
the search process. Compared with AE-CNN, a variant ofAE-CNN assisted by E2EPP (called AE-CNN+E2EPP) canachieve a 2.3x and 2.1x reduction in GPU days on CIFAR100
and CIFAR10, respectively. Lu et al. [ 95] adopt two surro-
gates to address the bi-level NAS problem. On the one hand, aﬁne-tuning method is adopted at the weight level to improve
the efﬁciency of SGD training. On the other hand, an online
learning method is used to improve the sample efﬁciency forthe search space at the neural architecture level.
Knowledge inheritance [ 44,47] is another promising
approach to accelerate ﬁtness evaluations. Zhang et al. [ 44]
propose an EA based on asexual reproduction to ﬁnd bet-ter typologies for deep CNNs and knowledge inheritance to
reduce the computation cost. Once the topology of an off-
spring individual is generated by its parent, the weights ofoffspring networks are directly copied from its parents. For
edges that do not appear in its parent network, the weights
are randomly initialized.To reduce the computational burden for ﬁtness evalua-
tions, another widely adopted approaches are to train andevaluate individuals using proxy metrics [ 85–87]. The per-
formance of the proxy models is used as the surrogate
measurements to guide the evolutionary search. Such proxymetrics include reducing the width (the number of channels)and the depth (number of layers) for the intended network
architecture to create a small-scale network, shortening the
training time, reducing the resolution of input images, andtraining on a subset of the full training dataset. However,
these simple proxy model constructing methods may result
in a low correlation in prediction mainly because they mayintroduce biases in ﬁtness estimation. Zhou et al. [ 86]h a v e
conducted extensive experiments on different combinations
of proxy metrics to investigate their behaviors in maintainingthe rank consistency in NAS, based on which a reliable hierar-chical proxy strategy is proposed to accomplish economical
neural architecture search (EcoNAS). The hierarchical proxy
strategy aims at discarding less promising candidate individ-uals earlier with a fast proxy and estimates more promising
individuals with a more expensive proxy. Hence, the EcoNAS
method is able to achieve a 400 ×reduced search time in
comparison to AmoebaNet [ 85] without sacriﬁcing the per-
formance. Lu et al. [ 87] empirically establish the trade-off
between the correlation of proxy performance to true perfor-mance and the speed-up in estimation.
Evolutionary multi-objective NAS methods considering
multiple conﬂicting objectives have been reported. One of
the earliest evolutionary multi-objective methods to designCNNs is NEMO [ 96], which simultaneously optimizes clas-
siﬁcation performance and inference time of a network based
on NSGA-II [ 97]. Inspired by NEMO, Lu et al. [ 84] con-
sider classiﬁcation error and computational complexity as
the two objectives. In addition, they empirically test multiple
computational complexity metrics to measure the inferencetime of a network containing the number of active layers, thenumber of activating connections between layers, and the
number of ﬂoating-point operations (FLOPs). And then, the
FLOPs are used as a second conﬂicting objective for opti-mization. Moreover, a Bayesian network (BN) is adopted to
learn the knowledge about promising architectures present
in the search history and then guide the future exploitation ingenerating new architectures. Subsequently, Lu et al. suggest
NSGANet-v2 [ 87], an extension of NSGANet [ 84], where a
comprehensive search space including more layer operationsand one more option that controls the width of the model isintroduced. Dong et al. [ 98] present a DPP-Net on the basis of
[99] that optimizes both GPU memory usage and the model
performance. Elsken et al. [ 100] proposed the LEMON-
ADE method, which formulates the NAS as a bi-objective
optimization problem that maximizes the performance and
minimizes the required computational resources. Inspiredby [101], LEMONADE reduces computational cost through
123