642 Complex & Intelligent Systems (2021) 7:639–657
hybrid approach that combines differential privacy together
with homomorphic encryption.
Vertical federated learning
In contrast to horizontal federated learning, vertical feder-
ated learning is applicable to the situations where the datasets
share the same sample space but have different feature space,as shown by part of surrounded by the dashed lines in Fig.3b. For example, two different ﬁnancial agents may have
the same customers but provide different services. Different
from horizontal federated learning, vertical federated learn-ing is similar to feature distributed learning [ 4] to some extent
which ’vertically’ partitions the training data, as shown in
Fig. 3a upon the feature space. Moreover, the central server
is often called a coordinator [ 23] in feature distributed learn-
ing or vertical federated learning since its main task is to
calculate the total loss rather than aggregating the uploadedweights.
V ertical federated learning is ﬁrst introduced in [ 23], in
which the overall framework contains one trusted coordinator
and two parties, where each party represents one client. Thecoordinator computes the training loss and generates encryp-
tion key pairs. Homomorphic encryption is adopted for the
privacy-preserving purpose and the effect of entity resolu-tion is also discussed. More recently, a two-party architecture
[24,25] is proposed by removing the trusted coordinator
which greatly reduces the complexity of the system. A typi-cal two-party framework of vertical federated learning usinga simple logistic regression model includes the following
steps:
1. Assume Party A contains the data labels. Party A creates
a homomorphic encryption key pair and sends the publickey to Party B. Both parties initialize their local modelparameters according to their feature dimensions of local
training data.
2. Both parties compute their local inner products of data
and the model. Then Party B sends its results to Party A.
3. Party A sums two inner products and calculates the loss
function by data labels. The loss is encrypted with a publickey and is sent to Party B. The model gradients of Party
A are also calculated.
4. Party B calculates the encrypted model gradients from the
received loss and encrypt. In addition, a random number
is encrypted and added to the encrypted gradients. Thesummation should be sent to Party A for decryption.
5. Party A uses a secret key to decrypt the summation value
and sends it to Party B.
6. Update both model parameters of the two parties.7. Repeat Step 2 to Step 6 until convergence.
In Step 3, the training loss is encrypted before being sent
to Party B, because it contains the information of the data
labels in Party A which cannot be revealed to Party B. As aresult, Party B needs to calculate its local model gradients onthe encrypted loss and a Taylor approximation is commonly
used [ 23,25] for simplifying this computation.
From the above discussions, we can see that vertical
federated learning is dramatically different from horizontal
federated learning. The central server in horizontal federated
learning is used for model aggregation, while in vertical fed-erated learning the server plays the role of calculating the loss
or collecting features. In addition, the server can be removed
in vertical federated learning, e.g., summing the training losswithin one of participating parties (clients). Apart from theabove, we often assume that not all parties contain the data
labels in vertical federated learning, e.g., only Client B con-
tains data labels in Fig. 3b and those parties with no data
labels are not able to update their models locally. Therefore,
we call the server ’coordinator’ that coordinates the feature
predictions from all parties for calculating the training lossin vertical federated learning.
Most studies of vertical federated learning only support
two parties (with or without a central coordinator) usinga simple binary logistic regression model. Feng et al. [ 26]
adopt the idea of multi-view learning to extend the previous
scheme into a multi-participant multi-class vertical federated
learning framework. Besides, Liu et al. introduce a federatedstochastic block coordinate descent algorithm, where all par-
ticipating parties update their local models for multiple times
to reduce the total number of communication rounds. In addi-
Fig. 3 Feature distributed
learning ( a) and vertical
federated learning ( b)
123