Complex & Intelligent Systems (2021) 7:639–657 641
Fig. 2 Flowchart of federated learning. θis the global model parame-
ters, nkis the data size of client k,Kis the total number of clients and
tis the communication round in federated learning. We just initialize
global model parameters randomly at the beginning of the communica-tion round and use updated model parameters afterwards
(gradients here means the difference between the down-
loaded model and updated model) would be sent to the
server. Note that the clients may have different amountsof training data and unbalanced computational resources.As a result, the server is not able to receive the uploads
from different clients at the same time.
3. The server aggregates the received uploads (synchronously
or asynchronously) to update the global model.
4. Repeat the above two steps until convergence.
From the above steps, we can ﬁnd that the central server can
only receive model weights or gradients of the participating
clients and has no access to any local raw data. Therefore,users’ privacy is immensely protected in horizontal federated
learning.
The above steps of the horizontal federated learning algo-
rithm appear to be very similar to those in synchronous dis-
tributed systems. However, these two schemes have different
learning environments and purposes. Horizontal federatedlearning is performed in a more complex environment sincethe connected edge devices like mobile phones may become
frequently ofﬂine and the global learning performance cannot
be guaranteed. In contrast to federated learning, distributedlearning systems are often designed and run in a more stable
environment to ensure a good learning performance. Apart
from that, the purpose of federated learning is to protectlocal user’s private data, while distributed learning is mainly
designed to accelerate the learning speed.
Horizontal federated learning has three additional main
challenges compared to the traditional centralized learning:(1) it must reduce the communication resources as much as
possible, (2) it needs to improve the convergence speed, and(3) it must make sure that no private information is leaked
in passing the model information. Much research work has
focused on reducing communication costs, such as clientupdates sub-sampling [ 6–8] and model quantization [ 9,10].
More recently, Chen et al. [ 11] propose a layer-wise asyn-
chronous update algorithm to reduce the communication
costs by decreasing the update frequency of the deep lay-ers in the neural network. In addition, Zhu et al. [ 12]u s ea
multi-objective evolutionary algorithm (MOEA) to simulta-
neously enhance the model performance and communicationefﬁciency. Learning a good model in horizontal federated
learning is not an easy task since the training data on different
clients are usually non-IID, leading to possible model diver-gence. To solve this issue, Zhao et al. [ 13] empirically explore
the effect of non-IID data and provide a statistical analysis
of divergence. Li et al. [ 14] propose a FedProx algorithm to
alleviate negative impacts of the system’s heterogeneity byinjecting a proximal term into the original loss on each client.
Apart from it, an attentive aggregation method [ 15]i su s e d
to minimize the weighted distance between the server modeland client models on non-IID datasets.
The central server is often regarded as honest but curi-
ous (follow federated learning protocol but try to infer clientdata information) in horizontal federated learning, and therevealed gradients of each client may potentially leak the
data information [ 6]. For this reason, Phong et al. [ 16] math-
ematically prove that model gradients (especially the ﬁrsthidden weights) are proportional to the original data and
adopt additive homomorphic encryption [ 17] to encrypt and
protect model gradients. In their method, the secret key iskept conﬁdential to the server but known to all participating
clients and the central server can easily get the plain model
gradients as long as one of connected clients uploads its secretkey. In order to mitigate this issue, secure multiparty compu-tation (SMC) [ 18,19] is proposed to partition an intact secret
key into several key shards and each client can just hold one
shard. As a result, the server must get at least tshards ( tis
the threshold value) for decryption. Consequently, privacy
preserving is signiﬁcantly improved.
However, homomorphic encryption will increase the com-
putation load, and SMC consumes much more communica-
tion resources, since encrypted model weights need to be
downloaded and uploaded between the server and at least t
clients for partial decryption. Therefore, a more light-weightprivacy-preserving technique called differential privacy [ 20]
can also be used in horizontal federated learning. Such as
the methods used in [ 6,21], a Gaussian or Laplacian noise is
added to the gradients of each client before sending them to
the central server. Note, however, that the learning process
may be interrupted if the accountant [ 22] exceeds a pre-
deﬁned threshold value. Most recently, Truex et al. suggest a
123