652 Complex & Intelligent Systems (2021) 7:639–657
tives need to be optimized and NSGA-II [ 97]i su s e da st h e
basic search algorithm. Finally, after several generations ofevolutionary optimization, multiple well trained subnets can
be obtained chosen from the trade-off solutions based on the
user’s preferences.
Open challenges
Currently, research on federated NAS is still very preliminaryand several challenges remain to be solved.
Horizontally partitioned data
There is no general solution that can well solve the non-IIDlearning degradation problems in horizontal federated learn-
ing, let alone in federated NAS. The earliest work to explore
non-IID data effect is proposed in [ 13]. The authors analyze
the possible reasons for divergence in global model training
on non-IID data and propose a strategy to mitigate this inﬂu-
ence by globally sharing a small part of the data across allconnected clients. However, this kind of data sharing intrin-sically violate the scope of privacy-preserving scheme.
The federated distillation approaches [ 123,124]a l s oh a v e
the potential risk of local data leakage. For the distillation, theteacher models are evaluated on mini-batches of unlabeled
data on the server and their logits for mini-batch are used to
train the student model on the server. The server can get alot of local data information even on fake mini-batch data
generated by local GAN generators [ 125].
Some statistical aggregation methods [ 14,126] are pro-
posed to replace the original federated averaging algorithm(FedAvg). Both mathematical and experimental results prove
that the proposed aggregation algorithms outperform the
FedAvg on non-IID data. However, these approaches areoften limited to some speciﬁc models and datasets, and it
is unclear if they can show better performance for federated
NAS frameworks. Hsieh et al. discuss the effect of non-IIDdata for DNNs in detail and different federated optimization
methods are used upon different DNNs, such as GoogleNet
[127],and ResNet [ 74]. Experiment results show that batch
normalization [ 128] performs really poorly on non-IID data,
but batch renormalization [ 129] and group normalization
[130] are much more robust for non-IID data, which are
much more suited for federated learning. Most recently, itis shown in [ 10] that ternary quantization is helpful in alle-
viating model divergence in federated learning, although its
effectiveness remains to be validated on federated NAS.
Vertically partitioned data
Current federated NAS methods are all based on horizontalfederated learning. Unlike horizontal federated learning, itis really hard to determine whether the data are IID or non-
IID in vertical federated learning since they are ’partitioned’towards the feature space.
Most existing vertical federated learning frameworks are
built on two-party systems using simple linear models. Sinceonly one party can hold the labels, the loss needs to be calcu-lated on ciphertext; otherwise, the label information will be
revealed. Then the gradients are very hard to calculate since
the total loss is encrypted. Some approximation techniqueslike Taylor expansions [ 23,25] are often used to simplify the
gradient calculations, which, however, may introduce strong
biases for complex models like DNNs.
Overall, vertical federated NAS is totally different from
horizontal federated NAS, which is in general still an unex-
plored research area.
Adversarial federated neural architecture search
Adversarial federated learning has two purposes: (1) infer-ence of the client data information; (2) attack the global
model to conduct backdoor [ 131] elements or even let the
model unusable. And the adversary in federated learning canbe one of participating clients or the central server, sincewe often assume the server is honest-but-curious. Thus, the
server should also be considered as a potential risk.
Federated learning is still fragile to white box attacks since
the model gradients and parameters still contain local data
information. Geiping et al. [ 132] showed that local images
can be reconstructed from the knowledge of model param-eters (or gradients) by inverting gradients techniques. In
addition, an adversarial GAN [ 125] generator can be devel-
oped on either the server [ 133] or the client side [ 134]. The
adversary can reconstruct other participating clients’ privatedata even if it has no knowledge of the label information.
Enthoven and Al-Ars [ 135] summarize most defence
strategies used in federated learning, which can be cate-gorized into three types: (1) subsample or compress the
communicated gradients [ 6,7,136]; (2) differential privacy
and SMC [ 19], and (3) robustness aggregation [ 137] using,
e.g., the Byzantine resilient aggregation rule [ 138,139].
In general, ﬁnding robust model architectures in federated
learning to defend against the adversarial attacks is still a hardtask.
Encrypted federated neural architecture search
Homomorphic encryption technologies are often applied to
prevent privacy leakage from the gradient information sent
to the server. However, using homomorphic encryption infederated NAS system has two main difﬁculties.
First, homomorphic encryption, including encoding and
encryption, is computationally expensive in federated learn-ing. At ﬁrst, all communicated model parameters need to
123