Complex & Intelligent Systems (2021) 7:639–657 653
be encoded into large inter numbers, because homomor-
phic encryption does not work on real numbers. Then theencoded parameters need to do modulus calculations with
large prime numbers one by one. Unfortunately, modern
deep neural network models contain millions of parameters,making the encryption process computationally extremelyintensive. Therefore, developing a light weighted encryption
method is an important yet challenging task for federated
learning, let alone for federated NAS.
Second, the original federated encryption is introduced
in which the server holds the public key and clients hold
the private key. This framework is unsafe, because only oneof clients uploads its secret key to the server. Therefore, a
more advanced SMC approach is adopted that divides the
whole secret key into several shards, and the server can-not decrypt the gradients unless it collected t(secret key
recover threshold) key shards. Unfortunately, the encrypted
gradients must be frequently transferred between the server
and clients, which signiﬁcantly increases the communica-tion costs, since the local clients can only partially decrypt
the gradients through their key shards. This is a big burden
to the communication resources, which needs to be solved inthe future.
Conclusion
In this survey paper, a brief overview of federated learningand NAS is provided, and a combination of both tech-niques, i.e., federated NAS is introduced. Given several
remaining challenges in both federated learning and NAS,
federated NAS becomes extremely challenging since manytechniques developed in centralized NAS are no longer suitedfor federated NAS, and NAS will be subject to more con-
straints introduced by the federated learning environment.
Two approaches to federated NAS are discussed, one isofﬂine optimization and the other is online optimization.
It is noted that ofﬂine evolutionary NAS methods are not
applicable for many real-world scenarios, mainly becausethe ofﬂine approach performs architecture search and weight
training separately and requires a large amount of communi-
cation costs. In addition, the performance of neural networkunder optimization must be acceptable for application andserious performance drop is not allowed. RT-FedEvoNAS
[120] offers a solution to the above challenges, although its
search space is highly constrained.
Despite that many grand challenges remain to be solved,
federated NAS is of paramount practical signiﬁcance for
many real-world problems, where handcrafted deep neuralnetworks may fail to work properly. We hope that this survey
will help understand the promises and challenges in federated
NAS, thereby triggering more research interests in devel-oping new theories and algorithms, thereby promoting theapplication of AI techniques to a wider range of ﬁelds where
data privacy and security is a primary concern.
Compliance with ethical standards
Conﬂict of interest The authors declare that they have no conﬂict of
interest.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adap-tation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, aslong as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and thesource, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indi-cate if changes were made. The images or other third party materialin this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence,unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If materialis not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and yourintended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds thepermitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copy-right holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecomm
ons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ .
References
1. Elsken T, Metzen JH, Hutter F (2018) Neural architecture search:
a survey, arXiv preprint arXiv:1808.05377
2. Yang Q, Liu Y , Chen T, Tong Y (2019) Federated machine learn-
ing: concept and applications. ACM Trans Intell Syst Technol(TIST) 10(2):1–19
3. McMahan B, Moore E, Ramage D, Hampson S, Arcas BAy (2017)
Communication-efﬁcient learning of deep networks from decen-tralized data. Artif Intell Stat1273–1282
4. Zhang G-D, Zhao S-Y , Gao H, Li W-J (2018) Feature-distributed
svrg for high-dimensional linear classiﬁcation, arXiv preprintarXiv:1802.03604
5. McDonald R, Hall K, Mann G (2010) Distributed training
strategies for the structured perceptron. In: Human language tech-nologies: The 2010 annual conference of the North Americanchapter of the association for computational linguistics, 456–464
6. Shokri R, Shmatikov V (2015) Privacy-preserving deep learning.
In: Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGSAC conference on com-puter and communications security, 1310–1321
7. Koneˇ cn`y J, McMahan HB, Y u FX, Richtárik P , Suresh A T, Bacon
D (2016) Federated learning: Strategies for improving communi-cation efﬁciency. arXiv preprint arXiv:1610.05492
8. Caldas S, Koneˇ cny J, McMahan HB, Talwalkar A (2018) Expand-
ing the reach of federated learning by reducing client resourcerequirements. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.07210
9. Han S, Mao H, Dally WJ (2016) Deep compression: Compress-
ing deep neural network with pruning, trained quantization andhuffman coding. In: 4th International Conference on LearningRepresentations, ICLR 2016, San Juan, Puerto Rico, May 2-4,2016, Conference Track Proceedings, Y Bengio and Y LeCun,Eds., [Online]. arXiv:1510.00149
10. Xu J, Du W, Jin Y , He W, Cheng R (2020) Ternary compression for
communication-efﬁcient federated learning. IEEE Trans NeuralNetw Learn Syst
11. Chen Y , Sun X, Jin Y (2019) Communication-efﬁcient feder-
ated deep learning with layerwise asynchronous model updateand temporally weighted aggregation. IEEE Trans Neural NetwLearn Syst
123