Complex & Intelligent Systems (2021) 7:639–657 643
Fig. 4 aSymmetric federated
learning, and basymmetric
federated learning
tion, Chen et al. propose an asynchronous vertical federated
learning method and differential privacy is also used for pri-vacy protection.
Hybrid federated learning
Hybrid federated learning is more realistic in the real worldand it assumes that datasets on different clients not onlyhave different sample spaces but also different feature spaces.
Therefore, in this scenario, different parties need to share the
data identity (ID) information to ﬁnd the intersection partfor distributed training, which is a threat to local clients’ pri-vacy. Since participants in hybrid federated learning are often
asymmetric [ 27], for instance, some participants are small
companies always requiring to protect their ID information,while some participants are large companies that have no
concern about the ID privacy. Symmetric federated learning
and asymmetric federated learning are illustrated in Fig. 4.
Secure ID alignment protocol is signiﬁcant for hybrid
federated learning, such as the commonly used Private Set
Intersection (PSI) protocol. In standard PSI, all participantswant to collaboratively ﬁnd the intersection (the part indi-cated by the dashed lines in Fig. 4) and keep unintersected
parts private. The PSI protocols can be implemented by a
classical public-key cryptosystem [ 28,29] or other similar
techniques.
Federated model training is similar to vertical federated
learning; however, for asymmetric federated learning, Gen-uine with Dummy (GWD) approach [ 27] is used to ensure
the correctness of computation results.
Neural architecture search
Since the quality of deep neural networks (DNNs) heav-ily depends on their architecture, increasing research efforts
have been committed to design of novel structures in thedeep learning community. However, manually designing
deep neural networks requires considerable expertise in the
ﬁeld of deep learning and the investigated problem, which isunrealistic for many interested users. Not until recently hasautomated machine learning (Auto ML), in particular neu-
ral architecture search (NAS) become very popular to allowinterested users without adequate domain knowledge to proﬁtfrom the success of deep neural networks. The framework of
NAS methods involves three dimensions [ 1], namely search
space, search strategies, and performance estimation strate-gies.
The search space is a collection of network architec-
tures, which has a major inﬂuence on the performance ofthe generated networks and search efﬁciency. The search
strategy deﬁnes the method used to automatically design the
optimal network architecture. To be speciﬁc, these searchstrategies can be divided into at least three categories: rein-forcement learning (RL), evolutionary algorithms (EAs), and
gradient-based (GD) methods. In addition, a few additional
methods, such as random search [ 30,31], Bayesian optimiza-
tion [ 32,33] and multinomial distribution learning [ 34], fall
outside of the above categories. The search strategy aims
at ﬁnding architectures that can obtain high performance onthe test dataset. To guide searches effectively, these strategies
utilize a performance estimation strategy to evaluate the qual-
ity of candidate architectures. Early work uses a simple wayof performance estimation, for example, by iteratively train-ing a candidate architecture on the training dataset with the
stochastic gradient descent (SGD) [ 35] and evaluating its per-
formance on the validation data [ 36–41]. Such an evaluation
strategy typically results in a prohibitively high computa-
tional cost. For example, to design a good performance of
neural network, the automatic evolving convolutional neuralnetwork (AE-CNN) [ 40] algorithm consumes 27 GPU-days
and the neural architecture search approach [ 36] consumes
22400 GPU-days on the CIFAR10 dataset. Because inefﬁ-cient search strategies require a large number of GPUs, manyNAS methods cannot be implemented given limited compu-
tational resources. To address these challenges, much recent
work dedicates to developing effective methods which canreduce the computational costs of performance evaluation,
e.g., surrogate-assisted evolutionary algorithms (SAEAs)
[33,42,43], information reuse [ 44,45], one-shot neural archi-
tecture search [ 46–50], among many others.
123