650 Complex & Intelligent Systems (2021) 7:639–657
of global models with the worst test accuracies (removed
global models that will not be trained and updated fromthe next communication round). The remaining groups
of clients upload their calculated model gradients to the
server for aggregation.
4. Repeat the above step for a number of pre-deﬁned com-
munication rounds.
5. Replace and store the global model with the ﬁrst model
in the global model list.
6. Repeat the above four steps until convergence.
7. Perform federated training on any stored global model.
Although the above procedure uses different architecture
generation methods (model pruning) and search space com-
pared to the evolutionary approach, it is clearly a populationbased ofﬂine federated NAS framework (weight training and
architecture search are separate). In addition to client sam-
pling, the authors also remove subsets of global models tofurther reduce the communication costs. However, the test
accuracies of each global model in the list is calculated before
model aggregation, which sometimes cannot represent thereal test accuracies, especially for the cases when the clients’data are particularly non-IID.
The overall framework of Ofﬂine federated NAS is shown
in Fig. 9and it has two main difﬁculties: (1) the number
of communication rounds for federated model training of
each individual is hard to determine. Setting a small number
of communication rounds may make the individual’s modelunder-trained and bias the ﬁtness evaluations. On the other
hand, setting a very large number of communication rounds
consumes too many communication resources. (2) Train-ing the candidate neural network models consume additionalcommunication resources, which should be avoided in fed-
erated learning. For the above reasons, online federated NASframeworks need to be developed to solve the above issues.
Online federated NAS trains the model and does the archi-
tecture optimization simultaneously (shown in Fig. 10). To
the best of our knowledge, there are currently two approachesto online federated NAS. One is gradient-based method
proposed in [ 119], and the other is an EA-based method
proposed in [ 120]. The gradient-based method adopts the
idea of DARTS [ 109], which is implemented in the feder-
ated environment. The global model here is called supernet
which consists of repeated directed acyclic graphs (DAGs)and each DAG contains all candidate operations. And relax-
ation tricks [ 121] are used to make a weighted sum of the
candidate operations differentiable so that the architectureparameters can be directly updated by the gradient descentalgorithm. A brief description of this method is given below.
1. The server initializes the supernet and its architecture
parameters.
2. All connected clients download the supernet and its archi-
tecture parameters from the server.
3. Each client trains and updates the supernet with ﬁxed
architecture parameters on mini-batch training data at
ﬁrst. Then update the architecture parameters with ﬁxedmodel parameters on mini-batch validation data. These
two procedures are performed alternately within one local
training epoch.
4. After local training for several epochs, all participating
clients upload both model and architecture parameters to
the server. The server performs weighted averaging uponthe supernet and architect parameters.
Fig. 9 Overall framework of
ofﬂine federated NAS
123