about. This ﬁnding contrasts with much of the existing literature
examining the potential implications of AI for healthcare, which
tends to take a more abstract approach that is not connected to
the practical concerns that patients and families may have, such as
the potential for AI to limit access to a preferred medication or
increase healthcare costs12,15. Participants expected to be
protected from these harms and felt that physician oversight
would be critical. Translational researchers and clinical implemen-
tation teams deploying new AI tools must be aware of these
expectations if they hope to ensure the successful integration of
AI into healthcare systems.
A subset of the concerns voiced by our participants are
reminiscent of concerns raised about prior medical advances,
including worries about higher costs, discriminatory uses, andfewer choices available to patients and providers. Both personal
and national healthcare expenditures have been rising steadily for
decades
16, and many interventions that promise to increase
efﬁciency have not delivered on their promise to decrease
healthcare costs17,18. Similarly, respect for patient autonomy is
one of the core principles of medical ethics19, and participants
were clear that they wanted to be able to choose whether or not
to have AI tools as a component of their care. To the extent that AI
tools could operate surreptitiously in the background, patients
who do not want AI used in their care may not know it is being
used, which could result in signi ﬁcant breaches of public trust
should this approach to AI deployment be discovered by those
patients. Similarly, while concerns about discrimination based on
predictive analytics are reminiscent of concerns about genetic
information20, it is unclear if legislators will recognize these
similarities and develop special protections that apply to AI-
enabled medical predictions. Here too, these considerations
highlight the value of proactive engagement with patients, both
to understand their concerns but also to consider what effective
policy responses might entail.
Other patient apprehensions about AI applications in healthcare
did not have obvious parallels to concerns about prior healthcare
technologies. These concerns mirror some of the most con-
tentious debates about the impact that AI may have on medicine.
For example, participants stressed the role of physicians as safety
monitors. A similar conversation is re ﬂected in contemporary
literature advocating for the necessity of the physician in AI-driven
healthcare systems21–25. Academics and patients alike seem to feel
that the physician must be at the center of medical decision-
making to preserve patient safety22,26. Participants were also
concerned about the future of healthcare systems, as they
become increasingly dependent on digital tools. The multiple
challenges of ensuring source-data quality, algorithmic reliability,
and unbiased AI outcomes have been recognized as a substantial
ethical and technological barrier to successful clinical implemen-
tation by bioethicists and AI developers alike15.
Addressing patient apprehensions about healthcare AI will
require creative solutions that incorporate systems-level trust
building, proactive technological innovation, and a recognition of
the complex social forces at work. Those advocating for clinical
uses of AI tools should support the development of transparent
oversight mechanisms that promote stakeholder engagement at
each step of AI development and implementation —from the
curation of healthcare datasets to widespread clinical usage27.
Importantly, our results show that patients recognize and are
beginning to grapple with the many nuanced issues raised by
applications of AI in healthcare. Despite the abstractness of
machine learning, and lack of personal experience with AI,
participants were quickly able to appreciate how they and their
families could be impacted (and potentially harmed) by healthcare
AI without appropriate oversight. Those concerns could easily
evolve into a deep skepticism about the promise of AI without
consistent and deliberate patient engagement.A limitation of this study is the racial and ethnic diversity of our
sample, which was limited by our recruitment methods, which
involved contacting primary care patients at a large health system
in the upper Midwest. Additionally, many participants hadpersonal or familial connections to healthcare occupations, whichlikely in ﬂuenced their perceptions of medical innovation. The
education level of participants and their insurance coverage was
higher than typical, which also may have impacted theirengagement with topics related to healthcare. These limitations
suggest caution in generalizing the ﬁndings we report to other
clinical settings and patient populations.
While use of focus-group methods was a strength of the study,
allowing us to explore a wide range of patient perspectives onhealthcare AI, use of speci ﬁc case studies to structure focus-group
discussions may have in ﬂuenced our results by encouraging
participants to focus on more familiar applications of AI in
healthcare. Additionally, the technical complexity of the AI toolswe examined may have resulted in inaccurate participant under-standings of those technologies and their potential impact.
While this research study provides important insights into
patient apprehensions about applications of AI in healthcare, the
limitations above highlight a clear need for additional research. Of
note, patient-centered research involving underrepresented orhistorically disadvantaged populations is crucial for ensuring
equitable and just applications of AI in healthcare. Additionally,
future research studies should seek to characterize the frequencyand potential impact of various patient concerns, using surveymethods and behavioral models of technology acceptance.
Patient engagement around real-world AI tools at various stages
of implementation are also critical for ensuring that AI innovationis responsive to patient concerns. Finally, patient perspectives onhealthcare AI are only one important factor in the ecosystem of
responsible AI development and implementation. Future research
should also examine systems-level readiness for healthcare AI andengage other stakeholders, including healthcare providers, payers,
and administrators.
Addressing patient concerns relating to AI applications in
healthcare is essential for effective clinical implementation. While
participants in our study may not have had a complete under-standing of AI algorithms or their capabilities, they were able toengage with core concepts relating to healthcare AI and could
readily express their expectations and apprehensions. Our results
clarify several potential sources of patient concern aboutapplications of AI in healthcare and highlight patients ’desire for
physician-led oversight of these technologies. If this expectation is
not met, it is possible that we could see a third “AI Winter ”in
which fears of patient harm lead to widespread rejection ofhealthcare AI by patients and their providers
9. To avoid that
possibility, it is critical that AI developers engage the public in
dialogue about both the potential bene ﬁts and harms of
applications of AI in healthcare28.
METHODS
Participant recruitment
We contacted 946 patients who visited a Mayo Clinic primary care facility
in Minnesota or Wisconsin between November 19, 2019 and February 25,
2020. Potential research participants were recruited by phone. Study
inclusion criteria included being conversant in English and being 18 yearsor older. Participants received $50 for their participation. This study was
approved by the Mayo Clinic Institutional Review Board (protocol #19-
010128). We did not solicit personal health information from participants,and oral consent was obtained for all participants at the beginning of each
focus group before data collection began in accordance with the IRB
recommendations.J.P. Richardson et al.
4
npj Digital Medicine (2021)   140 Published in partnership with Seoul National University Bundang Hospital