Preservation of patient choice and autonomy
Participants reported that the preservation of choice was an
important factor in their overall comfort with applications of AI in
healthcare. They felt that patients should have the right to chooseto have an AI tool used in their care and be able to opt-out of AI
involvement if they felt strongly.
I think it all comes back to choice, though, I think everybody ’s
getting the mentality that, and maybe I ’m wrong, but that an AI is
being pushed, but at the end of the day, our choice is still our choice,
and it ’s not being taken away. (FG 15).
In addition to the ability to choose whether an AI tool is used or
not, participants wanted to have the ability to dispute the
recommendations of an AI algorithm, or correct those recom-
mendations if they believed they were in error. Participants were
uncomfortable relying solely on recommendations made by an AI
without being able to evaluate the rationale for those recom-
mendations directly themselves.
So I’d rather know what they ’re observing and, if it ’s [AI] wrong, I
would [want to] be able to correct it rather than have them just
collect data and make assumptions. (FG 13).
Concerns about healthcare costs and insurance coverage
Participants also voiced concerns that AI tools might increase
healthcare costs and that those costs might be passed on to
patients. While participants acknowledged that AI might make the
delivery of some healthcare services more ef ﬁcient, they
anticipated high development and deployment costs. They felt
that adding another advanced technology would likely increase
the cost of their healthcare.
So it sounds expensive, and health care is already fairly expensive.
To go on his note, a lot of times you can get something that works
just as well for a lot less or you could get something super fancy, that
makes you think, hey I got this big fancy thing, but it really doesn ’t
do any better than the original cheaper version. (FG 9).
Additionally, participants worried about the impact that AI
recommendations could have on what types of treatment their
insurance providers would cover. For example, some participants
were concerned that an AI algorithm might recommend a
treatment that they could not afford. Similarly, others worried
that insurance companies might chose to cover only thosetreatments that are supported by AI recommendations, thereby
taking away some of the discretion traditionally reserved for
physicians.
Is insurance only gonna cover what the machine says it is and not
look for anything else? There is no reason for further diagnostics
because the machine already did it? I mean we already have a
situation in our healthcare system where money comes into play fordiagnosing things. (FG 9).
Participants recognized how the ability of AI to draw connec-
tions and make highly accurate predictions from images or
complex symptoms could be very helpful. However, they were
concerned that new types of predictions could result in new forms
of discrimination. Participants were especially worried that
insurance companies would use AI to discover otherwiseunknown medical information that could be used to deny
coverage or increase premiums.
I mean, …that information is wonderful, but who ’s gonna get it
after the doctors look at it is my big thing. Is the insurance company
gonna take it, and now all of a sudden …my premium doubles for
health insurance? (FG1).
Ensuring data integrity
Participants considered the impact of data quality on AI tools and
their recommendations, and had several concerns related to theway healthcare AI might be developed using ﬂawed datasets,
potentially resulting in harm to patients. They felt data from theelectronic health record was not accurate enough to be reliable in
teaching healthcare AI, citing personal experiences with errors
they had found in their own health records.
There ’s a lot of discrepancies in the medical record I must say,
especially now that you can see your portal. I know I ’ve seen things
saying that certain things were done or about myself and procedures
that were totally not true. So I ’ve had a lot of different things in my
medical chart that are inaccurate, very inaccurate, so if they ’re training
an arti ﬁ
cial intelligence that this is facts, it ’s like, well no. (FG 4).
Participants were also concerned about the possibility that AI
tools might reinforce existing biases in healthcare datasets. They
explained that this could happen as a result of an inherently
biased learning dataset or from developers unintentionallyincorporating their own bias into an AI algorithm.
Prejudices that people can have, like it could absorb those or it
could be taught to work against them, like a lot of people who are
overweight have said that their providers assume that that ’s the
cause and ignore doing other tests or pursuing other avenues, and if
an AI wasn ’t going to make the assumption that that was what was
the problem, then that would be good, but if it was learning from
people around it that it should make that assumption, then it wouldperpetuate the problem. (FG 13).
Risks of technology-dependent systems
Participants also expressed concerns about technological systems
that might be highly dependent on new AI technologies and
worried that some risks might be exacerbated if AI were to be
widely deployed in medicine. One such concern was a worry
about a systems-level crash or mass technological failure, and the
impact this might have on a clinical system that is heavily reliant
on AI tools.
I have some background in electronics, and one thing you can
guarantee with electronics is they will fail. Might not be now, might
never happen in 10, 20 years. The way things are made, ‘cause I ’ve
actually worked in the industry of making medical equipment, it ’s all
about using the cheapest method to get the end result. Well,
electronics fail. They just do. (FG9).
Additionally, participants brought up examples of bad actors
hacking into AI systems and manipulating these tools for nefarious
purposes.
I was just gonna say another concern that I think I would have,
just because of the way our world is evolving and revolving, is canthat arti ﬁcial intelligence be hacked? Who can control that? …I don ’t
know. Because any time you have a computerized program, I don ’t
care what anybody says, it can and it will get hacked because there ’s
always somebody that ’s out there just to do evil rather than good.
(FG15).
These concerns were compounded by the perception that
healthcare providers could easily become overly dependent on AI
tools, and over time might not be able to provide high-quality
care if access to those healthcare AI tools was unavailable.
If they were to get hacked or a system goes down …like what ’s
the contingency plan, but what is the contingency plan? If you have
all these doctors who are so used to having this arti ﬁcial intelligence
read all these, and they don ’t have the skill of reading it, then what
happens? (FG6).
DISCUSSION
The patients we consulted shared a variety of concerns that will
shape their perceptions of future AI applications in healthcare.
While they envisioned AI having a generally positive impact on
healthcare, this view was contingent on proactive oversight that
mitigates potential harms resulting from AI. While participants
were able to appreciate the widereaching impact of AI on
healthcare, their concerns centered on speci ﬁc ways in which AI
might result in harm to them personally, or to those they careJ.P. Richardson et al.
3
Published in partnership with Seoul National University Bundang Hospital npj Digital Medicine (2021)   140