participants were white (93.1%) and non-Hispanic/Latino (94.3%).
Most participants had an education level higher than a high
school degree (87.3%). Approximately one in ﬁve participants had
experience working in technology or computer science (19.5%) for
an average of 17.6 years. Nearly half of our participants had
experience working in healthcare or health science (44.8%) for an
average of 17.1 years. No participants reported any prior
experience with AI impacting their healthcare. A detailed
description of these and other participant characteristics is
presented in Table 1.
In what follows, we describe several major themes that
emerged during focus-group discussions of healthcare AI. Thesethemes re ﬂect multiple sources of patient concern and excitement
about applications of AI in medicine. We found that, while patients
are generally enthusiastic about the possibility of AI improvingtheir care, they are also concerned about the safety and oversight
of healthcare AI. We describe these concerns about AI safety, the
importance of patient choice, concerns about rising healthcarecosts, questions about data quality, and view of the security of AIsystems below.
Participants were excited about healthcare AI but wanted
assurances about safety
In general, participants reported enthusiasm about the ability of AI
to be a positive force in medicine. They felt healthcare AI was
compatible with the goals of medicine: to heal as many patients aspossible. Participants were supportive of developing AI tools for a
variety of different healthcare applications.
I feel good about it. I think it has the ability to be better. I mean,
it’s not a human. It ’s got more data, so probably. …[I]t probably has
more intelligence; it just has more information to work with to try tocome up with a proper diagnosis. …I don ’t think you will cure a lot
of diseases without that advanced intellect. Obviously, we ’ve come along way with the human brain, but we could probably go a lot
farther and speed the process with AI. (FG14) .
Our participants also reported being aware that healthcare AI
was still an emerging technology. As such, participants felt that itstill had potential to be used in many different creative andpositive ways.
This was often expressed as a sentiment of hopefulness,
coupled with an acknowledgment that these bene ﬁts could only
be realized through thoughtful implementation.
I feel like the future of AI just depends on how we choose to use it.
The impact will be what we choose it to be. …Because it ’s moldable,
it’s not going to do anything that we don ’t allow it to do. (FG7).
Participants urged caution in developing and implementing AI
tools. They reported a need for a careful transition period to
ensure that any AI tool used in their care is well-tested andaccurate.
So when this intelligence is built we have to test it, right? We have
to test it to make sure that it ’s helping correctly, and that to me
represents a big challenge and one we don ’t wanna jump into and
see what happens. We ’ve gotta be very careful there. (FG4).
Participants also called for oversight and regulatory protections
against potential harms. While participants often could notarticulate what these regulations should include or who should
enact them, they felt additional protections were necessary for
AI tools.
It’s gonna do what it ’s gonna do. I think that I look forward with
excitement …but I agree that there ’sd eﬁnitely some ﬂaws, and there
deﬁnitely needs to be some markers in there, at least right now, that
can also protect people. But it ’
s going to be positive if we can get
those safe markers in. (FG11).
Patients expect their clinicians to ensure AI safety
Participants reported that they felt their clinicians should act as a
safeguard to buffer patients from the potential harms that mightresult from mistakes made by healthcare AI. One way this wascommonly expressed was in terms of their healthcare providers
retaining ﬁnal discretion over treatment plans and maintaining
responsibility for patient care.
I believe the doctor always has the responsibility to be checking for
you, and you ’re his responsibility, you know? The AI is not
responsible; that ’s just a tool. (FG13).
Other participants were comfortable extending more authority
to AI tools, but still calling for their providers to provide “checks
and balances ”or“second opinions ”on recommendations
generated by healthcare AI. Most participants felt strongly thatan AI algorithm should not have the ability to act autonomously in
a clinical setting, stressing that both treatment decisions and the
monitoring of ongoing care should be done by a human provider.
I’d be okay with them telling a doctor what to do, but I don ’t know
that I ’d want a machine doing the treatment, especially depending
on what it is. Aiding, sure, they already do that with robotics and CTscans and all that, but I want a human there making sure that it ’s
doing what it ’s supposed to. (FG13).
Participants also noted the uniqueness of each patient, and
commented on the resultant individuality required in approachingmedical decision making. They viewed the providers ’role in using
AI as one of adapting AI recommendations to the patient ’s unique
personal situation, ensuring that they are not harmed and thatpatients follow through with clinical recommendations.
[I]t’s important to take into account that people, depending on
what the AI comes out with, people might not be willing to go withwhat that is, they might need alternates. And also just the questionof creativity, like what if the solution were actually something where
you would have to think outside the box? …What if it ’s something
they haven ’t encountered before? (FG13).Table 1. Characteristics of 87 patients who participated in focus
groups examining attitudes about the use of AI in healthcare.
N(%)
Sex
Male 44 (50.6)
Female 43 (49.4)
Ethnicity
Not Hispanic 82 (94.3)Choose not to Answer 5 (5.7)
Race (select all that apply)
White 81 (93.1)Black or African American 3 (3.4)American Indian or Alaska Native 2 (2.3)
Asian 1 (1.1)
Choose not to Answer 2 (2.3)
Age (Mean 53.5 years; Range 18 –91)
Age 18 –40 24 (27.6)
Age 41 –60 29 (33.3)
Age 61 + 34 (39.1)
Education
Less than HS Grad 1 (1.1)
Grade 12 or GED 10 (11.5)
College 1 –3 years 31 (35.6)
College 4 years or more 23 (26.4)Graduate school 22 (25.3)J.P. Richardson et al.
2
npj Digital Medicine (2021)   140 Published in partnership with Seoul National University Bundang Hospital1234567890():,;