ARTICLE OPEN
Patient apprehensions about the use of arti ﬁcial intelligence in
healthcare
Jordan P . Richardson1, Cambray Smith1, Susan Curtis1, Sara Watson1, Xuan Zhu2, Barbara Barry2and Richard R. Sharp1✉
While there is signi ﬁcant enthusiasm in the medical community about the use of arti ﬁcial intelligence (AI) technologies in
healthcare, few research studies have sought to assess patient perspectives on these technologies. We conducted 15 focus groups
examining patient views of diverse applications of AI in healthcare. Our results indicate that patients have multiple concerns,including concerns related to the safety of AI, threats to patient choice, potential increases in healthcare costs, data-source bias, and
data security. We also found that patient acceptance of AI is contingent on mitigating these possible harms. Our results highlight an
array of patient concerns that may limit enthusiasm for applications of AI in healthcare. Proactively addressing these concerns iscritical for the ﬂourishing of ethical innovation and ensuring the long-term success of AI applications in healthcare.
npj Digital Medicine           (2021) 4:140 ; https://doi.org/10.1038/s41746-021-00509-1
INTRODUCTION
Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI), the ability of computers to perform tasks
typically associated with human intelligence
1, has the capacity to
impact millions of patients by changing the way medicine ispracticed. Enthusiasm for applications of AI in healthcare hascontinued to grow, with early successes involving ChatBots,
diagnostic tools, and radiological image analysis
2–5. While there is
considerable excitement about these emerging technologies,prospective analyses of how AI technologies might be imple-mented responsibly into clinical practice has been limited.Importantly, to date there has been very little engagement withpatients who will be impacted by applications of AI in healthcare.This is troubling since patient concerns about AI could be asigni ﬁcant barrier to the dissemination and use of these tools.
Studies of nonmedical applications of AI have shown that thepublic tends to view nonmedical AI in highly variable ways
6, with
factors such as media coverage and early experiences playing keyroles in shaping public opinion. These considerations highlight theimportance of patient engagement to ensure that these
technologies are integrated into healthcare in a manner that
fosters public trust
7,8and mitigates widespread patient concerns
that might result in another “AI Winter ”9.
Moreover, since patients are the intended bene ﬁciaries of many
of these AI innovations, more carefully characterizing their needs,
values, and priorities is important for ensuring that these advancesare not just well-received but are developed and implemented inan ethical way that improves patient care. Even in situationswhere patients do not interface directly with AI technologies,patients still bear the largest risk should implementation be done
incorrectly or unethically
10. To the extent that patients will be
asked to accept the potential risks associated with novelapplications of AI in healthcare, there is an ethical obligation toensure that patient values and needs are incorporated intoimplementation plans. As in other areas of medical innovation,proactive patient engagement is an essential component ofimplementing healthcare AI in an ethical manner
11.
Applications of AI in medicine take advantage of unprece-
dented volumes of clinical data and computing power to informevidence-based decision making3. This raises new ethical ques-
tions related to the transparency of data use, accountability for
data stewardship, and potential inequities in the deployment ofAI
12. Currently, very little research has been done characterizing
patient and other stakeholder perspectives on applications of AI in
healthcare. Additionally, the few studies that have assessed
patient perspectives have focused on a narrow array of AI tools,
which limits their utility as a guide in anticipating patientengagement with other AI applications in healthcare
13,14. While
engaging patients around speci ﬁc applications of AI is a crucial
step in the research and development process, engagement at
this level of speci ﬁcity does not facilitate analysis of broader public
perspectives on AI and its application in healthcare, which is muchneeded for health policy development, innovation priority setting,
and implementation design.
The aim of the research study we report was to understand how
patients view the use of AI in their healthcare. To clarify sources of
patient excitement and concern about healthcare AI, we used
focus groups and case-study discussions to characterize the rangeof patient opinions about emerging AI applications in healthcare.
This approach allowed us to make AI technologies more accessible
to patients, while also engaging across diverse cases to promote
broader re ﬂection on the potential technological, societal, and
medical impacts of AI. The results we report highlight a range ofpatient concerns about applications of AI in healthcare. We hope
AI developers and healthcare institutions seeking to deploy new
AI technologies ﬁnd these results useful as they consider how best
to integrate AI technologies into healthcare and create govern-
ance structures that promote patient safety and foster the trust ofthe patients they serve.
RESULTS
We conducted 15 focus groups with 87 participants between
November 2019 and February 2020. Each focus group had
between three and seven participants and lasted 90 min.
Approximately half of our participants were female (49.4%) andthe average age of participants was 53.5 years old. A majority of
1Biomedical Ethics Research Program, Mayo Clinic Rochester, Rocheste, MN 55905-0002, USA.2Kern Center for the Science of Healthcare Delivery, Mayo Clinic Rochester,
Rocheste, MN 55905-0002, USA.✉email: Sharp.Richard@mayo.eduwww.nature.com/npjdigitalmed
Published in partnership with Seoul National University Bundang Hospital1234567890():,;