Secure Evaluation of Quantized Neural Networks 21
authors show that it is possible to just have parties per-
form the truncation locally. SecureNN [63] can be seen
asanextensionofSecureMLwhereboththree-andfour-
party protocols (both with one corrupted party) are
used. Concurrently to this work, CrypTFlow [45] builds
a system on top of SecureNN that is capable of evalu-
ating very large networks ( >100 layers) in reasonable
time. Another very attractive feature of CrypTFlow is
thatitprovidesamorecompleteframeworkthataccepts
standard Tensorﬂow trained models as input (hence the
name).
B MPC Protocols
B.1 Dishonest Majority
Protocols in the dishonest majority setting are often
harder to develop and they are also more complex than
honest majority ones. They are typically based in addi-
tivesecretsharinganduseauthenticationtagsforactive
security to ensure that the openings of shared values are
done correctly.
•SPDZ2k: This is the ﬁrst actively secure protocol over
Z2kin the dishonest majority setting, and it was pro-
posed initially by Cramer et al. [15] and implemented
subsequently by Damgård et al. [17]. This protocol can
be seen as an extension of MASCOT [42] (itself being
an extension of SPDZ, hence the name). Multiplica-
tionsin SPDZ2karehandledusingmultiplicationtriples,
which are preprocessed using oblivious transfer like in
MASCOT . Authentication is handled like in SPDZ, but
with an addition that allows this method to work over
Z2kwhich consists of working over the ring Z2k+sand
using the upper sbits for authentication.
•OTSemi2k ,OTSemiPrime : These protocols denote cut-
down versions of SPDZ2k and MASCOT , respectively.
In particular, they omit the usage of authentication
tags and the so-called “sacriﬁce” where two triples are
checked against each other and only of them can subse-
quently used in the protocol. There essentially remains
the generation of multiplication triples using OT.
•LowGear: This is an actively secure protocol for com-
putation modulo a prime. It uses semi-homomorphic en-
cryption based on learning with errors. See Keller et
al. [43] for details.B.2 Honest Majority
Honest majority protocols are typically developed us-
ing Shamir Secret Sharing (for an arbitrary number of
parties) or Replicated Secret Sharing (for small number
of parties). Since we consider only a small number of
servers we focus on the replicated SS instantiations.
•Replicated2k ,ReplicatedPrime : This protocol secret-
shares a value xamong three parties P1,P2,P3by let-
ting eachPihave random pairs (xi,xi+1)(indexes wrap
around modulo 3) subject to x≡x1+x2+x3modM,
whereM= 2kfor the ring case and M=pfor the ﬁeld
case. The most eﬃcient passively secure multiplication
protocol to date is the one presented by Araki et al. [2],
where the total communication involves 3ring elements.
•PsReplicatedPrime : This protocol by Lindell and Nof
[47] extends ReplicatedPrime to active security by pre-
processing potentially incorrect triples and proceeding
to the online phase using these, optimistically, check-
ing their correctness at the end of the execution using
sacriﬁcing techniques.
•PsReplicated2k : This protocol by Eerikson et al. [22]
is an extension of the one by Lindell et al. [47] to the
ring setting. This is achieved by incorporating ideas by
Cramer et al. [15] in order to adapt the post-sacriﬁce
step by Lindell et al. to the ring Z2k.
C Extended results
Communication and preprocessing
Table 7, analogous to Table 3, presents the communi-
cation, in Gigabyes, used by the protocols we consider
when evaluating diﬀerent ImageNet models. As noted in
Section 4, dishonest majority protocols require a great
deal of preprocessing material in order to evaluate a
network, which can be seen by the large diﬀerences be-
tween the values in columns corresponding to dishonest
majority, with respect to honest majority. Interestingly,
the protocol over Fpare cheaper with active security
than the protocol over Z2k. This is likely due to the fact
that preprocessing in Fp(with active security) is more
communication eﬃcient, than the protocol over Z2k, as
illustrated in Table 7.
WAN Benchmarks
We have also run the smallest model in a WAN set-
ting where each party is located on a diﬀerent conti-
nent.Forcomputationoverringswithprobabilistictrun-