Secure Evaluation of Quantized Neural Networks 16
On the other hand, moving between diﬀerent cor-
ruption models is relatively cheap. In this regard, the
overhead is in fact more or less the same regardless of
the threshold. I.e., moving from passive to active secu-
rity only increases the inference time by a factor of be-
tween 3 and 30.
We also observe that the choice of algebraic
structure—ﬁeld vs. ring—provides a performance boost
in some cases. The ring-based protocols mostly outper-
form the ﬁeld-based protocols in the passive case, while
the reverse is true for active security. This is because we
use homomorphic encryption with ﬁelds in this case but
oblivious transfer with rings, which has a higher commu-
nication requirement. Otherwise, we attribute the diﬀer-
ence to the fact that the ring we use is smaller than the
ﬁeld for security requirements. In particular, operations
overZ272can be performed by operating on only 72-bits
(inparticular,supportfor128-bitwidetypeswhichexist
in e.g., GCC can be used), while operating over Fpfor
p≈2128require multiplication of two 128-bit integers
withoutoverﬂow even when using Montgomery repre-
sentation. Furthermore, we use the faster comparison
proposed by Mohassel and Rindal [50] in the honest-
majority setting with rings.
Finally, we observe, not surprisingly, that inference
can be sped up by relying on a less precise method of
truncation. For example, if we consider the ﬁrst row
(model V1 0.25_128)inTable3weseethatprobabilistic
truncationspeedsupinferencebybetween80%and15%.
However, this increase in eﬃciency comes at the cost of
a (possible) decrease in accuracy. We do not expect that
this boost in eﬃciency will become more pronounced for
deeper models, since the exact truncation protocol only
depends on the size of the integers being truncated.
Scaling.
For protocols that support more than three parties, Ta-
ble 4 shows how the simplest network scales with up to
ﬁve parties. Note we do not use Shamir of replicated se-
cret sharing here for honest-majority computation. This
explains why there is no ring-based protocol and the dis-
crepancy between the results here and in Table 3. The
number of corrupted parties is set to the maximum in
the respective protocols, that is, 2, 3, 4 for dishonest
majority, and 1, 1, 2 for honest majority.4.5 Special Truncation
In order to evaluate the beneﬁt of our special trunca-
tion, we have benchmarked our implementation with
and without it against CrypTFlow [45] using the Se-
cureNN Networks A–D [63] as well as the CIFAR10
SqueezeNet examples in the CrypTFLow codebase [56].
Networks A–D are simple networks consisting of up to
about ten layers using only matrix multiplication, con-
volution, ReLU, and max-pooling while the CIFAR10
SqueezeNet involves more than ten of each convolutions
and ReLU. Table 5 shows our results using the same
network setup as previously described. Special trunca-
tion consistently improves over CrypTFlow whereas the
results without are sometimes considerably worse. The
improvement is noticeable because truncation in CrypT-
Flow simply consists of local operations whereas we use
a protocol for this. The protocol has the advantage that
it does not pose restrictions on the secret value whereas
the method in CrypTFlow requires that the most signif-
icantsbits of the secret are zero for a statistical security
parameter s. Without special truncation, we rely on a
protocol that requires krandom bits to mask a k-bit
value. The generation of random bits in turn requires at
leastkbit in communication, which makes the overall
communication quadratic in k. Special truncation how-
ever has communication cost linear in k. Note also that
we use comparisons as in ABY3[50], which is compara-
ble to the approach in CrypTFlow in that the protocol
is very speciﬁc to the security model and computation
domain.
We have also implemented CrypTFlow’s ImageNet
examples with and without special truncation. The re-
sults can be found in Table 6. Note the results were
obtained with the optimal number of threads for both
frameworks, which is 32 for MP-SPDZ and 8 for CrypT-
Flow.
5 Conclusions
Weshowthatitispossibletosecurelyevaluatelargeand
realistic networks, so called ImageNet networks, using
more-or-less existing MPC protocols. Moreover, the net-
works we evaluate are unmodiﬁed and can be trained us-
ing standard Tensorﬂow or any other framework which
supports the type of quantization discussed (which cur-
rently includes both PyTorch and MXNet). This work
thus provides a very appealing approach to secure evalu-
ation from an end-users perspective: First, because stan-