Secure Evaluation of Quantized Neural Networks 8
and only if a≤b, so the comparisons can be performed
directly on the quantized values.
In fact, activations like ReLU6 (which is used ex-
tensively in the models we consider in this work) can
be entirely fused into the dot product that precedes it,
as shown in Section 2.4 of [38]. Since ReLU6 is essen-
tially a clamping operation, it is possible, by carefully
pickingthequantizationparameters,tomaketheclamp-
ing of the product to the interval [0,28)Zalsotake care
of the ReLU6 operation. In short, if the zero-point is
0 and the scale is 6/255, then we are guaranteed that
m(q−z)∈[0,6]for anyq∈{0,..., 28−1}.
On the other hand, mathematical functions like sig-
moid must be handled diﬀerently. We will not be con-
cernedwiththistypeoffunctionsinthisdocumentsince
it is the case in practice that ReLU and ReLU6 (or sim-
ilar activation functions) are typically enough.7
3 Quantized CNNs in MPC
In the previous section we discussed how quantization
of neural networks works, or, more speciﬁcally, we dis-
cussedthequantizationschemebyJacobetal.[38].Now,
we turn to the discussion about how to implement these
operations using MPC. However, before diving into the
details of the protocols we use in this work, we de-
scribe the setting we consider for the secure evaluation
of CNNs.
3.1 System and Threat Model
Like most previous work on secure inference using MPC,
we consider a setting where both the model owner and
client outsource their model, respectively input to a
set of servers that perform that actual secure inference,
cf. the illustration in Figure 2.
We consider a setting of either two or three servers
P1,P2andP3depending on the setting (honest or dis-
honest majority) among which one is allowed to be cor-
rupted. The model and input owner each secret-share
their inputs to the servers at the beginning of the proto-
colexecution.Thispreservestheprivacyofthissensitive
information under certain assumptions on the adversar-
ial corruption. Then, the servers execute a secure mul-
tiparty computation protocol to evaluate the quantized
7See [38] for a discussion on quantization of mathematical
functions.
Model owner
Data ownerP1
P2P3
Fig. 2.Visualization of the Client-Server model we consider in
this work. The model and data owner secret-share their data
towards two or three servers, depending on the underlying MPC
protocol, who then execute the secure computation and return
the result to the clients.
modelonthegiveninput,obtainingsharesoftheoutput,
which can then be sent to the party that is supposed to
get the classiﬁcation result.
As we already mentioned previously, our techniques
have the crucial feature that virtually anysecret-
sharing-based MPC protocol can be used as the under-
lying computation engine. More precisely, let Rbe ei-
therZ2korFp, we only assume a secret-sharing scheme
/angbracketleft·/angbracketrightoverRfor two or three parties (depending on the
setting) withstanding one corruption, allowing local ad-
ditions/angbracketleftx+y/angbracketright←/angbracketleftx/angbracketright+/angbracketlefty/angbracketright, together with a protocol for
secure multiplication /angbracketleftx·y/angbracketright←/angbracketleftx/angbracketright·/angbracketlefty/angbracketright.8
One can also consider a variant in which the model
owner and the data owner are the parties running the
actual protocol. Fortunately, this can be seen as a par-
ticular case of the client-server model with two servers
in which the model owner plays one of the servers and
the input owner plays the other one. This only requires
an additional input round to guarantee that the inputs
are consistent.
Finally, another beneﬁt of the client-server model
is that it is highly compatible with reactive computa-
tion, in which the output of the prediction needs to
be used for subsequent operations. In this case, since
the servers obtain shares of the output, it is straightfor-
ward to pipeline this result to another MPC computa-
tion. Thegeneral-purposeMPCprotocolsweuseinthis
work can be categorized according to three diﬀerent di-
mensions: corruption threshold, type of corruptions and
underlying algebraic structure. For the ﬁrst dimension
8Protocols with these features are typically referred to as
general-purpose MPC protocols, and any construction that only
makes use of these properties is said to be in the arithmetic
black-box model.