Secure Evaluation of Quantized Neural Networks 4
truncation protocol for some threat models which
further improves eﬃciency.
Experiments. Finally, we evaluate the eﬃciency of a
large class of quantized models in a variety of dif-
ferent threat models. More precisely, we evaluate 16
diﬀerent models of varying size, each in 16 diﬀerent
settings.
We elaborate on each contribution below.
First, the fact that we identify a widely used quan-
tization scheme as being particularly well suited for se-
cure inference, provides a very promising area of study
for both researchers and practitioners. For researchers,
it provides a ﬁxed target for secure protocol design. For
practitioners, it shows that one does not have to aban-
don widely used Machine Learning frameworks in order
to design models for practical use that can evaluated
securely.
Secondly, showing that these techniques are com-
patible with the arithmetic black-box model (that is,
only secure additions and multiplications are required)
allows us to lower the requirements that an MPC pro-
tocol should satisfy in order to be suitable for secure
inference. This in eﬀect allows us to extend the amount
of protocols supported. However, this does not mean
that these protocols cannot be optimized, which in fact
takesustoourthirdcontribution:Wepresentoptimized
primitives for the case of truncation over the ring Z2k,
whichisnotaswellstudiedasthecorrepondingproblem
over ﬁelds and constitutes the main bottleneck when se-
curely evaluating our quantized neural networks.
Finally, to illustrate the advantages of our approach
with respect to constructing ad-hoc MPC protocols that
are only suitable to certain type of models, we perform
a large amount of experiments with a wider range of
models and diﬀerent MPC protocols. More precisely, we
securely evaluate 16 models that are part of the Ima-
geNet family3using MPC protocols that vary with re-
spect to several dimensions: Corruption threshold (hon-
est vs. dishonest majority), corruption model (passive
vs. active security) algebraic structure (integers modulo
2kor modulo prime p) and whether or not truncation is
exact or probabilistic.
Our experiments let us conclude several things:
3The choice of evaluating these models is only because of con-
venience, as they can be found as part of the Tensorﬂow Lite
model repository. As discussed in Section 4, anymodel trained
with Tensorﬂow can be evaluated using our framework without
the need of introducing extra tools.1. Corruption threshold has a very large impact on ef-
ﬁciency for general-purpose MPC. Indeed, a dishon-
est majority evaluation takes orders of magnitude
longer than honest majority.
2. On the other hand, corruption model has a compar-
ativelysmallerimpactoneﬃciency.Forexample,an
actively secure evaluation with an honest majority
protocol over a prime ﬁeld is only about 4 times
slower than if the evaluation was done with the cor-
responding passive protocol.
3. For passive protocols we ﬁnd that modulo a power
of 2 is between 4 and 10 as eﬃcient as the corre-
sponding protocol modulo a prime power. This re-
sult further supports all the recent work that has
gone into designing fast protocols that work over a
ring [15, 17] (as this ring is typically taken to be
integers modulo a power of 2).
4. Finally, by running our experiments for both exact
truncation (meaning we evaluate the model exactly
aswouldbedoneintheclear)andprobabilistictrun-
cation (meaning the evaluation may suﬀer some un-
known loss in accuracy) we can quantify the exact
gain in eﬃciency by relying on specialized protocols.
1.3 Related Work
The following review is focused the diﬀerent types of
quantization (if any) that prior works has used; addi-
tionally, we look at frameworks for secure inference that
prior works have developed. A broader review can be
found in Appendix A.
1.3.1 Quantization in prior work
Whetherimplicitlyorexplicitly,mostpriorworkalready
uses some form of quantization. For instance, replacing
ﬂoating-point by ﬁxed-point numbers can be seen as a
formofquantization.Moreoftenthannot,however,this
conversion is done in a very naive manner where the pri-
marygoalhasbeentoﬁtthemodelparameterstothese-
cureframeworkwithoutfurtherconsiderationaboutany
potential impact it might have on the model’s accuracy.
Relatively little work has made explicit use of quantiza-
tioninthecontextofsecurelyevaluatingMachineLearn-
ingmodels.OneexampleistherecentworkbyBourseet
al. [8], where the authors use a quantization technique
that is similar to the one described by Courbariaux and
Bengio [13]. Sanyal et al. [60] use the same techniques.
Nevertheless, their work lies in the FHE domain, which