Secure Evaluation of Quantized Neural Networks 13
ations, i.e. by computing ReLU (x)instead ofex. More
MPC friendly solutions exist, such as the spherical Soft-
max [19], which replaces exwithx2.
4 Implementation and
Benchmarking
This section discusses our implementation and our per-
formance results.
4.1 MobileNets
Our benchmarks are all performed by evaluating net-
works of the MobileNets type architecture [34]. A Mo-
bileNets network consists of 28 layers with 1000 output
classes and are trained on the ImageNet data set [36].
Layers are alternating (with few exceptions at the start
and end) pointwise convolutions and depthwise convolu-
tions. A pointwise convolution is a regular convolution
with a 1×1ﬁlter, while a depthwise convolution can
be viewed as a convolution where no summation across
output channels occurs. The size of the network can be
adjusted by two hyper parameters: a width multiplier α
and aresolution multiplier ρ.αscales input and output
channels, while ρscales the dimensions of the input im-
age.Thusαreducesboththemodelsize(astherewillbe
fewer parameters with a smaller α) and number of oper-
ations, while ρonly scales the number of operations. In
the following we denote a particular model as “ V1α_S”
whereSis the height and width of the input image
(thus dependent on ρ). We evaluate the pretrained mod-
els which are available on the Tensorﬂow repository,12
and we use their accuracy values.
Quantizing arbitrary tensorﬂow models.
WechoosetoevaluatetheMobileNetmodelsfortworea-
sons: First, they can be considered realistic in the sense
thattheyareexpressiveenoughtosolveawidevarietyof
image related classiﬁcation tasks. Thus, the evaluation
times we report in this section will correspond to run-
ning evaluations of similarly expressive models in prac-
tice. Second, the models are hosted in pre-trained form
online which in principle makes our results reproducible
(prior work, while sometimes describing the architecture
12See https://www.tensorﬂow.org/lite/guide/hosted_models65 70 75 80 85 90020406080100120
Accuracy (top-5)Time (s)passive, Z2k
passive, Fp
active, Z2k
active, Fp
Fig. 3.Evaluation times for honest majority protocols. x-axis
generally correspond to evaluating larger models.
of the models they evaluate, very rarely describe the
training process).
However, our technique is by no means limited to
running only MobileNet networks. A quantized model is
obtained either by performing quantization aware train-
ing13or by post-quantizing an already trained model14.
We stress that both these models are implemented
entirely by TensorFlow, so no external conversion is
needed.
4.2 Implementation
We implement secure inference in the MP-SPDZ frame-
work, which allows us to get timings for all the protocols
described in Section B. These protocols run over either
a primepor a ring Z2k. The prime is 128 bits while the
kwe use for the ring is 72 bits. As described in Section
3.3, these arise because we need some extra space in or-
der for the truncation by a secret shift to be correct. We
arrive atk= 72experimentally by computing the sizes
of the shift and dot-products needed in the models we
evaluate.
We ran all our benchmarks on colocated c5.9xlarge
AWSmachines,eachofwhichhas36cores,72gbofmem-
ory, a 10gpbs link between them and sub-millisecond la-
13See https://github.com/tensorﬂow/tensorﬂow/tree/r1.13/
tensorﬂow/contrib/quantize
14See https://www.tensorﬂow.org/lite/performance/post_
training_quantization