Secure Evaluation of Quantized Neural Networks 2
a model in practice,1preserving model privacy may be
desirable as well.
In order to break this apparent contradiction (per-
forming computation on data that is ought to be kept
secret) tools like secure multiparty computation (MPC)
can be used. Using such tools, image classiﬁcation can
beperformedsothatitdisclosesneithertheimagetothe
model owner, nor the model to the input owner. In the
client-server model this is achieved by letting the data
owner and the model owner secret-share their input to-
wards a set of servers, who then run the computation
over these shares.
1.1 Towards Deploying Secure Inference.
Research in the area of secure evaluation of CNNs has
been rich during the last couple of years [27, 39, 45, 48,
51, 57–59, 63]. The main goal of this prior research has
been to reduce the performance gap between evaluating
a CNN in the clear and doing it securely. Current state
of the art solutions rely on for example Garbled Circuits
[57] or MPC [45]. Both of these works manage to evalu-
ate large ImageNet type models (tens of layers and 1000
classes)withreasonableeﬃciency.Moreover,theCrypT-
Flow framework [45] also support secure inference with
malicioussecurityalbeitbyrelyingonasecurehardware
assumption. Several solutions have also been developed
by researchers closer to the industry side, such as TF-
Encrypted [16] or CrypTen [25], which suggests that se-
cure prediction has value beyond the academic point of
view—an important factor for accelerating wide adop-
tion of these techniques.
Theseadvancesmeanthatsecureevaluationoflarge
models (tens of layers, millions of parameters) can now
be performed in the order of seconds which, while too
slow for real-time classiﬁcation, is acceptable for many
privacy critical tasks like the ones described in [21, 23].
Medical tests typically take hours if not days or weeks,
so running an additional test that takes a few seconds
or minutes will not matter.
Given the intense interest in secure inference in re-
cent years, one might ask: what obstacles are preventing
the use of secure inference in practice? .Mostofthefocus
on the research literature has been on improving perfor-
1For example, the network by Yang et al. [ 64] costs
between $ 61 000and $ 250 000 to train according to
https://syncedreview.com/2019/06/27/the-staggering-cost-of-
training-sota-ai-models/.mance, but this is far from being the only challenge in
this direction.
Challenges, the ML perspective.
Setting aside the privacy requirement for a minute, de-
ploying a Machine Learning solution in practice is al-
ready a long and strenuous process. Data has to be ac-
quired and then processed; a model has to be designed,
its parameters have to be tuned and ﬁnally the model
needs to be trained. Moreover, the process is often re-
peated totally or in parts whenever new data is acquired
or a better model design is found.
It is not surprising that a signiﬁcant amount of ef-
fortisbeingspentondesigningfeature-richandwelldoc-
umented frameworks for developing these models, for
training them and for testing them. Frameworks such as
TensorFlow [24], PyTorch [54] and MXNet [12] are all
seeing signiﬁcant use and are being actively developed
by major companies (Google for TensorFlow, Facebook
for PyTorch and Apache for MXNet).
Ideally,itshouldbepossibletodesignamodelusing
these widely used frameworks and then simply alter the
way it is used at the very end when the model is used
to perform predictions on user provided inputs. How-
ever, most existing solutions for secure inference throws
a wrench into this process as they rely either on models
that use specialized activation functions, such as Cryp-
toNets[27]orrequireaspecializedtrainingprocess,such
as XONN [57]. For these reasons, a part that is often of
theleastconcern when developing a Machine Learning
solution (using the ﬁnal model for prediction) thus be-
comes an aspect that has to be considered at virtually
all steps of the design process.
It is worth noting here that it is not enough
for a framework to simply support conversion from a
trained model into a representation that can be used.
Such conversions typically involve steps like moving
from a ﬂoating point representation to a ﬁxed point
one, or exchanging certain activation functions with
“approximations”—all of which impact accuracy and
thus the expressiveness of the model.
These issues were also identiﬁed by the authors of
CrypTFlow [45] and a third of their work is spent detail-
ing a customized application that converts TensorFlow
code into a representation which can be run securely
by their framework, without substantially compromis-
ing on accuracy.
Our work takes a diﬀerent approach to this problem.
Namely, we investigate whether, and to what extent, ex-