Secure Evaluation of Quantized Neural Networks 3
isting frameworks such as TensorFlow support training
and designing models that can be securely evaluated.
Challenges, the MPC perspective.
In spite of notable progress in general-purpose MPC,
most of the existing MPC-based secure inference works
rely on customized subprotocols that are highly opti-
mized for particular activation functions. Moreover, and
as remarked on above, these activation functions are of-
ten themselves novel in the sense that they rarely see
use outside of secure inference.
Such a tight coupling between what can be evalu-
ated and how its evaluated also implies that often only
a single threat model is supported. In particular, if a
speciﬁc threat model is desired, then often this directly
determines what kind of network that can be run. For
example, if one requires a dishonest majority solution,
such as a 2-party protocol, then XONN is the current
most eﬃcient solution. But XONN only works on bina-
rized networks and only works with Signas the activa-
tion function.
At the other end, if one is ﬁne with honest majority
(typically 3 parties, as that is the most eﬃcient setting)
but require active security, then only CrypTFlow ﬁts
the bill; but CrypTFlow relies on secure hardware for
active security.
Ideally, the MPC that is used should be “oblivious”
to the network being evaluated, as that would allow a
user to more freely choose which threat model is best
suited for them withouthaving to think about the struc-
ture of the network, or specialized hardware. This is the
approach we take. That is, we investigate how appli-
cable general purpose MPC frameworks such as MP-
SPDZ [41] or SCALE-MAMBA [1] are to evaluate Con-
volutional Neural Networks.
Using general-purpose MPC frameworks is not only
convenient when it comes to the threat model. Another
important factor is that, given their ﬂexibility, this type
of protocols tend to receive more scrutiny from part of
the community [33], they are much better understood
from a practical point of view and they have more refer-
ence implementations.2These considerations are impor-
2Although MPC protocols, general-purpose or not, are accom-
panied with security proofs, this does not mean that their “level
of security” is the same. Details that appear only at imple-
mentation time, like instantiations of random oracles, make it
important to have an end-to-end understanding of the security.
Having reference implementations that are as close to industry-
grade as possible is important, and the panorama in this regardtant for an area like MPC, which is today in a stage in
which many applications are within the practical realm,
butnostandardizationofimplementationpractices(like
the ones found e.g. in symmetric-key cryptography) are
set yet.
1.2 Our Contribution
Our work addresses the challenges identiﬁed in the pre-
vious section, and to this end it focuses on the following
two questions that, while simple in nature, have so far
not been treated in research on secure inference.
1. To what extent can “MPC friendly” models be ob-
tainedfromexistingframeworkssuchasTensorFlow
or PyTorch, withoutrequiring a customized conver-
sionprotocol?Moreprecisely,isitpossibletodesign
amodelusingthesestandardframeworks,whichcan
then be eﬃciently evaluated by a secure protocol,
without at all tampering with the model?
2. To what extent does existing MPC frameworks sup-
port running models “out-of-the-box”? That is, can
we securely evaluate Machine Learning models (of
the kind described above) using general-purpose
MPC frameworks?
Thesequestionsprovideaminimalbaselinethatone
shouldkeepinmindbeforemovingontospecializedpro-
tocols or resorting to specialized models that improve
eﬃciency. In this work we explore these questions thor-
oughly, which results in the following contributions:
Quantization. We identify the quantization tech-
niques used in both TensorFlow, PyTorch and
MXNet and described in [38] as particularly well
suited for MPC. This type of quantization results
in models for which each output of each convolu-
tional layer can be expressed as a single dot-product
followed by a truncation.
MPC.We describe how to implement these types mod-
els in a black-box way; that is, without resorting to
special properties of the underlying MPC.
Optimizations. In settings where dot-products can be
securely computed with high eﬃciency, the main
bottleneck is truncation (or bitwise right-shift). As
optimizations, we therefore present an optimized
for general-purpose protocols is much more promising than for
special-purpose MPC.