Secure Evaluation of Quantized Neural Networks 5
diﬀers from multiparty computation. For instance, the
fact that the weights are kept in the clear by the model
owner changes the way the computation is performed,
and allows them to use only additions and subtractions.
XONN [57], which is based on Garbled Circuits, uses
a quantization scheme which converts weights into bits
[35]. For this to work, the authors need to increase the
number of neurons of the network and a large part of
their work is dedicated to describing how this scaling
can be performed. CrypTFlow [45] employ what can
be seen as a custom ﬁxed-point-to-ﬂoating-point conver-
sion protocol (called Athos) that automatically converts
the ﬂoating point weights of a Tensorﬂow model into a
ﬁxed points representation, where the parameters are
chosen so as to not compromise on the models original
accuracy.
1.3.2 Frameworks for secure evaluation
Several previous works provide what can be viewed as
a more complete framework for secure evaluation. The
ﬁrst of these is MiniONN [48] which provides techniques
for converting existing models into models that can be
evaluated securely. The authors demonstrate this frame-
work by converting and running several models for in-
teresting problem domains, such as Language modeling,
as well as more standard problems such as hand writing
recognition(MNIST)andimagerecognition(CIFAR10).
CrypTFlow[45]alsoprovidesmorecompleteframework.
Asalreadymentionedabove,theﬁrststepintheirframe-
work is a protocol for converting an Tensorﬂow trained
model into a model that can later be evaluated securely
using a protocol based on SecureNN [63].
1.4 Outline of the Document
In Section 2 we give a brief introduction to Neural Net-
works after which we describe the quantization scheme
wewillbeusing.InSection3weprovideaself-contained
description of our protocol for secure inference, describ-
ing the basic building blocks. We discuss implementa-
tion details and present benchmarks in Section 4, and
conclude in Section 5.2 Deep Learning and
Quantization
Deep learning models are at the core of many real-world
tasks like computer vision, natural language processing
and speech recognition. However, in spite of their high
accuracyformanysuchtasks,theirusageondeviceslike
mobile phones, which have tight resource constraints,
becomes restricted by the large amount of storage re-
quired to store the model and the high amount of en-
ergy consumption when carrying out the computations
that are typically done over ﬂoating-point numbers. To
this end, researchers in the machine learning commu-
nity have developed techniques that allow weights to be
represented by low-width integers instead of the usual
32-bit ﬂoating-point numbers, and quantization is rec-
ognized to be the most eﬀective such technique when
the storage/accuracy ratio is taken into account.
Quantization allows the representation of the
weights and activations to be as low as 8bits, or even
1bit in some cases [13, 55].4This is a long-standing
research area, with initial works already dating back
to the 1990s [5, 26, 49, 62], and this extensive research
bodyhaveenabledmodernquantizedneuralnetworksto
have essentially the same accuracy as their full-precision
counterparts [14, 29, 32, 53, 65].
2.1 Notation
For a valuex∈RN1×N2×N3we usex[i,j,c ]∈Rto de-
notetaking i’thvalueacrosstheﬁrstdimension,the j’th
value across the second dimension and the c’th value
across the last dimension. In a similar way, we might
writex[·,·,c]∈RN1×N2to denote the matrix obtained
by ﬁxing a speciﬁc value for the last dimension. A real
value interval is denoted by [a,b]and a discrete interval
by[a,b]Z. We deﬁne clamping of a valuex∈Rto the
interval [a,b], denoted by clampa,b(x), by setting x←a
ifx<a,x←bifx>band otherwise x←x. (Clamping
to a discrete interval is similarly deﬁned.) We denote by
N/lscriptthe set{1,...,/lscript}.
4Furthermore, some quantization techniques also allow to rep-
resent gradients with a small number of bits, which eﬀectively
allows for quantized training of neural networks. However, this
is still in a very early stage, and since we are focused only on
inference in this work, we do not present such techniques.