Anders Dalskov*, Daniel Escudero*, and Marcel Keller*
Secure Evaluation of Quantized Neural
Networks
Abstract: We investigate two questions in this paper:
First, we ask to what extent “MPC friendly” models are
already supported by major Machine Learning frame-
works such as TensorFlow or PyTorch. Prior works pro-
vide protocols that only work on ﬁxed-point integers
and specialized activation functions, two aspects that
are not supported by popular Machine Learning frame-
works, and the need for these specialized model repre-
sentations means that it is hard, and often impossible,
to use e.g., TensorFlow to design, train and test models
that later have to be evaluated securely. Second, we ask
to what extent the functionality for evaluating Neural
Networks already exists in general-purpose MPC frame-
works. These frameworks have received more scrutiny,
are better documented and supported on more plat-
forms. Furthermore, they are typically ﬂexible in terms
of the threat model they support. In contrast, most se-
cure evaluation protocols in the literature are targeted
to a speciﬁc threat model and their implementations are
only a “proof-of-concept”, making it very hard for their
adoption in practice. We answer both of the above ques-
tionsinapositiveway:Weobservethatthequantization
techniquessupportedbybothTensorFlow,PyTorchand
MXNet can provide models in a representation that can
be evaluated securely; and moreover, that this evalua-
tion can be performed by a general purpose MPC frame-
work. We perform extensive benchmarks to understand
theexacttrade-oﬀsbetweendiﬀerentcorruptionmodels,
network sizes and eﬃciency. These experiments provide
an interesting insight into cost between active and pas-
sive security, as well as honest and dishonest majority.
Our work shows then that the separating line between
existing ML frameworks and existing MPC protocols
may be narrower than implicitly suggested by previous
works.
Summary of Changes : Since the ﬁrst version, ﬁgures
for full implementation of inference of various networks
in MPC have been added . Furthermore, Assi Barak has
been removed from the authors at his request.
*Corresponding Author: Anders Dalskov: Aarhus Uni-
versity, E-mail: anderspkd@cs.au.dk
*Corresponding Author: Daniel Escudero: Aarhus Uni-
versity, E-mail: escudero@cs.au.dkAcknowledgements
This work has been supported by the European Re-
search Council (ERC) under the European Unions’s
Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under
grant agreement No 669255 (MPCPRO), and the Dan-
ishIndependentResearchCouncilunderGrant-IDDFF-
6108-00169 (FoCC) and the European Union’s Horizon
2020 research and innovation programme under grant
agreement No 731583 (SODA).
We thank Adrià Gascón for fruitful discussions, as
well as members of NEC and BIU, especially Prof.
Benny Pinkas and Prof. Yehuda Lindell. We thank Assi
Barak(whowaspreviouslyonthispaper)formanyhelp-
ful discussions in the initial phases of this project.
1 Introduction
Machine Learning (ML) models are becoming more rel-
evant in our day-to-day lives due to their ability to per-
form predictions on several types of data. Neural Net-
works (NNs), and in particular Convolutional Neural
Networks (CNNs), have emerged as a promising solu-
tion for many real-life problems such as facial recogni-
tion [46], image and video analysis for self-driving cars
[7] and even for playing games (most readers probably
know ofAlphaGo [61] which in 2016 beat one of the top
Go players). CNNs have also found applications within
areas of medicine. [23], for example, demonstrates that
CNNs are as eﬀective as experts at detecting skin can-
cers from images, and [21] investigated using CNNs to
examine chest x-rays.
Many applications that use Machine Learning to in-
fer something about a piece of data, does so on data
of sensitive nature, such as in the two examples cited
above. In such cases the ideal would be to allow the in-
put data to remain private. Conversely, and since model
training is by far the most expensive part of deploying
*Corresponding Author: Marcel Keller: CSIRO’s Data61,
E-mail: mks.keller@gmail.com
arXiv:1910.12435v2  [cs.CR]  1 Mar 2021