Secure Evaluation of Quantized Neural Networks 9
Threshold Z2k Fp
t < nPassive OTSemi2k OTSemiPrime
Active SPDZ2k LowGear
t < n/ 2Passive Replicated2k ReplicatedPrime
Active PsReplicated2k PsReplicatedPrime
Table 1. MPC protocols we use, classiﬁed depending on their
security level (passive vs. active) and their arithmetic properties
(modulo 2kvs. modulo a prime). Names are from MP-SPDZ.
we distinguish between two cases: honest vs dishonest
majority. In the former, the adversary is allowed to cor-
rupt strictly less than half of the parties. We instantiate
this case with 3 parties and 1 corruption, as that leads
to the most eﬃcient protocols. In the latter case, the
adversary can corrupt any number of parties provided
at least one party remains honest. We instantiate this
setting for 2 parties. While honest majority protocols
impose a stronger security assumption than dishonest
majority, they tend to be simpler in their design and
thus more eﬃcient. We further distinguish between pas-
sive and active corruptions, where the former means the
adversary follows the protocol and the latter allows the
adversarytodeviate.Notsurprising,activelysecurepro-
tocols impose an overhead over passively secure ones.
Finally, the algebraic structure on which the computa-
tion takes place also plays an important role in terms
of eﬃciency and protocol design, with protocols over Fp
being easier to design and possibly implement, but pro-
tocols over Z2kproviding some eﬃciency improvements
in terms of basic arithmetic and bit-operations [17].
We consider a total of 8MPC protocols to sup-
port the secure evaluation of the quantized CNNs, corre-
spondingtoallthepossiblecombinationsofthethreedi-
mensions mentioned above (active/passive, honest/dis-
honest majority and computation modulo a prime or a
power-of-two). Table 1 contains an overview of which
protocol is used in which security model. We provide
more details on each protocol in Section B in the ap-
pendix.
3.2 Building Blocks
For many applications, the multiplication protocol as-
sumed for/angbracketleft·/angbracketrightis not enough. In practice, many useful
functionalities cannot be nicely expressed in terms of
additions and multiplications and therefore, more often
than not, researchers end up developing custom proto-
cols for speciﬁc applications. As we argued in Section1.3, this also includes the case of secure evaluation of
Neural Networks.
In our case, thanks to the quantization scheme by
Jacob et al. [38] most of the operations in the evalu-
ation of a quantized Neural Network become additions
and multiplications, which are already supported by the
MPC protocols we consider here. Furthermore, the mul-
tiplications have a very special structure: they are part
of a dot product operation, which can be computed
more eﬃciently for the particular case of passive secu-
rity with an honest majority. However, the evaluation
still requires non-arithmetic operations like truncations
and comparisons, which are more expensive and require
specialized subprotocols for their computation. These,
fortunately, can be also implemented in the arithmetic
black-box model, that is, making use only of additions
andmultiplications,whichpreservesourﬂexibilitywhen
it comes to the underlying MPC protocol. In what fol-
lows we describe the primitives we require in order to
integrate the quantized models from Section 2 into our
secure engine.
3.2.1 Secure comparison
An important primitive involves comparing two secret-
shared values, in order to take certain action depending
on which of the two is larger. However, since revealing
whichofthetwoinputsislargerleaksinformationabout
the inputs themselves (which is not allowed in many ap-
plications),asecurecomparisonprotocoloutputsthebit
indicating the result of the comparison in secret-shared
form. More precisely, a secure comparison subprotocol
allows the parties to compute /angbracketleftb/angbracketright←/angbracketleftx/angbracketright?</angbracketlefty/angbracketright, that is,
b= 1ifx<y, andb= 0otherwise.
Just like the case with truncation, this problem is
well motivated and has received enough attention by
the community, with many existing proposals providing
diﬀerent trade-oﬀs. Given this, we may assume the exis-
tence of a secure comparison subprotocol, which can be
instantiated for example using the constructions from
[9] for the ﬁeld case, and [17] for the ring case. For the
special case of replicated secret sharing over Z2k, Mo-
hassel and Rindal [50] have proposed a more eﬃcient
approach. Comparison is equivalent to extracting the
most signiﬁcant bit of the diﬀerence between the two
operands. This bit can be computed from the carry bit
of adding the three shares, which in turn is possible
to achieve by a binary circuit on the local bit decom-
position of shares. While this binary circuit has linear