selection approach, furthermore, avoids the costly retraining of candidate models that are not ultimately
selected.
We applied our ensembling approach in the context of sentiment classication across four dierent do-
mains. Overall, promising results were observed. The ensembles slightly outperformed those associated with
a greedy selection approach in two out of the four cases evaluated. More interestingly, an ensemble of the 590
base learners selected by means of the favourability model achieved a 1% improvement in median accuracy
over the best individual model in respect of the SMS data set, in spite of the average base learner accuracy
being 14% lower than that of the individual model. The selection of a diverse set of base learners according
to our diversity metric therefore appears to provide some advantage. There is, however, considerable room
for improvement of this approach, as is discussed in the following section. 595
6.2. Limitations and future work
For the meta-learning approach towards combining base learner outputs, we only employed logistic re-
gression. This approach served as a proof of concept, as well as an indicator of the value of ensemble
learning in sentiment analysis. In order to evaluate the true limits of this approach, however, it would be
valuable to investigate the use of more complex combination algorithms, such as random forests or neural 600
networks. Furthermore, including a hyperparameter tuning step for this model could signicantly improve
on the observed results.
Finally, with respect to the proposed favourability model, several avenues for improvement can be pursued
based on our observations made during numerical experimentations. Although ensembles of base learners
selected according to our proposed model were shown to leverage internal diversity successfully and thereby 605
signicantly improve on average base learner accuracy, computed ensemble favourability values did not
correlate particularly well with relative ensemble performance. A dierent weighting of the composite metrics
of diversity, accuracy and ensemble size may produce a more eective measure of ensemble favourability.
Furthermore, it was observed that imposing a minimum threshold on base learner accuracy was capable of
improving the performance of the resulting ensemble models. Another promising avenue of future work could 610
be employing a Pareto approach instead of assigning weights to the individual component metrics.
7. References
[1] J. Kazmaier, J. H. van Vuuren, A generic framework for sentiment analysis: Leveraging opinion-bearing data to
inform decision making, decision Support Systems, 135, Manuscript 113304 (no page numbers) (2020).
[2] J. Kazmaier, J. H. van Vuuren, Sentiment analysis of unstructured customer feedback for a retail bank, ORiON 615
36 (1) (2020) 35{71.
[3] T. G. Dietterich, Ensemble methods in machine learning, in: International Workshop on Multiple Classier
Systems, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2000, pp. 1{15.
25