made by previous base learners. The general boosting procedure is illustrated in Figure 4 by means of an
example with three base learners.
Base learner 1+2+3 Base learner 1 Base learner 1+2 y^
y1   y^ y12   y^
Figure 4: A schematic illustration of the boosting ensemble method with three base learners.
Base learner 1 is trained in respect of the original training data. Subsequently, its error, denoted by the
dierence between the predicted outcome ^yiand the true label y, is observed. In the case of the example,
the model was found to misclassify instances of the star and circle classes. The data distribution is then 200
adjusted to give more weight to those classes that were misclassied, as indicated by the larger shapes in the
second data distribution. A second base learner is then trained in respect of the new distribution, and its
predictions are weighted with those of Base learner 1 to form an initial two-model ensemble. The results of
this ensemble are then employed to guide the next data distribution, and the process is repeated a specied
number of times. By iteratively adding new models targeted to address the weaknesses of the previous 205
models, weak learners are boosted to form a single strong learner.
The boosting procedure has been adapted by several algorithms, including the award-winning Ad-
aBoost [16] algorithm and XGBoost [17], which was employed in seventeen of the twenty nine winning
solutions to competitions hosted on the popular platform Kaggle [5, 9].
2.4. Stacking 210
Stacking [18] is an ensemble learning method in which a meta-learner is trained to combine several
independent base learners. This type of ensemble is typically heterogeneous, with diversity stemming from
the dierent learning algorithms employed. This is illustrated in Figure 5, where the same data set is
employed to train base learners of dierent types (denoted by dierent shades of grey). As is true for
the base learners in an ensemble, any learning algorithm can be employed as the meta-learning algorithm. 215
Typically, however, some form of linear or logistic regression is applied [18, 19].
As indicated in the gure, the meta-learning algorithm is trained in respect of a new data set formed by
the predicted outputs ^yiof each of the base learners i2f1;2;:::;Kgin order to return a collated prediction
^y. If the predictions which form the training data for the meta-learning algorithm were made in respect of
the same data employed to train the base learners, there would be a high risk of overtting [7]. A k-fold 220
cross-validation approach is therefore typically applied, whereby the base learners are trained in respect of
9