classication). Aggregating the results of several models may reduce the variance in the predicted results,
resulting in a superior model accuracy [15].
According to this method, diversity is achieved by training each base learner in respect of a dierent subset 175
of the training data (diversity by input manipulation5). Bagging is typically implemented by employing base
learners of the same type, and is therefore considered an homogeneous ensemble. Furthermore, each model
is constructed independently.
In order to provide a large enough data subset to each of the base learners, bootstrap sampling is
employed, which entails uniformly sampling with replacement from the original data set until a new data 180
set of the same size as the original data set has been constructed, which contains some repeated data points.
The outputs of each base learner are then aggregated by means of a simple average or plurality vote.
This process is illustrated schematically in Figure 3 in the case of three base learners, where cylindrical
shapes represent data stores, the symbols contained within these data stores represent dierent training
examples and where the white circle represents the aggregation of model outputs by means of weighting. 185
As is evident from the gure, the bootstrap samples each contain one or two repeated elements from the
original data set and represent dierent distributions of the same data. In the conguration in the gure,
Base learner 3 will likely more accurately dierentiate between stars and squares, whilst Base learners 1 and
2 will likely be better at identifying triangles and circles, respectively. The models are combined with the
aim of harnessing the models' complementary strengths in order to predict the output vector ^yaccurately. 190
Base learner 3Base learner 1
Base learner 2 y^
Figure 3: A schematic illustration of the bagging ensemble method with three base learners.
2.3. Boosting
Boosting is a procedure by which weak learners may be converted to strong learners, as rst outlined
by Schapire [11]. As in bagging, diversity is ensured by input manipulation, whereby each base learner is
trained in respect of a dierently distributed data set. Unlike bagging, however, boosting is a sequential and
dependent process. More specically, the data set for each new base learner is generated to target the errors 195
5The random forests technique additionally ensures diversity by learning algorithm manipulation, since it randomly selects
a subset of features that may be considered for the split at each level of the decision tree. Random forests therefore represents
an ensemble hybridisation approach.
8