6. Conclusions
In this paper, the eectiveness of various ensemble congurations was compared in the context of senti-
ment classication. After presenting a review of the literature on ensemble techniques in general and within
the context of sentiment analysis, in particular, a methodology was presented whereby various methods for 555
constructing homogeneous ensembles could be comparatively evaluated in a comparative fashion. Six dif-
ferent ensemble congurations (the combination of discrete and scoring model outputs by means of simple
voting, weighted voting and meta-learning, respectively) were implemented in conjunction with three dif-
ferent ensemble selection methods (a greedy approach and two variants of a newly proposed favourability
model) in respect of four data sets from various domains. 560
Median performance improvements of up to 5.53% over the best individual model were observed for
several ensemble congurations in respect of all four validation data sets. Furthermore, clear trends were
identied that may prove useful to other researchers in the eld. In particular, the combination of scoring
or probabilistic outputs by means of meta-learning matched or outperformed the remaining ve ensemble
congurations in respect of all the data sets in the validation suite. Moreover, in nine out of twelve cases 565
ensembles employing scoring outputs outperformed those utilising discrete outputs.
6.1. Research contributions
In spite of a growing interest in ensemble learning techniques in the machine learning community, the
application of ensemble models to sentiment classication is still limited. The application and comparative
evaluation of several dierent ensemble learning techniques to benchmark data sets from the sentiment 570
analysis literature may therefore be viewed as a useful contribution of this paper, which may form the basis
for future experimentation, as well as the promotion of complementary over competitive model selection.
Furthermore, as discussed in x2.5, the problem of selecting suitable base learners for an ensemble model
from a pool of candidates is under-explored in the literature. Many existing techniques involve comparing
individual prediction errors of candidate models in respect of training or validation data in order to select 575
a diverse and accurate set of base learners. As the number of candidate models increases, however, these
approaches become expensive in terms of storage and computing power, since all candidate models must
be trained in respect of the same data and their individual predictions stored. In this paper, a dierent
approach was proposed, in which a set of base learners is selected by maximising a novel favourability metric
| a weighted sum of measures of ensemble diversity, accuracy and size. The proposed diversity measure is 580
based on meta-features of the models, rather than their individual predictions. Ensemble diversity was, for
instance, quantied as the degree of dierentiation between base learners in respect of the learning algorithm
and feature set employed. This measure of diversity can be computed prior to deploying candidate models
and does not require individual predictions to be stored. If some measure of accuracy is already available
for candidate base learners, such as historical performance in respect of similar tasks, the proposed ensemble 585
24