The power of ensemble learning in sentiment analysis
Jacqueline Kazmaier1, Jan H van Vuuren
Stellenbosch Unit for Operations Research in Engineering, Department of Industrial Engineering, Stellenbosch University,
Private Bag XI, Matieland, 7602, South Africa
Abstract
An ensemble of models is a set of learning models whose individual predictions are combined in such a
way that component models compensate for each other's weaknesses. Although there has been a growing
interest in ensemble learning techniques in the general machine learning community, the use of ensembles
in sentiment classication is still limited. Moreover, much of the research activity on ensemble learning
is centred around homogeneous ensembles, although heterogeneous ensembles may prove very useful when
combining pre-trained models, which are often readily available.
In this paper, several techniques for constructing heterogeneous ensembles are applied and comparatively
evaluated in respect of benchmark sentiment classication data sets across four dierent domains. Median
performance improvements of up to 5.53% over the best individual model are observed for several ensemble
congurations in respect of all four validation data sets, and clear trends are identied that may prove useful
to other researchers in the eld. Furthermore, a novel ensemble selection approach is proposed that avoids
the storage of individual predictions, as well as the costly retraining of all candidate models for an ensemble,
that are often required by other such approaches.
Keywords: Ensemble learning, Sentiment analysis, Machine learning, Natural language processing
1. Introduction
Natural language processing (NLP) is a subeld of articial intelligence that enables computers to read,
interpret and derive meaning from human language. Tasks performed by NLP systems include machine
translation, automatic summarisation and sentiment analysis. The latter is often formulated as a classica-
tion problem of a given text into various sentiment categories ( e.g.positive, negative and neutral) and solved 5
by means of lexicon-based or machine learning approaches.
It was shown in [1] that lexicon-based models may be highly accurate in one domain, but typically
do not generalise well to other domains. Furthermore, whilst machine learning models trained in respect
of similar data often outperform lexicon-based models, this is only possible if a comprehensive process is
1Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: jqkazmaier@gmail.com (J Kazmaier), vuuren@sun.ac.za (JH van Vuuren)
Preprint submitted to Decision Support Systems January 6, 2021