in superior results for this selection approach compared with the performance of the best individual model. 515
Even with an average base learner accuracy 14% lower than that of the best individual model, as was the
case for the SMS data set, this ensemble conguration resulted in a 1% increase in median accuracy16. These
results suggest that there is potential for selecting base learners according to the proposed metric of ensemble
diversity in combination with a meta-learning approach.
There does not, however, appear to be a direct correlation between the ensemble favourability scores in 520
Table 3 and the scores achieved by the associated ensemble models summarised in Table 4. Whilst the most
favourable set of base learners was always generated according to the model selection approach, this set did
not result in the best ensemble performance in any of the four cases (although the results were typically
very close to those of the best ensemble). The individual metrics of ensemble size, diversity and accuracy,
when considered separately, were equally inadequate predictors of ensemble performance. Notwithstanding 525
this, the largest improvement over the best base learner (observed in respect of the Twitter data set) was
achieved by the most diverse ensemble of those generated according to the greedy approach, which generally
produced the largest ensembles with high accuracy scores. A dierent weighting of ensemble size, diversity
and accuracy in the proposed favourability metric may therefore be more eective in predicting ensemble
performance. 530
It is also worth noting that the Twitter data set presented the only case in which a lexicon-based model
was not signicantly outperformed by all of the machine learning models. It was therefore also the only case
in which a high ensemble diversity could be achieved without a signicant trade-o in ensemble accuracy.
On the other hand, whilst the model ML selection approach eectively applied a minimum threshold on base
learner accuracy for the other data sets in the validation suite, excluding the Vader model from the ensemble 535
corresponded to setting a maximum threshold on base learner accuracy in respect of the Twitter data set.
It is, therefore, unsurprising that the ensemble selected by the model approach achieved better results than
those of the ensemble selected viathe model ML approach only in respect of this data set. The inclusion
of a constraint on the minimum base learner accuracy in the optimisation problem (2){(3) may present an
additional avenue for improvement of the proposed ensemble selection approach. 540
With respect to the eectiveness of the output types and combination methods employed in the ensemble
models, a clear trend was observed across all four data sets, as shown in Figure 7. According to this trend,
the combination of scoring or probabilistic outputs by means of meta-learning matched or outperformed the
remaining ve ensemble congurations in respect of all the data sets in the validation suite. The relative
performance among the other ensemble congurations varied across data sets. In nine out of twelve cases, 545
however, ensembles employing scoring outputs outperformed those utilising discrete outputs.
In summary, the complementary selection of models resulted in a median performance improvement
over competitive selection across all four data sets. Furthermore, it was shown that ensembles formed by
16In both cases, scores are reported relative to the median accuracy of the best base learner.
22