and Pandey [23] found that a voting ensemble with base learners selected according to a greedy approach
matched or outperformed a stacking classier using all base learners in respect of four dierent data sets. The
stochastic iterative ensemble selection method of Caruana et al. [24, 25] consistently outperformed the greedy
approach, whilst a combination of cluster-based ensemble selection and stacking performed comparably with
or marginally worse than the greedy approach. The best results were, however, consistently achieved by rst 320
aggregating the results of base learners with the same learning algorithm and then stacking the aggregated
results. This may indicate that selecting base learners based on the diversity of their underlying learning
algorithms presents a promising approach.
3. The literature on ensemble learning in sentiment analysis
As mentioned in Section 1, the use of ensembles in sentiment classication is limited compared to other 325
research areas [6]. Nevertheless, several researchers have shown that ensembles and hybrid models perform
better than their individual components in respect of sentiment classication.
Wilson et al. [37], for instance, observed a 23% to 96% increase in classication accuracy when using
boosting compared to individual classiers. Prabowo and Thelwall [38] similarly found that a hybrid ap-
proach combining several lexicon-based and rule-based approaches with an SVM classier outperformed all 330
individual classiers in three of four tested cases.
Typical ensemble learning approaches towards sentiment analysis include stacking and weighting of dif-
ferent types of classiers. Comparatively, meta-learning approaches appear to outperform simple weighting
approaches towards sentiment classication. Omar et al. [39] compared the performance of a simple voting
ensemble with stacking ensembles employing na ve Bayes, logistic regression and SVM as meta-learners, 335
respectively, for classifying sentiment in Arabic customer reviews. They found that all ensemble techniques
outperformed their individual component models, and that stacking with logistic regression produced the
best results in terms of the well-known F-measure for both subjectivity and sentiment classication. Tsut-
sumi et al. [40] compared the performance of an SVM, ME and a lexicon-based approach with ensembles of
these classiers employing simple voting, weighted voting and meta-learning by means of an SVM, respec- 340
tively. Once again, all ensemble classiers were found to outperform the individual base learners, whilst the
best performance was achieved by stacking an SVM as the meta-learner.
Wang et al. [6], however, noted diculties associated with selecting base learners in a stacking approach
and actively turned away from such methods. Instead, they compared bagging, boosting and random subspace
or vertical partitioning approaches towards ensemble learning with na ve Bayes, maximum entropy, a decision 345
tree,knearest neighbours and an SVM as base learners, respectively. The results showed that the random
subspace approach with an SVM as the base learner performed best in six out of ten cases, and comparably
with the best results in the other four cases.
Other researchers have achieved good results by combining stacking with input data manipulation in
respect of the feature dimension. Xia et al. [41], for example, compared the eectiveness of various ensemble 350
13