partition base learners into clusters of models that make similar predictions. Each cluster is then separately
pruned in order to increase the overall diversity of the ensemble. Giacinto et al. [34], for instance, employed
hierarchical agglomerative clustering to partition classiers into groups of learners that made similar errors 285
in respect of a validation set. The base learner in a cluster whose predictions are most dissimilar to those of
learners from other clusters is then chosen to represent each cluster, whilst majority voting is employed to
aggregate predictions from all clusters. The number of clusters is chosen to maximise the validation accuracy
of the pruned ensemble.
The third category comprises ranking-based methods , which sort candidate base learners according to 290
some evaluation metric and then select a predened number of base learners according to this sorting order.
Inorientation ordering , for example, a signature vector is computed for each base learner. The signature
vector is a binary vector with one entry for each training observation, taking the value one if the observation
is correctly classied, or zero otherwise. The ensemble signature vector is the average of all base learner
signature vectors and represents the voting ensemble's predictive accuracy. Furthermore, the reference vector 295
is chosen as a vector orthogonal to the ensemble signature vector. The base learners are, nally, ordered
according to the angle between their signature vector and the reference vector. Only those base learners with
angles less than =2 radians are included in the ensemble. In essence, this method gives preference to base
learners that correctly classify instances misclassied by the full ensemble. Rooney et al. [35], on the other
hand, dened a composite metric, accuracy i+(diversity i), for each candidate base learner i. This metric is 300
composed of the base learner's validation accuracy (relative to that of the most accurate base learner) and the
base learner's contribution to overall ensemble diversity, weighted by a user-specied parameter 2[0;1].
Two dierent measures of diversity were compared in the paper. The rst represents the proportion of
models in the ensemble to which the base learner's prediction error is not highly correlated7. The second
represents the normalised variance of the base learner's predictions relative to the average predictions of all 305
candidate base learners. The Kbase learners achieving the highest composite metrics were then included in
the ensemble.
Finally, Tsoumakas et al. [22] dened a fourth category to accommodate all other approaches to ensemble
pruning. This includes, for example, a statistical approach by which only classiers whose performances are
signicantly8better than those of the other base learners are retained in the ensemble. 310
Onan [30] compared the relative performances of various homogeneous and heterogeneous ensemble mod-
els, as well as several evolutionary approaches towards ensemble selection in combination with stacking, in
respect of text classication problems. He found that heterogeneous ensembles ( i.e.stacking) outperformed
homogeneous ensembles ( e.g.AdaBoost, Bagging and Random Forest), whilst stacking congurations op-
timised by means of evolutionary algorithms performed better than regular stacking methods. Whalen 315
7Rooney et al. [35] considered errors with a Pearson correlation coecient [36] of 0.6 or greater as highly correlated.
8A dierence between two values is considered statistically signicant if it is unlikely that a dierence of such magnitude
would be observed due to sampling error alone.
12