tions in order to maximise some evaluation criterion. These methods may further be classied as greedy or 250
stochastic .
Whalen and Pandey [23], for example, employed a simple greedy approach in which the Ktop performing
classiers are added to the ensemble. They compared this approach with a variation by Caruana et al. [24,
25], in which an ensemble is iteratively generated by randomly selecting a small subset of candidate base
learners during each iteration and then including the candidate whose addition to the ensemble results in 255
the maximum performance of the ensemble. A notable drawback of such approaches is the requirement that
the ensemble size Kshould be selected beforehand. Furthermore, only the accuracy of the individual base
learners is considered in the rst approach, without regard for the eect of the base learners' inclusion on the
ensemble performance. Several other researchers have employed evolutionary algorithms, such as the genetic
algorithm [26, 27], ant colony optimisation [28], the articial bee colony algorithm [29] and particle swarm 260
optimisation [30] to select base learners. The objective functions of these algorithms are typically related
to the performance of the entire ensemble. If simple voting is employed as the output aggregation method,
this value is easily computed. If, however, a meta-learning algorithm is employed, the approach comes at a
signicant computational cost, since training and prediction steps must be performed during each iteration.
Other researchers have, therefore, computed evaluation measures re
ecting the diversity and accuracy 265
of a selected subset of base learners, based on the notion that choosing accurate and diverse base learners
should result in an accurate ensemble [31, 22]. This approach, however, introduces a dierent problem,
since there is neither a formal denition of model diversity nor a generally accepted means of quantifying its
magnitude [31, 32, 22]. Kadkhodaei and Moghadam [33] quantied diversity based on a measure of entropy
related to the classication of individual observations by the base learners. More specically, entropy (or 270
diversity) as dened in their paper is maximised when half the base learners vote for the positive class
and the other half vote for the negative class in a binary classication problem. A genetic algorithm was
employed to maximise entropy by selectively including certain base learners in the ensemble. Gu et al. [31]
presented a survey of multi-objective ensemble selection techniques, where ensemble selection is performed
in the context of a trade-o between accuracy and diversity. Several additional measures of diversity may be 275
found in the survey [31], many of which consider classiers that make dierent errors in respect of training
or validation data as diverse. By this denition, an increase in ensemble accuracy results in a decrease in
ensemble diversity, since the overall frequency of errors is reduced. Accuracy and diversity are therefore
often viewed as con
icting objectives, and Pareto optimal6solutions to the ensemble selection problem are
typically sought. 280
Approaches within the second category in the taxonomy by Tsoumakas et al. [22], namely clustering-
based methods , typically employ a two-stage process. First, unsupervised learning algorithms are employed to
6In this context, a solution is Pareto optimal if any other solution that results in a higher accuracy (diversity) is also
associated with a lower diversity (accuracy).
11