hypothesish. If there are too few data points available, the algorithm may nd several hypotheses that yield
the same accuracy in respect of the training data. By constructing an ensemble of several such accurate 85
classiers, their hypotheses are eectively averaged, reducing the risk of choosing an incorrect hypothesis
and thereby more closely resembling the true hypothesis f, as shown in Figure 2(a).
The second reason is computational . Many learning algorithms search through the hypothesis space by
means of local search algorithms, such as gradient descent, which may become stuck in local optima, even
when sucient training data are available. By repeatedly deploying such a search algorithm from dierent 90
starting points and aggregating the results, a better approximation may be achieved, as shown in Figure 2(b).
Finally, ensemble methods may overcome representational problems. Often, the true function fis not
contained within the hypothesis space Hprovided to the algorithm. The aggregation of several dierent
hypotheses inHmay, however, allow for an expansion of the space of representable functions, as shown in
Figure 2(c). 95
2.1.1. Diversity
Various dierent approaches exist for ensuring diversity between base learners. The three most common
approaches may be described as follows [3, 9]:
(i)Input manipulation : According to this approach, the training algorithm is executed several times, each
time employing a dierent subset of the training data. These subsets can be generated by random 100
sampling, or by partitioning the data set to either include dierent training examples with all features
in each subset ( horizontal partitioning ) or to include all training examples with dierent groups of
features in each subset ( vertical partitioning ).
(ii)Learning algorithm manipulation : Diversity may also be induced by altering the manner in which the
learning algorithm traverses the hypothesis space by selecting dierent hyperparameters for each base 105
learner or by introducing randomness into one of the steps of the algorithm. Forming a heterogeneous
ensemble comprising dierent learning algorithms may also be considered a form of learning algorithm
manipulation.
(iii) Output manipulation : According to this approach, the target variable provided to each learning al-
gorithm is altered. A multi-class ensemble classier may, for example, be constructed by combining 110
several binary classiers.
Naturally, it is also possible to combine several of the above approaches when constructing an ensemble.
Sagi and Rakoch [9] refer to such a combination as an ensemble hybridisation approach .
2.1.2. Dependency
Ensemble methods may also be distinguished by their dependency between base models [9]. Ensembles 115
generated within a dependent paradigm are constructed sequentially, allowing the knowledge generated
during the training of a previous base learner to in
uence the construction of the next base learner. In
5