followed to select a suitable combination of text features2, algorithm and (hyper)parameters [1]. Improving 10
the robustness of sentiment classication models, therefore, remains an open challenge.
Anensemble of models is a set of learning models whose individual predictions are combined in some
way [3] in order to attain a more generalisable result [4]. The intuition underlying this approach is that
dierent models exhibit dierent inductive biases. If the errors caused by these biases are uncorrelated, the
models in the ensemble are expected to compensate for each other's errors, resulting in a decrease in the 15
overall error when the model results are aggregated. It has been shown that ensemble methods can eectively
leverage this property in order to reduce variance error without increasing bias error [5].
There has been a growing interest in ensemble learning techniques aimed at producing more generalisable
models. Compared to other research areas, however, the use of ensembles in sentiment classication is still
limited [6]. Moreover, much of the research activity on ensemble learning is centred around homogeneous en- 20
sembles (combining similar models). Especially since pre-trained models are commonly encountered in NLP
tasks, however, there is also a need to investigate the understudied problem of constructing heterogeneous
ensembles (combining dissimilar models).
In this paper, several techniques for constructing heterogeneous ensembles are applied and comparatively
evaluated in respect of benchmark sentiment classication data sets across four dierent domains. In the 25
process, the advantages of ensemble learning are illustrated, and clear trends are identied that may prove
useful to other researchers in the eld. Furthermore, a novel ensemble selection approach is proposed that
avoids the storage of individual predictions, as well as the costly retraining of all candidate models for an
ensemble, that are often required by other such approaches.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. An overview of the literature on ensemble learning, 30
in general, is given in Section 2, and this is followed by a review of ensemble learning for sentiment analysis,
in particular. The methodology followed to implement and compare selected ensemble learning techniques
is described in Section 3. Subsequently, the relative performances of ensemble methods in respect of the
benchmark data sets are presented in Section 4. Finally, the paper closes with a short discussion on its
contents and some proposals for future work in Section 5. 35
2. The literature on ensemble learning
The notion that the combination of several `weak' classiers3can be combined to form a `strong' classier
has been studied in various contexts. French mathematician Nicolas de Condorcet, for instance, established
what is now known as Condorcet's Jury Theorem [8]. Consider a group of njurors who wish to reach a binary
2In order to apply machine learning algorithms, text must rst be converted into machine-readable vectors by means of bag-
of-words or word embeddings representations, for example (see [2] for a detailed review of document representation methods
for sentiment analysis).
3A classier that performs only marginally better than random guessing is referred to as a weak classier [5, 7]. A strong
classier , on the other hand, can be arbitrarily accurate [5].
2