decision ( e.g.to nd a defendant guilty ornot guilty ) by majority vote, where each juror has a probability 40
pof making the correct decision and where the probability that the correct verdict is reached by majority
vote isP. The theorem states that if p > 0:5, thenP > p . Furthermore, the theorem also states that
P!1 asn!1 for allp>0:5. The theorem has two limiting assumptions, namely that the votes should
be independent of one another and that there should only be two possible outcomes. Nevertheless, if these
conditions hold true, a jury whose members' judgements are only slightly better than a random vote can 45
come to the correct conclusion provided it is suciently large [5, 9].
Analogously, English statistician and polymath Sir Francis Galton discovered the phenomenon of the
wisdom of crowds whilst attending a livestock fair. As part of a contest, several visitors of the fair submitted
guesses estimating the weight of an ox. Galton observed that, although no single visitor succeeded in guessing
the true weight of the ox (1 198 pounds), the average of all the guesses (1 197 pounds) came remarkably close 50
to this value. As in the the situation described in Condorcet's Jury Theorem, the aggregation of numerous
simplistic predictions resulted in an accurate prediction [5]. As before, however, this is not unconditionally
true. According to Surowiekie [10], the following four conditions must hold in order for a crowd to be
considered wise:
IDiversity of opinon : Each person should have some information that is private . This may take several 55
forms, including a unique or unconventional interpretation of the facts.
IIIndependence : The opinion of an individual should not be in
uenced by the opinions of others.
IIIDecentralisation : People should each have access to a local source of knowledge or specialisation.
IVAggregation : There should be some means by which individual judgements may be combined to form a
collective decision. 60
The same basic principles that hold true for a wise crowd or jury may be applied to form an eective
ensemble of mathematical or statistical models. In the remainder of this section, ensemble methods are
discussed in the context of classication. Important considerations when constructing an ensemble classier
are rst outlined, and this is followed by descriptions of three popular ensemble methods, namely bagging ,
boosting and stacking . 65
2.1. Constructing an ensemble classier
A typical ensemble architecture comprises several base learners , which take as input an instance of the
feature vector x, and some means of combining or aggregating their results to yield a single prediction y,
as shown in Figure 1. Base learners are typically trained in respect of a set of training data by means of a
base learning algorithm , which can be a decision tree, a support vector machine (SVM) or any other suitable
algorithm [7]. Mathematically, an ensemble learning model may be described as a mapping
'(xi) =G(f1(xi);f2(xi);:::;f k(xi)) = ^yi;
whereGis an aggregation function and f1;f2;:::;f kare the base learners [9]. Often, base learners are
generated by applying the same base learning algorithm, resulting in homogeneous ensembles. Heterogeneous
3