congurations. More specically, they employed two dierent feature sets (parts-of-speech-related features
and features capturing word relations) and three dierent base learners (maximum entropy, na ve Bayes
and SVM) in conjunction with three dierent ensemble methods (simple voting, simple averaging of output
probabilities and stacking). The stacking approach was implemented in several dierent congurations
using linear regression, logistic regression, a neural network and SVM as meta-learners, respectively, and 355
in the form of the StackingC approach with linear regression as a meta-learner. In general, Xia et al. [41]
found that constructing an ensemble based on the dierent feature sets outperformed the use of a joint
feature set, and that ensembles of dierent classiers outperformed individual classiers, with meta-learning
approaches faring better than simple voting or averaging. Furthermore, ensembles of both dierent feature
sets and dierent classication algorithms outperformed the associated individual approaches. Araque et 360
al.[42] similarly found that an ensemble of classiers trained in respect of dierent types of features (surface
features, generic word embeddings and word embeddings trained for sentiment analysis) performed best and
that the meta-learning approach outperformed simple majority voting.
More complex approaches involved the use of additional model selection layers. Hassan et al. [43], for
example, developed a two-stage ensemble framework for sentiment analysis of Twitter data. During the 365
rst stage, dierent data sets, feature sets and classication algorithms are combined to form an array of
dierent models. A subset of the possible models is then selected by means of an iterative search algorithm
seeking to maximise validation performance of the ensemble. This approach was shown to better identify
extremities in the sentiment expressed in Tweets over time. On a similar note, Khan et al. [44] proposed
a semi-supervised framework in which SentiWordNet scores were revised by means of point-wise mutual 370
information, and where feature weights for these scores were learnt by an SVM-based multi-objective model
selection algorithm, resulting in superior performance in respect of benchmark data sets over existing lexicon-
based and machine learning approaches.
Finally, Lam and Kai [45] proposed a meta-learning ensemble model whose input features represent meta-
data on the data set or task at hand rather than the outputs of base learners. The model then recommends 375
a specic algorithm to make the prediction based on the given situation. This approach therefore represents
a mixture of expert models. Their results showed an improvement in classication accuracy for the ensemble
over individual base learners.
In summary, there is only limited volume of work in the literature on ensemble learning in sentiment
analysis that addresses the dicult, and often expensive, task of choosing suitable base learners from a pool 380
of candidates. Furthermore, no papers could be found that comparatively evaluate dierent combinations
of output type, combination method and ensemble selection approach simultaneously in respect of various
data sets. Both of these shortcomings are addressed in the remainder of this paper.
14