M. Homaei et al.
1 3 201 Page 40 of 65
and false data injection, compromise the integrity and reliability of DT systems. These 
attacks aim not only to disrupt but also to erode trust in data accuracy, which is crucial 
for the effective functioning of DTs. Poisoning attacks that corrupt training datasets for 
ML models can severely impact decision-making processes, underscoring the critical 
need for advanced defensive strategies to safeguard the security and operational effi-
ciency of DT-dependent systems (Lalouani et al. 2022) (Table 10).
4.4  Countermeasures via DTs: enhancing cybersecurity in the digital realm
In cybersecurity, AI and ML manifest as double-edged swords, providing formidable 
defences and potent means for attacks (Homaei et al. 2022). Within the context of DTs-dig-
ital mirrors of physical systems-AI and ML are essential, acting both to protect and to chal-
lenge. These technologies are pivotal in cybersecurity, strengthening defences while also 
being employed by attackers to infiltrate systems stealthily. Experts have recommended 
various defensive strategies to counter these threats, especially those pertinent to native 
digital applications (Khan et al. 2022; Zhang et al. 2022a).
Blockchain technology is a prime example of defensive measures, enhancing reli-
ability and securing the data essential to a DT’s functionality (Putz et al. 2021; Huo et al. 
2022; Liu et al. 2022). The integrity and confidentiality of data are paramount, necessi-
tating robust protection. Blockchain employs centralized and distributed encryption algo-
rithms to effectively manage and secure data distribution across networks. It also provides 
mechanisms to detect and prevent code manipulations within CPS. Thanks to its immuta-
ble nature, blockchain facilitates secure data tracking across networks, bolstering security 
and safety standards and providing a solid defence against unauthorized intrusions. Addi-
tionally, blockchain supports the engineering phase of DTs by providing monitorable and 
programmable solutions that enhance ML patterns, thereby increasing DTs’ resilience to 
cybercriminal activities and enabling them to serve multiple stakeholders simultaneously.Table 10  Attack method by AI in DT
Term Specifications
Cybercriminals can also use 
Automated Detection of Vulner -
abilitiesAI as a tool. Attackers often use AI to find and exploit vulnerabilities 
much faster than developers. Cybercriminals are usually ahead of 
security experts because they focus on one target (da Silva et al. 
2023; Matheu et al. 2020)
Fuzzing Technique For detecting automated vulnerabilities, fuzzing is proper. Specifically, 
designed inputs are fed to programs to trigger vulnerabilities and 
cause the system to crash (Matheu et al. 2020)
Infiltration Attacks Disruptive inputs to AI-based systems, including noise and algorithm 
changes by or through physical, cyber, or hybrid methods, expose 
the digital counterpart of self-driving cars to some of these attacks 
(Lalouani et al. 2022)
False data Injection and Poisoning Datasets, models, and algorithms are poisoned by some attacks based 
on AI. Dataset poisoning directly impacts the understanding of AI 
and DTs. A method of algorithm poisoning is federated learning, 
which exploits AI learning algorithms. The legitimate model is 
replaced with one already poisoned (Shen and Huang 2024; Lalouani 
et al. 2022)