M. Homaei et al.
1 3 201 Page 18 of 65
Interfaces (HMIs) and applications. This layer is essential for decision-makers, as it 
translates complex datasets into understandable formats, such as dashboards or 3D 
models, that assist in making informed decisions. Access control mechanisms are also 
crucial at this stage to ensure data security and provide access to various users.
Figure  6 also underlines the critical nature of security within these layers, suggesting a 
direct relationship between the layers’ depth and the complexity of the required cyberse-
curity measures. Integrating OT and IT with robust cybersecurity protocols, such as those 
provided by CPS and IIoT communications, is essential for system integrity. DTs leverage 
this structured layering to offer a dynamic simulation environment, enabling the monitor -
ing and control and real-time adaptation and optimization of physical assets. This adapt-
ability illustrates the versatility of DTs and their pivotal role in addressing the complex 
demands of Industry 4.0 (Alcaraz and Lopez 2022).
2.5  Challenges of DTs
Integrating DTs into CPS can significantly enhance system efficiency through improved 
intelligence, offering end users more valuable services. A DT should accurately represent 
spatial entities, objects, processes, and schedules as a digital replica of cyberspace. How -
ever, developing and implementing a DT poses several challenges. For example, within a 
network, DTs impact the calculation, control, and analysis phases of output data generated 
by IoT devices. Moreover, DTs must be designed to meet quality-of-service requirements, 
including delay, reliability, scalability, and distribution, and ensure privacy and security. 
Addressing these issues introduces new challenges and opportunities for interdisciplinary 
research, increasing its attractiveness and relevance (Botín-Sanabria et al. 2022).
2.5.1  CPS challenges
CPSs are complex networks that require tight coordination of networking, computing, and 
control to meet stringent performance demands. These systems necessitate low latency, 
high reliability, and significant scalability to support CPS applications (Delgado and Oye-
dele 2021; Lv et  al. 2022a). Consider the scenario of smart transportation systems and 
autonomous driving development. Vehicles must rapidly collect and process relevant data 
(Lv et al. 2022b; Ozkaya 2022). This data and computations from sensors must be effi-
ciently transmitted through communication networks to and from the smart vehicle and 
stored in both cloud spaces and vehicle databases (Ali et al. 2023). Furthermore, vehicles 
require the capability to perform computations while interacting with internal and cloud 
databases quickly. The safety of the driver, vehicle, and broader transportation ecosystem 
relies on these rapid and accurate computations in the vehicle’s virtual counterpart. Real-
time service is critical, and minimising hardware, software, and network errors is crucial, 
ideally aiming for zero faults.
Additionally, the design of autonomous driving applications must address scalability 
challenges such as network congestion and the complexity brought on by managing large 
fleets of vehicles, with the number of smart cars varying in each scenario. As highlighted 
by this example, maintaining high performance in CPS involves intricate interactions 
among multiple subsystems-networking, computing, and control-which collectively influ-
ence the system’s overall functionality (Dinis et al. 2021; Qian et al. 2022; Zhang and Tai 
2021). Even minor performance deviations in one subsystem can significantly affect the