M. Homaei et al.
1 3 201 Page 4 of 65
rockets, and space missions were based on DT (Mullet et al. 2021). Of course, due to 
the hardware, software, and processing limitations, it only included summary processes 
and monitoring phenomena, but it can be considered the beginning of this phenomenon 
(Huo et al. 2022).
According to IEEE author Roberto Saracco, in the last decade, the DT concept has 
evolved from a model of a physical entity used primarily in the design phase to a mir -
roring of an existing physical entity used as a reference model (Saracco and Henz 2022). 
A physical entity’s synchronisation with its associated instance may vary by leveraging 
embedded sensors in the physical entity, connected across a network to the DT using 
IoT (Saracco 2019; Hemdan et al. 2023). With the increasing development of computer 
and communication technologies, especially IoT and AI platforms, the DT concept has 
entered an innovation channel (Homaei et al. 2022; Abed et al. 2022). Perhaps in the 
distant years, due to the limited resources and the processing of many models, analysis, 
and tests in the digital model were impossible or associated with very high costs, which 
challenged its feasibility. DT aims to characterise physical assets through digital repre-
sentation industrial and monitoring applications using detail-based techniques, math-
ematical models, and application programming interfaces (APIs) (Perno et  al. 2022). 
Almost all these things are processed and executed on servers, cloud and fog, servers, 
and virtual resources (such as virtual machines (VM). Digital peer processing mainly 
aims to predict errors and detect or apply changes and deviations. It is related to cor -
rect functioning models and things like this that often correct the natural behaviour of 
a model or system. Naturally, networks such as the IoT connect these online resources 
to the physical world to interact with real-world components (Stjepandić et al. 2021). 
Therefore, in Fig.  1, the connection between the physical world, cyberspace, and net-
work communication is shown.
According to the literature on DTs and their inherent difference from other classical 
monitoring methods, there is two-way communication between the physical and virtual 
worlds or a virtual model based on network communication. In classical models, the 
information about the physical world was sent for inspection by experts. Nevertheless, 
in DT models, this communication is two-way; often, the feedback is sent to the physical 
world or applied directly to modify the model, system, or process (Wang et al. 2023a; 
Epiphaniou et al. 2023; Can and Turkmen 2023). According to Bergs et al. (2021), there 
are three types of mirror systems, which are classified as follows:
Fig. 1  The relationship between DT, CPS, and IoT