A review of digital twins and their application in cybersecurity…
1 3Page 23 of 65 201
data stream. Any deviation resulting in incomplete, inconsistent, or low-quality data can 
severely undermine system performance (Liu et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2022c). Moreover, 
cybercriminals might exploit these data vulnerabilities to engage in harmful activities and 
launch extensive attacks on these systems, potentially breaching confidential, private, and 
health-related regulations (Abounassar et al. 2021).
Several pervasive challenges are associated with the adoption of DTs in the healthcare 
industry (Ho 2021:
• Data quality High-quality data are crucial for a virtual twin to accurately represent its 
physical counterpart.
• Privacy It is imperative to secure information against cyber threats to ensure data secu-
rity.
• Ethical concerns There is a risk that DTs may exacerbate biases, such as racial bias, 
leading to healthcare inequalities if data representation is skewed.
• Trust/fear in AI There is a prevailing fear among healthcare professionals that DTs may 
replace them, which could hinder trust in DT modelling. It is essential to position DTs 
as tools that support rather than substitute healthcare professionals.
Additionally, concerns about the over-collection of data are prevalent. A regulatory frame-
work is necessary to ensure that service providers do not collect data irrelevant to the ser -
vices provided by the DT. The accumulation of excessive personal information increases 
the risk of hacking attacks. Effective detection of hacking and prevention of cyber-attacks 
require security measures that are continuously monitored and updated (Zhang and Tai 
2021). It is crucial that DTs maintain reliability to ensure the quality and accuracy of data, 
and they must be designed so that users cannot tamper with them.
In other words, users whose data is being collected should not be able to compromise 
the device’s integrity. If the data collection process is seamless and free from corruption, 
service providers can make informed decisions based on the data provided by the DT 
(Jimenez et al. 2019). Beyond data integrity issues, DTs risk becoming digitally obsolete if 
developers do not maintain the systems with updates and service support. It is essential for 
users to fully understand what they consent to when sharing their information with a DT. 
Cyberattacks pose an additional threat because DTs often store sensitive information that 
could be exploited (Pirbhulal et al. 2022).
Moreover, the algorithms that underpin DTs may unintentionally produce discrimina-
tory outcomes if they fail to consider socio-environmental factors like air pollution, water 
quality, and educational disparities, which can all significantly impact health outcomes 
(Aluvalu et al. 2023). Another significant concern in using DTs for personalized healthcare 
is over-diagnosis risk. Personalized healthcare aims to identify and mitigate diseases early, 
but overly preemptive actions could lead to unnecessary diagnoses and treatments. Three 
key elements must be considered to enhance cybersecurity in DT technologies for health-
care applications, as outlined in Table 5).
2.6.3  DT in smart cars
DTs in the truck industry have advanced significantly, partly due to the heightened impor -
tance of safety in road and street crossings. This advancement is driven by developing 
sophisticated control systems, sensors, and related technologies. Recent standards and 
procedures have been published in Europe and America, which most food manufacturing