A review of digital twins and their application in cybersecurity…
1 3Page 5 of 65 201
• A Digital Model (DM) is an isolated monitoring system without automatic connection 
to the real world (Simulink and software model).
• A Digital Shadow (DS) is a system with automatic one-way communication between 
physical and virtual space (Environmental monitoring).
• A DT is a system with a two-way and automatic connection between real-world and DT 
spaces.
An example of a DT can be seen in Fig.  1). Smart buildings are characterised by physical 
assets (sensors, cameras, and other devices) that send information to this DT to fire the 
simulation model in the real world (Röhm and Anderl 2022). Additionally, digital assets 
may establish configurations and execute commands suitable for maintaining, optimising, 
or improving the operational performance of their physical counterparts. To achieve the 
above, a DT must integrate algorithms, models, patterns, equipment, and communication 
technologies and systems and, if necessary, make decisions that are automatically applied 
to physical world equipment. Gartner also emphasises this practical aspect in its annual 
ranking of strategic technologies, ranking the DT paradigm fourth and first in 2018 and 
2019 (Saracco and Henz 2022). Market researchers predict that the DT market will grow 
from its current value of $3.1 billion to $48.2 billion by 2026. By 2031, the DT market 
will reach $183 billion, with composite DTs providing the most significant opportunity 
(Balyakin et al. 2022; Jeong et al. 2022). According to these reports, DT applications are 
used in various applications, such as industrial applications, production, smart cities, agri-
culture and animal husbandry, disaster management, and control and monitoring of the bat-
tlefield. Therefore, the key objective of this research is to investigate the potential security 
threats associated with the diverse applications of DT. In classical monitoring and control 
systems, cyber security’s importance often determines the application type (Somers et al. 
2023). This issue is very challenging in discussing the DT because most critical infrastruc-
ture may not interest those interested in security issues at first glance. With a closer look, 
we find that even the most straightforward application of the DT in society’s basic infra-
structure can be a passive defence. Therefore, paying attention to the cybersecurity of the 
most basic digital applications is necessary.
Figure  2 illustrates how each application and its tasks include essential services (data 
acquisition, distribution, synchronisation, modelling, simulation, representation, etc.) pro-
vided by various interfaces, technologies, and computation systems (Korovin 2022; Qian 
et al. 2022; Röhm and Anderl 2022; Krzyczkowski 2019). Because integrating these tech-
nologies and computation systems also entails serious security risks, this paper wanted to 
illustrate the classification of the threats according to infrastructures of functionality and 
their related technologies. In most of the above applications, monitoring over the internet 
was once challenging. Still, today, the infrastructure is steadily growing, and some stand-
ards are being published that help stabilise communications. Industry 4.0 requires exten-
sive CPS research to bridge the physical and virtual worlds (Korovin 2022; Shahzad et al. 
2022). This concept states that if production systems can operate more efficiently if they 
are intelligent to the affordability and availability of sensors and actuators, data collection 
has become easier than in previous decades (Alcaraz and Lopez 2022). Echoing the impor -
tance of these developments, this study broadens the scope by offering an extensive analy -
sis of cybersecurity challenges and potential AI-based solutions across various industries, 
thus providing a more comprehensive perspective than the specific yet innovative approach 
detailed in Suhail et al. (2023). However, amidst these advancements, a significant chal-
lenge remains in establishing secure platforms, a crucial aspect yet to be adequately 
addressed in DT technologies.