M. Homaei et al.
1 3 201 Page 42 of 65Table 11  Defence method by AI in DT
Term Definition/efficiency Limitation/challenges
Machine Learning NB classify data according to the Bayesian theorem, suggesting 
anomalous activities usually result from multiple events rather than 
a single attack. Additionally, NB analyses each activity to determine 
whether it is abnormal after training (Vieira et al. 2022a)Zero frequency and the problem of spammers deceiving the NB algo-
rithm led to experts utilising exceptional discoveries such as denying 
listing to obtain information
Federated Learning Model Federated learning offers to exchange data/information security and 
privacy. The FL model proposes these solutions to prevent and detect 
manipulation of equipment and user data on a macro scale and to 
reduce its effectiveness (Alazab et al. 2022b)In the early step of research and development, when the training method 
and process are still being iterated, federated learning is more expen-
sive than collecting and processing the information centrally
Support Vector Machines Cybersecurity uses SVM’s technique to analyse Internet traffic patterns 
and classify them into HTTP, FTP, and SMTP categories. During 
penetration testing or network traffic generation, SVMs are often 
used as training data for attacks that can be simulated (Vitthalrao 
2020; Adhikari et al. 2022)Due to the learning curve, it is unsuitable for implementing large data 
sets in real-world applications. This algorithm is capable of covering a 
limited number of attacks
K-Nearest Neighbour The K-NN technique is used for intrusion detection and detecting false 
data injection attacks since it adapts rapidly to new traffic patterns to 
detect previously unknown attacks (Majeed et al. 2021)It requires much memory and is computationally intensive due to storing 
all the training data. This algorithm is not used for distributed applica-
tions and has a long prediction time, making it unsuitable for real-time 
applications. Furthermore, this algorithm is also affected by unrelated 
features and data sizes
Decision Trees Cybersecurity analyses traffic size, flow, and duration by this method 
to detect DoS attacks (Vieira et al. 2022a)Many correlated and uncertain outcomes can make calculations very 
challenging when dealing with data classified at different levels. The 
nodes in a Decision Graph can be connected by (OR) rather than 
(AND); whereas the nodes in a (AND) graph can only be bound by 
(AND)
Artificial Neural Networks ANNs could give rapid response times, which is crucial in systems like 
traffic management (Zhang et al. 2021). Moreover, AI cybersecu-
rity measures often detect or stop attacks in progress rather than 
preventing them from occurring in the number one place, which is 
why other preventative security measures should be implemented 
(Paredes et al. 2021)A neural network faces two mismatch problems: the initial mismatch 
problem and the inherent mismatch problem. Due to these factors, 
neural networks are unsuitable for deployment in IT operations man-
agement environments