A review of digital twins and their application in cybersecurity…
1 3Page 33 of 65 201
System experts strive to preserve earlier insights that might inform future models, retaining 
valuable information even as system components evolve.
Despite the preventive efforts of experts and system designers, cybercriminals focus 
solely on exploiting data, models, and algorithms that are vulnerable to misuse. Without a 
doubt, DTs present appealing targets for these attackers, driven by the potential to under -
mine cybersecurity measures.
3.2  DT’s security goals and threats
In addition to other classifications for DTs, we have used a triple variety to understand the 
issue better. The DT’s platform is divided into three main parts in this category.
• Data collection or sensor side: Infrastructure-level security works on detecting incon-
sistencies in the physical system and equipment, such as sensors, cameras, and launch-
ers. Most of these pieces of equipment can fall under different cyber terms due to brand 
incompatibilities.
• Network: Communication infrastructure or network part: At this level of security, we 
mainly focus on anomaly detection, which does not correspond to possible behaviours 
such as identifying network events, including attacks, accidental access, and data usage. 
Researchers in this field exploit the unsolved unsupervised learning ability of autoen-
coders.
• Applications: DT platforms and IoT applications are being monitored for malware and 
botnets at the software level.
Cybersecurity literature does not provide a consensus regarding the essential security goals 
in DTs and IoT infrastructure. Several terms and definitions overlap, e.g., authentication 
can sometimes be used for identification since both are necessary for each other. There 
are different definitions of security goals, so this paper has not elaborated fully on them. 
Table  8 outlines the DT and IoT security goals based on existing literature (Homaei et al. 
2022; Al-Turjman et al. 2019; Paul 2022).
Cybersecurity threats are vast and have various countermeasures to mitigate risks. The 
DT platform can detect cyber threats such as sensor attacks, spoof-node attacks, hardware 
manipulation attacks, energy manipulation attacks, sniffing, DDoS, sensitive data leakage, 
Table 8  Security goals in DTs 
and IoTLayer Sensing Network Application
Security goals
Authorisation ✓ ✓ ✓
Authentication ✓ ✓ ✓
Availability ✓ ✓ ✓
Identification ✓ ✓ ✓
Integrity – ✓ ✓
Freshness ✓ ✓ –
Confidentiality ✓ ✓ ✓
Privacy – ✓ ✓
Non-repudiation ✓ ✓ ✓