A review of digital twins and their application in cybersecurity…
1 3Page 29 of 65 201
3.1  Attacks on DT/CPS
In recent years, critical infrastructures worldwide have been the targets of numerous cyber -
attacks, some of which have directly impacted DT and CPS. Notable incidents include the 
Stuxnet attack in 2009, the Aramco attack in 2012, the Tridium Niagara Framework Attack 
in 2012, the Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Disaster in 2012, and the Godzilla Attack! Turn 
Back! in 2013, the German Steel Mill Cyber Attack in 2014, the Kemuri Water Company 
Attack in 2016, the Ukrainian Power Grid Attack in 2016, the TRITON attack in 2017, 
the Cryptocurrency Malware Attack on SCADA systems in 2018, the Norsk Hydro Ran-
somware Attack in 2019, the Riviera Beach Ransomware Attack in 2019, and the Florida 
Water Treatment Poisoning Attack in 2021 (Kayan et al. 2022). Understanding the tactics 
employed by adversaries is crucial to comprehending the anatomy of these cyberattacks 
and developing effective countermeasures (Table  7). The following section discusses vari-
ous attacks on DTs, providing insights into their methodologies and impacts.
3.1.1  Reconnaissance‑based attacks
In cybersecurity, reconnaissance is a preliminary phase where attackers collect information 
about the target system or platform. This stage typically involves identifying, collecting, 
and scanning ports and input/output systems to detect security vulnerabilities, including 
zero-day vulnerabilities (Kulik et al. 2022). A notable instance of such an attack was the 
deployment of Triton malware at a petrochemical facility in Saudi Arabia in 2012. This 
attack illustrates how IT/OT infrastructures can be compromised at their core and through 
vulnerabilities in commonly used networks and industrial environments.
Reconnaissance can be conducted using advanced tools such as virtualizers, sand-
boxes, and similar platforms, which can operate concurrently or asynchronously. With the 
advent of AI technologies, these reconnaissance activities have become more formidable. 
Cybercriminals equipped with AI tools can now perform network scanning continuously, Table 7  A perspective from an attacker on DTs
Attack Actuation mode
Managing the product lifecycle The manipulation of benign behaviour of DTs to steer the CPS into an 
insecure state. Utilise the digital thread to link data throughout the life-
cycle of a product
Mode of replication Directly update the state of physical devices by replicating the virtual 
behaviour of their DTs
Mode of simulation Re-run test simulations to learn about system behaviour. The manipulation 
of simulation parameters or system specifications’ data during security 
tests may involve exploiting DTs’s specification-based or ML-based 
process knowledge
The design phases DT can be utilised for process knowledge based on specifications or ML
Phase of decommissioning Preserving knowledge about the system’s life for re-use if the DT is 
improperly disposed of. To access archived DTs’ data, exploit security 
breaches such as unauthorised access
Movement in the laterally Obtain control over assets of high value, such as design artefacts. The new 
values should be generated randomly to manipulate sensor readings or 
simulation parameters at random intervals without causing significant 
deviations from the actual process values