A review of digital twins and their application in cybersecurity…
1 3Page 7 of 65 201
2022). These two aspects of subject sensitivity and copyright or protection and ownership 
of data and processes are desirable to cybercriminals who are trying to disrupt or harm the 
business of a group or organisation. Most of these applications include basic infrastruc-
tures and non-operating governmental or private defences, whose damage can endanger the 
security of a country. In addition, a cybercriminal may harm DT from the physical environ-
ment and the digital space to take control of its underlying infrastructure and production 
assets (Alshammari et al. 2021; Lv et al. 2022a). The attack surface differs because the 
DT paradigm connects the two worlds through communication systems, technologies, and 
algorithms (Kose 2023).
The structure of the rest of the paper is as follows: Sect.  2 delves into DT concepts 
and structures, discussing classifications, integration with Industry 4.0, IoT, and the vari-
ous challenges faced, such as in CPS, data science, and optimisation. Section  3 investi-
gates security challenges across DT applications like smart cities and healthcare. Section  4 
analyses the range of security threats to DTs and outlines their security goals. Section  5 
focuses on AI’s role in cybersecurity within DTs, exploring the use of explainable AI and 
ML. The paper concludes with Sect.  6, summarising the findings and suggesting future 
research directions.
2  DT concepts and structures
The concept of the DT has garnered significant interest from researchers and industries and 
continues to evolve. Initially, DTs were primarily three-dimensional simulation models of 
physical objects. Over time, this concept has broadened to encompass simulations based on 
data collected from objects or physical systems, allowing for more precise replicas across 
various time and space scales. DT technology enables virtual representation and optimiza-
tion of physical objects or systems in real-time (Chinesta et al. 2018; Hribernik et al. 2021).
The critical components of DT, as identified in recent literature (Boyes and Watson 
2022; Fang et al. 2022; Sharma et al. 2022; Vieira et al. 2022b), include the physical space, 
cyberspace, and information processing space. The physical space consists of objects or 
systems, isolated or distributed across different regions, interconnected by communication 
technologies. This space uses sensors and communication devices to gather and transmit 
diverse data types, including measurements, user data, status features, and system errors. 
It also responds intelligently to feedback from cyberspace through specialized equipment 
such as operators.
The information processing space connects the physical space to cyberspace, managing 
data storage, processing (which includes pre-processing, analysis, extraction, and integra-
tion), and mapping (analysis, correlation, synchronization). Conversely, cyberspace con-
tains virtual models like workflow and simulation models, fed data from the information 
processing space. These models form the basis of a DT application subsystem, which com-
prises the visualization and simulation of objects or physical systems (Alcaraz and Lopez 
2022).
2.1  DT structures
Each DT comprises three main components: the physical system, the digital counter -
part, and the connections between them. The physical systems may represent a range of 
real-world scenarios, such as smart grids, smart conveyance, smart industries, and smart