A review of digital twins and their application in cybersecurity…
1 3Page 9 of 65 201
This article also aims to clarify common misconceptions about DTs, as listed in 
Table  1, to help researchers identify the correct technologies for their work and contrib-
ute more effectively to future developments in this field. Also, the DT service categories 
classify the use cases identified by the literature review (Table  2). It is also possible to 
categorise DT processes differently, as shown in Fig. 5  and Table 3 ).
Table 1  Widespread misconceptions about the DT
Term Reasons and differences
Device shadow IoT and cloud computing platforms are expected places to find device shadow 
research (Wang et al. 2022a). IoT device shadows are the virtual repre-
sentations of physical objects; they are services for maintaining copies of 
information extracted from physical devices connected to the internet
Cyber twin Due to the common understanding that “cyber” is another alternative term 
for “digital”, some researchers used the terms interchangeably (Rodrigues 
et al. 2021). It is common to hear terms such as CPS, cyber-DT, and so on 
(Adhikari et al. 2022). For the cyber twin or CPS to be successful, a network 
(internet architecture) must be closely aligned with the advancements and 
implementation of the Internet of Everything (IoE) (Dash et al. 2022). It 
is standard practice to combine the network architecture of a cyber twin or 
CPS with a digital thread
Fidelity model /Simulation In simulation modelling, fidelity refers to how closely a simulation model 
replicates the physical product it is simulating (Zhang et al. 2022b). Models/
simulations are often described as high/low/core/multi-fidelity, representing 
different levels of fidelity or considerations when building the simulation 
model (Purcell and Neubauer 2023). A common feature of DTs is their real-
time dynamic data exchange between a physical object and its virtual twin, 
as well as high or even ultra-high fidelity
Simulation From the viewpoint of the virtual twin (Palensky et al. 2022), simulation 
refers to the critical imitating capabilities of DT technology. The simulation 
indicates a broader range of models since it does not consider the real-time 
data exchange between the physically existing object; it is a part of the DT 
rather than another term
Digital thread Digital threads provide a continuous lifetime digital/traceable record of 
physical products, beginning with the innovative and designing stages and 
continuing into the end of their existence (Voth and Sturtevant 2022). In 
addition, they function as enablers of interdisciplinary information exchange 
and play an essential role in the digitisation process (Pessoa et al. 2022)
Digital Modelling Modelling is one of the essential elements of a DT, but it is not an alterna-
tive term to refer to a DT. Data is exchanged bi-bidirectionally between the 
physical product and its virtual twin. Still, the information is exchanged 
manually, which means the virtual twin represents a certain status of the 
physical product because of the manually controlled synthesis process (Fang 
et al. 2022; Tao et al. 2022)
DS In a DS, a physically existing product is represented by its virtual twin. Still, 
there is only a one-way data connection between the physical product and its 
virtual representation, which means that the virtual twins are merely digital 
representations of the physical entities (Bergs et al. 2021; Jarosz and Özel 
2022)