A review of digital twins and their application in cybersecurity…
1 3Page 31 of 65 201
experiences are crucial in preparing the next generation of engineers to enhance the com-
petitiveness of the United States aviation industry globally.
3.1.3  Targeting physical systems
Security within DTs platforms often takes a backseat to the complexities and critical 
aspects of implementing the finer details of a DT (Mora et al. 2022; Kayan et al. 2022; 
Kulik et al. 2022). Cybercriminals exploit the infrastructure-primarily software and mid-
dleware platforms-used in DTs to infiltrate entire systems. Given the diverse tools available 
to DT development and security teams, many of these intrusions remain covert. Advanced 
Persistent Threats (APTs) have exploited system infrastructure bugs to withstand software 
updates over recent years.
A prime example of such a strategy is observed in the Stuxnet attack, where the mal-
ware’s main objective was to intercept and manipulate signal transmissions to and from 
Programmable Logic Controllers (PLCs). The secretive nature of this attack allowed it to 
bypass security measures undetected, leading to significant damage to the targeted hard-
ware and adversely affecting the performance of the CPS. AI and ML algorithms can 
offer a countermeasure by continuously monitoring system inputs and outputs during such 
cybercriminal activities. These algorithms can learn, mimic, and alter patterns based on the 
cybercriminals’ desired outcomes, thus posing a formidable defence mechanism.
Industrial espionage and cyber warfare are expected to employ such sophisticated tac-
tics increasingly. The continuous advancement in AI and ML capabilities will play a piv -
otal role in perpetrating and countering these cyber-attacks, shaping the future landscape of 
cybersecurity in industrial settings.
3.1.4  Targeting the DT
Cybercriminals cause significant damage to logical and physical assets by targeting DTs, 
affecting DT applications (Benedictis et al. 2022; Kayan et al. 2022). Since DTs are equiv -
alent to CPS assets-encompassing a real system’s hardware, PLC codes, and hardware con-
trol software-an attack on a DT can directly affect the performance of PLCs, controllers, 
and robots, thereby impacting the system as a whole.
On the one hand, security experts can detect bugs and intrusions using DTs, leveraging 
them under security and safety regulations. This approach allows for analysing dynamic 
variables and recorded data to identify deviations from defined or learned policies in the 
platform, aiding DT system experts in providing crucial findings to security analysts. On 
the other hand, cybercriminals can exploit these same features to disrupt DT efficiency 
by detecting system trends and correlating data and variables. Such actions may even be 
aimed at obscuring the detection of misconduct (based on knowledge or behaviour) and 
complicating the reporting of attack details.
The unique aspect of these attacks is that the perpetrator uses the system’s own assets 
without external software or illegal tools, making intrusions difficult to detect. Conse-
quently, identifying long-term deviations in the system becomes complex, if not impossi-
ble. Cybercriminals’ use of AI and learning tools can further exacerbate this issue, creating 
noise in system data that is subtle yet significant enough to undermine the DT’s-and conse-
quently, the real-world CPS’s-performance.
Additionally, in some CPSs, prototypes of system assets are designed and tested based 
on simulations during the engineering phases, relying on DT input and output data from