M. Homaei et al.
1 3 201 Page 8 of 65
cities. These systems are designed to deliver services to multiple users. However, the 
operating environment for these systems can change (Delgado and Oyedele 2021; Hol-
mes et al. 2021; Ozkaya 2022; Rudskoy et al. 2021; Stjepandić et al. 2021), posing chal-
lenges in managing these changes, especially given the complexity of updating the real-
world cyber-physical models based on operational protocols. In response, DT provides 
a mechanism for controlling a simplified version of the physical system and simulating 
new environmental data. This control mechanism allows the physical system to adapt, 
guided by the insights provided by the DT. Consequently, the interaction between the 
physical and digital systems enables the categorization of DT into three types or genera-
tions: Digital Model (DM), Digital Shadow (DS), and Digital Twin (DT) (Delgado and 
Oyedele 2021; Stjepandić et al. 2021). Figure  4 illustrates these three generations of DT.
Generally, digital modelling involves representing a physical system or its theoretical 
model in digital form. The digital representation includes detailed descriptions of the 
physical components. A notable distinction between a DT and a CPS is that in DT, the 
sensor and input data are used to create a simulation model, from which tangible assets 
are derived (Delgado and Oyedele 2021). While there is a strong linkage between DM 
and CPS, these models cannot automatically modify the digital counterpart based on 
simulation results alone. The DS extends the capabilities of the DM by incorporating 
simulation functionalities, enhancing the model’s interaction with the physical world 
(Krückemeier and Anderl 2022). This process usually happens in a one-way flow, where 
environmental changes and physical inputs are necessary for the DM to interact with its 
environment, increasing the model’s accuracy and output quality.
However, the DM cannot autonomously correct or respond to inconsistencies or 
deviations from established policies in real time. The DT, an evolution of DS and DM, 
establishes a bidirectional connection between the digital model and the physical envi-
ronment. In DT systems, input data is fed directly from sensors into the model, and 
decision-making outputs are sent back to control the physical system (Krückemeier and 
Anderl 2022). This two-way interaction allows the digital model to effect changes in the 
physical system, providing outcomes based on dynamic system variables and enabling 
the control system to interact more effectively with the physical environment to achieve 
desired outcomes (Stjepandić et al. 2021).
Fig. 4  DT generations