M. Homaei et al.
1 3 201 Page 20 of 65
sampling rates (Delgado and Oyedele 2021; Lv et al. 2022a). The introduction of DT in 
CPS necessitates considering additional processes. The control process involves domain 
experts who manage DT through physical objects, while three computing processes are 
considered for computing the DT in CPS. Interactions among DTs are simulated in a sce-
nario, and actual CPS operations are computed based on the digital copies of physical enti-
ties or objects. Communications in CPS should consider interactions between physical 
objects and their virtual clones, among DTs, and between DTs and their human control 
interfaces.
Optimizing the vast amount of data generated during these processes is essential to 
maximize the limited resources available. Given the minimal hardware requirements due 
to the deployment scale, a significant concern in CPS is the data quality used to generate 
DTs. Furthermore, collecting consistent data from diverse sources in the CPS environment 
is challenging. Various CPS applications require different data sources, complicating the 
selection process. The high-frequency sampling of physical objects’ states to update them 
promptly results in large data volumes on the server side, which not only aids in develop-
ing other DT systems but also requires substantial storage space. Selecting valuable data 
for storage is always challenging as long as the stored data volume does not linearly relate 
to DT system performance (Holmes et al. 2021; Krückemeier and Anderl 2022; Ozkaya 
2022). Due to the heterogeneous nature of CPS systems, where IoT/CPS devices use dif-
ferent communication technologies, deploying a gateway with various radio interfaces to 
facilitate data exchange introduces additional hardware costs and potential network bot-
tlenecks. Designing a network infrastructure to meet strict timing and latency require-
ments for real-time communication between different components remains a formidable 
challenge.
2.6  Security challenges in DT applications
This section explores the privacy and security challenges within DT applications. DTs 
are inherently vulnerable to cyber-attacks due to their need to update the state of physical 
objects through network communications continuously. This vulnerability extends to the 
physical hardware, sensors, transmissions, and digital systems. For instance, an adversary 
might directly attack a device acting as a data collector, causing it to relay misleading or 
inaccurate data, exemplifying a data integrity attack. There is also a risk that an adver -
sary could compromise the gateway through which IoT devices manage data transmis-
sion, interjecting invalid data into the collected information (Huo et al. 2022; Majeed et al. 
2021; Qian et  al. 2022). Additionally, adversaries may inject false data directly into the 
DT. Given the DT’s close connection to physical objects, any compromise can significantly 
impact the entire system’s integrity.
Sensitive information within DT applications includes medical records, autonomous 
vehicle data, and real-time operations data for smart grids (Lalouani et al. 2022; Yu et al. 
2021). This necessitates robust authentication mechanisms for cyber-physical entities, digi-
tal communications, and machine-to-machine transmissions. Implementing these mecha-
nisms on low-energy IoT devices can be challenging and costly, especially on devices with 
limited power.
DT applications rely heavily on sensor data from the object layer to build a digital 
replica of the physical system. These sensors and gateways could be targeted by denial-
of-service (DoS) attacks or malware (Ghimire and Rawat 2022; Khraisat and Alazab 
2021). A compromised gateway or sensor complicates the DT’s ability to reflect the