A review of digital twins and their application in cybersecurity…
1 3Page 35 of 65 201
Previously, businesses had to deal with “typical threats” such as Zeus trojans, but new spe-
cies emerged as we learned how to deal with those threats. Recent threats include Ryuk 
ransomware, smart botnets, and Triickbot, a newly evolved trojan.
It should be noted. However, evolved threats are not even one of the highlights of risks 
(Ansari et  al. 2022; Arpita and Panchal 2022). Cybercriminals are equally enthusiastic 
about utilising AI and ML to their advantage (Kumar and Pande 2022). Smart protection 
methods are necessary to counter equally smart threats already on the horizon. The use 
of AI in cybercrime is included in some respects (Bonfanti 2022). Even though AI-based 
attacks have remained rare in the last few years, there have been discussions about devel-
oping powerful AI threats. Building the infrastructure to maintain such a threat is nec-
essary to create an AI virus. Viruses are small tools with a limited purpose that do not 
require AI, ML, DT, facial recognition software, or extensive data analysis (Hailu et  al. 
2022; Tsareva and Voronova 2022; Waqas et al. 2022). For the machine to learn, it uses 
techniques adapted from human learning techniques. These techniques generally have three 
stages (Table 9).
Moreover, the attackers exploit these machine-learning techniques to overcome the 
security system’s lines of defence. ML and DL are the best solutions to the security of the 
line of defence, proving conventional computer security methods are no longer effective 
(Kor et al. 2023; Lv et al. 2023). In cybersecurity, an IDS classifies the collected traffic 
into two main categories (normal and abnormal). Organising it as a different type of attack 
can go a long way. In this regard, supervised learning is used when a precise outcome is 
required. In ML and DL, there are supervised/unsupervised and semi-supervised methods, 
each of which can serve as a tool for cybersecurity. Each has its advantages and disadvan-
tages. Figure 8 is a general demonstration of how learning occurs.
The developed models of supervision aim to solve two types of problems:
• Regression problems: attempting to predict the value of an infinitude of continuous var -
iables.
• Classification problems: They involve classifying discrete objects with only a limited 
number of values, as their name suggests
4.1  Explainable AI for cybersecurity
Cybercriminals employ evolving attack patterns to evade detection. A traditional intru-
sion detection system (NIDS/HIDS), particularly one based on signatures, requires a con-
tinuous update. However, growing network data and standard ML tools are lacking as we 
move towards distributed and real-time processing. Integrating hybrid ML algorithms into 
big data processing will increase the percentage of accurate results and reveal the hid-
den knowledge within the data. Compared to manual or statistically-based approaches, 
ML and DL techniques can reduce the false recognition rate of traditional NIDS (Kaissar 
et al. 2022; Umer et al. 2022; Ji and Niu 2024). By reducing False Negatives, the detec-
tion rate will be improved. Therefore, AI techniques, particularly ML and DL, have been 
actively studied to assist the IDS in resisting malicious attacks by assuming that the pattern 
of attack packets differs from that of regular packets. This technique is based on a set of 
features that identify the state of an object, which must be selected carefully and accurately 
to avoid inaccuracy and waste of time. Removing unrelated or irrelevant features from the 
data set is necessary to achieve good data learning with accurate and efficient results. A 
process such as this is called a feature reduction or a dimensionality reduction. A feature