A review of digital twins and their application in cybersecurity…
1 3Page 37 of 65 201
selection process is necessary to select and generate only the most essential features. Some 
recent AI methods for solving intrusion detection problems include Artificial Neural Net-
works (ANN), Decision Trees (DT), Evolutionary Algorithms (EA), Genetic Algorithms 
(GA), Particle Swarm Optimisation (PSO), Simulated Annealing (SA), Rule-based Data 
Mining, and Swarm Intelligence (Rathore et  al. 2021; Anjum et  al. 2021; Farhan and 
D.Jasim 2022).
Different NIDS and HIDS have been deployed using ML/DL techniques in the literature 
(Zhang et al. 2022b). Since each one treats attacks in a particular architecture using differ -
ent datasets and various ML and DL algorithms, comparing them will not be easy. Like 
(Capuano et al. 2022; Patil et al. 2022, FNN-LSO is proposed for building an advanced 
detection system and improving the performance of IDS based on Feed-forward Neural 
Networks (FNN) combined with Locust Swarm Optimisation (LSO). Based on their find-
ings, LSO is recommended only for datasets with a high number of features and large data-
sets. The LSO algorithm is advantageous in large datasets due to the disproportionate num-
ber of local optima that render the conventional training algorithm virtually ineffective. 
Several algorithms have been combined (Aslam et al. 2022; Capuano et al. 2022) to train 
a neural network for various real-world datasets using Gravitational Search (GS) and PSO 
algorithms. Tests of the NSL-KDD dataset were conducted to demonstrate the applicability 
of the proposed approaches (e.g., error, training time, decision time, overage detection, and 
accuracy rate) (Hariharan et al. 2021; Sharma et al. 2022).
4.2  ML/DL in DT cybersecurity
The growing popularity of wireless connectivity has led IoT providers to seek cost-effective 
solutions for 5 G and 6 G networks from the outset (Homaei et al. 2021; Ji and Niu 2024). 
In this context, addressing cybersecurity is crucial to protect users, network equipment, and 
data from malicious attacks, unauthorized access, and data leaks. ML and DL play pivotal 
roles in the cybersecurity systems of IoT and DT platforms today. DL, in particular, offers 
Fig. 8  ML and DL models are trained (Ji and Niu 2024)