M. Homaei et al.
1 3 201 Page 16 of 65Table 4  Popular DT protocols and their security challenges
Protocol name Protocol type Protocol characteristics Security challenges Solutions
CoAP (Vieira et al. 2022a) Communication Explicitly developed for devices 
with limited resources, this proto-
col is based on the UDP. Mecha-
nism to facilitate the collection of 
continuous sensor dataSusceptible to Man-in-the-Middle, 
Multi-vector, Unreachable destina-
tion responses, DDoS amplified 
attacks, spoofing attacks, cross-
layer attacks, and reflection attacksCoAP does not provide authentica-
tion and authorisation; in this case, 
either communication security 
(IPsec or DTLS) or object security 
(within the payload) can be used. 
X.509 digital certificates, pre-shared 
keys, and public keys
DTDL (Terry 2022) Data representation By depicting six characteristics of 
IoT elements, its open-standards 
platform provides seamless data 
transmission between various 
apparatusesSusceptible to attacks based on 
update distributions or modular 
development at the disposal of 
developers. (e.g., Large-scale npm 
attack)Microsoft-managed encryption key
FDTF (Autiosalo et al. 2020) Data representation The data link between DT compo-
nents enables DT systems to share 
information using this protocolIt is not proof of the method’s 
validity and cybersecurity side. It 
has many security threats, so it is 
under developmentThere will be further validation of the 
method over time
FIWARE (Panfilis et al. 2018) Data representation Various IoT components are sup-
ported for data transmission and 
contextual information processingLack of confidentiality –
Modbus TCP/IP (Pires et al. 2021) Communication TCP enable industrial devices to be 
connected, provide reliable data 
transfer, and incorporate built-in 
checksum securityCommunications over networks are 
not confidential, there is no stand-
ard authentication, and there may 
be reliability problems: padding 
attacks, browser exploits, protocol 
weakness exploits, and bugs. Encapsulation of the packets, OPC 
UA, and IoT gateways with inbuilt 
Mod-bus/MQTT
MQTT (Human et al. 2021) Communication IoT equipment can now communi-
cate securely and reliably using 
this protocol based on lightweight 
TCP technologyAuthentication of data sources and 
anomaly detectionEncryption (TLS or SSL certificates), 
App-Layer Authentication (X.509), 
Authorisation (OAuth 2.0 (JWT), 
and HiveMQ)