Figure 2: The Dynabench example creation interface for sentiment analysis with illustrative example.
expect the model error to be much higher, but if
the platform actually lives up to its virtuous cycle
promise, that error rate will go down quickly. Thus,
we predict that linguists with expertise in explor-
ing the decision boundaries of machine learning
models will become essential.
While we are primarily motivated by evaluating
progress, both ANLI and “Beat the AI” show that
models can overcome some of their existing blind
spots through adversarial training. They also ﬁnd
that best model performance is still quite far from
that of humans, suggesting that while the collected
data appears to lie closer to the model decision
boundaries, there still exist adversarial examples
beyond the remit of current model capabilities.
3.1 Features and Implementation Details
Dynabench offers low-latency, real-time feedback
on the behavior of state-of-the-art NLP models.
The technology stack is based on PyTorch (Paszke
et al., 2019), with models served via TorchServe.1
1https://pytorch.org/serveThe platform not only displays prediction probabil-
ities, but through an “inspect model” functionality,
allows the user to examine the token-level layer
integrated gradients (Sundararajan et al., 2017), ob-
tained via the Captum interpretability library.2
For each example, we allow the user to explain
what the correct label is, as well as why they think
it fooled a model if the model got it wrong; or why
the model might have been fooled if it wasn’t. All
collected model-fooling (or, depending on the task,
even non-model-fooling) examples are veriﬁed by
other humans to ensure their validity.
Task owners can collect examples through the
web interface, by engaging with the community, or
through Mephisto,3which makes it easy to connect,
e.g., Mechanical Turk workers to the exact same
backend. All collected data will be open sourced,
in an anonymized fashion.
In its current mode, Dynabench could be de-
2https://captum.ai/
3https://github.com/facebookresearch/
Mephisto