Dynabench: Rethinking Benchmarking in NLP
Douwe Kielay, Max Bartoloz, Yixin Nie?, Divyansh Kaushikx, Atticus Geiger{,
Zhengxuan Wu{, Bertie Vidgenk, Grusha Prasad??, Amanpreet Singhy, Pratik Ringshiay,
Zhiyi May, Tristan Thrushy, Sebastian Riedelyz, Zeerak Waseemyy, Pontus Stenetorpz,
Robin Jiay, Mohit Bansal?, Christopher Potts{and Adina Williamsy
yFacebook AI Research;zUCL;?UNC Chapel Hill;xCMU;{Stanford University
kAlan Turing Institute;??JHU;yySimon Fraser University
dynabench@fb.com
Abstract
We introduce Dynabench, an open-source plat-
form for dynamic dataset creation and model
benchmarking. Dynabench runs in a web
browser and supports human-and-model-in-
the-loop dataset creation: annotators seek to
create examples that a target model will mis-
classify, but that another person will not. In
this paper, we argue that Dynabench addresses
a critical need in our community: contempo-
rary models quickly achieve outstanding per-
formance on benchmark tasks but nonethe-
less fail on simple challenge examples and
falter in real-world scenarios. With Dyn-
abench, dataset creation, model development,
and model assessment can directly inform
each other, leading to more robust and infor-
mative benchmarks. We report on four ini-
tial NLP tasks, illustrating these concepts and
highlighting the promise of the platform, and
address potential objections to dynamic bench-
marking as a new standard for the ﬁeld.
1 Introduction
While it used to take decades for machine learning
models to surpass estimates of human performance
on benchmark tasks, that milestone is now rou-
tinely reached within just a few years for newer
datasets (see Figure 1). As with the rest of AI, NLP
has advanced rapidly thanks to improvements in
computational power, as well as algorithmic break-
throughs, ranging from attention mechanisms (Bah-
danau et al., 2014; Luong et al., 2015), to Trans-
formers (Vaswani et al., 2017), to pre-trained lan-
guage models (Howard and Ruder, 2018; Devlin
et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2019b; Radford et al., 2019;
Brown et al., 2020). Equally important has been the
rise of benchmarks that support the development of
ambitious new data-driven models and that encour-
age apples-to-apples model comparisons. Bench-
marks provide a north star goal for researchers, and
2000 2005 2010 2015 20201.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.00.2
 MNIST
GLUEImageNet
SQuAD 1.1SQuAD 2.0
SwitchboardFigure 1: Benchmark saturation over time for popular
benchmarks, normalized with initial performance at mi-
nus one and human performance at zero.
are part of the reason we can conﬁdently say we
have made great strides in our ﬁeld.
In light of these developments, one might be
forgiven for thinking that NLP has created mod-
els with human-like language capabilities. Prac-
titioners know that, despite our progress, we are
actually far from this goal. Models that achieve
super-human performance on benchmark tasks (ac-
cording to the narrow criteria used to deﬁne hu-
man performance) nonetheless fail on simple chal-
lenge examples and falter in real-world scenarios.
A substantial part of the problem is that our bench-
mark tasks are not adequate proxies for the so-
phisticated and wide-ranging capabilities we are
targeting: they contain inadvertent and unwanted
statistical and social biases that make them artiﬁ-
cially easy and misaligned with our true goals.
We believe the time is ripe to radically rethink
benchmarking. In this paper, which both takes a
position and seeks to offer a partial solution, we
introduce Dynabench, an open-source, web-based
research platform for dynamic data collection and
model benchmarking. The guiding hypothesis be-arXiv:2104.14337v1  [cs.CL]  7 Apr 2021