answers (Kwiatkowski et al., 2019), and numbers,
dates and spans from the question (Dua et al., 2019)
as model performance progresses.
Sentiment analysis. The sentiment analysis
project is a multi-pronged effort to create a dy-
namic benchmark for sentiment analysis and to
evaluate some of the core hypotheses behind Dyn-
abench. Potts et al. (2020) provide an initial report
and the ﬁrst two rounds of this dataset.
The task is structured as a 3-way classiﬁcation
problem: positive, negative, and neutral. The mo-
tivation for using a simple positive/negative di-
chotomy is to show that there are still very challeng-
ing phenomena in this traditional sentiment space.
The neutral category was added to avoid (and
helped trained models avoid) the false presuppo-
sition that every text conveys sentiment informa-
tion (Pang and Lee, 2008). In future iterations,
we plan to consider additional dimensions of senti-
ment and emotional expression (Alm et al., 2005;
Neviarouskaya et al., 2010; Wiebe et al., 2005; Liu
et al., 2003; Sudhof et al., 2014).
In this ﬁrst phase, we examined the question of
how best to elicit examples from workers that are
diverse, creative, and naturalistic. In the “prompt”
condition, we provide workers with an actual sen-
tence from an existing product or service review
and ask them to edit it so that it fools the model.
In the “no prompt” condition, workers try to write
original sentences that fool the model. We ﬁnd
that the “prompt” condition is superior: workers
generally make substantial edits, and the resulting
sentences are more linguistically diverse than those
in the “no prompt” condition.
In a parallel effort, we also collected and vali-
dated hard sentiment examples from existing cor-
pora, which will enable another set of comparisons
that will help us to reﬁne the Dynabench protocols
and interfaces. We plan for the dataset to con-
tinue to grow, probably mixing attested examples
with those created on Dynabench with the help of
prompts. With these diverse rounds, we can ad-
dress a wide range of question pertaining to dataset
artifacts, domain transfer, and overall robustness of
sentiment analysis systems.
Hate speech detection. The hate speech task
classiﬁes whether a statement expresses hate
against a protected characteristic or not. Detect-
ing hate is notoriously difﬁcult given the important
role played by context and speaker (Leader May-nard and Benesch, 2016) and the variety of ways
in which hate can be expressed (Waseem et al.,
2017). Few high-quality, varied and large training
datasets are available for training hate detection
systems (Vidgen and Derczynski, 2020; Poletto
et al., 2020; Vidgen et al., 2019).
We organised four rounds of data collection and
model training, with preliminary results reported in
Vidgen et al. (2020). In each round, annotators are
tasked with entering content that tricks the model
into giving an incorrect classiﬁcation. The content
is created by the annotators and as such is synthetic
in nature. At the end of each round the model is
retrained and the process is repeated. For the ﬁrst
round, we trained a RoBERTa model on 470,000
hateful and abusive statements4. For subsequent
rounds the model was trained on the original data
plus content from the prior rounds. Due to the
complexity of online hate, we hired and trained
analysts rather than paying for crowd-sourced an-
notations. Each analyst was given training, support,
and feedback throughout their work.
In all rounds annotators provided a label for
whether content is hateful or not. In rounds 2,
3 and 4, they also gave labels for the target (i.e.,
which group has been attacked) and type of state-
ment (e.g., derogatory remarks, dehumanization,
or threatening language). These granular labels
help to investigate model errors and improve per-
formance, as well as directing the identiﬁcation of
new data for future entry. For approximately half
of entries in rounds 2, 3 and 4, annotators created
“perturbations” where the text is minimally adjusted
so as to ﬂip the label (Gardner et al., 2020; Kaushik
et al., 2020). This helps to identify decision bound-
aries within the model, and minimizes the risk of
overﬁtting given the small pool of annotators.
Over the four rounds, content becomes increas-
ingly adversarial (shown by the fact that target mod-
els have lower performance on later rounds’ data)
and models improve (shown by the fact that the
model error rate declines and the later rounds’ mod-
els have the highest accuracy on each round). We
externally validate performance using the HATE-
CHECK suite of diagnostic tests from Röttger et al.
(2020). We show substantial improvement over
the four rounds, and our ﬁnal round target model
achieves 94% on HATECHECK , outperforming the
models presented by the original authors.
4Derived from https://hatespeechdata.com , in
anonymized form.