scribed as a fairly conservative departure from the
status quo. It is being used to develop datasets
that support the same metrics that drive exist-
ing benchmarks. The crucial change is that the
datasets are now dynamically created, allowing for
more kinds of evaluation—e.g., tracking progress
through rounds and across different conditions.
3.2 Initial Tasks
We have selected four ofﬁcial tasks as a starting
point, which we believe represent an appropri-
ate cross-section of the ﬁeld at this point in time.
Natural Language Inference (NLI) and Question
Answering (QA) are canonical tasks in the ﬁeld.
Sentiment analysis is a task that some consider
“solved” (and is deﬁnitely treated as such, with
all kinds of ethically problematic repercussions),
which we show is not the case. Hate speech is
very important as it can inﬂict harm on people, yet
classifying it remains challenging for NLP.
Natural language inference. Built upon the se-
mantic foundation of natural logic (Sánchez Valen-
cia, 1991, i.a.) and hailing back much further (van
Benthem, 2008), NLI is one of the quintessential
natural language understanding tasks. NLI, also
known as ‘recognizing textual entailment’ (Dagan
et al., 2006), is often formulated as a 3-way classi-
ﬁcation problem where the input is a context sen-
tence paired with a hypothesis, and the output is a
label (entailment, contradiction, or neutral) indicat-
ing the relation between the pair.
We build on the ANLI dataset (Nie et al., 2020)
and its three rounds to seed the Dynabench NLI
task. During the ANLI data collection process, the
annotators were presented with a context (extracted
from a pre-selected corpus) and a desired target la-
bel, and asked to provide a hypothesis that fools the
target model adversary into misclassifying the ex-
ample. If the target model is fooled, the annotator
was invited to speculate about why, or motivate why
their example was right. The target model of the
ﬁrst round (R1) was a single BERT-Large model
ﬁne-tuned on SNLI and MNLI, while the target
model of the second and third rounds (R2, R3) was
an ensemble of RoBERTa-Large models ﬁne-tuned
on SNLI, MNLI, FEVER (Thorne et al., 2018) re-
cast as NLI, and all of the ANLI data collected
prior to the corresponding round. The contexts for
Round 1 and Round 2 were Wikipedia passages
curated in Yang et al. (2018) and the contexts for
Round 3 were from various domains. Results indi-cate that state-of-the-art models (which can obtain
90%+ accuracy on SNLI and MNLI) cannot exceed
50% accuracy on rounds 2 and 3.
With the launch of Dynabench, we have started
collection of a fourth round, which has several in-
novations: not only do we select candidate contexts
from a more diverse set of Wikipedia featured arti-
cles but we also use an ensemble of two different
models with different architectures as target adver-
saries to increase diversity and robustness. More-
over, the ensemble of adversaries will help mitigate
issues with creating a dataset whose distribution is
too closely aligned to a particular target model or
architecture. Additionally, we are collecting two
types of natural language explanations: why an ex-
ample is correct and why a target model might be
wrong. We hope that disentangling this informa-
tion will yield an additional layer of interpretability
and yield models that are as least as explainable as
they are robust.
Question answering. The QA task takes the
same format as SQuAD1.1 (Rajpurkar et al., 2016),
i.e., given a context and a question, extract an an-
swer from the context as a continuous span of
text. The ﬁrst round of adversarial QA (AQA) data
comes from “Beat the AI” (Bartolo et al., 2020).
During annotation, crowd workers were presented
with a context sourced from Wikipedia, identical to
those in SQuAD1.1, and asked to write a question
and select an answer. The annotated answer was
compared to the model prediction using a word-
overlap F 1threshold and, if sufﬁciently different,
considered to have fooled the model. The target
models in round 1 were BiDAF (Seo et al., 2017),
BERT-Large, and RoBERTa-Large.
The model in the loop for the current round is
RoBERTa trained on the examples from the ﬁrst
round combined with SQuAD1.1. Despite the
super-human performance achieved on SQuAD1.1,
machine performance is still far from humans on
the current leaderboard. In the current phase, we
seek to collect rich and diverse examples, focusing
on improving model robustness through generative
data augmentation, to provide more challenging
model adversaries in this constrained task setting.
We should emphasize that we don’t consider this
task structure representative of the broader deﬁ-
nition even of closed-domain QA, and are look-
ing to expand this to include unanswerable ques-
tions (Rajpurkar et al., 2018), longer and more com-
plex passages, Yes/No questions and multi-span