2.2 Adversarial Training and Testing
Research progress has traditionally been driven by
a cyclical process of resource collection and ar-
chitectural improvements. Similar to Dynabench,
recent work seeks to embrace this phenomenon, ad-
dressing many of the previously mentioned issues
through an iterative human-and-model-in-the-loop
annotation process (Yang et al., 2017; Dinan et al.,
2019; Chen et al., 2019; Bartolo et al., 2020; Nie
et al., 2020), to ﬁnd “unknown unknowns” (Atten-
berg et al., 2015) or in a never-ending or life-long
learning setting (Silver et al., 2013; Mitchell et al.,
2018). The Adversarial NLI (ANLI) dataset (Nie
et al., 2020), for example, was collected with an
adversarial setting over multiple rounds to yield
“a ‘moving post’ dynamic target for NLU systems,
rather than a static benchmark that will eventually
saturate”. In its few-shot learning mode, GPT-3
barely shows “signs of life” (Brown et al., 2020)
(i.e., it is barely above random) on ANLI, which
is evidence that we are still far away from human
performance on that task.
2.3 Other Related Work
While crowdsourcing has been a boon for large-
scale NLP dataset creation (Snow et al., 2008;
Munro et al., 2010), we ultimately want NLP sys-
tems to handle “natural” data (Kwiatkowski et al.,
2019) and be “ecologically valid” (de Vries et al.,
2020). Ethayarajh and Jurafsky (2020) analyze the
distinction between what leaderboards incentivize
and “what is useful in practice” through the lens of
microeconomics. A natural setting for exploring
these ideas might be dialogue (Hancock et al., 2019;
Shuster et al., 2020). Other works have pointed
out misalignments between maximum-likelihood
training on i.i.d. train/test splits and human lan-
guage (Linzen, 2020; Stiennon et al., 2020).
We think there is widespread agreement that
something has to change about our standard eval-
uation paradigm and that we need to explore al-
ternatives. The persistent misalignment between
benchmark performance and performance on chal-
lenge and adversarial test sets reveals that standard
evaluation paradigms overstate the ability of our
models to perform the tasks we have set for them.
Dynabench offers one path forward from here, by
allowing researchers to combine model develop-
ment with the stress-testing that needs to be done
to achieve true robustness and generalization.3 Dynabench
Dynabench is a platform that encompasses different
tasks . Data for each task is collected over multiple
rounds , each starting from the current state of the
art. In every round, we have one or more target
models “in the loop.” These models interact with
humans, be they expert linguists or crowdworkers,
who are in a position to identify models’ shortcom-
ings by providing examples for an optional context .
Examples that models get wrong, or struggle with,
can be validated by other humans to ensure their
correctness. The data collected through this pro-
cess can be used to evaluate state-of-the-art models,
and to train even stronger ones, hopefully creat-
ing a virtuous cycle that helps drive progress in
the ﬁeld. Figure 2 provides a sense of what the
example creation interface looks like.
As a large-scale collaborative effort, the platform
is meant to be a platform technology for human-
and-model-in-the-loop evaluation that belongs to
the entire community. In the current iteration, the
platform is set up for dynamic adversarial data col-
lection, where humans can attempt to ﬁnd model-
fooling examples. This design choice is due to the
fact that the average case, as measured by maxi-
mum likelihood training on i.i.d. datasets, is much
less interesting than the worst (i.e., adversarial)
case, which is what we want our systems to be able
to handle if they are put in critical systems where
they interact with humans in real-world settings.
However, Dynabench is not limited to the adver-
sarial setting, and one can imagine scenarios where
humans are rewarded not for fooling a model or
ensemble of models, but for ﬁnding examples that
models, even if they are right, are very uncertain
about, perhaps in an active learning setting. Sim-
ilarly, the paradigm is perfectly compatible with
collaborative settings that utilize human feedback,
or even negotiation. The crucial aspect of this pro-
posal is the fact that models and humans interact
live “in the loop” for evaluation and data collection.
One of the aims of this platform is to put expert
linguists center stage. Creating model-fooling ex-
amples is not as easy as it used to be, and ﬁnding
interesting examples is rapidly becoming a less triv-
ial task. In ANLI, the veriﬁed model error rate for
crowd workers in the later rounds went below 1-in-
10 (Nie et al., 2020), while in “Beat the AI”, human
performance decreased while time per valid adver-
sarial example went up with stronger models in the
loop (Bartolo et al., 2020). For expert linguists, we