5 Conclusion and Outlook
We introduced Dynabench, a research platform for
dynamic benchmarking. Dynabench opens up ex-
citing new research directions, such as investigat-
ing the effects of ensembles in the loop, distribu-
tional shift characterisation, exploring annotator
efﬁciency, investigating the effects of annotator ex-
pertise, and improving model robustness to targeted
adversarial attacks in an interactive setting. It also
facilitates further study in dynamic data collection,
and more general cross-task analyses of human-
and-machine interaction. The current iteration of
the platform is only just the beginning of a longer
journey. In the immediate future, we aim to achieve
the following goals:
Anyone can run a task. Having created a tool
that allows for human-in-the-loop model evaluation
and data collection, we aim to make it possible for
anyone to run their own task. To get started, only
three things are needed: a target model, a (set of)
context(s), and a pool of annotators.
Multilinguality and multimodality. As of now,
Dynabench is text-only and focuses on English, but
we hope to change that soon.
Live model evaluation. Model evaluation
should not be about one single number on some
test set. If models are uploaded through a standard
interface, they can be scored automatically along
many dimensions. We would be able to capture
not only accuracy, for example, but also usage of
computational resources, inference time, fairness,
and many other relevant dimensions. This will in
turn enable dynamic leaderboards, for example
based on utility (Ethayarajh and Jurafsky, 2020).
This would also allow for backward-compatible
comparisons, not having to worry about the
benchmark changing, and automatically putting
new state of the art models in the loop, addressing
some of the main objections.
One can easily imagine a future where, in order
to fulﬁll reproducibility requirements, authors do
not only link to their open source codebase but also
to their model inference point so others can “talk
with” their model. This will help drive progress, as
it will allow others to examine models’ capabilities
and identify failures to address with newer even
better models. If we cannot always democratize
thetraining of state-of-the-art AI models, at the
very least we can democratize their evaluation .Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Jason Weston, Emily Di-
nan and Kyunghyun Cho for their input on this
project, and Sonia Kris for her support. ZW has
been supported in part by the Canada 150 Research
Chair program and the UK-Canada AI Artiﬁcial
Intelligence Initiative. YN and MB have been sup-
ported in part by DARPA MCS N66001-19-2-4031,
DARPA YFA17-D17AP00022, and ONR N00014-
18-1-2871. CP has been supported in part by grants
from Facebook, Google, and by Stanford’s Institute
for Human-Centered AI.
References
Cecilia Ovesdotter Alm, Dan Roth, and Richard Sproat.
2005. Emotions from text: Machine learning
for text-based emotion prediction. In Proceed-
ings of Human Language Technology Conference
and Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing , pages 579–586, Vancouver,
British Columbia, Canada. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.
Joshua Attenberg, Panos Ipeirotis, and Foster Provost.
2015. Beat the machine: Challenging humans to
ﬁnd a predictive model’s “unknown unknowns”. J.
Data and Information Quality , 6(1).
Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Ben-
gio. 2014. Neural machine translation by jointly
learning to align and translate. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1409.0473 .
Max Bartolo, Alastair Roberts, Johannes Welbl, Sebas-
tian Riedel, and Pontus Stenetorp. 2020. Beat the ai:
Investigating adversarial human annotation for read-
ing comprehension. Transactions of the Association
for Computational Linguistics , 8:662–678.
Yonatan Belinkov and Yonatan Bisk. 2018. Synthetic
and natural noise both break neural machine transla-
tion. In International Conference on Learning Rep-
resentations .
Yonatan Belinkov, Adam Poliak, Stuart Shieber, Ben-
jamin Van Durme, and Alexander Rush. 2019.
Don’t take the premise for granted: Mitigating ar-
tifacts in natural language inference. In Proceed-
ings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics , pages 877–891, Flo-
rence, Italy. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.
Samuel R. Bowman, Gabor Angeli, Christopher Potts,
and Christopher D. Manning. 2015. A large anno-
tated corpus for learning natural language inference.
InProceedings of the 2015 Conference on Empiri-
cal Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages
632–642, Lisbon, Portugal. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.