Task Rounds Examples vMER
NLI 4 170,294 33.24%
QA 2 36,406 33.74%
Sentiment 3 19,975 35.00%
Hate speech 4 41,255 43.90%
Table 1: Statistics for the initial four ofﬁcial tasks.
3.3 Dynabenchmarking NLP
Table 1 shows an overview of the current situation
for the four tasks. Some tasks are further along
in their data collection efforts than others. As we
can see, the validated model error rate (vMER; the
number of human-validated model errors divided
by the total number of examples—note that the
error rates are not necessarily comparable across
tasks, since the interfaces and in-the-loop models
are not identical) is still very high across all tasks,
clearly demonstrating that NLP is far from solved.
4 Caveats and Objections
There are several obvious and valid objections one
can raise. We do not have all the answers, but we
can try to address some common concerns.
Won’t this lead to unnatural distributions and
distributional shift? Yes, that is a real risk. First,
we acknowledge that crowdsourced texts are likely
to have unnatural qualities: the setting itself is ar-
tiﬁcial from the perspective of genuine communi-
cation, and crowdworkers are not representative
of the general population. Dynabench could exac-
erbate this, but it also has features that can help
alleviate it. For instance, as we discussed earlier,
the sentiment analysis project is using naturalistic
prompt sentences to try to help workers create more
diverse and naturalistic data.
Second, if we rely solely on dynamic adversarial
collection, then we increase the risks of creating un-
natural datasets. For instance, Bartolo et al. (2020)
show that training solely on adversarially-collected
data for QA was detrimental to performance on
non-adversarially collected data. However, they
also show that models are capable of simultane-
ously learning both distributions when trained on
the combined data, retaining if not slightly im-
proving performance on the original distribution
(of course, this may not hold if we have many
more examples of one particular kind). Ideally, we
would combine adversarially collected data withnon-adversarial—preferably naturally collected—
data, so as to capture both the average and worst
case scenarios in our evaluation.
Finally, we note that Dynabench could enable
the community to explore the kinds of distribu-
tional shift that are characteristic of natural lan-
guages. Words and phrases change their meanings
over time, between different domains, and even be-
tween different interlocutors. Dynabench could be
a tool for studying such shifts and ﬁnding models
that can succeed on such phenomena.
What if annotators “overﬁt” on models? A po-
tential risk is cyclical “progress,” where improved
models forget things that were relevant in earlier
rounds because annotators focus too much on a par-
ticular weakness. Continual learning is an exciting
research direction here: we should try to under-
stand distributional shift better, as well as how to
characterize how data shifts over time might im-
pact learning, and how any adverse effects might
be overcome. Because of how most of us have
been trained, it is natural to assume that the last
round is automatically the best evaluation round,
but that does not mean that it should be the only
round: in fact, most likely, the best way to eval-
uate progress is to evaluate on allrounds as well
asanyhigh-quality static test set that exists, possi-
bly with a recency-based discount factor. To make
an analogy with software testing, similar to check-
lists (Ribeiro et al., 2020), it would be a bad idea
to throw away old tests just because you’ve written
some new ones. As long as we factor in previous
rounds, Dynabench’s dynamic nature offers a way
out from forgetting and cyclical issues: any model
biases will be ﬁxed in the limit by annotators ex-
ploiting vulnerabilities.
Another risk is that the data distribution might
be too heavily dependent on the target model in
the loop. When this becomes an issue, it can be
mitigated by using ensembles of many different ar-
chitectures in the loop, for example the top current
state-of-the-art ones, with multiple seeds.5
How do we account for future, not-yet-in-the-
loop models? Obviously, we can’t—so this is a
very valid criticism. However, we can assume that
an ensemble of model architectures is a reasonable
approximation, if and only if the models are not
too bad at their task. This latter point is crucial: we
5ANLI does not show dramatically different results across
models, suggesting that this is not necessarily a big problem
yet, but it shows in R2 and R3 that ensembles are possible.