take the stance that models by now, especially in
aggregate, are probably good enough to be reason-
ably close enough to the decision boundaries—but
it is deﬁnitely true that we have no guarantees that
this is the case.
How do we compare results if the benchmark
keeps changing? This is probably the main hur-
dle from a community adoption standpoint. But
if we consider, e.g., the multiple iterations of Se-
mEval or WMT datasets over the years, we’ve al-
ready been handling this quite well—we accept
that a model’s BLEU score on WMT16 is not com-
parable to WMT14. That is, it is perfectly natural
for benchmark datasets to evolve as the community
makes progress. The only thing Dynabench does
differently is that it anticipates dataset saturation
and embraces the loop so that we can make faster
and more sustained progress.
What about generative tasks? For now Dyn-
abench focuses on classiﬁcation or span extraction
tasks where it is relatively straightforward to es-
tablish whether a model was wrong. If instead
the evaluation metric is something like ROUGE or
BLEU and we are interested in generation, we need
a way to discretize an answer to determine correct-
ness, since we wouldn’t have ground truth annota-
tions; which makes determining whether a model
was successfully fooled less straightforward. How-
ever, we could discretize generation by re-framing
it as multiple choice with hard negatives, or simply
by asking the annotator if the generation is good
enough. In short, going beyond classiﬁcation will
require further research, but is deﬁnitely doable.
Do we need models in the loop for good data?
The potential usefulness of adversarial examples
can be explained at least in part by the fact that hav-
ing an annotation partner (so far, a model) simply
provides better incentives for generating quality an-
notation. Having the model in the loop is obviously
useful for evaluation, but it’s less clear if the resul-
tant data is necessarily also useful in general for
training. So far, there is evidence that adversarially
collected data provides performance gains irrespec-
tive of the model in the loop (Nie et al., 2020;
Dinan et al., 2019; Bartolo et al., 2020). For ex-
ample, ANLI shows that replacing equal amounts
of “normally collected” SNLI and MNLI training
data with ANLI data improves model performance,
especially when training size is small (Nie et al.,
2020), suggesting higher data efﬁciency. How-ever, it has also been found that model-in-the-loop
counterfactually-augmented training data does not
necessarily lead to better generalization (Huang
et al., 2020). Given the distributional shift induced
by adversarial settings, it would probably be wisest
to combine adversarially collected data with non-
adversarial data during training (ANLI takes this
approach), and to also test models in both scenarios.
To get the most useful training and testing data, it
seems the focus should be on collecting adversarial
data with the best available model(s), preferably
with a wide range of expertise, as that will likely
be beneﬁcial to future models also. That said, we
expect this to be both task and model dependent.
Much more research is required, and we encourage
the community to explore these topics.
Is it expensive? Dynamic benchmarking is in-
deed expensive, but it is worth putting the numbers
in context, as all data collection efforts are expen-
sive when done at the scale of our current bench-
mark tasks. For instance, SNLI has 20K examples
that were separately validated, and each one of
these examples cost approximately $0.50 to obtain
and validate (personal communication with SNLI
authors). Similarly, the 40K validated examples in
MultiNLI cost $0.64 each (p.c., MultiNLI authors).
By comparison, the average cost of creation and
validation for ANLI examples is closer to $1.00
(p.c., ANLI authors). This is a substantial increase
at scale. However, dynamic adversarial datasets
may also last longer as benchmarks. If true, then
the increased costs could turn out to be a bargain.
We should acknowledge, though, that dynamic
benchmarks will tend to be more expensive than
regular benchmarks for comparable tasks, because
not every annotation attempt will be model-fooling
and validation is required. Such expenses are likely
to increase through successive rounds, as the mod-
els become more robust to workers’ adversarial
attacks. The research bet is that each example
obtained this way is actually worth more to the
community and thus worth the expense.
In addition, we hope that language enthusiasts
and other non-crowdworker model breakers will
appreciate the honor that comes with being high up
on the user leaderboard for breaking models. We
are working on making the tool useful for educa-
tion, as well as gamifying the interface to make it
(even) more fun to try to fool models, as a “game
with a purpose” (V on Ahn and Dabbish, 2008), for
example through the ability to earn badges.