Feed Forward
Multi-head 
Attention
Add & LayerNormAdd & LayerNorm
K V Q
XZ(a) Self-Attention (SA)
Feed Forward
Multi-head 
Attention
Add & LayerNormAdd & LayerNorm
K V Q
XYZ
 (b) Guided-Attention (GA)
Figure 2: Two basic attention units with multi-head
attention for different types of inputs. SA takes one group
of input features Xand output the attended features Zfor
X; GA takes two groups of input features XandYand
output the attended features ZforXguided by Y.
[29]. Using different combinations, we obtain three MCA
variants with different motivations.
3.1. Self­Attention and Guided­Attention Units
The input of scaled dot-product attention consists of
queries and keys of dimension dkey, and values of dimen-
siondvalue. For simplicity, dkeyanddvalue are usually set
to the same number d. We calculate the dot products of the
query with all keys, divide each by√
dand apply a softmax
function to obtain the attention weights on the values. Given
a queryq∈R1×d,nkey-value pairs (packed into a key
matrixK∈Rn×dand a value matrix V∈Rn×d),
the attended feature f∈R1×dis obtained by weighted
summation over all values Vwith respect to the attention
learned from qandK:
f=A(q,K,V) = softmax(qK√
d)V (1)
To further improve the representation capacity of the
attended features, multi-head attention is introduced in
[29], which consists of hparalleled ‘heads’. Each head
corresponds to an independent scaled dot-product attention
function. The attended output features fis given by:
f=MA(q,K,V) = [head 1,head2,...,headh]Wo(2)
headj=A(qWQ
j,KWK
j,VWV
j) (3)
whereWQ
j,WK
j,WV
j∈Rd×dhare the projection ma-
trices for the j-th head, and Wo∈Rh∗dh×d.dhis the
dimensionality of the output features from each head. To
prevent the multi-head attention model from becoming too
GA
(Y) (X)
(a) ID(Y)-GA(X,Y)
SA
 GA
(Y) (X)
 (b) SA(Y)-GA(X,Y)
GA
(Y) (X)
SA
 SA
 (c) SA(Y)-SGA(X,Y)
Figure 3: Flowcharts of three MCA variants for VQA. (Y)
and (X) denote the question and image features respectively.
large, we usually have dh=d/h. In practice, we can
compute the attention function on a set of mqueriesQ=
[q1;q2;...;qm]∈Rm×dseamlessly by replacing qwithQ
in Eq.( 2), to obtain the attended output features F∈Rm×d.
We build two attention units on top of the multi-head
attention to handle the multimodal input features for VQA,
namely the self-attention (SA) unit and the guided-attention
(GA) unit. The SA unit (see Figure 2a) is composed of a
multi-head attention layer and a pointwise feed-forward lay-
er. Taking one group of input features X= [x1;...;xm]∈
Rm×dx, the multi-head attention learns the pairwise rela-
tionship between the paired sample < xi,xj>withinX
and outputs the attended output features Z∈Rm×dby
weighted summation of all the instances in X. The feed-
forward layer takes the output features of the multi-head
attention layer, and further transforms them through two
fully-connected layers with ReLU activation and dropout
(FC(4d)-ReLU-Dropout(0.1)-FC( d)). Moreover, residual
connection [ 12] followed by layer normalization [ 3] is
applied to the outputs of the two layers to facilitate opti-
mization. The GA unit (see Figure 2b) takes two groups
of input features X∈Rm×dxandY= [y1;...;yn]∈
Rn×dy, whereYguides the attention learning for X. Note
that the shapes of XandYare ﬂexible, so they can be
used to represent the features for different modalities ( e.g.,
questions and images). The GA unit models the pairwise
relationship between the each paired sample < xi,yj>
fromXandY, respectively.
Interpretation: Since the multi-head attention in Eq.( 2)
plays a key role in the two attention units, we take a closer
look at it to see how it works with respect to different
types of inputs. For a SA unit with input features X, for
eachxi∈X, its attended feature fi= MA(xi,X,X)
can be understood as reconstructing xiby all the samples
inXwith respect to their normalized similarities to xi.
Analogously, for a GA unit with input features XandY, the
attended feature fi= MA(xi,Y,Y)forxi∈Xis obtained
by reconstructing xiby all the samples in Ywith respect to
their normalized cross-modal similarity to xi.
6283