Att.
Reduce
GloVe+
LSTM
Faster 
R-CNNQ: What is the 
mustache 
made of?
BCE
Loss
A: Banana
+
Att.
Reduce
FC
FC
 Stacking
Encoder-
Decoderor
Deep Co-Attention 
Learning ( §4.2 )Question and Image
Representation ( §4.1 )Multimodal Fusion and Output 
Classifier ( §4.3 )
Figure 4: Overall ﬂowchart of the deep Modular Co-Attention Networks (MCAN). In the Deep Co-attention Learning stage,
we have two alternative strategies for deep co-attention learning, namely stacking andencoder-decoder .
3.2. Modular Composition for VQA
Based on the two basic attention units in Figure 2,
we composite them to obtain three modular co-attention
(MCA) layers (see Figure 3) to handle the multimodal
features for VQA. All three MCA layers can be cascaded
in depth, such that the outputs of the previous MCA layer
can be directly fed to the next MCA layer. This implies
that the number of input features is equal to the number of
output features without instance reduction.
The ID(Y)-GA(X,Y) layer in Figure 3ais our baseline.
In ID(Y)-GA(X,Y), the input question features are directly
passed through to the output features with an identity
mapping, and the dense inter-modal interaction between
each region xi∈Xwith each word yi∈Yis modeled
in a GA(X,Y) unit. These interactions are further exploited
to obtain the attended image features. Compared to the
ID(Y)-GA(X,Y) layer, the SA(Y)-GA(X,Y) layer in Figure
3badds a SA(Y) unit to model the dense intra-modal
interaction between each question word pair {yi,yj} ∈Y.
The SA(Y)-SGA(X,Y) layer in Figure 3ccontinues to add
a SA(X) unit to the SA(Y)-GA(X,Y) layer to model the
intra-modal interaction between each image region pairs
{xi,xj} ∈X.1.
Note that the three MCA layers above have not covered
all the possible compositions. We have also explored other
MCA variants like the symmetric architectures GA(X,Y)-
GA(Y ,X) and SGA(X,Y)-SGA(Y ,X). However, these MCA
variants do not report comparative performance, so we do
not discuss them further due to space limitations.
4. Modular Co-Attention Networks
In this section, we describe the Modular Co-Attention
Networks (MCAN) architecture for VQA. We ﬁrst explain
1In our implementation, we omit the feed-forward layer and norm layer
of the SA(X) unit to save memory costs.the image and question feature representation from the
input question and image. Then, we propose two deep
co-attention models, namely stacking andencoder-decoder ,
which consists of multiple MCA layers cascaded in depth to
gradually reﬁne the attended image and question features.
As we obtained the attended image and question features,
we design a simple multimodal fusion model to fuse the
multimodal features and ﬁnally feed them to a multi-label
classiﬁer to predict answer. An overview ﬂowchart of
MCAN is shown in Figure 4.
We name the MCAN model with the stacking strategy
as MCAN sk-Land the MCAN model with the encoder-
decoder strategy as MCAN ed-L, where Lis the total
number MCA layers cascaded in depth.
4.1. Question and Image Representations
The input image is represented as a set of regional visual
features in a bottom-up manner [ 1]. These features are the
intermediate features extracted from a Faster R-CNN model
(with ResNet-101 as its backbone) [ 26] pre-trained on the
Visual Genome dataset [ 18]. We set a conﬁdence threshold
to the probabilities of detected objects and obtain a dynamic
number of objects m∈[10,100]. For the i-th object, it
is represented as a feature xi∈Rdxby mean-pooling the
convolutional feature from its detected region. Finally, the
image is represented as a feature matrix X∈Rm×dx.
The input question is ﬁrst tokenized into words, and
trimmed to a maximum of 14 words similar to [ 28,14].
Each word in the question is further transformed into a
vector using the 300-D GloVe word embeddings [ 25] pre-
trained on a large-scale corpus. This results in a sequence
of words of size n×300, where n∈[1,14]is the number
of words in the question. The word embeddings are then
passed through a one-layer LSTM network [ 13] withdy
hidden units. In contrast to [ 28] which only uses the
ﬁnal state ( i.e., the output feature for the last word) as the
6284