Deep Modular Co-Attention Networks for Visual Question Answering
Zhou Yu1Jun Yu1∗Yuhao Cui1Dacheng Tao2Qi Tian3
1Key Laboratory of Complex Systems Modeling and Simulation,
School of Computer Science and Technology, Hangzhou Dianzi University, China.
2UBTECH Sydney AI Centre, School of Computer Science, FEIT, University of Sydney, Australia
3Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei, China
{yuz, yujun, cuiyh }@hdu.edu.cn, dacheng.tao@sydney.edu.au, tian.qi1@huawei.com
Abstract
Visual Question Answering (VQA) requires a ﬁne-
grained and simultaneous understanding of both the visual
content of images and the textual content of questions.
Therefore, designing an effective ‘co-attention’ model to
associate key words in questions with key objects in images
is central to VQA performance. So far, most successful
attempts at co-attention learning have been achieved
by using shallow models, and deep co-attention models
show little improvement over their shallow counterparts.
In this paper, we propose a deep Modular Co-Attention
Network (MCAN) that consists of Modular Co-Attention
(MCA) layers cascaded in depth. Each MCA layer models
the self-attention of questions and images, as well as
the question-guided-attention of images jointly using a
modular composition of two basic attention units. We
quantitatively and qualitatively evaluate MCAN on the
benchmark VQA-v2 dataset and conduct extensive ablation
studies to explore the reasons behind MCAN’s effectiveness.
Experimental results demonstrate that MCAN signiﬁcantly
outperforms the previous state-of-the-art. Our best single
model delivers 70.63 %overall accuracy on the test-dev set.
1. Introduction
Multimodal learning to bridge vision and language
has gained broad interest from both the computer vision
and natural language processing communities. Signiﬁcant
progress has been made in many vision-language tasks,
including image-text matching [ 23,14], visual captioning
[9,30,1], visual grounding [ 10,34] and visual question
answering (VQA) [ 2,21,14,36]. Compared to other
multimodal learning tasks, VQA is a more challenging task
that requires ﬁne-grained semantic understanding of both
∗Jun Yu is the corresponding author
Figure 1: Accuracies vs. co-attention depth on VQA-v2
valsplit. We list most of the state-of-the-art approaches
with (deep) co-attention models. Except for DCN [ 24]
which uses the convolutional visual features and thus leads
to inferior performance, all the compared methods ( i.e.,
MCAN, BAN [ 14] and MFH [ 33]) use the same bottom-up
attention visual features to represent images [ 1].
the image and the question, together with visual reasoning
to predict an accurate answer.
The attention mechanism is a recent advance in deep
neural networks, that has successfully been applied to the
unimodal tasks ( e.g., vision [ 22], language [ 4], and speech
[8]), as well as the aforementioned multimodal tasks. The
idea of learning visual attention on image regions from the
input question in VQA was ﬁrst proposed by [ 27,7], and
it becomes a de-facto component of almost all VQA ap-
proaches [ 10,16,1]. Along with visual attention, learning
textual attention on the question key words is also very
important. Recent works have shown that simultaneously
learning co-attention for the visual and textual modalities
can beneﬁt the ﬁne-grained representation of the image
and question, leading to more accurate prediction [ 20,
33]. However, these co-attention models learn the coarse
6281