question feature, we maintain the output features for all
words and output a question feature matrix Y∈Rn×dy.
To deal with the variable number of objects mand
variable question length n, we use zero-padding to ﬁll X
andYto their maximum sizes ( i.e.,m= 100 andn= 14 ,
respectively). During training, we mask the padding logits
with−∞ to get zero probability before every softmax layer
to avoid the underﬂow problem.
4.2. Deep Co­Attention Learning
Taking the aforementioned image features Xand the
question features Yas inputs, we perform deep co-attention
learning by passing the input features though a deep co-
attention model consisting of LMCA layers cascaded
in depth (denoted by MCA(1), MCA(2)... MCA(L)).
Denoting the input features for MCA(l)asX(l−1)and
Y(l−1)respectively, their output features are denoted by
X(l)andY(l), which are further fed to the MCA(l+1)as
its inputs in a recursive manner.
[X(l),Y(l)] = MCA(l)([X(l−1),Y(l−1)]) (4)
For MCA(1), we set its input features X(0)=Xand
Y(0)=Y, respectively.
Taking the SA(Y)-SGA(X,Y) layer as an example (the
other two MCA layers proceed in the same manner), we
formulate two deep co-attention models in Figure 5.
The stacking model (Figure 5a) simply stacks LMCA
layers in depth and outputs X(L)andY(L)as the ﬁnal
attended image and question features. The encoder-decoder
model (Figure 5b) is inspired by the Transformer model
proposed in [ 29]. It slightly modiﬁes the stacking model
by replacing the input features Y(l)of the GA unit in each
MCA(l)with the question features Y(L)from the last MCA
layer. The encoder-decoder strategy can be understood as
an encoder to learn the attended question features Y(L)with
Lstacked SA units and a decoder to use Y(L)to learn the
attended image features X(L)with stacked SGA units.
The two deep models are of the same size with the same
L. As a special case that L= 1, the two models are strictly
equivalent to each other.
4.3. Multimodal Fusion and Output Classiﬁer
After the deep co-attention learning stage, the output
image features X(L)= [x(L)
1;...;x(L)
m]∈Rm×dand
question features Y(L)= [y(L)
1;...;y(L)
n]∈Rn×dalready
contain rich information about the attention weights over
the question words and image regions. Therefore, we
design an attentional reduction model with a two-layer MLP
(FC(d)-ReLU-Dropout(0.1)-FC(1)) for Y(L)(orX(L)) to
obtain its attended feature ˜y(or˜x). Taking X(L)as an
...
SA
GA
SA
SA
GA
SA
SA
GA
SA
(a) Stacking
...
SA
GA
SA
SA
GA
SA
SA
GA
SA
 (b) Encoder-Decoder
Figure 5: Two deep co-attention models based on a cascade
of MCA layers ( e.g., SA(Y)-SGA(X,Y)).
example, the attended feature ˜xis obtained as follows:
α= softmax(MLP( X(L)))
˜x=m/summationdisplay
i=1αix(L)
i(5)
whereα= [α1,α2,...,αm]∈Rmare the learned attention
weights. We can obtain the attended feature ˜yforY(L)us-
ing an independent attentional reduction model by analogy.
Using the computed ˜yand˜x, we design the linear
multimodal fusion function as follows:
z= LayerNorm( WT
x˜x+WT
y˜y) (6)
whereWx,Wy∈Rd×dzare two linear projection matrices.
dzis the common dimensionality of the fused feature.
LayerNorm is used here to stabilize training [ 3].
The fused feature zis projected into a vector s∈RN
followed by a sigmoid function, where Nis the number
of the most frequent answers in the training set. Following
[28], we use binary cross-entropy (BCE) as the loss function
to train an N-way classiﬁer on top of the fused feature z.
5. Experiments
In this section, we conduct experiments to evaluate the
performance of our MCAN models on the largest VQA
benchmark dataset, VQA-v2 [ 11]. Since the different
MCA variants and deep co-attention models may inﬂuence
ﬁnal performance, we perform extensive quantitative and
qualitative ablation studies to explore the reasons why
MCAN performs well. Finally, with the optimal hyper-
parameters, we compare our best model with current state-
of-the-art models under the same settings.
5.1. Datasets
VQA-v2 is the most commonly used VQA benchmark
dataset [ 11]. It contains human-annotated question-answer
6285