Q: How many sheep we can
see in this picture ?
 A: 3
SA(Y)-1 SA(Y)-6
GA(X,Y)-1SA(X)-1 SA(X)-6
GA(X,Y)-6
(a) Encoder-Decoder ( P: 3)
SA(Y)-1 SA(Y)-6
GA(X,Y)-1SA(X)-1 SA(X)-6
GA(X,Y)-6
 (b) Stacking ( P: 3)
Figure 7: Visualizations of the learned attention maps ( softmax( qK/√
d)) of the attention units from typical layers. SA(Y)- l,
SA(X)-land GA(X,Y)- ldenote the question self-attention, image self-attention, and question guided-attention from the l-th
layer, respectively. Q, A, P denote the question, answer and prediction respectively. The index within [0-19] shown on the
axes of the attention maps corresponds to each object in the image (20 objects in total) . For better visualization effect, we
highlight three objects in the image that are related to the answer ( i.e., sheep).
makes the optimization difﬁcult. Similar observations are
also reported by [ 5]. Furthermore, the encoder-decoder
model steadily outperforms the stacking model, especially
whenLis large. This is because the learned self-attention
from an early SA(Y) unit is inaccurate compared to that
from the last SA(Y) unit. Directly feeding it to a GA(X,Y)
unit may damage the learned guided-attention for images.
The visualization in §5.4supports this explanation. Final-
ly, MCAN is much more parametric-efﬁcient than other
approaches, with MCAN ed-2 (27M) reporting a 66.2 %
accuracy, BAN-4 (45M) a 65.8 %accuracy [ 14], and MFH
(116M) a 65.7 %accuracy [ 33]. More in-depth comparisons
can be found in the supplementary material.
MCA vs. Depth: In Figure 6, we show the detailed
performance of MCAN ed-Lwith different MCA variants.
With increasing L, the performance gaps between the three
variants increases. Furthermore, an interesting phenomenon
occurs in Figure 6c. WhenL= 6, the number type accura-
cy of the ID(Y)-GA(X,Y) and SA(Y)-GA(X,Y) models are
nearly identical, while the SA(Y)-SGA(X,Y) model reports
a 4.5-point improvement over them. This veriﬁes that self-
attention for images plays a key role in object counting.
Question Representations: Table 1csummarizes ablationexperiments on different question representations. We can
see that using the word embeddings pre-trained by GloVe
[25] signiﬁcantly outperforms that by random initialization.
Other trick like ﬁne-tuning the GloVe embeddings or re-
placing the position encoding [ 29] with a LSTM network
to model the temporal information can slightly improve the
performance further.
5.4. Qualitative Analysis
In Figure 7, we visualize the learned attentions from
MCAN sk-6 and MCAN ed-6. Due to space limitations, we
only show one example and visualize six attention maps
from different attention units and different layers. More
visualizations can be found in the supplementary material.
From the results, we have the following observations.
Question Self-Attention SA(Y): The attention maps of
SA(Y)-1 form vertical stripes, and the words like ‘how’
and ‘see’ obtain large attention weights. This unit acts as
a question type classiﬁer. Besides, the large values in the
attention maps of SA(Y)-6 occur in the column ‘sheep’.
This reveals that all the attended features tend to use the
feature of ‘sheep’ for reconstruction. That is to say, the
keyword ‘sheep’ is identiﬁed correctly.
6287