interactions of multimodal instances, and the learned co-
attention cannot infer the correlation between each image
region and each question word. This results in a signiﬁcant
limitation of these co-attention models.
To overcome the problem of insufﬁcient multimodal
interactions, two dense co-attention models BAN [ 14] and
DCN [ 24] have been proposed to model dense interactions
between any image region and any question word. The
dense co-attention mechanism facilitates the understanding
of image-question relationship to correctly answer ques-
tions. Interestingly, both of these dense co-attention models
can be cascaded in depth, form deep co-attention models
that support more complex visual reasoning, thereby poten-
tially improving VQA performance. However, these deep
models shows little improvement over their corresponding
shallow counterparts or the coarse co-attention model MFH
[33] (see Figure 1). We think the bottleneck in these
deep co-attention models is a deﬁciency of simultaneously
modeling dense self-attention within each modality ( i.e.,
word-to-word relationship for questions, and region-to-
region relationship for images).
Inspired by the Transformer model in machine trans-
lation [ 29], here we design two general attention units:
a self-attention (SA) unit that can model the dense intra-
modal interactions (word-to-word or region-to-region); and
a guided-attention (GA) unit to model the dense inter-
modal interactions (word-to-region). After that, by modular
composition of the SA and GA units, we obtain different
Modular Co-Attention (MCA) layers that can be cascaded
in depth. Finally, we propose a deep Modular Co-Attention
Network (MCAN) which consists of cascaded MCA layers.
Results in Figure 1shows that a deep MCAN model sig-
niﬁcantly outperforms existing state-of-the-art co-attention
models on the benchmark VQA-v2 dataset [ 11], which
veriﬁes the synergy of self-attention and guided-attention
in co-attention learning, and also highlights the potential of
deep reasoning. Furthermore, we ﬁnd that modeling self-
attention for image regions can greatly improve the object
counting performance, which is challenging for VQA.
2. Related Work
We brieﬂy review previous studies on VQA, especially
those studies that introduce co-attention models.
Visual Question Answering (VQA). VQA has been of
increasing interest over the last few years. The multimodal
fusion of global features are the most straightforward VQA
solutions. The image and question are ﬁrst represented as
global features and then fused by a multimodal fusion mod-
el to predict the answer [ 37]. Some approaches introduce
a more complex model to learn better question represen-
tations with LSTM networks [ 2], or a better multimodal
fusion model with residual networks [ 15].One limitation of the aforementioned multimodal fu-
sion models is that the global feature representation of an
image may lose critical information to correctly answer
the questions about local image regions ( e.g., “what is in
the woman’s left hand”). Therefore, recent approaches
have introduced the visual attention mechanism into VQA
by adaptively learning the attended image features for a
given question, and then performing multimodal feature
fusion to obtain the accurate prediction. Chen et al .
proposed a question-guided attention map that projected the
question embeddings into the visual space and formulated
a conﬁgurable convolutional kernel to search the image
attention region [ 7]. Yang et al. proposed a stacked attention
network to learn the attention iteratively [ 31]. Fukui et al.
[10], Kim et al. [16], Yu et al. [32,33] and Ben et al. [6]
exploited different multimodal bilinear pooling methods to
integrate the visual features from the image’s spatial grids
with the textual features from the questions to predict the
attention. Anderson et al . introduced a bottom-up and
top-down attention mechanism to learn the attention on
candidate objects rather than spatial grids [ 1].
Co-Attention Models. Beyond understanding the visual
contents of the image, VQA also requires to fully un-
derstand the semantics of the natural language question.
Therefore, it is necessary to learn the textual attention
for the question and the visual attention for the image
simultaneously. Lu et al. proposed a co-attention learning
framework to alternately learn the image attention and
question attention [ 20]. Yu et al. reduced the co-attention
method into two steps, self-attention for a question em-
bedding and the question-conditioned attention for a visual
embedding [ 33]. Nam et al . proposed a multi-stage co-
attention learning model to reﬁne the attentions based on
memory of previous attentions [ 23]. However, these co-
attention models learn separate attention distributions for
each modality (image or question), and neglect the dense
interaction between each question word and each image
region. This become a bottleneck for understanding ﬁne-
grained relationships of multimodal features. To address
this issue, dense co-attention models have been proposed,
which establish the complete interaction between each
question word and each image region [ 24,14]. Compared to
the previous co-attention models with coarse interactions,
the dense co-attention models deliver signiﬁcantly better
VQA performance.
3. Modular Co-Attention Layer
Before presenting the Modular Co-Attention Network,
we ﬁrst introduce its basic component, the Modular Co-
Attention (MCA) layer. The MCA layer is a modular
composition of the two basic attention units, i.e., the self-
attention (SA) unit and the guided-attention (GA) unit,
inspired by the scaled dot-product attention proposed in
6282