20
 40
 60
 80
 100
Epoch
1.30
1.35
1.40
1.45
1.50
1.55Degree of conflict
MAML_layer4
MAML_layer3
MAML_layer2
MAML_layer1
Ours_layer4
Ours_layer3
Ours_layer2
Ours_layer1(a) Degree of conﬂict at each layer
 (b) Manual γfor each layer
0
 100
 200
 300
 400
 500
Index of tasks
1.40
1.45
1.50
1.55
1.60
1.65
1.70Degree of conflict (c) Degree of conﬂict for each task
0.0
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1.0
Attenuation parameter ( )
0
50
100
150
200
250
300Index of tasks
Layer 4 (MAML+L2F)
Layer 3 (MAML+L2F)
Layer 2 (MAML+L2F)
Layer 1 (MAML+L2F)
Layers (MAML) (d) Generated γfor each task
Figure 3: Analysis on degree of conﬂict and attenuation: (a) Throughout training, degree of conﬂict is measured and observed
to vary among layers. For MAML, deeper layers exhibit greater extent of conﬂict, which aligns with the observation that
deeper layers encode more task speciﬁc features [ 34]. After applying L2F to MAML, conﬂict is observed to have decreased
greatly. (b) Manual attenuation of an initialization by different levels (the lower γ, the stronger attenuation) for each layer
affects the classiﬁcation accuracy of a 4-layer CNN on miniImageNet. The ﬁgure suggests that deeper layers prefer the
stronger attenuation. This supports our argument that the larger degree of conﬂict suggests the initialization quality is more
compromised and that the compromised part needs to be minimized. (c) The degree of conﬂict between each meta-train task
and the MAML initialization is observed to vary. This indicates that the amount of prior knowledge that is useful is different
for each task. (d) Different attenuation parameters γare generated by the proposed method for each meta-test task, especially
for middle-level layers. This suggests that the degree of conﬂict varies for each task, especially in middle-level layers.
is to learn a “good” starting point for fast adaptation to
new tasks, the shared initialization, in fact, hinders the fast
learning process. This is illustrated by sharp optimization
landscape during fast adaptation in Figure 2. This is mainly
due to disagreement between tasks on the location of a “good”
starting point. We call such disagreement conﬂict .
At each training iteration, each task Titakes the initial-
ization closer to the desired location via gradient: ui=
−∇θLD′
Ti(fθ′
i)during meta-update. However, since MAML
shares the initialization, the update is made via gradients
accumulated over a batch of tasks/summationtext
iuias in Equation
(2). Hence, in the example of two tasks, the conﬂict occurs
between tasksTiandTjwhen their gradient directions, i.e.
directions of uianduj, differ. The more their directions
differ, the more the initialization update diverges from ui
anduj, pointing towards the location that is not desirable for
bothTiandTj. We refer to this phenomenon as compromise
in the initialization .
We deﬁne the degree of conﬂict among tasks to be the
average angle between uiand/summationtext
iui, which is measured
as the average absolute arccosine of the dot product of the
normalized vectors, ETi∼p(T)[/vextendsingle/vextendsinglecos−1(ˆui·v)/vextendsingle/vextendsingle], whereˆuiis
ui
/bardblui/bardblandvis/summationtext
iui
/ba∇dbl/summationtext
iui/ba∇dbl. Figure 3(a) measures the degree
of conﬂict at each epoch and demonstrates that the conﬂict
is indeed more prominent in deeper layers, which aligns
with the observation that the deeper layers encode more
task-speciﬁc features [ 34].
3.4. Learning to Forget
When the degree of conﬂict is high, we say the initializa-
tion is more compromised , and hence the more difﬁcult it isto learn new tasks quickly, as illustrated by sharp loss land-
scape in Figure 2. This suggests that the learner ﬁnds some
part of the initialization to be irrelevant or even detrimental
for learning a given task. We thus propose to discard such
compromised part of the prior knowledge via attenuating
the initialization parameters θdirectly. Then, one may ask
which parameter is compromised?
To answer the question, we refer to the previous ﬁnding
that lower layers of a CNN encode general knowledge while
deeper layers contain more task-speciﬁc information [ 34].
Upon this observation, we hypothesize that lower layers
do not need much attenuation while deeper layers do. To
support our hypothesis, we perform an experiment, shown
in Figure 3(b), where we vary the amount of attenuation
(γj) on each layer to observe how much each layer beneﬁts.
As expected, deeper layers favor stronger attenuation while
lower layers prefer little to no attenuation. This leads to
the second question: How much should the parameters be
attenuated layer-wise?
One answer would be to let a model learn to ﬁnd an opti-
mal set of attenuations. The answers to these two questions
lead to our proposal: learn layer-wise attenuation via ap-
plying a single learnable parameter γjon the initialization
parameters of each layer θjas follows:
¯θj=γjθj, (3)
wherejis the layer index of a neural network. The atten-
uated initialization ¯θserves as a new starting point for fast
adaptation to tasks. Although this may reduce the extent
of compromise that may exist in the original MAML ini-
tialization, one may ask if the amount of unnecessary or
contradicting information in the initialization is equal across
2382