Learning to Forget for Meta-Learning
Sungyong Baik Seokil Hong Kyoung Mu Lee
ASRI, Department of ECE, Seoul National University
{dsybaik, hongceo96, kyoungmu }@snu.ac.kr
Abstract
Few-shot learning is a challenging problem where the
goal is to achieve generalization from only few examples.
Model-agnostic meta-learning (MAML) tackles the problem
by formulating prior knowledge as a common initialization
across tasks, which is then used to quickly adapt to unseen
tasks. However, forcibly sharing an initialization can lead
to conﬂicts among tasks and the compromised (undesired by
tasks) location on optimization landscape, thereby hindering
the task adaptation. Further, we observe that the degree
of conﬂict differs among not only tasks but also layers of
a neural network. Thus, we propose task-and-layer-wise
attenuation on the compromised initialization to reduce its
inﬂuence. As the attenuation dynamically controls (or selec-
tively forgets) the inﬂuence of prior knowledge for a given
task and each layer, we name our method as L2F (Learn
to Forget). The experimental results demonstrate that the
proposed method provides faster adaptation and greatly im-
proves the performance. Furthermore, L2F can be easily
applied and improve other state-of-the-art MAML-based
frameworks, illustrating its simplicity and generalizability.
1. Introduction
Recent deep learning models demonstrate outstanding
performance in various ﬁelds; however, they require super-
vised learning with a tremendous amount of labeled data.
On the other hand, humans are able to learn concepts from
only few examples. Considering the cost of data annota-
tion, the capability of humans to learn from few examples is
desirable.
When there are concerns for overﬁtting in few-data
regime, data augmentation and regularization techniques are
often used. Another commonly used technique is to ﬁne-tune
a network pre-trained on large labelled data from another
dataset or task [ 19,26]. Fine-tuning often does provide adap-
tation without overﬁtting even in few-data regime, however
at the cost of computation due to many update iterations [ 31].
In contrast, meta-learning tackles the problem systematically
via two stages of learners: a meta-learner learns common
Figure 1: When there is a large degree of conﬂict , the up-
dated initialization ends up in the location neither of tasks
desires. Such undesired (hence compromised) initialization
location can make learning difﬁcult during fast adaptation to
each task. Our method makes the fast adaptation easier by
minimizing the inﬂuence of the compromised initialization
for each task, through attenuation parameter γgenerated
by the task-conditioned network g. This makes the opti-
mization landscape smoother and hence helps achieve better
generalization to unseen examples.
knowledge across a distribution of tasks, which is then used
for a learner to quickly learn task-speciﬁc knowledge with
few examples. A popular instance is the model-agnostic
meta-learning (MAML) [ 5], where a meta-learner is formu-
lated such that it learns a common initialization that encodes
the common knowledge across tasks.
The assumption of the existence of a task distribution may
justify MAML for seeking a common initialization among
tasks. But, there still exists variations among tasks, some
of which may lead to the disagreement among tasks on the
location of the initialization. We call such disagreement
conﬂict and formally deﬁne it in this paper. Some of prior
knowledge encoded in such compromised initialization is
useful for one task but may be irrelevant or even detrimen-
tal for another. Consequently, a learner struggles to learn
new concepts quickly with the prior knowledge that conﬂicts
with information from new examples, as illustrated in Fig-
1
2379