(a) loss landscape
 (b) gradient predictiveness
0
 5000
 10000
 15000
 20000
 25000
 30000
Steps
10
20
30
40
50
60-smoothness
MAML
MAML+L2F (c) “effective” βsmoothness
Figure 2: Visualization of optimization landscape: In [ 23], they analyze the stability and smoothness of the optimization
landscape by measuring Lipschitzness and the “effective” β-smoothness of loss. We use these measurements to analyze
learning dynamics for both MAML and our proposed method during training on 5-way 5-shot miniImageNet classiﬁcation
tasks, i.e. investigating fast-adaptation (or inner-loop) optimization. At each inner-loop update step, we measure variations in
loss (a), the l2difference in gradients (b), and the maximum difference in gradient over the distance (c) as we move to different
points along the computed gradient for that gradient descent. We take an average of these values over the number of inner-loop
updates and plot them against training iterations. The thinner shade in plots (a) and (b) and the lower the values in plot (c)
indicate the smoother loss landscape and thus less training difﬁculty [ 23].
ure 1. Such learning difﬁculty can manifest as the sharp
loss landscape and thereby poor generalization to new exam-
ples [ 11,23]. Motivated by our hypothesis, we analyze and
indeed observe the sharp landscape during fast adaptation to
new examples (as shown in Figure 2) and suggest that the
learned initialization by MAML is a “bad” location.
One solution for a meta-learner would be to simply forget
the part of the initialization that hinders adaptation to the
task, minimizing its inﬂuence. This raises two questions:
Where do these conﬂicts occur? To what extent? We hy-
pothesize that the degree of conﬂict varies among layers of a
neural network, especially CNN, since deeper layers learn
more task-speciﬁc knowledge or class-speciﬁc knowledge
in classiﬁcation [ 34]. To test the hypothesis, we measure
conﬂict at each layer and observe that conﬂict is indeed more
severe at deeper layers, as shown in Figure 3(a). We also
observe that the amount of agreement between the learned
initialization and the initialization desired by a given task
differs for each task in Figure 3(c). Thus, we argue that
conﬂicts occur at two levels: task and layer.
Motivated by the observation, we propose to learn selec-
tiveforgetting by applying a task-and-layer-wise attenuation
on MAML initialization, controlling the inﬂuence of prior
knowledge for each task and layer. For each task, we ar-
gue that initialization weights and its gradients (obtained
from support examples of task), together, encode informa-
tion about optimization speciﬁc to a task, and thus propose
to condition on them to generate attenuation parameters.
As for layer-wise attenuation, we generate an attenuation
parameter for each layer. The proposed method, named
L2F (Learn to Forget), indeed improves the quality of theinitialization (illustrated by a smoother loss landscape in
Figure 2) and consistent performance improvement across
different domains, managing to maintain the simplicity and
generalizability of MAML.
2. Related Work
Meta-learning aims to learn across-task prior knowledge
to achieve fast adaptation to speciﬁc tasks [ 2,7,24,25,29].
Recent meta-learning systems can be broadly classiﬁed
into three categories: metric-based, network-based, and
optimization-based. The goal of metric-based system is
to learn relationship between query and support examples
by learning an embedding space, where similar classes are
closer and different classes are further apart [ 9,27,28,32].
Network-based approaches encode fast adaptation into
network architecture, for example, by generating input-
conditioned weights [ 14,17] or employing an external mem-
ory [ 15,22]. On the other hand, optimization-based systems
adjust optimization for fast adaptation [ 5,18,16].
Among optimization-based systems, MAML [ 5] has re-
cently received interests, owing to its simplicity and general-
izability. The generalizability stems from its model-agnostic
algorithm that learns across-task initialization. The initial-
ization aims to encode prior knowledge that helps the model
quickly learn and achieve good generalization performance
over tasks on average. While MAML boasts the simplicity,
it shows relatively low performance on few-shot learning.
There has been several works that tried to improve the
performance, especially on few-shot classiﬁcation [ 1,10,12,
35,8]. However, none of these methods tackles the problem
2380